==PAGE:1==
Development
of
a
Radiance­Based
Multi­
Phase Daylight Simulation Tool For Early­
Stage Urban Planning
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of a Radiance­Based Multi­Phase Daylight Simulation Tool For Early­
Stage Urban Planning
Master Thesis in Architectural Engineering
Autumn, 2021
32.5 ECTS
By
Oliver­Oskar Bruun Christiansen
Supervisor: Mandana Sarey Khanie
Co­supervisor: Mathias Sønderskov Schaltz
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This MSc thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Civil Engi­
neering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. This thesis accounts for 32.5 ECTS and was
carried out over the course of 5.5 months between 23rd of August and 7th of February.
The project was supervised by Mandana Sarey Khanie and co­supervisor Mathias Søn­
derskov Schaltz. I would like to sincerely thank my supervisors for their counseling and
guidance throughout this thesis.
Oliver­Oskar Bruun Christiansen ­ s163805
Signature
Date
ii
07-02-2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Many new construction projects struggle to keep up with the current daylight regulations.
Urbanisation causes an increase in plot ratios of new development sites as well as higher
buildings. This combination of denser and higher buildings, makes the accessibility to
daylight extremely difficult. To better tackle these new and challenging daylight conditions,
architects and urban planners, need quicker daylight simulations tools to implement earlier
in their design phases.
This MSc. thesis evaluates the possibilities of creating such a tool, based on a Three­
Phase Method daylight simulation, that reuses a pre­calculated view matrix, and outputs
a 3D visualisation of the results. The tool was created purely with components from Hon­
eybeePlus, which uses Radiance to run the simulation. It is not within the scope of the
thesis, to dive deeper into the code behind Radiance, but only to investigate, what can be
achieved directly through the HoneybeePlus plug­in in Grasshopper.
A script was built, which would generate a view matrix from a single parametric room, and
then map this room around a bigger geometry. The mapped rooms were then simulated
with a Three­Phase simulation, that would reuse the previously calculated view matrix.
Lastly the results of the simulation were shown in both 2D and 3D in accordance to the
danish building regulation’s 300 lux rule.
The produced script showed, that while it is possible to reuse a pre­generated view matrix,
the benefits of doing so are limited. Through several simulation tests, both non­reusing
and reusing, it was observed that the simulation times were almost identical, with only
a minor insignificant improvement in the reusing simulation. The ability to visualise the
results of the simulation in 3D showed great promise, by giving the user a quick and easy
way to evaluate the results of their simulation.
Overall, it can be concluded that reusing view matrices in Three­Phase simulations, run
by HoneybeePlus components, won’t have as big an impact as expected. In order to fully
take advantage of the reusing possibilities of the Three­Phase Method, a deeper study
into the code and commands of Radiance, needs to be investigated.
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Premise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Effects of daylight
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Earlier integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Daylight requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
BR18
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Why Three­Phase Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theory
9
3.1
Daylight terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Utilized software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
Rhino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.2
Grasshopper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2.3
Ladybug/Honeybee
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2.4
Radiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Matrix­based daylight simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3.1
Different daylight metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Multi­Phase simulation in Radiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.1
The different daylight Matrices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4.2
The different phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Methodology
17
4.1
Ideal workflow of script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.1.1
Visualisation of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Reusing a view matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2.1
Choosing view matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Description of simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Assessment
27
5.1
Viewing the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Reusing a view matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Comparison between simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Discussion
35
6.1
Review of the tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.1.1
Evaluating potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.1.2
Bigger scale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.2
Further studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.3
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
v
==PAGE:8==
7
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
41
A Appendix
45
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
AEC
Architectural Engineering Construction
BIM
Building Information Modeling
BPS
Building Performance Simulation
BR18 Bygningsreglementet 2018
BREP Boundary Representation
BSDF Bidirectional Scattering Distribution Function
CAD
Computer Aided Design
CD
Candela
CFS
Complex Fenestration Systems
DA
Daylight Autonomy
DF
Daylight Factor
EPW
Energy Plus Weather
LED
Light­Emitting Diode
NURBS Nonuniform Rational B­Splines
PC
Personal Computer
RAM
Random Access Memory
TMY
Typical Meteorological Year
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
This following chapter will introduce the overall background of the thesis, as well as map
out the general project objectives and structure of the report.
The construction industry is currently known as a quite conservative industry. Compared
to other industries, construction has been struggling to adapt and to utilise the advance­
ment of digital technologies of the last decades. However, due to recently developed,
more accessible tools and software, adoption is now picking up speed, notably within
computer simulations.
Simulations in the building industry are not at all new, but the practice has not fully reached
its golden years yet. In the AEC (Architectural Engineering Construction) Industry, com­
puter based design and simulations have been used extensively for energy optimisation,
daylight assessments, structural designs etc.
However, many of these computational tools have been primarily applied in later stages
of building designs. This way of implementing simulations might in some cases be suf­
ficient, but are also in some cases too late. In past years, building projects have been
separated into two separate phases: architectural design and in­depth engineering. This
could cause projects to be not be fully feasible in regards of energy, indoor climate, or
structural soundness, because these topics are first thoroughly addressed at a later point
in building development, where it in some cases is too late to properly fix. Recent years
have shown a shift in this divided workflow towards a homogeneous collaboration of ar­
chitects and engineers. Architectural firms are utilising digital tools progressively more in
order to create architectural designs with higher feasibility.
A big reason for the increased merging between architecture and engineering can be cred­
ited to technological improvements, that have made it easier for architects and engineers
to collaborate. The advancement of CAD­tools, such as Revit, has accomplished to inte­
grate the engineering aspect of construction directly into the design. Concepts such as
BIM (Building Information Modelling) have further digitised the building process through­
out the whole building life cycle. Computational design has pushed the boundaries of
what can be achieved, and broadened the technical capabilities of designers. All these
tools are collectively pushing the AEC industry in more modern direction.
In this thesis, an investigation into a way of integrating early stages of specifically daylight
optimisation is carried out.
1.1
Premise
The construction industry is today, more than ever, being pressured by the size and den­
sity of the urban development. Plot ratios of newly developed projects are severely in­
creasing, whereas the amount of undeveloped land is slowly decreasing. These factors
force compact and high­rise architecture, which in return, reduces free landscape and
public space in the urban development. Another result of that process is the difficulty of
ensuring sufficient interior daylight. Having adequate daylight in buildings becomes pro­
gressively more challenging with the increasing requirements demanded by the building
regulations.
The primary tool to adjust the amount of daylight in buildings, is the addition and removal of
glass. However, it happens occasionally, that the interior daylight of a proposed building
1
==PAGE:12==
design cannot be fixed by the use of glass alone. Such circumstances force developers
to apply for dispensations from the municipality, or change overall functions of the af­
fected rooms. In order to minimise these situations, it is important for architects, to design
projects with a focus on ensuring aspects, such as sufficient interior daylight, early on in
the process.
One way for engineers to support architects is to develop new equipment, that can be
utilised earlier in design phases. These instruments should have the ability to give prompt
estimates, rather than slow but precise results. Giving architects estimate feedback on
the technical capabilities of their design right away, enables them to test the possible
outcomes of design changes.
1.2
Objectives
This thesis examines the ways of integrating early stages of specifically the daylight opti­
misation. The main objective is to investigate the development of an early stage daylight
analysis tool, based upon the Three­Phase daylight simulation method.
The script should provide architects with a quicker way to estimate the interior daylight
quality of mass­based designs. Furthermore, the tool should supply the user with instant
3D visualisation of their daylight simulation results. Overall the main aim of the thesis is to
develop a tool, which can help architects and urban planners asses and optimize daylight
conditions of their construction in a quick and efficient way.
1.2.1
Scope
The scope of the thesis is to test the possibilities of the Three­Phase daylight simula­
tion method through the components of HoneybeePlus in Grasshopper. The contexts of
this thesis will therefore not dive deeper into the code structure of Radiance, and how to
perform simulations directly through Radiance commands.
1.3
Thesis Structure
The thesis start with Chapter 2 describing the background of the problems in the industry,
which the thesis aims to help. It then proceeds to Chapter 3 where the necessary theory
for understanding the topics of the thesis is explained. The methodology Chapter 4, will
describe how the built script has been developed and how it works. Results of the simu­
lation tests are assessed in Chapter 5 and discussed in Chapter 6. Lastly Chapter 7 will
conclude on the findings and results of the thesis.
2
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
The following chapter explains the overall basic principle of this thesis. It includes the
initial analysis of the current industry, and why the state of things demonstrates the need
for earlier adaptations of daylight calculations. This chapter also includes an introduction
to the daylight analysis method.
2.1
Effects of daylight
Daylight has always played an important role for humankind. Since the beginning of hu­
man life, daylight has been setting the boundaries of activity, by indicating time of day, as
well as providing safety. Throughout the development of human modern society, daylight
has helped to create biological and social rhythms.
Even in the medical world, daylight has played an important role. When looking at images
of Bispebjerg Hospital in Copenhagen (see Figure 2.1), it shows how in 1913 when it was
built, there was a medical belief, that proper access to daylight helped curing sick people,
which today has been proven true for some conditions. When looking at images of the
exterior facades of the hospital, the high window ratio is apparent, both in terms of the
individual window sizes but also in the amounts of windows.
Figure 2.1: Exterior facades of Bispebjerg Hospital (Museum, 2021)
Studies have also shown the importance of proper daylight in a work related context.
In schools it has been proven that over the course of one year, pupils show 20­25%
better learning performance in a classroom with proper daylight, in comparison to pupils
in classrooms with inadequate daylight. Similar research has been conducted for office
spaces, where workers with a good window view had a 6­12% higher work efficiency than
workers without. (Green, 2020)
Today our world is constantly lit up by artificial lights. These are often energy saving LED’s,
which provide cheap and more sustainable lighting, but with the downside of typically
emitting more bluish light. These wavelengths of the light spectrum have a tendency to
have a negative effect on the human sleep cycle because it signals the brain to wake up.
Studies from Harvard University have shown that blue light suppress the release of the
hormone melatonin. Melatonin is released in the brain and has a regulating effect on the
sleep cycle. (Harvard, 2020)
3
==PAGE:14==
Recent years of Covid­19 related lockdowns have caused a growth in the amount of peo­
ple working from home. (Worklife, 2021) This has brought several challenges for people,
and also required the development of new routines. Simply the aspect of having to create
a proper professional work space in your home can be a challenge for many people. Of­
fice buildings are tailored into providing the best work conditions possible, whereas most
peoples homes are focused on providing a safe space for relaxation and non work related
tasks.
Having to work under sub­optimal conditions can be straining in the long term, and es­
pecially proper lighting can be one of these conditions that many homes don’t provide.
Especially people living in smaller, lower, and older apartment buildings, will have issues
in receiving proper daylight for work tasks. With the prospects of a future, where working
from home becomes a more common norm (White, 2021), this only further emphasises
the importance of ensuring proper daylight in future housing buildings.
Classification systems and building regulations help maintain the requirements of new
buildings, in order to both build healthy and sustainable, but also to ensure proper indoor
environments for the inhabitants. In terms of daylight it is however, not enough to focus
on gaining as much light as possible. Other factors, such as glare, views, type of win­
dow glass, and overheating are also important, when designing the daylight in buildings.
Specifically, overheating, being quite a challenge in high rise buildings, where the heat
gain from windows differs a lot from the lower floors to the higher floors. This becomes
a common challenge in high rise building, where buildings are designed with the same
window layout on each floor. The result of this is aesthetically pleasing but problematic,
because lower floors might not have enough window area for receiving enough daylight,
and higher floors have too much window area causing overheating. This exact problem is
tackled in a newer ongoing Danish project named Daylight In the Built Environment.(A. M.
Maria Kamper, 2020)
2.2
Earlier integration
The project, Daylight In the Built Environment, is an example of an interdisciplinary devel­
opment project supported by Real Dania. The aim of the project is to study the daylight
conditions in building, while taking their influence of urban planning, facade design and
thermal indoor climate into account. The project is created by a collaboration of VIA Uni­
versity College, Arkitema, and MOE.
This research project is still in its early phases. During a Building Green hosted event in
2021, the project was presented by the team. Daylight In the Built Environment is getting
more relevant due the increasing problems deriving from urbanisation. The development
of urbanisation is a wide spread phenomenon around the world, and many cities are strug­
gling to keep up with the fast­growing demand for housing. This results in the increase
of plot ratios of new development sites as well as higher buildings, that are permitted by
municipalities. This combination of denser and higher buildings, makes the accessibility
to daylight extremely difficult. One of the bigger challengers the collaborated research
is identifying, comes from the lack of existent framework, when it comes to managing
daylight in urban planning phases.
Currently, daylight analysis is mainly done during later stages of the project, even though
many of the design choices in the earlier urban planning phases have a big impact on
the daylight in future buildings. The Real Dania funded research overall has the greater
goal of investigating the current problems, and by doing so, providing clear proof for the
need of integrating daylight in the Danish Planning Law. The Danish Planning Law is set
4
==PAGE:15==
to lay out the basic rules for public authorities to follow, when planning new development
projects in Denmark. The law ensures an overall assessment of the socioeconomic re­
sults of a project, so it will result in the desired development of the country or individual
municipality. Another important goal of the planning law is to preserve the danish nature
and the possible sustainable impacts that construction projects might have.
The lack of required daylight in the planning law, enables municipalities to permit very
dense projects, since their potential daylight issues are not addressed before they have
been approved. (S. M. Maria Kamper, 2021a) An article from the team behind the research
project further expands on these issues. It is stating, that access to proper daylight is
about to become a luxury, only available to wealthier people, who can afford higher placed
apartments.(S. M. Maria Kamper, 2021b) The collaboration aims to develop new tools and
methods, which the municipalities and urban designers can utilise, to ensure, that local
planning can provide with a better basis for fair daylight conditions in future buildings.
2.3
Daylight requirements
For assessing daylight requirements, several daylight metrics are used. These metrics
work as tools for optimizing and estimating daylight qualities of a given surface. The
following theory chapter will give a more in depth description of the most common daylight
metrics.
When talking about daylight metrics in scenarios of building performance, the term day­
lighting is often used. Daylighting refers to everything, that is daylight related in the build­
ing context, and it can be a building performance metric, that is quite difficult to evaluate.
The definition on what good daylighting is, can be very dependent on the context of a
person’s work. In a study from 2006 by Reinhart C. F. and Galasiu A., five exemplary
definitions to daylighting are given. These definitions are shown in figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Five different definitions for Daylighting (Christoph F. Reinhart, 2006)
Implementing a focus on daylighting in early stages of urban planning is important, to en­
sure proper daylight­based illumination indoors. Both to reduce the annual energy con­
sumption for artificial lights, and to ensure the visual stimulation and health benefits, that
proper daylight provides to the residents.(Christoph F. Reinhart, 2006)
In order to achieve, what is deemed sufficient daylighting, several daylighting metrics
have been established. These metrics provide clear context to everyone who is involved
in daylight­oriented work. Daylight metrics are calculable and therefore also used when
daylight­oriented laws are elaborated. Within the building industry these laws are com­
monly known as building regulations.
5
==PAGE:16==
2.3.1
BR18
The Danish building regulation is known as Bygningsreglementet 2018 or BR18 in short.
As the name states, this regulation came out in 2018 and is still in use. The regulation con­
tains the current requirements, standards, and guidelines for Denmark­based construc­
tions. The regulations are regularly updated, to keep up with the developments within
the construction industry. (Molio, 2021) When the regulations where settled in 2018, they
changed the requirements for daylight within residential buildings.
The new requirements are applied in paragraph 379.(Bygningsreglementet, 2021) It states
that enough daylight can be documented, by proving an internal illuminance with a mini­
mum of 300 Lux on half of the relevant floor areas during at least half of hours of daylight.
In housing projects, the relevant floor area is equal to the whole floor area of a used room,
where as in office related contexts, the relevant floor area is only the floor area used for
workplaces. The requirement of 300 lux will be the main objective, which will be assessed
in this project.
6
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Why Three­Phase Simulation
The method of this thesis is based on the Three­Phase daylight simulation. This is a ma­
trix based, parametric simulation, which can perform daylight simulation on complex and
dynamic fenestration systems. Complex Fenestration Systems (CFS) refer to any type
of window technology with a non­clear switchable layer. Examples of such are translu­
cent insulating panels or shading devices. These extra layers have been implemented to
many new fenestration systems, as they way to improve both thermal and visual qualities
of indoor spaces.(Frauenhofer ISE, 2015) CFS won’t play a big role in the context of this
thesis, but are required for running the Three­Phase simulation. Rather, the simulation
is chosen for its individual phases which can be calculated individually. The three­phase
method breaks down the steps where light is transferred into three different simulations:
• From the sky to the exterior of the fenestration
• Transmission through the fenestration system
• From the interior fenestration into the simulated space
As in any daylight simulation the initial input is the sky luminance known as a sun vector.
The final results are the illuminance values which are also vectors. In a three­phase
simulation the results are achieved by multiplying the sun vector by each of the three
matrices, which represent different phases of the light transfer. The idea behind this thesis
is to utilise that this type of simulation is conducted in three split calculations. The overall
calculation is still done by a single equation, but each of the matrices within the equation
are interpreted as individual steps.
The interior matrix, known as a view matrix, can be calculated beforehand. This view ma­
trix is dependent on the interior fenestration as well as the simulated space. The concept
is, that a library of view matrices can be generated. These view matrices can be calcu­
lated on different sizes of simulated space. These simulation spaces will, in this case, be
individual rooms with a single window. By having calculated the view matrix beforehand,
part of the simulation has been removed, and therefore it should, in theory, run quicker.
7
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
3
Theory
The following chapter will explain the theory behind the topics and calculations, used
during the project. Initially, a short introduction into the used daylighting terms is given,
as well as a quick rundown of the utilised software, and an explanation of the terminology
used for the multi­phase simulation.
3.1
Daylight terminology
The term daylight describes all direct and indirect light rays, that are emitting from the
sun. Daylight has, for centuries, been the primary source of light in architecture. Even
with the development of burning light sources or modern electric lighting, daylight remains
the preferred source of light during daytime. When working with daylight, it is important,
to understand the technical properties of light.
Luminous Intensity
Luminous intensity is a descriptive value of the radiation of light, emitted by a light source
in a certain direction. (Auersignal, 2021) The value is expressed in candela (cd), which
derives from the luminous intensity of a single burning candle. (VELUX Knowledge Centre
for Daylight, Energy and indoor Climate (DEIC), 2014)
Luminous flux
Luminous flux is the measurement of the perceived power of emitted light. The SI derived
unit of luminous flux is lumen, which is a measurement of the total amount of light emitted
by a light source. Because of this lumen is commonly used to provide information about
brightness. (Auersignal, 2021)
Illuminance
Illuminance refers to the measurement of the amount of daylight, received on a surface.
The common expression of illuminance is lux. lux can be calculated in two ways. When
calculating lux for small distances, it is the ratio between lumen and surface area. Over
greater distances, lux is calculated as the ratio between the luminous intensity and the
distance between the surface and the light source. lux is one of the most common ratios
of daylight measurements and is used by most daylight performance indicators, to deter­
mine, whether an area is sufficiently lit. (VELUX Knowledge Centre for Daylight, Energy
and indoor Climate (DEIC), 2014)
3.2
Utilized software
There are many different software which can be utilised for daylight oriented simulations.
This project is mainly based on the 3D modelling software Rhino. This software has a
built­in visual programming interface called Grasshopper. Within Grasshopper the user
has access to countless downloadable plug­ins, some which can be used for daylight
simulations.
The specific software used for this thesis was chosen for its open source abilities. This
enables the user to test out several different plug­ins, and also enables fully customised
coding, if necessary.
3.2.1
Rhino
Rhino is a free­form 3D modeling tool and computer aided design (CAD) tool. It is devel­
oped by the American company Robert McNeel & Associates. Rhino relies on NURBS,
9
==PAGE:20==
Nonuniform Rational B­Splines, which are a mathematical representation of 3D geome­
try. This thesis will use Rhino to make surfaces, breps, and meshes. Surfaces are sheets
with zero thickness, breps are boundary representations of solids, and meshes are a col­
lection of polygons that define the shape of an object. Rhino is one of the main standard
3D modelling tools for designers and architects, because of its ability to provide accurate
modelling, as well as create designs for rendering, animation, engineering, and others.
(Associates, 2021)
3.2.2
Grasshopper
Grasshopper is a visual programming interface integrated within Rhino. It allows the user
to manipulate and use the tools of Rhino through different components, that can be placed
on an open canvas. A Grasshopper component is a small box with an integrated code.
This box then usually contain some inputs and outputs. Inputs and outputs are the con­
nection points which receive data in an input and returns data in an output.
Grasshopper has endless possibilities due to the feature of allowing the user full control
over the form generation of the designed object. Another great benefit to Grasshopper
is the wide array of plug­ins. These plug­ins provide new components for the user to
design with. There are several plug­ins for daylight simulation, but also for generating,
manipulating, and visualising geometry. (Davidson, 2021)
3.2.3
Ladybug/Honeybee
Ladybug and Honeybee are both Grasshopper plug­ins and provide the backbone of the
performed studies in this thesis. Ladybug provides the user with a set of components to
visualise and analyse weather data in Grasshopper. Honeybee can then furthermore be
added, and provide access to the use of several simulation engines, such as Radiance,
which is used to perform daylighting simulations in this thesis. (Tools, 2021)
3.2.4
Radiance
Radiance is a program for the analysis and visualisation of lighting, both natural and ar­
tificial. The application is one of the main tools of the industry for daylight calculations.
Based on the geometry, materials, luminaries, time, date, and sky conditions of sites, Ra­
diance can calculate and display the results of different daylight simulations. Because of
the program’s compatibility with Rhino and Grasshopper, as well as its very few limitations
on the way it handles geometry and materials of a building, it is a popular tool amongst
architects, engineers, and researchers. (RFritz & AMcneil, 2019)
3.3
Matrix­based daylight simulation
When conducting daylight simulations, several of the daylight metrics are used. The fol­
lowing section will introduce those and describe all examined metrics in this thesis. Day­
light metrics for building performance simulations (BPS) contain an initial setup of internal
and external metrics, and within these, a division of climate based and non­climate based
metrics. (Christoph F. Reinhart, 2006)
3.3.1
Different daylight metrics
Daylight Factor (DF)
The Daylight Factor is a stable metric for assessing the daylight conditions of a building.
It is defined as the ratio between an internal illuminance point in a building, compared to
a external illuminance point, under a overcast sky of 10000 lux. An example of a required
daylight factor of a work plane can thus be found as the ratio between the recommended
500 lux work plane of offices, and an outside illuminance of 10000 lux, resulting in a
Daylight Factor of
500lux
10000lux = 2%DF. In other terms, the daylight factor in this example
10
==PAGE:21==
indicates that two percent of the light from the outside is hitting the work plane. (Christoph
F. Reinhart, 2006)
Daylight Autonomy (DA)
The Daylight Autonomy (DA) metric is an indicator of the illuminance of a work plane
and shows whether this work plane has efficient daylight, in order to accord with the rec­
ommended levels. The DA is defined as the percentage of the, by humans, occupied
time of the year, when the minimum illuminance requirement at a sensor is met purely by
daylight.(Christoph F. Reinhart, 2006)
3.4
Multi­Phase simulation in Radiance
Multi­phase is a term for the matrix based simulation methods. These simulations consist
of separate raytracing processes.
The Three­Phase Method, which is being tested in this thesis, has two separate raytracing
processes. One of them accounts for the light transfer between the interior sensor points
and the fenestration system. This one is known as the view matrix. The second one
accounts for the light transfer between the fenestration system and the sky. This one is
known as the daylight matrix.
The division between the calculations of the light transfer in this simulation makes it run
quicker. It also enables for more precise simulations when working with geometry with
complex fenestration systems.(Eleonora Brembilla, 2019)
There are five different multi­phase simulations. Each of the multi­phase simulations ad­
dresses a different parametric simulation. Figure 3.1, shows a flow chart on how to decide
which simulation is required, dependent on whether the simulation setup has, a dynamic
scene, external shading, or if it requires more accurate spatial resolution.
Figure 3.1: A decision tree showcasing the different requirements for different phases of daylight
analysis. The simulation names are seen on the right. For this thesis the Three­Phase Method
was chosen, as it is the simplest method that includes a dynamic scene.(Subramaniam, 2017,
Chapter 1.)
11
==PAGE:22==
For this thesis the Three­Phase Method was chosen, as it is the simplest method that in­
cludes a dynamic scene. If the results from testing the Three­Phase Method are promis­
ing, it could be further adapted to using Five­ or Six­Phase Methods for more precise
results. However, for testing the intended workflow of reusing a view matrix, the Three­
Phase is sufficient.
3.4.1
The different daylight Matrices
View Matrix (V)
The view matrix calculates how the light is transferred inside a given room. This matrix
is created by a Radiance simulation. A view matrix can be generated in two different
ways, one being an image­based view matrix and the other an illuminance­based view
matrix. Regardless of the simulation type, a view matrix always traces the daylight rays
coming from a fenestration system such as a window. Then it either traces them until
they reach either a specific view in the view based method, or until they reach a set of
illuminance measure points, in the illuminance­based method. The simulations run in this
thesis are illuminance­based. The view matrix is therefore only affected by the interior
circumstances of a given room, and will not be affected by exterior factors, such as the
sky matrix of the surrounding context. (Subramaniam, 2017)
A standard Three­Phase simulation is conducted over a full year, in steps of 1 hour, mean­
ing the daylight is simulated 8760 times. In this case, the view matrix consist of n amount
of rows and 145 columns, n being the amount of simulation points within the simulation
grid. The 145 columns comes from the 145 sky patches, which is the discretization level
used in this thesis.
Transmission Matrix (T)
Also included in Three Phase Method, is the transmission matrix (T). The main require­
ment for the generation of a T­matrix is a Bidirectional Scattering Distribution Function
(BSDF) File. The BSDF file’s function is to make the connection between the entering and
exiting flux in a given opening of a building, such as windows, doors, skylights or other
fenestration systems. This file type is typically generated by the LBNL (Lawrence Berke­
ley National Laboratory) software, Window (Laboratory, 2019), or by using the genBSDF
command in Radiance. (Subramaniam, 2017)
Daylight Matrix (D)
The daylight matrix is a mathematical matrix, which contains luminous flux transfer coef­
ficients between the sky division and the window’s Klem divisions. A mathematical hemi­
spherical division designed by Joe Klems, used to plot how and where the daylight rays
are hitting a fenestration. (McNeil, 2014) In a multi­phase simulation, the daylight matrix
accounts for the exterior daylight calculation, by containing the flux transfer between the
glazing and the sky and ground (Subramaniam, 2017)
Sky Matrix (S)
The sky matrix consists of a series of sky vectors, and is generated either from Typical
Meteorological Year (TMY) data, or through Energy Plus Weather (EPW) data. The sky
matrix contains a location value, as well as the direct­normal radiation and the horizontal­
diffuse radiation values of a sky patch. (Subramaniam, 2017)
12
==PAGE:23==
3.4.2
The different phases
As earlier stated, this paper revolve around the potential uses of the Three­Phase Method.
This method was created to increase the efficiency of simulations of complex fenestra­
tion systems, which are common in modern construction, where glass is heavily utilised.
However, there are also other multi­phase simulations, which can be beneficial in certain
scenarios.
Two­Phase Method
The Two­Phase Method is also known as the 1­phase method in some context and is used
to calculate daylight coefficients in a single run. As the schematic in Figure 3.2 shows,
the Two­Phase method calculates the daylight coefficient on a surface directly from the
sky vector. The equation for calculating the total illuminance in the Two­Phase Method is:
E = CdcS
Where E is the total illuminance, C is the daylight coefficient matrix, and S is the sky
vector. This method is less precise, and also not suitable for simulations on CFS, which
is a common need in modern designs. (Subramaniam, 2017, Section 2.2)
Figure 3.2: A schematic diagram of the Two­Phase Method, showing how the daylight coefficient
on a surface is calculated directly from the sky vector. (Subramaniam, 2017, Chapter 6.)
Three­Phase Method
The Three­Phase method was introduced in 2010, to help increase the efficiency of simu­
lations. This method consists of two separate raytracing processes, one for the light from
the sensor or view points to the view matrix and one for the light from the view matrix
to the daylight matrix. These are then multiplied by the transmission matrix (T), and the
climate data for the whole year (S). Each of these ray tracing processes are run by the
rcontrib command in Radiance. The equation for the Three­Phase calculation is:
E = V TDS
Where E is the total illuminance, V is the view matrix, T is the transmission matrix, D is
the daylight matrix, and S is the sky vector. (Subramaniam, 2017, Section 2.3)
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: A schematic diagram of the Three­Phase Method, which shows the different phases
of the simulation.(Subramaniam, 2017, Chapter 7.)
Five­Phase Method
In order to achieve better accuracy for the results of the Three­Phase method, a Five­
Phased method was introduced. This method uses the results of the Three­Phase, and
subtracts the direct sun component of it, and subsequently recalculates it more accu­
rately, by using better sun sources. Compared to the Three­Phase method, the Five­
Phase method is more commonly needed for solar glare studies, or if renderings are
required. The equation of the Five­Phase is an extended version of the Three­Phase
equation where two additional steps are added:
E = V TDS −VdTDdSd + Cds + Ssun
The subtracted term VdTDdSd is a separate Three­Phase simulation, where the direct sun
component is isolated. The equation finally adds the term Cds + Ssun which is a more ac­
curate simulation with direct solar contribution. These added terms make the Five­Phase
Method more accurate than the Three­Phase Method. (Subramaniam, 2017, Section 2.5)
Four­Phase and Six­Phase Methods
The Four­ and Six­Phase methods are extensions to the Three­ and Five­Phase methods.
They are useful, when doing analysis containing external shading systems. (Eleonora
Brembilla, 2019) The advantage to these methods when having external shading sys­
tems, comes from the extra ray tracing process of the Facade Matrix (F) as seen in Figure
3.4. The equation for calculating the total illuminance with the Four­Phase method is:
E = V TFDS
Where E is the total illuminance, V is the view matrix, T is the transmission matrix, D
is the daylight matrix, F is flux transfer matrix for the facade, and S is the sky vec­
tor.(Subramaniam, 2017, Section 2.4)
The Six­Phase Method is similar to the Five­Phase Method just with an inclusion of the
F­Matrix from the Four­Phase Method. (Subramaniam, 2017, Section 2.5)
14
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.4: A schematic diagram of the Four­Phase Method, which shows the added F­matrix.
(Subramaniam, 2017, Chapter 8.)
15
==PAGE:26==
16
==PAGE:27==
4
Methodology
This following segment describes the different methods and approaches, that were used
in the research of this thesis. It explains the intended workflow of the script, how the view
matrix can be reused, and lastly how the script has been built.
4.1
Ideal workflow of script
The initial concept of the thesis has arisen from the multi­phase daylight analysis, which
is a matrix­based parametric simulation. For the purpose of the study the Three­Phase
Method should be sufficient, as it is the simplest of the multi­phase methods with an ability
to reuse a view matrix.
This method calculates the illuminance of set analysis points, which we need for the 300
lux analysis of the building regulations. As stated more in depth in 3.4.2 the Three­Phase
Method is based upon the equation I = V TDS. The principle of this project is to split up
the equation and calculate a set of view matrices (V ) for different room sizes. This would
give us a library of view matrices, which can be used for calculating the illuminance of a
room in a building.
In 4.1 a flowchart of the simulation workflow is shown. Initially, a simulation will calculate
the view matrix of a parametric room, by running a Three­Phase simulation, and saving
the view matrix. Afterwards, this view matrix can be utilised to save time in the simula­
tion of a bigger mass, containing several rooms within the same geometry and window
measurement of the initial singular room.
Figure 4.1: Simple flowchart of the intended simulation workflow
A new Three­Phase simulation will then be conducted on the bigger geometry, to calculate
the Daylight matrix, which is the exterior parameter, based on the geometry of the bigger
geometry. However, for this simulation, instead of having to calculate the view matrix of
each of the rooms, it will re­use the previously calculated view matrix from the library. In
theory, this would save simulation time and make it possible to more rapidly calculate the
illuminance of several hundred rooms in a larger building.
4.1.1
Visualisation of results
In order to quickly review the results of the daylight simulation, the script should include
a visual output of the simulation results in two different formats. One being a 2D planar
visualisation of the rooms in a single floor level, and the other being a full 3D­view of the
whole building.
17
==PAGE:28==
The results of these visualisations should show the calculated illuminance levels on the
floors of the rooms, and which rooms have sufficient daylight, based on the building reg­
ulations BR18. The 2D­plans will be auto generated, using the ladybug component LB
Spatial Heatmap, which colours a mesh, based on values and parameters. The 3D­plans
are generated by a custom built axonometric view visualiser. This assess the results of
the simulation in regards to the 300 lux requirement of the building regulations. Rooms
that are in compliance with this requirement will be coloured green, and rooms which are
not, will be coloured red. These visualisations should quickly provide the architects with
an overview of the feasibility of achieving proper daylight within their proposed building
mass.
4.2
Reusing a view matrix
The main premise of the intended workflow in this thesis, requires the ability to run a
view matrix reusing parametric Three­Phase daylight simulation through HoneybeePlus
components. Before diving into whether or not this is possible, it is important to first
understand what a view matrix is, and how it works. This was covered mostly in Section
3.4.1, however, there are some more Honeybee specific understandings to it.
When performing the Three­Phase daylight simulation through HoneybeePlus, the recipe
component in Grasshopper runs the simulation through Radiance scripts. The recipe
component has a toggle feature, where the user can choose to reuse a previous view
matrix. This toggle is a boolean, which is a data type that can only have the values true or
false. This boolean is by default set to false, but can be toggled to true by the user. This
indicates to the component that it should reuse the view matrix for the next simulation.
In Figure 4.2 a comparison between two similar simulations is shown. The first is from a
simulation, where the reuse toggle is turned off, and the other where it is turned on. Both
simulations are taken from a single room geometry with a single south­facing window.
Figure 4.2: Comparison between simulation batch files. Left: batch file from a non­reusing Three­
Phase Simulation. Right: batch file from a reusing Three­Phase simulation.
The batch file is the executing command of the simulation. It runs different radiance
scripts, and thus calculates and simulates the Three­Phase daylight autonomy for the
chosen geometry. The only difference in these two simulations is, that the simulation
running the batch­file to the right, is reusing a previously calculated view matrix.
To test, how the simulation is run differently with the reuse feature turned on, a comparison
was done, using diffchecker.com. The results of these differences are seen in Figure 4.2,
where the first batch file calculates the view matrix in lines 58­61, whereas the second
18
==PAGE:29==
batch file from the simulation, reusing a view matrix, is blank in these lines of code.
This comparison proves that the reuse function of the Honeybee component is working
as desired, because it shows that the reusing simulation, doesn’t calculate a new view
matrix.
4.2.1
Choosing view matrix
For the intended workflow of this script, it is necessary to have the ability to freely choose,
what view matrix the simulation should reuse. In the batch files, shown in Figure 4.2, it is
noticeable, that the script calculates a new view matrix by using the radiance command
rfluxmtx. After calculating the view matrix, the script goes on to step 2/3 where it calculates
the daylight matrix. Lastly, it finishes the Three­Phase calculation by multiplying these
matrices together in step 3/3.
Looking at the right­side window of the batch file, which reuses the view matrix, it is evi­
dent, that the calculation step is fully skipped, and it just proceeds directly to calculating
the daylight matrix. In step 3/3 it multiplies the 3 matrices together, thus using a matrix
named v_matrix. It is this specific matrix, which has to be manually added by the user,
for the script to function.
The batch file doesn’t clearly state, where the implemented view matrix is located, how­
ever, using trial and error, it was found that the reuse function works when a viable view
matrix is already located in the result folder of the simulation.
In Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4, two simulation result folders are shown. Figure 4.3 shows
the results folder of a Three­Phase simulation, where the reuse toggle is turned off, and
Figure 4.4 shows the results folder of a Three­Phase simulation. Here the reuse toggle is
turned on. In the date modified (in this case going by the Danish name ”Ændringsdato”),
it is seen that the reusing simulation in Figure 4.4 is using the previously calculated view
matrix from the first simulation, instead of calculating a new one.
Figure 4.3: Results folder from non reusing simulation.
Figure 4.4:
Results folder from reusing simulation.
The modified time column of the
south_window.vmx shows, that it is reused from the previous simulation in Figure 4.3.
19
==PAGE:30==
This test showed, that the simulation script reuses a previous view matrix, if it is located
in the result folder. Therefore the user can manually choose, what view matrix to reuse,
by putting it in the results folder of the simulation. Note however, that for this to work, the
view matrices need to share the exact same name.
20
==PAGE:31==
4.3
Description of simulation
The simulation, built in Grasshopper, consist of six parts. These individual sections of
Grasshopper scripts compute different elements of the simulation. The script is built up
by using mainly elements from Ladybug and HoneybeePlus, but also a few components
from the plug­in Human. The script as a whole can be seen in Appendix A.
The first part of the script is used to generate a parametric room, containing a parametric
window and a simulation grid, that is based on a mesh. A Three­Phase simulation setup
has also been connected to this geometry, in order to run a simulation and to get the view
matrix of the room. This first part of the simulation can be seen in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Grasshopper script for generating the initial room geometry. Left side of the script
generates the parametric room, window, and simulation grid. Right side of the script runs the
Three­Phase simulation for generating the view matrix.
The top left of the script first shows the sky matrix generator, which is needed for the
Three­Phase simulation (annotated as ”sky Mtx” in Figure 4.5. Below is the grid generator,
which is connected to generate the geometry for the analysis grid of the simulation. In
the bottom of the script is the room geometry generator. This outputs a parametric room,
which can be connected to a HoneybeePlus component for generating the Honeybee
surfaces, which are the walls, floor, and ceiling of the room. Also attached to the room is
a parametric window generator seen below. This section of the script creates a parametric
window, and attaches an xml­file to it, which is needed for the Three­Phase simulation.
After the initial room has been created, the script then needs to map this room around
several times on a bigger geometry. This is done by using the second part of the script
seen in Figure 4.6. This section uses a set Brep to generate a set of planes. These
planes can then be used together with the Orient component. The orient component can
take a piece of geometry and map it to a different location based upon a plane. So, in
short, this part of the script, takes the geometry of the first room and puts it all around the
planes, generated from the Brep, quickly creating several identical rooms around the set
geometry of the Brep.
At the end of this part of the script all the individual meshes, Breps and window surfaces
of the now recently created rooms are grouped together.
With the newly grouped geometry, the script can progress into the third part, which is the
assigning part. This part of the script is seen in Figure 4.7.
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.6: Grasshopper script for mapping the room onto a Brep. This part of thje script uses
a set Brep to generate a set of planes. These planes can then be used together with the Orient
component. The orient component can take a piece of geometry and map it to a different location
based upon a plane.
It starts by taking the grouped geometry and dividing it into surfaces, Breps, and meshes
using a component called Sort Objects By Type from the Human plug­in. Afterwards,
these different elements are cleaned by a Clean Tree component and their respective
HoneybeePlus components to generate Honeybee window groups and Honeybee sur­
faces, as well as simulation test points. All these elements are now progressing to the
fourth part of the script which runs the simulation.
The simulation script can be seen in Figure 4.8, and uses three HoneybeePlus compo­
nents. First, the Analysis Grid component takes the test points and their vectors and
generates an analysis grid. This grid is then added to the second component, the Honey­
beePlus Gridbased Three­Phase Daylight Analysis Recipe. This is the component, which
outputs the correct Radiance ”recipe” for running the simulation. This component also
contains the option to reuse an already calculated view matrix.
22
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.7: Grasshopper script for assigning the geometry elements to the simulation.
The
grouped geometry is divided into surfaces, Breps, and meshes using a component called Sort
Objects By Type from the Human plug­in. Afterwards, these different elements are cleaned by
a Clean Tree component and their respective HoneybeePlus components to generate Honeybee
window groups and Honeybee surfaces, as well as simulation test points.
The last component of this part of the script is the HoneybeePlus Run Randiance Analysis.
This component connects all the created Honeybee Object geometry with the simulation
recipe. Toggling on ”write” and ”run” will start the simulation. After the simulation is fin­
ished, the results will be outputted and can be connected to the fifth part of the script,
which visualises the results.
The fifth part of the script is the visualisation part. This is shown in Figure 4.9. Initially the
script uses the component, HoneybeePlus Hourly Values, to sort all the results from the
simulation into specific times of the year. These values are then connected to a Ladybug
component called LB Spatial Heatmap, which creates the 2D planes for showing the lux
values of each individual test point of a room.
Another connection point from the hourly values is connected to a stream gate. This
gate, when set to true, allows the data to pass through. The data is afterwards split up
in a Data Tree. From this data tree, the simulation results in each of the different rooms
being identified.
The results from each of these rooms are connected to a cluster, which will colour the room
based on the results of the simulation. The cluster is sort of a custom built component,
where a script is grouped within, to simplify the layout of the overall script. The interior of
the cluster can be seen on Figure 4.10.
The clustered script is used to sort the lux values from the simulation, to check whether
the room is following the 300­lux requirement of the Danish building regulation. The script
takes the results from the simulation and removes all the values below 300 lux. After­
wards, it detects whether at least half of the overall results are above 300 lux. If so, it
indicates a true value to a stream gate, which then colours a box of the room green.
If less than half of the measurements are above 300 lux, the stream gate will not open,
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.8: Grasshopper script for simulating the Three­Phase simulation. The simulation script
uses three HoneybeePlus components. First, the Analysis Grid component takes the test points
and their vectors and generates an analysis grid. This grid is then added to the second compo­
nent, the HoneybeePlus Gridbased Three­Phase Daylight Analysis Recipe. This is the compo­
nent, which outputs the correct Radiance ”recipe” for running the simulation. This component also
contains an option to reuse an already calculated view matrix.
and thus colour the room red. The box of the room is generated in the lowest part of
the script, using the simulation mesh of the room, in order to generate a Brep box, in the
exact position of the room, which will then be coloured dependent on the daylight results.
These colours give the designer a quick visual indication of whether or not a room in that
specific location would gain sufficient daylight.
24
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.9: Grasshopper script for visualizing the results of the simulation. The script uses the
component, HoneybeePlus Hourly Values, to sort all the results from the simulation into specific
times of the year. These values are then connected to a Ladybug component called LB Spatial
Heatmap which visualises 2D results. Another connection point from the hourly values is con­
nected to a stream gate. This gate, when set to true, allows the data to pass through onto the
clusters which visualises the 3D results.
Figure 4.10: Grasshopper script of the exploded cluster used to visualise the illuminance results
in 3D. The data is sorted in part by some basic python scripts, and lastly visualised by a coloured
brep.
25
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
5
Assessment
The following chapter will assess the results of several performed simulations, using the
built script. These simulations have been conducted with different purposes in mind, as
regarding to which features of the script were to be tested.
5.1
Viewing the results
Initially, the workflow of mapping a singular room onto a bigger geometry, thus reusing
it over and over again, proved to be successful. The mapping of the room is performed
quickly and can be adjusted to the users’ wishes through different parameters. The script
slows down a bit when creating the HoneybeePlus geometry necessary for the simulation,
however, it still executes within seconds.
Within the following figures, the results of a Three­Phase daylight autonomy simulation
on a 10 room mapped geometry is shown. Figure 5.1 shows the hourly values which has
been visualised. For this simulation it is performed at 2PM on a day in August.
Figure 5.1: The Ladybug component LB Calculate Hour of The Year (HOY) component, is used
to sort which hourly values of the simulation to show in the results.
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.2 shows the 2D results. Is shows that the sun sits quite high to the east, thus
providing sufficient daylight for the rooms with south or east facing windows.
Figure 5.2: Simulation results shown in 2D from the LB Spatial Heatmap. It shows that the sun
sits quite high to the east, thus providing sufficient daylight for the rooms with south or east facing
windows
The rooms to the north and west show significantly less interior daylight, due to their
window placement. From the 2D view it can be difficult to tell from a quick glance at the
total illuminance legend, whether the room has at least half of its sensor points above 300
lux.
For an easier rough overview, the 3D view is used instead. In Figure 5.3 the same sim­
ulation results can be seen in an axonometric 3D view. Here the script instantly shows
which rooms have a minimum of half of their simulation points above the 300 lux threshold.
These are the rooms highlighted in green.
As estimated from the 2D view in Figure 5.2, the east and south facing rooms gain enough
sunlight to be in compliance with the 300 lux rule. Furthermore, the 3D view also clearly
shows that two of the top northern rooms actually receive sufficient daylight, even though
it wasn’t as clear from the 2D view.
28
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.3: Simulation results shown in 3D. The script instantly shows which rooms have a mini­
mum of half of their simulation points above the 300 lux threshold. These are the rooms highlighted
in green, whereas the red rooms are below this threshold.
5.2
Reusing a view matrix
The main goal of the thesis was to investigate the possibilities and potential benefits of
reusing an existing view matrix when simulating Three­Phase daylight autonomies. As
determined in the methodology section 4.2.1 this workflow is achievable, when an existing
view matrix is located in the results folder of the simulation. It is therefore possible to
recalculate a view matrix of a room and use it for another room of the same proportions.
With the idea behind the script being based on this theory, it is important that a view
matrix from a room, can be reused in a bigger simulation with several of the same rooms.
In order to check whether or not this is possible, a simple study was done. A view matrix
of a single window room with the geometry 3x4x3 meters was taken from a simulation and
put into the results folder of a simulation mapping this exact room 10 times. So, the same
simulation is performed as shown in the previous section 5.1, however this time with the
reuse toggle turned on. Unfortunately, the analysis component returned an error when
running this simulation. The error message is seen in line 43 in Figure 5.4.
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.4: Error message from simulation output of a mapped 10 room simulation, reusing a
singular view matrix. The error states that if the analysis grid has been change you must re­
calculate the view matrix.
The error indicates that the simulation is not possible to run, because the length of the
results is smaller than the analysis grid points. It also states that if the analysis grid has
been changed, it is necessary to recalculate the reused matrix. Judging from this error
message, the problem occurs when it simulates a 10­room geometry, while only having a
single room analysis grid from the view matrix.
This indicates that the Radiance simulation is simulating the geometry as a whole singular
geometry, rather as 10 individual ones, and thus requires a singular view matrix of all 10
rooms rather than using a one room view matrix 10 times.
It is still possible to perform a simulation of the 10 mapped rooms reusing a view matrix,
however the component requires that the reused view matrix matches the size of the
simulated geometry. For this simulation setup the room’s simulation grid contains 48
simulation points. A view matrix for this room will therefore consist of 48 rows. When
running a simulation of a 10­room geometry, the view matrix then needs to contain 480
rows, for the simulation to run. This means that the simulation can reuse a view matrix
generated specifically from this geometry but not the smaller view matrix of 48 rows from
a single room simulation.
Figure 5.5 shows a side by side cut out of a 1 room view matrix calculated by a simulation
on a 1 room geometry and a 10 room view matrix calculated by a simulations on a 10 room
geometry. As seen highlighted in yellow, the row’s of the matrix matches the simulation
points of the simulation, and the 10 room view matrix therefore has 10 times as many
rows of data.
30
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5: Comparison between 1 room and 10 room view matrices. As seen highlighted in
yellow, the row’s of the matrix matches the simulation points of the simulation, and the 10 room
view matrix therefore has 10 times as many rows of data.
So, in order to be able to reuse a view matrix it is required that it has the correct size for
the simulation to run without errors. A way to manually bypass this problem, and still use
the single room view matrix for the 10­room simulation, is to manually copy the contents
of the view matrix, and paste it 9 times, hereby creating a single matrix.
A 480­row matrix can then be achieved which simply contains the same 48 rows 10 times
in a row. This should in theory force the simulation to use a pre­calculated view matrix
from a single room, on a simulation of a 10­room geometry. This copied view matrix was
tested, and the results from the simulation can be seen in Figure 5.6
The results from this simulation show that each of the 10 rooms, have the exact same illu­
minance levels. This way of reusing a view matrix can therefore not be used. The results
however give a deeper insight in how the Three­Phase simulation is run. It disproves the
initial thought, that even if the view matrix is the same for each room, the difference in the
daylight matrix would provide a difference in the results.
5.3
Comparison between simulations
As determined from the results of the view matrix mapping tests, it proved unsuccessful
in reusing a view matrix of a single room, for a simulation of several rooms. Still when
manually manipulating the view matrix to fit to the simulation, it provided unusable, be­
cause each room would have the exact same results. The possibility of reusing a single
room view matrix for a bigger study is therefore quite low.
To investigate whether such future work should be pursued, a time­based test was per­
formed. The aim of this test was to check if reusing a view matrix actually has any positive
effect on Three­Phase simulation. The test was performed on two different sizes of ge­
ometry. The first test was conducted on a smaller model containing 2 rooms, and the
second test on a bigger model of 10 rooms. The reason for these different sizes, was to
avoid time differences based on computational power. The first test of the 2­room model
contains 10 simulation first done with the reuse toggle off, and then 10 simulations with
the reuse toggle on. The results are shown in Figure 5.7
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.6: Results of simulation using a manipulated view matrix. The results from this simulation
show that each of the 10 rooms, have the exact same illuminance levels. This way of reusing a
view matrix can therefore not be used.
The y­axis contains the time it took the simulation to run in seconds. The blue column
represents the results from not reusing a view matrix, and the orange columns contain
the results of reusing a view matrix. The two horizontal lines indicate the mean time for all
10 simulations. It is shown that the simulation reusing a view matrix was slightly quicker.
The average time of a non­reusing simulation was 88.8 seconds, and the average time of
reusing simulation was 85.2 seconds. So averagely 3.6 seconds quicker. However, these
time differences are very minor, and might be results of computer power differences during
simulation. For further investigation the same study was done on a bigger 10 room model.
The results from this are shown in Figure 5.8.
For this 10­room model the average simulation time of a non­reusing simulation was 177
seconds, and 172 seconds for the reusing simulation. The reusing simulation was also
in this case slightly quicker, averagely 5 seconds. Still the difference in simulation time
is so minor, that it majorly is based upon computational power during the simulations.
These results seem to indicate, that there actually isn’t any time saved from reusing a
view matrix.
32
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.7: Simulation time for a 2­room model. The y­axis contains the time it took the simulation
to run in seconds. The blue column represents the results from not reusing a view matrix, and the
orange columns contain the results of reusing a view matrix. The two horizontal lines indicate the
mean time for all 10 simulations.
Figure 5.8: Simulation time for a 10­room model. The y­axis contains the time it took the simulation
to run in seconds. The blue column represents the results from not reusing a view matrix, and the
orange columns contain the results of reusing a view matrix. The two horizontal lines indicate the
mean time for all 10 simulations.
33
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
6
Discussion
The following chapter will discuss the results and findings of the thesis. An evaluation of
the built script’s strengths and weaknesses, will lay way to a discussion on whether this
conducted workflow has potential for future work. The chapter will furthermore provide a
guideline to potential future works as well as put it into a perspective context.
6.1
Review of the tool
Based on the initial design plans for the workflow and capabilities of the tool, it has proven
partly successful. The idea of creating a Grasshopper based script for running Three­
Phase simulations and visualizing the results has been achieved. A method for success­
fully reusing a view matrix from a single room, and then mapping that room around a
bigger geometry which is then simulated, has only partly been achieved. It was found
that the HoneybeePlus components used for running the simulation, wouldn’t accept a 1
room view matrix for a 10­room geometry. Further studies found that even when reusing
a 10 room view matrix for the simulation, simulation times proved to be unchanged, and
thus without any time benefits from reusing a view matrix.
The theoretical idea of the possibility still stands but seems to definitely require a different
methodology than what was used in this project. The built­in reuse feature in the used
Honeybee components seem to be limited in its flexibility, by only working with a pre­
calculated view matrix from the exact same geometry. The component also doesn’t give
the user a way to easily manually chose what view matrix to use, by for example giving in
input to the directory of the view matrix. This directory seems to be coded directly in the
script as the results folder of the simulation.
Looking past the unsuccessful trials of reusing, the rest of the script performed okay.
The ability to generate a simple parametric room, and then use it to create a way bigger
geometry by mapping it around on a Brep, was proven quite successful. The mapping part
of the script can be created in many different ways, and there are for sure more efficient
and better ways to do it, than what was developed in this project. However, the current
script was efficient enough to test and prove the workflow.
Also, the ability to quickly visualize the daylight simulation results in 3D has a big potential.
Giving the users a quick visual output to their results in 3D rather than 2D, can provide
a very good communication tool, especially when showcasing early­stage mass designs.
The script which was used to visualize these results in this project can still be optimized
a lot. Especially a way to remove the necessity of having a visualization script for each
individual room, and rather have a single script which can loop through the data and
visualize all rooms at once could be a great improvement.
6.1.1
Evaluating potential
Considering the results of this study it seems unlikely to achieve impacting time saving
daylight simulations by reusing view matrices. There are, however, still other potential so­
lutions which haven’t been tested in this project. When looking at the mathematical equa­
tion of the Three­Phase simulation 3.4.2, it seems obvious that by having a pre­calculated
view matrix available, the overall equation should be simulated quicker, because one of
the simulation elements has been removed. As the results in Section 5.3 showcased, this
expected lower simulation time was not proven. As of now the results return two impor­
35
==PAGE:46==
tant questions. The first question is whether the calculation of a view matrix actually is so
quick, that a pre­calculation and reuse, won’t affect the overall time of a simulation?
Testing whether or not this would be the case, could be possible by creating a more com­
plex room geometry. The room geometry used in this thesis was a very simple box layout
with a single window, which also results in a more simple view matrix. Pre­calculating a
view matrix of a more complex room with several windows, a more complex room layout,
and more simulation points, would maybe results in bigger time saves.
It could also be that the method and workflow of this specific script is wrong, and that
reusing a view matrix can save simulation time if done in a different way. To further inves­
tigate this, it seems necessary to dive more into the code behind the Radiance simulation.
As seen in the batch files outputted from the simulation, shown in Figure 4.2, Radiance
first calculates the individual matrices and then multiplies them in the equation as seen in
line 67 in the batch file to the left. When the one room view matrix was tested on a 10­room
geometry, the component outputted an error, because the size of the view matrix, didn’t fit
the simulation grid. Meaning that the rows and columns of the 1 room view matrix, wasn’t
matching with the rows and columns of a 10 room view matrix.
Even though the view matrix could manually be manipulating to work on a bigger geom­
etry, the results only proved to be exactly the same as seen in Figure 5.6. These results
indicates that the intended workflow is not working.
6.1.2
Bigger scale
The test with this script was done on still fairly small models. This was intentionally done
in order to reduce simulation time enough, to a point where thorough testing was possible.
From the results in 5.3, it shows that the 2 room simulation saved averagely 3.6 seconds
when reusing a view matrix, and the 10 room simulation saved averagely 5 seconds.
As stated earlier these savings are quite minimal to a point where they are unnoticeable,
but they still indicate some kind of time save. Whether it is results of the idea actually
working, or the time changes are a results of different processing power during simulation
is unclear. It could be interesting to run the script on way bigger geometries, to check
what type of time difference it then would have. For example on a building with 10 floors
and 10 rooms on each floor. Unfortunately my computer couldn’t handle simulations of
this size as they would overload my RAM, causing my PC to freeze. These bigger tests
could however, maybe be performed using a server based simulation such as Pollination.
(Cloud, 2021)
6.2
Further studies
The script, which was built in this thesis, aimed to test several features related to multi­
phase simulation. The main feature was the ability to reuse a view matrix in a simulation on
mapped geometry using the tools available through HoneybeePlus. The main purpose
of this would be to save simulation time, by having a saved library of view matrices of
different room sizes, in order to run simulations more quickly on bigger geometry. The
results showed that this specific workflow was not beneficial.
Another ability which the script tested, was a way to visualize the results of the simulation
in 3D and show whether the analyzed rooms were following the building regulations in
regards to daylight. This part of the script was successful but has room for improvement.
Currently the script requires a specific script for each individual room. This makes the
script less scale able, as bigger geometries would require very big scripts. Another fault
36
==PAGE:47==
to this current method, is that it requires a lot of manual inputs whenever the geometry is
changed.
However, there are a lot of promising aspects of creating a workflow to properly showcase
results of daylight simulations in 3D. It would give architects an ability to quickly visualize
zones in their geometry with insufficient daylight, and also provide them with an additional
communication tool when evaluating their results.
It could be interesting to investigate different and more improved scripts for showing day­
light results in 3D. For example by adding ways to showcase the results based on different
daylight parameters other than the 300 Lux. There is also a potential for combining this
type of result visualizer, to other types of daylight scripts not necessarily based on multi­
phase simulation or even Honeybee plugins. The visualizer could for example be tested
with a Climate Studio simulation.(Solemma, 2021) Climate Studio has great capabilities
for running quick daylight analysis locally, so this might be better than Honeybee when
the aim is to run quicker simulations.
6.3
Outlook
A final outlook on the results of this thesis, indicates that making a functional View­Matrix
reusing Three­Phase simulation, will require a more in depth look at the code behind Ra­
diance. The topic of running simulations by reusing phases is explained in Section 7.3
in Sarith Subramaniams: ”Daylight Simulations with Radiance using Matrix­based Meth­
ods”. (Subramaniam, 2017, Section 7.3). This section explains how parametric reusing
simulations can be performed trough the use of Radiance commands. These Radiance
commands can be seen in (Subramaniam, 2017, Appendix C.3). Taking a look into how
the Radiance code and these commands fully function, would be the first step for further
work.
37
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
7
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to create a script, which could successfully reuse a view matrix
in Three­Phase daylight simulation with the tools available in HoneybeePlus. Hereby,
making it possible for a user, to calculate view matrices of different sized rooms, and save
these for use in future simulations of bigger geometry.
The results of the produced script showed that while it is possible to reuse a pre­generated
view matrix, the benefits of doing so are limited. By testing several simulations both non­
reusing and reusing, simulation times showed to be almost identical, with only a minor
improvement in the reusing simulations. Another aspect of the script was the ability to ac­
tually use a single room view matrix, and then map that room around a bigger constructed
Rhino Brep, creating several identical rooms. While with this workflow it was possible to
create the geometry, it wasn’t successful in running the simulation as intended.
The simulation wouldn’t accept the view matrix of the singular room, because it didn’t
match the size of the analysis grid of the 10 mapped new rooms. However, by manually
manipulating with the size of view matrix, by copying the contents of it 10 times within
itself, it was possible to run the simulation. The result of this simulation was that each
of the generated rooms had the exact same illuminance levels, meaning that the reused
view matrix, made all rooms identical.
Lastly the script’s ability to visualize the final results of the simulation in 3D were partly
successful. Though the visualizing part of the script is clunky and requires manual inputs,
it could still showcase which rooms were achieving at least 300 Lux in at least half of
their illuminance points. This type of visualizer can, if optimized, give architects working
in earlier stages of design, an ability to easily identify potential problematic areas of their
design.
Overall, it can be concluded that reusing view matrices in Three­Phase simulations, run
by HoneybeePlus components, won’t have as big an impact as expected. It is therefore
required to look deeper into the code and commands of Radiance, to investigate future
possibilities of this workflow.
39
==PAGE:50==
40
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
Associates, R. M.
bibinitperiod. (2021). Features. https://www.rhino3d.com/features/#overview
Auersignal. (2021). All about luminous intensity, luminous flux & illuminance. https://
www.auersignal.com/en/technical-information/visual-signalling-equipment/luminous-
intensity/
Bygningsreglementet. (2021). Lys og udsyn. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-
bestemmelser/18/Krav
Christoph F. Reinhart, Z. R., John Mardaljevic. (2006). Dynamic daylight performance
metrics for sustainable building design. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.
1582/LEUKOS.2006.03.01.001?journalCode=ulks20
Cloud, P. (2021). Platform. https://www.pollination.cloud/platform
Davidson, S. (2021). Grasshopper. https://www.grasshopper3d.com/
Eleonora Brembilla. (2019). Applicability of climate­based daylight modelling. Loughbor­
ough University Research Repository. https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/articles/
thesis/Applicability_of_climate-based_daylight_modelling/9455126
Frauenhofer ISE. (2015). Integrated Simulation of Complex Fenestration Systems. Frauen­
hofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems. https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/content/
dam/ise/en/documents/information-material/Building-Energy-Technology/15e_
ISE_Flyer_Complex_Fenestration.pdf
Green, B. (2020). Få dagslyset tilbage med bæredygtigt design. https://buildinggreen.eu/
together/2020/11/23/faa-dagslyset-tilbage-baeredygtigt-design/
Harvard. (2020). Blue light has a dark side. https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-
healthy/blue-light-has-a-dark-side
Laboratory, L. B. N. (2019). Window. https://windows.lbl.gov/software/window
Maria Kamper, A. M. (2020). Dagslys i det begbyggede miljø. https://www.ucviden.dk/
da/projects/dagslys-i-det-bebyggede-milj%C3%B8
Maria Kamper, S. M., Amdi Worm. (2021a). Dagslys i det bebyggede miljø. https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=_iSSZixcuCQ
Maria Kamper, S. M., Amdi Worm. (2021b). Vi skal have dagslys ind i planloven. https:
//byrummonitor.dk/Debat/art8483881/Vi-skal-have-dagslys-ind-i-planloven
McNeil, A. (2014). The three­phase method for simulating complex fenestration with radi­
ance. https://www.radiance-online.org/learning/tutorials
41
==PAGE:52==
Molio. (2021). Bygningsreglementet sikrer ensartethed i byggeriet i danmark. https://
molio.dk/produkter/digitale-vaerktojer/byggedata/hvad-er-bygningsreglementet
Museum, D. S. (2021). Billeder fra bispebjerg hospital ­ eksteriører. https://dsr.dk/dshm/
sygeplejens- historie/dansk- sygepleje- i- 150- aar/bispebjerg- hospital- indviet- 1913/
billeder-fra-0
RFritz, & AMcneil. (2019). About radiance. https://www.radiance-online.org/about
Solemma. (2021). Climate studio. https://www.solemma.com/climatestudio
Subramaniam, S. (2017). Daylighting simulations with radiance using matrix­based meth­
ods. https://www.radiance-online.org/learning/tutorials/matrix-based-methods
Tools, L. (2021). Ladybug. https://www.ladybug.tools/
VELUX Knowledge Centre for Daylight, Energy and indoor Climate (DEIC). (2014). Day­
light, Energy and Indoor Climate Basic Book. Velux. https://www.velux.com/what-
we-do/research-and-knowledge/deic-basic-book
White, M. C. (2021). The home office might be here to stay. https://www.nbcnews.com/
business/business-news/home-office-might-be-here-stay-workers-are-flexing-their-
n1278395
Worklife, B. (2021). Coronavirus: How the world of work may change forever. https://
www . bbc . com / worklife / article / 20201023 - coronavirus - how - will - the - pandemic -
change-the-way-we-work
42
==PAGE:53==
List of Figures
2.1
Exterior facades of Bispebjerg Hospital (Museum, 2021) . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Five different definitions for Daylighting (Christoph F. Reinhart, 2006) . . . .
5
3.1
A decision tree showcasing the different requirements for different phases
of daylight analysis. The simulation names are seen on the right. For this
thesis the Three­Phase Method was chosen, as it is the simplest method
that includes a dynamic scene.(Subramaniam, 2017, Chapter 1.) . . . . . .
11
3.2
A schematic diagram of the Two­Phase Method, showing how the daylight
coefficient on a surface is calculated directly from the sky vector. (Subra­
maniam, 2017, Chapter 6.)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
A schematic diagram of the Three­Phase Method, which shows the differ­
ent phases of the simulation.(Subramaniam, 2017, Chapter 7.) . . . . . . . 14
3.4
A schematic diagram of the Four­Phase Method, which shows the added
F­matrix. (Subramaniam, 2017, Chapter 8.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.1
Simple flowchart of the intended simulation workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Comparison between simulation batch files. Left: batch file from a non­
reusing Three­Phase Simulation. Right: batch file from a reusing Three­
Phase simulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Results folder from non reusing simulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
Results folder from reusing simulation. The modified time column of the
south_window.vmx shows, that it is reused from the previous simulation in
Figure 4.3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.5
Grasshopper script for generating the initial room geometry. Left side of the
script generates the parametric room, window, and simulation grid. Right
side of the script runs the Three­Phase simulation for generating the view
matrix. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.6
Grasshopper script for mapping the room onto a Brep. This part of thje
script uses a set Brep to generate a set of planes. These planes can then
be used together with the Orient component. The orient component can
take a piece of geometry and map it to a different location based upon a
plane. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.7
Grasshopper script for assigning the geometry elements to the simulation.
The grouped geometry is divided into surfaces, Breps, and meshes using
a component called Sort Objects By Type from the Human plug­in. Af­
terwards, these different elements are cleaned by a Clean Tree compo­
nent and their respective HoneybeePlus components to generate Honey­
bee window groups and Honeybee surfaces, as well as simulation test points. 23
4.8
Grasshopper script for simulating the Three­Phase simulation. The sim­
ulation script uses three HoneybeePlus components. First, the Analysis
Grid component takes the test points and their vectors and generates an
analysis grid. This grid is then added to the second component, the Hon­
eybeePlus Gridbased Three­Phase Daylight Analysis Recipe. This is the
component, which outputs the correct Radiance ”recipe” for running the
simulation. This component also contains an option to reuse an already
calculated view matrix. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
43
==PAGE:54==
4.9
Grasshopper script for visualizing the results of the simulation. The script
uses the component, HoneybeePlus Hourly Values, to sort all the results
from the simulation into specific times of the year. These values are then
connected to a Ladybug component called LB Spatial Heatmap which vi­
sualises 2D results. Another connection point from the hourly values is
connected to a stream gate. This gate, when set to true, allows the data to
pass through onto the clusters which visualises the 3D results. . . . . . . . 25
4.10 Grasshopper script of the exploded cluster used to visualise the illuminance
results in 3D. The data is sorted in part by some basic python scripts, and
lastly visualised by a coloured brep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.1
The Ladybug component LB Calculate Hour of The Year (HOY) component,
is used to sort which hourly values of the simulation to show in the results. . 27
5.2
Simulation results shown in 2D from the LB Spatial Heatmap. It shows that
the sun sits quite high to the east, thus providing sufficient daylight for the
rooms with south or east facing windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Simulation results shown in 3D. The script instantly shows which rooms
have a minimum of half of their simulation points above the 300 lux thresh­
old. These are the rooms highlighted in green, whereas the red rooms are
below this threshold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.4
Error message from simulation output of a mapped 10 room simulation,
reusing a singular view matrix. The error states that if the analysis grid has
been change you must re­calculate the view matrix.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.5
Comparison between 1 room and 10 room view matrices. As seen high­
lighted in yellow, the row’s of the matrix matches the simulation points of
the simulation, and the 10 room view matrix therefore has 10 times as many
rows of data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.6
Results of simulation using a manipulated view matrix. The results from
this simulation show that each of the 10 rooms, have the exact same il­
luminance levels. This way of reusing a view matrix can therefore not be
used.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.7
Simulation time for a 2­room model. The y­axis contains the time it took
the simulation to run in seconds. The blue column represents the results
from not reusing a view matrix, and the orange columns contain the results
of reusing a view matrix. The two horizontal lines indicate the mean time
for all 10 simulations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.8
Simulation time for a 10­room model. The y­axis contains the time it took
the simulation to run in seconds. The blue column represents the results
from not reusing a view matrix, and the orange columns contain the results
of reusing a view matrix. The two horizontal lines indicate the mean time
for all 10 simulations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
44
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
45
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
