==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis:
Modeling of surface height and river dis-
charge using satellite altimetry and flow laws
- A case study of Amur River
Author:
Linda Christoffersen, s147334
Supervisors:
Karina Nielsen, DTU Space
Peter Bauer-Gottwein, DTU Environment
Monica Frias, DTU Environment
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
What always murmurs but never talks,
always runs but never walks,
has a bed but never sleeps,
has a mouth but never speaks?
Modeling of surface height and river discharge using satellite altimetry and flow laws
- A case study of Amur River
Master Thesis:
January, 2022
By
Linda Christoffersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU Space, National Space Institute, Elektrovej, building 328, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
https://www.space.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Models relating river discharge and water surface elevation, WSE, are of high interest,
as these enable estimations of discharge based on water surface elevation. The Saint-Venant
equations forms a 1-dimensional hydraulic model which require knowledge of the river cross
sectional geometry, bed slope, river discharge, lateral inflow, WSE, and bed roughness. The
satellite ICESat-2 ATL03 data product is utilised to extract knowledge of the river cross sec-
tional geometry at multiple locations using laser altimetry. The river cross sectional geometry
that is submerged by water is expressed mathematically by the submerged channel depth, a
shape parameter, and a discharge correction parameter. Along with the bed roughness, these
three parameters can not be directly measured, and are therefore calibrated. The calibration
process is performed by the global search algorithm Shuffled Complex Evolution.
A case study of Amur River is conducted along a stretch of 130km, where 11 river cross
sections reflect the river cross sectional geometry. The calibration parameters are calibrated
through 7000 iterations and the optimal calibration parameter values result in a RMSE of the
simulated WSE of 1.4 meters. The calibration process finds parameter values at the boundary
of the parameter space, and multiple parameters are correlated. The model is validated against
radar altimetry WSE from Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2 with a RMSE of 1.55 meters and a median
error of 9.04%. The hydraulic model estimates river discharge based on WSE measurements
from radar altimetry with a median error of -31.1%.
The model performance will benefit
from improved quality of river cross sections, and expanding the hydraulic model to include
reservoirs and other hydraulic aspects affecting the river discharge.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Karina Nielsen, Senior Researcher, DTU Space, Geodesy and Earth Observation.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Karina Nielsen for being a good supervisor and
mentor through my whole master’s degree and the final thesis. We have worked together since my
bachelor thesis, which have given me much perspective and motivation to continue within the field
of geophysics.
Peter Bauer-Gottwein, Professor, DTU Environment.
I am deeply grateful to Peter Bauer-Gottwein for providing great insight into hydrology and the
mechanisms that influence my hydraulic model and the results. I have left our meetings with a
greater understanding of the topic and new aspects to consider.
Monica Frias, PhD student, DTU Environment.
Monica Frias has generously provided Python code, practical experience with the MIKE software,
and know-how of the procedure. I would not have been able to get the model running without her
scripts to guide me. She has been a huge help in finding potential mistakes in my work.
DHI, Company
Special thanks to DHI for providing their extensive and thorough MIKE software for free to
accomplish the goals of this thesis. The MIKE software has been a key element in the process
and has been of great help.
Elena Zakharova, Senior Researcher, Water Problem Institute, Moscow
I would like to extend my gratitude to Elena Zakharova for providing insitu discharge data for the
Amur River.
Marie Eldor, Master student, DTU Space, Geomagnetism and Geospace.
Marie has been a huge help with insightful suggestions, important inputs, keeping me focused, and
creating a good study environment at our student oﬀice. Marie has been a good help in extracting
the essence of my confusions and provide answers of great insight.
My family and friends
I am very, very grateful to my family and my boyfriend for the tremendous and unconditional
support throughout my studies and my master thesis. They have motivated me, acknowledged
my frustrations, and proposed solutions to move forward. I can’t thank you enough. I also highly
appreciate my friend Kristine’s patience with never ending report-technical questions.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis is carried out over the period August 2nd 2021 to February 2nd 2022. The
project is a collaboration between DTU Space and DTU Environment at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU. The extent of the thesis is 35 ECTS points and is the final project of the
Master in Earth and Space, Physics and Engineering. The primary supervisor is Senior Researcher
Karina Nielsen from DTU Space and Professor Peter Bauer-Gottwein from DTU Environment is
co-supervisor. Further, PhD Student Monica Frias from DTU Environment has functioned as a
co-supervisor.
This project seeks to build a knowledge bridge between DTU Space and DTU Environment. DTU
Environment has extensive knowledge in the field of river modelling and hydrology while DTU
Space has great insight into Earth observation from satellites.
Programs used for this project are R 3.5.2, Python 3.7, QGIS 3.18.3, and MIKE 2021. DHI has
provided a free student-license to enable use of their software. Due to limited experience in python
programming it has been necessary to adopt some python scripts from Monica Frias to reach the
end goal. The model calibration has been performed on a server with processor Intel(R) Xeon(R)
CPU E5-2690 v2 3.00 GHz with 32GB RAM.
Linda Christoffersen - s147334
Signature
Date
iv
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Contents
Abstract
ii
List of abbreviations
vii
List of Symbols
viii
1
Introduction
1
2
Altimetry remote sensing
3
2.1
Laser altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Radar altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Comparison of satellite missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Hydrodynamics in rivers
7
3.1
Physics of flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Flow resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Hydraulic geometry relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
Natural depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.4
Conveyance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Hydraulic model: 1D Saint-Venant equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Data
13
4.1
River cross sections: ICESat-2 ATL03
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Training data: ICESat-2 ATL13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Validation data: Sentinel-3 and Cryosat 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
River discharge: Insitu gauge stations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5
Upstream drainage area: MERIT Hydro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.6
Ancillary data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
River Case Study: Amur River
15
6
Method and implementation
18
6.1
River representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2.1
Extraction of river topography from ATL03 data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2.2
River cross section profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2.3
Modelling submerged channel bathymetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.2.4
Manual validation of cross sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2.5
Cross sections in MIKE HYDRO River
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Preparation of validation and insitu data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.4
Implementation of hydraulic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4.1
Updating submerged channel geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4.2
Steady state solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.5
Hydraulic model calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.5.1
Manual calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.5.2
Calibration with SpotPy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.5.3
Shuffled complex evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7
Results
35
7.1
Simulated WSE profiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.2
Effect of calibration parameters on simulated WSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.3
Grid convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.4
Performance of global search algorithm for calibration parameter values
. . . . . .
40
7.5
Validation of hydraulic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.6
Application: Prediction of river discharge from WSE measurements . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Discussion
46
v
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
8.1
River cross sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8.2
Effect of discharge correction on the WSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.3
Calibration process and parameter values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.4
Validation of hydraulic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.5
Data quality and availability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.6
Processing time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9
Future work
52
10 Conclusion
53
11 Appendix A: Additional results
56
12 Appendix B: Code
57
vi
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
List of abbreviations
ATLAS
Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System
ATL03
ATLAS data product 03
ATL13
ATLAS data product 13
CCE
competitive complex evolution
DEM
Digital Elevation Model
GKD
Gaussian Kernel Distribution
GRWL
Global River Widths from Landsat
GSWE
Global Surface Water Explorer
RGT
Reference Ground Track
RMSE
Root mean squared error
RS
Remote Sensing
SAR
Synthetic aperture radar
SARIn
Synthetic Aperture Interferometric
SCE-UA
Shuffled complex evolution from University of Arizona
SS solver
Steady state solver
UPA
Upstream drainage area
WSE
Water Surface Elevation
vii
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
List of symbols
A
Cross sectional flow area
[m2]
b
River width
[m]
c
Speed of light
[m/s]
dx
Grid size in hydraulic model
[m]
d
Submerged channel depth of river cross section
[m]
E
Residual between simulated and calibration WSE
[m]
g
Gravitational acceleration
[m/s2]
Hse
Height of satellite above reference ellipsoid
[m]
Hss
Height of satellite above ground surface
[m]
Hp
Photon height
[m]
K
Conveyance
[m3/s]
n
Manning’s friction coeﬀicient
[s/m1/3]
P
Wetted perimeter
[m]
Q
River discharge
[m3/s]
q
Lateral inflow
[m2/s]
R
Hydraulic radius
[m]
r
Shape parameter for submerged river profile
S0
River bottom slope
[m/m]
Sf
Friction slope
[m/m]
t
Time
[s]
Tt
Transmission time
[s]
Tr
Receiving time
[s]
v
Flow velocity
[m/s]
V
Area-average velocity
[m/s]
w
River depth in Saint-Venant equations
[m]
xxs
Horizontal coordinate of river cross section
[m]
x
Distance along chainage
[m]
z
Submerged channel depth at center
[m]
α
Discharge correction parameter
[m/ (m3/s)]
θ
Angle
[degree]
ρ
Water density
[kg/m3]
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Fresh water resources are critical for energy and food production, and human survival. 2 billion
people live in countries with high water stress, and 90 percent of natural disasters are weather
related (United Nations 2018).
Over time, climate changes have led to increased frequency of
extreme events. These events influence people and wildlife near water bodies, which serve as a link
between the environment and society. Droughts limit the access to fresh water while floods result
in material damages, crop damages, and cost of human lives.
Amur River, which is located on the border of Russia and China, is subjected to major flood-
hazards which inundate large territories. Repeated floods have been recorded, and the most severe
event was measured in 2013 which became the most destructive one within the observation period.
The first step in mitigating the consequences of extreme events is to understand the underlying flow
dynamics. This increases the ability to develop tools for predicting hydrological extreme events
(Bolgov et al. 2017).
A river is influenced by various climactic criteria, for example precipitation, seasonality in precip-
itation, drainage area, and melt of glaciers and seasonal snow (A. Gupta, Slaymaker, and Junk
2020). River characteristics such as discharge, cross sectional geometry, and water surface elevation
have previously been measured insitu, for example by gauge stations. Insitu data posses the huge
limitation that only areas that are physically accessible can be measured. Further, insitu data can
be very expensive and time consuming. Hydrodynamic modelling is a good tool for forecasting
and thereby mitigating extreme events. These models needs calibration for each river to accurately
represent the flow dynamics. This has conventionally been based on insitu measurements of water
surface elevation, river slope, and river bathymetry (Jiang, Madsen, and Bauer-Gottwein 2019).
Advancements in remote sensing techniques have proposed an increased role in hydraulic and
hydrologic fields. Remote sensing is able to estimate key hydraulic parameters needed for hydro-
dynamic models. River width, water surface elevation, and river slope can now be measured by
remote sensing. The altimetry satellite ICESat-2 is able to measure the surface elevation every
0.7 meters along track. This brings the opportunity to estimate the visible river bed geometry at
low flow periods. These measurements help constrain model parameters for calibration of hydro-
dynamic models. The spatial distribution of remote sensing measurements are of high importance,
especially in ungauged regions.
The objective of this study is to utilize the advancements in remote sensing to create a 1-dimensional
hydrodynamic model of a reach of Amur River. ICESat-2 ATL03 data product is used to measure
the cross sectional geometry of the river at low flow conditions. The cross sectional geometry of the
river defines key parameters needed to create a model that reflect the flow dynamics of the river.
Key parameters are among other the river width, flow area, how much the flow area increases when
the water level increases, and similar physical aspects.
The river flow is represented by a 1-dimensional hydraulic model given by the Saint-Venant equa-
tions. These equations combine the mass balance equation and the momentum balance equation
for a gradually varied flow. This model is dependent on flow area, river slope, bed friction, and
river discharge. The cross section geometry that is submerged by water, can not be directly mea-
sured by satellites. This part of the cross section geometry is therefore estimated mathematically
by a set of parameters. Parameters describing the submerged cross section geometry, along with
the channel bed roughness, are calibrated by a global search process. The model is calibrated with
respect to these parameters using robust estimations of the water surface elevation from ICESat-2
ATL13 altimetry measurements.
The calibrated model will be used to predict the amount of water flowing through Amur River, also
called river discharge measured in m3/s, in the future. When the water surface elevation has been
measured by satellites, the corresponding river discharge can be calculated from the calibrated
hydraulic model.
This provides a means of estimating river discharge from satellite altimetry
1
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
alone, when the model is calibrated. Predicting river discharge will help mitigate losses and costs
of extreme events and improve understanding of the river dynamics.
2
==PAGE:12==
2
ALTIMETRY REMOTE SENSING
2
Altimetry remote sensing
Remote sensing, RS, is the process of monitoring and detecting physical characteristics from re-
flected and emitted radiation. It posses the great advantage that it can collect data in remote areas
where physical access is limited. Insitu measurements is often slow, expensive, and sometimes im-
possible as the survey area must be accessible to measure on site. Remote sensing is increasingly
used for water monitoring, as it is effective and have good global coverage. It is not possible to
measure river discharge directly with remote sensing, though, measurements of the river width,
slope, and surface elevation can contribute to estimating river discharge. Hydrodynamic relations
couples the water surface elevation to discharge, and satellite data is therefore useful for creating
hydraulic models of rivers.
Remote sensing covers different sensing methods for measuring surface elevation with its own
pros and cons. Laser and radar altimetry has for years been used to estimate water and land
topography (Bjerklie et al. 2018). This project uses laser altimetry from the satellite ’Ice, Cloud,
and Land Elevation Satellite-2’, ICESat-2, to measure the river cross sectional geometry and the
water surface elevation, WSE. Radar altimetry measured by Sentinel-3, and Cryosat-2 is exploited
to measure the WSE which is used for model validation.
2.1
Laser altimetry
ICESat-2, is a part of NASA’s Earth Observing System and was launched in September 2018. The
payload instrument Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System, ATLAS, is a laser altimeter
that uses visible wavelengths of 532nm. The system determines the surface elevation by emitting
a laser pulse and measuring the return time. The height of the reflecting surface is calculated as
Hp = Hse −Hss = Hse −cTt −Tr
2
(2.1)
where Hp is the elevation of the scattering surface, Hse is the satellite height above the reference
ellipsoid and Hss is the satellite height above the scattering surface. Hss is often called the range.
Tt is the transmission time, Tr is the receiving time, and c is the speed of light.
The ability
to precisely measure the transmit and receive time is crucial to accurately measure the photon
scattering heights.
The photon travel time is corrected for different geophysical effects on the
photon speed which is described in (NASA 2021).
Figure 1: Ideal beam and footprint pattern of the ICESat-2 payload ATLAS,
from NASA 2021 figure 6.
3
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Radar altimetry
2
ALTIMETRY REMOTE SENSING
ATLAS emits 1000 laser pulses with approximately 1014 photons every second which results in
elevation measurements every 0.7 meters along the ground track. The emitted laser pulse is split
into six beams arranged in three pairs by a diffracting optical element. The beams in each beam-
pair has an energy ratio of 1:4 to improve the detection of different surfaces. The six beams are
categorized based on the ground pattern from left to right: gt1l, gt1r, gt2l, gt2r, gt3l, gt3r. l and
r refer to the left and right position in a beam pair, respectively (NASA 2021). Figure 1 shows the
configuration of the six beams. The distance between two beam pairs is 3.3km in the across-track
direction. The strong and weak beams in a beam pair are separated by 2.5km in the along-track
direction and 90 meters in the across-track direction (NASA 2021).
ATLAS uses visible photon wavelengths and therefore posses the ability to penetrate calm and clear
water. In open ocean water ATLAS photons can penetrate up to 80m, in coastal areas ATLAS
photons can penetrate up to 20 meters, while it is only possible to penetrate up to 6 meters in
estuary zones. Penetration in inland water is highly dependent on water clarity (NASA 2020).
Water in rivers are often too opaque to be penetrated and the river bottom elevation can therefore
not always be detected. Visible wavelength have the great disadvantage that it can not penetrate
heavy clouds, thus, data is not available for times with bad weather.
Multiple data products are available based on the ICESat-2 ATLAS photon measurements. The
ATL03 data product contains geolocated photons thus each photon is referenced to longitude,
latitude, height, and time. The data product ATL13 contains WSE based on ATL03 data. This
product is created in areas with inland waters and in coastal regions. The WSE is calculated by
analysing the water scattering and other physical parameters and correct the elevation for these.
The product uses multiple ATL03 photons for the correction, and the product therefore has an
along track resolution of 30-100 meters.
Technical details about the product can be found at
(NASA 2020).
2.2
Radar altimetry
Cryosat-2 was launched on April 8th 2010 and detects water surface elevation with a radar altimeter
called Synthetic Aperture Interferometric Radar Altimeter, SIRAL. SIRAL is a Ku-band radar
altimeter which operates in three modes. Figure 2 shows the basic principle of Low resolution
mode and SAR mode. When measuring inland waters Synthetic Aperture Interferometry, SARIn,
is used. This method uses two synthetic aperture radars, SAR, mounted on the satellite 1 meter
apart. These two SAR receive the transmitted signal echo almost simultaneously. If the returning
signal is coming from another direction than nadir, the signal have travelled different distances to
reach each antenna. This results in a different signal phase and angle of arrival which can be used
to derive the signal origin (ESA 2021a). When the origin of the signal is derived, the along-track
footprint can be reduced, resulting in better accuracy.
The Sentinel-3 mission consists of two satellites flying in the same orbit, but with 140 degrees
spacing. Sentinel-3A was launched 16th of February 2016 and Sentinel-3B was launched on 25th
of April 2018, and both satellites are still operating.
It is a collaboration between ESA and
EUMETSAT whose main objective is to measure sea surface topography. The on board instrument
is a radar, which can operate in high resolution mode and low resolution mode. The high resolution
mode uses SAR technology, which was first introduced for Cryosat. Sentinel-3 uses SAR mode
globally in opposition to Cryosat-2 which only uses SAR mode in specific areas. The Sentinel-3
radar emits pulses at Ku-band (ESA 2021b).
4
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Comparison of satellite missions
2
ALTIMETRY REMOTE SENSING
Figure 2: Left; Radar altimeter wavefront, right; SAR mode altimeter pinpoints
surface with Doppler shift. Figure adopted from (EUMETSAT 2017, figure2)
2.3
Comparison of satellite missions
Table 1 show key aspects of the orbit and measurement technique for ICESat-2, Sentinel-3, and
Cryosat-2.
The satellites’ orbit, repeat time, footprint, track separation, and global coverage
determines how well it is suited to measure different areas and objects. Due to the very high
along-track resolution of ICESat-2 of 0.7 meters, and the relatively small footprint of 14 meters,
ATLAS is useful to measure small variations on the surface. The track separation determines which
water bodies is measured while the repeat time defines how often it is measured. ICESat-2 has a
repeat time of 91 days and Sentinel-3 has a repeat time of 27 days, which enables the possibility
of measuring seasonal changes.
ICESat-2
Sentinel-3
Cryosat-2
Launch
15-10-2018
16-02-2016
08-04-2010
Repeat cycle
91 days
27 days
369 days
Along track resolution
0.7m ATL03
30-100m ATL13
300 m
∼300 m
Footprint across track
14 m
1.64 km
15 km
Track separation at equator
28.8 km
52 km
7.5 km
Measurement technique
Laser
Radar
Radar
Wavelength
532 nm
Ku-band
Ku-band
Inclination
92 degrees
98.65 degrees
92 degrees
Weather dependence
Does not penetrate clouds
All conditions
All conditions
Table 1: Overview of key aspects of ICESat-2, Sentinel-3, and Cryosat-2 (NASA
2020,NASA 2021,ESA 2021b,ESA 2021a).
Cryosat-2 has a drifting ground track pattern, where most other satellites have a much lower
repeat-track time. This limits the possibility of frequently measuring elevations at the same point,
but on the other hand Cryosat-2 has a smaller inter-track distance. This provide measurements
at a larger number inland water bodies and higher spatial resolution of water level profiles along
rivers. Combining different altimetry missions and techniques provide a good spatial and temporal
coverage of inland water bodies (EUMETSAT 2017).
5
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Comparison of satellite missions
2
ALTIMETRY REMOTE SENSING
ATL03 data product is ideal for high resolution elevation profiles due to the low along track
resolution.
In this project, ATL03 will be utilized to produce cross section profiles of rivers.
ATL13 data is robust WSE measurements and will be used to calibrate the hydraulic model
against. The validation of the model is conducted by comparing the model simulation of WSE
with measurements from Cryosat-2 and Sentinel-3.
6
==PAGE:16==
3
HYDRODYNAMICS IN RIVERS
3
Hydrodynamics in rivers
The goal is to create a model that represent the flow dynamics of a stretch of Amur River and
use this to estimate river discharge from measured water surface elevations, WSE, along the river.
River discharge is the amount of water that flows through a cross section of the river given in
m3/s. The hydraulic model should represent the physical behavior and flow dynamics and must
therefore include key elements that describe the river flow.
Rivers are natural stream of water flowing in a channel. Many large rivers start at higher elevation
where water accumulate from the drainage basin and flow towards the ocean, lakes, or other rivers.
A tributary is a river that flows towards another river, contributing to the size and flow of the
primary river. River discharge is highly determined by precipitation and melting of ice and snow
within the river drainage area, which means that rivers have fast turnover times. Water entering
the river system from for example precipitation seldom remains in the system for more than a
couple of weeks (Bauer-Gottwein 2022).
The position along a river is defined by the river chainage. The chainage is the distance along
the river given in meters from an upstream location. The chainage follows the curves of the river
and the distance along the chainage can therefore be longer than the direct distance between two
points, see figure 3.
Figure 3: Schematic of spatial dimension of rivers, called chainage.
It is a
1-dimensional curved coordinate following the river.
Adapted from Bauer-
Gottwein 2022, figure 5.
Other defining aspects of a river is the river morphology. River morphology describes the local
geology and sediment transport, which may change along the course of the river. The sinuosity
describes how much a river bends through the landscape. Some rivers are braided and thus split
into sub-rivers separated by bars of land and merge together again. The sinuosity and meandering
of rivers are dependent on the local geology and sediment supply (A. Gupta, Slaymaker, and Junk
2020). The cross section shape of the river is influenced by the waters ability to transport sediment
and the sinuosity.
The bed material influences how fast the water flows. A river with smooth river bed will flow
faster than a river with large boulders. The channel slope is the difference in elevation between
two points divided by the distance between these points. The channel slope influences the water
flow as a steep slope will allow water to flow faster. Figure 4 shows a natural channel cross section
and nearby terrain. When the river extends beyond the river banks, flood plains are flooded. The
flow resistance of flood plains are much higher than the resistance in the main channel. When the
water level reaches the top of the banks the river has reached the bank full width and elevation
(DHI 2017).
7
==PAGE:17==
3.1
Physics of flow
3
HYDRODYNAMICS IN RIVERS
Figure 4: Natural river channel cross section.
Inspired by Wang, Lee, and
Melching 2015, figure 1.19.
In the following, key parameters of river flow will be described further, leading to the hydraulic
model representing the river.
3.1
Physics of flow
River flow is a balance between gravity’s attraction which accelerates water downhill and friction
opposing the acceleration. Key parameters defining river flow is
Key parameters of river flow
Q
Discharge
[m3/s]
w
Flow depth
[m]
S0
Bed slope
[m/m]
b
River width
[m]
A
Flow cross sectional area
[m2]
v
Average flow velocity
[m/s]
x
Chainage
[m]
Table 2: Overview of key aspects of river flow (Bauer-Gottwein 2022).
Figure 5 shows an open channel with flow cross sectional area A, river width, b, and depth, w. The
river cross section is a 2D section or profile of the river, perpendicular to river flow. The wetted
perimeter, P [m], is the part of the bottom and sides that are covered by water, represented by
the clear blue line. The hydraulic radius is given by the river cross-sectional area over the wetted
perimeter, R = A/P [m](DHI 2017). This describes how much influence the bed resistance has on
the flow (Armanini 2017).
Figure 5: Schematic of channel flow, adopted from Bauer-Gottwein 2022, figure
5.
Discharge is the volume of water passing through a cross section of the river per time, and is
therefore given by ∆Q = v cos(θ)∆A where v is the velocity, and θ is the angle between the
velocity vector and the perpendicular to the cross section. In the following it is assumed that
the angle is zero, and the discharge can therefore be described by equation 3.1 where V is the
8
==PAGE:18==
3.1
Physics of flow
3
HYDRODYNAMICS IN RIVERS
area-average velocity (Brorsen and Larsen 2009). Equation 3.1 describes how the water velocity
increases if the flow area decreases while the discharge is hold constant, and vise versa.
Q = V A
(3.1)
River discharge is affected by lateral inflow from tributaries, ground water, and surface run-off.
The lateral inflow is represented by q in figure 5 and is given by the inflow per distance. The unit
is (m3/s)/m = m2/s.
3.1.1
Flow resistance
Flow resistance is the general term for multiple frictional forces acting against the water flow. Form
resistance is caused by wakes, spills, sharp changes in flow direction etc while grain resistance is
associated to surface roughness. These terms can be described by different equations where Chézy,
Darcy-Weisbach, and Manning’s equations are the three classic expressions (Ferguson 2013).
Manning’s equation contains a roughness coeﬀicient, n, which is dependent on absolute roughness
and relates river discharge, Q, flow area, A, and friction slope, Sf:
Q = 1
nAR
2
3 S
1
2
f
(3.2)
The friction slope is the river slope that would result in the gravity force, accelerating water,
and friction force, resisting flow, cancel each other. In that case, the flow would be steady and
uniform. Manning’s n has the unit [s/m1/3]. Sometimes Manning’s equation is expressed in terms
of the Manning number, M, which is the reciprocal of n. Manning’s equation is convenient as n
is constant for a given channel material. Examples of Manning’s roughness coeﬀicient for different
river beds are shown in table 3 (Ferguson 2013).
Channel type
Manning’s n [s/m1/3]
Sand bed
0.012-0.026
Soft clay
0.05-0.125
Firm soil
0.018-0.032
Coarser sand
0.026-0.035
Gravel
0.028-0.035
Cobble
0.030-0.50
Vegetation
> 0.2
Table 3: Examples of Manning’s roughness coeﬀicient for natural channels.
(Ferguson 2013, Arcement and Schneider 1998, Brorsen and Larsen 2009)
3.1.2
Hydraulic geometry relations
The shape of a channel is one of the major characteristics for channel flow. The river width and
depth describe how much water is contained in the river. Ideally, the river bed profile is measured
insitu to find the exact shape, but this is expensive and time consuming. Currently, it is not
possible to measure the submerged river bed profile with remote sensing and the submerged part
must therefore be estimated mathematically.
Dingman 2007 proposes an approach of estimating the river geometry mathematically. It is as-
sumed that the geometry does not change significantly during in-bank flow. The cross section
geometry can change during extreme flow, but the assumption is reasonable most of the time
(Dingman 2007). In the following it is assumed that the channel cross section is symmetrical and
that the following relation describes the geometry:
9
==PAGE:19==
3.1
Physics of flow
3
HYDRODYNAMICS IN RIVERS
z = w
2
b
r
xr
xs
,
0 ≤xxs ≤b
2
(3.3)
where z is the height above the channel bottom, w is the flow depth, and b is the width. xxs is
the horizontal distance from the channel center. xxs must be positive to ensure real values. The
channel shape for negative xxs is found by mirroring z values with positive xxs as the channel
shape is symmetrical.
The parameter, r, is the channel shape parameter that defines the shape of the cross-section. The
channel shape parameter must be a positive value. Different values and the corresponding channel
shapes are shown in figure 6 (Dingman 2007, Schaperow et al. 2019). When r = 1 the channel
shape is a triangle, when r = 2 the channel is a parabola, and when r goes towards infinity the
channel becomes rectangular.
Figure 6: Illustration of the channel shape based on different channel shape
parameters, r.
The river bed elevation above the water surface can be measured directly, for example from satellite
altimetry. The unknown geometry is the part of the channel that is submerged. Equation 3.3
estimates only the submerged part of the river cross section. The river width can be found from
satellite altimetry measurements, but the channel depth and the channel shape parameter must
be assumed.
3.1.3
Natural depth
The natural depth is the flow depth when the water surface and the channel bottom is parallel,
and the water depth remains constant with uniform flow. The natural depth is the depth that
results in a balance between flow resistance and velocity. Thus the natural depth occur when the
Manning equation is fulfilled (Brorsen and Larsen 2009). The natural depth can be calculated
when the discharge and the slope is known, as A and R in the Manning equation are functions of
the depth.
3.1.4
Conveyance
The conveyance, K, describe how much water is carried through a channel cross section, given
a water surface elevation. The conveyance is given in [m3/s] and is a measure of the carrying
capability of the liquid as it is proportional to the discharge (Jiang, Christensen, and Bauer-
Gottwein 2021). The conveyance can be expressed from the Manning equation;
Q = 1
nAR
2
3 S
1
2
f = KS
1
2
f
⇒
K = 1
nAR
2
3
(3.4)
10
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Hydraulic model: 1D Saint-Venant equations
3
HYDRODYNAMICS IN RIVERS
3.2
Hydraulic model: 1D Saint-Venant equations
Water flow in open channels such as rivers can be described by the Saint-Venant equations which
composes a 1-D dynamic wave model in open channels (Jiang, Christensen, and Bauer-Gottwein
2021). The Saint-Venant equations express the mass balance and momentum balance equations
for a gradually varied flow. The mass balance equation states that water is conserved within a
system, and can therefore not be either created or lost. The momentum balance equation is based
on Newton’s law that states that all forces acting on the water particles equals the mass times
acceleration (Bauer-Gottwein 2022).
Mass balance equation
The mass balance equation states that the difference in discharge entering and exiting the system
must be accounted for in the storage, thus ∆S = Qin −Qout, where ∆S is the change in storage.
The difference in discharge that enters and exits the system is affected by the lateral inflow and
the discharge change per distance. The system storage is given by the the change in depth over
time (Bauer-Gottwein 2022). This can be expressed mathematically as:
∆S = ∆x∂w
∂t
,
Qin −Qout = −∂Q
∂x ∆x + q∆x
(3.5)
where ∆x is the distance of the control volume. Combining these equations the mass balance
equation becomes
∂w
∂t + ∂Q
∂x −q = 0
(3.6)
Momentum balance equation
The momentum balance equation accounts for the forces acting on the water volume. The main
forces are the gravitational attraction, net pressure force, and friction. The gravitational force
acting in the flow direction is
Fg = ρgA∆x sin(θ) = ρgA∆xS0
(3.7)
where S0 is the bed slope defined as −∂z
∂x [m/m] and g is the gravitational acceleration [m/s2], and
ρ is the density of water [kg/m3].
The pressure force is the force from the water itself acting on a control volume. Figure 7 shows a
control volume in a river and the pressure force acting on the upstream and downstream end of
the volume. The pressure force is a function of water depth, and a change in depth will therefore
result in a change in pressure force.
Figure 7: Illustration of the pressure force acting on a control volume. Adopted
from Bauer-Gottwein 2022, figure 8.
The net pressure force is given by
11
==PAGE:21==
3.2
Hydraulic model: 1D Saint-Venant equations
3
HYDRODYNAMICS IN RIVERS
Fnp = −(ρgδw) A
,
δw = ∂w
∂x ∆x
(3.8)
The minus sign describes that the net pressure force acts against the chainage direction when
the depth at the downstream location increases. The friction force also acts against the chainage
direction and is given by
Ff = −ρgA∆xSf
(3.9)
The sum of the forces acting on the volume is given by
Fg + Fnp + Ff = ρgA∆xS0 −ρgδwA −ρgA∆xSf
(3.10)
This expression equals the mass times the acceleration cf. Newton’s second law. Taking the volume
integral and the surface integral (see Bauer-Gottwein 2022 for further details) the Saint-Venant
equations become
Mass:
∂A
∂t + ∂Q
∂x = q
Momentum:
∂Q
∂t + ∂
∂x
 
βQ2
A
!
+ gA∂w
∂x −gA(S0 −Sf) = 0
(3.11)
β is the momentum coeﬀicient from the surface integral, which is set to unity (Kittel et al. 2021).
The mass balance equation and the momentum balance equation can be combined to an expression
independent of flow depth. When the flow depth is isolated it can be calculated as a function of
the river discharge. We assume steady-state flow, meaning constant discharge over time. The
change of flow depth ∂w over a change in chainage ∂x can be isolated from equation 3.11. Details
are provided in (Kittel et al. 2021, supporting information) where a rectangular channel shape is
assumed. The Saint-Venant equations thereby becomes
∂w
∂x =
Q2
gA3 ∂A
∂x + S0 −Q2
K2 + 2Qq
gA2
1 −Q2
gA3 ∂A
∂w
(3.12)
The right hand side of equation 3.12 is now independent of the derivative of depth with respect to
chainage. The water surface elevation is found as the elevation of the river bottom plus the river
depth. Equation 3.12 can be solved in steps where the current depth is dependent on the water
depth at the previous location.
The WSE profile along the river is therefore dependent on the variables in equation 3.12, and a
boundary condition which initialises the equation. The system is initialized by assuming natural
flow at the most downstream location. If the water depth is known at a location, e.g. at a artificial
dam, this can be used as the boundary condition.
Solving the Saint-Venant Equations rely on a set of assumptions (Bauer-Gottwein 2022):
• The flow is 1-dimensional
• Water is assumed to be homogeneous and in-compressible.
• The bottom slope is small and cosine to the angle therefore equals 1.
• The water flow can be assumed parallel to the bottom, which means that vertical acceleration
is neglected.
• The water flow is in the direction of the river canal.
• Bed resistance coeﬀicients for steady uniform turbulent flow can be applied.
12
==PAGE:22==
4
DATA
4
Data
The hydraulic model represented by the Saint-Venant equations uses four categories of data; river
cross section geometry, WSE measurements for model calibration, insitu discharge, and a flow
accumulation map. Further, some data sets are used as a part of the pre-processing of the river
cross sections which are described under ancillary data. This section presents data used in the
model development.
4.1
River cross sections: ICESat-2 ATL03
ICESat-2 ATL03 measures elevation with high resolution which is exploited to extract the dry river
cross sectional geometry. Parameters extracted from ATL03 data product are latitude, longitude,
photon height, time, and signal confidence for all six laser beams.
The photon event time is
calculated as time for the photon event plus an epoch time.
The elevation is calculated with
reference to the WGS84 G1150 ellipsoid in the ITRF 2014 reference frame (NASA 2021).
A signal confidence is assigned to all photon events based on a signal-to-noise ratio. The signal
confidence is categorized as 4: high confidence, 3: Medium confidence, 2: Low confidence, 1: Back-
ground, 0: Noise, and -1: Not classified. The signal confidence is divided into 5 different surface
types; land, ocean, sea ice, land ice, and inland water, which each contain a signal confidence.
(NASA 2021).
ATL03 data from 2018-10-15 to 2021-02-10, which crosses Amur River, is used for producing the
river cross section geometry estimates.
4.2
Training data: ICESat-2 ATL13
Water surface elevation data is needed to calibrate the hydraulic model. For this, ICESat-2 ATL13
data from 2018-10-25 to 2021-07-10 is used. ATL13 data is available for lakes with area larger
than 0.01 km2, rivers wider than 100 meters, near shore water up to 7 km, and bays. ATL13
corrects for water volume scattering, water surface dynamics, light propagation etc. A description
of each processing step is provided in (NASA 2020). The extracted parameters are the time of
photon event, latitude, longitude, orthometric height in EGM2008, water surface height above the
WGS84 ellipsoid, and water body id. The water surface elevation above the geoid is given by the
orthometric height plus the water surface elevation above WGS84 (NASA 2020).
4.3
Validation data: Sentinel-3 and Cryosat 2
Validation WSE measurements are extracted from Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2 measurements. Data
from 2016-03-13 to 2019-12-22 is used. Extracted parameters are latitude, longitude, WSE, and
time. Validation data from Cryosat-2 and Sentinel-3 are handled the same way as ATL13 training
data.
4.4
River discharge: Insitu gauge stations
Insitu discharge data is typically measured by a gauge station which can measure different data such
as water height, velocity, chemistry, temperature, and discharge. Insitu data is often available from
the Global Runoff Data Center, GRDC, which contain over 10000 stations across 159 countries.
Insitu discharge data for the insitu stations Komsomolsk and Bogorodskoe along Amur River for
recent years are not publicly available.
Data for these stations have been provided by Elena
Zakharova, Phd, working for Water Problem Institute in Moscow, and EOLA in France.
Daily insitu data for the station Komsomolsk has been provided from 2012-01-01 to 2019-12-31 and
for the station Bogorodskoe from 2008-01-01 to 2019-12-31. Additionally, reconstructed discharge
data for Komsomolsk is provided by Zakharova for 2020. Reconstructed data contain uncertainties
13
==PAGE:23==
4.5
Upstream drainage area: MERIT Hydro
4
DATA
up to 60%. More information about reconstruction of discharge data and background knowledge
is provided by (Kouraev et al. 2004).
4.5
Upstream drainage area: MERIT Hydro
The upstream drainage area, UPA, describe the area that contributes to the discharge of a given
point. The MERIT Hydro UPA describe the upstream drainage area given in km2. Assuming
a linear relation between upstream drainage area and discharge, this can be converted to flow
accumulation. The MERIT hydro product is created based on water body data sets such as GSWE
Occurrence, G1WBM, and OpenStreetMap. Data is given with reference to WGS84 system and
the EGM96 geoid. The flow accumulation map is available at http://hydro.iis.u-tokyo.ac.j
p/~yamadai/MERIT_Hydro/.
4.6
Ancillary data
EGM08
The geoid is an equipotential surface representing the mass distribution of the Earth. If no tides,
currents and waves are considered, the geoid corresponds to the sea surface. The geoid fluctuates as
the local mass distribution changes. Over large distances the reference ellipsoid would misrepresent
the water surface elevation. The elevation of a point above the geoid is found as the ellipsoid
elevation added to the geoid correction. The EGM08, Earth Gravitational Model 2008, with 1
degree resolution is used and can be downloaded here; https://www.agisoft.com/downloads/
geoids/.
GSWE Water Occurrence
The Global Surface Water Explorer, GSWE, contain several data sets for surface water extracted
from Landsat data.
GSWE data sets contain water occurrence, change intensity, seasonality,
recurrence, transitions, and maximum water extent. Data is available for download as data tiles
at https://global-surface-water.appspot.com/download. GSWE data is based on 32 years
of Landsat data to quantify changes in global surface water of water bodies larger than 30m by
30m. Surface water occurrence is assigned a value between 0 and 100 representing the percentage
of time where water is present. Comparing GWSE data with over 40000 reference points shows
less than 1% false water detection and less than 5% water missed (Pekel et al. 2016).
ALOS Global Digital Surface Model, AW3D30 DSM
ALOS Global Digital Surface Model, AW3D30 DSM, is a digital surface elevation model with a grid
size of 30 meters provided by Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Earth Observation Research
Center. Elevation data is extracted from the Advanced Land Observation Satellite that uses SAR
technology. Data is available for download at https://www.eorc.jaxa.jp/ALOS/en/aw3d30/da
ta/index.htm.
Global River Widths
Shapefiles of river center lines is available from the Global River Widths from Landsat Database,
GRWL Database, https://zenodo.org/record/1297434.
These center lines are based on
7376 Landsat data products and image processing techniques to calculate the location, width, and
braiding index of rivers. The data set contains rivers wider than 30 meters. The river width is
validated by in-situ data from 1250 gauge stations.
HydroSHEDS
HydroSHEDS is the oﬀicial website providing data related to hydrology. Data used for this project
is the river network and HydroBASINs data.
HydroBASINS consists of polygons representing
watershed boundaries on global scale. Data has a 15-arcsecond resolution. River network data
include all global rivers with a catchment area larger then 10km2. This results in 8.5 million river
reaches including estimate of reach length, final outlet ocean, average discharge etc. HydroSHEDS
data is available at https://hydrosheds.org/downloads.
14
==PAGE:24==
5
RIVER CASE STUDY: AMUR RIVER
5
River Case Study: Amur River
Amur River is the tenth longest river in the world and forms the border between Russia and China,
see figure 8. The Chinese name, Heilong Jian, means Black Dragon River, and the Mongol name,
Kharamuren, means Black River. It is 2824 kilometers long and the river’s drainage basin is 1855
thousand square kilometers and drains large portions of far east Russia and the Northeastern China
(WorldAtlas 2021).
Figure 8: Amur River, tributaries, and drainage area.
Gauge stations are
marked by orange dots. Data from HYDROsheds HydroBASINS, and GRWL
river center lines.
Amur River is divided into Upper Amur, Middle Amur and Lower Amur. Upper Amur flows from
the beginning of Amur where Shilka and Argun Rivers confluence until Amur meets Zeya River.
Zeya River contributes 16% of the total discharge. Middle Amur extends from The Amur-Zeya
junction to the city of Khabarovsk. Middle Amur confluences with Bureya River and Songhua
River, which is the largest tributary of Amur River. Between Loubei and Komsomolsk, Amur
River is dominated by low flow depth, easily flooded banks, which results in lakes, ponds and
broken channels creating small islands (WorldAtlas 2021).
Lower Amur flows from Khabarovsk to the outlet in Strait of Tartary. Near Komsomolsk the plains
narrow and flow through a restricted channel due to high elevations on both sides. Downstream
of Komsomolsk the river is close to the sea, but is restricted from entering the Sea of Japan due
to the Sikhote-Alin Range (WorldAtlas 2021).
The climate of Amur basin is dominated by the high latitude location and the monsoon winds.
During winter, polar air masses bring dry and cool air resulting in temperatures down to -30
degrees Celsius. The summer temperatures reaches above 20 degrees Celsius. Ice forms on Amur
from the end of October and the river is icebound from November to April. The heaviest rain fall
in the southern and eastern parts of the river where it ranges between 600 mm and 900 mm per
year. The majority of precipitation occur in the summer months. The monsoon rain results in
floodings from may to October and the water level can reach up to 14 meters above the usual level
in extreme years (WorldAtlas 2021).
15
==PAGE:25==
5
RIVER CASE STUDY: AMUR RIVER
Study area
The study area is placed between the cities Komsomolsk and Bogorodskoe in the Lower Amur. The
study area is mainly chosen based on considerations of length, river width and nearby geology. The
river stretch must not contain hydraulic controls or unaccounted significant inputs that contribute
to the discharge (Bjerklie et al. 2018). The availability of insitu data is also of importance. Gauge
stations along Amur River is marked by orange points in figure 8.
Figure 9 shows the survey area midway between the gauge stations Komsomolsk and Bogorodskoe.
The survey area is approximately 130 km long and has well-defined borders and very little flood
plains. Downstream of the survey area the river becomes more meandered and have larger flood
plains. The river is 1km to 3km wide within the survey area. Yellow lines in figure 9 represent the
11 ICESat-2 reference ground tracks, RGT, within the survey area.
Figure 9: Survey area of Lower Amur River with ICESat-2 reference ground
tracks.
Insitu data is measured upstream and downstream of the survey area in the cities of Komsomolsk
and Bogorodskoe. The insitu stations measure river discharge which are shown in figure 10. The
dotted line is reconstructed discharge for Komsomolsk based on data from 2018 and 2019, as oﬀicial
data is not available. It has not been possible to reconstruct data for Bogorodskoe for 2020. The
discharge changes periodically with season where the winter period (approx. December to March)
has the lowest discharge. The maximum discharge occurs in the summer and early autumn with
a discharge in the order of 20000-30000 m3/s. In 2013 and 2019 significant peaks of 50000 m3/s is
seen.
16
==PAGE:26==
5
RIVER CASE STUDY: AMUR RIVER
Figure 10: Insitu discharge data for Komsomolsk and Bogorodskoe.
17
==PAGE:27==
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
6
Method and implementation
River flow can be described by the 1-dimensional Saint-Venant equations, see equation 3.12. The
Saint-Venant equations are dependent on a set of river parameters that must be known. Some
variables in the Saint-Venant equation can be directly measured while others must be calibrated.
Table 4 gives an overview of variables in the Saint-Venant equations and how they are determined.
Description
Unit
Determined by
Q
Discharge
m3/s
Measured by insitu gauge stations.
q
Lateral inflow
m2/s
Estimated from UPA.
A
Flow area
m2
Calculated by MIKE HYDRO from
cross section geometry and WSE.
K
Conveyance
m3/s
Estimated by MIKE HYDRO based on
cross section geometry and bed resistance.
w
Flow depth
m
Estimated by Saint-Venant equation.
S0
Bed slope
-
Elevation difference between two points
divided by the distance.
∂A
∂w
Change in area per
m
Calculated based on cross section
change in water depth
geometry and WSE.
∂A
∂x
Change in area over
m
Calculated based on cross section geometry,
distance
WSE, and distance between grid points.
g
Gravitational acceleration
m/s2
Constant of 9.81 m/s2.
x
Position along river chainage
m
x is changed by dx in each sim. step.
dx
Step size for WSE simulation
m
Chosen based on grid convergence.
d
Depth of submerged channel
m
Calibration.
r
Geometric shape param.
-
Calibration.
α
Discharge correction param.
m/(m3/s)
Calibration.
n
Manning’s roughness
s/(m1/3)
Calibration.
ATL13 training WSE
m
WSE measured by ATL13.
Radar altimetry validation WSE
m
WSE measured by Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2.
Table 4: Overview of variables for Saint-Venant equation and calibration pro-
cess.
The overall processing scheme is shown in figure 11. The main steps consists of preparing data and
estimating the river cross section profile, calibrating the four calibration parameters, and running
the hydraulic model. Section 6.1 describes the river representation and how lateral inflow from
tributaries are estimated. Section 6.2.1 describe how ATL03 data is used to get the river cross
section geometry which lead to the derivation of other parameters for the hydraulic model. Section
6.3 describe how calibration and insitu data is prepared for the hydraulic model.
The submerged part of the river cross section is determined mathematically by the shape parameter,
r, and the submerged channel depth, d, which is described in section 6.2.3. A correction parameter,
α, is applied to the submerged channel depth, which is further described in section 6.4.1.
The implementation of Saint-Venant equations is described in section 6.4.2. The calibration pro-
cess adjust model parameter values to match the system it represents, evaluated by an objective
function. The calibration setup is described in section 6.5. The performance of the calibration
is evaluated using ATL13 WSE and insitu discharge from two gauge stations. When the model
is calibrated, all parameters in the 1-D model is known. It is then possible to estimate the river
discharge from WSE measurements from, for example, satellite altimetry.
18
==PAGE:28==
6.1
River representation
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 11: Overview of processing flow flow raw ATL03 data to the final cal-
ibrated hydraulic model. The main steps are pre-processing of data, imple-
menting the hydraulic model, and calibrating the hydraulic model.
6.1
River representation
Amur River is represented by a center line shapefile produced by HydroSHEDS Database. The
center line is used as a representation for the river flow direction. Figure 12 shows the survey
area of Amur River and the river center line represented by the blue line. ATL03 river geometry
profiles must be perpendicular to the river flow and sharp bents in the center line will therefore
distort the geometry profile. The center line is therefore smoothed to avoid bents that will cause
mis-representation in the river cross section profile.
A buffer shapefile is created with a radius of 1.8 degrees on each side of the river center line, shown
by the purple polygon in figure 12. The buffer shapefile is used to limit ATL03 data, and the width
of the buffer shapefile should therefore represent the width of the river and flood plains. The river
19
==PAGE:29==
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
chainage is represented by discrete points along the center line separated by 200 meters. This is
used to assign a position along the river to each cross section profile.
Figure 12: Figure illustrating the smooth river center line and the buffer shape
file within the survey area.
The MERIT Hydro flow accumulation map is a raster data set which represents the flow accumu-
lation area for each tile. Assuming a linear relationship between accumulation area and discharge,
the flow accumulation map serves as an estimate of the contribution of river tributaries to the total
discharge in the main river. The flow accumulation map is sampled in the same chainage points
as river chainage shape file.
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6.2.1
Extraction of river topography from ATL03 data
River cross section data is extracted from ATL03 data through multiple steps. The first steps
handles the data quality through photon confidence and compares ATL03 to a digital elevation
model, DEM. Only photons detecting the Earth’s surface is at interest, and photons with signal
confidence above 2 is accepted. Photons detecting clouds and atmosphere can be falsely categorized
with signal confidence above 2. These situations are handled by comparing ATL03 photon elevation
with the ALOS DSM. If more than 25% of ATL03 data points in a river cross section have an
elevation difference to the DSM larger than 250 meters, data is discarded. If less than 25% deviates
from the DSM with more than 250 meters, only points deviating from the DSM is removed, and
the rest of the data set is accepted.
Each photon event is assigned a water occurrence value based on the GSWE water occurrence
product. Photon events representing the river is defined at points with water occurrence larger
than 5%. Cross sections containing less than 200 photons of water is discarded, as this suggests
that the river is too shallow to observe with confidence. The surface water elevation is found with
a Gaussian Kernel Distribution, GKD. The WSE is defined as the elevation that results in the
largest peak in the GKD. Figure 13 shows ATL03 data across Amur River on 13-10-2019 and the
WSE based on the GKD. The black points are photon events given by a distance to the river center
line and elevation.
20
==PAGE:30==
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 13: Photon events across Amur River at chainage 4725300m. The WSE
is found as the peak of a Gaussian kernel distribution.
Data is limited to the part of the river and nearby topography which has relation to the water
flow.
This part of the river cross section is found as photon events with elevation lower than
WSE+60 meters. The threshold of 60m is chosen to be larger than needed as points with elevation
WSE+60m can be vegetation.
This ensures that if vegetation of 20m is present, the ground
elevation will extend to 40 meters above the WSE. The threshold should be chosen based on the
river at hand, and the maximum WSE for the river. This elevation can therefore be reduced when
more knowledge of the maximum WSE is available.
The river cross section profile must be perpendicular to the river center line when handled by MIKE
HYDRO (see section 6.2.5). ICESat-2 tracks and the river center line will seldom be perpendicular,
and ATL03 data will therefore show a skewed version of the river cross section, which results in a
larger flow area. Data points are therefore projected onto the perpendicular direction of the river
center line.
ATL03 photon events mainly detect the ground and the water surface, but also vegetation, points
underneath the ground surface, and the atmosphere, see figure 13. Outliers are removed with a
Hampel filter with a window size of 50 points. This removes clear outliers but are not able to
remove vegetation points.
6.2.2
River cross section profiles
The ATL03 measurements are converted to one single line of topography using the R package tsHy-
dro (Nielsen et al. 2015). This procedure estimates the elevation with highest point density while
handling outliers with a robust probability distribution. The method is developed to estimate time
series of WSE from satellite data while handling noise and potential errors in an objective manner.
It can be customized to estimate cross section profile elevations by considering the topography
profile as a time series. The most important aspect of this process is the sensitivity to outliers.
Outliers in the form of canopy should be ignored while sensitivity to topography variations should
be represented. This is a trade off, and the settings are found by trial and error. The parameter
init.logit is set to log(0.3), which determines the sensitivity to outliers. init.logit is chosen to put
a low emphasis on the robust t-distribution and therefore makes the height estimation sensitive
to topography variations. Data is collected in time bins (which corresponds to dividing data into
distance bins across the river) to reduce computation time. The number of bins is one fourth of
the number of data points.
The resulting cross section profile is shown by the yellow line in figure 14. The profile has success-
fully detected to ground topography, including an island in the middle of the river. Photon events
that represent canopy are not included in the cross section profile. In cases where the canopy is
21
==PAGE:31==
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
thicker, the profile includes canopy points, as the procedure is too sensitive. If the sensitivity to
outliers is reduced, the island in the middle of the river will not be detected. An island in the
middle of the river influences the hydraulic model more than some canopy on the river bed, which
is the main argument for the value of init.logit.
Figure 14: River cross section profile after applying robust height estimation
with tsHydro.
6.2.3
Modelling submerged channel bathymetry
The river bathymetry in areas covered by water can not be measured by ATL03 photons. The river
bathymetry is therefore estimated by a simple geometric shape defined by the shape parameter,
r, as described in section 3.1.2. Sections that is estimated by r is defined as points along the
estimated cross section within WSE+20cm and WSE-20cm. A stretch of water is replaced by the
geometric shape if it is longer than 40 meters. Stretches of ground, for example islands or ground
between smaller river channels, are kept if they are wider than 40m.
The geometry of the submerged cross section geometry is initialized with a shape parameter value
of 1.3 and a submerged channel depth of 12 meters. These values are initial guesses and will be
updated in the calibration process. The final cross section with estimated bathymetry is shown
in figure 15 by the yellow line. The end points of the full cross section geometry is assigned the
maximum elevation of the entire cross section to ensure that a flood plain doesn’t continue beyond
the cross section data.
Figure 15: Final river cross section profile with the bathymetry estimated by
a geometric shape defined by the submerged channel depth, d, and a shape
parameter, r.
22
==PAGE:32==
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
Depending on the specific situation, the elevation above WSE and the resolution of the cross section
profile points can be adjusted. There is no need to include profile points higher than the WSE
at extreme flow. The computation speed is highly dependent on the number of points in a cross
section profile. ATL03 provides points every 0.7 meters which is a much higher resolution than
needed. Sampling points every 10-50 meters is a appropriate depending on the topography.
Channel depth corrections
From the launch of ICESat-2 in 2018 until 2021-02-07, 35 cross sections of Amur are extracted
using the automated scripts. The cross section position along the river chainage and the WSE is
shown in figure 16. The yellow points represent cross sections measured at high flow periods, and
the blue points represent the cross sections measured at low flow periods.
Figure 16: Water surface elevation for ATL03 cross section profiles.
Including all of these cross sections will result in a very unrealistic profile along the river, as the
WSE for the cross sections vary between 8m and 19m above the geoid. The WSE is related to
the amount of water flowing through the river at the measurement time. When the river bed is
exposed, ATL03 can measure the exact elevation of the river bed. When the river bed is covered
by water, it is estimated as described above. We wish to increase the amount of the river bed that
is measured by ATL03 and cross sections measured at high flow periods are excluded.
A cross section measured at a very low discharge will result in a low WSE, while cross sections
measured with a higher discharge - but still during low flow periods, will result in a higher WSE.
The WSE is directly measured by ATL03, and can therefore not be corrected, but the depth of
the submerged part of the cross section profile can be corrected. Two corrections are applied; one
correction for the mis-estimation of the WSE, and one correction for the difference in discharge at
the measurement time.
The water surface elevation from ATL03 data is calculated as the peak of Gaussian Kernel distri-
bution of the photon elevations. ATL13 water surface elevations are calculated with a more robust
method, see section 4.2. Figure 17 show the difference in WSE measured by ATL13 and ATL03 for
all cross sections. These are water surface elevations measured at the same time, but estimated by
different methods. The ATL13 estimate is always higher than the ATL03 estimate, which results
in a positive difference. The WSE difference lies between 0.0m and 0.15m.
23
==PAGE:33==
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 17: Difference in water surface elevation between ATL03 and ATL13
for cross sections along Amur river. A positive WSE difference occurs when
ATL13 WSE is detected higher than the ATL03 WSE.
The submerged channel depth is corrected for the difference between ATL03 WSE and ATL13
WSE. The difference in WSE is subtracted from the channel depth. A cross section with too low
WSE will be represented by a depth that is correspondingly smaller. This forces the WSE to
increase at that particular cross section, and the WSE will therefore approach the ATL13 training
WSE. This will elevate the bottom elevation of the channel, and thereby result in a larger simulated
WSE. For a few cross sections, ATL13 data is not available, and the correction is set to zero.
Figure 18: Effect of WSE correction. The WSE difference between ATL03 and
ATL13 is subtracted from the submerged channel depth, d.
The WSE correction will change the channel depth, and therefore the bottom elevation. Figure
20 shows the channel bottom elevation for low flow cross sections. The bottom elevation is found
by assuming a submerged channel depth of 5 meters, and subtracting this depth from the cross
section WSE. The black line shows the bottom elevation before any corrections are applied, and
the blue line show the bottom elevation after the WSE correction is applied.
The second channel depth correction, corrects for the difference in discharge on the days the cross
section profiles were measured. The discharge value measured by insitu stations at the time a cross
section is measured are extracted. When the discharge increases, the WSE also increases. This is
accounted for by estimating the relation between the change in discharge and corresponding change
in WSE. Positions where calibration data is available at different times, and therefore at different
discharges are used. The difference in WSE and difference in discharge at these time results are
defined ∆WSE and ∆Q. Figure 19 shows the relation between ∆WSE and ∆Q.
24
==PAGE:34==
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 19: Relation between change in discharge and change in WSE.
A linear regression is applied to the relationship, shown by the green line in figure 19. The slope
of the regression describes the resulting change in WSE when the discharge changes, and is given
by α=0.00024 meters per m3/s. The submerged channel depth is corrected for the difference in
discharge at the time they were measured. Discharge for the cross sections varies between 2200m3/s
and 12800m3/s. The cross section with the lowest discharge is defined as the reference and the
other cross sections are corrected with regard to the reference. The difference in discharge between
the cross sections are found, and the corresponding WSE corrections are calculated as ∆WSE = α
∆Q. Using the cross section with the smallest discharge ensures that the bottom elevation of the
other cross sections are lowered relative to the reference.
The effect of the discharge correction is shown by the green line in figure 20. When α=0.00024
m/(m3/s) the correction is between 0 meters and 2.52 meters. Applying the correction changes the
bottom elevation significantly for some cross sections. Cross sections between chainage 4775000m
and 480000m are lowered drastically. Meanwhile, one cross section in this area has a very little
correction. The value of α=0.00024m/(m3/s) is an apriori value based on 15 points shown in figure
19. The discharge correction parameter is therefore introduced as a calibration parameter, and the
calibration process will therefore find the optimal value for the discharge correction.
Figure 20: Low flow cross section bottom elevation with and without correc-
tions. Channel depth is assumed to be 5 meters.
The submerged channel depth after the two corrections are applied becomes:
dcorr = dinit −(WSEAT L13 −WSEAT L03) + α∆Q
(6.1)
25
==PAGE:35==
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
where dcorr is the corrected submerged channel depth and dinit is the initial submerged channel
depth.
6.2.4
Manual validation of cross sections
If two cross sections are close together, for example within 300 meters, one of the cross section
should be excluded. See for example the two most left cross sections in figure 20 or at chainage
4735000m. A small change in the bottom elevation for the neighbouring cross section can cause
steep changes in the simulated WSE. Cross sections in proximity can therefore introduce unrealistic
slopes while not providing much additional information about the river cross section profile. If the
bottom slope is positive, thus increasing with increasing chainage, water will be trapped upstream
of the cross section with high elevation. This creates a plateau in the WSE profile and a steep
decrease in WSE on the downstream side of the cross section.
For some cross sections, the automatic process of selecting realistic cross sections and detecting
the WSE has not worked properly. The WSE is found using a Gaussian Kernel Distribution of
the photon elevations. In cases where flood plains are present, the elevation of the flood plain can
dominate the kernel distribution and result in wrong WSE. The consequence of this is that the
main river channel is not detected.
Figure 21 shows three neighbouring cross sections where flood plains are present. The color of the
cross section represent the distance along the chainage. The most upstream cross section is bright
blue, and the most downstream cross section is dark blue, see figure 22(left). In the middle cross
section the water surface is detected in three stretches at approx. -4000m and -5000m distance to
the center line. The upstream and downstream cross sections have detected the main channel at
the center of the river.
Figure 21: Neighbouring cross sections demonstrating the weakness of using
GKD to estimate WSE at cross section with large flood plain. The black indi-
cator show the true river position for the cross section at chainage 4809300m.
This creates an unreasonable situation where the water is forced to move from approx 0m from the
center line to -4000m from the center line during a distance of 2400m. The river center line product
represents the main river channel, and the majority of water should therefore be transported close
to the river center line.
The middle cross section has a smaller channel area than the two others. This influences the con-
veyance shown in figure 22(right). The conveyance for the middle cross section increases drastically
until the elevation of the flood plain is reached, and then flattens. The two other cross sections
have a more smooth curve. The conveyance describe how much water can be carried through the
cross section for a given WSE. When neighbouring cross sections have very different conveyance
water will accumulate upstream of the cross section with low conveyance. The cross section located
at chainage 4809300m is rejected to avoid a plateau in the WSE profile.
26
==PAGE:36==
6.2
Preparation of river cross section geometry
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 22: Spatial position of neighbouring cross section described in figure 21
and conveyance as a function of water level for the cross sections.
Based on the above bottom elevation corrections and considerations of s realistic bottom elevation
slope, 11 cross sections are selected for the hydraulic model representing Amur River. Figure 23
show the final bottom elevation profile for the approved cross sections. The discharge correction is
dependent on the value of α which will be definitively determined in the calibration process. The
final bottom elevation profile can therefore be different than shown in figure 23.
Figure 23: Cross section bottom elevation for cross sections used for the hy-
draulic model. α parameter for discharge correction is 0.00024m/m3/s.
6.2.5
Cross sections in MIKE HYDRO River
MIKE is a hydrology software produced by DHI which consists of several products for different
hydrology applications related to cities, coastal areas, river and lakes, and groundwater. MIKE
HYDRO River is designed to model river networks including simulating river hydraulics, flood-
ing, forecasting and the like. MIKE Zero is a Windows integrated graphical user interface for
presentation, visualisation, and pre- and post-processing. The capabilities of the MIKE software
goes far beyond what is used in this project. In this project MIKE Zero is used to handle cross
section profiles, described in previous section. MIKE Zero stores the cross sections and contains
an interface to compare and visualise cross sections. MIKE Hydro Cross Section Module is called
from the steady state solver implemented in Python (see section 6.4) which extracts information
of cross sections and values derived from the cross sections.
All river cross section profiles are imported into one data file in MIKE HYDRO River with the
extension .xns11. Each river cross section profile must contain properties that relates the cross
27
==PAGE:37==
6.3
Preparation of validation and insitu data
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
sections, which is a river name, river segment name, unique cross section ID, and position along the
chainage. The cross sections are defined by a set of coordinates along the river in UTM coordinates,
and in a local coordinate system describing the elevation above the geoid and distance to the center
line (DHI 2021).
Figure 24: Location of cross section markers for MIKE HYDRO.
Key points in the river cross sections are assigned a marker. Points with marker M1 is the left
leeve bank, M2 is the lowest point in the cross section, M3 is the right leeve bank, M4 is the left
low flow bank of the main channel, and M5 is the right low flow bank of the main channel. Only
the part of the cross section in between marker M1 and M3 is included in the simulation (DHI
2021). The round points (M7 and M8) in figure 24 define additional river channels, and each river
channel must be assigned unique markers.
MIKE Zero processes the river cross sections and provides graphs representing different cross section
attributes. Processed data in MIKE Zero is the flow area, conveyance, river width, resistance
radius, and resistance as a function of water level. These graphs should be smooth curves, and
can therefore be used as a quality indicator. Nearby cross sections should have similar curves, and
these graphs can therefore be used to compare neighbouring cross sections, as described in section
6.2.4. If the curves, especially the conveyance, is very rough the cross section should be inspected
to ensure a reasonable profile.
6.3
Preparation of validation and insitu data
The hydraulic model is calibrated against an error measure between the simulated WSE from the
hydraulic model and validation data from ATL13. The WSE measured by ATL13 is used as the
true WSE, and the simulated WSE should match the ATL13 training data. For the calibration
process, both discharge and WSE must be known, such that the calibration parameters, n, d, r,
and α are the only unknowns. Days where both insitu discharge data and ATL13 WSE data is
available is therefore extracted.
Only one WSE value for each ICESat-2 beam across the river is extracted to get the most reliable
WSE estimate. Data points where the GSWE water occurrence is above 95% and the distance to
the center line is less than 50 meters are used. The angle between the river center line and the
ATL13 track must be larger than 20 degrees to ensure that ATL13 data is not measured along the
river and therefore measuring along the WSE slope.
Insitu discharge data from the upstream and downstream gauge stations corresponding to instances
of ATL13 training WSE are extracted. The model calibration is applied to the discharges which
has available ATL13 training WSE. This means, that a WSE profile is simulated for each day both
discharge data and ATL13 WSE are available. If validation WSE from different satellite missions
28
==PAGE:38==
6.4
Implementation of hydraulic model
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
are used, many unique discharge values can be available. The setup can therefore be optimized by
grouping discharge values close together, to reduce the number of simulations required.
In the period of 2018-10-25 to 2021-07-10 ICEsat-2 crosses the survey area of Amur River 82
times. Insitu data is available from 2012-2019 which gives 123 calibration instances where both
insitu discharge and ATL13 training WSE is available. ICESat-2 measures elevation with 6 beams
simultaneously. The WSE is therefore measured at 6 different positions along the river chainage
in one day. Grouping validation data into instances with the same discharge value results in 26
different discharge values. It is therefore not necessary to group the validation data further.
6.4
Implementation of hydraulic model
The main components in the model setup is the representation of cross sectional geometry and the
steady state solver which implements the Saint-Venant equations. The survey area is represented
by the main river shown in blue in figure 25 and ATL03 cross sections are shown by purple lines.
The steady state solver calculates the WSE in a series of grid points represented by black crosses
in figure 25. The WSE is dependent on the amount of water flowing in the model and the model
is therefore run for specific discharges.
Figure 25: Schematic of model setup for hydraulic model.
A synthetic cross section is created based on the most downstream cross section profile and is
placed 10km downstream of the survey area. The steady state solver is initialised by assuming
natural flow depth at the synthetic cross section. This is an assumption, and the model needs
some simulation steps to burn in from the boundary condition to values that reflect the measured
cross section profile. The synthetic cross section move the burn in period away from the area at
interest.
6.4.1
Updating submerged channel geometry
The river cross sections are represented by the ATL03 cross sections and the submerged river
bathymetry is represented by the modelled submerged geometry.
The submerged geometry is
dependent on the channel depth, shape parameter, and discharge correction parameter. Each time
a set of calibration parameters are chosen, the submerged channel geometry must be updated.
6.4.2
Steady state solver
The steady state solver implements the Saint-Venant equation and simulates the WSE in a series
of spatial increments of dx along the river. The spacing of the grid points can be defined freely,
but grid convergence should be considered. The simulated WSE is dependent on the step size,
29
==PAGE:39==
6.4
Implementation of hydraulic model
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
and the step size should therefore be chosen so small, that the effect of the step size is negligible.
Additional grid points are placed where cross sections are available.
The steady state solver is initialised at the synthetic cross section and moves upstream in steps of
dx. The geometry of the cross section is extracted from MIKE HYDRO River. The slope, S0 is
found as the slope between the first and last cross section. The WSE at the most downstream is
found as the natural depth, which is dependent on the slope, the bed resistance, and an assumption
of uniform flow.
When the solver has been initialized at the downstream cross section, the Saint-Venant equations
can be applied. The flow area and conveyance is extracted from MIKE HYDRO River, the slope is
calculated based on the current grid point and the next grid point. The discharge is the discharge
for which the WSE is estimated, and g is the gravitational constant.
The contribution to the discharge from tributaries are accounted for with the flow accumulation
map. The flow accumulation maps is sampled at chainage points along the river. The change in
discharge from previous grid point to current grid point is given by the lateral inflow:
q = ∂Q
∂x = Qx(i) −Qx(i−1)
dx
(6.2)
Where dx is the step size. Under the assumption of a linear relationship between accumulation
area and discharge, the discharge in point x can be estimated based on the current position along
the river and the insitu discharge;
Qx(i) = UPAx(i) −UPAups
UPAds −UPAups
(Qds −Qups)
(6.3)
Qds and Qups are the insitu discharge at the downstream and upstream stations. UPAx is the
upstream drainage area for grid point x, UPAups is the accumulation area at the upstream insitu
station, and UPAds is the accumulation area at the downstream insitu station. The fraction in
equation 6.3 describes the current upstream drainage area as a fraction of the total upstream
drainage area. This fraction is applied to the difference in discharge between the upstream and
downstream gauge stations.
The change in the water depth from previous grid point to the current grid point, ∂h
∂x, is given by
the Saint-Venant equations:
∂w
∂x =
Q2
gA3 ∂A
∂x + S0 −Q2
K2 + 2Qq
gA2
1 −Q2
gA3 ∂A
∂w
(6.4)
The water depth grid point i −1 (the upstream grid point of the current position, i) therefore
becomes
wi−1 = wi −∂w
∂x · dx
(6.5)
The WSE is found as the bottom elevation, which is interpolated from the nearby cross sections,
plus the water depth.
The work flow of the WSE simulation is illustrated in figure 26. The WSE is simulated for all
discharge values where ATL13 training WSE is available. The eﬀiciency of the steady state solver
is therefore dependent on the number of grid points along the river reach and the number of
calibration instances.
30
==PAGE:40==
6.5
Hydraulic model calibration
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 26: Work flow of steady state solver which simulates the WSE at each
grid point along the river.
6.5
Hydraulic model calibration
Four parameters can not be directly measured and must therefore be calibrated. The calibration
process determines a set of parameters and calculate a WSE profile for all unique discharge values.
The performance of the WSE simulation is estimated by the root mean square error between the
simulated WSE and the ATL13 training WSE. First, the parameters are estimated manually by
guessing parameter values and observing the effect on the simulated WSE. When realistic ranges
for the parameters are found, the python package SpotPy calibrates the parameters with the global
search algorithm Shuffled Complex Evolution.
6.5.1
Manual calibration
An initial calibration of the four calibration parameters are implemented as a manual calibration.
The purpose of the manual calibration is to find a reasonable range for the model parameters to
feed the automatic calibration implemented in SpotPy.
A value for each parameter is chosen and the cross sections are updated based on the depth, shape
parameter, and α. The steady state solver estimates a WSE using Manning’sn. This is done for
a series of different values and combinations, and the effect of the parameters are observed. The
interval for Manning’s n is based on table values of bed resistance in natural rivers. Values for
depth is based on knowledge of Amur River and r is chosen to cover a very steep and shallow shape
to a broad and wide shape. α is varied around the slope of the linear regression in figure 19. The
intervals therefore becomes:
n = {0.008 - 0.03} [s/m1/3]
d = {3 - 17} [m]
r = {0.5 - 10}
α = {0.0001 - 0.0004} [m / (m3/s)]
Some parameter combinations can result in a WSE that is below the bottom of some cross sections.
The system can not handle if the simulated WSE is below the bottom elevation of the cross sections,
which is not physically possible either. Correspondingly, combinations can result in unrealistic high
simulated WSE which extends above the highest point of a cross section. The manual calibration
should therefore narrow down which parameter values that are reliable. Calibration using SpotPy
is an automated process, and the whole setup will fail if one of these issues occur.
31
==PAGE:41==
6.5
Hydraulic model calibration
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
6.5.2
Calibration with SpotPy
The hydraulic model calibration is implemented in the Python package SpotPy. SpotPy is a pack-
age that has implemented a series of global search algorithms, objective functions, and parameter
distributions, with the purpose of solving hydrological models. The processing scheme is shown in
figure 27.
Figure 27: Processing scheme implemented in SpotPy. Adapted from (Houska
et al. 2015)
The parameter space for the calibration parameters are uniform distributions as no prior distribu-
tions exists. The interval for the uniform distribution is based on the manual calibration
n = {0.008 - 0.025} [s/m1/3]
d = {4 - 12} [m]
r = {0.5 - 10}
α = {0.0001 - 0.0004} [m / (m3/s)]
The simulation step in figure 27, updates the river geometry and simulates the WSE. The per-
formance of the model with the given parameters is evaluated by comparing the modelled WSE
with ATL13 training WSE. Based on the performance, new model parameters are estimated with
the SCE-UA global search algorithm. The SCE-UA setup is described in section 6.5.3. When new
calibration parameter values are found, they are used as input for the simulation.
When WSE profiles corresponding of all unique discharge values are completed, the simulated
WSE is compared to the ATL13 training WSE. The objective function used to evaluate the model
performance is the root mean squared error, RMSE:
Obj =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
E(i)2
,
E(i) = WSEcal(i) −WSEsim(i)
(6.6)
Based on the performance of the current parameters the objective function is updated, and new
calibration parameters are found using SCE-UA. If the performance of a set of parameters are poor,
the objective function has a large value in this point of parameter space. The search algorithm will
move away from this point and search for new parameters in other places of the parameter space.
6.5.3
Shuffled complex evolution
The Shuffled Complex Evolution method, SCE-UA, is developed at the University of Arizona. It
is a global optimization method that uses complex shuffling to search for optimal model parame-
32
==PAGE:42==
6.5
Hydraulic model calibration
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
ters. It has proven to be effective, eﬀicient, and robust in calibrating hydrological models (Duan,
Sorooshian, and V. K. Gupta 1994), and are widely used within hydrological applications.
The workflow of SCE-UA is shown in figure 28. The algorithm samples s points randomly from
the parameter space. The objective function value is calculated for all points, and the points are
ordered from smallest to largest objective function value. The s points are divided into p groups,
also called complexes, which each contain m points. The number of complexes is set to p=2n+1,
where n is the number of calibration parameters. The first complex contains every p(k-1)+1 point,
he second complex contain every p(k-1)+2 point, where k=1,2,...m where m is the number of points
in a complex.
Each complex are evolved through the algorithm competitive complex evolution, CCE. The CCE
algorithm evolves the complexes based on the geometric shape of the points to direct the search
closer to the global minimum. More information of this process is provided by (Duan, Sorooshian,
and V. K. Gupta 1994). The complexes are now shuffled to exchange knowledge which reduces
the risk of getting stuck in a local minimum or flat area and therefor converging prematurely. If
the specified convergence criteria is reached the algorithm are terminated. When the algorithm is
terminated, the calibration parameter values are accepted and used in the SpotPy framework.
Figure 28:
Shuffled Complex Evolution, SCE-UA, algorithm that searches
model space to find optimal model parameter values for Simulation.
The convergence criteria describes the relative improvement over a number of iterations. If the
convergence criteria is not met, and the minimum number of complexes required are less than p,
the complex with lowest ranked points are removed. The SCE-UA algorithm returns to the CCE
algorithm and evolves the complexes again.
The algorithm is defined by the following variables
• Number of calibration parameters, n.
• Number of random points, S.
• Number of complexes, p.
33
==PAGE:43==
6.5
Hydraulic model calibration
6
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
• Number of points in complex, m.
• Maximum relative change in objective function.
• Max iterations for relative change.
• Maximum number of model runs.
The number of complexes is defined as p=2n+1=9 as 4 parameters are calibrated, and the maxi-
mum number of iterations is 7000. For the remaining parameters default values are used.
The number of complexes influence the computation time. Fewer complexes means faster compu-
tation, but the risk that the minimum of the objective function is not found increases. The number
of parameters to calibrate also influence the eﬀiciency. The model space has the dimensions of
the number of model parameters. Thus, more model parameters will result in a more complex
objective function. Further discussion of the effects of algorithm control variables can be found in
Duan, Sorooshian, and V. K. Gupta 1994.
34
==PAGE:44==
7
RESULTS
7
Results
The primary objective is to estimate river discharge based on WSE measurements along the survey
area of Amur River. The first step in reaching this goal is to create a model that relates WSE
and discharge. The forward problem is estimating the WSE based on discharge data which is
solved to calibrate the hydraulic model.
Extracting discharge from WSE measurements is the
inverse problem. First, the forward problem is solved for different model settings to observe that
the model works.
The calibration process is implemented with SCE-UA, and the results and
performance of this algorithm are assessed.
The calibrated model is validated against radar altimetry measurements of the WSE from Sentinel-
3 and Cryosat-2. Lastly, discharge is estimated based on WSE measurements from radar altimetry.
7.1
Simulated WSE profiles
The forward problem of the hydraulic model produces a WSE profile along the river based on
insitu discharge and the river cross section profiles. If the four calibration parameters are selected
properly, the model will represent the true river flow dynamics. The performance of the hydraulic
model is evaluated by ATL13 measurements of the WSE. Examples of the simulated WSE profile
for different calibration parameters and discharge values are presented.
Figure 29 shows the simulated WSE for discharge of 2310m3/s, Manning’s roughness of 0.01s/m1/3,
submerged channel depth of 6m, shape parameter r equals 0.5 and the α correction parameter
equals 0.0002m/(m3/s). The simulated WSE lies between 7 meters above the geoid at the down-
stream cross section and approx. 8.5 meters at the upstream cross section. The six red points are
validation WSE points from ATL13. The validation points lies very close to the simulated WSE,
and the simulation of the WSE results in a root mean square error of 0.04m.
Figure 29: Simulated WSE from steady state solver along stretch of Amur River
for Q = 2310m3/s, n=0.01s/m1/3, d=8m, r=0.5, and α=0.0002m/(m3/s). The
simulated WSE profile is compared to ATL13 training WSE which is shown by
red points.
The slope of the simulated WSE reflects the slope of the validation points very well. The profile
is smooth and does not have large drops or discontinuities. At chainage 4740000m, a small bump
in the profile is seen. Vertical grey lines represent the position of cross sections for reference. The
three cross sections in this area look reasonable, both w.r.t bottom elevation, conveyance, and
channel geometry. The bump therefore does not represent unwise chosen cross sections etc.
Another simulated WSE profile is shown in figure 30 for Q = 6280m3/s. The calibration parameters
are set to n = 0.01s/m1/3, d=5m, r=3, and α=0.0002m/(m3/s). The WSE has increased to 8.5m
35
==PAGE:45==
7.1
Simulated WSE profiles
7
RESULTS
Figure 30:
Simulated WSE profile from steady state solver along stretch
of Amur River for Q = 6280m3/s, n = 0.01s/m1/3, d=5m, r=3, and
α=0.0002m/(m3/s). The simulated WSE profile is compared to ATL13 train-
ing WSE which is shown by red points.
above the geoid at the downstream end of the survey area and approx. 10m. at the upstream
location. This corresponds with the expected behaviour where an increase in river discharge will
result in an increase of the WSE. The ATL13 calibration points are not fitted as well for this
simulation as in figure 29. This is partly due to the low precision of the ATL13 training points.
Figure 31 shows the simulated WSE profile for discharge of 36100m3/s. The Manning roughness is
0.008s/m1/3, the submerged channel depth is 7m, the shape parameter is 3, and α=0.0003m/(m3/s).
The general WSE has increased, mainly due to the increase in discharge. The smooth profile seen
for low discharges has become more disrupted with low slopes in some areas and very steep slopes
in other areas. These jumps and steep slopes are a result of the conveyance of the cross sectional
profiles.
Figure 31: Simulated WSE from steady state solver for stretch of Amur River
for Q = 36100m3/s, n = 0.01s/m1/3, d=8m, r=3, and α=0.0003m/(m3/s). The
simulated WSE profile is compared to ATL13 training WSE which is shown by
red points.
The red points represent ATL13 training WSE, and the RMSE of the simulated WSE is 0.05m
related to these points. Though, the RMSE is low, the bump at chainage 4740000m is not reflected
in the calibration points. This suggests that the bump is artificial and might not reflect the actual
WSE in this area.
The calibration parameters have different values for the three examples shown in figure 30-31.
This indicates that different combinations of calibration parameters can produce a simulated WSE
profile that fits the validation WSE for the given discharge within reasonable accuracy. Though,
36
==PAGE:46==
7.2
Effect of calibration parameters on simulated WSE
7
RESULTS
we wish to find the set of calibration parameters that fits all validation WSE measurements with
the smallest RMSE.
7.2
Effect of calibration parameters on simulated WSE
The previous results show the WSE profile for varying discharge and varying calibration parameter
values. The WSE profile is dependent on the discharge, step size, and calibration parameter values.
To verify the effect of each calibration parameter, one is varied while the others are held constant.
This isolates the effect of each calibration parameter.
The WSE profile along Amur River for varying submerged channel depths, d, is shown in figure
32. The WSE is simulated for n = 0.01s/m1/3, r=3, and α=0.0002m/(m3/s), and the depth of the
submerged channel has been varied between 5m and 12m. This figure shows the effect of changing
the depth of the submerged channel, and the absolute WSE values are not of great interest. When
the depth of the submerged channel is increased, the WSE decreases. This happens, as a larger
submerged channel depth gives a larger flow area, which can store more water, and the WSE
decreases.
Figure 32: Effect on simulated WSE when changing the submerged channel
depth, d.
Figure 33 shows the effect of changing the shape parameter, r, which has been varied between 0.5
and 10. When r increases, the WSE decreases. As with the submerged channel depth, a larger r
value creates a larger flow area, and the river can therefore store more water, which results in a
decreasing WSE. The change in flow area is not linearly related to the change in r. This explains
why the WSE profile decreases more when r is changed from 1 to 5 than from 5 to 10. The larger
the r value is, the smaller the effect on the flow area.
37
==PAGE:47==
7.2
Effect of calibration parameters on simulated WSE
7
RESULTS
Figure 33: Effect on simulated WSE when changing the bathymetry shape-
parameter, r.
The effect of varying the Manning roughness is shown in figure 34. n has been varied between
0.008s/m1/3 and 0.03s/m1/3. When Manning’s n increases, the simulated WSE also increases. The
roughness describes how large the resisting force, acting against gravity, is. When the resistance
increases, water will experience a larger resisting force, and will flow more slowly, which forces the
water to accumulate in the river. The bump in the WSE profile at chainage 4740000m is more
pronounced for small values of Manning’s n than for large values.
Figure 34: Effect on simulated WSE when changing the Manning roughness,
n.
Figure 35 shows the effect of varying α.
The expected effect of increasing α, is a decreas-
ing WSE. When α increases, the submerged channel depth increases, the flow area increases
and the WSE therefore decreases.
Figure 35 shows this effect on the upstream part of the
river (chainage 4687000m-4750000m), and the opposite effect on the downstream part (chainage
4750000m-4835000m). The middle of the WSE profiles shows that the effect of the discharge cor-
rection changes at different chainages dependent on the α-value. α=0.0002m/(m3/s) affects the
effect on the WSE from 4775000m and downstream while α=0.0004m/(m3/s) affects the WSE
profile from chainage 4740000m and downstream.
38
==PAGE:48==
7.3
Grid convergence
7
RESULTS
Figure 35: Effect on simulated WSE when changing the discharge correction
parameter, α.
The discharge correction is not applied uniformly to all cross sections, see figure 20. The correction
is dependent on the discharge at the measuring time for the given cross section. The cross sections
are therefore influenced by this correction by 0m up to multiple meters, depending on the value
of α. As the effect of the correction is not uniformly distributed along the river, the effect in the
simulated WSE is not the same across the river. This will be further discussed in section 8.2.
7.3
Grid convergence
Besides the calibration parameters, the simulated WSE is also dependent on the step size. This is
the size of the steps along the river chainage which is taken by the steady state solver. The effect
of the grid size is dependent on the slopes of the river as the Saint-Venant equations assumes small
slopes. If the step sizes are too large, this assumption no longer holds.
The effect of the grid size on the WSE is investigated by changing the step size between 10m and
10000m and calculating the RMSE between the WSE profile with 10m grid size and the other
WSE profiles. Figure 36 shows the RMSE for different grid sizes with a logarithmic scale on the x
axis. The RMSE is low for grid sizes below 200m and starts to increase faster at 500m grid size.
This suggests that the grid size should be kept under 500m to ensure that the grid size does not
affect the simulated WSE significantly.
Figure 36: Illustration of the grid convergence of the simulated WSE. x axis is
grid size and the y axis is the RMSE between the WSE with 50m grid and the
other WSE profiles.
39
==PAGE:49==
7.4
Performance of global search algorithm for calibration parameter values
7
RESULTS
7.4
Performance of global search algorithm for calibration parameter
values
The calibration process consists of a global search algorithm, SCE-UA, implemented in SpotPy
where four calibration parameter’s ideal value is found. The performance of a set of calibration
parameters are evaluated based on the RMSE between the simulated WSE and validation WSE
from ATL13. The uniform value span for the calibration parameters are:
n = {0.008 - 0.025} [s/m1/3]
d = {4 - 12} [m]
r = {0.5 - 10}
α = {0.0001 - 0.0004} [m / (m3/s)]
The SpotPy setup is set to find 7000 sets of parameter values through 9 complexes in the global
search algorithm. SpotPy produces a series of figures illustrating the performance of search algo-
rithm and the performance of the optimal parameters. Figure 37 shows the parameter values that
are tested and the interaction between the calibration parameters. The off-diagonal elements show
the sampled values in the parameter space by blue points. All areas of the parameter space has
been sampled, and the global search approaches ideal values indicated by a large point density.
The diagonal elements in figure 37 show the point density as a function of parameter values. As
the global search evolve it will approach optimal values for each parameter and focus the search
in that area of the parameter space. The global search moves towards values at the border of
the parameter space for n, d, and α. The algorithm finds that the optimal value for these three
calibration parameters lies at the lower boundary of the parameter space.
The fact that 3 out of 4 calibration parameter values moves towards the boundary values could
suggest that the parameter space is not ideal. On the other hand, the parameter space should
reflect values that are physically possible for the system. Based on apriori knowledge of Amur
River and the calibrating parameters, it is unlikely that the Manning roughness should occupy
values below 0.008s/m1/3.
40
==PAGE:50==
7.4
Performance of global search algorithm for calibration parameter values
7
RESULTS
Figure 37: Overview of sampling of calibration parameter space by the SCE-UA
global search algorithm.
The off-diagonal plots in figure 37 shows a correlation between the submerged channel depth and
Manning’s n, indicated by the linear relationship between the parameter values. This means that
a low submerged channel depth will result in a low Manning roughness. A similar relationship is
seen for n and α. When calibration parameters are correlated, we are trying to calibrate more
parameters than the available data supports.
The evolution of each calibration parameter is shown in figure 38 as a function of iterations. SpotPy
only saves data for a part of the iterations. The x axis therefore represent 2241 iterations out of the
total 6000 iterations. The figure illustrates that the global search algorithm initially searches in the
full parameter space and slowly moves towards the area with the lowest objective function. The
final 500-1000 iterations samples parameter values in a very narrow value span, which indicates
that the search has approached ideal parameter values.
41
==PAGE:51==
7.4
Performance of global search algorithm for calibration parameter values
7
RESULTS
Figure 38: Evolution of calibration parameter values as a function of SpotPy
iterations.
The optimal calibration parameter values based on 6000 SpotPy iterations are:
n = 0.00802s/m1/3
d = 4.00m
r = 2.87
α = 0.0001m/(m3/s)
The objective function values for the saved iterations is shown in figure 39. Initially, the parameter
space is searched in the full space and the resulting objective function value reach 5 meters RMSE.
As the search algorithm converges towards optimal calibration parameter values, the objective
function decreases. When the objective function decreases the simulated WSE approaches the
ATL13 training WSE. The minimum objective function value reached for this setup is 1.42 meters.
Figure 39: RMSE objective function as a function of SpotPy iterations.
Based on the calibration parameter values found by the calibration setup, the WSE is calculated for
the highest and lowest discharge values for ATL13 calibration data. Figure 40 show the maximum
and minimum WSE simulated by the steady state solver with optimal calibration parameter values.
The area between the WSE for maximum and minimum discharge are coloured blue to represent
42
==PAGE:52==
7.5
Validation of hydraulic model
7
RESULTS
that other simulated WSE profiles can obtain these values.
The red points are the validation
WSE from ATL13. The simulated WSE does not cover the three validation points at 4710000m-
4720000m with an elevation of approx. 19 meters. The simulated WSE does not include three
validation points at the downstream end of the survey area with an elevation of approx. 6 meters.
Otherwise, all validation points lie within the simulated WSE. This suggests that the obtained
calibration parameter values produces WSE profiles in the area of the validation WSE.
Figure 40: Simulated WSE and calibration WSE for optimal calibration pa-
rameter values.
7.5
Validation of hydraulic model
The hydraulic model implemented in the steady state solver simulates a WSE profile given a
upstream and downstream discharge, a UPA, and values for the four calibration parameters. The
simulated WSE is compared to measurements from Sentinel-3 and cryosat-2, which measure surface
elevations from satellite radar altimetry. This data constitutes as validation data while ATL13
WSE has been utilized as training data. Based on the discharge of the day each radar altimetry
measurement is made, a WSE profile is calculated and compared to the measured WSE.
Summary statistics of the WSE error is shown in table 5. The RMSE of the simulated WSE and
the validation data is 1.55m. It is expected that a model will perform with a higher error on the
validation data than on the training data. The error is calculated as (Simulated −True)/True.
The mean and median error is 9.04% and 10.18%, respectively.
Min.
1st Qu.
Median
Mean
3rd Qu.
Max.
RMSE
-18.06%
0.05%
9.04%
10.18%
19.42%
45.55%
1.55m
Table 5: Summary statistics of errors of WSE estimate from hydraulic model
compared with Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2 measurements.
Data from two locations along Amur River where Sentinel-3 passes by often is extracted for visu-
alisation. Figure 41 shows the simulated WSE and the measured WSE by Sentinel-3 at chainage
4759300m. WSE measured within chainage 4757600m and 4760600m are included to produce the
time series. Each simulated and measured WSE is extracted from the same location, and the
WSE values can therefore be directly compared. The seasonal trend of the measured WSE from
Sentinel-3 is well captured by the hydraulic model. The low WSE in the winter between 2017 and
2018 are not well reflected in the hydraulic model. The WSE is simulated 1-2 meters higher than
the measured WSE. This corresponds with figure 40 that indicate that extreme high and low WSE
are poorly simulated by the hydraulic model. The WSE estimates does not correspond very well
in the summer periods with decimal year 2017.3-2017.6 and 2018.3-2018.6.
43
==PAGE:53==
7.6
Application: Prediction of river discharge from WSE measurements
7
RESULTS
Figure 41: Validation of hydraulic model by comparison of simulated WSE and
measured WSE by Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2 at chainage 4759300m.
The procedure from figure 41 is applied to measurements at chainage 4776800m, which is shown
in figure 42. Figure 42 contains WSE measurements between chainage 4775500m and 4778300m.
Again, the seasonal variations are well reflected in the simulated WSE while smaller variations are
not captured. The accuracy of the simulated WSE at chainage 4776800m corresponds with the
accuracy of figure 41.
Figure 42: Validation of hydraulic model by comparison of simulated WSE and
measured WSE by Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2 at chainage 4776800m.
7.6
Application: Prediction of river discharge from WSE
measurements
The primary goal is to create a model representing a stretch of Amur River and estimate the
river discharge based on WSE measurements from satellites. Satellites measure surface elevations
continuously on global scale, and WSE from satellite altimetry is therefore a great data resource.
This resource can now be exploited to estimate the river discharge of this stretch of Amur River
in the future. The WSE measured by a satellite is related to the position along the river and the
discharge at the measurement instance.
The river discharge at the downstream insitu gauge station has been estimated from altimetry
WSE measurements. Figure 43 shows the estimated discharge compared to the insitu discharge.
The seasonal variations are well reflected by the estimated discharge, though large variations and
instabilities are observed. Between 2017.3 and 2017.6, the estimated discharge fluctuates strongly,
while the true discharge is relatively stable. The same is seen for the period between 2018.3 and
44
==PAGE:54==
7.6
Application: Prediction of river discharge from WSE measurements
7
RESULTS
2018.5. These are the same time periods where the WSE is poorly estimated in figure 41 and figure
42.
Figure 43: Time series of estimated discharge from radar altimetry WSE com-
pared with insitu discharge at Bogorodskoe.
The discharge estimate errors are summarised in table 6. The maximum and minimum errors are
-77.0% and 96.1% respectively. The median and mean errors are -31.1% and -20.9% respectively.
The negative error indicates that the model generally underestimates the river discharge. The
errors are large considering practical applications of the model.
Min.
1st Qu.
Median
Mean
3rd Qu.
Max.
RMSE
-77.05%
-49.36%
-31.07%
-20.94 %
0.00%
96.08%
4925.42m3/s
Table 6: Summary statistics of error of discharge estimate from hydraulic model
compared with insitu discharge.
45
==PAGE:55==
8
DISCUSSION
8
Discussion
The main objective is to relate measured WSE along a stretch of Amur River to the discharge at
a downstream location. The process consists of extracting the river cross sectional geometry and
insitu discharge data to calibrate a hydraulic model against satellite altimetry measurements of
the WSE. When the model is calibrated river discharge is estimated based on a WSE measurement
and a location along the river. Different aspects of the method and calibration of the hydraulic
model will be discussed. After, the results of the calibration process, calibrated parameter values,
and the relation between WSE and discharge will be discussed.
8.1
River cross sections
The implemented method for extracting river cross sections are robust and handle poor data
quality, outliers etc. The cross sectional geometry is estimated by an automatic process, that uses
raw ATL03 data and outputs complete river cross sections with a modelled bathymetry profile for
the submerged part of the cross section. Some cross sections have been rejected based on a manual
validation as they did not capture the full flood plain. Some cross sections were rejected by the
automated process as the script did not manage to detect the WSE.
The WSE of ATL03 data is found using a Gaussian Kernel Distribution, GKD. This method works
well were the river is the lowest elevation, the river bed elevates above the water surface, and the
river is well defined. When flood plains are present, the GKD sometimes detects a wrong WSE,
and the river is not detected by the algorithm. An example of this is shown in figure 21. The
GKD is applied on data where the water occurrence is above 5%. This limit could be increased to
remove the influence of flood plain elevations on the WSE estimate.
The submerged channel depth is corrected by two estimates. One correction accounts for the dif-
ferent WSE measured by ATL03 and ATL13, and the other accounts for the difference in discharge
when the cross sections were measured. The ATL13 algorithm for detecting WSE generally esti-
mates the WSE 0m-0.15m higher than the GKD applied on the ATL03 data. The correction for the
WSE assumes a linear relationship between the difference in WSE and the effect of reducing the
submerged channel depth. When the channel depth is reduced 10cm the WSE will not necessarily
rise 10cm. This relationship is dependent on the cross sectional geometry.
The correction for discharge at the time the cross sections are measured is assuming a linear
relationship between change in discharge and change in WSE. The relationship between discharge
and WSE is in reality not linear, as it is dependent on the river cross sectional geometry. The WSE
will increase less when flood plains are present as the width of the river strongly increases when
the elevation of the flood plain is reached. The error of assuming a linear relationship is reduced
by excluding river cross sections measured at high flow conditions. This reduces the difference in
discharge between the cross sections, and thereby reduces the effect of the assumption of a linear
relationship.
Figure 44 illustrates a river cross section by a black line. The two dotted horizontal lines represent
the WSE at high and low flow conditions. If the cross section is measured at high flow conditions
the submerged channel geometry would be represented by the dark blue curve. If the cross section
were measured at low flow conditions, the submerged channel geometry would be represented by
the light blue curve. The figure illustrates that knowledge of the true cross sectional geometry is
lost, when cross sections are measured at high flow conditions. When the WSE is low, a larger
fraction of the cross section geometry consists of satellite measurements. Though, the depth is
compensated for the large river discharge it is favorable to use cross sections measured at low flow,
to utilize knowledge of the true river cross sectional geometry.
46
==PAGE:56==
8.2
Effect of discharge correction on the WSE
8
DISCUSSION
Figure 44: Modelled submerged channel bathymetry dependent on high and
low flow conditions. Black line is true river cross section profile, dark blue is
high flow conditions, and light blue is low flow conditions.
The miss-representation of the true geometry increases for cross sections which does not have a
symmetric cross section profile. When a river winds, water carves into the outside edge of the
bend, creating an asymmetrical cross section profile. Including cross sections measured at high
flow conditions are a trade off between a good spatial distribution of cross sections, and the amount
of a cross section that is measured by altimetry vs. modelled by the geometry relation.
8.2
Effect of discharge correction on the WSE
The submerged channel depth for cross sections at chainage 4775000m-4800000m are strongly in-
fluenced by the discharge correction, see figure 20. The discharge correction changes the submerged
channel depth, which affects the river slope in this area. Figure 35 shows the effect of changing α
between 0.0001m/(m3/s) and 0.0004m/(m3/s) on the WSE. At the upstream part of the survey
area, the effect of the discharge correction behaves as expected, while the WSE behaves opposite
as expected at the downstream part of the survey area.
The WSE is highly influenced by the bottom elevation of the cross sections. Figure 45 shows a
river bottom elevation profile with a black line while the WSE is represented by a dotted line.
Two points along the bottom elevation profile controls a large part of the WSE. These points are
called controlling points as they control the flow conditions of the upstream stretch. The WSE is
less sensitive to the bottom elevations of cross sections which are lower than the controlling points.
The WSE must exceed the elevation of the controlling points, before continuing downstream.
Figure 45: Illustration of behaviour of the WSE which is highly dependent on
controlling points of the bottom elevation profile.
When a points in the bottom elevation is lowered, the net pressure force from the downstream direc-
tion increase along with the WSE. If the net pressure force on the water becomes dominant, water
will be slowed down and accumulate upstream. This is called the backwater effect. The backwater
effect might explain the unexpected effect of the discharge correction at the downstream part of
the survey area. At the downstream half of the survey area, the WSE increases when α increases.
47
==PAGE:57==
8.3
Calibration process and parameter values
8
DISCUSSION
When cross sections at chainage 4735000m and chainage 4810000m have high bottom elevations
and the upstream cross sections have lower bottom elevations, lakes will be filled with water until
the WSE exceeds the elevation of the controlling points. When the downstream cross sections are
lowered by the correction, the backwater effect of the ocean or other reservoirs downstream of the
survey area are extended further up the river which increases the WSE.
The backwater effect influences the WSE to different extend dependent on the value of α. When α
is large, the effect extends to chainage 4740000m, while the effect of a smaller α-value only affects
the WSE to approximately chainage 4800000m. Figure 46 shows the bottom elevation profile for
different discharge corrections. If α is larger than approximately 0.00015m/(m3/s) the backwater
effect is allowed to extend further upstream, as the bottom elevation at chainage 4790000m extends
below the controlling point at chainage 4810000m.
Figure 46: Effect of discharge correction defined by α on the bottom elevation.
A large α increases the bottom slope between cross sections at 4735000m and cross section at
chainage 4790000m. When the bottom slope increases, the WSE affected by the backwater effect
can extend further upstream. This could explain the different chainage positions where the effect
of the discharge correction changes.
The discharge correction changes the submerged channel depth by 0m up to 2.52m when α=0.00024
m/(m3/s). The discharge for the cross sections with highest correction is 12761m3/s while the
smallest discharge for a cross section is 2260m3/s. If the submerged channel depth, d, is 4 meters,
the effect of the discharge correction of up to 2.5m is a significant change of the submerged channel
depth. If the channel depth is 12 meters, a discharge correction of 2.5m on some cross sections is
less significant. A discharge correction of 2.5m might be too dominating on the submerged channel
depth when d is in the order of 4 meters. The discharge differences allowed between the cross
sections should therefore be considered in relation to the absolute submerged channel depth.
8.3
Calibration process and parameter values
The hydraulic model includes parameters that can not be directly measured by remote sensing.
These parameter are therefore calibrated by searching through model space with the SCE-UA
algorithm and evaluating the performance by calculating the RMSE between the simulated WSE
and ATL13 WSE. The RMSE of the calibration parameter values with the best performance is
1.42m.
Figures from the SpotPy setup show the performance of the calibration process. The parameters
n, d, and α approaches the lower boundary of the model space. The calibration parameters d
and n, and the parameters d and α are correlated.
When parameters are correlated, one or
48
==PAGE:58==
8.4
Validation of hydraulic model
8
DISCUSSION
more parameters should be removed. This increases the computation time due to the curse of
dimensionality and makes the model easier to interpret.
The SpotPy setup has been run with r, n, and d as calibration parameters and α was assigned the
apriori value of 0.00024m/(m3/s). This did not improve the performance of the search algorithm, as
n and d still obtained values at the lower boundary of the model space and the RMSE became 1.45
meters. The next step is to fix the Manning roughness to 0.01s/m1/3 and α to 0.00024m/(m3/s)
and run the calibration setup once more. Based on the discussion earlier of the quality and draw
backs of the cross sections and the discharge correction, better cross sections at chainage 4775000-
4800000m should also be obtained.
The RMSE of the optimal calibration parameter values is 1.42m which is a relatively high RMSE.
The RMSE for a hydraulic model with improved cross sections and more training data could lie
within of 0.5m-1m. The hydraulic model would benefit from being calibrated against a larger
number of WSE measurements as these constrain the calibration parameters.
The submerged channel depth, d, is the depth of the modelled part of the river channel.
All
cross sections are measured at low flow, and the submerged channel depth therefore represent the
submerged channel depth when river flow is at its lowest. Further, this depth refers to the depth of
the reference cross section for the discharge correction, which is the cross section located at chainage
4708700m. The other cross sections are corrected for discharge w.r.t. this cross section, and the
other cross sections therefore have a larger submerged channel depth. This justifies allowing a low
values of the parameter d.
The parameter search space must be large enough for all realistic values of the calibration param-
eters to be tested. On the other hand, a large model space can bring unrealistic combinations
of parameter values. If a large depth, large shape parameter, small Manning’s n, and a large α
is tested simultaneously, all parameters contribute to a low simulated WSE. This combination
of calibration parameter values might decrease the WSE below the bottom elevation of the cross
sections. Meanwhile each of the parameter values might be appropriate in a combination with
other values for the remaining calibration parameters. The search area should therefore not be
limited only based on one unrealistic combination of values.
In cases of an unrealistic combination of parameter values, the script fails. The script fails if the
WSE extends above the end points of the cross sections, or below the bottom elevation. This means,
that the search algorithm fails and the whole execution is terminated. This could be handled by a
try-catch statement in the steady state solver. If the calculations fail due to errors described above,
the WSE could be set to an unrealistic value, thus strongly penalising the parameter combination
resulting in termination of the script.
8.4
Validation of hydraulic model
The simulated WSE from the steady state solver shows a small bump in the WSE at chainage
4740000m. The nearby cross sections look reasonable, meaning realistic, well produced, and similar
to neighbouring cross sections. In this area of the river small islands are present, resulting in
multiple smaller channels rather than one large. This is shown in figure 47. The meandering can
cause more resistance on the water and a more weaved water flow. This could create a small
plateau of the WSE upstream of the islands.
49
==PAGE:59==
8.5
Data quality and availability
8
DISCUSSION
Figure 47:
River cross sections at chainage 4731900m, 4737600m, and
4744200m and nearby islands.
The simulated WSE is compared to radar altimetry measurements of the WSE from Sentinel-3
and Cryosat-2. Data from these satellites constitutes as validation data while ATL13 data has
performed as training data. The RMSE error of the simulated WSE compared to validation data
is 1.55m. This value is slightly larger than the RMSE of the training data. A model typically
performs worse on the test data than on the training data. Further, Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2
measurements contain larger errors than ICESat-2 ATL13.
The errors of the simulated WSE is affecting the model’s ability to predict river discharge based on
WSE measurements. The discharge estimation has a median and mean error of -31.1% and -20.9%
respectively. These are very large errors considering practical applications. A discharge estimate
with a median error of 30% is very uncertain, and steps towards improving the model should be
taken.
8.5
Data quality and availability
The discharge value assigned to each cross section is extracted from the insitu station at Komso-
molsk. The cross sections are measured between 2018 and 2020. Discharge data for 2020 is only
available as reconstructed data which is estimated to contain errors between 0% and 60%. 7 out of
11 cross sections are measured in 2020, and reconstructed data is therefore used for the discharge
correction. This will introduce some error in the assigned discharge, and therefore the applied
discharge correction.
Amur River is often covered by ice in the winter months. Altimetry WSE measurements might
measure the top of the ice instead of the water surface in the winter periods. The insitu stations
measure the actual discharge flowing through the river. This can introduce a discrepancy between
the measured surface elevation and the insitu discharge. If altimetry WSE is dominated by ice
measurements, the model will be calibrated based on a wrong relationship between discharge and
WSE. The poor WSE simulations occur in summer periods, and can not be directly related to this
issue.
ATL13 has an accuracy within 10cm, and the model can therefore not be expected to perform
better than 10cm in accuracy.
The model is validated against Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2 WSE
measurements which has a lower accuracy than ATL13. If more ICESat-2 data and insitu data
were available, ATL13 data could be divided into training and validation data, which would remove
the effect of the lower accuracy of Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2.
When more satellite data and more discharge data is available, the amount of available cross
sections will increase. The overlap between ICESat-2 data and insitu data from both gauge stations
only covers 15 months. The survey area contain 11 ICESat-2 RGT which are visited every three
months by ICESat-2. ICESat-2 therefore only measures the surface elevation of the survey area
50
==PAGE:60==
8.6
Processing time
8
DISCUSSION
on approx. 50 occasions in the period of available discharge data. Approx. one fourth of these
crossings occur at high flow times, and data from these periods are not favorable. ICESat-2 is
not able to penetrate clouds and poor weather conditions, which further reduces the number of
crossings where data can be used for modelling Amur River. The number of quality measurements
from ICESat-2 during low flow season is therefore highly limited.
8.6
Processing time
The main engine in the setup is the steady state solver. It performs a series of executions for
each grid step along the river stretch. The steady state solver calculates a WSE profile along
the river for each available calibration discharge (discharges where both ATL13 and insitu data is
available). The relation between the processing time of the steady state solver is linear dependent
on the number of grid points and the number of calibration instances.
The most time consuming part of the SS solver is the calls to MIKE HYDRO. These calls account
for the vast majority of the processing time of the SS solver. The time spent on calling MIKE
HYDRO is highly dependent on the number of points in the cross sections. When a cross section is
imported from MIKE HYDRO, each data point in the cross section are loaded, and the processed
data produced by MIKE HYDRO is recalculated. Thus a number of calculations follow from the
amount of points in the cross sections. Limiting the number of unused calculations performed by
MIKE HYDRO will reduce computation time.
Optimisation of the processing time should focus on the number of ATL13 calibration instances,
the number of grid points along the river, and the number of points in the cross sections. These are
all elements that are used by the steady state solver, which is the bottle neck w.r.t processing time.
Implementing parallel computing on the search algorithm and the steady state solver will highly
increase the computation time. Thus, if a computer with 20 CPU cores are used with parallel
computing on the SS solver, the script would perform up to 20 times faster.
The processed data in MIKE HYDRO are geometric properties directly derived from the cross
section geometry. These calculations could be performed in a common programming language such
as python. The implementation of the steady state solver might be optimised if the dependency
of MIKE HYDRO was removed. The current setup only uses a fraction of the possibilities of
MIKE HYDRO. As long as a very small part of the advantages of MIKE HYDRO is utilized, the
setup could be more eﬀicient by confining to one tool or programming language. Removing the
dependency on MIKE HYDRO gives more freedom to consider optimisation of the process and
implementing other statistical tools.
51
==PAGE:61==
9
FUTURE WORK
9
Future work
The work done in this report is a good foundation for further river modelling. As described in the
discussion, many aspects of the procedure can be improved and thereby create a better hydraulic
model. The main draw back is the automatic extraction of the cross sectional profiles and the small
overlap between satellite data and insitu discharge data. The automated process should be revised
in depth which might provide more cross sections and therefore giver a better representation of
the river cross section profiles.
Considering processing eﬀiciency, it would be interesting to explore the opportunity of implement-
ing the full processing scheme in an open-source programming language and operating system.
This will allow for more flexibility and easier setup on servers with large processing power.
The hydraulic model has been implemented assuming 1 depth, 1 roughness and 1 submerged shape
parameter for the complete river stretch. This is of course an assumption and future work could
focus on implementing varying calibration parameters. The first step could be to accept 2 different
values for each parameter thereby dividing the river stretch inro two major stretches with certain
geometric attributes. If the survey area is in an area with steep topography slopes towards the
river it could be assigned a large submerged channel depth compared to areas with floodplains.
Ideally, each calibration parameter for each measured cross section should be assigned a unique
value.
The 1D hydraulic model represented by the Saint-Venant equations assumes that discharge enter
the system from the upstream cross sections and from tributaries. In the real world, the system is
more complex, and the river system contains lakes and reservoirs that can store water and slowly
release it. Including these water features surrounding the river will improve the performance of
the model.
52
==PAGE:62==
10
CONCLUSION
10
Conclusion
Utilization of advancements in remote sensing techniques for hydraulic models has improved the
understanding of river flow. Calibrated hydraulic models relate water surface elevation measure-
ments to river discharge. ICESat-2 ATL03 data is utilized for extracting the river cross sectional
geometry of a stretch of Lower Amur River. 11 river cross section profiles are extracted from
ICESat-2 ATL03 data for the hydraulic model.
The river is modelled by a 1-Dimensional hydraulic model described by the Saint-Venant equations
which calculates the water depth given the cross sectional geometry, river discharge, lateral inflow,
and channel roughness. Four parameters are calibrated against ICESat-2 ATL13 WSE measure-
ments to determine the ideal values of the submerged channel depth, d, the submerged channel
geometry parameter, r, the manning roughness, n, and a discharge correction parameter, α.
A global search algorithm is implemented as the SCE-UA running 7000 iterations of combi-
nations of calibration parameter values.
The optimal calibration parameters are found to be
n=0,00802s/m1/3, d=4,00m, r=2,87, and α=0,0001m/(m3/s). These parameters result in a RMSE
of 1,42m. The calibration parameters are found to be strongly correlated, and the calibration pro-
cess has not performed satisfactory.
The hydraulic model is validated by comparing the simulated WSE for different discharge values
with Sentinel-3 and Cryosat-2 WSE measurement. The hydraulic model captures the seasonal
variations of the WSE, but poorly estimates low water surface elevations.
The RMSE of the
simulated WSE is 2,6m and the median error is 8,9%.
The main objective is to estimate river discharge based on WSE measurements. WSE from Sentinel-
3 and Cryosat-2 is used to estimate the river discharge based on the calibrated hydraulic model.
The discharge is estimated with a median error w.r.t insitu discharge of -31,1%. Strong fluctuations
of the estimated discharge is observed in summer periods, while the insitu discharge is stable.
This report proposes a series of disadvantages of the procedure and possible improvements for
creation river cross section profiles. Future work should focus on high quality of river cross sec-
tions, expanding training data for model calibration, and investigate the calibration parameter
correlation. The processing time can be improved through parallel computing of the steady state
solver. The hydraulic model can be expanded to include reservoirs and tributaries affecting the
river discharge.
53
==PAGE:63==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
References
United Nations (2018). Water. https://www.un.org/en/global-issues/water.
Bolgov, M. V. et al. (2017). “Characteristics of extreme precipitation events within the Amur river
basin in summer 2013”. English. In: Geography and Natural Resources 38.2. Cited By :5, pp. 139–
146.
Gupta, Avijit, Olav Slaymaker, and Wolfgang J. Junk (2020). Introducing Large Rivers. John Wiley
& Sons Ltd. isbn: 9781118451410.
Jiang, Liguang, Henrik Madsen, and Peter Bauer-Gottwein (2019). “Simultaneous calibration of
multiple hydrodynamic model parameters using satellite altimetry observations of water surface
elevation in the Songhua River”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment, pp. 229–247. doi: \url{h
ttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2019.03.014}.
Bjerklie, David M. et al. (2018). “Satellite remote sensing estimation of river discharge: Application
to the Yukon River Alaska”. In: Journal of Hydrology 561, pp. 1000–1018. doi: \url{https://d
oi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2018.04.005}.
NASA (2021). Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document for Inland Water Data Products (ATL03).
Tech. rep. doi: \url{https://doi.org/10.5067/ATLAS/ATL03.004}.
– (2020). Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document for Inland Water Data Products (ATL13). Tech.
rep. doi: \url{https://doi.org/10.5067/ATLAS/ATL13.003}.
ESA (2021a). Cryosat-2 Product Handbook.
– (2021b). Sentinel-3 SLSTR User Guide. https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/user-gu
ides/sentinel-3-slstr. Accessed on 28.12.2021.
EUMETSAT (2017). Sentinel-3 SRAL Marine User Handbook.
Bauer-Gottwein, Peter (2022). River Routing. Lecture notes for 12320 Hydrology, Spring 2022.
DHI (2017). MIKE 1D - DHI Simulation Engine for 1D river and urban modelling. https://man
uals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/2017/Water_Resources/MIKE_1D_reference.pdf.
Wang, Zhao-Yin, Joseph H. W. Lee, and Charles S. Melching (2015). Basic Concepts and Man-
agement Issues of Rivers. Springer. isbn: 978-3-642-25652-3.
Armanini, Aronne (2017). Principles of River Hydraulics. Springer. isbn: 978-3-319-88548-3.
Brorsen, Michael and Torben Larsen (2009). Lærebog i hydraulik. Aalborg universistetsforlag. isbn:
978-87-7307-978-2.
Ferguson, R. (2013). “9.5 Reach-Scale Flow Resistance”. In: Treatise on Geomorphology. Ed. by
John F. Shroder. Academic Press, pp. 50–68. isbn: 978-0-08-088522-3. doi: \url{https://doi
.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374739-6.00230-X}. url: %5Curl%7Bhttps://www.sciencedirec
t.com/science/article/pii/B978012374739600230X%7D.
Arcement, George J. and Verne R. Schneider (1998). “Guide for Selecting Manning’s Roughness
Coeﬀicients for Natural Channels and Flood Plains”. In: U.S Geological Survey Water-supply
paper 2339. In cooperation with U.S.Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Adminis-
tration, pp. 1–38. url: %5Curl%7Bhttps://pubs.usgs.gov/wsp/2339/report.pdf%7D.
Dingman, S. Lawrence (2007). “Analytical derivation of at-a-station hydraulic–geometry relations”.
In: Journal of Hydrology 334, pp. 17–27. doi: \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.20
06.09.021.}.
Schaperow, Jacob et al. (2019). “A curve-fitting method for estimating bathymetry from water
surface height and width”. In: Water ressources research 55, pp. 4288–4303. doi: \url{http:
//doi.org/10.1029/2019WR024938}.
Jiang, Liguang, Silja Westphal Christensen, and Peter Bauer-Gottwein (2021). “Calibrating 1D
hydrodynamic river models in the absence of cross- sectional geometry: A new parameterization
scheme”. In: Hydrology and Earth system sciences, pp. 1–14. doi: \url{https://doi.org/10.5
194/hess-2021-210}.
Kittel, Cecile et al. (2021). “Hydraulic model calibration using CryoSat-2 observations in the
Zambezi catchment”. In: Water ressources research, pp. 1–19. doi: \url{https://doi-org.pr
oxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1029/2020WR029261}.
Kouraev, Alexei V. et al. (2004). “Ob’ river discharge from TOPEX/Poseidon satellite altimetry
(1992–2002)”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 93, pp. 238–245. issn: 0034-4257. doi: \url
{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2004.07.007}.
54
==PAGE:64==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Pekel, Jean-François et al. (2016). “High-resolution mapping of global surface water and its long-
term changes”. In: Nature 540, pp. 418–422. issn: 0034-4257. doi: \url{https://doi.org/10
.1038/nature20584}.
WorldAtlas (2021). Amur River. https://www.worldatlas.com/rivers/amur-river.html.
Nielsen, Karina et al. (2015). “Validation of CryoSat-2 SAR mode based lake levels”. In: Remote
Sensing of Environment 171, pp. 162–170. issn: 0034-4257. doi: \url{https://doi.org/10.1
016/j.rse.2015.10.023}. url: %5Curl%7Bhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/arti
cle/pii/S0034425715301759%7D.
DHI (2021). MIKE HYDRO River. http://doc.mikepoweredbydhi.help/webhelp/2021/mikeh
ydro_river/index.htm#%3E%3Epan=2.
Houska, T. et al. (2015). “SPOTting Model Parameters Using a Ready-Made Python Package”.
In: PLOS ONE 10, e0145180. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145180. url: %5Curl%7Bhttps:
//journals.plos.org/plosone/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0145180%5C&typ
e=printable%7D.
Duan, Qingyun, Soroosh Sorooshian, and Vijai K. Gupta (1994). “Optimal use of the SCE-UA
global optimization method for calibrating watershed models”. In: Journal of hydrology 158,
pp. 265–284. issn: 0022-1694. doi: \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1694(94)90057-4
}.
55
==PAGE:65==
11
APPENDIX A: ADDITIONAL RESULTS
11
Appendix A: Additional results
Additional results
Table 7 relates chainage, WSE, and discharge for Amur River. The columns describe a chainage
position and the rows represent discharge values. The distance along chainage is given in thousands.
The table only consists of values for every 1000m3/s and every 10km along the river. For real use,
this of cause needs a finer resolution. If a WSE of 10.28m is measured at chainage 4740000m, the
corresponding discharge for that measurement is 8000m3/s.
Q \x·103
4690
4700
4710
4720
4730
4740
4750
4760
4770
4780
4790
4800
4810
4820
4830
2000
8.29
8.24
8.18
8.10
7.93
7.76
7.45
7.20
7.00
6.84
6.72
6.61
6.54
6.49
6.45
3000
8,84
8,78
8,70
8,60
8,42
8,25
7,94
7,71
7,55
7,42
7,33
7,24
7,17
7,13
7,08
4000
9,34
9,28
9,19
9,07
8,89
8,72
8,42
8,22
8,08
7,98
7,90
7,82
7,75
7,71
7,67
5000
9,79
9,72
9,62
9,50
9,31
9,15
8,86
8,68
8,56
8,47
8,40
8,33
8,26
8,22
8,18
6000
10,21
10,14
10,03
9,90
9,71
9,56
9,28
9,12
9,01
8,93
8,87
8,80
8,74
8,70
8,65
7000
10,58
10,50
10,38
10,25
10,06
9,92
9,64
9,49
9,39
9,32
9,26
9,19
9,13
9,10
9,05
8000
10,95
10,87
10,74
10,61
10,42
10,28
10,01
9,88
9,79
9,72
9,66
9,60
9,54
9,50
9,46
9000
11,27
11,19
11,06
10,92
10,74
10,60
10,33
10,20
10,12
10,05
10,00
9,93
9,87
9,84
9,80
10000
11,55
11,47
11,33
11,19
11,01
10,87
10,61
10,48
10,40
10,34
10,29
10,22
10,16
10,13
10,09
11000
11,85
11,76
11,61
11,47
11,29
11,16
10,89
10,78
10,70
10,64
10,59
10,52
10,46
10,44
10,39
12000
12,12
12,03
11,87
11,74
11,56
11,43
11,16
11,05
10,97
10,92
10,87
10,80
10,74
10,72
10,68
13000
12,38
12,29
12,12
11,99
11,81
11,68
11,41
11,30
11,23
11,17
11,12
11,05
11,00
10,98
10,93
14000
12,65
12,56
12,38
12,25
12,07
11,95
11,68
11,57
11,50
11,45
11,40
11,33
11,28
11,26
11,22
15000
12,94
12,85
12,66
12,53
12,36
12,23
11,96
11,86
11,79
11,74
11,69
11,62
11,57
11,55
11,51
16000
13,15
13,06
12,87
12,73
12,56
12,44
12,17
12,07
12,00
11,95
11,90
11,83
11,79
11,77
11,73
17000
13,40
13,30
13,11
12,97
12,81
12,68
12,41
12,32
12,25
12,20
12,15
12,08
12,04
12,02
11,98
18000
13,55
13,45
13,24
13,11
12,94
12,82
12,54
12,45
12,38
12,33
12,28
12,21
12,17
12,15
12,11
19000
13,78
13,67
13,46
13,33
13,16
13,04
12,76
12,67
12,61
12,56
12,51
12,44
12,39
12,38
12,34
20000
13,98
13,88
13,66
13,53
13,37
13,25
12,97
12,88
12,82
12,77
12,72
12,65
12,61
12,59
12,55
21000
14,18
14,07
13,84
13,72
13,55
13,43
13,15
13,06
13,00
12,96
12,91
12,84
12,80
12,78
12,74
22000
14,36
14,25
14,02
13,89
13,73
13,61
13,32
13,24
13,18
13,13
13,08
13,01
12,98
12,96
12,92
23000
14,55
14,44
14,19
14,07
13,91
13,79
13,50
13,42
13,36
13,31
13,26
13,19
13,16
13,14
13,10
24000
14,71
14,59
14,34
14,21
14,06
13,93
13,64
13,56
13,50
13,45
13,40
13,33
13,30
13,28
13,24
25000
14,87
14,75
14,49
14,37
14,21
14,08
13,79
13,71
13,65
13,60
13,55
13,49
13,45
13,44
13,40
26000
15,07
14,95
14,68
14,56
14,41
14,28
13,99
13,91
13,85
13,81
13,76
13,69
13,66
13,64
13,60
27000
15,23
15,11
14,83
14,71
14,56
14,43
14,13
14,06
14,00
13,95
13,90
13,83
13,80
13,79
13,75
28000
15,35
15,23
14,94
14,82
14,67
14,54
14,24
14,16
14,11
14,06
14,01
13,94
13,91
13,90
13,85
29000
15,53
15,41
15,11
14,99
14,84
14,71
14,41
14,34
14,28
14,23
14,18
14,12
14,09
14,07
14,03
30000
15,67
15,54
15,24
15,12
14,97
14,84
14,54
14,47
14,41
14,36
14,31
14,25
14,22
14,20
14,16
31000
15,82
15,69
15,37
15,26
15,11
14,98
14,68
14,60
14,54
14,50
14,45
14,39
14,36
14,34
14,30
32000
15,96
15,83
15,50
15,39
15,25
15,11
14,81
14,73
14,68
14,63
14,58
14,52
14,49
14,48
14,43
33000
16,10
15,97
15,63
15,52
15,38
15,24
14,94
14,87
14,81
14,76
14,71
14,65
14,63
14,61
14,57
34000
16,22
16,09
15,75
15,64
15,50
15,36
15,06
14,99
14,93
14,88
14,83
14,77
14,75
14,73
14,69
35000
16,39
16,25
15,90
15,80
15,66
15,52
15,22
15,14
15,09
15,04
14,99
14,93
14,91
14,89
14,85
36000
16,53
16,39
16,03
15,92
15,79
15,65
15,35
15,27
15,22
15,17
15,12
15,06
15,04
15,02
14,98
37000
16,66
16,52
16,15
16,05
15,91
15,77
15,48
15,40
15,34
15,30
15,25
15,19
15,17
15,15
15,11
38000
16,77
16,63
16,25
16,16
16,02
15,88
15,58
15,51
15,45
15,40
15,35
15,30
15,28
15,26
15,22
39000
16,92
16,78
16,39
16,29
16,16
16,02
15,72
15,65
15,59
15,55
15,50
15,44
15,42
15,40
15,36
40000
17,21
17,06
16,65
16,56
16,44
16,29
16,00
15,93
15,87
15,82
15,77
15,72
15,70
15,69
15,64
41000
17,28
17,13
16,72
16,63
16,50
16,36
16,06
15,99
15,93
15,89
15,84
15,78
15,77
15,75
15,71
42000
17,40
17,26
16,83
16,75
16,62
16,47
16,18
16,11
16,05
16,01
15,96
15,90
15,89
15,87
15,83
43000
17,53
17,38
16,94
16,86
16,73
16,59
16,30
16,22
16,17
16,12
16,07
16,02
16,01
15,99
15,94
44000
17,64
17,49
17,05
16,96
16,84
16,69
16,40
16,33
16,27
16,23
16,18
16,13
16,11
16,10
16,05
45000
17,78
17,63
17,18
17,10
16,98
16,83
16,54
16,47
16,41
16,37
16,32
16,27
16,26
16,24
16,19
46000
17,89
17,74
17,28
17,20
17,08
16,93
16,65
16,57
16,52
16,47
16,42
16,37
16,36
16,35
16,30
47000
18,00
17,85
17,38
17,30
17,18
17,03
16,75
16,67
16,62
16,57
16,53
16,48
16,47
16,45
16,40
Table 7: Table for finding the discharge Q [m3/s] at the downstream insitu
station in Bogorodskoe given a WSE measurement in meters above the geoid
at a chainage position x [m]. Columns describe a chainage position and the
rows represent discharge values. Elements in the table is WSE, from which the
discharge can be found. The distance along chainage is given in thousands.
56
==PAGE:66==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
12
Appendix B: Code
R code
Additional scripts are provided in attached zip file.
Extraction of river cross section profile from ATL03
1
################################################
2
#Script for extracting the bathymetry and water surface of lakes from ATLAS 03 data
3
################################################
4
#.rs.restartR()
5
6
######## Libraries ############################################################
7
library(anytime)
8
library(date)
9
library(lubridate)
10
library(sp)
11
library(raster)
12
#library(h5) package h5 is removed from CRAN - use hdf5r instead
13
library(hdf5r)
14
library(rhdf5)
15
library(rgdal)
16
library(pracma)
17
library(zoo)
18
library(strucchange)
19
library(DescTools)
20
library(geometry)
21
library(RANN)
22
library(geosphere)
23
library(TMB)
24
library(stats)
25
library(tsHydro)
26
27
#library(profvis)
28
#profvis({
29
30
######## Directories ###########################################################
31
path_raw_data <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Amur_river/ICEsat_data/ATL03/"
32
path_result <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/RESULTS/Bathymetry_results"
33
path_occurence <- '/mnt/Space_data/rawdata/GSWE/occurrence_v1.1/occurrence_'
34
path_extract_occurrence <- '/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/Extract_occurrence.R'
35
path_DEM <- '/home/Linda/Thesis/Data/DEM/'
36
path_extract_DEM <- '/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/Extract_DEM.R'
37
path_read_icesat <- '/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/readICESAT_h5.R'
38
path_plot_conf <- '/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/Plot_signal_conf.R'
39
path_intersect_shape <- '/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/Intersect_shapefiles.R'
40
path_Buffer_shape <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Amur_river/GIS_files/New_shapefiles/Buffer2.shp
"#Amur_buffer_08#ATL13_Amur_buffer2
41
path_functions <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/Functions.R"
42
path_functions_TMB <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/functions_TMB.R"
43
path_chain_shapefile <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Amur_river/GIS_files/New_shapefiles/Chain.
shp"
44
path_get_centerline_projection <- '/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/get_centerline_
projection.R'
45
46
47
######## Begin script #########################################################
48
cat(as.character(Sys.time())," Start extract river bathymetry main script \n")
49
50
filelist = list.files(path=path_raw_data,pattern=".nc",recursive=TRUE,full.names=TRUE) #
Multiple statements: use intersect
51
52
Area_name <- "Amur"
53
beam_name <<- c('gt1l', 'gt1r', 'gt2l', 'gt2r', 'gt3l', 'gt3r')
54
55
56
bbox <- c(50.6,51.6,137.9,139.2) #Amur
57
bbox <- c(50.6,51.6,137.5,138.2) #Amur
58
59
Result_folder_name <<- paste(path_result,"/",Area_name,sep="")
60
if(!dir.exists(Result_folder_name)){
57
==PAGE:67==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
61
dir.create(toString(Result_folder_name))
62
}
63
64
################# Shapefile ##########################
65
source(path_functions)
66
source(path_intersect_shape)
67
Buffer_shape <- LoadSHAPE(path_Buffer_shape)
68
centerline_shape <- LoadSHAPE(path_chain_shapefile)
69
70
loop_from <- 6
71
loop_to <- length(filelist)
72
73
######## Loop over data files ##################################################
74
for(k in loop_from:loop_to){
75
76
setwd(path_raw_data)
77
nc <- filelist[k]
78
cat("\n\n",as.character(Sys.time()),"Running iteration: ",k,"\n")
79
ground_track <<-
substr(nc,71,74)
80
81
######## Loop over beams #####################################################
82
for(beam_no in c(1,3,5)){
83
beam <<- beam_name[beam_no]
84
cat("\n\n",as.character(Sys.time()),"Running iteration: ",k," beam ",beam,"\n")
85
86
source(path_read_icesat)
87
88
fit<-try(readICESAT_h5(nc,bbox),silent=TRUE)
89
90
if(class(fit)=="try-error"){
91
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Try-catch failed, data is discarded and script
continues for next file \n")
92
break
93
} else if(file.info(nc)$size == 0){
94
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),'Try-catch failed as file is empty \n')
95
next
96
} else if(is.null(fit)){
97
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"No data points within bbox, go to next beam \n")
98
next
99
} else {
100
ICEsat_data <- readICESAT_h5(nc,bbox) #Open netCDF files into R
101
}
102
103
######## Accept data confidence higher than 2 ##############################
104
ICEsat_data <- ICEsat_data[ICEsat_data$conf_inland_w > 2,]
105
106
if(dim(ICEsat_data)[1] == 0){
107
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"No points with medium or high conf, skip beam \n")
108
break
109
}
110
111
######## Intersect with shapefile ##########################################
112
113
114
115
sPoints<-ICEsat_data[,1:2]
#lon,lat
116
inMask <- myIntersect(Buffer_shape, sPoints, world=TRUE)
#inmask contains index
117
end_time <- Sys.time()
118
119
120
if(length(inMask$id) >0){
121
122
data_inmask <- ICEsat_data[inMask[,1],]
123
if(dim(data_inmask)[1] < 300){
124
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Too little data available, skip \n")
125
next
126
}
127
128
######## Extract DEM elevation and limit data to +- 200 meters of DEM ####
129
130
source(path_extract_DEM)
131
sPoints <- data_inmask[,2:1]
#Extract (lat,lon)
58
==PAGE:68==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
132
DEMfiles <- getDEMfiles(sPoints)
133
DEMval <- getDEMvalue(sPoints,DEMfiles)
134
135
dat_DEM <- cbind(data_inmask,DEMval)
136
DEM_index <- which(abs(dat_DEM$DEMval-dat_DEM$elev.id.) > 300)
137
138
if(length(DEM_index)/dim(dat_DEM)[1] > 0.25){#If more than 20% deviates from DEM
139
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Data deviates from DEM, skip \n")
140
next
141
}
142
143
if(length(DEM_index) > 0){
144
dat_DEM <- dat_DEM[-DEM_index,]
145
}
146
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"DEM ok, now check occurrence \n")
147
######## Extract occurrence #############################################
148
149
source(path_extract_occurrence)
150
sPoints <-dat_DEM[,2:1]
#Extract (lat,lon)
151
OCfiles <- getGSWEfiles(sPoints)
152
OCval <- getOCvalue(sPoints,OCfiles)
153
154
dat_oc <- cbind(dat_DEM,OCval)
155
156
######## Find WSE ########################################################
157
water <- dat_oc[dat_oc$OCval > 5,]
158
if(dim(water)[1] < 200){
#dat_DEM$lon.id.
159
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Too few water points, skip \n")
160
next
161
}
162
163
GKD <- density(water$elev.id.) #Gaussian kernel distribution
164
WSE <- GKD$x[which.max(GKD$y)]
165
166
if(WSE > 70){
167
next()
168
}
169
170
171
dat_oc <- dat_oc[dat_oc$elev.id. < WSE+90 & dat_oc$elev.id. > WSE-5,]
172
water <- dat_oc[dat_oc$OCval > 0,]
173
174
if(dim(water)[1] < 200){#dat_DEM$lon.id.
175
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Too few water points, skip \n")
176
next
177
}
178
179
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Before proj dat \n")
180
181
######## Project data onto cross section and save #######################
182
#This provides projection , dist to centerline , UTM coor etc
183
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Enter centerline projection \n")
184
source(path_get_centerline_projection)
185
proj_dat <- get_centerline_projection(dat_oc,centerline_shape)
186
if(is.null(proj_dat)){
187
next
188
}
189
190
######## Reduce data by outlier and height ##############################
191
outlier <- hampel(proj_dat$elev.id.,50)
192
193
if(!is.null(outlier$ind)){
194
proj_dat <- proj_dat[-outlier$ind,]
195
}
196
197
if(dim(proj_dat)[1] < 500){#dat_DEM$lon.id.
198
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Data points: ",dim(proj_dat)[1],"\n")
199
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Too few points, skip \n")
200
next
201
}
202
203
elevation_limit <- 25
59
==PAGE:69==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
204
data_limited <- reduce_data(proj_dat,elevation_limit)
205
206
if(is.null(data_limited)){
207
next()
208
}
209
210
if(dim(data_limited)[1] < 1){
211
next()
212
}
213
214
plot(data_limited$time.id.,data_limited$elev.id.)
215
points(c(data_limited$time.id.[1],data_limited$time.id.[length(data_limited$time.
id.)]),c(WSE,WSE),type="l",col="blue")
216
217
if(is.null(data_limited)){
218
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"This data set is skipped after limitng data, next
\n")
219
next
220
}
221
222
if(dim(data_limited)[1] < 300){#dat_DEM$lon.id.
223
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Data points: ",dim(proj_dat)[1],"\n")
224
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Too few points, skip \n")
225
next
226
}
227
228
if((max(data_limited$elev.id.)-min(data_limited$elev.id.)) < 3){
229
data_limited <- reduce_data(proj_dat,elevation_limit+20)
230
}
231
232
######## Get cross section with TsHydro ##################################
233
234
#start_time <- Sys.time()
235
#plot(data_limited$V10,data_limited$elev..m.)
236
237
238
if(dim(data_limited)[1] > 15000){#dat_DEM$lon.id.
239
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Data points: ",dim(proj_dat)[1],"\n")
240
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Too many points for tsHydro to process, skip \n")
241
return()
242
}
243
244
245
source(path_functions_TMB)
246
Xsec <- Use_tsHydro(data_limited)
247
Xsec2 <- Xsec
248
#end_time <- Sys.time()
249
#TsTime <- end_time - start_time
250
251
lines(Xsec$time.id.,Xsec$fit2.pl.u,col="purple")
252
253
254
255
######### Save processed data ############################################
256
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Save data \n")
257
file_name <- paste(path_result,"/",Area_name,"/",Area_name,"_",ground_track,"_",as
.POSIXct(floor_date(Xsec$time_stamp.id.[1], "days")),"_",beam, "_crossec.csv"
, sep="")
258
print(file_name)
259
260
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"create index file",file_name,"\n")
261
Header <- data.frame("Lon [deg]","Lat [deg]","Height [m]","DecYear","Time Stamp","
Sig. Conf.","Surf_type","DEM height","Ocurrence","Dist centerline","Dist
chain","UTM_E","UTM_N","EGM08","tsH_sd")
262
write.table(Header, file = file_name, row.names = FALSE, col.names = FALSE, sep =
", ", quote = TRUE)
263
write.table(Xsec2[c(1,2,15,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,16)], file = file_name, row.
names = FALSE, append = TRUE, col.names = FALSE, sep = ", ")
264
265
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Done with writing to file: ",file_name,"\n")
266
267
}# Data within shapefile
60
==PAGE:70==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
268
269
}# Beams
270
}# Data files
271
272
273
#})
Listing 1: Extract_river_bathymetry.R
Preparing cross section for import in MIKE HYDRO
1
################################################################################
2
# Script that loads ICEsat cross sections and calculate the water surface
3
# elevation and the shape/smoothing parameter
4
# Output of this script is input for Mike Hydro River
5
###############################################################################
6
7
######### Packages ##################
8
library(lubridate)
9
library(date)
10
library(sp)
11
library(raster)
12
#library(h5) package h5 is removed from CRAN - use hdf5r instead
13
library(hdf5r)
14
library(rhdf5)
15
library(rgdal)
16
library(pracma)
17
library(zoo)
18
library(strucchange)
19
library(DescTools)
20
library(stats)
21
library(geosphere)
22
23
### Function for converting to decyear
24
JulSecToDYice<-function(time){
25
library(lubridate)
26
library(date)
27
#mydate<-as.Date(time/86400, origin="2018-01-01")
28
mydate<-as.Date(time/86400, origin="1980-01-06 00:00:00")
29
decimalDate<-decimal_date(mydate)
30
return(decimalDate)
31
}
32
33
options(digits=14)
34
########## Paths ###############################################################
35
path_icesat_tracks <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/RESULTS/Bathymetry_results/Amur"
36
path_output <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/RESULTS/Results_for_Mike/"
37
path_output_shape <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/RESULTS/Bathymetry_results_r_shape/"
38
path_chainage <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Amur_river/GIS_files/New_shapefiles/Chain.shp"
39
path_buffer <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Amur_river/GIS_files/New_shapefiles/Buffer.shp"
40
path_intersect_shape <- '/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/Intersect_shapefiles.R'
41
path_template <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Programming/Python_scripts/Xsec_template_LC.txt"
42
#path_parameters <- "/home/Linda/Thesis/Amur_river/Amur_parameters.txt"
43
44
Area_name <- "Amur"
45
46
file_name <- paste(path_output,"/",Area_name,"/",Area_name,"_newtest.txt", sep="")
47
file_name_stat <- paste(path_output,"/",Area_name,"/",Area_name,"_statistics_newtest.txt
", sep="")
48
49
#CLEAR ALL DATA FILES BEFORE WRITING FROM THE BEGINNIG
50
#close( file( file_name, open="w" ) )
51
#close( file( file_name, open="w" ) )
52
53
#file_name_rshape_end <- "_crossec_interpolated.csv"
54
55
######### Pre processing #######################################################
56
#source(path_intersect_shape)
57
#Chainiage <- LoadSHAPE(path_chainage)
58
59
filelist <- list.files(path_icesat_tracks,pattern="crossec.csv",full.names=TRUE)#test_
data
61
==PAGE:71==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
60
61
######## Main processing #######################################################
62
#length(filelist)
63
for(s in 1:length(filelist)){
64
65
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Running iteration: ",s,"\n")
66
beam <<-
substr(filelist[s],73,76)
67
ground_track <- substr(filelist[s],57,60)
68
icesat <- read.table(filelist[s],sep=",",header = TRUE, check.names = TRUE)
69
70
#if(icesat$Dist.chain[1] == 4834100){
71
#
browser()
72
#} else {
73
#
next()
74
#}
75
76
77
78
points_per_meter <- nrow(icesat)/(max(icesat$Dist.centerline)-min(icesat$Dist.
centerline))
79
80
icesat_sampled = icesat[seq(1, nrow(icesat), points_per_meter/0.07), ] #Sample points
every 14 meters
81
82
83
84
85
#cross_sec_pos <- c
(4687400,4687600,4702100,4702300,4731900,4737400,4744200,4786000,4792900,4806900,4825800,4834100)
86
87
#for(i in cross_sec_pos){
88
#
if(icesat_sampled$Dist.chain[1] == i){
89
90
#Find end cross sections to dublicate and correct elevation according to approx.
slope
91
92
93
### Converts height to geoid ###
94
icesat_sampled$Hgeoid <- icesat_sampled$Height..m. - icesat_sampled$EGM08
95
icesat_sampled <- icesat_sampled[order(icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline),]
96
97
98
if((max(icesat_sampled$Hgeoid)-min(icesat_sampled$Hgeoid)) < 2){
99
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"Too low cross scetion, dropped iteration: ",s,"\n"
)
100
next()
101
}
102
103
######## Find WSE ############################################################
104
water <- icesat_sampled[icesat_sampled$Ocurrence > 5,]
105
106
GKD <- density(as.numeric(water$Hgeoid)) #Gaussian kernel distribution
107
WSE <- GKD$x[which.max(GKD$y)]
108
109
icesat_sampled <- icesat_sampled[icesat_sampled$Hgeoid < WSE+12 ,] #Only accept
low points
110
111
######## Add first and last high point #######################################3
112
maxH <- max(icesat_sampled$Hgeoid)
113
icesat_sampled$Hgeoid[1] <- maxH
114
icesat_sampled$Hgeoid[length(icesat_sampled$Hgeoid)] <- maxH
115
116
######## R shape geometry ################################################
117
118
submerged_idx <- which(icesat_sampled$Hgeoid < WSE+0.2 & icesat_sampled$Hgeoid >
WSE-0.3) #Data with same height as water
119
120
121
sec_break <- which(diff(submerged_idx) > 4)#Find sectionsof water at least 4
points apart (thus an island must be 4*20m = 80m)
122
begin_point <- c(submerged_idx[1],submerged_idx[sec_break+1])
62
==PAGE:72==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
123
end_point <- c(submerged_idx[sec_break],submerged_idx[length(submerged_idx)])
124
125
points_id <- which(icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[end_point]-icesat_sampled$Dist.
centerline[begin_point] > 40)#This is the length of the water stretch
126
begin_point <- begin_point[points_id]
127
end_point <- end_point[points_id]
128
129
Y <- 10
130
icesat2 <- icesat_sampled
131
if(length(begin_point)>0){
132
r <- 1.3
133
for(i in 1:length(begin_point)){
134
W <- icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[end_point[i]]-icesat_sampled$Dist.
centerline[begin_point[i]]
135
x <- icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[begin_point[i]:end_point[i]] - (icesat_
sampled$Dist.centerline[begin_point[i]]+icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[
end_point[i]])/2
136
pos_x <- abs(x)
137
138
z <- Y*pos_x^r*(2/abs(W))^r
139
submerged_elev <- z+WSE-max(z)
140
icesat2$Hgeoid[begin_point[i]:end_point[i]] <- submerged_elev
141
}
142
}
143
144
145
#plot(icesat2$Dist.centerline ,icesat2$Hgeoid)
146
# filename_time <- substr(floor_date(as.POSIXct(icesat$Time.Stamp[1]), "day")
,1,10)
147
# file_name_shape <- paste(path_output_shape,"/",Area_name,"/",Area_name,"_",
ground_track,"_",filename_time,"_",beam, file_name_rshape_end, sep="")
148
# Header <- data.frame("Lon [deg]","Lat [deg]","Hellip","DecYear","Time Stamp","
Sig. Conf.","Surf_type","DEM height","Ocurrence","Dist centerline","Dist
chain","UTM_E","UTM_N","EGM08","tsH_sd","Hgeoid")
149
# write.table(Header, file = file_name_shape, row.names = FALSE, col.names = FALSE
, sep = ", ", quote = TRUE)
150
# write.table(icesat2, file = file_name_shape, row.names = FALSE, append = TRUE,
col.names = FALSE, sep = ", ")
151
#browser()
152
153
######## Current river width (M4 and M5) ####################################
154
#Flow index calculated in icesat_sampled
155
left_flow_idx <- begin_point[which.max(abs(icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[end_
point]-icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[begin_point]))]
156
left_flow_point <- icesat_sampled[left_flow_idx, ]
157
158
if(dim(left_flow_point)[1] < 1){
159
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"No flow point, dropped iteration: ", s,"\n")
160
next()
161
}
162
163
164
right_flow_idx <- end_point[which.max(abs(icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[end_point
]-icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[begin_point]))]
165
right_water_point <- icesat_sampled[right_flow_idx, ]
166
167
if(dim(right_water_point)[1] < 1){
168
cat(as.character(Sys.time()),"No flow point, dropped iteration: ", s,"\n")
169
next()
170
}
171
172
173
174
plot(icesat$Dist.centerline,icesat$Height..m. - icesat$EGM08,pch=20,col="red",ylim
=c(-2,35))
175
points(icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[submerged_idx],icesat_sampled$Hgeoid[
submerged_idx],pch=20,col="green")
176
points(icesat2$Dist.centerline ,icesat2$Hgeoid,pch=20,col="blue")
177
points(icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[begin_point],icesat_sampled$Hgeoid[begin_
point],col="orange",cex=2)
178
points(icesat_sampled$Dist.centerline[end_point],icesat_sampled$Hgeoid[end_point],
col="orange",cex=2)
63
==PAGE:73==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
179
180
181
182
######## Assign values to data file #########################################
183
#Chain for ordinary files
184
chain <- mean(icesat2$Dist.chain)
185
186
# Chain for extraordinarry upstream
187
# chain <- mean(icesat2$Dist.chain)-10000
188
# Chain for extraordinarry downstream
189
# chain <- mean(icesat2$Dist.chain)+10000
190
191
192
Branch_ID <- paste("1-",chain,sep="") #As I only work with 1 branch of Amur
193
194
if(length(left_flow_idx)> 0){
195
min_height_idx <- which(icesat2$Hgeoid == min(icesat_sampled$Hgeoid[left_flow_
idx:right_flow_idx])) #Flow index calculated in icesat_sampled
196
datum <- round(min(icesat_sampled$Hgeoid[left_flow_idx:right_flow_idx]),4)
#Flow index calculated in icesat_sampled
197
} else {
198
datum <- round(min(icesat2$Hgeoid[icesat$Ocurrence > 5]),4)
199
min_height_idx <-which(icesat2$Hgeoid == min(icesat2$Hgeoid[icesat2$Ocurrence >
5]))
200
}
201
202
coor <- data.frame(icesat2$Dist.centerline ,icesat2$UTM_E,icesat2$UTM_N)
203
coor <- format(round(coor,digits=8),nsmall=8)
204
205
resistance <- 20
206
207
profile <- data.frame( matrix(nrow = length(icesat2$Lat..deg.), ncol = 7))
208
for(index in 1:length(icesat2$Lat..deg.)){
209
Mike_id <- "<#0>"
#This is handeled by quote
=FALSE in write table
210
211
##Normal cross sections
212
profile[index,] <- c(format(round(icesat2$Dist.centerline[index],digits=8),
nsmall=8),format(round(icesat2$Hgeoid[index],digits=8),nsmall=8),resistance
,Mike_id,0,0,0)
213
214
# Upstream cross section
215
# profile[index,] <- c(format(round(icesat2$Dist.centerline[index],digits=8),
nsmall=8),format(round(icesat2$Hgeoid[index]+0.14,digits=8),nsmall=8),
resistance ,Mike_id,0,0,0)
216
217
# Downstream cross section
218
# profile[index,] <- c(format(round(icesat2$Dist.centerline[index],digits=8),
nsmall=8),format(round(icesat2$Hgeoid[index]-0.14,digits=8),nsmall=8),
resistance ,Mike_id,0,0,0)
219
220
}
221
222
profile[which.min(icesat2$Dist.centerline),4] <- "<#1>"
#Left levee bank
223
profile[min_height_idx,4] <- "<#2>"
#Deepest point
224
profile[which.max(icesat2$Dist.centerline),4] <- "<#4>"
#Right levee bank
225
profile[begin_point ,4] <- "<#64>"
#Points of R shape
interpolation
226
profile[end_point ,4] <- "<#32>"
#Points of R shape
interpolation
227
profile[left_flow_idx,4] <- "<#8>"
#Left low flow bank #
First point of main interpolation
228
profile[right_flow_idx,4] <- "<#16>"
#Right low flow bank #
Last point of main interpolation
229
230
Temp_lines <- read.table(path_template,sep="\t",stringsAsFactors = FALSE)
231
Temp_lines[1,1] <- 1
232
Temp_lines[2,1] <- Area_name
233
Temp_lines[3,1] <- chain
234
Temp_lines[5,1] <- 0 # datum. THIS IS A TEST
235
Temp_lines[7,1] <- Branch_ID
236
64
==PAGE:74==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
237
Temp_lines[12,1] <- paste("PROFILE",length(icesat2$Lon..deg.),sep="\t")
238
Temp_lines[17,1] <- paste("COORDINATES",sep="\t")
239
Temp_lines[18,1] <- paste("3",length(icesat2$Lon..deg.),sep="\t")
240
241
242
write.table(Temp_lines[1:12,1], file = file_name, row.names = FALSE, append = TRUE
, col.names = FALSE, sep = "\t",quote=FALSE)
243
write.table(profile, file = file_name, row.names = FALSE, append = TRUE, col.names
= FALSE, sep = "\t",quote=FALSE)
244
write.table(Temp_lines[17:18,1], file = file_name, row.names = FALSE, append =
TRUE, col.names = FALSE, sep = "\t",quote=FALSE)
245
write.table(coor, file = file_name, row.names = FALSE, append = TRUE, col.names =
FALSE, sep = "\t",quote=FALSE)
246
write.table(Temp_lines[20,1], file = file_name, row.names = FALSE, append = TRUE,
col.names = FALSE, sep = "\t",quote=FALSE)
247
248
decYear1 <- JulSecToDYice(icesat2$DecYear[1])
249
statistics <- data.frame(chain, icesat2$Hgeoid[left_flow_idx],decYear1,icesat2$
Time.Stamp[1],ncol=4)
250
write.table(statistics , file = file_name_stat, row.names = FALSE, append = TRUE,
col.names = FALSE, sep = ",",quote=FALSE)
251
252
cat("\n")
253
#}#IF the file is one of my accepted cross sections
254
#}#Loop over accepted cross sections
255
}#outer loop over all files
Listing 2: Processing_before_Mike.R
Python code
Model calibration process
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Mon Oct
4 10:54:18 2021
4
5
@author: mcfr
6
"""
7
8
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
9
"""
10
Created on Wed Aug 25 09:47:20 2021
11
12
@author: mcfr
13
"""
14
15
from datetime import datetime,date, timedelta
16
import spotpy
17
import numpy as np
18
import pandas as pd
19
import spotpy
20
from spotpy.parameter import Uniform,Normal
21
from spotpy.objectivefunctions import rmse
22
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
23
from R_channel_shape import R_channel_shape2
24
from SS_Solver_new import SS_Solver2
25
from scipy import interpolate
26
27
28
29
30
## Load river range data for iteration of dishcharge and
31
32
33
34
######## LC: Load data #######################################################
35
Insitu_WSE_path = r'E:\FINAL_SETUP\InSitu_WSE_new_tuesday.csv'
36
global Insitu_WSE_group
37
Insitu_WSE = pd.read_csv(Insitu_WSE_path,usecols=(0,1,2,3,4,5))
38
65
==PAGE:75==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
39
XS_info_path = r'E:\FINAL_SETUP\Cross_section_info_newtest_tuesday.csv'
40
global Insitu_WSE_group
41
XS_info = pd.read_csv(XS_info_path,usecols=(0,1,2,3,4))
42
43
UPA_path = r'E:\FINAL_SETUP\UPA.csv'
44
global UPA
45
UPA = pd.read_csv(UPA_path,usecols=(0,1))
46
47
global xns11_path
48
xns11_path = r'E:\FINAL_SETUP\AMUR_newtest_tuesday.xns11'
49
50
r_segment = "1"
51
r_name =
"Amur"
52
53
#Borders of my area
54
chain_ups =
4677100
#These are different for 'AMUR.
xns11'
55
chain_ds = 4844100
# ds location of aoi
56
57
chain_insitu_ups = 4580500
#Location of upstream
insuti station
58
chain_insitu_ds = 5069300
#location of down stream
in situ station
59
60
UPA_ups = 1739520
61
UPA_ds = 1787714
62
UPA_aoi = 1771810
63
64
65
def Q_calc(Q_UP,Q_DS,UPA_UP,UPA_DS,UPA_x):
66
Q_x = (UPA_x-UPA_UP)/(UPA_DS-UPA_UP)*(Q_DS-Q_UP)+Q_UP
67
return(Q_x)
68
69
Q_aoi = np.zeros(len(Insitu_WSE[' Q_ds']))
70
71
for i in np.arange(0,len(Insitu_WSE[' Q_ds']),1):
72
Q_x = (UPA_aoi-UPA_ups)/(UPA_ds-UPA_ups)*(Insitu_WSE[' Q_ds'][i]-Insitu_WSE[' Q_ups'
][i])
73
Q_aoi[i] =
Q_calc(Insitu_WSE[' Q_ups'][i],Insitu_WSE[' Q_ds'][i],UPA_ups,UPA_ds,UPA_
aoi)
74
75
Insitu_WSE.insert(6,"Q_aoi",Q_aoi)
76
77
cross_sec_pos =
[4687100,4708700,4731900,4737600,4744200,4781000,4787200,4792700,4806900,4825800,4834100]
#4744200
78
cross_sec_pos = np.array(cross_sec_pos)
79
80
81
delta_x = 300
82
critical_deltax = 300
83
critical_pos = {'Area1':[4730000,4750000]}
84
critical_pos = pd.DataFrame(data=critical_pos)
85
86
x_start = np.linspace(chain_ups, critical_pos['Area1'][0], int(round((critical_pos['
Area1'][0]-chain_ups)/delta_x)))
87
critical_x = np.linspace(critical_pos['Area1'][0], critical_pos['Area1'][1], int(round((
critical_pos['Area1'][1]-critical_pos['Area1'][0])/critical_deltax)))
88
x_end = np.linspace(critical_pos['Area1'][1], chain_ds, int(round((chain_ds-critical_pos
['Area1'][1])/delta_x)))
89
90
x = np.concatenate((x_start,critical_x[1:len(critical_x)-1],x_end,cross_sec_pos,Insitu_
WSE[' Chain']),axis=0)
91
x = np.unique(x)
92
x = np.sort(x)
93
94
sim_wse = np.zeros(len(Insitu_WSE[' Date']))*-99 #LC: peallocate simulated WSE for each
day with insitu data
95
96
97
class spotpy_setup(object):
98
'''
66
==PAGE:76==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
99
Model for the SS_solver and the bed elevation with the R-shpe geometry.
100
101
Input:
r_shape=spotpy.parameter.Uniform(low=1.5 , high=3,
optguess=2.3)
102
depth=spotpy.parameter.Uniform(low=2 , high=12,
optguess=3)
103
n_manning=spotpy.parameter.Uniform(low=0.30 , high=0.06,
optguess=0.04)
104
'''
105
106
def __init__(self, obj_func=None):
107
self.params = [ spotpy.parameter.Uniform('n',low=0.008, high=0.03),
108
spotpy.parameter.Uniform('depth',low=4, high=12),
109
spotpy.parameter.Uniform('r',low=0.5 , high=10),
110
spotpy.parameter.Uniform('alpha',low=0.0001 , high=0.0004),
111
]
112
113
self.obj_func = obj_func
114
115
self.xns11Filepath = xns11_path
116
self.chain_filepath = UPA_path
117
self.group_discharge = Insitu_WSE.groupby(' Q_ds')
118
self.date = Insitu_WSE[' Date']
119
self.chain =Insitu_WSE[' Chain']
120
self.wse = Insitu_WSE[' WSE']
121
self.Q_up = Insitu_WSE[' Q_ups']
122
123
self.Q_Down = Q_aoi
124
self.Q = Insitu_WSE[' Q_ds']
125
self.start_chain = chain_ups
126
self.end_chain = chain_ds
127
self.UPA_UP = UPA_ups
128
self.UPA_DOWN = UPA_ds
129
#self.delta_x = 100
#meters, spacing between
interpolated x-sections
130
131
self.x = x
132
133
134
135
def parameters(self):
136
return spotpy.parameter.generate(self.params)
137
138
139
def simulation(self, model_param):
#LC: Documentation says this
should be second function to call
140
sim_wse = np.zeros(len(self.date))*-99
#LC: preallocate
141
chain_idx = np.zeros(len(self.date))*-99
#LC: preallocate
142
143
sim_w = []
144
BL = []
145
Area = []
146
Rh = []
147
chain_sim = []
148
149
print(" ")
150
print("THIS IS THE NEW PARAMETERS:")
151
print("Parameters: ", model_param)
152
print(" ")
153
154
#Update the submerged portion geometry
155
css_list = R_channel_shape(self.start_chain,self.end_chain, model_param[1],model
_param[2],model_param[0],self.xns11Filepath ,Insitu_WSE,XS_info,model_param
[3])
156
157
count = 0
158
159
for name,group in self.group_discharge:
160
mean_discharge = np.mean(group[' Q_ds'])
161
mean_Q_up = np.mean(group[' Q_ups'])
162
mean_Q_Down = np.mean(group['Q_aoi'])
163
164
165
print(" ")
166
#print("Keep using these parameters: ")
67
==PAGE:77==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
167
print("Parameters: ",model_param)
168
print("Mean discharge: ",mean_discharge)
169
print(" ")
170
171
[w, wse, BL_array, A_array, Rh_array] = SS_Solver(model_param[0], self.start
_chain,self.end_chain,self.x,self.xns11Filepath ,mean_discharge,UPA['
Chain'], UPA['UPA'],mean_Q_up,mean_Q_Down,self.UPA_UP,self.UPA_DOWN,r_
segment,r_name)
172
173
174
#Interpolate WSE profile for our x-sec obs
175
f = interpolate.interp1d(x,wse,kind='linear')
176
wse_tmp = f(group[' Chain'])
177
sim_wse[group.index] = wse_tmp
178
179
return sim_wse
180
181
182
def evaluation(self):
#LC: evaluate the samples
183
return
self.wse
184
185
186
def objectivefunction(self,simulation,evaluation , params=None):
#LC: we use RMSE
187
#SPOTPY expects to get one or multiple values back,
188
#that define the performance of the model run
189
190
if not self.obj_func:
191
# This is used if not overwritten by user
192
like = rmse(evaluation ,simulation)
#LC: we use RMSE
193
else:
194
#Way to ensure flexible spot setup class
195
like = self.obj_func(evaluation ,simulation)
#LC: we use RMSE
196
return like
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
######## LC: Call optimization model #######################################
204
sampler = spotpy.algorithms.sceua(spotpy_setup(),dbname='SCEUA_Amur_test3',dbformat='csv
')#LC: save results as SCEUA_amur_test1.csv
205
sampler.sample(6000,ngs=9)
206
207
######## LC: Extract results and model evaluation #############################
208
results = sampler.getdata()
209
210
211
plt.rcParams.update({'font.size': 25})
212
plt.rcParams.update({'xtick.labelsize':20})
213
plt.rcParams.update({'ytick.labelsize':20})
214
spotpy.analyser.plot_parametertrace(results)
# Use the analyser to show
the parameter trace
215
216
217
plt.rcParams.update({'font.size': 25})
218
plt.rcParams.update({'xtick.labelsize':40})
219
plt.rcParams.update({'ytick.labelsize':40})
220
spotpy.analyser.plot_parameterInteraction(results)
# LC: Use the analyser to
show the parameter interaction
221
222
223
print(spotpy.analyser.get_best_parameterset(results))
# LC: the best found
parameter set. This should give optimal value for all parameters
224
225
226
#Plot best result
227
bestindex,bestobjf = spotpy.analyser.get_minlikeindex(results)
228
best_model_run = results[bestindex]
229
fields = [word for word in best_model_run.dtype.names if word.startswith('sim')]
230
best_simulation = list(best_model_run[fields])#This is the best run which is a row in
the output file
68
==PAGE:78==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
231
#Contain parameter values and simulation
WSE for all calibration points.
232
233
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(22,9))
234
ax = plt.subplot(1,1,1)
235
ax.plot(Insitu_WSE[' Chain'],Insitu_WSE[' WSE'],'.', label='Observations',markersize=15)
236
ax.plot(Insitu_WSE[' Chain'],best_simulation ,'.', label='Best objf.='+str(bestobjf),
markersize=15)
237
plt.xlabel('Chainage [m]',fontsize=28)
238
plt.ylabel ('WSE above geoid [m]',fontsize=28)
239
plt.legend(loc='upper right')
240
fig.savefig('Best_modelrun.png',dpi=300,bbox_inches = 'tight')
241
242
243
diff = Insitu_WSE[' WSE']- best_simulation
244
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(16,9))
245
ax = plt.subplot(1,1,1)
246
ax.plot(Insitu_WSE[' Chain']/1000,diff,'.r', label='Best objf.='+str(bestobjf),
markersize=15)
247
plt.xlabel('Chainage [km]',fontsize=28)
248
plt.ylabel ('Water level residual [m]',fontsize=28)
249
250
251
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(22,9))
252
plt.rcParams["figure.figsize"] = (25,8)
253
plt.rcParams.update({'font.size': 33})
254
plt.plot(results['like1'])
255
plt.ylabel('RMSE',fontsize=33)
256
plt.xlabel('Iteration',fontsize=33)
257
plt.savefig("SCEUA_objectivefunctiontrace.png",bbox_inches = 'tight')
258
259
260
posterior=spotpy.analyser.get_posterior(results)
Listing 3: Main_script_Amur2.py
Steady state solver
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Fri Jan 29 15:08:59 2021
4
5
Function for Steady State solver given a river cross section
6
7
@author: mcfr
8
"""
9
import clr
10
clr.AddReference("System");
11
import System
12
from System.Collections import *
13
clr.AddReference('System.Linq')
14
from System.Linq import *
15
from System.Text import *
16
clr.AddReference(r"C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE Zero\2021\bin\x64\DHI.Mike1D.
CrossSectionModule.dll");
17
from DHI.Mike1D.CrossSectionModule import *
18
clr.AddReference("DHI.Mike1D.Generic");
19
from DHI.Mike1D.Generic import *
20
clr.AddReference(r"C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE Zero\2021\bin\x64\DHI.Mike1D.
ResultDataAccess.dll");
21
from DHI.Mike1D.ResultDataAccess import *
22
23
import h5py
24
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
25
import pandas as pd
26
import numpy as np
27
import glob, os, shutil
28
import geopandas as gpd
29
from geopandas import GeoDataFrame
30
from shapely.geometry import Point
31
import fiona
32
from scipy import interpolate , optimize
69
==PAGE:79==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
33
from Q_calc import Q_calc
34
from datetime import datetime,date, timedelta
35
36
import time
37
38
def SS_Solver(n,start_chain,end_chain,x,xns11Filepath , Q,
chainage,
UPA,
Q_UP,
Q_DS,
UPA_UP,UPA_DS, r_segment,r_name):
39
40
g = 9.81 # Gravitational constant
41
42
# Open Xsec file
43
diagnostics = Diagnostics("Errors");
44
csDataFactory = CrossSectionDataFactory();
45
csData = csDataFactory.Open(Connection.Create(xns11Filepath), diagnostics);
46
47
steps = len(x)
48
w = np.ones(steps)*-99
49
wse = np.ones(steps)*-99
50
xsloc=Location(r_name, x[-1])
51
crossSection =
csData.GetCrossSection(xsloc, r_segment);
52
crossSectio_DS= csData.FindCrossSection(xsloc, r_segment);
53
54
xsloc_us=Location(r_name, x[0])
55
crossSection_us = csData.GetCrossSection(xsloc_us, r_segment);
56
A_array=np.ones(steps)*-99
57
A_array_US=np.ones(steps)*-99
58
BL_array=np.ones(steps)*-99
59
Qx_vector=np.ones(steps)*-99
60
Rh_array=np.ones(steps)*-99
61
62
63
xsBaseRawDS = crossSectio_DS.BaseCrossSection
64
xsBaseRawUS = crossSection_us.BaseCrossSection
65
66
dx_0 = x[-1] - x[0]
#Length of river stretch
67
S0_syn = ( xsBaseRawUS.BottomLevel - xsBaseRawDS.BottomLevel)/dx_0
#Average
slope of river. (h_us - h_ds)/length
68
69
#Consdering uniform flow assumptions , we take the depth calculated at the ds cross
section
70
wseDS=crossSection.BottomLevel+xsBaseRawDS.GetNaturalDepthOld(Q,S0_syn)
71
72
w[-1] = wseDS - crossSection.BottomLevel #River depth
73
wse[-1] = wseDS
74
75
76
Qx_vector[-1]=Q
77
#Interpolate UPA values for the grid
78
f=interpolate.interp1d(chainage,UPA,kind='linear')
79
UPA_x=f(x)
80
steps = len(x)
81
q_array=[]
82
83
for i in range (steps-1,0,-1):
84
85
dx = x[i] - x[i-1]
86
xsloc=Location(r_name, x[i])
87
crossSection = csData.GetCrossSection(xsloc, r_segment);
88
xsloc_us=Location(r_name, x[i-1])
89
crossSection_us = csData.GetCrossSection(xsloc_us, r_segment);
90
91
cross_sec_pos =
[4687200,4708700,4731900,4744200,4781000,4787200,4792700,4806900,4825800,4834100]
#4744200
92
93
94
BL = crossSection.BottomLevel
95
BL_array[i]=BL
96
BL_us = crossSection_us.BottomLevel
97
S0 = (BL_us - BL)/dx
98
99
A = crossSection.GetFlowArea(wse[i])
70
==PAGE:80==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
100
A_array[i]=A
101
A_us = crossSection_us.GetFlowArea(BL_us + w[i])
102
A_array_US[i]=A_us
103
dAdx = (A-A_us)/dx
104
dAdw = crossSection.GetFlowAreaDerivative(wse[i])
105
Rh = crossSection.GetHydraulicRadius(wse[i])
106
Rh_array[i]=Rh
107
K =1/n * A * Rh**(2/3)
108
109
#Associate discharge to chainage point
110
Qx_vector[i-1]=Q_calc(Q_UP,Q_DS,UPA_UP,UPA_DS,UPA_x[i])
111
dQdx=(Qx_vector[i] - Qx_vector[i-1])/dx
112
q=dQdx
113
q_array.append(q)
114
115
RHS = (Q**2/g/A**3*dAdx + S0-Q**2/K**2 - (2*Q*q)/(g*A**2))/(1-Q**2/g/A**3*dAdw)
116
117
w[i-1] = w[i] - RHS*dx #Explicit solution of river depth
118
wse[i-1] = BL_us + w[i-1]
119
if np.isnan(wse[i-1]):
120
print("OH NOOO")
121
return(w, wse, BL_array, A_array,Rh_array);
Listing 4: SS_solver.py
Update river cross sections
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Sep
7 13:48:00 2021
4
5
@author: mcfr
6
"""
7
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
8
"""
9
Created on Mon Aug 23 09:14:30 2021
10
11
@author: mcfr
12
"""
13
import clr
14
clr.AddReference("System");
15
import System
16
from System.Collections import *
17
clr.AddReference("System.Linq")
18
from System.Linq import *
19
from System.Text import *
20
clr.AddReference(r"C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE Zero\2021\bin\x64\DHI.Mike1D.
CrossSectionModule.dll");
21
from DHI.Mike1D.CrossSectionModule import *
22
clr.AddReference("DHI.Mike1D.Generic");
23
from DHI.Mike1D.Generic import *
24
clr.AddReference(r"C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE Zero\2021\bin\x64\DHI.Mike1D.
ResultDataAccess.dll");
25
from DHI.Mike1D.ResultDataAccess import *
26
27
28
import h5py
29
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
30
import pandas as pd
31
import numpy as np
32
import glob, os, shutil
33
import geopandas as gpd
34
from geopandas import GeoDataFrame
35
from shapely.geometry import Point
36
import fiona
37
from pykalman import KalmanFilter
38
import xlwt
39
from tempfile import TemporaryFile
40
import abc
41
import math
42
43
71
==PAGE:81==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
44
45
def R_channel_shape(start_chain,end_chain,depth, r, n ,xns11Filepath ,ATL13_wse,XS_info,
alpha):
46
47
diagnostics = Diagnostics("Errors")
#Write
error if file can not be opened
48
csDataFactory = CrossSectionDataFactory();
#Call
class of functions
49
csData = csDataFactory.Open(Connection.Create(xns11Filepath), diagnostics); #Open
cross section file
50
51
chainage_total = end_chain-start_chain
52
53
xx = np.linspace(start_chain-1,end_chain+1)
54
x_loc_span=LocationSpan("Amur", xx[0], xx[-1])
#LC: This
is the exact position of cross section in the given span
55
56
## Update several xsections: find the location span between start chain and end
chain
57
css_list = csData.FindCrossSectionsForLocationSpan(x_loc_span, "1",True)
58
59
60
for ijk in range(0,len(css_list)):
61
62
info_tmp = css_list[ijk].Info
63
info = info_tmp.split('-')
64
chainage_tmp = float(info[1])
65
66
xsBaseRaw = css_list[ijk].BaseCrossSection
67
interp_from = [xsBaseRaw.GetMarkerIndex(4),xsBaseRaw.GetMarkerIndex(7),xsBaseRaw
.GetMarkerIndex(9),xsBaseRaw.GetMarkerIndex(11) ]
68
interp_to = [xsBaseRaw.GetMarkerIndex(5),xsBaseRaw.GetMarkerIndex(8),xsBaseRaw.
GetMarkerIndex(10),xsBaseRaw.GetMarkerIndex(12) ]
69
70
xsloc=Location("Amur",chainage_tmp)
71
crossSection = csData.GetCrossSection(xsloc, "1");
72
73
74
#print(interp_from)
75
76
for k in range(0,len(interp_from)): #Loop over each submerged channel section
77
#If marker does not exist:
78
if interp_from[k] == -1 or interp_to[k] == -1:
79
continue
80
81
subZvals = np.zeros(len(range(interp_from[k],interp_to[k])))*-99
82
subXvals = np.zeros(len(range(interp_from[k],interp_to[k])))-99
83
84
xsloc=Location("Amur",chainage_tmp)
85
crossSection = csData.GetCrossSection(xsloc, "1");
86
87
#When marker exist
88
for i in range(interp_from[k],interp_to[k]): #Loop over points in submerged
section
89
Ztemp = xsBaseRaw.Points[i].Z
90
Xtemp = xsBaseRaw.Points[i].X
91
subZvals[i-interp_from[k]] = Ztemp
92
subXvals[i-interp_from[k]] = Xtemp
93
94
95
# APPLY FIRST CORRECTION
96
XS_info_tmp = XS_info.loc[XS_info['Chain'] == chainage_tmp]
97
98
WSE_difference = XS_info_tmp['ATL13'] - XS_info_tmp['ATL03']
99
depth2 = float(depth - WSE_difference)
100
101
# APPLY SECOND CORRECTION
102
discharge_diff = XS_info_tmp['Discharge']-np.min(XS_info['Discharge'])
103
#print("CORRECTION: ",alpha*discharge_diff)
104
105
depth3 = float(depth2 +alpha*discharge_diff)
106
depth4 = float(depth3)
72
==PAGE:82==
12
APPENDIX B: CODE
107
108
109
W = abs(xsBaseRaw.Points[interp_to[k]].X-xsBaseRaw.Points[interp_from[k]].X)
110
Y_depth = depth4
111
x_coor = subXvals[1:len(subXvals)-1] - (np.min(subXvals[1:len(subXvals)-1])+
np.max(subXvals[1:len(subXvals)-1]))/2
112
x = abs(x_coor)
113
z_depth = Y_depth*(x**r)*(2/W)**r
# Height
of the bed above the lowest point of the channel
114
datum = subZvals[0]-depth4
115
subZ_rchannel = datum+z_depth
116
117
# #Update values in Mike x-sec
118
for j in range(interp_from[k]+1,interp_to[k]-1):
119
xsBaseRaw.Points[j].Z = subZ_rchannel[j-interp_from[k]-1]
120
121
xsBaseRaw.FlowResistance.ResistanceValue = 1/n
122
xsBaseRaw.CalculateProcessedData()
123
124
#Save data:
125
csData.Connection.FilePath.FileNameWithoutExtension;
126
csDataFactory.Save(csData);
127
128
129
csData.Connection.FilePath.FileNameWithoutExtension;
130
csDataFactory.Save(csData);
131
return css_list
Listing 5: R_channel_shape.py
73
