==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS
Borgný Súsonnudóttir Hansen 
Effects of minimum phase
processing on speech and spatial
perception in binaural hearing
aids
Department of Health Technology 
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months in the Hearing Systems Group, Department of
Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and at the Copenhagen Hear-
ing and Balance Centre (CHBC), Rigshospitalet, in collaboration with WS Audiology Denmark
A/S, in partial fulfilment for the Master program in Audiologopedics, University of Copenhagen.
Effects of minimum phase processing on speech and spatial
perception in binaural hearing aids
Master Thesis
February, 2022
By
Borgn´y S´usonnud´ottir Hansen
s210091
Supervisors
Abigail Anne Kressner
DTU & CHBC
Torsten Dau
DTU
Borys Kowalewski
WS Audiology
Copyright & Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by: DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 352, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
https://www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Understanding speech in acoustic complex environment is one of the main complaints expressed
by individuals with hearing loss (HL). Minimum phase processing (MIN) has been employed
to optimize sound quality in hearings aids, by applying a low processing delay. However, due
to non-linear group delay, minimum phase processing can cause distorted interaural time dif-
ferences (ITDs). Binaural cues are essential in understanding speech-in-noise, and the present
study aimed to investigate if MIN could result in reduced speech perception compared to linear
phase processing (LIN). This was achieved by simulating a hearing loss in 18 normal hearing
individuals, who were tested in a spatial release from masking (SRM) paradigm, where the
maskers were either co-located or spatially separated at ±30◦, using a female talker and female
maskers. Two types of stimuli were used: (1) broadband stimuli, and (2) lowpass (LP) filtered
stimuli with at cutoff frequency of 1 kHz. In the LP filtered condition, the participants would
primarily have access to ITDs, while the broadband stimuli served as a reference. The results
showed that LP filtering the signal resulted in a reduced SRM; however, no difference was found
between the processing condition in either stimulus type (broadband mean LIN: 16.7 dB, MIN:
15 dB; LP mean LIN: 8.14 dB, MIN: 8.6 dB). The results from the present study indicate that
MIN does not compromise speech perception and can be used to optimize sound quality in
hearing aids without compromising speech intelligibility.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Introduction
1
Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Background
4
The hearing system - a brief introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Binaural hearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Understanding speech in noise and effects of hearing loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Spatial release from masking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
Type of masker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Age and hearing loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Hearing Aids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Spatial cues and speech intelligibility in hearing aids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Method
13
Participants and inclusion criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Stimuli and spatialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
A. Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
B. Spatialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Results
19
Spatial release from masking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Speech reception thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Discussion
25
Comparisons with previous literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Effects of LP filter on speech intelligibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
The role of ILDs and ITDs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:5==
Conclusion
30
Bibliography
32
Appendix A
36
Appendix B
38
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
BM
Basilar membrane
CHBC
Copenhagen Hearing and Balance Center
co-loc.
co-located
dB
decibel
DSP
Digital signal processing
EM
Energetic masking
GUI
Graphical user interface
HA
Hearing aid
HI
Hearing impairment
HL
Hearing loss
HRTF
Head related transfer function
Hz
Hertz
IG
Insertion gain
ILD
Interaural level difference
ITD
Interaural time difference
IM
Informational masking
LSO
Lateral Superior Olive
LP
Lowpass
LIN
Linear phase processing
MIN
Minimum phase processing
MSO
Medial Superior Olive
NH
Normal hearing
SD
Standard deviation
SO
Superior Olive
SPL
Sound pressure level
SNHL
Sensorineural hearing loss
SNR
Signal-to-noise ratio
SRM
Spatial release from masking
SRT
Speech reception threshold
SSN
Speech shaped noise
WHO
World Health Organization
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Introduction
Understanding speech in noise is a difficult task for people with sensorineural hearing loss
(SNHL), even when properly fitted with a hearing aid (HA; Healy and Yoho, 2016). People
without hearing loss can understand speech in noise (to reasonable levels) effortlessly, and this
ability relies to some extent on binaural processing (Yost, 2017). When there is a unilateral
or bilateral hearing loss (HL), the benefits of binaural processing are limited or in worst cases
absent (Best and Swaminathan, 2019; Avan et al., 2015; Steven Colburn et al., 2006).
HAs have been around for some decades and are used to restore hearing in people with HL.
Depending upon the severity and type of the HL, HAs can be fitted with an open or closed ear
mold (Stone et al., 2008). In a closed fitting, only processed sound will be delivered. This leads
to effective processing in terms of compression, noise reduction, and microphone directionality,
but can also lead to occlusion and discomfort. To avoid occlusion and provide better comfort,
open fittings can be used, however this depends on the HL in question. Open fittings provide
a mixture of unprocessed direct sound and processed sound, resulting in a more natural and
comfortable experience (Winkler et al., 2016). However, because the processed path is delayed
by up to 12 ms, the interference with the unprocessed direct sound in the ear canal leads to
comb-filtering artifacts (Winkler et al., 2016), resulting in an altered sound quality (Stone et al.,
2008). To avoid the comb-filtering some HA manufacturers have implemented a minimum phase
processing (MIN) strategy instead of the linear phase processing (LIN). The delay is shorter in
the MIN, which reduces the amount of comb-filtering. Although helpful in improving the quality
of the sound, the MIN can also introduce small time differences between the two ears. This is
because the group delay of the MIN processing in each ear depends on the shape of the insertion
gain (IG) across frequency. In a scenario with spatially separated sources the insertion gain
can be different across ears, due to dynamic-range compression and other types of non-linear
processing. This could potentially result in distorted interaural time differences (ITDs) in a
binaural hearing setting. Binaural cues are essential in listening in noisy environments, since
the brain uses the differences in time and level to separate the speech from the interfering sounds
(Amiri and Jarollahi, 2020).
The issue of understanding speech in complex acoustic scenarios is often referred to as the
Cocktail Party problem and was first described by Cherry in 1953. Binaural processing is be-
lieved to play a role in such complex conditions (Avan et al., 2015), and the spatial release from
masking paradigm is a method of investigating the role of the binaural cues. The spatial release
from masking paradigm is a speech-in-noise in test, where the listener is presented a sentence
1
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1. Introduction
in the presence of a masker and is asked to repeat it. The listener is tested in two conditions,
where the masker and the signal are either co-located or spatially separated (Litovsky, 2012).
The results are usually better in the spatially separated condition, and this improvement is
termed spatial release from masking (SRM; Litovsky, 2012). SRM has been studied in vari-
ous configurations and with different types of maskers. For example, Yost (2017) investigated
SRM in up to six maskers and employed three types of maskers (1) speech (informational and
energetic masking), (2) noise (energetic masking), and (3) speech-in-filtered speech (informa-
tional masking). The spatial configuration of the maskers depended upon how many maskers
were used in the given task. Yost (2017) looked into the effects of two, four and six maskers,
which were always placed in symmetrical pairs on the horizontal plane. In the experiment with
two maskers, the maskers were placed at ±30◦, ±45◦, ±60◦, or ±90◦azimuth angle; with four
maskers, two combinations were used: (1) ±30◦and ±60◦, or (2) ±45◦and ±90◦. Finally, in
the condition with six maskers, the placement was ±30◦, ±60◦, and ±90◦. Yost (2017) found
that the SRM decreased with increasing number of maskers, and that this was not dependent
upon the type of masker used. Yost (2017) also found that SRM was largest in the condition
with informational and energetic masking (speech maskers), followed by the condition with in-
formational masking (filtered speech maskers) and finally the energetic masking (noise maskers)
provided the smallest amount of SRM. However, other factors like age, the distinction between
the voices in informational masking, etc., influence the amount of SRM (Litovsky, 2012).
Objective
A previous study (Gr¨oblbauer, 2021) found inter-subject variability in a small sample size when
comparing how much SRM was present with LIN compared to MIN with lowpass (LP) filtered
stimuli.
The study included 11 participants and four of these participants had poor SRM
with the MIN compared to the LIN. MIN introduces differences in IG between the ears, which
potentially could result in distorted ITD. In LIN there is a constant group delay, which does not
have an impact on the ITDs. The main objective of the current study is to investigate if the
same effects can be found in a larger cohort using two conditions: broadband and LP-filtered.
It is assumed, that all participants will get masking release in the LIN combined with the
broadband filtered stimuli, since they will have access to both interaural level differences (ILDs)
and ITDs. We hypothesize that (1) considering the LIN with the broadband stimuli, MIN and
broadband stimuli will have little to no effect on the masking release, since the participants
will have access to ILDs, rendering less importance to the ITDs. (2) With LP filtered stimuli,
most of the useful ILD cues in the high-frequency range are filtered out, and consequently, the
2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1. Introduction
participants must rely on ITD cues. Here, it is assumed that some participants weight ILD cues
higher relative to the ITD cues. With this assumption it is hypothesized that these participants
will have limited release from masking. We assume that the effect of the lowpass filter on speech
intelligibility is quantified by the difference between the speech reception thresholds (SRTs) in
the co-located broadband and low-pass conditions. (3) Finally, among the participants that have
masking release with LP filtered stimuli and LIN, we hypothesize that the participants will have
reduced masking release with MIN, due to potentially distorted ITDs.
3
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2. Background
Background
The hearing system - a brief introduction
The auditory system can be divided into the peripheral and the central auditory system. The
peripheral auditory system can further be divided in three parts: the outer-, the middle-, and the
inner ear, as illustrated in Figure 1. The outer ear consists of the external ear (i.e., the auricle)
and the external auditory meatus (the ear canal) and ends at the eardrum.
The eardrum
separates the outer ear from the middle ear, which consists of the middle ear ossicles: the
malleus, the incus, and the stapes. The purpose of the middle ear ossicles is to amplify the
soundwaves coming from the air-filled space to the fluidfilled space in the inner ear. The inner
ear consists of the cochlea and the vestibular system, where the latter is responsible for balance.
The cochlea is a coiled-shaped structure that registers the sound and transmits it to the auditory
nerve that descends from the auditory cortex in the temporal lobe, illustrated in Figure 2. From
the cochlea to the auditory cortex the auditory nerve passes several important structures that
are essential for optimal hearing. These will be covered to the extent that is necessary in terms
of binaural hearing.
Binaural hearing means hearing or listening with two ears opposite to
monaural hearing, which means listening with one ear (Plack, 2018d).
Figure 1: Outline of the outer, the middle, and the inner ear. Image from Plack (2018b, p. 60).
Already at the first point after the cochlea, at the cochlear nucleus, binaural interaction
is present and continues all the way to the medial geniculate before arriving at the auditory
cortex.
4
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2. Background
Figure 2: Illustration of the binaural auditory path. Image from Plack (2018b, p. 79)
The Superior Olive (SO) is the first anatomical location for binaural interaction (Seikel
et al., 2016) and is specialized in analysing the difference in intensity, timing, and frequency
between the two ears (Avan et al., 2015). The SO can be divided into the medial superior olive
(MSO) and the lateral superior olive (LSO). The MSO analyzes the interaural differences in
the low-frequency area, while the LSO analyzes the interaural differences in higher frequency
area, primarily around 1-2 kHz (Seikel et al., 2016). The Inferior Colliculus is thought to be
associated with further processing of the neural stimuli coming from both SOs (Plack, 2018b).
All the coded information finally comes together in the auditory cortex, which in turn transports
the information to other sensory systems in the cortex, which are responsible for interpreting it
into meaningful content (Plack, 2018b).
Binaural hearing
Binaural hearing enables humans and other mammals to localize sound in space and to un-
derstand speech in noise (Plack, 2018d).
There are specifically two binaural cues that aid
localization in space and aiding in understanding speech in noise. These are the interaural time
differences (ITDs) and the interaural level differences (ILDs). The ITD is the difference in time
for when the sound reaches one ear compared to the other and is predominantly used in low
frequencies; however, there is also evidence that ITDs are used in the high frequency region, but
it is generally accepted that this ITD information comes from the ITD information within the
5
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2. Background
envelope as opposed to within the fine structure of the signal (Best and Swaminathan, 2019;
Avan et al., 2015; Steven Colburn et al., 2006; Macpherson and Middlebrooks, 2002). The ILD
is the difference in level or intensity between the two ears. The head causes a shadowing effect
attenuating the intensity in the ear that is further away from the sound source. The ILDs are
mainly used in the high frequency region (Plack, 2018d; Van Opstal, 2016).
Figure 3: The horizontal and median plane rel-
ative to the head, together with the correspond-
ing changes in azimuth and elevation.
Image
from Plack (2018d, p. 172).
Figure 3 illustrates localization rela-
tive to the head. The horizontal- and me-
dian plane, together with the correspond-
ing directional changes in azimuth (for the
horizontal plane) and elevation (for the
median plane). Localization on the hor-
izontal plane is possible when there is a
difference in time and/or level between the
two ears, hence binaural processing is a
requirement for this ability (Plack, 2018d;
Van Opstal, 2016).
However, if the localization is solely
on the median plane, there will be no dif-
ference in time or level.
In such cases,
head-movement will solve the issue if it is a continuous sound source. If this is not the case, or
if the head is fixed in space, monaural cues will aid the sound localization, specifically the pinna
effect (Plack, 2018d).
Understanding speech in noise and effects of hearing loss
In most social settings, the listener will be surrounded by different degrees of background noises.
Understanding speech in noise can be challenging for normal hearing (NH) individuals but is
especially difficult for people with HL (Healy and Yoho, 2016). Focusing on people with SNHL,
the difficulty in understanding speech in noise is mainly due to loss of hair cells in the inner
ear, resulting in a deficiency in separating different frequency components from each other
(Arlinger et al., 2016), due to the broadening of the auditory filters on the basilar membrane
(BM; Moore, 2003). A SNHL is typically characterized with a increasing sloping HL in the
audiogram (Stach, 2010b). One of the consequences from the elevated audiometric thresholds
in the higher frequency area is the inability to hear consonants (Arlinger et al., 2016).
6
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. Background
Figure 4:
Phonetic representation of speech
sounds in an audiogram.
Image from Stach
(2010b, p. 123).
Figure 4 illustrates the phonetic sym-
bols of speech sounds. They are placed in
an audiogram to illustrate the minimum
audiometric thresholds required to hear
them.
These phonetic representations
are language dependent and might differ
from one language to another but over-
all, slightly elevated thresholds (+20dB
hearing level) in the higher frequency area
(2 −4 kHz) will result in an inability to
hear these sounds. In fact, a HL of ∼25
dB HL at 2 −4 kHz will result in a sig-
nificantly worsened ability to understand
speech in noise (Arlinger et al., 2016).
Binaural hearing is essential when
understanding speech in noise, in realis-
tic listening scenarios, and the spatial cues
described in the preceding, play an important role understanding speech in noise (Litovsky,
2012). By analysing the differences, including ILDs and ITDs, between the input in the right
and the left ear, the NH listener is usually able to separate the speech signal from the interfering
background noise (Amiri and Jarollahi, 2020). This ability is also known as the squelch effect
(Litovsky, 2012).
Consequently, when a HL is present, the ability to analyze differences in ILDs and ITDs
is impaired. Since understanding speech in noise relies heavily upon these abilities, people with
HL experience difficulties in a cocktail party environment (Litovsky, 2012).
Spatial release from masking
When centered in an acoustic complex environment, participants rely heavily on binaural pro-
cessing to filter out the background noise from the target speech (Ellinger et al., 2017). The
importance of binaural cues is evident when measuring speech intelligibility in a condition when
the target and the masker are co-located compared when they are spatially separated, for exam-
ple if the target is at the center and the maskers are located at ±90◦. The speech intelligibility,
often measured as the SRT, is highly improved in the spatially separated condition.
7
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Background
This phenomenon is termed spatial release from masking (Amiri and Jarollahi, 2020; Litovsky,
2012). The SRM-paradigm used in this study is based on varying the SNR adaptively to find
the SRT at 50% correct, where the result is given in dB.
The amount of SRM is dependent upon several factors, including masker configuration,
type of masker, hearing impairment, age, etc.
Type of masker
In SRM experiments, and other speech-in-noise experiments, the target is masked by a competing
stimulus. Masking ”occurs whenever the activity produced on the basilar membrane by one
sound (the masker) obscures the activity produced by the sound you are trying to hear (the
signal)” (Plack, 2018a, p. 100), and masking is traditionally divided into energetic masking
(EM) and informational masking (IM; Amiri and Jarollahi, 2020). Several definitions have been
made of both EM and IM, but generally it can be said that EM ”results from the spectral overlap
of the target and masker on the basilar membrane, while IM occurs at higher level” (Amiri and
Jarollahi, 2020, p. 128). An example of EM is when the target and the masker are on the same
frequency band on the BM, making it harder to separate from each other, compared to if they
were located on different frequency bands. IM occurs when the target and the masker are easily
confused (Amiri and Jarollahi, 2020), such as when both target and maskers are speech signals
(Litovsky, 2012), or if multiple talkers are used as maskers (Amiri and Jarollahi, 2020).
Amiri and Jarollahi (2020) highlight that while spatial processing results in an improvement
in both EM and IM, the amount of SRM is higher in IM. In their study comparing EM and IM,
Arbogast et al. (2002) found that in an EM condition, the SRM in the EM and IM conditions
was 7 and 18 dB respectively.
While the type of masker (i.e., IM versus EM) is important when considering SRM, the
number of maskers is also influential in the amount of masking release the listener experiences.
Yost (2017) investigated the effects of up to six maskers on SRM in normal hearing participants.
He found that as the number of maskers increased, the amount of masking release decreased,
and was smallest with six maskers.
Age and hearing loss
Age and HL are both factors that influence the amount of masking release.
Regardless of
hearing status, elderly participants experience less masking release and require a larger angle
of separation compared to younger participants (Srinivasan et al., 2016). HL also reduces the
8
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Background
SRM in elderly significantly. Srinivasan et al. (2016) investigated the effects of age and hearing
loss on the minimum required angle for SRM and found that young NH require a separation
of ∼2◦, older NH 6◦-separation, while the older participants with HL required 30◦separation to
gain masking release. When comparing different age groups, the cognitive status of the older
participants should also be considered (Ellinger et al., 2017). Charney and Srinivasan (2020)
investigated the potential relationship between working memory and SRM, and found significant
correlations between SRM and working memory, indicating that ”working memory, in addition
to age and hearing loss, plays an important role in understanding speech in complex listening
scenarios” (Charney and Srinivasan, 2020, p. 6).
Hearing Aids
The general purpose of a HA is to restore hearing by amplifying sound. There are a broad
range of HAs available on the market, ranging from small completely-in-the-canal to behind-
the-ear devices. Although they differ in size, they basically consist of the same components:
microphone(s), an amplifier, a receiver, and a battery (Dillon, 2012c).
Figure 5: Illustration of the perceived quality of
the loudness as a function of dB HL for NH and
individual with HL. Image from Stach (2010b,
p. 109)
Amplifiers have in the past used ana-
log technology to amplify the signals. To-
day nearly all HAs use digital signal pro-
cessing to process the sound.
SNHL
is characterized by loudness recruitment,
meaning that the dynamic range is re-
duced compared to individuals with NH
(Plack, 2018c). Figure 5 shows generalized
curves of the perceived loudness as a func-
tion of hearing level in dB in individuals
with NH and HL. The slope of the func-
tion for the individuals with HL is steeper,
indicating that the loudness perception at
medium-to-high intensity levels grow more
rapidly compared to individuals with NH
(Stach, 2010b). Linear amplification applies a constant amount of gain regardless of input sig-
nal level. This results in excessive amplification of loud sounds and can cause uncomfortable
loudness for the HA user (Plack, 2018c). Compression amplification, on the other hand applies
less gain to high-intensity input sounds, making it possible to hear all sounds at comfortable
9
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Background
level. Moreover, with multi-channel compression, the gain can be controlled independently in
multiple frequency bands (Dillon, 2012b).
The digital signal processing (DSP) used in modern HAs utilizes digital filters that are
characterized by a certain amount of delay. This delay is typically measured as group delay of
each frequency and it describes ”how much the envelope of signal components in this frequency
will be delayed” (Dillon, 2012c, p. 35). Delays of around 10 ms will compromise the sound
quality, while delays that exceed 10 ms will influence the speech intelligibility negatively (Dillon,
2012c). The perceptual consequences of the delay seem to be closely connected with type of
HL. Stone and Moore (1999) studied the effects of processing delay on speech perception by
simulating HL and the sound processed through an HA. They found that higher delay (40
ms) was more tolerable when simulating a moderate HL, than when simulating a mild HL.
Bramsløw (2010) explored the effects of delay on comb-filtering and the perceived sound quality
in participants with NH and HL (only mild HL). The primary aim was to investigate the effects
of delay values of 5, 7, and 10 ms. These correspond to typical delays used in commercial HAs
(Balling and Helmink, 2021). The participants reported audible artifacts of the delay, however
no significant were found across the participants with NH and the participants with HL. The
literature concerning perceptual benefits or issues with low delay HAs is sparse, however Zakis
et al. (2012) looked into the effects of 1.4 ms and 3.4 ms with LIN or MIN when listening to
music in open-fitted HAs. They concluded that there was no difference between no delay, 1.4
ms and 3.4 ms, and that the effects of the MIN and LIN were unclear.
The issue of delay is especially relevant in open-fitted HAs, due to the mixture of direct
sound and processed sound. The unprocessed direct sound will reach the eardrum faster than
the processed sound. The interaction of the unobstructed direct sound and the delayed processed
sound can cause comb-filtering, which alters the sound quality of the perceived signal (Dillon,
2012c).
Spatial cues and speech intelligibility in hearing aids
As stated in the preceding, the ability to localize sound relies on binaural processing. ILDs are
mainly used in high-frequency sounds, while ITDs are more prominent in low-frequency sounds.
However, there are also some indications that the ITDs can be used in the higher frequency area
by exploiting the differences in the envelope instead of the fine structure (Dillon, 2012a).
Gr¨oblbauer (2021) compared LIN and MIN in a SRM experiment in young NH participants.
The stimuli presented was LP filtered at 1 kHz, to ensure that the potential effects of ILDs
10
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Background
would be minimal, forcing the participants to mainly rely on ITD cues. The study concluded
that in general the participants had the same amount of SRM in both processing conditions,
although highlighting a subgroup of participants not gaining the same amount of SRM in the
MIN condition compared to the LIN condition. Gr¨oblbauer (2021) suggested that the difference
in performance could be due to difference in ILD/ITD cue weighting among the participants,
suggesting that some participants potentially were more sensitive to the ITD distortions in the
MIN. Due to the small cohort, the author furthermore suggested a replication of the study with
a bigger cohort to investigate if the same subgroup would emerge.
As part of their study Macpherson and Middlebrooks (2002) investigated the cue weighting
of ITD and ILD on the perceived lateral angle using wideband, lowpass, and highpass noise
bursts. The stimuli were presented over headphones and manipulated in ITD or ILD by delaying
or attenuating the signal to one ear. Their results were in accordance with the Duplex theory of
sound localization, meaning that ITDs were generally given high weight in the lowpass stimuli,
ILDs in the highpass stimuli. In general, the participants weighted ITDs higher than ILDs in
the wideband condition. This general picture was, however, not true for all the participants,
indicating a subgroup of participants that gave a relatively larger ITD-weights in the highpass
condition.
Ellinger et al. (2017) investigated the role of binaural cues on speech intelligibility. They
employed a SRM paradigm with a multi-talker speech masker in the study, with the spatial
configurations being either co-located or spatially separated at ±45◦. In the spatially separated
condition, they compared four different conditions: (1) consistent ITD and ILD cues, (2) ITD
cues only, (3) ILD cues only, and (4) inconsistent ITD and ILD cues. They found that the largest
SRM when the ITD and ILD cues were consistent, followed by ITD cues only, ILD cues only
and lastly the inconsistent ITD/ILD cues. Their results support the notion that binaural cues
are essential in understanding speech-in-noise, but also that the ITDs and ILDs alone provide
substantial cues to facilitate spatial release from masking, although not to the level when they
are combined. However, the studies on the importance ITD or ILD cues alone on SRM indicate
conflicting findings. Glyde et al. (2013) found that ILDs provided near to the same amount of
SRM as ITDs and ILDs combined, and the contribution of ITD cues alone provided significantly
less SRM. While also using speech-on-speech maskers, the spatial separation was ±90◦which
could potentially account for the difference in masking release in the two studies.
In the MIN strategy, variations of insertion gain across the ears (due to compression and
non-linear processing) lead to different amount of group delay on the left and right side, thus
potentially distorting the ITDs. This can potentially be detrimental to individuals with HL
11
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Background
whose binaural processing might already be impaired. The consequences of such cue distortion
on real-life speech perception can be quantified by looking into the effects in a SRM study. This
thesis aims at quantifying this effect by comparing LIN, which has a constant delay, to MIN,
which does not have a constant delay. To shed a light on the importance of ITDs and ILDs
in the two processing strategies this study compares the effects of broadband and LP filtered
stimuli in each processing condition.
12
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3. Method
Method
Participants and inclusion criteria
Eighteen normal hearing participants (mean: 25; range: 20-29), participated in the study. All
the participants were Danish native speakers. Normal hearing is defined by the World Health
Organization (WHO) as audiometric thresholds below 20 dB hearing level. Eight of the partic-
ipants were recruited from the DTU test participant database NOAH, and the other ten were
recruited elsewhere. Audiometric screening was performed first for new test participants or for
those from the database but with an audiogram that was more than two year old. Prior to
testing or audiometry, the ear canal and tympanic membrane were examined using an otoscope.
All participants provided informed consent and all experiments were approved by the
Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference H-16036391).
The
participants received hourly compensation.
Stimuli and spatialization
The original experiment was designed by David Gr¨oblbauer (2021). The current study was based
on the same code with some modifications due to limitations in the original experiment. The
following will provide a description of the original study’s stimuli generation and spatialization,
as well as a description of the modifications made. For further details, the reader is advised to
consult the original study (see Gr¨oblbauer, 2021). Stimuli were created digitally using MATLAB.
A. Stimuli
The Danish speech corpus Dantale II (Wagener et al., 2003) was used in the study. All the
sentences in the Dantale II corpus have the same sentence structure, with the following word-
classes <noun ><verb><numeral><adjective><object>, where the noun is always a name.
Both target and masker sentences were female talkers. The target sentence always started with
the call sign Anders, while the masker sentences contained other names, for example Henning
or Birgit.
The experiment was designed as a closed-set test, giving the participants 10 possible options
for each word-class. The stimuli were presented over headphones, and the participants were
instructed to repeat the sentences using the graphical user interface (GUI) presented in Figure
6. Each category was coded using the forced choice method, meaning that the participants had
13
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3. Method
to identify one word per category in order to continue with the test. The GUI was provided by
Adam Westermann (WS Audiology).
Figure 6: GUI used in the experiment.
To measure the SRT, a 1-up 1-
down tracking procedure (Levitt, 1971)
was used, with the target level chang-
ing adaptively according to the response,
while the masker levels were fixed.
The
initial step size for the first 3 reversals
was 6 dB, and 3 dB for the remaining
trials.
If the response was correct, the
target level decreased, if 50% was correct
the target level remained the same, and
if the response was incorrect, the target
level was increased.
A correct response
corresponded to 3 or 4 correctly identified
words, 50% to 2 words correct, and 1 or
none correctly identified words were deemed as incorrect. Each measurement had a minimum
of 30 trials and a maximum of 50 trials. The SRT-measurement (e.g., 50% correct) consisted
of a minimum of 11 reversals. The SRT was calculated for every trial, and the overall SRT for
each experiment was calculated as an average of all the trials.
The primary aim of the study was to investigate the effects of LIN and MIN on speech
intelligibility in binaural HAs. In order to achieve this, a hearing-loss profile based on the N2
standard audiogram (Bisgaard et al., 2010) as shown in Figure 7(a) was simulated. A modified
version of the BEAR compressor (Sanchez Lopez et al., 2018), developed by Ole Hau (WS
Audiology), was used to elicit the effects of the HL in both processing conditions. The time
constants used to fit the BEAR compressor were 1700 dB/s (attack speed) and 200 dB/s (release
speed), which corresponds to fast-acting (syllabic) compression.
The fitting rationale NAL-NL2 was used to derive the level- and frequency-dependent com-
pression gains. Figure 7(b) shows the IG at three input levels (55-, 65- and 80-dB SPL). A N2
HL (figure 7, a) is a HL mainly affecting frequencies above 1 kHz, and the IG is predominantly
applied to the frequencies above 1 kHz, as illustrated in figure 7 (b).
14
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3. Method
Figure 7: (a) N2 standard audiogram, (b) NAL-NL2 IG of three speech input levels. Figure
from Gr¨oblbauer (2021, p. 9).
The input level of the masker was fixed at 55 dB SPL, and the initial input level of the target
was 65 dB SPL. Once passed through the compressor, these signals receive an amplification of
up to 40 dB, as illustrated by the dotted and the bold curve in Figure 7 (b). This would result
in excessive sound levels in the headphones. Since the present study is using participants with
NH, a fixed attenuation of 30 dB was applied to output of the signal, to ensure that the level of
the output did not exceed uncomfortable levels.
Two filters were designed to investigate the potential detrimental effect MIN has on the
naturally occurring ITDs. Knowing that binaural cues (e.g., ILDs and ITDs) are of paramount
importance in understanding speech in noise, the masker and the target sentences were either
presented after passing through a LP filter, or without the LP filter (i.e., broadband stimuli).
The LP filter had a cut-off frequency at 1 kHz, and a broadband noise masker was added to
ensure that no frequencies above the cutoff frequencies were audible to the participant. The
level of the added broadband noise was ∼10 dB higher than the signal, that was filtered out.
In the broadband condition, the participant would have access to both ILDs and ITDs in the
LIN condition, and the ILDs and distorted ITDs in the MIN condition. In the LP condition,
the importance of the participants weighting of the ILDs and ITDs are considered, since only
ITD cues are preserved in the LIN condition, while being distorted in the MIN condition. The
interaural cues available to the participants are displayed in Table 1.
Broadband filter
LP filter
LIN
ILDs + ITDs
ITDs
MIN
ILDs + distorted ITDs
distorted ITDs
Table 1: Interaural cues available in broadband filtered stimuli and lowpass filtered stimuli
15
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3. Method
The primary aim of the current study was to investigate the effects of LIN and MIN on
speech perception. To be able to compare the two processing strategies, they should have the
same magnitude response. The compressor gains were extracted to create the filters. The LIN
filter was created first, and its transfer function was subsequently used to design the MIN filter
with the same magnitude response.
B. Spatialization
The SRM was investigated by measuring the SRT with the target speech and maskers being
either co-located (co-loc.) or spatially separated (separ.) condition of ±30◦on the horizontal
plane, illustrated in Figure 8. The spatial separation of 30◦was selected based on Gr¨oblbauer
(2021) the objective analysis of potential distortions (Chapter 4.1). The analysis showed an ITD
fluctuation of 0.2 ms in the MIN condition translating into 20◦. A spatial separation of 30◦still
ensured that the participants could get SRM in the MIN condition. The elevation was 0◦in all
conditions.
Figure 8: Masker and target configuration in the SRM experiment. (a) Maskers and target are
co-located at 0◦. (b) Maskers are spatially from the target at 30 ◦. Figure from Gr¨oblbauer
(2021, p. 8).
When using headphones in localization tasks, SRM experiments and other experiments
that require spatial features, head-related transfer functions (HRTFs) can be used to realize
the spatial features. Both the study by Gr¨oblbauer (2021) and the current study used non-
individualized HRTFs for in-ear and HA microphones developed by Oreinos et al. (2013). The
present study used channels 1 and 2, which corresponded to the in-ear microphones for the left
and right ear.
16
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3. Method
Experimental procedure
The SRM experiments took place in a double-walled soundproof booth, and the stimuli were
presented over headphones using Sennheiser HD650 circumaural headphones. All the measure-
ments were conducted at the Copenhagen Hearing and Balance Centre, Ear, Nose, and Throat
(ENT) & Audiology Clinic, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital or at the Technical
University of Denmark.
Broadband condition
LP condition
LIN co-loc.
LIN co-loc
LIN separ.
LIN separ.
MIN co-loc.
MIN co-loc.
MIN separ.
MIN separ.
Table 2:
Stimulus type (broadband and low-
pass) and processing conditions.
The stimuli for each type (i.e., broad-
band or LP filtered) were presented block-
wise, and each block consisted of four mea-
surements: (a) LIN co-located, (b) LIN
spatially separated., (c) MIN co-located,
and (d) MIN spatially separated. The ex-
periment overview is summarized in Table
2.
The order of the block presentation
was randomized for all participants, en-
suring that half of the participants tested with the broadband condition first and vice versa.
The order of the processing condition (LIN-MIN) was randomized within the blocks. The partic-
ipants completed two rounds of training prior to each block to account for procedural learning.
The training consisted of the LIN co-loc. for each stimulus type. The participants were in-
structed to focus on the speaker that was perceived to be right in front of them (e.g., 0◦on the
horizontal plane), and always starting with the name Anders. Furthermore, the participants
were encouraged to guess if they could not identify the target sentence. The GUI (Figure 6)
was used to collect the responses. The participants did not receive feedback during the test.
The duration of each block was ∼30 minutes, and the total test duration was ∼2 hours
including breaks, without audiometric screening.
The participants were encouraged to take
breaks as needed; however, a break of at least 15 minutes was scheduled between the blocks.
Statistical analysis
All the data analysis was performed using Rstudio. The data was fitted to a linear mixed effects
model using the lmerTest package. The model was fitted to the SRT data and to the computed
SRM data. In the SRT-model, stimulus type, masker configuration and processing conditions
(LIN-MIN) were fixed effects, while the random effect was the participants. In the SRM-model,
17
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3. Method
stimulus type and the processing condition were fixed effects, and participants as the random
effect.
The models were simplified using the step function (lmerTest), eliminating interactions in
the model that were not significant.
Overall significant differences between the means were
analyzed using a type III analysis of variance (ANOVA). If the models had significant interac-
tions, a post-hoc analysis analysing pair-wise comparisons were performed, using the emmeans
package. The emmeans package uses estimated marginal means to do pairwise comparisons.
A significance level of 0.05 was used to determine significant differences. The Tukey method
is incorporated in the emmeans package to correct for multiple comparisons, readjusting the
p-values.
18
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4. Results
Results
The following section describes the general trends of the data, and the results of the statistical
analysis on the SRTs and the SRM. The SRM was calculated as the difference between the
spatial configurations: co-loc. and separ. within each condition. Table 3 lists the mean, median,
standard deviation (SD), and range of both SRT and SRM for each condition. The individual
results are available in table format in Appendix A and plotted in Appendix B.
Broadband stimuli (n = 18)
LIN co-loc.
MIN co-loc.
LIN separ.
MIN separ.
LIN SRM
MIN SRM
Mean
3.60
3.53
-13.1
-11.4
-16.7
-15
Median
3.66
3.56
-14.8
-12.9
-18
-16
SD
1.63
1.34
5.57
4.80
5.07
4.70
Range
-1; 7
1.19; 5.88
-19.2; 4.86
-16.6; 1.5
-23.6; -2.14
-19.9; -2.12
Lowpass filtered stimuli (n = 18)
LIN co-loc.
MIN co-loc.
LIN separ.
MIN separ.
LIN SRM
MIN SRM
Mean
4.87
4.80
-3.27
-3.80
-8.14
-8.60
Median
4.75
4.38
-3.62
-3.5
-8.56
-8.36
SD
1.18
1.61
4.66
4.45
4.42
5.09
Range
2.88; 7
2.75; 7.75
-11.4; 5.5
-9.88; 3.25
-14.7; -1.5
-17.6; 0
Table 3: Mean, median, SD and range for all spatial configurations and the amount of SRM.
Top panel shows the results using broadband stimuli, bottom panel using LP stimuli.
Spatial release from masking
Figure 9 (A) shows the SRM for the processing conditions LIN and MIN summarized in box
plots. The box plot representing the results obtained with LP stimuli is highlighted in gray and
the broadband highlighted in blue. Figure 9 (B) shows the individual data points for LIN and
MIN connected by a dashed line with broadband stimuli. In Figure 9 (B) there is a general trend
that the participants achieve an equal amount of masking release in the LIN and MIN condition;
however, there are exceptions (e.g., s3). Figure 9 (C) plots the individual data points with LP
stimuli for the LIN and MIN condition. Figure 9 (C) does not have the same general trend that
is observed in Figure 9 (B), as some participants gain more SRM in the LIN condition, while
other participants gain more SRM in the MIN condition. Additionally, some participants gain
approximately an equal amount of masking release in both processing conditions.
19
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 9: (A) Spatial Release from Masking for each processing condition (LIN-MIN) and stimuli
type (broadband and LP filtered stimuli). (B) Individual data points for LIN and MIN with
broadband stimuli. (C) Individual data points for LIN and MIN with LP filtered stimuli.
To investigate if MIN combined with LP filtered stimuli resulted in reduced masking release,
the difference in SRM between MIN and LIN (∆LIN-MIN) was plotted as a function of SRM in
the LIN processing condition. In Figure 10 (A), the data is plotted for the broadband stimuli
only, and in Figure 10 (B) for LP filtered stimuli only.
The broadband stimuli serves as a
reference condition. The black lines are regression lines, and the dashed blue horizontal lines
are ±3 dB relative to zero. The horizontal dashed lines are plotted at ±3 dB, because the small
step size was 3 dB in the adaptive track of the test. Values of ± 3 dB or less are considered
20
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4. Results
on the order of the test uncertainty, since the result of zero on the ordinate indicates an equal
amount of masking release in both processing conditions.
Negative values indicate a higher
amount of masking release in the LIN processing condition, and positive values a higher amount
in the MIN condition. Using broadband stimuli, 10 participants (55%) obtained relatively equal
amounts of masking release in both processing conditions, 2 participants (11%) gained more
masking release in the MIN condition, and the remaining 6 participants (33%) gained more in
the LIN condition. The SRM LIN and ∆LIN-MIN for the broadband stimuli were found to be
moderately positively correlated (r[16] = .56, p = .015). In the LP filtered stimuli, there is more
variation in the data. 8 participants (44%) gained an equal amount of masking release in both
conditions, while 5 participants (28%) gained more in the MIN condition, and the remaining 5
participants (28%) gained more in the LIN condition. The correlation between SRM LIN and
∆LIN-MIN for the LP filtered stimuli were not significant (r[16] = .26, p = .29).
Figure 10: Difference in SRM between MIN and LIN for all individuals as a function of SRM
in the LIN condition. The black line is the regression line. The dashed blue horizontal lines are
±3 dB relative to zero.
The SRM data was fitted to a linear mixed effects model. The dependent variable was
SRM, while the independent variables were processing condition and stimulus type, and the
participants were considered a random effect. The step function (lmerpackage) used to eliminate
21
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4. Results
non-significant interactions eliminated the participants and the processing type (LIN and MIN)
leaving a significant effect of stimulus type. No significant interaction between processing type
and stimulus type was found. Due to lack of statistical difference between LIN and MIN, the
data for MIN and LIN was combined for each stimulus type, and a two-sample t-test between
stimulus type was performed. The mean of the broadband stimuli was −15.52 dB, and −8.37
dB with LP stimuli. The participants achieved better SRM with broadband stimuli, compared
to LP stimuli t(141.75) = -9.3986, p<.001.
Speech reception thresholds
Figure 11 (A) summarizes the SRT data for all participants for all processing conditions and
spatial configurations in box plots. In Figure 11 (B), the data is re-plotted for the broadband
condition only. Similarly, in Figure 11 (C) shows re-plotted data for the LP condition. Both
figures include color-coordinated datapoints for each individual.
The SRT data was fitted to a linear mixed effects model. The SRT was the dependent vari-
able, while the processing condition, spatial configuration and stimulus type were independent
variables. The participants were fitted as a random effect. The step function did not elimi-
nate any factors, hence indicating statistically significant interactions stimulus type (broadband
and LP) and processing condition (LIN-MIN, including spatial configuration). The results from
the type III ANOVA with Satterthaite’s method revealed a significant effect of the processing
type, stimulus type, and the interaction between the processing type and stimulus type. The
results were as follows: (1) processing condition F(3, 119) = 158.793, p < .001; (2) stimulus type
F(1, 119) = 81.406, p < .001, and the interaction between processing condition and stimulus
type F(3, 119) = 15.781, p < .001.
22
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 11: SRT data. (A) Box plots of all spatial configurations (e.g., co-located vs. spatially
separated) and stimulus type (broadband + lowpass). (B) Broadband stimuli. Box plot and
data points for all participants for all spatial configurations. (C) Lowpass filtered stimuli. Box
plot and data points for all participants for all spatial configurations.
The results of the analysis of the pairwise comparisons of the means are listed in Table 4. Tukey’s
method was used to correct for multiple comparisons.
23
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Results
stimulus type
Processing condition, spatial configuration
Lowpass
LIN co-loc. - LIN separ.***
Lowpass
MIN co-loc. - MIN separ.***
Lowpass/broadband
LIN separ. - LIN separ.***
Lowpass/broadband
MIN separ. - MIN separ.***
Broadband
LIN co-loc. - LIN separ.***
Broadband
MIN co-loc. - MIN separ.***
Lowpass
LIN co-loc. - MIN co-loc.
Lowpass/broadband
LIN co-loc. - LIN co-loc.
Lowpass/broadband
MIN co-loc. - MIN co-loc.
Lowpass
LIN separ. - MIN separ.
Broadband
LIN co-loc. - MIN co-loc.
Broadband
LIN separ. - MIN separ.
Table 4: Summary of the pairwise comparisons on the SRT data. ∗∗∗= p < .0001.
The analysis of the SRTs found a significant interaction of processing condition and stimulus
type. The post-hoc analysis revealed a significant effect of spatial configuration (co-loc. - separ.)
using both stimulus types but did not find any significant difference in the SRTs obtained using
MIN compared to LIN. Additionally, the statistical analysis did not find an effect of processing
condition (LIN - MIN); however, there was a significant effect of stimulus type. Using broadband
stimuli, the participants gained substantially more masking release, compared to when using LP
filtered stimuli.
24
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 5. Discussion
Discussion
This study investigated the effects of linear phase processing and minimum phase processing
on speech perception using broadband and LP filtered stimuli. It was hypothesized that using
broadband stimuli the participants would gain close to the same amount of masking release in
both processing conditions. The results and the statistical analysis support this hypothesis, since
the participants gained close to the same amount of masking release in the LIN (mean : 16.7)
and in the MIN (mean : 15) processing condition.
Considering that ITD is the binaural cue predominantly used in the low frequency area, it
was assumed that LP filtering the stimuli would force the participants to rely on ITD cues, due
to the lack of high frequency components. It was hypothesized that some participants would
have reduced masking release in LIN processing condition combined with LP filtered stimuli.
The study found that all participants had elevated SRTs and reduced masking release with LP
filtered stimuli and the LIN condition (mean : 8.14 dB), whereas the SRM was 16.7 dB using
broadband stimuli. The results could indicate that ITD cues alone, do not provide the same
amount of binaural support as ILDs and ITDs combined.
Furthermore, it was expected that LP filtered stimuli combined with the MIN processing
condition, would result in higher SRTs and reduced masking release. This did not seem to be
the case, however. The statistical analysis did not find a significant difference between the two
processing strategies when the data was fitted to a linear mixed effects model, and the third
hypothesis was therefore rejected.
Comparisons with previous literature
The current study was an extension of the study by Gr¨oblbauer (2021). Gr¨oblbauer (2021)
used LP filtered stimuli and found an average SRM of ∼8 dB with LIN and ∼7 dB with MIN.
The present study found an average SRM of 8.14 dB with LIN and 8.6 dB with MIN. Even
though slight modifications were made in the current study, the results seem to be similar. In
the study by Gr¨oblbauer (2021) four of the participants (36%) gained less SRM in the MIN
condition compared to the LIN condition and were highlighted as a potential subgroup. The
remaining participants gained close to the same amount of masking release in LIN and MIN, or
slightly more in MIN (<than 2 dB). In the present study using LP filtered stimuli, 8 participants
(44%) gained close to the same amount of masking release (within ±3dB) in both processing
conditions, 5 participants (28%) gained more (+3dB) masking release in the MIN condition,
while 5 participants (28%) gained more (-3dB) in the LIN condition. This suggests some degree
25
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 5. Discussion
of variation; however, a majority obtained the same amount of masking release in the MIN and
LIN condition (Figure 10, B). When using broadband stimuli, 10 participants (55%) obtained
close to the same amount of masking release in both processing conditions. 2 participants (11%)
obtained more masking release in the MIN condition, while 6 participants (33%) obtained more
in the LIN condition. There is less variation when using broadband stimuli, which is also evident
in Figure 10 (A); the data points are closer to zero, compared to Figure 10 (B).
The amount of masking release depends on various factors, one of them being the type of
masker used. Previous studies on SRM, and masking in general, categorize masker type into
two categories: EM and IM. EM is usually achieved using noise maskers, while informational
maskers contain filtered speech. The amount of masking release is increased when using maskers
containing informational masking compared to energetic masking (Yost, 2017; Litovsky, 2012;
Arbogast et al., 2002; Noble and Perrett, 2002).
The present study used female speech maskers (i.e., IM+EM), and a female target voice.
The voices, although not belonging to the same speaker, were very similar, and many participants
expressed that they could not hear a difference in the voices alone. A greater amount of masking
release when using same-sex target and masker is generally supported by previous work. A sub-
experiment in the study by Noble and Perrett (2002) investigated the effect of same-sex talker
and masker, compared to mixed-sex talker and masker, on SRM. They found that SRM was
greatest when using female target and masker (∼5 dB), followed by male target and masker
(∼3.5 dB), and male talker and female masker (∼3.5 dB), and the lowest amount of SRM was
found when using a female target and male masker (∼2 dB). Similarity, Glyde et al. (2013)
found a greater amount of SRM using same-sex talker and masker (SRM: ∼13 dB), compared
to different gender voices (SRM: ∼7 dB). The study by Allen et al. (2008) did, however, not
follow this trend. They found that mixed-sex target and masker resulted in a greater amount of
masking release, compared to same-sex target and masker.
In comparison, the present study found a substantial amount of masking release with the
broadband stimuli (LIN, mean: 16.7 dB); MIN, mean: 15 dB). Using LP filtered stimuli, the
SRM was reduced (LIN, mean: 8.14 dB; MIN, 8.6 dB), potentially due to lack of ILDs present,
or due to reduced speech intelligibility. The effects of LP filtering on speech intelligibility are
considered in the following.
26
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5. Discussion
Effects of LP filter on speech intelligibility
The purpose of using the LP filter was to force the participants to rely on ITD cues alone. While
there was no difference between the processing conditions, using LP filtered stimuli resulted in
an elevated SRT and smaller amount of masking release, compared to when using broadband
stimuli. When using a cutoff frequency of 1kHz, several phonemes become distorted. Figure 4
shows a phonetic representation of speech sounds (phonemes) in an audiogram, and the cutoff
frequency distorts the following phonemes that also occur in the speech corpus Dantale II:
[f, s, k, t, p, g]. Reduced speech intelligibility in the LP filtered condition might therefore also
be a confounding factor, that resulted in elevated SRTs and less masking release (Glyde et al.,
2013). An indication of the effects of reduced speech intelligibility are present for four of the
participants (s3, s10, s14, and s17; Appendix B), who did not reach negative SRTs in the
spatially separated condition.
Reduced speech intelligibility using LP filtering is supported in the literature. Li et al.
(2019) investigated the role of LP filtering on SRM using three cutoff frequencies: 600, 750 and
1000Hz. The speech material used were Mandarin sentences, and they investigated the effects
using two types of maskers: speech shaped noise (SSN) and a two-talker masker. When using the
SSN masker, there was no statistical difference in speech intelligibility using 1kHz and 750Hz;
however, using a cutoff frequency of 600Hz resulted in significantly worse performance. When
using the two-talker masker, the authors found that the speech intelligibility was significantly
reduced when using a cutoff frequency of 600 and 750 Hz, compared to 1kHz. Bhargava and
Ba¸skent (2012) measured the effects of different cutoff frequencies (500, 1000, 2000, and 3000Hz)
on word recognition, using the Dutch speech material Vrij Univeristy corpus. The only effect
was found using a cutoff frequency of 500Hz, while the other frequencies resulted in a ceiling
effect. Oxenham and Simonson (2009) used a SRM paradigm to investigate the effects of LP
filtering (cutoff frequency: 1200Hz) and highpass filtering (cutoff: 1500Hz). These effects were
investigated using three types of maskers: (1) spectrally matched steady noise, (2) single-talker
interference, and (3) speech-modulated noise. They found that LP filtering and highpass filtering
resulted in less masking release with all maskers, when compared to using broadband stimuli.
The role of ILDs and ITDs
Using LP filtered stimuli the participants obtained elevated SRTs compared to when using
broadband stimuli. In the LP filtered stimuli the participants did not have or had limited access
to ILDs, leaving them with ITDs only in the spatially separated condition. The present study
27
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5. Discussion
hypothesized that LP filtered stimuli combined with MIN would have detrimental effects on the
obtained SRTs and SRM, and that the participants would obtain increased masking release and
lower SRTs using LIN and LP filtered stimuli, indicating that ITDs would aid them in separating
the masker from the target. This did, however, not seem to be true for the participants that
participated in the study. The difference in masking release in LIN and MIN with LP filtered
stimuli was less than 1 dB, and the same was evident in the obtained SRTs in the spatially
separated condition for both processing strategies. The results indicate that the participants
weight ILDs higher than ITDs cues, even though a cue weighting study was not performed as
part of the study. It is, however, important to emphasize that there was a substantial amount of
variation in the SRTs obtained with LIN (between -1.5 an -14.7) and MIN (between 0 and -17.6)
using LP filtered stimuli, see Figure 11 (C). The importance of ILDs on speech intelligibility
are supported by previous studies. Rennies and Kidd (2018) investigated the effects of binaural
cues on speech intelligibility.
Stimuli were presented containing ILDs only, ITDs only, and
with ILDs and ITDs.
They found that the speech intelligibility was similar with preserved
cues and with ILDs only, while the speech intelligibility was substantially reduced when the
participants only had access to ITDs. In fact, the ITD only stimuli resulted in close to the
same speech intelligibility as when the masker and the target were co-located, and hence no
binaural cues were present. These results are supported by Glyde et al. (2013) who found that
ILDs only provided near to the same amount of masking release as ILDs and ITDs combined,
and ITDs alone did not provide the same amount of SRM as ILDs. However, as mentioned
in the Background chapter, there are conflicting results of the importance of ITDs and ILDs
on speech intelligibility. For example, Ellinger et al. (2017) found that ITDs provided more
masking release, compared to ILDs.
Further investigations are required on the importance of ILDs and ITDs for speech intelli-
gibility. A larger cohort could potentially provide a clearer picture of the variation with the LP
filtered stimuli. The present study showed more variation than the study by Gr¨oblbauer (2021),
and thus could a larger cohort potentially show that there are three groups: (1) individuals that
gain the same amount of SRM in both processing conditions, (2) individuals that gain more SRM
in the MIN condition, and (3) individuals that gain more SRM in the LIN condition. Hence,
indicating a lack of generalization using LP filtering stimuli. Additionally, an experiment using
highpass filtered stimuli could provide more information on the resilience of ILD cues alone. It
is, however, possible that reduced speech intelligibility is introduced by the LP filter. Therefore,
it should be considered to apply different methods of removing ILD cues instead of LP filtering
the signal. Furthermore, including a cue-weighting study with a regression analysis on the SRM
28
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5. Discussion
and the cue-weighting results would also yield information on an individual level.
Limitations
A shortcoming of the present study was the implementation of non-individual HRTFs for creat-
ing the spatial environment. While generic HRTFs are less time consuming, individual HRTFs
could provide a more realistic spatial environment for the individual participant (Richter, 2019).
Individual HRTFs could potentially reassure better spatialization and lower SRTs in the spa-
tially separated configurations. While the use of non-individualized HRTFs could result in the
range of variability in the data, specifically in using LP filtered stimuli, the fact that all data
points are based on a single measurement, can also contribute to the variability. A re-test ses-
sion could provide more reliable results and potentially less variation or a clearer picture of the
variance; however, this would require another testing session for all participants.
Finally, SNHL can be caused by several factors, for example malformation of the cochlea
(e.g., Mondini defect), infection (e.g., meningitis, cytomegalovirus), syndromal (e.g., Pendred
syndrome, CHARGE), trauma (e.g., acoustic, head trauma). SNHL can be hereditary or non-
hereditary (e.g., noise-induced), and congenital (e.g., Mondini defect) or acquired (e.g., pres-
byacousis, M´eni`ere’s Disease) (Stach, 2010a). These patient-specific factors, or etiologies, can
influence the outcome of the HA to varying degrees. The current study simulated a HL in NH
individuals, to be able to solely focus on the outcome of the processing condition. It is however,
not NH individuals that benefit from HAs in everyday life, and thus, individuals with HL should
be included in future studies.
29
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
Conclusion
Understanding speech in complex acoustic environments depends on many factors. Being able
to utilize binaural cues, like ITDs and ILDs, aids the listener in knowing where the sound comes
from, and which sound source to focus on. Impairment of the auditory system, specifically in
the cochlea, results in increased audiometric thresholds as well as suprathreshold deficits in both
monaural and binaural processing. This results in a difficulty in understanding speech, especially
in complex acoustic environments. HAs help the hearing impaired individual to some extent;
however, many people with hearing impairment still experience difficulty in social settings with
many talkers (Souza, 2016).
HAs aim at restoring audibility. Most modern HAs typically provide dynamic-range com-
pression to account for loudness recruitment as well as single-channel noise reduction and adap-
tive directionality, aiming to improve the SNR. These features inevitably provide some degree
of signal distortion and listeners with HL might display different degrees of sensitivity to such
distortion.
MIN is a strategy of processing which aims to reduce processing delay and associated
artifacts. However, this type of processing can also introduce distortion of the ITDs. This is
because group delay of a minimum phase filter depends on its gain-frequency characteristics.
Thus, large differences in gain across ears can introduce different processing delays, and thus,
modify the natural ITDs. Such cue distortion can be potentially detrimental to individuals with
HL whose binaural processing might already be impaired.
The consequences of such cue distortion on real-life speech perception can be quantified in
the laboratory by SRM. The SRM paradigm is a method to investigate the influence of spatial
separation of the target and the masker. When the masker and the target are co-located the
listener is not able to utilize spatial cues to separate the sources, and this usually results in an
elevated SRT when compared to the SRTs in the spatially separated condition.
This thesis aimed at quantifying the effects of MIN on speech perception using NH partic-
ipants. The results did not reveal any detrimental effect of the MIN processing on the speech
perception, indicating that, at least for the conditions tested, MIN is a successful approach for
optimizing the sound quality in HAs without compromising speech perception for the user.
30
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
Acknowledgements
Throughout the whole process of the thesis, I have received a great deal of support and assistance.
First, I would like to thank my supervisors Abigail Anne Kressner, Borys Kowalewski, and
Torsten Dau for providing all the support and encouragement through each stage of the process.
To David Gr¨oblbauer, who wrote the original code for the SRM experiment. Thank you for your
availability and help on the present study. To Jonathan Regev, thank you for your support, and
for encouraging me to pursue a master’s thesis in the field of technical audiology. And to all my
other colleagues at Hearing Systems, thank you for all your support.
The experiment was mainly conducted at Copenhagen Hearing and Balance Center, Ear, Nose,
and Throat (ENT) & Audiology Clinic, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital. Thank
you for making the facilities available for the study. Furthermore, I would like to thank all the
participants who participated in the study.
At last, I would like to express my gratitude to my family and friends for their unconditional
support.
31
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
Bibliography
Allen, K., Carlile, S., and Alais, D. (2008). Contributions of talker characteristics and spatial location to
auditory streaming. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 123(3):1562–1570.
Amiri, M. and Jarollahi, F. (2020). An overview on informational masking. Auditory and Vestibular
Research, 29(3):128–139.
Arbogast, T. L., Mason, C. R., and Kidd, G. (2002). The effect of spatial separation on informational
and energetic masking of speech. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 112(5).
Arlinger, S., Juahiainen, T., and Jensen, J. H. (2016). Høreskader. In Poulsen, T., editor, Nordisk lærebog
i audiologi, chapter 7, pages 283–335. Syddansk Universitetsforlag, Odense.
Avan, P., Giraudet, F., and B¨uki, B. (2015). Importance of binaural hearing. In Audiology and Neuro-
tology, volume 20, pages 3–6. S. Karger AG.
Balling, L. W. and Helmink, D. (2021). Optimizing sound in signal processing and hearing aid fitting .
Audiology Practices, 13(4):12–17.
Best, V. and Swaminathan, J. (2019). Revisiting the detection of interaural time differences in listeners
with hearing loss. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 145(6):EL508–EL513.
Bhargava, P. and Ba¸skent, D. (2012). Effects of low-pass filtering on intelligibility of periodically inter-
rupted speech. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 131(2):EL87–EL92.
Bisgaard, N., Vlaming, M. S. M. G., and Dahlquist, M. (2010).
Standard Audiograms for the IEC
60118-15 Measurement Procedure. Trends in Amplification, 14(2):113–120.
Bramsløw, L. (2010). Preferred signal path delay and high-pass cut-off in open fittings. International
Journal of Audiology, 49(9):634–644.
Charney, L. and Srinivasan, N. K. (2020). Relationship between spatial release from masking and working
memory. Acoustical Society of America.
Cherry, E. C. (1953). Some Experiments on the Recognition of Speech, with One and with Two Ears.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 25(5):975–979.
Dillon, H. (2012a). Binaural and bilateral considerations in hearing aid fitting. In Hearing Aids, chap-
ter 15, pages 430–467. Boomerang press, Sydney, 2nd edition.
Dillon, H. (2012b). Compression systems in hearing aids . In Hearing Aids, chapter 6, pages 170–197.
Boomerang press, Sydney, 2nd edition.
Dillon, H. (2012c).
Hearing aid components .
In Hearing Aids, chapter 2, pages 20–49. Sydney :
Boomerang Press, Sydney, 2nd edition.
32
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
Ellinger, R. L., Jakien, K. M., and Gallun, F. J. (2017). The role of interaural differences on speech
intelligibility in complex multi-talker environments). The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
141(2):EL170–EL176.
Glyde, H., Buchholz, J. M., Dillon, H., Cameron, S., and Hickson, L. (2013). The importance of interaural
time differences and level differences in spatial release from masking. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 134(2):EL147–EL152.
Gr¨oblbauer, D. (2021). Spatial perception of gain dependent group delay differences in binaural hearing
aids using minimum phase processing. MSc Thesis, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Lyngby.
Healy, E. W. and Yoho, S. E. (2016). Difficulty understanding speech in noise by the hearing impaired:
Underlying causes and technological solutions. In Proceedings of the Annual International Conference
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS, volume 2016-October, pages 89–92.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.
Levitt, H. (1971). Transformed Up-Down Methods in Psychoacoustics. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 49(2B):467–477.
Li, H., Zhang, X., Feng, Y., and Chen, F. (2019). Impact of low-pass filtering on masking release in
understanding Mandarin sentences. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 146(1):EL52–
EL57.
Litovsky, R. Y. (2012). Spatial Release from Masking. Acoustics Today, 8(2).
Macpherson, E. A. and Middlebrooks, J. C. (2002). Listener weighting of cues for lateral angle: The duplex
theory of sound localization revisited. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 111(5):2219.
Moore, B. C. J. (2003). Frequency selectivity in impaired hearing . In An Introduction to the Psychology
of Hearing, pages 117–119. Academic Press, Amsterdam ; Boston, 5th edition.
Noble, W. and Perrett, S. (2002). Hearing speech against spatially separate competing speech versus
competing noise. Perception & Psychophysics, 64(8):1325–1336.
Oxenham, A. J. and Simonson, A. M. (2009). Masking release for low- and high-pass-filtered speech in
the presence of noise and single-talker interference. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
125(1):457–468.
Plack, C. (2018a). Frequency selectivity. In The sense of hearing, chapter 5, pages 86–109. Routledge,
New York, 3rd edition.
Plack, C. J. (2018b). A journey through the auditory system. In The sense of hearing, chapter 4, pages
59–85. Routledge, New York, NY, 3rd edition.
Plack, C. J. (2018c). Hearing Impairment. In The sense of hearing, chapter 13, pages 259–281. Routledge,
Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY, third edition.
33
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
Plack, C. J. (2018d). Spatial Hearing. In The sense of hearing, chapter 9, pages 171–191. Routledge,
New York, NY, third edition edition.
Rennies, J. and Kidd, G. (2018). Benefit of binaural listening as revealed by speech intelligibility and
listening effort. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 144(4):2147–2159.
Richter, J.-G. (2019).
Fundamentals.
In Vorl¨ander, M. and Fels, J., editors, Fast measurement of
individual head-related transfer functions, chapter 2, pages 3–26. Logos Verlag Berlin, Berlin.
Sanchez Lopez, R., Fereczkowski, M., Bianchi, F., Piechowiak, T., Hau, O., Pedersen, M. S., Behrens, T.,
Neher, T., Dau, T., and Santurette, S. (2018). Technical evaluation of hearing-aid fitting parameters
for different auditory profiles.
Seikel, J. A., Drumright, D. G., and King, D. W. (2016). Auditory Physiology. In Anatomy & Physiology
for speech, language, and hearing, pages 531–569. Engage Learning, Clifton Park, NY, 5th edition.
Souza, P. (2016). Speech Perception and Hearing Aids. In Hearing Aids, volume 56, chapter 6, pages
151–180. Springer International Publishing.
Srinivasan, N. K., Jakien, K. M., and Gallun, F. J. (2016).
Release from masking for small spatial
separations: Effects of age and hearing loss. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 140(1).
Stach, B. A. (2010a). Sensory hearing disorders . In Clinical audiology: an introduction, chapter 4, pages
153–177. Delmar Cengage Learning, Clifton Park, NY, 2nd edition.
Stach, B. A. (2010b). The nature of hearing disorder. In Clinical Audiology: An Introduction, chapter 3,
pages 101–134. Delmar, Cengage Learning, 2nd edition.
Steven Colburn, H., Shinn-Cunningham, B., Kidd, Jr, G., and Durlach, N. (2006).
The perceptual
consequences of binaural hearing. International Journal of Audiology, 45(sup1).
Stone, M. A. and Moore, B. C. J. (1999). Tolerable Hearing Aid Delays. I. Estimation of Limits Imposed
by the Auditory Path Alone Using Simulated Hearing Losses. Ear and Hearing, 20(3):182–192.
Stone, M. A., Moore, B. C. J., Meisenbacher, K., and Derleth, R. P. (2008). Tolerable Hearing Aid
Delays. V. Estimation of Limits for Open Canal Fittings. Ear & Hearing, 29(4).
Van Opstal, J. (2016). Acoustic Localization Cues. In The Auditory System and human sound-source
localization behavior, chapter 7, pages 171–208. Elsevier/AP, Amsterdam; Boston.
Wagener, K., Josvassen, J. L., and Ardenkjær, R. (2003). Design, optimization and evaluation of a Danish
sentence test in noise. International Journal of Audiology, 42(1):10–17.
Winkler, A., Latzel, M., and Holube, I. (2016). Open Versus Closed Hearing-Aid Fittings: A Literature
Review of Both Fitting Approaches. Trends in Hearing, 20.
34
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
Yost, W. A. (2017). Spatial release from masking based on binaural processing for up to six maskers.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 141(3):2093–2106.
Zakis, J. A., Fulton, B., and Steele, B. R. (2012). Preferred delay and phase-frequency response of open-
canal hearing aids with music at low insertion gain. International Journal of Audiology, 51(12):906–913.
35
==PAGE:42==
Appendix A
Appendix A
Broadband stimuli (n = 18)
Subjects
LIN co-loc.
MIN co-loc.
LIN separ.
MIN separ.
LIN SRM
MIN SRM
s1
3.4
3.5
-14.76
-16.25
-18.15
-19.75
s2
5.125
5.875
-11
-9.5
-16.125
-15.375
s3
3.8125
1.6
-18.125
-3.2
-21.9375
-4.8
s4
7
3.625
4.8571
1.5
-2.1429
-2.125
s5
-1
1.75
-17.375
-15.125
-16.375
-16.875
s6
3.5
3.25
-12.8
-16.625
-16.3
-19.875
s7
3.4
4.75
-15.875
-14.6
-19.275
-19.35
s8
2.875
3.3571
-7.625
-13
-10.5
-16.3571
s9
2.3125
4.8571
-12.875
-10.7
-15.1875
-15.5571
s10
3.3571
5.2
-7.5
-7.25
-10.8571
-12.45
s11
4.3
3.25
-19.25
-14.75
-23.55
-18
s12
5.5
1.1875
-14.75
-15.125
-20.25
-16.3125
s13
2.215
4.375
-11
-8.375
-13.125
-12.75
s14
4
4
-15.875
-11.75
-19.875
-15.75
s15
4
2.5
-15.5
-14.75
-19.5
-17.25
s16
4
4.375
-15.875
-9.2857
-19.875
-13.6607
s17
4.3
4.375
-13.625
-12.8
-17.925
-17.175
s18
2.75
1.75
-17.375
-14
-20.125
-15.75
36
==PAGE:43==
Appendix A
LP stimuli (n = 18)
Subjects
LIN co-loc.
MIN co-loc.
LIN separ.
MIN separ.
LIN SRM
MIN SRM
s1
3.4
3.25
-3.5
-9
-6.9
-12.25
s2
7
4.75
-2
-0.125
-9
-4.875
s3
7
4.9
1
2.875
-6
-2.025
s4
4.6429
6.1
-10.1
-7.625
-14.7429
-13.725
s5
2.875
6.1
-5.75
-3.125
-8.625
-9.225
s6
2.875
7.75
-11.375
-9.875
-14.25
-17.625
s7
5.875
6.7
-3.875
-8
-9.75
-14.7
s8
5.2
4
-6.875
-3.5
-12.075
-7.5
s9
5
3.3571
1
-8.375
-4
-11.7321
s10
4
3.2
5.5
3.25
1.5
0
s11
4.375
3.25
-2
-3.5
-6.375
-6.75
s12
4.75
5.8
-4.625
-9.125
-9.375
-14.925
s13
4.75
4
-3.75
-2.3
-8.5
-6.3
s14
6.1
2.75
3.1429
2.2
-2.9571
-0.55
s15
5.5
2.875
-5.75
-3.875
-11.25
-6.75
s16
5.25
7
-1.75
-2.75
-7
-9.75
s17
4.3
6.625
1.75
1.75
-2.55
-4.875
s18
4.75
4
-9.875
-7.25
-14.625
-11.25
37
==PAGE:44==
Appendix B
Appendix B
38
==PAGE:45==
Appendix B
39
