==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
February 2, 2022
Process surveillance and
data-collection soft-tooling process
chain
Lukas Nyboe Bek
(s153475)
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take a second to give my thanks to the people who helped this
thesis come to fruition. First and foremost a great thanks to Yang Zhang and
Flavia Frumosu for your wonderful enthusiasm when supervising me through
this project. I do not believe I will ever meet anyone who’s going to reply
back to my emails as fast as you do! I would also like to thank Wenzhen and
Shuo for all the help you provided in the lab. Without you, I would have
never been able to understand what was happening in the lab!
To my great friend August, thank you for constantly fixing my LaTeX docu-
ment every time i manage to break it in a new way.
Finally, a tremendous and loving thanks to my girlfriend for always being
there for me. Words cannot describe how much you’ve meant for me through-
out this thesis.
Lukas Nyboe Bek, 02/02/2022
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Industry 4.0 has paved the way for numerous technological advancements in
the digitalization of manufacturing processes. One of the significant aspects
of this digitalization is the application of digital twins. No uniform agreement
of what technologies drive a digital twin exists; however, a typical depiction
of digital twins consists of three parts: a physical, a digital, and the data
tying them together.
In this project, the digital twin concept is applied to a soft-tooling process
chain employing additive manufacturing for injection molding. The goal is
to develop a digital twin spanning the entire process chain. In addition, the
digital twin will seek to improve the current process chain, either directly or
indirectly, through values such as real-time state monitoring and simulated
runs.
Inspired by similar work in the industry, the digital twin was built using a
modular approach with Python as its core. Using the micro web framework
Python Flask, a graphical user interface displays the state of the process
chain to its operator. Furthermore, managing the data in the digital twin is
done using an embedded database built with the lightweight RDBMS SQLite.
The digital twin’s quantification was done by a comparison of its proposed
and actual values. While not giving a definitive conclusion regarding the
proposed digital twin, gaining value from a digital twin in the soft-tooling
process is possible.
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
February 2, 2022
Contents
1.0 Introduction
1
1.1
The soft-tooling process chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Digital Twins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.0 Related Work
13
2.1
Digital Twin in a Multi-Step Production Line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Digital Twin using Modular Open-Source Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.0 Method
16
3.1
The Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Machine Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Digital Twin Model for Machines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Building the Digital Twin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Web Application Through Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Database management system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.0 Implementation
25
4.1
The web server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1
Front-end . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
User interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Sensor data for simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Database layer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.0 Discussion
37
5.1
Validation of proposed values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Implementation limitations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.0 Conclusion
40
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
References
45
Appendix A
46
Initial goals of thesis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Appendix B
47
Initial time schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Appendix C
48
s153475
Contents
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis – CONTENTS
February 2, 2022
Code project created in thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
s153475
Page 1 of 48
==PAGE:6==
Glossary
DT
Digital Twin
HMI
Human-Machine-Interface
IoT
Internet of Things
IM
Injection Molding
DLP
Direct light processing
CNC
Computerized numerical control
CMM
Coordinate measuring machine
OPC
Open Platform Communications
OPC UA
OPC Unified Architecture
UX
User Experience
GUI
Graphical User Interface
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
1.0
Introduction
In manufacturing, industry 4.0, also used interchangeably with the fourth in-
dustrial revolution, deals with the digitalization of manufacturing processes.
As the name 4.0 suggests, it is the fourth significant revolution in a series
of revolutions. They span back to the first industrial revolution in the 18th
century, with the introduction of the steam engine and mechanization of pro-
duction. Computers and automation were introduced in the third industrial
revolution, allowing for the industry 4.0 push to improve those technologies
further. It does so by combining Internet of Things, Big Data, cloud comput-
ing, internet of services, and cyber-physical systems (Hwang, 2016). Some of
the principles of Industry 4.0 can be formulated as:
1. Communication between machines in a process chain.
2. Transparency i.e. complete information about a process and the actors
in it, through the accumulation of machine data, smart products, and
production data in general.
3. Better use of data through analysis and visualization of machine and
sensor data.
4. Decisions through automatic data-based decision making, allowing for
more automation and optimization of human resources.
One of the main components is data and how to utilize it for maximum value
creation and human interaction (or lack thereof) (Kurasov, 2021).
An article by Kenett and Coleman mentions that industry 4.0 relies on three
basic elements: sensor technology transmitting continuous measurements,
flexible manufacturing capabilities such as additive manufacturing (also ref-
ered to as 3D Printing), as well as data analysis utilizing machine learn-
ing, statistical data analysis, and artificial intelligence (Kenett and Coleman,
2021). Looking at the Request Soft-tooling project at DTU, these three ba-
sic elements are all present, allowing for the question of how to implement
Industry 4.0. The Request soft-tooling project introduces a new soft-tooling
process chain, exploring using a vat photopolymerization process to print 3D
molds. Following a few other steps, the mold will lastly be used in injection
molding to produce parts. These terms will be described in the following
section 1.1.
The progress from initially creating the 3D printed mold to
having its created parts will be referred to as a run, and the entire Request
soft-tooling process chain will be referred to as the process chain.
s153475
Page 1 of 48
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
1.1
The soft-tooling process chain
Soft-tooling refers to the materials used for the molds in injection molding.
Injection molding is the process of creating parts based on a mold.
An
example of a mold used in the process chain can be seen in figure 1.
Figure 1: A mold used in the process chain
When printing a part, the injection molding machine closes the mold and
injects it with a heated material. After being allowed to cool down to harden
the material and plasticizing the resin, the mold opens once again and ejects
a part. The act of printing one part is referred to as a cycle. This process
repeats itself for however many parts are needed or until the mold begins fal-
tering. Soft-tooling, compared to a traditional mold out of metal can provide
more flexible design freedom, reduce machining time as well as reduce cost
(Zhang et al., 2017). The injection molding machine used for this process
chain is called BOY XS. Built-in sensors measure several process parameters
in the injection molding process. The step of injection molding will be re-
ferred to as IM.
The process is still in development and already consists of several different
machines, each with different purposes. The entire process can be seen in
figure 2. In concise terms, the process chain consists of 3D printing a mold
to use in the injection molding parts. The X’s on figure 2 indicates an ”OR”
decision, meaning the processes can go either one or the other way. There
can be a substantial variation between each run regarding which machines
get used and the order they appear in. To understand why, it is beneficial
s153475
Page 2 of 48
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
first to understand the role of each machine.
Figure 2: The entire soft-tooling process
The first step starts with the 3D printer. The printer itself is made at DTU
and uses vat polymerization to 3D print the molds used and can be seen in
figure 3.
The printing uses a UV light mask projection technique.
This technique
performs the 3D printing using vat polymerization, where a build plate moves
down into a ”container” (vat) which holds a polymer solution. The vat is then
exposed to light from a direct light processing (DLP) projector solidifying
(curing) the polymer solution. The build plate then moves up, and a new
polymer layer is exposed again. This process repeats itself until an entire 3D
model is printed. The printer itself takes a stack of images as input, where
each image acts as a layer in the 3D model (Saxena et al., 2020). There
are built-in sensors to measure different parameters on the printer e.g., force
pressure on the built plate and the position of the built plate based on its
axis. The 3D printing step will be referred to as the DLP.
s153475
Page 3 of 48
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
Figure 3: The DLP 3D printer
After the DLP step, the mold will go through a washing and curing step.
During these phases, the mold will be have the excess polymer washed off
followed by a curing step. Both machines are produced by Formlabs.
When the mold has been washed and cured, there is a variable step between
three different machines. The machines are a CNC milling machine, a coor-
dinate measuring machine (CMM), and the injection molding step described
earlier. From the process chain model in figure 2, the ”measuring and milling
of mold” refers to the CMM for measuring and CNC milling for milling. The
same is true when measuring parts, as it also happens through the CMM.
CNC stands for Computer Numerical Control and is programmed code con-
taining instructions for precise movements carried out by a machine. Milling
is the process of cutting/drilling material using a rotating cylindrical tool.
s153475
Page 4 of 48
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
Combined, it means a machine takes code with some instructions for precise
input to mill material. For this process chain, the purpose of CNC milling
consists of milling the mold to fit its required form better. For example, the
3D printed mold currently prints a few extra layers, which the CNC milling
step removes to ensure a better fit of the required form. Sometimes the entire
step of CNC milling might be skipped, however, as the mold will be ready
for injection molding right from being printed, washed, and cured. The CNC
milling machine used in this process chain is called Pocket NC V2 and is
from a company called Pocket NC. The step of CNC milling will be referred
to as CNC milling.
Coordinate Measuring Machine, or CMM for short, is a machine that mea-
sures the geometrical shapes of a physical object using a probe. It measures
discrete points on the object to get a high-precision overview of the geomet-
rical layout of an object. In this case, the use of the CMM machine is to
check how well the printed mold fits its required shape. Before the CNC
milling step, it can measure if and how the mold should be milled. It can
also be used after the CNC milling step to check the geometrical shape of
the mold after milling. The machine used is called DeMeet 400, and the step
surrounding its use will be referred to as CMM.
Both the CNC milling and CMM steps can go back and forth until the mold
is ready for injection molding. However, they can also be skipped if the mold
is ready after being washed and cured.
An operator controls the machines during a run, manually starting them.
Then, after completing a step in the process chain, the operator manually
moves the mold to the next machine in the process chain. Ideally, the process
should run with a higher level of autonomy, using robots to move the mold
where possible, a Human-Machine-Interface (HMI) capable of visualizing and
controlling the entire process chain, and in general, creating a more uniform
and collected process chain.
1.2
Digital Twins
With an understanding of the soft-tooling process chain, it is interesting to
start applying the concepts of industry 4.0. First, looking back at Kenett
and Coleman’s description of the three basic elements of which industry 4.0
relies upon; sensor technology, flexible manufacturing, and data analysis, it is
clear that the process chain involves both sensors and flexible manufacturing.
Furthermore, through the data produced by the process, the argument for
using data analysis is also clear, as it can provide valuable insights in the
optimization of the entire process chain (Xu and Duan, 2019; Kurasov, 2021).
s153475
Page 5 of 48
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
A fundamental term associated with industry 4.0 is Digital Twins (DT). It
refers to a virtual representation of a physical asset, product, or process
used to simulate it for various purposes. It integrates many of the concepts
and technologies of industry 4.0, making DTs highly integrated within this
industrial push (Cinar et al., 2020). However, as widespread as the DTs are
becoming, no general definition and agreement of their features and scopes
exist (Cimino et al., 2019). Looking back to between 2010 to 2012, the US Air
Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) and NASA, while researching predictive
maintenance and performance-life evaluation of aircraft, were among the first
to define a DT as: ”an integrated multi-physics, multi-scale, probabilistic
simulation of a vehicle or system that uses the best available physical models,
sensor updates, fleet history, etc., to mirror the life of its flying twin” (Shafto
et al., 2012). Since DTs started becoming more popular, there has been a
significant theoretical research in DTs, but no uniform agreement of both
the DT as a concept as well as its underlying technologies have been reached.
(Li et al., 2020a). One of the reasons behind this is that DTs offer many
different services, as described by (Tao et al., 2018), but only a limited set
of these services exists in a single DT application. They do, however, argue
that a DT comprises of three parts: a physical part, a digital part, and the
data which ties them together (Tao et al., 2018).
(Li et al., 2020a) also
claim this by mentioning a DT being three aspects consisting of a physical
entity, a virtual body, and the mapping between them. While doing a review
on current digital twin applications in manufacturing, Cimino et al. (Cimino
et al., 2019) groups the DT services described by Tao et al. into the following
categories:
• Real-time state monitoring, updating the DT in real time.
• Energy consumption analysis.
• Product failure analysis and prediction and product maintenance strat-
egy analysing real-time state data together with historical data predict-
ing faults and constructing a maintenance strategy.
• Intelligence optimization based on the human operation and behavioural
data to improve the product or process.
• Behaviour analysis and user operation guide to learn how the user
interacts and/or providing visual guidance of the system through user-
friendly HMI (Human-Machine-Interface).
• Product virtual maintenance and virtual operation providing a software
solution which allows for virtual training maintenance before carrying
s153475
Page 6 of 48
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
it out on the physical counterpart as well as allowing for virtual training
of new operators.
Another study by Li et al. into digital twin technology in manufacturing lists
five key generic technologies indispensable for the realization of DTs. The
study is based on current DT research results and application cases and lists
the technologies as:
DT modelling technology: As a digital model represents an abstraction of a
physical entity or process, the model has to adhere to the physical attributes
and laws of the physical object, such as operating mechanisms, data models,
and physical dimensions.
Data acquisition and transmission technology: Since the physical entity or
process will contain data, especially continuous sensor data streams, it is
crucial to have the technology to manage the collection and transmission of
said data.
Data management technology: Following the data acquisition and transmis-
sion technology, this data will naturally need to be managed and stored. In
addition, the technology used will need to allow for a large amount of data
processing, cleaning, and feature extraction and give the correct data to the
proper object at the right time.
Intelligent algorithm and computing power: Computing the potentially mas-
sive amounts of data requires the DT to implement intelligent algorithms and
AI to provide valuable insights and decision-making to optimize the general
process.
Human-computer interaction technology: With humans having the highest
amount of control and generally having the decision-making power, the DT
needs to provide an interface for interaction with the virtual body.
This
interface includes an HMI exposing the status and control of the DT as well
as acquiring the human behaviors with the system (Li et al., 2020a).
For a small summary on DTs, their purpose is to appear as a virtual ab-
straction from a physical asset or process. They utilize the technologies of
industry 4.0 to provide a variety of value and services to said asset or pro-
cess. There is no set definition for the exact description of a DT, but some
key generic technologies are used along with some general services provided,
which can be implemented to the DT as seen fit.
1.3
Goals
With the knowledge of the soft-tooling process chain and the values provided
by industry 4.0 and DTs, an important understanding is that not everything
s153475
Page 7 of 48
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
can be carried out in a single thesis. The final result is a functioning DT
built on top of the current soft-tooling process chain, which should indicate
the possibilities described in the previous sections. It is also worth noting
that the DT should cover the entire soft-tooling process chain from the DLP
step to the final part created by the injection molding step. This means
that while the DT covers the entire process, each machine will also have a
built-in virtual abstraction in the DT. The tools and technologies used to
create the DT can vary greatly, but given this is a computer science thesis,
the technologies used will reflect that.
Given the ambiguous nature of DTs, the proposed DT for this project have
been broken down to the values it should provide. These values are merely
based on observations of the current process chain set-up; mainly how oper-
ations of the run are done and how its surrounding data is handled:
V1: Simulated run through the entire process chain, running only on the
DT.
V2: Data management allowing for all the data in a run be processed,
cleaned, and stored.
V3: Visual interface of the current state of the process chain.
V4: Assistance in the decision making process through real-time state mon-
itoring.
V5: Connection to physical machines, reading data in real-time.
For V1, the idea is to have the simulation as the ground layer for the DT.
Through V1 the DT should manage a simulated run through the entire process
chain using a virtual environment. The simulated runs can be using either
custom data or mock data pulled straight from the machines during previous
runs. Being able to do simulated runs with either custom or mock data allows
for the application of machine learning models to gain greater insight into
the process chain without running the physical machines.
With the introduction of simulated runs, the natural value of V2 comes to
mind. With all the data going through the process chain, some kind of data
management needs to take place. A data collection and management system
was the primary motivator for creating this project, given the loose data
currently appearing in the process chain. Having a data management system
also allows for a more accessible data analysis application.
V1 and V2 can be seen as the backbone, integrated within the DT, but without
providing any value to the operator. An HMI showing the status and controls
s153475
Page 8 of 48
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
of the DT should ease the interfacing of an operator using the system. V3
seeks to provide this value.
Papers reviewing DTs frequently mention how they utilized services like, e.g.,
real-time state monitoring, intelligent algorithms, and data analysis (Li et al.,
2020a; Tao et al., 2018). For this project, the idea is to assist in the decision-
making process through V4, by helping the operator with recommendations
and warnings based on the current data readings from each step.
Finally, V5 aims to make the final connection between the physical system
and its virtual abstraction. Instead of having the DT run with virtual ab-
stractions of each step, it would instead read the actual real-time data from
each step.
To make the process of creating the DT more graspable, the project is divided
into milestones. Sub-goals have been added to each milestone, to further split
the task of creating the DT cf. table 1. The milestones roughly follow the
structure of the three parts of a DT: the physical, the virtual, and the data
connection tying it all together. The first milestone can be considered the
initial setup, which concerns reading the data from the machines in each step.
Separating the data from the machines early on can help in highlighting if
any machines need assistance from the manufacturer, which might take some
time for a response. In addition, knowing the data available and having a
database for storage allows for the use of mock data during simulation runs
of the DT.
s153475
Page 9 of 48
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
Milestone 1
Read sensor through OPC UA in
BOY XS
Get input files from CNC milling
and CMM steps
Modify DLP source code
Interface with Formlabs through
homemade connection
Create database fitting data model
Milestone 2
Make GUI for operators through
web application
Use mock data from machines in
simulation
Simulate a run
Connect
virtual
machine
to
database
Implement premature end run func-
tionality
Milestone 3
Create connection between virtual
part and physical machines
Identify suitable process parameters
Identify areas for error propagation
and mitigation
Assist in decision making process
Table 1: Milestones and sub-goals
Simulation runs are the focus of the second milestone. A virtual skeleton
needs to exist before introducing the exciting possibilities available in the
DT, e.g., data analysis, machine learning, and AI. Additionally, simulating
the process before connecting the virtual and physical parts will hopefully
ease collecting the process chain data in a collected system. This requires
setting up the simulation to appear as accurate to reality as possible while
using the data collected from the first milestone. A minor extra feature is
adding a premature end-run button. Should the operator notice an error
or just want to end a run prematurely, the functionality should be there to
handle that scenario.
Lastly, the final connection between the physical and virtual part can be
made. The third milestone brings the entire project together and begins the
optimization process through the DT. While the milestone is not inherently
optional, it is made with the thought that there might not be time to achieve
s153475
Page 10 of 48
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
all the goals of the DT. Optimistically, the points mentioned will bring the
most direct suggestions of improvement to the process chain, which is the
reason for having it. It is, however, structured over three milestones, as the
first two milestones will provide the foundation for the application of data
analysis.
Before moving along with the creation of the DT, I want to shed a little light
on how the milestones came to be. The initial goal of this thesis was only
to focus on the injection molding step. By creating a process surveillance
system, it should have a data collection system and utilize the data for error
propagation and mitigation. The original goals can be seen in Appendix A.
The plans for the thesis changed at an early stage in the project and shifted
its focus from just the injection molding step to the entire process chain.
This pivot happened because the initial idea was to work on modeling a real-
life process using software tools, for which the entire process chain seemed
to be a much better fit. Because the change happened early enough in the
project, the initial project plan had the entire process chain in mind, as seen
in Appendix B.
A second pivot happened around weeks 6-7. Camunda, an open-source work-
flow and decision automation platform was initially supposed to be the tool
used to manage the process chain throughout but did not seem to satisfy
the project’s needs. So, once again, the project changed to a custom build
software tool rather than Camunda, though not as substantial a change in
project goals as the first pivot. Nonetheless, the way to the final solution
had changed with a new goal in mind: the creation of the digital twin.
Together with the initial project plan, a risk analysis was also created at the
beginning of the project. The purpose was to view the risks associated with
the initial project plan. It can be seen in table 2.
RISK
PROBABILITY
IMPACT
CONSEQUENCE
Hardware problems
Low
High
Projected would be momentarily halted
Modelling process takes longer than anticipated
Medium
Low
Reduced time for implementations
Unable to connect to machines
Medium
High
Inability to directly incorporate in DT
Development of DT taking longer
High
Medium
Some goals are dropped
Pandemic complications
High
Varying
Limited ability to work in periods
Table 2: Risk analysis table.
The possibility of hardware problems always exists, though the chance of it
happening is considered very low. While the impact would be high when it
s153475
Page 11 of 48
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis – 1.0 Introduction
February 2, 2022
happens, it is relatively easy to get around by borrowing new hardware and
keeping material and code in a cloud service.
Modeling an entirely new process always takes time, but getting a proper
process chain is critical. As it happens early on in the project, there is plenty
of time to work around potential challenges in this step.
Inability to connect and read from the machines is one of the more severe
risks of the project, which would severely impact the ability to complete
the process chain. To mitigate this risk, connecting to the machines should
happen as early in the project as possible, giving ample time to potentially
contact the manufacturers.
Giving estimates on development tasks has always been diﬀicult, especially
from an early point in the project, where goals and ideas are constantly
evolving. A baseline of what is needed from the digital twin has been created
through the milestones and sub-goals to counter this somewhat. Should time
be running short, some of the latter goals could be omitted without ruining
the DT.
Finally, on the horrendous topic of the pandemic.
Its impact and conse-
quences can vary wildly from just a minor headache to being denied access
to the lab. There is no real reason to discuss this risk, as it has already been
wildly discussed the past two years, and the only way to hopefully prevent it
is by staying cautious.
s153475
Page 12 of 48
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis – 2.0 Related Work
February 2, 2022
2.0
Related Work
The open-ended nature of DTs has brought vastly different ways of realizing
a DT. Enterprise solutions from large corporations like IBM’s Watson IoT
platform (IBM, 2022), Amazon’s IoT device shadow (Amazon, 2022), and
Microsoft’s device twin (Microsoft, 2022) exist offering generalized solutions,
in which the physical system needs to fit the framework provided by the en-
terprise. Opposite of the large enterprise solutions exists the DTs proposed
through research fitting a specific process or system. For this project, the
large proprietary software vendors will not be considered, as they often exists
in closed-source products (Minerva et al., 2020) and lowers the interoperabil-
ity between different parts of a digital twin (Bonney et al., 2021).
2.1
Digital Twin in a Multi-Step Production Line
Cimino et al.
propose a practical implementation of a DT for an assem-
bly laboratory line based on over 50 different literature reviews of digital
twin application in manufacturing (Cimino et al., 2019).
The developed
DTs purpose is to monitor energy consumption in a production line built
inside an industry 4.0 laboratory. The production line consisted of seven
different assembly stations of a prototypical mobile phone. Each station is
equipped with a Band, PLC, Application module, and HMI and is controlled
by an MES (manufacturing execution system) using OPC UA, a machine-to-
machine communication standard.
Matlab and Simulink were used to model and acquire data in the production
following indications proposed by Fumagalli et al. (Fumagalli et al., 2019).
They use Matlab as their computing environment and Simulink as the corre-
sponding dynamic simulation environment. Through the OPC UA toolbox,
Cimino et al. extracted big data sets in real-time on Simulink with a simple
MATLAB function. However, they interestingly observed a delay between
the values displayed at the HMI of each station compared to the Simulink.
To fix this error, they introduced a new MATLAB function, making it pos-
sible to connect to every station’s PLC board only once at the start of the
simulation.
The Request soft-tooling process chain will likewise have a fragmented way
of communicating with its physical devices. Each step of the soft-tooling
process chain can be compared to the stations in Cimino et al.’s production
line. However, while the production line used by Cimino et al. already exists
in an interconnected system, the request soft-tooling process chain requires
the DT to be moved in-between each step. For this reason, the DT in this
s153475
Page 13 of 48
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis – 2.0 Related Work
February 2, 2022
project might not benefit from the same discovery, but a similar solution
might.
Another point argued by Cimino et al. is about the representation of a single
station in the DT. They argue that a replication of the production line should
be represented by the data extracted through each station. Furthermore, to
better represent the stations, a general identification of machine states fitting
to every station were presented as: Idle, Working Mode, Energy-safe Mode,
Emergency button triggered, and Machine Error. Using the machine states,
the following functionalities of their DT were created:
• Energy Consumption cmputation of the station;
• Collection of data read from PLCs and its visualization on a graphical
user interface (GUI);
• The tracking of each carrier moving around on the production line.
Extrapolating this way of replication to the Request soft-tooling process chain
can be done through its defined steps, where each step acts as the stations
in the DT from Cimino et al. The states for the soft-tooling process chain
can not follow the same states as those presented by Cimino et al., as each
machine in the process chain exists independently without a PLC board sup-
porting it. However, a generalization can be made, giving each machine in
each step three phases: before running, running, and after running.
2.2
Digital Twin using Modular Open-Source Framework
As stated in section 1.3, the DT built for this project will be done using
technologies reflecting of computer science study line. Specifically, most of
the personal experience comes from software development, with little to no
experience in hardware implementations. Based on this reasoning, a paper by
Bonney et al. (Bonney et al., 2021) demonstrating an open-source, modular,
and system independent framework using Python Flask is of great interest.
They refer to their tool as DTOP for digital twin operationl platform. Python
is used as the core language because of its widespread dominant usage in
web-based and scientific applications. Bonny et al. argue that even though
Python receives criticism about its speed, it can still run expensive algorithms
through accessible libraries like Numpy and CUDA. The argument of using
Python as the core language for its accessible libraries and general use in data
science is compelling in the context of this project’s DT. Furthermore, having
a skeleton in Python which can be extended with the vast amount of scientific-
and application libraries makes the implementation highly customizable.
s153475
Page 14 of 48
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis – 2.0 Related Work
February 2, 2022
The GUI presented in the framework by Bonney et al. is made with Python
Flask. Flask is a lightweight micro web framework written in python (Armin
Ronacher, 2022) and was chosen by Bonney et al. for its accessibility and thor-
ough documentation. Using Python Flask, they can write the tools provided
by their DTOP into two files: one containing the scientific code or functions
performing calculations based on the users’ inputs, and one gathering the
users’ inputs and invoking the calculations. One of their counter-arguments
against using a web application for the GUI was increased diﬀiculty manag-
ing cyber security. However, this should not be a problem for the proposed
DT in this project since the DT is running in an enclosed system with no
public interface.
The difference between the DTOP created by Bonney et al. and the proposed
DT in this project lies in the fact that they are creating a general open-source
framework for the application of DTs. Their DT is supposed to act as an
open-source version of the proprietary software solution offered by enterprises.
For this reason, their DT contain several tools used for various engineering
application categorized into self-contained tools, file IO tools, and 3rd party
simulation tools. In the case of this project’s DT, it fits under the category
of self-contained tools, as it is fully contained within itself and is designed
specifically for the Request soft-tooling process chain.
s153475
Page 15 of 48
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
3.0
Method
3.1
The Machines
This sections covers the machines and how to convert them to a virtual
abstraction.
3.1.1
Machine Data
Data represents the basis for DTs (Li et al., 2020a), meaning that in order
to achieve an ultra-realistic mapping between physical and virtual entities,
it will require a complete overview of all available data in the process chain.
The data can be separated into three categories: input, sensor, and output.
These categories are based on the machine states as proposed by (Cimino
et al., 2019). Input data is seen as the parameters given to the machine
before it starts doing its function, and output data is what is produced when
the machine finishes doing its job. Sensor data refers to the data streaming
from the machine while it is running.
The soft-tooling process chain always begins with the DLP step. A custom-
made open-source software developed at DTU operates the DLP. The soft-
ware handles everything related to the DLP process, including most of the
data appearing in this step.
The input data from the DLP gets loaded
through the software interface shown in figure 4. The red border has been
added to show some of the input data, which affects the process.
Starting the DLP will lead to the following data category: the sensor data.
Two groups of sensors produce data while the DLP is running. The first group
concerns the motor moving the build plate. The second group consists of
three sensors on top of the build plate, measuring applied force. The motors
sensors continuously stream the time since the DLP started, the motor torque,
and the motor’s position in relation to its y-axis. After finishing the print, the
DLP software will produce a log file containing the settings used during the
print, a log file populated with all the motor sensor readings, and, naturally,
the actual mold itself.
s153475
Page 16 of 48
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
Figure 4: Open-source software running DLP
Following the DLP is the washing and curing step by the machines from
Formlabs. Data-wise, they are reasonably straightforward. The cure takes
temperature and time as inputs, whereas the wash only takes time.
Measurement and milling are also reasonably simple steps in regards to the
data. The CMM outputs either a .pdf or a .csv file of the measurements. The
CNC milling is based upon a .gCode file as input and produces no output.
Lastly, an OPC UA server built into the BOY XS IM machine exposes all the
relevant data for the injection molding step. The relevant data includes sensor
readings such as current pressure, write operations like setting a clamping
force, and general system information such as the name of the material used.
The IM step outputs only physical parts but provides no output data.
OPC UA is a data exchange standard used in industrial communication
to enhance the interoperability between hardware devices and automation
software through its framework. It acts as a platform-independent service-
oriented framework utilizing either a client-server or a publish-subscribe
model (OPC Foundation, 2022a). OPC UA defines nodes and their struc-
ture in an OPC UA server’s address space through its information model.
Similar to object-oriented programming, the information model defines types,
s153475
Page 17 of 48
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
which can be instantiated and extended (OPC Foundation, 2022b). In brief,
the information model is a collection of nodes and their references. A node
is uniquely identified by its id and acts as an entity representing informa-
tion, which in the case of the BOY XS can be sensor readings. Connect-
ing to an OPC UA server is done through an OPC UA client, some being
GUI frameworks like UaExpert, others being programming language-specific
frameworks.
A complete overview of the data consumed and produced by the process
chain can be seen in table 3. The Data was found by reading each machine’s
documentation and interfacing with the machines. Reading data from the
DLP step was generally done from software controlling the DLP, though the
force sensors from the build plate required a custom python script.
The
Formlabs machines for the washing and curing steps run on a closed-source
machine with no built-in way of interfacing besides its physical controls. This
is circumvented through a project made specifically for the Request soft-
tooling project. This project solders an Arduino directly on the Formlabs
Wash’s PCB, allowing it to control it through a PLC. Interfacing with the
CNC milling machine (Pocket NC v2) was done through Ethernet. Using
the Pocket NC v2 software tool allowed for control of the machine using a
gCode file. The CMM machine (DeMeet 400) is connected with a computer
in the lab running its proprietary software through a serial port. The IM
machine (BOY XS) was read through its OPC UA server while connected
via Ethernet.
s153475
Page 18 of 48
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
DLP data
Input:
Parameters, image stack
Sensor:
Force
readings
on
build
plate, motor torque, posi-
tion, and time
Output:
Log file of motor sensor
readings and log file of
parameters used (physical
mould)
IM data
Input:
Default settings
Sensor:
Sensor readings, managed
through OPC UA server
Output:
None (physical parts)
Wash data
Input:
Time
Sensor:
None
Output:
None
Cure data
Input:
Time and temperature
Sensor:
None
Output:
None
Measuring data
Input:
None
Sensor:
None
Output:
.csv or .pdf measurements
Milling data
Input:
gCode file
Sensor:
None
Output:
None
Table 3: All available data from the process chain
Ideally, in a real production setting, the DT should be connected to each ma-
chine simultaneously, making the read/write process much more stationary.
However, given the current setup of each step, connecting to every machine
in the process chain simultaneously is too convoluted since it would require
too many cables and dongles and take up too much space in the lab. There-
fore, each machine connection will happen sequentially but for the sake of
this project will still be seen as an interconnected process chain.
3.1.2
Digital Twin Model for Machines
The model used for the digital twin can be of any sort, as long as it is
a suﬀiciently accurate representation of the physical objects (Wright and
Davidson, 2020). The primary motivator for this project comprised of getting
and utilizing the data throughout soft-tooling process chain. Based on this
motivator, a suﬀiciently accurate representation of the physical process chain
s153475
Page 19 of 48
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
is seen as the data it contains. The data should be tied to the step it comes
from, providing a virtual representation through the data. The DT should
work sequentially through each step in the process chain and manage the
data happening for each machine in each step. To give an example using
the step of DLP 3D printing, a virtual abstraction should accurately accept
the parameters and image stack, stream the sensor data, and lastly, produce
the log files present in the real world DLP. The idea, using the DLP step, is
shown in figure 5.
Figure 5: Creating the virtual abstraction of the DLP
The laptop shown in the physical process chain runs the software tool con-
trolling the DLP. The DT should acquire the same data from the DLP as
represented in table 3 and should do so at the same time it happens. For
example, when the DLP begins its printing process, the DT should already
have received the input parameters and start receiving sensor data.
s153475
Page 20 of 48
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
3.2
Building the Digital Twin
Based on the varying sub-goals of the milestones, the language used to create
the DT needs to act as a Swiss army knife, in the sense that it needs to
provide functionality in a lot of different areas. Given the data-heavy nature
of this project and the concept of DTs, it makes sense to use Python, as
Python is one of the most used languages for working with data (Şahinaslan,
2019). Python also works as a general-purpose language, with many libraries
and tools beyond data science, especially when it comes to interfacing with
different systems (Fox, 2018). Finally, based on the DT created by (Bonney
et al., 2021) described in section 2.2 proves that python can be used for a
DT.
3.2.1
Web Application Through Python
Creating the HMI for the DT is done through a web application with Python
Flask. The reasoning behind creating it as a web application is of time con-
cerns. Coming from a background with close to zero knowledge in front-end
development of any kind, the simplest solution seems to be running the GUI
(graphical user interface) through a web application. Python web applica-
tion frameworks fit into three categories: full-Stack frameworks, micro frame-
works (also called non-full-stack frameworks), and Asynchronous frameworks
(Thangarajah, 2019). Full-stack frameworks help by providing most, if not
all, of the technology stack, from interface to data storage, including basic
components such as form validation and template layouts. Micro frameworks
exist as a lightweight counterpart to the full-stack framework, primarily just
providing the base ”application server” with some micro frameworks also
providing parts of the technology stack (The Python Software Foundation,
2022). Lastly, the asynchronous frameworks allow for large sets of concur-
rent connections (Thangarajah, 2019). Python Flask, a micro framework,
has been chosen as the web application for the DT. Since the web applica-
tion is supposed to act as a GUI for the DT in a localized setting, i.e., an
enclosed factory setting, the micro framework provided a more straightfor-
ward baseline, which can be extended. Python Flask was created in 2010
by Pocoo, a team of open source developers, and is now maintained by The
Pallets Project, served under the BSD license. The idea behind Flask is to
create a solid web application foundation through its two major components,
Werkzeug and Jinja2 (Relan, 2019). Werkzeug provides routing, debugging,
and a comprehensive web server gateway interface (WSGI) using HTTP as
its communication protocol. Jinja2 is a template engine combining templates
with a data model to produce client-side templates.
s153475
Page 21 of 48
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
The general structure of Flask looks as follows:
project folder
static
scipt.js
style.css
templates
main.html
app.py
As its name suggests, the static folder contains the web application’s static
content, e.g., image files, a javascript file, and a CSS file. The templates folder
contains the HTML templates, and the app.py exists as the main starting
point of the web application. Figure 6 shows the general structure of routing
in Flask. Routing bind URLs to python functions through the @app.route()
tag. If a server is running on port 5000 on localhost, using the route /hello
from figure 6 to access localhost:5000/hello will write ”Hello, World” in the
browser.
Figure 6: Hello World using Flask
Source: https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.0.x/quickstart/
Python Flask should technically be enough to create the entire GUI, but a few
extra extensions have been added to ease the development. The Bootstrap ex-
tension has been added to help with the web application’s styling. It describes
itself as ”the world’s most popular front-end open-source toolkit”(Bootstrap
Core Team, 2022) and provides valuable styling features such as grid-based
layout, dropdowns, and progress bars. The main point of adding Bootstrap
was to avoid re-inventing the wheel regarding layout and styling.
Looking back to the value of real-time state monitoring, the idea is to update
the DTs GUI with the latest sensor readings constantly. The Turbo-Flask
framework has been added to the flask web server to add a more dynamic data
delivery option. Turbo-Flask is an extension to flask integrating the turbo.js
JavaScript library. Turbo provides complimentary techniques through four
s153475
Page 22 of 48
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
modules, focusing on creating the speed and agility of a single-page appli-
cation without actually having to write any JavaScript (Basecamp, 2022).
Having never worked with JavaScript before, avoiding it as much as possible
was the primary motivator for choosing this framework. The four modules
Turbo.js provides are:
• Turbo Drive: By transparently updating pages in the background this
module accelerates page navigation.
• Turbo Frames: Wraps individual HTML segments into turbo frames,
which allows for each segment to be updated, without changing or
reloading the rest of the page.
• Turbo Streaming: Lets the server-side application submit HTML frag-
ments to client-side.
• Turbo Native: Wraps the web application in a native iOS or Android
app.
Turbo realizes the four modules by creating a transparent WebSocket con-
nection between the web server and client.
3.2.2
Database management system
With knowledge of the data in the process chain, the programming language
used, and the web application framework, it is time to introduce a database
management system (DBMS). The DBMS is used to collect the data pro-
duced by the process chain. The general idea is to put the data from a single
run in relation to each other through a run id, making it possible to look up
the relevant data used throughout the run.
A great deal of technologies have already been used to store data in manufac-
turing and cyber-physical systems including XML (Souza et al., 2019), Mon-
goDB (Angrish et al., 2017), and relational databases like MySQL (Longo
et al., 2019), and SQLite (Zheng et al., 2018). Based on personal preference
and experience, the DBMS system built for the DT will be through a rela-
tional DBMS. The specific DBMS technology chosen is SQLite. SQLite is
a simple, lightweight DBMS when compared to its more feature-rich coun-
terparts such as MySQL and PostgreSQL (Oracle, 2022; PostgreSQL Global
Development Group, 2022). Features missing in SQLite, compared to Post-
greSQL, includes the lack of ability to handle simultaneous access by multiple
users, missing security features, and many supported data types. None of
these differences are needed for the DT proposed in this project, making
s153475
Page 23 of 48
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis – 3.0 Method
February 2, 2022
SQLite an obvious lightweight choice, which is already integrated into the
python language by default.
SQLite has also been proven to be able to
manage real-time stream processing throughput of up to 60.000 records a
minute using a dual-core CPU, making it more than fast enough to handle
the process data (Yamamoto and Koizumi, 2013).
s153475
Page 24 of 48
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
4.0
Implementation
This section aims to elaborate on the practicalities of some of the implemen-
tations. The focus of the implementation phase followed the milestones given
for this project, starting with milestone 1 and progressing onward. The fo-
cus was primarily on creating a proper simulation of the process chain before
coupling the DT with its machines. The code written in this thesis can be
found through Appendix C.
4.1
The web server
Going through the entire web server’s code will not make sense, but I still
wish to shed light on some of its most essential aspects.
In general, each step in the process chain has three states: before starting
machine -> machine running -> after after running the machine. The three
states of each step take the corresponding categories of data found in section
3.1.1.
Managing the overall status of the system is done through Python Flask’s
session variables. A session variable is similar to a cookie, with the main
difference being that the session variable is stored on the server. The session
object is a dictionary object containing a key-value pair of session variables
and their associated values, which can be accessed directly in the HTML
templates. An example of how session variables are used can be seen in figure
7 showing the route called by the client when starting the curing step (but
not the cure machine). Line 262-264 updates three different session variables
keeping track of the state of the DT. session['currentstep'] = 3 changes
the session variable currentstep to 3, based on a previously defined dictionary
which maps step 3 to being the cure step.
A dictionary of each step has been created to have a specific reference between
the name of a step and an id. The dictionary is set up as follows:
machine_steps = {
1:
”DLP” ,
2:
”Wash” ,
3:
”Cure” ,
4:
” Meassure ” ,
5:
” Milling ” ,
6:
” I n j e c t i o n
Moulding ” ,
7:
” choose ”
}
s153475
Page 25 of 48
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
Step 7, choose, is an extra step added used only for logic purposes when the
operator has to choose between measuring, milling, and injection molding.
The ”machine_running” session variable on line 264 in figure 7 is used to
update if the machine of the current step is running or not. As the route
used is the beginning of the curing step, ”machine_running” is set to false.
After the machine is started, another route called /startcure handles the
logic when the machine starts, including flipping the session variable ”ma-
chine_running” to true. Finally, the last stage happens when the machine
has stopped running. This is registered when the next step begins, signifying
the end of the previous step, and can be seen happening on line 261 in figure
7 through the method update_machine().
Figure 7: Begining of cure step through route ’/cure’
The method update_machine() is a helper method introduced to manage
machines in the run.
Its parameters contain the currentstep variable de-
scribed earlier and a Boolean flag, where True means starting, and False
means ending. The update_machine() method queries the database, tying
the step together with the run. Section 4.4 about the database layer goes
into more detail describing how it is tied together.
Looking at lines 268-270 in figure 7 is the management of a timetable. Each
step’s start and end time is saved in the database for further insights into pro-
cess optimization. The timetable is saved as a dict in a session variable aptly
named ”timetable”. In the case of lines 268-270, the timetable is updated
with the time of the wash step’s ending time, since starting the curing step
means the end of the washing step. Furthermore, keeping a timetable allows
s153475
Page 26 of 48
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
the DT to try and predict when each step should happen. The timetable is
shown to the operator through a table in the GUI and shows both the actual
and expected time of each step. Prediction of how long a step lasts is based
on a timetable.csv file in the static folder containing an approximate time
for each step. A random value spanning a limited range is either added or
subtracted to the approximate time when creating the timetable predictions.
Using the timetable.csv allows for easier customization of time approxima-
tions by the operator. Figure 8 shows the code for setting the expected times
of the curing step. It is an excerpt of the create_estimated_timetable()
function used at the beginning of a new run to calculate the expected timings
of every step.
Figure 8: Setting the expected times for the cure step
The prediction is simple in the sense that it assumes that machine steps
always happen sequentially in the order dictated by the ”machine_steps”
dictionary.
On lines 138-139, when calculating the expected start of the
curing step, the value expected_time containing the time spent up un-
til now is added to the time in between machines and a random integer.
TIME_BETWEEN_MACHINES is a set value defined in the code, which is added
to account for moving the mold in between each step. Calculating the ex-
pected end time of the curing step on lines 141-142 uses the already known
expected_time and adds the approximate time from the timetable.csv. Usu-
ally, the expected end time would include adding a random number for vari-
ety, but the cure and wash steps have specific time input, removing the need
for padding. An example of the final timetable can be seen in figure 9, in a
run currently on the wash step’s running state.
s153475
Page 27 of 48
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
Figure 9: Timetable used in the GUI
4.1.1
Front-end
There are a couple of interesting things to note about the implementation of
the front-end layer, which will be described in this section. Currently, the
session variables and their use have been described concerning the web server.
However, their true purpose shows when used with the Jinja2 templating
engine. For example, in figure 10 from the Control.html template, the session
variables are used in combination with Jinja’s code blocks. A code block is
surrounded by {% %} tags and allows for simple code execution in HTML files.
The code from figure 10 shows the steps the current run has been through.
Its output can be seen in figure 13 in the following section.
Figure 10: Sessions in the font-end
Line 57 in figure 10 shows another use of the session variables, namely through
Jinja’s variable block {{ }}. A for-loop goes through the session['machines']
variable, which contains a list of all the steps the current run has been
through. Using Jinja’s variable tag, the session variable session['machine_steps'
containing the name-to-id dictionary of steps, gets the name of the current
machine in the for-loop through its id.
s153475
Page 28 of 48
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
The general structure of the templates relies on Jinja’s include keyword and
Turbo Frames to decompose pages into independent contexts. An example
of how they are utilized can be seen in figure 11 showing the main HTML
document running the front-end. Using Jinja’s include keyword allows an-
other HTML template to be built into the current template. In the case of
figure 11, it shows the entire body of the main HTML template running the
GUY (not including some extra scripts). The header.html inputs the header
on the page, and controls.html inputs the three general modules of the DT
described in the next section.
Figure 11: The main HTML page
Rendering templates through Flask is done with the render_template()
function. However, Turbo changes the behavior of how templates are de-
livered by introducing Turbo Frames, as seen on lines 19 and 21 in figure
11. As this is happening in the main HTML template, the Turbo Frame is
named main. When the main page’s content is to be changed, the web server
streams the content into the Turbo Frame named main updating only the
contents in the Turbo Frame. An example of this can be seen in the return
call of the last line in figure 7 with:
turbo.stream(turbo.update(control_template(), 'main')). Using
turbo.update() in a turbo.stream() targeting the 'main' template, the
'main' Turbo Frame’s content is updated with the contents of the
control_template(). The control_template() function is simply just a
call to the render_template() function, returning the control.html tem-
plate.
s153475
Page 29 of 48
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
4.2
User interface
The HMI is built with simplicity in mind. It contains three modules: a run
overview, machine overview, and timetables overview. When launching the
DT, the first screen the user will be met with is shown in figure 12. The
DT can start the next run through the run overview module as no run has
started. The checkbox saying ”Run as simulation” is used to decide if the
DT should run parallel to the physical machines or if the DT should work as
a simulation.
Figure 12: The main interface before starting a run
Through the Run overview module, the operator will be presented with rele-
vant information about the current run. Figure 13 shows the Run overview
module at the DLP step wile in the running state.
s153475
Page 30 of 48
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
Figure 13: Run overview with DLP step in running state
The Run overview module exists as a general overview, presenting the same
information no matter the step. To present a more machine-specific overview,
the fittingly named Machine overview provides an overview including control
of the current machine step. Every step has a custom overview fitting to
the data required or provided by the current machine. Figure 14 shows the
Machine overview module when at the DLP step during its running state.
For the sake of development, the button ”Next step” will bring the user to
the next step.
Figure 14: Machine overview with DLP step in running state
4.3
Sensor data for simulation
Creating the mapping from the physical steps into their virtual abstractions
was generally reasonably straightforward, given that most of the data is static,
i.e., fixed data that does not change after being collected. However, the DLP
s153475
Page 31 of 48
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
and IM steps contain dynamic data through their sensor data streams. In
order to create the simulation as close as possible to reality, the sensor data
from both steps are needed to create a mock version for simulation runs.
Using sensor data collected from the machines should also ease connecting
the virtual and physical parts.
Using mock data from the DLP motor is straightforward, as the current
configuration of the software outputs the sensor readings from a print job into
a .txt file. Using the output from a previous print from the DLP step allows
the virtual abstraction to mock the motors sensor readings with accurate
data. An excerpt of the motor sensor output can be seen in figure 15. From
the excerpt, the ”Projector_O;” and ”Projector_Off” indicate the print of
one layer, which can also be seen from the position. The position increases
when lowering the build plate into the VAT since the motor is zeroed towards
the top of the DLP.
Figure 15: Excerpt of DLP motor reading
The three sensors measuring force on the built plate proved much more diﬀi-
cult to read since they are not incorporated in the software tool running the
DLP. The simulation instead creates mock data by taking the CPU load of
the system over three different time frames.
Getting sensor node.get_value() data from the IM step was done through
an OPC client in python using the framework called opcua-asyncio by FreeOpcUa:
https://github.com/FreeOpcUa/opcua-asyncio. The opcua-asyncio frame-
works provides both OPC UA server and client functionality. Connecting
s153475
Page 32 of 48
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
to the OPC UA server using this framework is done through a single line
of code: Client(url_of_server). Through the OPC UA client, the func-
tion client.get_node("nodeid") gets a node from the BOY XS. Using the
nodes built in function node.get\_value() reads the information present in
the current node. For example, consider the following code snippet:
client = Client(url)
node = client.get_node("20004")
value = node.get_value()
Provided the URL is the correct one for the OPC UA server on the BOY XS,
the above code snippet would read the data on the node with the id of 20004.
It would read the current clamping force in newtons, as this value has been
tied into node 20004. The node ids in the OPC UA server ranges from 20001
to 20047. When running the client script, the script creates a list of all the
nodes on the server, then continuously calls client.get_value(nodes_list),
which returns the value of each node list.
Figure 16: Reading nodes from OPC UA server in BOY XS
This can be seen in figure 16 on line 59. The values are then loaded into a list,
which upon a keyboard interrupt will be converted to a comma-separated .txt
file as shown on lines 69-72 in figure 16. Each row in the .txt file represents
a new reading of all values, and each column represents nodes 1 to 47 going
from left to right.
Besides having an OPC UA client script, a server script was also made. The
server script creates an OPC UA server acting as a basic variant of the server
s153475
Page 33 of 48
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
in the BOY XS. It uses measured data from a previous run of the BOY XS
and exposes it through the same node id’s. The OPC UA server will then
act as the BOY XS during simulation runs. To allow for this functionality,
the client script contains the variable is_simulation, changing the URL of
the OPC UA server between the BOY XS’s and the locally hosted OPC UA
server.
4.4
Database layer
Going from start to end in the process chain is defined as a run.
What
connects the data throughout the process chain is the current run. Combined
with the data found in section 3.1.1, most of the database tables can be
created. In general, each machine got its own table where each row contains
a parameter or sensor reading and a unique run id. Figure 17 shows the
logical design of the database. In the logical design figure, the name _params
suggests the table contains specific machine parameters. dlp_motor is used
for the motors sensor readings.
Since the data from the IM step is read
through a continuous stream on the OPC UA server, the table was aptly
named im_data. It should also be noted that dlp_params and im_data have
been shortened down for the simplicity of the figure since showing 47 different
columns in one table would not make for a great figure. The last two tables
are run and machine. A run contains many machines, and a machine can be
in many runs, creating a many-to-many relation. To avoid a many-to-many
relation, the junction table run_machine is used to track which machines
have been used in the run. A unique id was added, as the same machine can
appear multiple times in the same run, making a composite key unusable.
s153475
Page 34 of 48
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
Figure 17: Logical Design of Database
The database itself is embedded in the root of the project folder. Whenever
the database connection is needed, it happens through the get_db() function
as seen in figure 18. When a connection is made to the database for the
first time, get_db() calls connect_db() to get a database connection. The
connection is then stored in the g object, a global namespace provided by
Flask.
s153475
Page 35 of 48
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis – 4.0 Implementation
February 2, 2022
Figure 18: Methods to get database context
s153475
Page 36 of 48
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis – 5.0 Discussion
February 2, 2022
5.0
Discussion
5.1
Validation of proposed values
This thesis proposed the creation of a DT on the following set of value,
described in section 1.3:
V1: Simulated run through the entire process chain, running only on the
DT.
V2: Data management allowing for all the data in a run be processed,
cleaned, and stored.
V3: Visual interface of the current state of the process chain.
V4: Assistance in the decision making process through real-time state mon-
itoring.
V5: Connection to physical machines, reading data in real-time.
Milestones 1-3 and their individual sub-goals were introduced to assist in the
realization of the values. A simulated run of the entire process were solved
using a web application allowing an operator to go through the different
stages of each step. However, V1 cannot be seen as provided by the DT,
since the simulated process chain is not completed. The replication method
by (Cimino et al., 2019) mentioned in section 1.3, consisted of making a
replication of each physical step in the process chain represented by the data
from the step. For the milling, meassuring, and IM steps, this method of
creating a virtual abstraction is not present in the DT. The ground work
exists, by having the routing function starting each step, but precise data
does not exist.
This was sadly due to time-constraints, making the final
steps of the process chain incomplete. Nonetheless, it can still be argued
that the value is partially provided, as the a virtual abstraction exists of
part of the process chain. For V2 the database model was created based on
the discovered data in each process. Hence, V2 can be seen as provided by
the DT. A visual interface was created providing several different overviews
of a run, as shown in figure 9, 12, 13, and 14 fitting the expectations of
V3. Splitting each step into three phases (states), as suggested by Cimino et
al. (Cimino et al., 2019) in section 1.3, assists in providing a more specific
overview of the exact state of the system at any given moment.
V4 was
supposed to be realized through the sub-goal of milestone 3. Although, since
a fully functioning process chain simulation was never completed, the entirety
of milestone 3 never came to be. Theoretically, the idea was to implement
s153475
Page 37 of 48
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis – 5.0 Discussion
February 2, 2022
V4 in the same way as (Bonney et al., 2021) described in section 2.0. Using
the routes of flask, was giving the users input as well as the sensor data,
which should be fed into the scientific code section, performing the real-time
state monitoring. Their practical implementation can be seen in the GitHub
project containing the code of the DTOP (Bonney et al., 2022). Nevertheless,
V4 is not realized in this DT, not necessarily because of the proposed DT,
but because the milestone including V4 did not get reached. As mentioned
for V4, the sub-goals of milestone 3 never came to be. This also impacted
V5, as the sub-goal of ”create connection between virtual part and physical
machines” was a major part of it. V5 can be seen as being split in two parts,
starting with the exploratory phase in milestone 1. Connected and reading
from each machine were part of the preliminary steps before being able to
connect the DT with its physical counterpart. This preliminary phase was
done through section 3.1.1 when describing the data. The actual connection
between the DT and the physical system is seen as the second phase of V5.
5.2
Implementation limitations
Connecting to each machine proved more diﬀicult than expected and was
different for every step. The methods used to interface with the machines
in the process chain consists of Ethernet, OPC UA over Ethernet, serial
port through computer in the lab, custom built software through laptop in
the lab, custom made python script for force sensors, and a custom built
combined PLC and Arduino solution. Even though the process chain was
seen as being interconnected just for the sake of this project, connecting to
each machine sequentially is sub-optimal. In the created DT by Cimino et al.
mentioned in section 2.1, the production line consists of seven stations. Each
station contains a PLC which the DT communicates with through an OPC
UA server. Having a similar standardized communication method through
an OPC UA server would remove the need for a new connection method
for every step. Furthermore, giving each step a PLC could standardize the
process chain even more, though not strictly needed.
Creating dynamic content in the GUI provided many problems. When a
machine started, the web server was supposed to spawn a new thread, man-
aging the real-time machine data. Updating the GUI could then be done
through the Turbo Flask framework. The spawned thread would invoke a
method, which would then continuously push content updates to the appro-
priate Turbo Frame. Though, as it turns out, Turbo’s functionality can only
be used inside of the app.route context, leaving the ideal solution to re-
turn an error. One way of solving this issue could be by using JavaScript to
s153475
Page 38 of 48
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis – 5.0 Discussion
February 2, 2022
manage dynamic content instead.
It is not easy giving a proper reflection on the methods used since the mile-
stones realizing the values were not completed. Table 4 display the milestones,
showing which sub-goals were completed ✓, not completed χ, and partially
completed (✓).
Milestone 1
✓Read sensor through OPC UA in
BOY XS
✓Get input files from CNC milling
and CMM steps
χ Modify DLP source code
✓Interface with Formlabs through
homemade connection
✓
Create
database
fitting
data
model
Milestone 2
✓Make GUI for operators through
web application
(✓) Use mock data from machines
in simulation
(✓) Simulate a run
✓
Connect
virtual
machine
to
database
χ Implement premature end run
functionality
Milestone 3
χ Create connection between virtual
part and physical machines
χ Identify suitable process parame-
ters
χ Identify areas for error propaga-
tion and mitigation
χ Assist in decision making process
Table 4: Updated milestones and goals
s153475
Page 39 of 48
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis – 6.0 Conclusion
February 2, 2022
6.0
Conclusion
This project sought to propose a digital twin for the Request soft-tooling
process chain at DTU. The virtual abstraction used in the digital twin was
created based on the data in the process chain. Separating the data into
input, sensor, and output categories allowed it to be matched with the three
corresponding states of each step: before running the machine, machine run-
ning and after running the machine.
Python was chosen as the language behind the digital twin with the philos-
ophy of using lightweight modular tools as a working skeleton. The idea of
using a modular setup based around Python came from (Bonney et al., 2021)
but deviated from their idea by creating the digital twin as a custom solution
fitting the Request soft-tooling process chain.
Using the micro framework Python Flask, a simplistic GUI presented an op-
erator with the essential run information. It shows an overview of the current
state of the process through a machine-specific overview combined with an
overall run overview. Additionally, it provides the operator with a time es-
timation of the process chain based on a customizable CSV file in tandem
with a simple calculation. Flask also provides a framework separating the
web interface from the main Python code, theoretically allowing for a more
straightforward application of mathematical calculations and data science.
An embedded database was created using SQLite to store all the relevant
data in the process chain.
Connecting to each machine in the process chain was an incredibly compli-
cated process, as every machine had a different way of interfacing. Though
initially one of the goals of this project, a uniform data acquisition system
using data exchange protocols would theoretically provide a ton of value.
Originally the digital twin’s quantification should be done by comparing its
proposed and actual values. Therefore, getting a definite answer to whether
the proposed digital twin in this thesis provides value to the soft-tooling
process chain is not possible at its current stage. Looking at the singular
components like the OPC UA client, the created database, and the GUI, it
should, however, be clear that the soft-tooling process chain can gain value
from a digital twin.
s153475
Page 40 of 48
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis – 6.0 Conclusion
February 2, 2022
6.1
Future Work
The apparent mention is the completion of all milestones proposed in the
project. However, a few exciting improvements exist when focusing on what
the DT can provide past the values proposed in the project. One of the most
critical future works is implementing bi-directional communication between
the DT and the physical system. For this project, the main focus consisted of
pulling the data from each machine. The DT takes input from the user when
doing a simulation run, meaning the ground layer for bi-directional commu-
nication already exists. Having the DT control the process chain would allow
a standardized software tool, running on the same platform throughout the
run. Together with bi-directional communication, creating an interconnected
system would assist in streamlining the process chain. Equipping each step
with a PLC as the stations in the production line of (Cimino et al., 2019)
could assist in realizing the bi-directional communication between the DT
and each step. Furthermore, installing an OPC UA server managing the en-
tire process chain through their PLCs would only require the DT to connect
that one OPC UA server for collective access to the process chain.
Another interesting potential improvement could be in the form of a DT built
with A 3D model. (Qin et al., 2021) proposed a three-step systematic method
of constructing a 3D digital twin for intelligent manufacturing. In short, the
first step includes creating a high-fidelity geometric model. In the second step,
the physical properties are attached to the geometric model, and the natural
motion of the physical device gets simulated on the geometrical model. Lastly,
the model is synchronized with its physical counterpart to form a digital twin.
However, an important note is that the three-step method is only applied to
a single machine rather than a process chain.
s153475
Page 41 of 48
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis – REFERENCES
February 2, 2022
References
Amazon (2022). Amazon device shadow. https://docs.aws.amazon.com/
iot/latest/developerguide/iot-device-shadows.html.
Angrish, A., Starly, B., Lee, Y. S., and Cohen, P. H. (2017). A flexible data
schema and system architecture for the virtualization of manufacturing
machines (vmm). Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 45:236–247.
Armin Ronacher (2022). Python flask. https://flask.palletsprojects.
com/en/2.0.x/.
Basecamp (2022). Turbo.js. https://turbo.hotwired.dev/.
Beazley, D. M. (2009). Python essential reference. Addison-Wesley Profes-
sional.
Bonney, M. S., de Angelis, M., Wagg, D., and Borgo, M. D. (2021). Digi-
tal twin operational platform for connectivity and accessibility using flask
python. 2021 Acm/ieee International Conference on Model Driven Engi-
neering Languages and Systems Companion (models-c), pages 237–241.
Bonney, M. S., de Angelis, M., Wagg, D., and Borgo, M. D. (2022). Github
containing the created dtop by bonney et al.
https://github.com/
Digital-Twin-Operational-Platform/Cristallo.
Bootstrap Core Team (2022). Boostrap. https://getbootstrap.com/.
Cimino, C., Negri, E., and Fumagalli, L. (2019).
Review of digital twin
applications in manufacturing. Computers in Industry, 113:103130.
Cinar, Z. M., Nuhu, A. A., Zeeshan, Q., and Korhan, O. (2020). Digital
twins for industry 4.0: A review. Industrial Engineering in the Digital
Disruption Era, pages 193–203.
Czwick, C., Kugler, S., Greven, J., and Anderl, R. (2019). Communication
protocol application for enhanced connectivity of sensors, machines and
systems in additive manufacturing and production networks. Ifip Advances
in Information and Communication Technology, 565:136–145.
Fox, C. (2018). Python for data science primer. Data Science for Transport,
pages 15–25.
FreeOpcUa (2022). Opc ua framework for python. https://github.com/
FreeOpcUa/opcua-asyncio.
s153475
Page 42 of 48
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis – REFERENCES
February 2, 2022
Fumagalli, L., Polenghi, A., Negri, E., and Roda, I. (2019). Framework for
simulation software selection. Journal of Simulation, 13(4):286–303.
Grelle, P. F. (2005). Injection molding. Handbook of Plastic Processes, pages
1–123.
Hwang, J. S. (2016). The fourth industrial revolution (industry 4.0): Intelli-
gent manufacturing. Smt Surface Mount Technology Magazine, 31(7):10–
15.
IBM (2022).
Ibm watson iot platform.
https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/
IoT/GA_information_management/ga_im_device_twin.html#device_
twins.
Kenett, R. and Coleman, S. (2021). Data and the fourth industrial revolution.
Significance, 18(3):8–9.
Kurasov, D. A. (2021). Computer-aided manufacturing: Industry 4.0. Iop
Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 1047(1):012153.
Li, P., Zhu, H., and Luo, L. (2020a). Digital twin technology in intelligent
manufacturing. Proceedings - 2020 2nd International Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence and Advanced Manufacture, Aiam 2020, pages 195–200.
Li, P., Zhu, H., and Luo, L. (2020b). Digital twin technology in intelligent
manufacturing. Proceedings - 2020 2nd International Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence and Advanced Manufacture, Aiam 2020, pages 195–200.
Longo, F., Nicoletti, L., and Padovano, A. (2019). Ubiquitous knowledge
empowers the smart factory: The impacts of a service-oriented digital
twin on enterprises’ performance. Annual Reviews in Control, 47:221–236.
Microsoft (2022). Microsoft device twins. https://docs.microsoft.com/
en-us/azure/iot-hub/iot-hub-devguide-device-twins.
Minerva, R., Lee, G. M., and Crespi, N. (2020). Digital twin in the iot con-
text: A survey on technical features, scenarios, and architectural models.
Proceedings of the Ieee, 108(10):1785–1824.
Negri, E., Fumagalli, L., and Macchi, M. (2019). A review of the roles of
digital twin in cps-based production systems. Value Based and Intelligent
Asset Management, pages 291–307.
NI-DAQmx (2021). Python api for interacting with ni-daqmx driver. https:
//github.com/ni/nidaqmx-python/.
s153475
Page 43 of 48
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis – REFERENCES
February 2, 2022
OPC Foundation (2022a). Opc ua. https://opcfoundation.org/about/
opc-technologies/opc-ua/.
OPC Foundation (2022b). Opc ua specification. https://opcfoundation.
org/developer-tools/specifications-unified-architecture.
Oracle (2022). Mysql documentation. https://dev.mysql.com/doc/.
PostgreSQL Global Development Group (2022). Postgresql documentation.
https://www.postgresql.org/docs/.
Qin, H., Wang, H., Zhang, Y., and Lin, L. (2021). Constructing digital twin
for smart manufacturing. In 2021 IEEE 24th International Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), pages 638–
642.
Relan, K. (2019). Building REST APIs with Flask : Create Python Web
Services with MySQL. Apress.
Şahinaslan, E. (2019). Review of the most popular data science programs
used today: python and r.
Saxena, P., Bissacco, G., Meinert, K. ￿., Danielak, A. H., Méndez Ribó, M.,
and Pedersen, D. B. (2020). Soft tooling process chain for the manufactur-
ing of micro-functional features on molds used for molding of paper bottles.
Journal of Manufacturing Processes, 54:129–137.
Shafto, M., Conroy, M., Doyle, R., Glaessgen, E., Kemp, C., LeMoigne,
J., and Wang, L. (2012). Modeling, simulation, information technology
& processing roadmap. National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
32:1–38.
Souza, V., Cruz, R., Silva, W., Lins, S., and Lucena, V. (2019). A digital
twin architecture based on the industrial internet of things technologies.
2019 Ieee International Conference on Consumer Electronics, Icce 2019,
page 8662081.
Tao, F., Cheng, J., Qi, Q., Zhang, M., Zhang, H., and Sui, F. (2018). Digital
twin-driven product design, manufacturing and service with big data. In-
ternational Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 94(9-12):3563–
3576.
Thangarajah, V. (2019). Python current trend applications-an overview.
s153475
Page 44 of 48
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis – REFERENCES
February 2, 2022
The Python Software Foundation (2022). Web frameworks for python. https:
//wiki.python.org/moin/WebFrameworks/.
Wright, L. and Davidson, S. (2020). How to tell the difference between a
model and a digital twin. Advanced Modeling and Simulation in Engineer-
ing Sciences, 7(1):13.
Xu, L. D. and Duan, L. (2019).
Big data for cyber physical systems in
industry 4.0: a survey. Enterprise Information Systems, 13(2):148–169.
Yamamoto, M. and Koizumi, H. (2013). An experimental evaluation using
sqlite for real-time stream processing. Journal of International Council on
Electrical Engineering, 3(1):68–72.
Zhang, Y., Pedersen, D. B., Segebrecht Gøtje, A., and Mischkot, M. (2017).
A soft tooling process chain employing additive manufacturing for injection
molding of a 3d component with micro pillars. Journal of Manufacturing
Processes, 27:138–144.
Zheng, P., Lin, T. J., Chen, C. H., and Xu, X. (2018). A systematic design
approach for service innovation of smart product-service systems. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 201:657–667.
s153475
Page 45 of 48
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis – Appendix A
February 2, 2022
Appendix A
Initial goals of thesis
Goals
Using complex event processing agents to process sensor
data from existing machine built-in sensors
Creation of an online system to manage the injection
molding process
Identification of manual or automatic error propagation
using process serveillance
Creation of statistical models to find possible areas/me-
assurements for error propagation
Analyze available sensor data for the identification of
critical parameters
Modelling the entire process from the 3D printed inserts
used for the injection molding process
Table 5: Initial goals of thesis
s153475
Page 46 of 48
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis – Appendix B
February 2, 2022
Appendix B
Initial time schedule
Week(s)
Activity
1
Learn the process chain, understand the purpose of each ma-
chine, setup practicalities.
2-4
Research process surveillance and event processing, find sim-
ilar industry solutions, explore options applicable to process
chain, explore data management solutions.
5-7
Model the entire process chain using process modelling tool,
figure out the data available for each machine, test model.
8-13
Interface with every machine in the process chain, read data
from every machine in the process chain.
14-17
Create a server to manage the process model, create database
based on available data, add every machine connection to the
process model.
18-20
Test everything, validate runs.
21-26
Small fixes and write report.
s153475
Page 47 of 48
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis – Appendix C
February 2, 2022
Appendix C
Code project created in thesis
As the code for the digital twin is hosted at a private GitHub repository,
it is handed in as an appendices through DTU Inside in a ZIP file named
s153475_digitaltwin.zip
The created OPC UA client and sever can be see on the public GitHub
repository: https://github.com/LukasBek/opcuaclient_BOY.
s153475
Page 48 of 48
