==PAGE:1==
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral frac-
ture in a biomechanical model
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
Master Thesis
February 2nd, 2022
By
Isabelle Bilde Pfander
@lX@ Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo: Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by: DTU, Department of Health Technology, Bygning, Ørsteds Pl. 345C, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN: [0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN: [000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN: [0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN: [000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) in conjunction with Hvidorve Hospital, the Department of Health Technology at
DTU, the Department of Mechanical Engineering, and the Department of Civil Engineering
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering, Msc Eng.
This thesis was conducted over a period of 6 months from the 2nd of August 2021 to the
2nd of February 2022, corresponding to 35 ECTS credits.
Isabelle Bilde Pfander - s192907
Signature
Date
ii
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis evaluates the effect of working length on fracture micromotion using failure
points and strains in the fracture gap on distal femurs. As patients with femur fractures
are typically elderly with osteoporotic bone, nonunion or malunion is commonplace and
optimal treatment is not well defined. Working length of the construct is known to impact
the mechanical environment of the fracture gap which in turn has a large impact on optimal
fracture healing and the development of nonunion or malunion.
Through cyclical and failure compression testing on three and four different groups of
bones respectively, this working length effect was studied. During cyclical testing, a 3D
ARAMIS system using the DIC method was used to obtain full field displacements and
strains across the entire surface of the femur. For both cyclical and failure testing, Instron
data describing the forces acting on the femur as well as the piston position were also
used.
It was concluded that there is an optimal working length to be found in femur fractures,
and out of the three working lengths studied in this report, the short working length was
determined to be ideal. However, more research is needed to conclude an optimal working
length for all femur fractures.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to all of my supervisors for the invaluable advice
and guidance they have given me throughout the testing, analyzing and writing process.
I would like to thank Marie Sand Traberg and Søren Ohrt-Nissen for their insightful sug-
gestions and extensive knowledge to help steer the direction of the thesis. I would also
like to thank Mehrtash Manouchehr for his extensive experience in the machines used in
this thesis, and his ability to problem solve any issues that arose during testing.
I am also extremely grateful to the team of orthopedic surgeons from Hvidovre Hospital
who made this project possible; Jacob Lagoni, Asger Hauggard, and Søren Ohrt-Nissen.
Without their unparalleled guidance and knowledge, this project would not have been
possible. I would like to particularly recognize Jacob Lagoni and Søren Ohrt-Nissen, who
performed the exhausting task of preparing all sawbones for testing through surgery. I am
also especially thankful to Asger Haugaard who’s thorough understanding of mechanical
engineering was a huge asset to this project, specifically the data analysis portion.
Many thanks should also go to lab engineer Anil Uzal and electronics technician Christian
Peter Rasmussen, who were helpful in ensuring that the tests would run smoothly.
I cannot leave DTU without also mentioning the incredible help of lab technician Brian
Lovenholt Rasmussen. His unwavering support and profound belief in my abilities, along
with endless hours of design, manufacturing, and brainstorming of the bone mounts, was
invaluable for this project. Thank you for all of your help.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for their continued help and support
during this project.
Supervisors
Marie Sand Traberg, Associate Professor, Department of Health Technology, DTU
Søren Ohrt-Nissen, Surgeon, Department of Orthopedics, Hvidovre Hospital
Mehrtash Manouchehr, Lab Engineer, Department of Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Special thanks to:
DePuy Synthes for sponsoring the sawbones, plates, and screws used in this project
iv
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
A ”All” working length bone group
Cycle One cycle of cyclical testing entails 1,000 revolutions of loading on the bone. 50
testing cycles are initiated per bone per group in this report.
DIC Digital Image Correlation
L ”Long” working length bone group
LCP-DF locking compression plate - distal femur
M ”Medium” working length bone group
Revolution One revolution is one loading revolution of the bone starting at 350N, loading to
750N, unloading to 50N, and then loading back to 350N. 50,000 testing revolutions
are initiated per bone per group in this report. 1,000 testing revolutions constituted
one cycle of cyclical testing.
S ”Short” working length bone group
TRS Trenn release spray
TNF-α Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha
VEGF Vascular endothelial growth factor
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Anatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Femur Fractures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Orthopedic Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Mechanical Testing and Analysis Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
13
3.1
Treatment Groups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Surgeries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Bone Mount Component Design and Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Cyclic Axial Testing Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Failure Testing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.6
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Results
32
4.1
Cyclical Testing Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2
Failure Testing Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5
Discussion
45
5.1
Method Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Conclusion
51
7
Recommendations
52
7.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Bibliography
53
A Appendix
A1
A.1 Biomechanical Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A1
A.2 Extra Images For Intro and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A2
A.3 Extra Info Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A3
A.4 Extra Images Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A12
A.5 Matlab Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A21
vi
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:8==
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Distal femoral fractures are relatively common fractures [1] and have an increased
risk of mortality when compared to other fractures such as the hip fractures and proximal
femoral fractures [2, 3]. Optimal treatment of such fractures has not been well estab-
lished. Since these fractures typically occur in elderly patients with osteoporosis, this
further increases the rate of nonunion and malunion after surgery.
1.1.1
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is when a bones density continually decreases. This decrease in density
indicates that the bone is no longer as strong as it previously was which can increase
the risk of fractures considerably [4]. Osteoporosis is also problematic when trying to use
plates and screws to treat fractures. Since osteoporotic bones are fragile, screw loosening
is a commonly seen problem in osteoporotic bone fractures [4]. As a large percentage of
elderly women, 5-20% in women over 50, and elderly men, 1-5% in men over [5, 4], have
osteoporosis, sawbones were used in this study for consistency of results.
1.1.2
Union, Malunion, and Nonunion
Many factors need to align for a fracture to heal properly and achieve union. If some-
thing goes wrong, the fracture might achieve malunion or even nonunion. Both malunion
and nonunion can cause pain and some degree of loss of function for the patient [6, 7]. If
this is significant, another surgery must be performed to correct the malformality.
Common risk factors for malunion and nonunion include smoking, obesity, and medical
issues such as diabetes [6]. Common causes of malunion or nonunion include improper
vascularization of the fractured bone, infection, and excessive movement of the bone
fracture which causes destabilization [6]. A combination of these factors can increase the
likelihood of malunion and nonunion. The percentage of nonunion and malunion cases
can be as high as 20%, which means that the common causes of malunion and nonunion
are important to consider when treating fractures of any kind [8, 9]
1.1.3
Micromotion
Micromotion is motion in the mm range. This motion is typically seen in the interfrag-
mentary gap and is also called interfragmentary motion. Some form of micromotion is
known to stimulate bone healing in a fracture, which is the end goal for fixing a femur
fracture [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. This means that it is crucial to look at the level of micro-
motion seen in a femur fracture. However, while some amount of micromotion is desired
in a femur fracture to simulate bone healing, the exact about of micromotion wanted to
simulate this growth is still debated today. The interfragmentary strain hypothesis was
introduced in 1979 by S M Perren [15], and it states that fracture healing will only happen
if the motion within the fracture divided by the width of the fracture gap is less than the
fracture strain of bone, which is 2% in sheep [16, 14]. It also proposes that if the fracture
gap itself increases, the likelihood of union will increase [16, 14]. However, some articles
[17, 18, 19] show that exceeding the fracture strain of bone, still allows for proper union
of the bone. Despite these discrepancies, the interfragmentary strain hypothesis is still
used as a baseline today.
Another parameter that can be examined to help determine the best value of micro-
motion would be the stiffness of the construct. High stiffness in a fracture plate could also
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
1
==PAGE:10==
induce stress shielding over the long term which is unwanted during fracture healing [11,
20, 21, 22]. Stiffness of the construct can be reduced by using shorter fracture plates [23],
employing far cortical locking [24, 23] and changing the positioning of screws in the frac-
ture plate [25]. This indicates that a construct with ample micromotion and lower stiffness
would theoretically allow for better union of the fracture.
1.1.4
Working Length
Working length is the distance between the two screws closest to a femur fracture on
either side of the fracture itself in bridge plating (see figure 1.1) [10]. The working length
is known to have an effect on micromotion [26, 27]. In a study by Chao et al, a larger
working length had lower strains and axial stiffness in the fracture plate in the distal end
of the femurs [28]. The longer working length also lowered the fatigue strength of the
construct [29].
Figure 1.1: Diagram of two different working lengths in a oblique femur fracture. [10]
1.2
Objectives
The overall purpose of this investigation is to evaluate the effect of working length on
fracture micromotion, strains in the fracture gap, and failure points. This data will help
future surgeons find the optimum working length for transverse femur fractures to induce
bone growth, and prevent nonunion or malunion. We hypothesize that a medium sized
working length is the optimum working length for transverse femur fractures.
The micromotion of the fracture will be obtained through biomechanical testing and use
of the 3D ARAMIS system using the DIC method.
A section titled ”Biomechanical Concepts” is located in the appendix section A.1 which
includes relevant technical terms and material concepts to help with the readability of this
report.
2
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Anatomy
2.1.1
Femur
The femur is a bone located in the thigh, and is the longest bone in the body. It is made
up of three parts, the proximal end, the shaft, and the distal end (see figure 2.1). The prox-
imal end is the end of the femur connected to the hip by the femoral head. Muscles and
ligaments connect to the proximal end of the femur, some of which include the obturator
externus muscle and the iliofemoral ligament (see figures 2.2 and 2.3 for hip muscles and
ligaments). The shaft connects the proximal and distal ends of the femur. If a fracture
occurs in the femoral shaft, the injury is typically caused by a high energy impact [30].
This can cause damage to the surrounding soft tissue and can also compromise blood
supply [31]. The distal end of the femur contains two bony protrusions that are made
up of the lateral condyle and epicondyle, and the medial condyle and epicondyle. These
two protrusions are connected to the tibia, and the patella sits between the condyles and
epicondyles in an area called the patellar surface [32]. The proximal end of the femur is
attached to the tibia by tissues such as the tibial collateral ligament (See figure 2.4 for
knee muscles and ligaments).
Figure 2.1: Anatomy of a femur. The proximal end of the femur includes the femoral head,
femoral neck, and the lesser trochanter. The shaft of the femur connects the proximal
and distal ends of the femur. The distal end of the femur includes the medial and lateral
epicondyles as well as the patellar surface [33].
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Muscles that connect the proximal femur to the hip joint [34].
Figure 2.3: Ligaments that connect the proximal femur to the hip joint. The left image
shows the anterior view of the right hip joint. The right image shows the posterior view of
the right hip joint [34].
Figure 2.4: Muscles and ligaments located at the distal end of the femur and the knee.
The image shows the anterior view of the right knee [34].
2.1.2
Bone Tissue
As infants, the process of ossification is still taking place [35]. This means that much
of the bone is still woven, or immature, bone and is in the process of becoming mature,
4
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:13==
or lamellar, bone. This ossification does not stop until skeletal maturity is reached around
the ages of 18-25 years old [35]. This process is similar to the process of bone healing
described in section 2.2.2 [36].
Mature bone is made up of two types of bone tissue, cortical bone and cancellous
bone. Cortical bone is compact and has a high resistance to bending and torsion, which
indicates that this bone is important for weight bearing in the body [37]. This kind of bone
is typically found on the outside of the bone as seen in figure 2.5. Cancellous bone, also
known as trabecular bone or spongy bone, is typically located on the inside of the bone,
surrounded by cortical bone. This bone transfers loads to the cortical bone and helps
absorb shock [37].
Figure 2.5: There are two different types of bone tissue that make up a bone. Cortical
bone is located on the outside of the bone, while cancellous bone is found throughout the
rest of the bone, excluding the medullary cavity [38].
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Femur Fractures
2.2.1
Femur Fracture Types
Figure 2.6: Types of possible femur fractures include transverse fractures, linear fractures,
oblique fractures, spiral fractures, greenstick fractures, and comminuted fractures [39]
There are many different types of femur fractures, some of the most common types
include: transverse fractures, oblique fractures, spiral fractures, comminuted fractures,
and open fractures (see figure 2.6) [40]. The type of fracture depends on the force causing
the fracture. For example, spiral fractures are typically caused by a twisting force to the
thigh, and comminuted fractures are typically caused by excessively forceful events [40].
In younger people, femur fractures are typically caused by a high-energy collision resulting
in a fracture, while in the elderly or in people with weakened bones, even low-energy
collisions can cause a fracture [41].
2.2.2
Fracture Healing
Two types of fracture healing are: primary (direct) and secondary (indirect) healing.
Primary healing is a form of bone healing where osteoclasts and osteoblasts directly
heal the fracture [42]. This kind of healing typically occurs when using conventional screws
and plates, or lag screws which directly compresses the bony fragment and causes ab-
solute stability (i.e. no micromotion).
Secondary bone healing occurs in four main steps; hematoma formation, fibrocarti-
laginous callus formation, bony callus formation, and bone remodeling (see figure 2.7 for
the stages of secondary bone healing). These bone healing steps are stimulated by mi-
cromotion which is typically present in a variety of constructs including external fixation,
intramedullary nailing and locked constructs [24].
Steps of secondary bone healing [43, 44, 10]:
• Hematoma Formation (Days 1-5)- Hematoma formation begins seconds after the
fracture occurs. There is an influx of cells that secrete growth factors. Platelets,
6
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:15==
macrophages and neutrophils in the area also secrete cytokines such as TNF-α,
VEGF and interleukins. These secretions stimulate cells to remove damaged tissue
and stimulates healing at the fracture site.
• Fibrocartilaginous Callus Formation (Days 5 to 11)- VEGF stimulates the formation
of new blood vessels at the fracture and granulation tissue begins to form. Cartilage
starts to form into a soft callus.
• Bony Callus Formation (Days 11 to 28)- The cartilaginous callus begins to convert
the soft callus into a hard callus made of woven bone through calcification. At the
end of this stage, immature bone is formed.
• Bone Remodeling (Days 18 an onwards)- Newly formed, immature, woven bone is
remodeled with a combination of osteoblast and osteoclast activity. This activity
causes the center of the callus to become compact bone, and the outside edges
of the callus to become lamellar bone. The vasculature is also remodeled to fit the
new bone. This stage can last months to years, but will eventually culminate in a
return to normal bone structure.
Figure 2.7:
Different stages of secondary bone healing.
The four stages are:
1)
Hematoma formation, 2) Fibrocartilaginous callus formation, 3) Bony callus formation,
and 4) Bone remodeling. It can take between a few months, to years for the fractured
bone to heal completely. [44]
2.2.3
Variables Influencing Fracture Healing
Age, hormones, local stress, blood supply, degree of trauma, type of bone affected,
and mechanical environment can all affect fracture healing [17, 45]. Important factors in
fracture healing include amount of blood supply to the fractured bone, degree of trauma,
and type of bone affected. Using locked plating rather than compression plating to sta-
bilize the fracture is preferable, as locked plating preserves vascularization [10]. When
fixing a fracture, it is also imperative to keep the bony fragment properly supported and in
the right place for proper fracture healing to occur [45].
2.3
Orthopedic Hardware
2.3.1
Femur Fracture Plates
For a femur fracture to properly heal, it must be supported by some sort of device.
Before internal fracture plates were invented in 1895 by Arbuthnot Lane [46], and brought
to widespread use in the late 1920’s by the development of the Smith-Petersen method
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
7
==PAGE:16==
[47], fractures were externally fixed using objects such as wires and casts [48]. These
external fixation techniques were not always the most successful in properly treating a
femur fracture.
Some internal fracture fixation methods are described below:
• Conventional Screw and Plate- This was one of the first types of internal fixation.
This type of fixation depends on the friction between the screw and the bone caused
by the compression of the plate to the bone [49]. This type of fixation is hardly used
to date since it prevents proper vascularization of the bone which is necessary for
proper fracture healing [10]. See appendix figure A.1 for more information.
• Intramedullary Nailing- Intramedullary nailing is a method where a rod is reamed
into the intramedullary cavity and held in place with intramedullary nails [50]. This
type of fixation is typically used for femur fractures located near the middle of the
femur shaft. See appendix figure A.2 for more information.
• Locked Constructs- Locked constructs use locking screws which have a threaded
screw head so that the screw head can be immobilized in both the plate and the bone
[10]. This allows vascularization to be preserved as the plate is no longer flush with
the bone [10]. These plates typically use bridge plating, where the fracture zone is
left untouched by screws. See appendix figure A.1 for more information.
This project will be using locked constructs for the internal fracture fixation.
Plate Materials
Generally, femur plates are made of either stainless steel or titanium. Stainless steel
is stiffer than titanium. The nonunion rate for stainless steel is higher than the nonunion
rate for titanium in distal femur fractures [51, 52], and the decreased stiffness of titanium
also stimulates more callus formation in the fracture [53].
Recently there has also been an increased interest in plates that have a stiffness closer
to that of bone, which would help reduce stress shielding. These new materials would also
need to be biocompatible [54]. Some of these materials include a hybrid glass/epoxy/flax
composite material [21] and special, stiffness-graded plates [20]. Both of these plate
materials are closer to the mechanical properties of human bone, however there is not
much research done into these new materials, so stainless steel or titanium are still the
most common materials used in fracture plates [55]. This project will be using stainless
steel plates and screws.
2.3.2
Orthopedic Screws
There are a few different categories of screws used in femur plate fixation. Some of
these types and categories include:
• Cancellous Screws- These screws are designed to hold onto cancellous bone. The
threads on the body of the screw are deeper and spaced further apart than in cortical
screws [56].
• Cortical Screws- These screws are made to sit in the cortical bone [56, 24]. The
threads are shallower and spaced closer together than cancellous screws.
• Lag Screws- These are specialized screws used for interfragmentary compression.
They are inserted perpendicular to the fracture and they span the fracture itself [56].
• Locking Screws- These are screws where both the body of the screw and the screw
head are threaded. This allows the screws to lock into the femur plate. These
8
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:17==
screws are used in locked constructs [56, 24]. See figure 2.8 for an example of a
locking screw.
• Non-locking Screws- These are screws where the body of the screw is threaded and
the head is smooth. These kinds of screws are used in conventional, compression
plates [56]. These screws can cause increased shear stress where the screw meets
the bone when undergoing axial loading [57]. (See figure 2.8 for an example of a
nonlocking screw.)
• Self Tapping Screws- These are screws that can be used directly after drilling. They
have cutting flutes that help create a channel for the screw to sit in, in the bone [58].
Figure 2.8: The screw on top is a locking screw with a threaded head. The screw on the
bottom is a non-locking screw without a threaded head [59, 60].
It is also possible to combine some of these categories for example in the self tapping
locking screw used in this study. This is a screw that has both a threaded body and head,
as well as cutting flutes.
2.4
Mechanical Testing and Analysis Methods
2.4.1
Mechanical Tests
There are a few different mechanical tests that are used to determine the mechanical
properties of a material. Some of these tests include:
• Tensile Testing- Tensile testing is a kind of mechanical testing where the sample
undergoes a tensile force until failure of the material.
• Fatigue Testing- Fatigue testing is where the sample is cyclically loaded until the
end of the test to determine the fatigue life of a sample.
• Compressive Testing-Compressive testing is a test that evaluates the material be-
havior during a compressive force.
• Torsion Testing- Torsion testing tests how a material will respond to a twisting mo-
tion.
• Axial Testing- Axial testing is a form of testing where the specimen is axially loaded.
This report will be utilizing axial compressive fatigue testing and failure testing.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
9
==PAGE:18==
2.4.2
Axes of the Femur
When the femur is loaded in an in vivo situation, it is loaded through the mechanical
axis (See figure 2.9) [61]. This force comes from the hip bone that is attached to the femur
by the femoral head. To emulate an in vivo situation as accurately as possible, the load
will be applied to the mechanical axis rather than the anatomical axis.
Figure 2.9: Mechanical and anatomical axes of the femur. The red line indicates the
mechanical axis, the blue line indicates the vertical axis and the transverse knee axis,
and the black line indicates the femoral shaft axis or the anatomical axis. The mechanical
axis is an imaginary line that goes from the middle of the femoral head to the intercondylar
notch. The anatomic axis is centered on the shaft of the femur and runs from the greater
trochanter to the intercondylar notch. [62].
2.4.3
Digital Image Correlation
Digital image correlation (DIC) is a highly accurate optical method that shows the strain
and the full-field displacements of an object by using a correlation algorithm [63]. This
method allows for visualization of strains over an entire visible area, rather than only where
a strain gauge is placed on the specimen [64]. This method will be used to determine the
displacements and strains in the femur fracture.
To obtain 3D displacements using the DIC method, a stereo camera setup is needed.
This stereo camera setup uses triangulation to compute 3D positions of points in images
(See figure 2.10 for stereo camera setup). To calibrate the cameras, both intrinsic and
extrinsic parameters need to be defined. The intrinsic camera parameters are variables
such as lens distortions and are automatically defined during calibration. Extrinsic param-
eters include position of the cameras in 3D space relative to each other, and is typically
changed based on the size of the object being measured and the calibration object used
[65] (See section 3.4.2 for an in depth explanation of the calibration of the ARAMIS sys-
tem).
10
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:19==
To prepare the specimen, it must be coated in white paint and sprayed with a black
speckle pattern, creating a stochastic pattern. This specimen is then placed in front of the
stereo camera setup which captures the speckled specimens gray value information for
subsequent image analysis.
Figure 2.10: Stereo camera setup and triangulation [65]
The system then detects changes by tracking blocks of pixels, or interrogation cells, in
the images that are uploaded to the system [66, 63]. Stereo triangulation can then be used
to obtain 3D behavior from the 2D images obtained from the two cameras [63]. To obtain
the 3D displacement and strain, the pixels in each stage, for both the left and right image,
are matched with the pixels in the rest of the images in the GOM correlate software.
This allows for the triangulation of points using the calibration parameters described in
table 3.3 and the reference stage defined in the ARAMIS system. The reference stage is
automatically set to the first image obtained and all values are equal to zero.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:21==
3
Methods
The mechanical testing portion of this thesis was conducted at the DTU structural lab
located in building 119 on the DTU Lyngby campus. An Instron 8874 machine was used
for the cyclical axial testing and an Instron 8502 was used for failure testing. DIC data will
be obtained using a 12M ARAMIS adjustable camera system. The 3D printer used was
a Creality Max 10 3D printer.
The sawbones used in this project model the right femur. They are fourth generation
composite femurs made with 17 PCF solid foam and a 10 mm canal [67]. They have a
length of 450 mm, a condylar width of 85 mm, a head diameter of 48 mm, and a canal
diameter of 9.5 mm [67]. The neck angle is 122 degrees with an anteversion of 15 de-
grees. The plate used is a stainless steel LCP-DF 4.5/5.0 plate for the right femur. This
plate has 13 holes and a length of 316 mm (see figure 3.1). Two types of cortical screws
were used in this project: locking screw stardrive Ø 5.0 mm, self-tapping stainless steel
screws with a length of either 36 mm or 70 mm. Four 70 mm screws were used in the
distal end of the femur, and between three and five 36 mm screws were used along the
femoral shaft.
Figure 3.1: Femur plate used in surgeries
Sawbone Values
Length
450 mm
Condylar Width
85 mm
Head Diameter
48 mm
Canal diameter
9.5 mm
Neck angle
112◦
Anteversion
15◦
Material
17 PCF solid foam
Plate Values
Number of holes
13
Length
316 mm
Material
Stainless steel
Screw values
Length
36 mm and 70 mm
Material
Stainless steel
Table 3.1: Values for materials being used
in this project [67].
Mechanical Testing Values
Frequency
2 Hz
DIC data
every 1,000 revolutions
Maximum Axial Force
750 N
Minimum Axial Force
50 N
Number of revolutions
50,000
Total number of bones
20
Table 3.2: Values used in the Instron
machine to test the micromotion in the
femur fracture
In tables 3.1 and 3.2, the values describing the testing can be seen. While 2 Hz is
approximately twice the normal walking frequency of 0.9 Hz [68], this normal walking
frequency varies greatly between subjects. A frequency of 2 Hz was chosen in this project
because this frequency is seen in many similar studies regarding micromotion in femur
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
13
==PAGE:22==
fractures [69, 70]. The frequency of the test is quite important to consider since bone is a
viscoelastic material, so its stiffness depends on the frequency of the chosen load.
DIC data was not recorded over the entire testing period as this would have resulted
in an inoperable amount of data. Instead, a singular image was obtained before cyclical
testing began, and then after every 1,000 revolutions of loading, resulting in a total of 51
pictures per bone.
A maximum axial force of 750 N was used since patients with a femur fracture are
encouraged to walk normally once the operation is complete in Denmark. This means
the femur fracture should be fully load bearing immediately after implantation, which for
a 70 kg person, is about 1,300N [70]. Since it can be assumed that most do not actually
walk completely normally on a fractured femur with an implanted plate, that value was
reduced to 750N. This value is also similar to the loading force for other similar studies
[69, 70]. The minimum load was defined as 50 N to ensure that data collection would be
accurate since when the Instron machine to reaches a 0N load, data quality issues can
arise. Since the loads applied to the femur are also much lower than what the load cell
attached to the Instron machine is typically capable of ( +/-25 kN force and torque of up
to +/-100 Nm with an accuracy of 0.005 %) this also contributes to more noise. 50,000
revolutions was chosen as it corresponds to between 5 days to a few weeks of walking
and is seen in similar studies [70, 69].
3.1
Treatment Groups
Four groups were created during the surgeries of the bone. Three of the groups, con-
sisting of 5 bones each, had different working lengths (long, medium, and short) where
three 36 mm locking screws were used along the femoral shaft, and four 70 mm locking
screws were used in the distal end of the femur. The screws were placed as shown in
figure 3.2. The fourth group, also consisting of 5 bones, had two extra screws placed in
the femoral shaft in the medium configuration, shown in figure 3.2d. The bones were la-
beled as ”L” for long working length, ”M” for medium working length, ”S” for short working
length, and ”A” for all screw holes filled in for the medium working length bone.
14
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:23==
(a) Screw placement in plate for bone in the
short group
(b) Screw placement in plate for bone in the
medium group
(c) Screw placement in plate for bone in the
long group
(d) Screw placement in plate for bone in the all
group
(e) Screw placement in plate for the distal fe-
mur for all groups
(f) View of part of the distal end of the femur
(g) Anterior view of the femur
Figure 3.2: The placement of the screws in the four different groups.
3.2
Surgeries
Before testing the sawbones, surgeries were performed to imitate femur fractures. In
this case, an oblique femur fracture was imitated (See figure 3.3 for steps taken during
surgery of the sawbones). To ensure that the plates were attached to the bone in the
exact same place each time, a 3D printed rig to control the placement was designed in
Solidworks (see figure 3.3a). This rig controls where the plate is placed on the femur and
where the fracture is created. When the surgeries were performed, the bone was first
placed in the bone rig. The plate was then added to the rig and held down with a clamp.
The surgeons then added the screws in the different configurations specified in section
3.1. After the plate was attached, the fracture was created by removing a 10mm section of
the sawbone controlled for by the rig with a hacksaw (see figure 3.3e). While this changed
the anatomy of the bone, the exact placement of the plate on the bone was deemed more
important than preserving the exact anatomy of the bone. As the same portion of bone is
removed for all groups, consistency between groups is maintained.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Solidworks drawing of the bone rig
(b) Bone rig holding a sawbone
(c) Bone rig controlling for the placement of the
plate
(d) Bone rig holding the bone with attached
plate when the fracture is created
(e) 10 mm section of bone removed
with a hacksaw
Figure 3.3: Steps taken during the surgery of the sawbones. First a bone rig was designed
in Solidworks. This rig was then used by the surgeons to ensure that each bone plate
was fixated to each sawbone in the exact same configuration. Afterwards the plate was
attached to the bone with two types of screws and a 10 mm section of the femur was
removed to simulate an oblique fracture.
3.3
Bone Mount Component Design and Fabrication
3.3.1
Type 1 Proximal Epoxy Bone Mount
West System 105 Epoxy Resin and West System 205 fast hardener were used to cast
the type 1 epoxy bone mounts. To allow for easy removal of the bone after casting them
in epoxy, a release spray TRS was used. This spray was first tested on a small 3D printed
piece to ensure proper release from the mold was obtained. Before casting the bone in the
epoxy, two 3D printed boxes were created to hold two bones during the casting process
to create two halves of the epoxy bone mount. The same process is repeated for both
halves of the bone mount. The entire bone casting process is shown in figure 3.4.
16
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:25==
(a) 3D printed epoxy casting box with three
screw holes to attach metal plate.
(b) Epoxy box with silicone covering holes and
bone and metal plate placed inside
(c) Ensuring that the bone is properly lined up
in the box so that the two halves can later be
properly put together
(d) Faulty epoxy bone mounts. Epoxy got too
warm (Excess of 150 ◦C) and created a hon-
eycomb structure within the epoxy greatly re-
ducing its mechanical strength and damaging
the bone.
Figure 3.4: Steps in the first epoxy bone mount casting process. First, two 3D epoxy
casting boxes were printed. Two bones were then lined up in this box so that it was level
and epoxy mixed with some fiberglass is poured into the molds. However, since the epoxy
reached extreme temperatures, the epoxy did not harden properly and was discarded.
The boxes and the bones were sprayed with three coats of the release spray. A metal
half circular plate was then screwed into each box with screws which were turned nine
times before to the plate was attached. This ensured that the half circular plates were
properly cast into the epoxy. The release spray was then added to the screws with a
cotton swab to ensure removal of the screws from the epoxy. The metal plate was not
sprayed with release spray to ensure good bonding between the epoxy and the metal.
To seal the box where the bone was placed, silicone was used. The bones were then
placed into their respective boxes so that the middle of the half circular metal plates were
lined up with the intercondylar notch. This ensures that the loading on the bone occurs
through the mechanical axis of the femur. Two boxes and bones were used in this case,
so that the bones could easily be removed from the epoxy and the epoxy could securely
hold both sides of the bone.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
17
==PAGE:26==
To begin to cast the bone, ten pumps of epoxy and ten pumps of the hardener were
mixed together well. Then, some fiberglass pieces were slowly added. This mixture was
subsequently poured into the molds. This process was repeated until the boxes were
almost filled. After pouring a few rounds of epoxy, the first round of poured epoxy began to
get extremely hot, turned a burnt orange color, and started smoking. No more epoxy was
poured into the mold, but the epoxy previously poured expanded, created a honeycomb
structure and reached more than 150 ◦C.
3.3.2
Type 2 Proximal Epoxy Bone Mount
The epoxy used in the type 1 epoxy molds was not manufactured to be poured in
thick layers to create a mold. This caused the epoxy to overheat and lose its mechanical
strength. The epoxy used in this fabrication was clear, DiaCast 86 epoxy that was de-
signed to be used for molding. This epoxy can safely be poured in layers approximately
3-4 cm deep. The entire bone casting processes is shown in figure 3.5.
When casting this epoxy, the two epoxy boxes used had to be redesigned. The pre-
vious epoxy bone mount box was modified to simplify the lining up process of the bone,
and to waste less epoxy during the casting by creating a flat bottom (see figure 3.5a). The
screw holes were also offset to ensure that the loading was on the middle of the femoral
head. A plastic plate was placed along the coronal plane in the middle of the femur with
a cutout to follow the bone (see figure 3.5b). This plate was attached to the bone using
silicone so that the two halves of the mould could later be separated from the mold. The
two half circle metal plates were screwed into the boxes and everything except the metal
plates were sprayed with three coats of separator spray from Diatom.
To cast the bone, the two boxes were clamped tightly together to prevent leakage,
with the plastic plate and femoral head placed in between and silicone added to keep
everything together. The femur was held vertically with a clamp to ensure that the bottom
of the epoxy bone mount box was parallel to the medial and lateral condyles (see figure
3.5c). In this case, only one bone was used, to help ensure that the final mold would fit
together properly.
When pouring the epoxy, it was poured in layers 3-4 cm thick. The max temperature
reached was approximately 80 ◦C. The layers were poured until the entire box was filled.
It was then allowed to harden for five days and was subsequently removed from the mold.
Once removed, it was allowed to finish fully hardening for another three days.
After the epoxy was fully hardened, bent metal plates were fabricated to compress the
epoxy together during testing to give the entire epoxy bone mount more strength (see
figure 3.5f). These metal plates were made in two parts; they were bent with a brake and
were then screwed together with three screws on each side.
From this point on, ”epoxy bone mount” refers to the type 2 epoxy bone mounts.
18
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:27==
(a) Redesigned epoxy box to prevent wasting
excess epoxy and ensure the load is applied
on the mechanical axis of the femur.
(b) Plastic plate placed between the two boxes
for the epoxy form to allow for separation of the
two halves of the epoxy.
(c) Casting setup ensuring that the bone is
properly aligned in the box.
(d) Completed epoxy mold with plastic plate in
between and metal plate centered on top of the
femoral head.
(e) Two halves of the epoxy mold with the metal
plates inside.
(f) Top epoxy bone mount attached to the In-
stron machine with the metal plates compress-
ing the epoxy.
Figure 3.5: Steps of the second epoxy bone mount casting process
3.3.3
Distal Bone Mount
A bone mount to hold the distal end of the femur was also required for the compression
fatigue testing. When creating this distal bone mount, a metal plate was made and the
approximate form of the distal end of the femur was ground out (figure 3.6a). Two blocks of
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
19
==PAGE:28==
aluminum were created to control for the anterior posterior direction. A plate of aluminum
was placed on top of the block of aluminum on the side of the femur with protruding
condyles (figure 3.6b). This plate reached two thirds of the way over the condyles and a
piece of high density foam was attached to prevent bone damage. The aluminum blocks
and plate were all screwed onto the contoured metal plate (figure 3.6c).
(a) Picture of distal bone mount with contour of
bone ground out of the aluminum plate. Mark-
ings helped to indicate where the bone was
aligned.
(b) Full distal bone mount with contour of bone
ground out and two blocks of aluminum to con-
trol for rotation. A swinging plate on top of one
block prevents the bone from moving in the
construct.
(c) Distal bone mount with bone inserted
Figure 3.6: Distal bone mount components.
3.4
Cyclic Axial Testing Methods
3.4.1
ARAMIS System Setup
ARAMIS system components for 2M and 12M systems (specs are given in appendix
tables A.1 and A.2 respectively):
• Computer with ARAMIS software
• Two cameras with 12M or 2M sensor
• Adjustable base to hold cameras
• GOM Testing Controller
20
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:29==
The 12M ARAMIS adjustable camera system was used to detect displacements and
strains on the femurs surface. Before the calibration was started, the size of the wanted
area needed to be measured to determine the lens size and the calibration values needed
(see appendix figure A.7 for table to help determine the parameters that the ARAMIS
system needs to follow). The ARAMIS system camera setup was then manipulated so
that the values in table 3.3 are true using figure 3.7 as a reference. Once all of these
values were properly implemented, the calibration of the ARAMIS system could start (see
section 3.4.2). To prepare the test subject, it must be speckled with black dots. When
painting the black dots on the object, the dots should be a uniform size and the object
should be approximately 50% black and 50% white. This object was then placed in front
of the ARAMIS system and data collection could begin.
Figure 3.7: Figure to determine what the different parameters in appendix figure A.7 and
table 3.4.2 correspond to [71].
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
21
==PAGE:30==
Calibration object values
Camera lens
Titanar B 75mm lens
Calibration Object
GOM/CP 20/MV 90x72 mm
Camera Support
800 mm
Camera Angle
25 ◦mm
Slider Distance
184 mm
Measure Distance
480 mm
Table 3.3: Values for the calibration of the Aramis DIC system. These values are
obtained from appendix figure A.7 [71]. Figure 3.7 shows what the corresponding values
indicate.
3.4.2
ARAMIS System Calibration
Figure 3.8: How the ARAMIS camera system is attached to the adjustable base to obtain
data. The lights are positioned above the cameras and can be adjusted to point directly
towards the specimen. The focusing ring can be turned to fine tune the focus of the
camera. The cameras are attached to a 800 mm camera support bar and their angle, tilt,
and distance can be adjusted. Once the cameras are locked onto the support bar, the
handles can also be used to adjust the angle of both of the cameras together without the
need for re-calibration.
To calibrate the ARAMIS system, an appropriate calibration plate (see appendix figure
A.3 for an image of the calibration plate) was chosen that corresponded to the measuring
area size that was wanted (see appendix figure A.6 and A.7) and placed on a calibra-
tion holder. Bright lights were also needed to properly see the camera image. After the
22
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:31==
ARAMIS system was setup (See figure 3.8) according to the values in table 3.3, an ID
card was taped to the bone. This ID card was used as it is easier to determine the focus
of the lens with text. Focusing the lens of the camera was done by turning a silver ring
located on the camera lens. The image must be properly exposed so that the test subject
is bright, but there are no red areas in the image, indicating overexposure.
Figure 3.9: ARAMIS calibration. The right hand column shows the position the calibration
plate needs to be for the next picture. The bottom two images show the live image of the
calibration plate. The top two images show the previous image taken for the calibration.
The yellow plus’s in the upper two images show the points that are recognized by the
system on the calibration plate.
Calibration 1
Calibration deviation
0.042 pixels
Scale deviation
0.001 mm
Calibration 2
Calibration deviation
0.045 pixels
Scale deviation
0.001 mm
Table 3.4: Calibration deviation and scale deviation values for first and second
calibration. The calibration deviation value must not exceed 0.05 pixels and the scale
deviation values must not exceed 0.008 mm. Both calibrations passed the checks.
Once the the camera was focused on the ID card attached to the test subject, the arm
was moved to face the calibration object. Calibration began on the ARAMIS system by
specifying which calibration object was being used in the system. The calibration object
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
23
==PAGE:32==
was then placed in 13 different positions (see figure 3.9 for one position example), in-
cluding; close to the camera sensor, far from the sensor, rotated 180 deg etc. Once all
of these steps were completed, a calibration results panel determined if the calibration
was acceptable. For a calibration to be accepted, the calibration deviation must be below
0.050 pixels and the scale deviation must be below 0.008 mm (see table 3.4 and ap-
pendix figure A.8 for calibration deviations). After the calibration is accepted, the testing
can begin.
3.4.3
ARAMIS System Trial
(a) DIC picture before displacement.
The
green field (surface component 2.dY) is show-
ing the change in displacement in the y direc-
tion, which in this picture is zero since it is de-
fined as the reference picture. Point compo-
nent 1 (”Facet point 1”) describes the distance
in the x and y directions and the scalar distance
for that specific point.
(b) DIC picture after displacement. The color
gradient of surface component 2.dY is show-
ing the change in displacement from the refer-
ence picture (figure 3.10a). There is also some
deformation occurring since the cardboard was
not moved strictly in one plane. Point compo-
nent 1 (”Facet point 1”) describes the distance
change from the previous reference image (fig-
ure 3.10a)
Figure 3.10: DIC data before and after displacement of the test subject.
A test of the ARAMIS system was done early on in the thesis. This was done using
cardboard and a 2M ARAMIS system. This ARAMIS system is only able to capture an
object in 2D, as opposed to the 12M system which can capture an object in 3D. To begin,
the cardboard was spray painted with white paint to ensure high contrast with the black
dots that were applied later. After the speckle pattern was added, pictures were taken
with the system. These pictures can then be exported into GOM correlate, which is an
evaluation software that uses the DIC method. In this test, the cardboard was moved a
known distance on the table and two pictures were taken, one before the movement (figure
3.10a) and one after (figure 3.10b). These pictures were exported and analyzed in GOM
correlate where it was seen that the distance the cardboard was moved corresponded to
the distance obtained from the software. Since a 2D system was used, the system also
picked up some ”deformation” of the cardboard as the cardboard was not moved strictly in
one plane. Since the 2M ARAMIS system only obtains data in 2D, everything is assumed
to be in the X and Y planes. Thus, any displacement in the Z direction is seen as a relative
displacement in the X and Y planes. See section 3.6.1 for further explanation of how to
analyze data in GOM correlate.
24
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:33==
3.4.4
Instron Machine Setup
To begin testing in the Instron 8874 machine (See appendix figure A.4 for a detailed
image of the Instron machine), epoxy bone mounts and distal bone mounts must be fab-
ricated to properly hold the bones in the testing machine (Process described in section
3.3). These bone mounts are then attached to the Instron machine to securely hold the
bone during fatigue testing.
If the pump for the machine is not already on, then some revolutions also need to be
run without anything in the machine for a few minutes to warm up the oil pressurizing the
machine.
To begin testing in the Instron machine, a wave matrix was created. This tells the
machine what and when to do certain movements. The values from table 3.2 were used
to create this wave matrix. The wave matrix specifies that the rotation should be held
constant and that the load should follow the following eight steps:
1. Load to 700 N in 10 seconds
2. Hold for a specified number of seconds (80 s, 120 s, 200 s)
3. Load to 400 N in 5 seconds
4. The load should follow a sine wave with an amplitude of 350 N for 1,000 revolutions
at 2 Hz (then should go back to step 1 above, and repeat 50 times)
5. Load to 700 N in 10 seconds
6. Hold for 100 seconds
7. Load to 0 N in 10 seconds
8. Hold for 4 days
Steps 2 and 6 were to allow the ARAMIS system to take a picture when the bone was
loaded at 700N. A damping effect was also added after step 4 to help in data acquisition.
The number of seconds the machine was told to hold in step 2 was changed when fine
tuning the lag time between the ARAMIS and Instron machines.
After the wave matrix was created, the 3A bone was used to test the data output and
the parameters of the wave matrix. This was to ensure that the frequency of testing was
not too high to get accurate data.
After this testing was completed, the first bone was added into the machine. This was
done by first placing the bone between the two epoxy bone mount halves and screwing
the screws into the metal plate located inside the bone. The metal compression plates
were then screwed together over the epoxy. When screwing the metal plates together for
the epoxy bone mount, it was ensured that the gap between the two wings of the metal
plate was always between 5.5 and 6.5 mm. This ensured that the epoxy and bones were
compressed the same amount every time. When the epoxy and bones are compressed
with the metal plates, there was a 2-4 mm gap in the epoxy caused by the plastic plate
placed between the two halves of the epoxy bone mount during casting.
To attach this epoxy bone mount to the machine, a metal plate with a rod was made and
was attached to the metal plate placed inside the epoxy with six corresponding screws.
This rod was then place inside another metal plate with a rod that was created and at-
tached to the Instron machine. These two rods placed inside each other were screwed
together with two screws perpendicular to the rods (Can be seen in figure 3.5f between
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
25
==PAGE:34==
the label titled LCE-034 and the epoxy bone mount). This is done with the Instron ma-
chine piston in a high position. The bone was then lowered into the distal bone mount with
sandpaper on one side to prevent slippage and the aluminum plate over the condyles was
screwed down.
Once the bone was loaded, a singular picture was taken with the ARAMIS system to
ensure that the pattern quality was high enough to get proper data. If not, the pattern was
repainted and checked again, whereafter testing could begin. The Instron machine and
the ARAMIS system were then started (see setup in figure 3.11). All short, medium, and
long bones were tested in the same manner.
Figure 3.11: Setup of the ARAMIS system behind the Instron machine
Electronic synchronization of the ARAMIS systemand the Instorn machine was not
possible, so this was manually done. A frame frequency was determined based on the
amount of time needed for one Instron cycle to be completed and the system was told to
stop taking pictures after 50 pictures were taken. This allowed for the ARAMIS system to
take pictures of the bone in the Instron machine during steps 2 and 6.
A checklist for the bone testing procedure was created and followed to ensure consis-
tency in testing procedure (See appendix section A.3.4 for procedure).
3.5
Failure Testing Methods
3.5.1
Instron Machine Setup
For the failure testing setup, the same setup as for the cyclic testing was originally
used. However, the epoxy bone mounts began failing before the bones did. To ensure
that the bone was more securely held, an instron machine with larger grips was used
(figure 3.12), Instron 8502.
26
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.12: Instron 8502 machine with grips and platform.
To begin testing, a one step wave form was created. The bone was loaded at a rate of 4
mm per minute until the failure point was reached and then the test was manually stopped.
Since this machine can only do axial compression, there was inherent rotation control of
the specimen. The Instron data was then exported to matlab where data analysis was
done.
To affix the femurs into the new Instron machine, the proximal end of the femur was
cut with a band saw until the thickness was under 30 mm, so that the grips could properly
hold the proximal end of the femur. The grip pressure can reach up to 692 bar, which
would crush the specimen. To prevent this, the grips were only closed until the bone was
properly fixed to the machine, i.e. under 25 bar. To ensure that the femur was being
loaded on the mechanical axis, the distal end of the femur was placed flat on a platform
held by the bottom instron grips, and then the top grips were closed to affix the proximal
end.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
27
==PAGE:36==
3.6
Data Processing
Figure 3.13 shows the flow of the data through the different data processing methods.
Figure 3.13: Flowchart showing the process of obtaining and analyzing the data.
3.6.1
Cyclical Testing DIC Data Analyzed in GOM Correlate
Before starting cyclical testing, a single image was taken of the area to be analyzed.
The pattern was checked to ensure that it was acceptable, and then a surface component
was created ensuring that the facet size was 40 and the pixel size was 30. These were
the smallest values that still allowed for the surface component to cover most of the bone.
Once the testing was over, ARAMIS automatically began calculating values for the surface
component created in the first image for the same area in all images, since the first image
is automatically considered the reference stage. This reference stage was changed to
the first image of the cyclical testing images for all bones.
Once the images were taken using the ARAMIS system, they were loaded into GOM
correlate for further analysis. In the GOM workspace (figure 3.14) the previously created
surface component covering the entire visible area of the femur, was loaded. To obtain
the displacement over the gap in the femur, six point components were created. These
points were created on either side of the gap at three points along the femur (left, middle
and right of the femur as shown in figure 3.15). These points were then inspected and the
displacement vectors were obtained. After automatic recalculation done by the software,
a table diagram was created with the values of all components in all images.
28
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.14: GOM correlate workspace with a surface component created.
Figure 3.15: Example of the GOM correlate workspace with reference point components
created. The placement of points one through six were kept constant over all bones. Point
1 in the reference image is defined as ⃗V1, point 1 in the deformed image is defined as ⃗V ′
1.
This naming convention is followed for all six points. ”Plate” describes the area closest to
the fracture plate. ”Middle” describes the middle of the fracture gap. ”Far” describes the
area furthest from the fracture plate
Cyclical Testing DIC Data Further Analyzed in Matlab
After analyzing the DIC data in GOM correlate, the data was exported into Matlab for
further analysis. The data consists of many different values including the X, Y, and Z
displacement values for each of the six points for all DIC pictures taken for each bone.
The data from the 50 cyclic loading cycles are then extracted from the raw data.
The X, Y, and Z displacement values for each picture were also extracted for every
point for every picture of every bone. These are defined as the vectors for each point in
the DIC pictures. To obtain the displacement vectors in the gap the following equations
are used:
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
29
==PAGE:38==
⃗V ′
12 = ⃗V ′
1 −⃗V ′
2
(3.1)
⃗V ′
34 = ⃗V ′
3 −⃗V ′
4
(3.2)
⃗V ′
56 = ⃗V ′
5 −⃗V ′
6
(3.3)
Where ⃗V ′
1 = the displacement vector at point 1 in the deformed configuration, ⃗V ′
2 = the
displacement vector at point 2 in the deformed configuration and so on.
To obtain the deformation, the reference displacement vector must be subtracted from
the deformed vector. However, since the reference displacement vector is defined as
[0,0,0] the deformation is equal to the displacement vector.
To get the average vector over the entire fracture gap, the three vectors describing the
displacement in the fracture gap are averaged.
⃗V ′
avg =
⃗V ′
12 + ⃗V ′
34 + ⃗V ′
56
3
(3.4)
Once all these vectors are obtained, Gram Schmidt Normalization is performed using:
⃗VN = (⃗V ′
avg · ⃗Vx)⃗Vx
(3.5)
and
ϵN = |⃗VN|
L
(3.6)
for normal strain calculation. And
⃗VT = ⃗V ′
avg −⃗VN
(3.7)
and
ϵT = |⃗VT |
L
(3.8)
for shear strain calculation where ⃗Vx = the mechanical axis, L = length of the fracture
gap, ϵN = normal strain, and ϵT = shear strain. The mechanical axis is defined as [0,1,0]
in this case as the pictures of the bone were obtained with the camera being parallel to
the floor and the mechanical axis being perpendicular to the ground. The same camera
setup was used for all bones, therefore, the mechanical axis is simply defined as the y
axis in GOM correlate.
This normalization is performed on the average vector of the entire fracture gap, as
well as on the vector close to the plate, in the middle of the femur, and furthest away from
the femur so that normal and shear strain values are obtained for all four areas of the
fracture gap.
In the long bones, this normalization was only done on the 2L, 3L, 4L and 5L bones.
The data from 1L was excluded since there was an unexplained jump in the strain values
(See appendix figures A.21 and A.22 for 1L graphs). The pictures from the last two cycles
for all bones were also removed because the 5L data could not be obtained for those two
pictures.
After this data was processed, an average data set was created for each group, S, M,
and L, for the normal and shear strain in all four places (Close to plate, middle, far from
30
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:39==
plate, average over entire fracture gap). These values were then plotted (see section
4.1.1).
All vectors and lengths are given in mm. The entire Matlab code is located in the
appendix section A.5.2.
3.6.2
Cyclic Testing Instron Data Analyzed in Matlab
After obtaining the data from the Instron machine during cyclic loading, the excel files
were then loaded into matlab. Since the excel files contained excess data taken during
steps 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8, the data from step 4 (Cyclic testing) was extracted.
The data was then properly incremented by adding an artificially small time increment.
This was done because some of the data points consisted of the exact same number,
which could cause inaccurate data interpolation.
After incrementation, time was subtracted from some of the tests to ensure that the
data was properly synchronized. When running the test, some changes were made to
the holding time in step 2 between different bones, which caused the data between these
bones to become asynchronous. 40 seconds were removed from S3, M1, M2, and 3L,
since the rest step for these bones were 40 seconds longer than the rest step for the rest
of the bones (excl. 5L). 120 seconds were removed from 5L since the rest step for this
bone was 120 seconds longer than the rest of the bones (excl. S3, M1, M2, and 3L).
Once the time frames of all the different bones were synchronized, the data was linearly
interpolated. To ensure that the same number of points were interpolated for all bones,
the timesteps were first synchronized to yield 30,000,000 data points regardless of the
original size of the data, then interpolated.
After data interpolation, all of the data was passed through a lowpass filter with a fre-
quency defined as 0.1 π rad/sample. This lowpass filters out high frequencies and allows
for lower ones to pass through.
The data for each group was then averaged to get an average cyclic testing experiment
for each of the three groups. An exponential fit line was created and the relevant data
was plotted (See section 4.0.1). In this case, the time data is given from 0 to 30,000,000
seconds, when in reality the data was all given over a time period of about 29,000 seconds
(approximately 8 hrs).
The entire Matlab code is located in the appendix section A.5.1.
3.6.3
Failure Testing Instron Data Analyzed in Matlab
Failure data was also obtained from an Instron machine. This data was then read
into matlab. The position and load columns were extracted and placed into their own
corresponding vectors. The raw data was then plotted to see the entire failure curve data
for all bones (See appendix figures A.24, A.25, A.26, A.27, and A.28 for all bones plotted).
The data for 4L was removed since the data was inconsistent.
The load at which the bone failed as well as the ultimate strength was then extracted.
These failure loads and ultimate strengths were then graphed with a boxplot for each
group (see section 4.2).
The entire Matlab code is located in the appendix section A.5.3.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:41==
4
Results
4.0.1
Instron Matlab Results
Cyclic Testing Information
Bone
Calib. Testing
Order
+ or - In-
stron Data
+ or - DIC
data
Notes
1A
-
-
Bone used in first epoxy mold
casting attempt, Bone is fused
to mold
2A
1
2
-
-
Bone used in first epoxy cast-
ing. Bone removed and head
glued on for calibration
3A
2
-
-
Moment controlled test
4A
1
1
-
-
Used to test Instron machine
torque value, but twisted al-
most 90 degrees (not physio-
logical)
5A
2
-
-
1S
2
9
+
+
2S
2
11
+
+
3S
2
8
+
+
4S
2
15
+
+
5S
2
16
+
+
1M
1
6
+
+
2M
1
3
+
+
3M
2
10
+
+
4M
2
13
+
+
Cyclic testing paused at step 2
to check speckle pattern
5M
2
17
+
+
1L
1
5
-
-
2L
2
12
+
+
3L
1
7
+
+
Bone fell down after cyclic test-
ing and broke
4L
2
14
+
+
5L
1
4
+
+
Table 4.1: Cyclic testing information is included in this table. ”Bone” describes the bone
in question. ”Calib.” describes which calibration the ARAMIS system was using during
testing of the ”Bone”. ”Testing Order” describes the order in which the bones were tested
in the Instron machine. ”+ or - Instron Data” describes if the bone data was included (+)
or excluded (-) in the Instron data analysis (see section 3.6.2 for Instron data analysis
methods). ”+ or - DIC data” describes if the bone data was included (+) or excluded (-) in
the DIC data analysis (See section 3.6.1 for DIC data analysis methods) ”Notes”
contains any extra information about the bone. DIC and Instron data for 1L was
excluded. The Instron data seemed corrupted so it was discarded. The DIC data had an
unexplained jump in the data so it was also discarded.. See appendix figures A.21 and
A.22 to see the unexplained jump in the data
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
33
==PAGE:42==
4.1
Cyclical Testing Results
Table 4.1 shows relevant cyclic testing information.
Figures 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 show the average revolutions with interpolated data and figure
4.4 shows the fit graphs for all three graphs. Time on the x axis is an artificial time scale
from 0 to 30 million seconds. Position on the y axis describes the position of the piston in
the Instron machine. Lower values indicate the piston being lowered further.
The maximum position of the S average filtered data (figure 4.1) during the first cycle
was 7.1635 mm. The minimum position was 3.3001 mm. The maximum position of the
S average filtered data during the last cycle was 5.9397 mm. The minimum was 2.8888
mm.
Figure 4.1: Average S revolutions with interpolated data. Data averaged includes 1S, 2S,
3S, 4S, and 5S.
Figure 4.2: Average M revolutions with interpolated data. Data averaged includes 1M,
2M, 3M, 4M, and 5M.
The maximum position of the M average filtered data (figure 4.2) during the first cycle
34
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:43==
was 6.9661 mm. The minimum position was 5.5825 mm. The maximum position of the
M average filtered data during the last cycle was mm. The minimum was 2.5536 mm.
The maximum position of the L average filtered data (figure 4.3) during the first cycle
was 6.7446 mm. The minimum position was 2.8434 mm. The maximum position of the
L average filtered data during the last cycle was 5.4908 mm. The minimum was 2.6481
mm.
Figure 4.3: Average L revolutions with interpolated data. Data averaged includes 1M, 2M,
3M, 4M, and 5M.
Figure 4.4: Average fit lines for the averaged, interpolated S, M and L groups. Red in-
dicates the Long group, black indicates the medium group, and blue indicates the small
group. The long group includes bones L2, L3, L4, and L5. The medium group includes
bones 1M, 2M, 3M, 4M and 5M. The short group includes bones 1S, 2S, 3S, 4S, and 5M.
The fit graphs (figure 4.4) show that the y intercept of the S, M and L groups are dif-
ferent. The y value of the fit curve of the S average filtered data at x=0 was 4.9446 mm.
The y value of the fit curve of S average filtered data at x=30,000,000 was 3.9293 mm.
The y value of the fit curve of the M average filtered data at x=0 was 4.7411 mm. The y
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
35
==PAGE:44==
value of the fit curve of M average filtered data at x=30,000,000 was 3.4697 mm. The y
value of the fit curve of the L average filtered data at x=0 was 4.5697 mm. The y value
of the fit curve of L average filtered data at x=30,000,000 was 3.5776 mm. The slopes of
the fit lines for L and S are similar. The position of the piston for the M and S groups are
similar throughout the test.
4.1.1
DIC Matlab Results
Figures 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, and 4.8 show the normal strain at different parts of the fracture gap
as well as an average normal strain of the entire fracture gap. Figures 4.9, 4.10, 4.11,
4.12 show the shear strain at different parts of the fracture gap as well as the average
shear strain of the entire fracture gap.
The x axis describes the number of cycles passed in the test. The y axis describes the
strain as a ratio of the normal strain vector over the fracture gap length.
The normal strain averaged across the entire fracture gap (figure 4.5) is similar for the
L and S groups. All three strain graphs follow a logarithmic graph. The strain values for
the M group is higher then the L and S group average strain. The max strain for the S
and L groups was 0.73%. The max strain for the M group was 1.28%.
Figure 4.5: Normal strain values for the average of the entire fracture gap. All five bones
were used for the S and M averaged groups. Bones 2L, 3L, 4L, and 5L, were used for the
L group average.
The normal strain near the plate (figure 4.6) are similar for the M and L groups. The
strain starts off increasing quickly, and then begins to normalize. In the beginning of the
cycles, the L and M plates have higher strain values than S. Then around cycle number
38, the strains of M and L are lower than that of S. The strain graphs for M and L follow a
logarithmic graph, while the strain values for S seem more linear. The max strain for the
S group was 1.03%. The max strain for the M group was 0.99%. The max strain for the
L group was 0.95%.
36
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.6: Normal strain values for the part of the fracture gap closest to the fracture
plate. All five bones were used for the S and M averaged groups. Bones 2L, 3L, 4L, and
5L, were used for the L group average.
The normal strain in the middle of the fracture gap (figure 4.7) is similar for the L and
S groups. All three strain graphs follow a logarithmic graph. The strain values for the M
group is higher then the L and S group average strain. The max strain for the S and L
group was 0.74%. The max strain for the M group was 1.24%.
Figure 4.7: Normal strain values for the middle of the fracture gap. All five bones were
used for the S and M averaged groups. Bones 2L, 3L, 4L, and 5L, were used for the L
group average.
The slope of the normal strain in the area of the fracture gap furthest from the fracture
plate (figure 4.8) is similar for the L and S groups. All three strain graphs follow a logarith-
mic graph. The strain values for the M group is the highest, then the S group strains, and
the L group strains have the lowest values. The max strain for the S group was 1.07%.
The max strain for the M group was 2.14%. The max strain for the L group was 0.74%.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.8: Normal strain values for the part of the fracture gap furthest from the fracture
plate. All five bones were used for the S and M averaged groups. Bones 2L, 3L, 4L, and
5L, were used for the L group average.
The shear strain averaged across the fracture gap (figure 4.9) is similar for all three
groups until around cycle number 19. Past this cycles, the shear strain of the M group is
the highest, followed by the S group, and then the L group. All three strain graphs follow
a logarithmic graph. The max strain for the S group was 2.63%. The max strain for the M
group was 2.96%. The max strain for the L group was 2.12%.
Figure 4.9: Shear strain values for the average of the entire fracture gap. All five bones
were used for the S and M averaged groups. Bones 2L, 3L, 4L, and 5L, were used for the
L group average.
The shear strain of the fracture gap closest to the plate (figure 4.10) is similar for the S
and M groups. The S and M groups have higher shear strains close to the plate than the
L group does. All three strain graphs follow a logarithmic graph. The max strain for the S
group was 2.84%. The max strain for the M group was 3.07%. The max strain for the L
group was 2.02%.
38
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.10: Shear strain values for the area close to the fracture gap. All five bones were
used for the S and M averaged groups. Bones 2L, 3L, 4L, and 5L, were used for the L
group average.
The shear strain across the middle of the fracture gap (figure 4.11) is similar for all three
groups until around cycle number 19. Past this cycles, the shear strain of the M group is
the highest, followed by the S group, and then the L group. All three strain graphs follow
a logarithmic graph. The max strain for the S group was 2.57%. The max strain for the M
group was 2.95%. The max strain for the L group was 2.14%.
Figure 4.11: Shear strain values for the middle of the fracture gap. All five bones were
used for the S and M averaged groups. Bones 2L, 3L, 4L, and 5L, were used for the L
group average.
The shear strain across the fracture gap furthest from the fracture plate (figure 4.12)
follows a logarithmic graph for all three groups. The L group has higher strains during the
first 20 cycles or so, and then ends with having the lowest shear strain of all of the groups.
The M group has the highest shear strain after 50 cycles. The max strain for the S group
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
39
==PAGE:48==
was 2.47%. The max strain for the M group was 2.88%. The max strain for the L group
was 2.24%.
Figure 4.12: Shear strain values for area of the fracture gap furthest from the fracture
plate. All five bones were used for the S and M averaged groups. Bones 2L, 3L, 4L, and
5L, were used for the L group average.
Tables 4.2 and 4.3 show a summary of the shear and normal strains found in the dif-
ferent areas of the fracture gap.
Normal Strain Averaged
S
0.73%
M
1.28%
L
0.81%
Normal Strain Plate
S
1.03%
M
0.99%
L
0.95%
Normal Strain Mid
S
0.74%
M
1.24%
L
0.74%
Normal Strain Far
S
1.07%
M
2.14%
L
0.74%
Table 4.2: Normal strain values for:
averaged across the entire fracture gap
(Averaged), close to the fracture plate
(Plate), in the middle of the fracture gap
(Mid), and furthest from the fracture plate
(Far).
Shear Strain Averaged
S
2.63%
M
2.96%
L
2.12%
Shear Strain Plate
S
2.84%
M
3.07%
L
2.02%
Shear Strain Mid
S
2.57%
M
2.95%
L
2.14%
Shear Strain Far
S
2.47%
M
2.88%
L
2.24%
Table 4.3: Shear strain values for:
averaged across the entire fracture gap
(Averaged), close to the fracture plate
(Plate), in the middle of the fracture gap
(Mid), and furthest from the fracture plate
(Far).
40
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:49==
Graphs showing all of the normal and shear strain values for each bone are located in
the appendix section A.4.2.
4.2
Failure Testing Results
4.2.1
Instron Matlab Results
Failure Testing Information
Bone
+ or - Fail-
ure data
Broke
(Proxi-
mal)
Broke
(Lesser
Trochanter)
Notes
1A
-
Bone fused with epoxy
2A
-
Femur cut out of epoxy,
only used for calibration
3A
+
Yes
No
tested in Instron 8874 first,
then in 8502
4A
+
Yes
No
5A
-
Yes
No
Data not recorded by In-
stron
1S
+
Yes
Yes
2S
+
Yes
No
3S
+
Yes
Yes
4S
+
Yes
No
5S
-
No
Yes
1M
+
Yes
No
2M
-
No
Yes
3M
+
Yes
Yes
4M
+
Yes
Yes
5M
-
No
Yes
1L
+
Yes
No
2L
+
Yes
No
3L
-
Bone broke (dropped)
4L
-
Yes
No
5L
-
No
Yes
Table 4.4: All bones were tested on the same day. ”Bone” describes the bone in
question. ”+ or - Failure Data” describes if the bone data was included (+) or excluded
(-) from the failure data analysis (see section 3.6.3 for failure data analysis methods).
”Broke (Proximal)” describes if the bone broke at the most proximal screw connecting
the femur plate to the femur. ”Broke (Lesser Trochanter)” describes if the bone broke
near the lesser trochanter of the femur from buildup of stress. ”Notes” describes any
additional information about the bone during failure testing
Table 4.4 shows relevant failure testing information. Figure A.23 in the appendix shows
the stress-strain curve describing relevant areas of the curve.
Figure 4.13 shows where the bones broke during failure testing. Bones 2S, 3S, 4S, 1M,
2M, 5M, 1L, 2L, 4L, 3A, 4A, and 5A broke at the most proximal screw in the plate. Bones
5S, 2M, 5M, and 5L broke near the lesser trochanter. Bones 1S, 3S, 3M, and 4M broke
at the most proximal screw in the plate and near the lesser trochanter simultaneously.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
41
==PAGE:50==
Bones 5S, 2M, 5M, and 5L were excluded from the analysis because they only broke
near the lesser trochanter. 5A was excluded as the data was not recorded by the Instron
machine. 4L data was excluded since the data had inexplicable jumps in the data (4L
data seen in appendix figure A.24). While this limits the amount of data, the quality was
not acceptable. Bones 2L, 1S, and 1M also had some data quality issues, however these
issues were not deemed significant so these data were included.
(a) Failure point(s) of the short group.
(b) Failure point(s) of the medium group.
(c) Failure point(s) of the long group.
(d) Failure point(s) of the all group.
Figure 4.13: Failure points of the bones after failure testing. The bones broke either at
the most proximal screw, near the lesser trochanter or at both points.
Figures 4.14, 4.15, 4.16 shows the matlab graphs obtained from analyzing the Instron
failure data. The long group consisted of 1L and 2L. The medium group consisted of 1M,
3M and 4M. The short group consisted of 1S, 2S, 3S, and 4S. The all group consisted of
3A and 4A. Table 4.4 describes the failure testing in more detail.
The fuzziness of the data is due to vibrational noise and the fact that the accuracy of
the machine is not very high for the values being measured (accuracy = 12.5N). Since
the failure test was a compressive test, the loads on the y axis and the position on the
42
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:51==
x axis are given in negative values. The bones that failed at the lowest loads were the
3A and 4A groups at around 330 N and 450 N of compressive force respectively. The
bones that failed at the highest loads were 1M and 4M, at around 1,200 N of compressive
force. The bone group with the highest ultimate strength and the highest failure load was
the medium bone group, at around 1,400 N of compressive force. The bone group with
the lowest ultimate strength and failure load was the all bone group at around 400 N of
compressive force.
Figure 4.14: Failure graph of all bones included in analysis. Reddish colors indicate an ”S”
bone, bluish colors indicate ”M” bones, greenish colors indicate ”L” bones, and black/gray
colors indicate ”A” bones. The x axis indicates the position of the piston in the Instron
machine. The y axis indicates the amount of load applied by the machine to the bone.
Figures A.25, A.26, A.27, A.28 in appendix show all bones plotted by group.
Figure 4.15: Boxplot depicting the load at which the bones failed. The x axis consists of
the four groups tested. The y axis consists of the loads applied by the machine to the
bone.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.16: Boxplot depicting the ultimate strength of the bones. The x axis consists of
the four groups tested. The y axis consists of the loads applied by the machine to the
bone.
44
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:53==
5
Discussion
As stated in the introduction, some level of micromotion is wanted to heal a bone frac-
ture and stimulate osteoblasts and osteoclasts to rebuild bone properly, while at the same
time the strains the fracture experiences should also be reduced, as this is bad for bone
growth. A decreased working length theoretically increases strain in the fracture gap [72].
This decreased working length also increases the stiffness of the construct [73, 74, 27],
which in turn decreases micromotion in the fracture gap [13, 75]. This means that both
stiffness of construct and strain can be used to approximate micromotion.
This project was focused on finding the best screw placement to reduce nonunion and
malunion in femur fractures. This was analyzed by looking at the difference in micromo-
tion between different screw placements. However, the ideal level of micromotion is not
currently known. One rule of thumb that surgeons use is that the level of compressive
strain should not significantly exceed the compressive strain of normal bone, which is
less than 10%. However, this value was derived from an old study on sheep tibia, which
is not necessarily analogous to human bone [18, 76, 77, 78]. Further studies also only
examine different micromotion values in a variety of different animals [79]. Therefore, it
is hard to quantify the ideal level of micromotion.
5.1
Method Development
5.1.1
Sawbone
If cadaveric bones were to be used in this study, osteoporosis could be a major prob-
lem for the repeatably of the mechanical testing, since many elderly patients have osteo-
porosis. Possible screw loosening due to the brittle bones would also make it difficult to
accurately measure the micromotion in the femur fracture [80]. Since many cadavers are
at different stages of osteoporosis, this could also attribute to differences in micromotion
values. Sawbones were therefore used in this project (further description of sawbones in
section 5.1.1.) as this allows for greater control over the variables in the experiment.
5.1.2
Cyclic Testing
To begin cyclical testing, the femur must be properly attached to the Instron machine.
Since the femur is an organic shape, not made of simple lines and circles, this proved to be
a challenge. Epoxy was eventually used as it would be able to closely follow the organic
contour of the bone. Machined metal bone mounts were also attempted, but were not
able to be created with the tools available at the time (this process is further described in
section 5.3.1). Since torsion was not used during testing, a simpler proximal bone mount
could have been used which could have been more secure and stable.
Before beginning cyclical testing, machine testing had to be performed. This included,
deciding on how the data would be obtained from the Instron machine, how to synchro-
nize the ARAMIS system with the Instron machine, and how to synchronize the possible
torsional and axial forces. These tests were done with bones from the A group, which
were used as a testing group. As these bones were also used to make the epoxy molds,
there was not enough data to be able to include this group in the cyclical testing section.
During testing of the machine, it was found that the torsional load was misunderstood
by the machine. When inputting a value of 10 N/m, which was also seen in other similar
studies [72, 81], the test bone (4A) twisted almost 90 degrees, which is much more than a
value of 10 N/m. Also, when looking at the torsional forces acting on a femur, these forces
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
45
==PAGE:54==
are acting all along the bone itself from the muscles and tendons running along the bone.
When applying torsion in this test, it was only applied to the femoral head. Therefore,
the torsional aspect of the test was removed, so that its uncertainty would not affect the
outcome of the test.
When creating the waveform, there was a relatively long holding period. This was
because synchronization of the Instron machine and the ARAMIS system via electrical
signal could not be achieved so the systems had to be manually synchronized. During
this process, it was found that the Instron machine lost about a second per cycle when
executing the wave matrix commands. Since there were 50 cycles that the bone needed
to go through, the hold command needed to be held for at least 50 seconds. This hold
command value was increased to create a safety buffer. The long static holding of the
bone is not expected to have any effect on the results of this experiment.
After testing seven bones, the ARAMIS system was decalibrated. This was most likely
due to some sort of change between the position of the two cameras relative to each other
that happened overnight. A second calibration (see section 3.4.2 for a description of the
calibration steps) was required to ensure that the data was accurate and the system could
properly recognize the DIC pattern. After calibration, the system was setup as previously
described in section 3.4.1.
When undergoing these mechanical tests, it is important to know where to load the
specimen. In this case, the femur was being axially loaded with a compressive force and
it was loaded on the mechanical axis. This axis mostly passes through air and partially
through the shaft of the femur. This axis is especially important to consider for bone since
bone is an anisotropic material, so the direction of the load has a large impact on how the
bone will react to loads.
5.1.3
Failure Testing
When obtaining the failure data, excessive noise was seen in the graph. This noise
was due to vibrational noise of the testing machine as well as the uncertainty from the
large load cells used in this experiment. The Instron 8502 machine has a dynamic load
capacity of 250 kN (accuracy of 0.005 %, 12.5 N) which is a much higher load than the
forces being used which means excessive noise can be introduced during data aquisition.
Despite the noise, the trend of the data is clearly seen.
When conducting the failure tests originally, the epoxy bone mounts were used in the
Instron 8874 machine. However, after continually increasing the load on the bone, the
epoxy mounts began to fail. When there was no load present on the bones, the epoxy
bone mounts were parallel with the floor. However, when the mounts were continually
loaded, the mounts began to become nonparallel with the floor. Eventually the test was
stopped, since the epoxy was failing before the bones themselves failed.
To properly test the failure of the bones, a new Instron 8502 machine with 30 mm grips
was used. The proximal end of the femur had to be cut to fit into the grips which inevitably
changed the anatomy of the femur and caused the creation of a stress point at the lesser
trochanter.
5.1.4
Data Analysis
When testing the bones, the first DIC picture taken was taken after the bone had un-
dergone 1,000 loading revolutions. To mitigate this, an image was taken with the ARAMIS
system before beginning the Instron testing cycle. However, this first picture was some-
times not recognized along with the cyclical cycle pictures, so the reference picture used
46
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:55==
was the first picture taken after 1,000 revolutions to ensure consistency between the spec-
imens.
When using the lowpass filter in matlab to analyze the cyclic testing Instron data, a
buildup of high values at the start and end of the signal can be seen. This can happen
when there is an abrupt start or end to a signal as there is in this case. This causes the
algorithm to explode the values at the beginning and the end. To remove this, extra data
handing steps are needed. However, since the filtered data, excluding the head and tail
ends, was a good fit to the data, this was not done due to time constraints.
When zooming in on the average graphs for the S, M and L groups in the Instron
cyclical data (figures 4.1, 4.2, 4.3), it can be seen that the synchronization is imperfect.
Theoretically, the average data cycles should have peaks that gradually change height,
rather than abruptly becoming longer or shorter. When looking at the original data zoomed
in, there are areas of the data where the peaks are relatively well aligned (see alignment
in appendix figure A.10) and areas where the peaks are not well aligned (see alignment in
appendix figure A.9). This translates to an average data set where a proper average peak
can sometimes be seen (see peak in appendix figure A.12) and where a poor average
peak can also be seen (see peak in appendix figure A.11). Since this difference is not
uniform across the entire data set, it cannot be easily fixed by shifting the data. To ensure
that the entire data is properly synced, advanced signal processing would be required.
This would require aligning the peaks of each data set using techniques such as cross
correlation. Due to time constraints this was not attempted in this project.
5.2
Data Analysis
One of the best measures of fracture stability is the amount of interfragmentary strain
present in the fracture [17]. In general, smaller interfragmentary gaps seem to be less
sensitive to the amount of interfragmentary strain than fractures with larger gap sizes
[17]. When looking at compressive strain, this promotes the formation of fibrocartilaginous
tissue while tensile strain promotes the formation of fibrous connective tissue that includes
collagen fibers [17]. This report uses a large fracture gap in order to properly see the
strains within the fracture gap. In an in vivo situation, this would cause the fracture to be
more sensitive to the strains experienced in the fracture gap which could delay fracture
healing.
When looking at the overall strain in a cell culture model, there was a significant in-
crease in cell proliferation seen when a 1% strain was applied [18]. When this strain
was increased to 4% or more, the osteoblasts began to perpendicularly align with the
strain direction, more perpendicularly aligned with more strain [18]. After the strains were
increased to past 5%, proliferation was no longer increased [18]. In an article looking at
distal femur locking plates, it was concluded that strains over 10% and shear strains could
be harmful to proper bone healing between fracture fragments [82]. In this report, the nor-
mal strains were between 0.73% and 2.14% and shear strains were between 2.02% and
3.07%. These strain values do not exceed the 4% strain that caused the osteoblasts to
align, nor do they exceed the 10% strain limit that could harm proper bone healing.
The shear strains were relatively high, which could be harmful to bone healing. The
shear strains of the medium group was the highest in all places in the fracture gap, which
indicates that malunion or nonunion caused by shear strain is highest for the medium
working length group. This suggests that the medium working length is not a desirable
working length to stimulate proper fracture healing.
A longer working length theoretically reduces strain at the fracture site, which would be
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
47
==PAGE:56==
advantageous for healing purposes [72]. Looking at the strains in this report, it is seen that
the strains for the long working length is either the lowest or equal to the lowest strains in
all areas for both normal and shear strain, which aligns with the conclusions from Pletka
et al [72]. Another article found that increasing the working length did not seem to have
an association with increased survival of the femur [28]. This also corresponds with the
results in this report, as the failure load of the long group was significantly lower than the
failure loads for the medium and short working length groups. This implies that while a
longer working length is beneficial in terms of strain reduction at the fracture site, a working
length can be too long. A working length that is too long lowers the fatigue strength of the
construct [29] (as seen in figure 4.4) comparatively to the M and S groups and can cause
screw loosening and fracture nonunion [19].
The working length can also influence axial stiffness [27, 12, 79]. When increasing the
working length, the stiffness of the construct decreases [73, 74, 27]. A reduced stiffness
is shown to help increase healing of the fracture and reduce the risk for malunion or
nonunion [27]. There is an increase in the number of nonunion cases associated with
a short working length which could partially be attributed to its increased stiffness [83].
Other factors that can change construct stiffness includes altering the plate length, the
screw position, and the screw number (screw density) [79, 84, 12].
These factors suggest that there is an optimal working length range [19].
When looking at the failure load of the four different groups (see figure 4.15), it can
clearly be seen that the medium and short bones fail at a higher load than the long and
all bones, which indicates that they are able to handle more load. This is also supported
by the fact that the ultimate strength of the medium and short bones are also higher than
the long and all groups. These failure testing values are able to tell us that, if a bone
experiences a single large load, this would best be handled by a bone with a medium
working length, followed closely by bones with a short working length. Bones with a long
or medium working length with all screw holes filled, would not handle a large compressive
load well.
5.3
Limitations
5.3.1
Data Acquisition
An important aspect of cyclical fatigue testing is the strength of the mounts holding the
specimen in the testing machine. The mounts holding the specimen must be stronger than
the test subject to prevent the mounts from tiring before the specimen. During cyclical
testing, the bone was not held perfectly with the epoxy bone mounts. When the bone
was loaded to 750N, there was slight flexion of the mounts. This could introduce slight
uncertainties during the tests. The epoxy bone mounts also began to crack near the
metal plate during torsional testing. These cracks were repaired with super glue whenever
they were noticed. Even with the supporting pressure of the metal plates around the
epoxy, the mounts continued to flex during the loading tests. A metal bone mount was
originally attempted and would have removed the uncertainty of flexion during testing
(further described in appendix section 5.3.1).
During failure testing, the anatomy of the sawbones was changed using a band saw.
Slight differences in the anatomy between bones could introduce some uncertainty. Since
the stress buildup in the lesser trochanter caused some bones to only fail at this point,
some bones were removed from the analysis which resulted in only two bones for the A
and L. This small sample size could increase the margin of error for these groups.
48
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:57==
5.3.2
Data Analysis
Since the ARAMIS system and the Instron machine were also not able to be electron-
ically synced, the exact load the bone was experiencing when the ARAMIS picture was
taken is unknown. However, the changes in load of the machine are minuscule and are
expected to have no impact on the data.
5.3.3
ARAMIS System
The ARAMIS system is not able to see anything that is not in full view of the camera.
This means that the ARAMIS system was not able to see inside the fracture gap, so vector
analysis was done to obtain a strain field in the fracture gap. There was also a slight
dimple on the sawbone near the distal end of the femur, as shown in figure 5.1, which
the ARAMIS system was repeatedly not able to detect (see figure 5.1b). This gives us an
incomplete stress-strain field over the bone. This limitation of the system also makes it
hard to see the areas right above and below the fracture gap as well as the sides of the
bone.
(a) Dimple location on distal end of the femur
(b) Dimple location on DIC image.
The
ARAMIS system is not able to detect stresses
and strains inside the dimple. Since this dim-
ple is so close to the fracture edge, this could
cause issues with data analysis if a more de-
tailed displacement field in the fracture gap is
wanted.
Figure 5.1: Dimple placement on the femur and in the DIC image
5.3.4
DIC Method
When using the DIC method, the size of the interrogation cells used to calculate the
results have a large impact on precision and resolution of the results. Larger interrogation
cells give better strain precision but cause a reduction in the spatial resolution of the data
obtained [85]. The pattern itself can also influence the measurement data quality [85].
Typically, the focus for using the DIC method is on the information content found in the
entire image, however, our focus is on specific points within the image. This means that
the resolution is especially important for this project. 5-10 pixels per speckle gives the
optimum spatial resolution for the DIC data [63]. With a resolution of 4096 x 30,000 pixels,
this value was hard to obtain during pattern application. Small differences in spot size and
application between bones could also affect measurements [63]. This is why checking the
pattern quality before testing as well as consistent application of the speckle pattern are
important steps during data acquisition.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
49
==PAGE:58==
5.3.5
Surgeries and Anatomy
Bones are considered visco-elastic materials. However, this effect is relatively slow in
bones. In cartilage, this effect is less than 1 Hz during walking [86], amd in bones this effect
is much slower. Since the cyclic testing of the bone is done at 2 Hz, this viscoelasticity
should not be relevant. Most studies that have looked into this phenomenon, are looking
at strain rates higher than 200 Hz [87, 88, 89], which is much larger than the frequencies
our bone is exposed to.
In vivo, muscles and tendons are also present in the upper thigh. This inevitably sta-
bilizes the femur. However, this effect is expected to be minimal.
When the surgical treatments were done, a 10 mm section of the bone was removed,
which changes the anatomy of the bone. Instead of sawing out a portion of the bone, the
bone could have first been ”fractured” and then displaced 10 mm, and then the plate could
have been added. However, this would make it difficult to ensure exact placement of the
femur plates between bones, and ensure that the linear axis of the bone was preserved.
Therefore, it was decided to first affix the femur plate to the femur, and then remove a
10 mm section of the bone. The anatomical change is not expected to have a significant
impact on the results of this experiment.
The gap itself is also typically not present during in vivo fracture fixation as there is
typically some form of bone contact. This could also impact how the loads are distributed
across the bone. However, since the focus of this report was looking at the movement
within the fracture, this 10 mm gap was needed to obtain strains within this area.
When sawing the 10mm section out of the bone, a hand saw was used and the bone
was cut along the guide lines in figure 3.3b. Slight variations in this removal process could
be present, but is not expected to have a large impact on the results of this experiment.
The fracture imitated in this study is the oblique fracture that is perfectly straight. Such
a cross sectional perfect fracture is almost never seen in the clinic, as they are typically
comminuted and messy fractures.
50
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
This study focused on evaluating the effect of working length on fracture healing through
micromotion, failure points and strain values. This was done using a combination of the
3D ARAMIS system using the DIC method and through cyclic and failure compression
testing.
This report concluded that there is an optimal working length that will provide ample
micromotion while also providing enough stiffness to prevent fracture displacement, how-
ever it was not defined in this report. A decrease in strain values was found to correlate
with an increased working length to a certain point. This increased working length cor-
responded to a decreased stiffness of the construct which causes an increase in gap
micromotion. It was found that the shear strain in the medium working length fracture gap
was the highest from all groups, and shear strain is known to negatively impact fracture
healing, which implies that the medium working length would have the highest rate of
malunion. Although the medium working length tolerated the highest load before failure,
which is an important factor for dealing with higher loads, fracture union is determined to
be a more important factor. The long working length had the lowest shear strains, but
tolerated the lowest load before failure. These results show that the short working length
is the optimal working length out of the three working lengths studied, because the shear
strain values are lower than the medium working length, and the failure load it can endure
is almost analogous with the medium working length. However, these results also show
that more research needs to be done into the impact of working length on fracture healing
to determine the optimal working length.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
51
==PAGE:60==
7
Recommendations
7.1
Future Work
No statistical analysis was done for this project due to time constraints. Statistical
comparisons of the different groups should be conducted to determine with certainty if the
differences were significant.
Stiffness is an important factor in the strength of bone as well as the strength of the
femur plate [20]. Stiffness of the femur plate can affect the loading conditions of the bone
which can affect the strength of the bone in the long term. FEA models of femur fractures
can be used to asses these values and have already been investigated [18, 90, 91, 74,
92, 19], but could be further developed.
Current research regarding micromotion levels, and the union of bone and creation of
calluses, includes an article by Jagodinski et. al [14] that states that micromotion of at least
0.2 mm is needed for the production of callus, and up to 1 mm is acceptable. Anything
past 2 mm however, would not be beneficial. Han et. al [79] looked at two types of axial
micromotion locking plate constructs, one that allows for micromotion of 0.3 mm, and one
that allows from micromotion up to 0.6 mm in sheep tibia. For their study, the bone heals
better when fixed with the construct that allows 0.6 mm micromotion [79]. Wazen et. al
[93] looked at micromotion in mouse tibiae, where implants had either 0.15 mm or 0.3
mm of micromotion. In this study, areas that had strain concentrations above 30% had
disrupted bone regeneration and areas with low strain values had bone formation. As all
of these studies used animal or cell models, there is still a need for further research in this
area.
52
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Matthew S. Coon and Ben J. Best. “Distal Femur Fractures”. eng. In: StatPearls.
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2022. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/books/NBK551675/ (visited on 01/31/2022).
[2]
Islam Mubark et al. “Mortality Following Distal Femur Fractures Versus Proximal
Femur Fractures in Elderly Population: The Impact of Best Practice Tariff”. en. In:
Cureus 12.9 (Sept. 2020). ISSN: 2168-8184. DOI: 10.7759/cureus.10744. URL:
https://www.cureus.com/articles/41646-mortality-following-distal-femur-fractures-
versus-proximal-femur-fractures-in-elderly-population-the-impact-of-best-practice-
tariff (visited on 01/31/2022).
[3]
Sung Huang Laurent Tsai et al. “Distal femur fractures have a higher mortality rate
compared to hip fractures among the elderly: Insights from the National Trauma
Data Bank”. English. In: Injury 52.7 (July 2021), pp. 1903–1907. ISSN: 0020-1383,
1879-0267. DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2021.04.023. URL: https://www.injuryjournal.
com/article/S0020-1383(21)00332-6/fulltext (visited on 01/31/2022).
[4]
A. Yanez, J.A. Carta, and G. Garces. “Biomechanical Evaluation of a New System
to Improve Screw Fixation in Osteoporotic Bones”. In: Medical Engineering and
Physics 32.5 (2010), pp. 532–541. DOI: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2010.02.014.
[5]
Does Osteoporosis Run in Your Family? | CDC. en-us. Apr. 2021. URL: https:
//www.cdc.gov/genomics/disease/osteoporosis.htm (visited on 01/19/2022).
[6]
Malunion and Nonunion Fracture Treatment | UPMC. en. URL: https://www.upmc.
com/services/orthopaedics/conditions- treatments/malunion- nonunion (visited on
12/30/2021).
[7]
Malunion and Nonunion Fractures. en-US. URL: https://www.pennmedicine.org/
for - patients - and - visitors / find - a - program - or - service / penn - orthoplastic - limb -
salvage- center/complex- fracture- care/malunion- and- nonunion- fractures (visited
on 12/30/2021).
[8]
David Marsh. “Concepts of Fracture Union, Delayed Union, and Nonunion”. en-US.
In: Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research® 355 (Oct. 1998), S22. ISSN:
0009-921X. URL: https://journals.lww.com/clinorthop/Abstract/1998/10001/
Concepts_of_Fracture_Union,_Delayed_Union,_and.4.aspx (visited on 12/25/2021).
[9]
Four Factors for Fracture Healing: Treatment of Nonunion and Malunion - Penn
Medicine. en-US. URL: https://www.pennmedicine.org/departments-and-centers/
orthopaedic - surgery / about - us / excellence - in - motion - newsletter / archive / 2019 -
newsletter/treatment-of-nonunion-and-malunion (visited on 12/30/2021).
[10]
Amirhossein Goharian, Mohammed Rafiq Abdul Kadir, and Mohamed Ruslan Ab-
dullah. Trauma Plating Systems: Biomechanical, Material, Biological, and clinical
Aspects. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier, 2017. ISBN: 9780128047583.
[11]
Shih-Hao Chen et al. “Finitie Element Comparison of Retrograde Intramedullary
Nailing and Locking Plate Fixation with/without an Intramedullary Allograft for Dis-
tal Femur Fracture Following Total Knee Arthroplasty”. In: The Knee 21.1 (2014),
pp. 224–231. DOI: 10.1016/j.knee.2013.03.006.
[12]
Michael Hackl et al. “Plate Osteosynthesis of Proximal Ulna Fractures—A Biome-
chanical Micromotion Analysis”. In: Journal of Hand Surgery Am 42.10 (2017),
834.e1–834.e7. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2017.05.014.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
53
==PAGE:62==
[13]
Jake P. Heiney et al. “Distal Femoral Fixation: A Biomechanical Comparison of Tri-
gen Retrograde Intramedullary (I.M.) Nail, Dynamic Condylar Screw (DCS), and
Locking Compression Plate (LCP) Condylar Plate”. In: The Journal of Trauma In-
jury, Infection, and Critical Care 66.2 (), pp. 443–449.
[14]
Michael Jagodzinski and Christian Krettek. “Effect of Mechanical Stability on Frac-
ture Healing- An Update”. In: Injury 38.1 supplement (2007), S3–S10. DOI: 10.
1016/j.injury.2007.02.005.
[15]
Aline S. Macedo et al. “Physics behind the implants used for high strain fractures:
literature review”. In: Brazilian Journal of Veterinary Research and Animal Science
55.1 (2018), p. 1. DOI: 10.11606/issn.1678-4456.bjvras.2018.131164.
[16]
G. Vicenti et al. “Micromotion in the Fracture Healing of Closed Distal Metaphyseal
Tibial Fractures: A Multicentre Prospective Study”. In: Injury 45S.Supplement 6
(2014), S37–S35. DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2014.10.019.
[17]
Peter Augat, Marianne Hollensteiner, and Christian von Runden. “The role of Me-
chanical Stimulation in the Enhancement of Bone Healing”. In: Injury 52.Supple-
ment 2 (2021), S78–S83. DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2020.10.009.
[18]
Lutz E. Claes et al. “Effects of Mechanical Factors on the Fracture Healing Pro-
cess”. In: Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research 355S (1998), pp. 132–147.
DOI: 10.1097/00003086-199810001-00015.
[19]
Jianzhai Wang et al. “Plating System Design Determines Mechanical Environ-
ment in Long Bone Mid-shaft Fractures: A Finited Element Analysis”. In: Journal
of Investigative Surgery 33.8 (2020), pp. 699–708. DOI: 10.1080/08941939.2019.
1567875.
[20]
VK Ganesh, K Ramakrishna, and Dhanjoo N Ghista. “Biomechanics of bone-fracture
fixation by stiffness-graded plates in comparison with stainless-steel plates”. In:
Biomedical engineering online 4.46 (2005). DOI: 10.1186/1475-925X-4-46.
[21]
Saeed Manteghi et al. “Investigation of the mechanical properties and failure modes
of hybrid natural fiber composites for potential bone fracture fixation plates”. en.
In: Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 65 (Jan. 2017),
pp. 306–316. ISSN: 1751-6161. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016.08.035. URL: https:
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S1751616116303046 (visited on
12/25/2021).
[22]
Abdellah Ait Moussa et al. “Minimizing Stress Shielding and Cement Damage in
Cemented Femoral Component of a Hip Prosthesis through Computational Design
Optimization”. In: Advances in Orthopedics 2017.2017 (2017), p. 8437956. DOI:
10.1155/2017/8437956.
[23]
M.J. Weaver, G.W. Chaus, and A. et al Masoudi. “The effect of surgeon-controlled
variables on construct stiffness in lateral locked plating of distal femoral fractures”.
In: BMC Musculoskeletal disorders 22.512 (2021). DOI: 10 . 1186 / s12891 - 021 -
04341-2.
[24]
Michael Bottland et al. “Far Cortical Locking Can Reduce Stiffness of Locked Plat-
ing Constructs While Retaining Construct Strength”. In: The Journal of Bone and
Joint Surgery 91.8 (2009), pp. 1985–1994. DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.H.01038.
[25]
Peini Chao et al. “Effect of plate working length on plate stiffness and cyclic fatigue
life in a cadaveric femoral fracture gap model stabilized with a 12-hole 2.4 mm
locking compression plate”. In: BMC veterinary research 9.125 (2013). DOI: 10.
1186/1746-6148-9-125.
[26]
Sven Mardian et al. “Locking Plate Constructs Benefit from Interfragmentary Lag
Screw Fixation with Decreased Shear Movements and More Predictable Fracture
54
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:63==
Gap Motion in Simple Fracture Patterns”. In: Clinical Biomechanics 70 (2019),
pp. 89–96. DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2019.08.008.
[27]
Nikhil Nanavati and Marcus Walker. “Current Concepts to Reduce Mechanical
Stiffness in Locked Plating Systems: A Review Article”. In: Orthopedic Research
and Reviews 6 (2014), pp. 91–95. DOI: 10.2147/ORR.S66014.
[28]
Ching-Kong Chao et al. “Contradictory Working Length Effects in Locked Plating
of the Distal and Middle Femoral Fractures- a Biomechanical Study”. In: Clinical
Biomechanics 80 (2020), p. 105198. DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2020.105198.
[29]
W Ricci et al. “Biomechanical Investigation of Plate Working Length on Fatigue
Characteristics of Locking Plate Constructs in Human Cadaveric Distal Metaphy-
seal Femoral Fracture Models”. In: 1754. 56th Annual Meeting of the Orthopaedic
Research Society.
[30]
Femur Shaft Fractures (Broken Thighbone) - OrthoInfo - AAOS. URL: https://
www.orthoinfo.org/en/diseases--conditions/femur-shaft-fractures-broken-thighbone/
(visited on 01/23/2022).
[31]
“11 - Femur and Pelvis Fractures”. en. In: ed. by M. Patrice Eiff and Robert Hatch.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2012, pp. 214–233. ISBN: 9781437704280. DOI:
10.1016/B978- 1- 4377- 0428- 0.00011- 9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9781437704280000119 (visited on 01/23/2022).
[32]
Oliver Jones. The femur. URL: https://teachmeanatomy.info/lower-limb/bones/
femur/. (accessed: 14.09.2021).
[33]
Femur Bone Anatomy. URL: https://www.registerednursern.com/femur- bone-
anatomy/. (accessed: 14.09.2021).
[34]
Rao Sharath and Vijayan Sandeep. Anatomy and physiology. Houston, Texas:
Openstax, 2013. ISBN: 1938168135.
[35]
Grant Breeland, Margaret A. Sinkler, and Ritesh G. Menezes. “Embryology, Bone
Ossification”. eng. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2022.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539718/ (visited on 01/23/2022).
[36]
Bone formation. URL: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-ap/chapter/
bone-formation/. (accessed: 14.09.2021).
[37]
Ott S. M. “Cortical or Trabecular Bone: What’s the Difference?” In: American Jour-
nal of Nephrology 47 (2018), pp. 373–375. DOI: 10.1159/000489672.
[38]
Difference Between Trabecular and Cortical Bone. en-US. URL: https://www.
differencebetween.com/difference-between-trabecular-and-cortical-bone/ (visited on
12/30/2021).
[39]
Femur Fracture Physiotherapy. URL: https://www.phoenixrehabgroup.com/femur-
fracture-physiotherapy.html. (accessed: 07.09.2021).
[40]
Jason A. Lowe. Femur Shaft Fractures (Broken Thighbone). URL: https://orthoinfo.
aaos.org/en/diseases-- conditions/femur- shaft- fractures- broken- thighbone/. (ac-
cessed: 07.09.2021).
[41]
Sari Salminen et al. “Specific Features Associated with Femoral Shaft Fractures
Caused by Low-Energy Trauma”. In: Journal of Trauma 43.1 (1997), pp. 117–122.
DOI: 10.1097/00005373-199707000-00027.
[42]
Bone Healing. URL: https://www.physio- pedia.com/Bone_Healing. (accessed:
08.09.2021).
[43]
Jonathon Sheen and Vishnu Garla. Fracture Healing Overview. URL: https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK551678/. (accessed: 08.09.2021).
[44]
Ben Sharareh. Fracture Healing. URL: https : / / www . orthobullets . com / basic -
science/9009/fracture-healing. (accessed: 08.09.2021).
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
55
==PAGE:64==
[45]
R L Cruess and J Dumont. “Fracture Healing”. In: Canadian Journal of Surgery
18.5 (1975), pp. 403–413.
[46]
Hans K. Uhthoff, Philippe Poitras, and David S. Backman. “Internal plate fixation
of fractures: short history and recent developments”. In: Journal of Orthopaedic
Science 11.2 (2006), pp. 118–126. DOI: 10.1007/s00776-005-0984-7.
[47]
Jan Bartonicek. “Proximal femur fractures”. In: Clinical Orthopaedics and Related
Research 419 (2004), pp. 306–310. DOI: 10.1097/01.blo.0000116316.28472.d8.
[48]
Philippe Hernigou and Jacques Pariat. “History of internal fixation (part 1): early
developments with wires and plates before World War II”. In: International Or-
thopaedics 41.6 (2017), pp. 1273–1283. DOI: 10.1007/s00264-016-3347-4.
[49]
J Cordey, M Borgeaud, and S Perren. “Force transfer between the plate and the
bone: relative importance of the bending stiffness of the screws friction between
plate and bone”. In: Injury 31.Supplement 3 (2000), pp. C21–C28. DOI: 10.1016/
s0020-1383(00)80028-5.
[50]
Jihyeung Kim et al. “Retrograde Intramedullary Nailing for Distal Femur Fracture
with Osteoporosis”. In: Clinical Orthopaedic Surgery 4.4 (2012), pp. 307–312. DOI:
10.4055/cios.2012.4.4.307.
[51]
Robert Gaines et al. “Titanium versus Stainless Steel Locked Plates for Distal Fe-
mur Fractures: Is There Any Difference?” In: paper 55. Orthopaedic Trauma Asso-
ciation. URL: https://ota.org/sites/files/legacy_abstracts/ota08/otapa/OTA080655.
htm.
[52]
Michael Zlodwodzki et al. “Titanium Locking Plates are Superior to Stainless Steel
Locking Plates in the Treatment of Osteoporotic Distal Femur Fractures: A Biome-
chanical Study in a Fresh-Frozen Human Cadaver Model”. In: Orthopaedic Pro-
ceedings 94-B.SUPPXXXV II (2018).
[53]
Trevor J. Lujan et al. “Locked Plating of Distal Femur Fractures Leads to Inconsis-
tent and Asymmetric Callus Formation”. In: Journal Of Orthopaedic Trauma 24.3
(2010), pp. 156–162. DOI: 10.1097/BOT.0b013e3181be6720.
[54]
Semih Benli et al. “Evaluation of Bone Plate with Low-stiffness Material in Terms
of Stress Distribution”. In: Journal of Biomechanics 41.15 (2008), pp. 3229–3235.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.08.003.
[55]
David C. Tapscott and Christopher Wottowa. “Orthopedic Implant Materials”. eng.
In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2022. URL: http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560505/ (visited on 01/23/2022).
[56]
Rajesh Purushothaman. Bone screws in orthopaedic surgery. URL: https://orthopaedicprinciples.
com/2013/06/bone-screws-in-orthopaedic-surgery/. (accessed: 14.09.2021).
[57]
B. Grawe et al. “Fracture fixation with two locking screws versus three non-locking
screws”. In: Bone Joint Research 1.6 (2012), pp. 118–124. DOI: 10.1302/2046-
3758.16.2000078.
[58]
M. B. Bickley and D. P. Hanel. “Self-tapping versus standard tapped titanium screw
fixation in the upper extremity”. eng. In: The Journal of Hand Surgery 23.2 (Mar.
1998), pp. 308–311. ISSN: 0363-5023. DOI: 10.1016/S0363-5023(98)80132-9.
[59]
Gareth Arthurs. “Advances in internal fixation: locking plates”. In: In practice 37
(Jan. 2015), pp. 13–20. DOI: 10.1136/inp.g7695.
[60]
Tim Wang et al. “Cancellous Screws Are Biomechanically Superior to Cortical
Screws in Metaphyseal Bone.” In: Orthopedics (2016). DOI: 10.3928/01477447-
20160509-01.
[61]
Jeffrey J. Cherian et al. “Mechanical, Anatomical, and Kinematic Axis in TKA: Con-
cepts and Practical Applications”. In: Current Reviews in Musculoskeletal Medicine
7.2 (Mar. 2014), pp. 89–95. ISSN: 1935-973X. DOI: 10.1007/s12178-014-9218-
56
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:65==
y. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4092202/ (visited on
01/23/2022).
[62]
Rao Sharath and Vijayan Sandeep. Knee surgery. New Delhi, India: Jaypee Digi-
tal, 2014. ISBN: 9789351522256.
[63]
Craig Hillman. Digital Image Correlation: What It Is and Common Pitfalls. URL:
https://www.dfrsolutions.com/blog/digital- image- correlation- what- it- is- and-
common-pitfalls. (accessed: 28.09.2021).
[64]
Mark T. Begonia et al. “Non-Contact Strain Measurement in the Mouse Forearm
Loading Model Using Digital Image Correlation (DIC)”. In: Bone 81 (Dec. 2015),
pp. 593–601. ISSN: 8756-3282. DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.09.007. URL: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4640949/ (visited on 01/23/2022).
[65]
Digital Image Correlation and Strain Computation Basics; Technical White Paper.
en-us. 2018. URL: https://www.gom.com/en/products/3d- testing (visited on
01/24/2022).
[66]
Nick McCormick and Jerry Lord. “Digital Image Correlation”. In: 13.12 (2010),
pp. 52–54. DOI: 10.1016/S1369-7021(10)70235-2.
[67]
Sawbones USA. Femur, 4th Gen., Composite, 17 PCF Solid Foam Cancellous,
10 mm Canal, Large. URL: https://www.sawbones.com/femur- large- left- 4th-
generation-composite-special-manufacturing-10mm-canal3406-3.html. (accessed:
13.09.2021).
[68]
A. Pachi and Tianjian Ji. “Frequency and velocity of people walking”. In: 83 (Feb.
2005), pp. 36–40.
[69]
P. Duffy et al. “Assessment of Fragment Micromotion in Distal Femur Fracture
Fixation with RSA”. In: Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research 448 (2006),
pp. 105–113. DOI: 10.1097/01.blo.0000224008.19798.91.
[70]
Michael Schuller et al. “Micromotion at the Fracture Site After Tibial Nailing With
Four Unreamed Small-Diameter Nails—A Biomechanical Study Using a Distal
Tibia Fracture Model”. In: The Journal of Trauma Injury, Infection, and Critical Care
66.5 (2009), pp. 1391–1397. DOI: 10.1097/TA.0b013e31818b4c8e.
[71]
Technical Data Aramis Adjustable. en-US. URL: https://www.gom.com/fileadmin/
user_upload/metrology-systems_technical-data_aramis-adjustable_EN.pdf (visited
on 01/13/2022).
[72]
Joshua D. Pletka et al. “Biomechanical Comparison of 2 Different Locking Plate
Fixation Methods in Vancouver B1 Periprosthetic Femur Fractures”. In: Geriatric
Orthopaedic Sugery and Rehabilitation 2.2 (2011), pp. 51–55. DOI: 10 . 1177 /
2151458510397609.
[73]
Konrad L. Hoffmeier, Gunther O. Hofmann, and Thomas Muckley. “Choosing a
Proper Working Length can Improve the Lifespan of Locked Plates A Biomechan-
ical Study”. In: Clinical Biomechanics 26.4 (2011), pp. 405–409. DOI: 10.1016/j.
clinbiomech.2010.11.020.
[74]
Sven Mardian et al. “Working Length of Locking Plates Determines Interfragmen-
tary Movement in Distal Femur Fractures Under Physiological Loading”. In: Clinical
Biomechanics 30.4 (2015), pp. 391–396. DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2015.02.006.
[75]
Jacob Elkins et al. “Motion Predicts Clinical Callus Formation”. In: The Journal of
Bone and Joint Surgery 17;98.4 (2016), pp. 276–284. DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.O.00684.
[76]
Petra Klein et al. “The initial phase of fracture healing is specifically sensitive to
mechanical conditions”. eng. In: Journal of Orthopaedic Research: Official Publi-
cation of the Orthopaedic Research Society 21.4 (July 2003), pp. 662–669. ISSN:
0736-0266. DOI: 10.1016/S0736-0266(02)00259-0.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
57
==PAGE:66==
[77]
J. Kenwright and A. E. Goodship. “Controlled mechanical stimulation in the treat-
ment of tibial fractures”. eng. In: Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research 241
(Apr. 1989), pp. 36–47. ISSN: 0009-921X.
[78]
S. Wolf et al. “The effects of external mechanical stimulation on the healing of
diaphyseal osteotomies fixed by flexible external fixation”. In: Clinical Biomechan-
ics 13.4 (1998), pp. 359–364. ISSN: 0268-0033. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0268-0033(98)00097-7. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0268003398000977.
[79]
Zhihua Han et al. “Axial Micromotion Locking Plate Construct Can Promote Faster
and Stronger Bone Healing in an Ovine Osteotomy Model”. In: Frotiers in Bioengi-
neering and Biotechnology 8.593448 (2021). DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.593448.
[80]
Elke Rometsch et al. “Screw-Related Complications After Instrumentation of the
Osteoporotic Spine: A Systematic Literature Review With Meta-Analysis”. In: Global
Spine Journal 10.1 (Feb. 2020), pp. 69–88. ISSN: 2192-5682. DOI: 10 . 1177 /
2192568218818164. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6963360/
(visited on 02/01/2022).
[81]
G. Bergmann et al. “Hip Contact Forces and Gait Patterns from Routine Activi-
ties”. In: Journal of Biomechanics 34.7 (2001), pp. 859–871. DOI: 10.1016/s0021-
9290(01)00040-9.
[82]
Utku Kandemir et al. “Implant Material, type of Fixation at the Shaft and Position of
Plate Modify Biomechanics of Distal Femur Plate Osteosynthesis”. In: Orthopaedic
Trauma 31.8 (2017), e241–e246. DOI: 10.1097/BOT.0000000000000860.
[83]
Martin F. Hoffmann et al. “Clinical outcomes of locked plating of distal femoral frac-
tures in a retrospective cohort”. In: Journal of Orthopaedic Surgery and Research
8.1 (Nov. 2013), p. 43. ISSN: 1749-799X. DOI: 10.1186/1749-799X-8-43. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1186/1749-799X-8-43 (visited on 01/28/2022).
[84]
Thomas Ellis, Craig Bourgeault, and Richard Kyle. “Screw Position Affects Dy-
namic Compression Plate Strain in an In Vitro Fracture Model”. In: Journal of or-
thopaedic trauma 15 (June 2001), pp. 333–7. DOI: 10.1097/00005131-200106000-
00005.
[85]
G. Crammond, S. W. Boyd, and J. M. Dulieu-Barton. “Speckle pattern quality as-
sessment for digital image correlation”. en. In: Optics and Lasers in Engineering
51.12 (Dec. 2013), pp. 1368–1378. ISSN: 0143-8166. DOI: 10.1016/j.optlaseng.
2013.03.014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0143816613001103
(visited on 01/24/2022).
[86]
Bernard M. Lawless et al. “Viscoelasticity of articular cartilage: Analysing the effect
of induced stress and the restraint of bone in a dynamic environment”. In: Journal
of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 75 (Nov. 2017), pp. 293–301.
ISSN: 1751-6161. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2017.07.040. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5636614/ (visited on 02/01/2022).
[87]
T. P. M. Johnson, S. Socrate, and M. C. Boyce. “A viscoelastic, viscoplastic model
of cortical bone valid at low and high strain rates”. en. In: Acta Biomaterialia 6.10
(Oct. 2010), pp. 4073–4080. ISSN: 1742-7061. DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2010.04.
017. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1742706110002060
(visited on 01/17/2022).
[88]
Rampersadh Claire Victoria, Welgemoed Lee-Anne, and Cloete Trevor John. “A
multispecies investigation of the strain rate sensitivity of the modulus of cortical
bone”. en. In: EPJ Web of Conferences 250 (Jan. 2021), p. 06003. ISSN: 2100-
014X. DOI: 10.1051/epjconf/202125006003. URL: https://www.epj-conferences.
58
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:67==
org / articles / epjconf / pdf / 2021 / 04 / epjconf _ dymat2021 _ 06003 . pdf (visited on
01/17/2022).
[89]
A. Chawla, S. Mukherjee, and Ch Kranthi Teja. Elastic Response of bones at vary-
ing strain rates.
[90]
Mark Heyland et al. “Semi-rigid Screws Provide an Auxiliary Option to Plate Work-
ing Length to Control Interfragmentary Movement in Locking Plate Fixation at the
Distal Femur”. In: Injury 46.4 supplement (2015), S24–S32. DOI: 10.1016/S0020-
1383(15)30015-2.
[91]
Ju-Ho Kim, Suk-Hun Kim, and Seung-Hwan Chang. “Estimation of the Move-
ment of the Inter-Fragmentary gap of a Fractured Human Femur in the Presence
of a Composite Bone Plate”. In: Journal of Composite Materials 45.14 (2010),
pp. 1491–1498. DOI: 10.1177/0021998310383730.
[92]
Wei Sheng et al. “Finite Element- and Design of Experiment-Derived Optimiza-
tion of Screw Configurations and a Locking Plate for Internal Fixation System”. In:
Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine 2019.5636528 (2019), 15
pages. DOI: 10.1155/2019/5636528.
[93]
Rima Wazen et al. “Micromotion-induced strain fields influence early stages of
repair at bone-implant interfaces”. In: Acta Biomaterrialia 9.5 (2013), pp. 6663–
66674. DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2013.01.014.
[94]
Geoffrey R. Mitchell and Ana Tojeira. “Role of Anisotropy in Tissue Engineering”.
en. In: Procedia Engineering. 3rd International Conference on Tissue Engineer-
ing, ICTE2013 59 (Jan. 2013), pp. 117–125. ISSN: 1877-7058. DOI: 10.1016/j.
proeng.2013.05.100. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S187770581301014X (visited on 01/23/2022).
[95]
“2 - The Basic Properties of Building Materials”. In: Building Materials in Civil Engi-
neering. Ed. by Haimei Zhang. Woodhead Publishing Series in Civil and Structural
Engineering. Woodhead Publishing, 2011, pp. 7–423. ISBN: 978-1-84569-955-0.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1533/9781845699567.7. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9781845699550500025.
[96]
Tekscan. What is Compression Force. (accessed: 12.12.2021). 2021. URL: https:
//www.tekscan.com/blog/pressure-mapping/what-compression-force.
[97]
Britannica The Editors of Encyclopaedia. elasticity. 2021. URL: https : / / www .
britannica.com/science/elasticity-physics. (accessed: 16.12.2021).
[98]
Load at Failure (Impact); en. URL: http://www.instron.com/en/our- company/
library/glossary/l/load-at-failure-impact (visited on 01/23/2022).
[99]
Qianfan Xin. “2 - Durability and reliability in diesel engine system design”. In: Diesel
Engine System Design. Ed. by Qianfan Xin. Woodhead Publishing, 2013, pp. 113–
202. ISBN: 978-1-84569-715-0. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857090836.1.
113. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781845697150500029.
[100]
Corrosionpedia. Fatigue Strength. (accessed: 12.12.2021). 2020. URL: https://
www.corrosionpedia.com/definition/494/fatigue-strength.
[101]
Susan E. Lad, W. Scott McGraw, and David J. Daegling. “Haversian remodeling
corresponds to load frequency but not strain magnitude in the macaque (Macaca
fascicularis) skeleton”. In: Bone 127 (2019), pp. 571–576. ISSN: 8756-3282. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2019.07.027. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S8756328219303011.
[102]
Elasticity vs plasticity - Energy Education. en. URL: https://energyeducation.ca/
encyclopedia/Elasticity_vs_plasticity (visited on 01/23/2022).
[103]
S. K. Khanna and X. Long. “4 - Fatigue behavior of spot welded joints in steel
sheets”. en. In: ed. by Xin Sun. Woodhead Publishing Series in Welding and
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
59
==PAGE:68==
Other Joining Technologies. Woodhead Publishing, Jan. 2010, pp. 65–100. ISBN:
9781845695361. DOI: 10.1533/9781845699765.65. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9781845695361500044 (visited on 01/23/2022).
[104]
Stiffness. en-gb. URL: https://www.designingbuildings.co.uk/wiki/Stiffness (visited
on 01/23/2022).
[105]
Biomechanics & Biomaterials | Team Bone. en-US. URL: https://teambone.com/
education/education-clinical/orthopedic-basic- science/biomechanics-biomaterials/
(visited on 01/06/2022).
[106]
Viscoelasticity - Lesson. en. URL: https://www.teachengineering.org/lessons/view/
cub_surg_lesson04 (visited on 01/23/2022).
[107]
Go Yamako et al. “Improving stress shielding following total hip arthroplasty by
using a femoral stem made of β type Ti-33.6Nb-4Sn with a Young’s modulus gra-
dation”. In: Journal of Biomechanics 3.63 (2017), pp. 135–143. DOI: j.jbiomech.
2017.08.017.
[108]
What is a Tension Force? - Definition from Corrosionpedia. en. URL: http://www.
corrosionpedia.com/definition/6197/tension-force (visited on 01/23/2022).
[109]
Difference Between Yield Strength and Ultimate Strength. en-US. URL: https://
www.difference.minaprem.com/solid/difference-between-yield-strength-and-ultimate-
strength/ (visited on 01/23/2022).
[110]
Pasquale Vena and Dario Gastaldi. “Nanoindentation-Based Characterization of
Hard and Soft Tissues”. en. In: ed. by Roger Narayan. Oxford: Elsevier, Jan. 2019,
pp. 203–214. ISBN: 9780128051443. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801238-3.99923-9.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128012383999239
(visited on 01/23/2022).
[111]
What is Yield Strength? - Definition from Corrosionpedia. en. URL: http://www.
corrosionpedia.com/definition/1193/yield-strength (visited on 01/23/2022).
[112]
P Cronier et al. “The Concept of Locking Plates”. In: Orthopaedics and Traumatol-
ogy: Surgery and Research 96.Supplement 4 (2010), S17–S36. DOI: 10.1016/j.
otsr.2010.03.008.
[113]
Ralf Westphal. Telemanipulated Long Bone Fracture Reduction. URL: https://
www.researchgate.net/figure/The-process-of-closed-intramedullary-nailing-taken-
from-Winkelbach-2006-a-Soft_fig6_221786762. (accessed: 07.09.2021).
[114]
Stress-Strain Curve | How to Read the Graph? en-GB. June 2020. URL: https:
//fractory.com/stress-strain-curve/ (visited on 01/31/2022).
60
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
A.1
Biomechanical Concepts
General biomechanical concepts to help the readability of the report.
• Anisotropic- The behavior of the material will change depending on the direction of
the load application [94].
• Brittle Material- This is a material that will fracture under pressure or tension but
does not majorly deform before fracturing. This means they also typically do not
handle impact well [95].
• Compression- Compression force happens when a physical force presses toward
the middle of an object. This can reduce the size of the object [96].
• Elasticity- This is the ability of a given material to return to its original size and shape
when the load causing its deformation is removed [97] .
• Failure load- Load value where there is a sharp drop in load the load. This is the
point where the material has lost almost all of its strength [98].
• Fatigue Limit- This is a stress value for a given object that the object can be sub-
jected to for an extremely long number of cycles without failure [99].
• Fatigue Strength- The highest stress that a material can withstand for a given num-
ber of cycles without breaking [100].
• Haversion Remodeling- The coordination of osteoblasts and osteoclasts to replace
current bone [101].
• Interfragmentary strain hypothesis- fracture healing will only happen if the motion
within the fracture divided by the width of the fracture gap is less than the fracture
strain of bone (2%) [16, 14] (See section 1.1.3).
• Malunion- Malunion is when a fracture has begun to heal or, if it has healed fully,
heals in the wrong position [malunion].
• Nonunion- Nonunion is when a fractured bone refuses to heal even after an ex-
tended period of time [8].
• Plasticity- The ability of a solid material to undergo permanent deformation [102].
• Residual stress- The internal stress of a free body object that is not undergoing a
force [103]. This stress typically builds up during manufacturing.
• Stiffness- How much a material or object can resist a load before deformation oc-
curs. This helps quantify the strength of a material under loading conditions [104].
• Strain- How much an object deforms as a result of a loading force [105].
• Stress- Force divided by area. This is the internal force of the material that resists
the applied force [105].
• Stress Relaxation- When a material decreases its tendency to return to its original
form when a load is removed[106].
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A1
==PAGE:70==
• Stress shielding- Stress shielding is a phenomenon that happens when a bone no
longer fully experiences the full stress it would normally experience [107]. This re-
duction in the stress that a bone would normally experience causes a reduction in
the density of the bone. This of course makes the bone weaker and increases the
chance of implant loosening. This means that it is extremely important that the frac-
ture plates induce as little stress shielding as possible in the bone, to preserve the
bones strength.
• Tension- A reaction force by an object when it is pulled [108].
• Ultimate Strength- The highest stress a material can withstand before it fails [109].
• Union- Union is when a fracture is healed in the proper position through bone re-
generation [8].
• Viscoelastic- The material responds in a different way depending on the speed to
which the load is applied and the length of it [110].
• Yield Strength- The maximum amount of stress an object can undergo without plas-
tic deformation [111].
A.2
Extra Images For Intro and Background
Supporting images for the introduction and background sections.
Figure A.1: The left picture shows the traditional screw and plate system with a nonlocking
screw relying on compression of the plate to the bone. The right picture shows the locking
plate system with a locking screw which allows the preservation of vascularization. [112]
A2
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.2: Image showing the process of intramedullary nailing. First, a small cut is
made to access the proximal end of the femur. The intramedullary cavity is then reamed
in preparation for the intramedullary nail. The intramedullary nail is the inserted and im-
mobilized in the femur using intramedullary screws. [113]
A.3
Extra Info Methods
A.3.1
Extra Images Methods
Supporting images for the methods section of the report.
Figure A.3: Calibration plate CP 20/ MV 90x72 mm2 used to calibrate the DIC system.
The minimum range is 87 mm x 65 mm and the maximum range is 130 mm x 95 mm (see
figure A.6). The measuring volume calibrated to was 100 mm x 75 mm (see figure A.7
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A3
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.4: Picture of the Instron machine used to test the sawbones.
A4
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:73==
A.3.2
Type 1 Metal Bone Mounts
The original bone mounts that were to be used, were going to be made out of metal
and be laser cut to mold directly along the contours of the bone. To do this, a 3D scan
was taken of a test bone using an Atos Scanbox 3D scanner (see figure A.5) located at
the DTU Ballerup campus. This became too complicated so an epoxy mould was used
instead.
Figure A.5: Image of the Atos Scanbox located at DTU Ballerup campus. This was used
to take a 3D scan of all the contours of a test sawbone.
A.3.3
ARAMIS System Specs and Calibration Tables
Tables describing the specifications of the ARAMIS system as well as the calibration
results of the ARAMIS system.
Aramis system specs 2M
Camera sensor
CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor)
Camera Resolution
1936 x 1216 Pixel
Illumination
Dual Blue Light LED
Measuring Area
10 mm x 6 mm up to 5000mm x3000mm
Ambient Conditions
+5 ◦C to +40 ◦C
Voltage Range (typical)
100-240 V AC, 50-60 Hz
Power consumption
typically 15 W, maximum 100 W
Strain Measuring Range
0.005% up to >2000%
Strain Measuring Resolution
up to 0.005%
Specimen Temperature
Typically -100◦C up to + 1500◦C
Table A.1: Aramis 2M system technical data [71]
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A5
==PAGE:74==
Aramis system specs 12M
Camera sensor
CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor)
Camera Resolution
4096 x 3000 Pixel
Illumination
Dual Blue Light LED
Measuring Area
20 mm x 15 mm up to 5000mm x 4000mm
Ambient Conditions
+5◦C to +40◦C
Voltage Range (typical)
100-240 V AC, 50-60 Hz
Power consumption
typically 15 W, maximum 100 W
Strain Measuring Range
0.005% up to >2000%
Strain Measuring Resolution
up to 0.005%
Specimen Temperature
Typically -100◦C up to + 1500◦C
Table A.2: Aramis 12M system technical data [71]
Figure A.6: Table to determine the optimal calibration object for the size of the object
being measured [71]. The highlighted row corresponds to the calibration object used.
A6
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.7: Table to determine the parameters that the ARAMIS system needs to follow.
The definitions of the different parameters are found in figure 3.7 [71]. The highlighted
row corresponds to the measuring volume used.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A7
==PAGE:76==
(a) First calibration table for the ARAMIS sys-
tem
(b) Second calibration table for the ARAMIS
system
Figure A.8: Figures showing the calibration values for the ARAMIS system. For a calibra-
tion to be accepted, the calibration deviation must be below 0.050 pixels and the scale
deviation must be below 0.008 mm.
A.3.4
Testing Procedure
Document outlining the procedure for adding the femurs into the instron machine during
cyclic testing.
A8
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:77==
BONE TESTING PROCEDURE 
o Bone 
❑ Paint Bone with speckle pattern 
❑ Ensure the white line on the metal plate lines up with the black line on epoxy 
❑ Screw all 6 screws into top of epoxy bone mount with painted bone in between 
❑ Place the metal plates around the epoxy and tighten the 6 screws on the wings until 
the gap is uniform on both sides and the bone is firmly held between them 
o Instron 
❑ Ensure the machine is on and the pressure is on 
❑ Raise the actuators high enough to be able to insert the specimen and mounts 
o Bone fixation to the Instron machine 
❑ Line the white line on the circular metal plate attached to the epoxy up with the 
white line on the circular metal plate attached to the Instron machine 
❑ Insert the bolt on the epoxy metal plate to the hole in the Instron metal plate 
❑ Screw 2 screws to hand tightness perpendicular to the bone 
❑ Turn on specimen protect on the computer controlling the Instron Machine 
❑ Zero the torsion and load values on the Instron Machine 
❑ Lower and rotate the bone so that it perfectly fits into the bottom bone mount 
❑ Place sandpaper between the posterior part of the femur and the aluminum block to 
increase friction and grip while lowering the bone into the bottom bone mount 
❑ Ensure that the DIC pattern is acceptable in the DIC system 
▪ 
Take a picture 
▪ 
Check the pattern quality 
▪ 
Fix any DIC pattern issues that arise 
❑ Screw the bottom two screws securing a rotating plate to hold the bone over the 
lateral and medial condyles 
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A9
==PAGE:78==
o Instron and DIC 
❑ Ensure the DIC system is on and the area to be measured is centered in the image 
❑ Open Aramis professional and click on “New Project” 
❑ Click on the symbol with 4 vertical lines and click on start measuring sequence 
❑ Set the measuring mode to “fixed frame rate” and “1Hz” and the finish at to “image 
count reached” and “10” 
❑ In the Instron system, click on the button in the lower left hand corner with an arrow 
pointing to a red dot 
❑ Set machine to load to –700N in 10 seconds 
❑ Press start on the instron system and Aramis system simultaneously 
❑ Take reference picture at –700N by clicking on the symbol with 4 vertical lines and 
“capture single image” 
❑ Doing the same as when loading, unload the specimen to 0N and take 10 pictures 
during this 10 second unloading process 
❑ Click on the upper right hand symbol with 3 horizontal lines and click on inspection 
❑ Create a new surface component for the area that is to be analyzed and click “ok” 
❑ Open Instron WaveMatrix 
❑ Click on the test icon in the WaveMatrix instron program 
❑ In the “Create a New Project” window, ensure that the project name is correct (In 
this case Femur_BoneLabel) and the project folder location is correct (in this case 
C:\Users\f-admin\Desktop\Isabelle\Femurs) 
❑ Click on the next button in the upper right hand corner 
❑ In step two of “Create a New Project” ensure that the correct Method is highlighted 
(in this case Isabelle_Femur_final) 
❑ Click the next button in the upper right hand corner 
A10
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:79==
❑ In the “Testing” tab click on the validate button (button with a checkmark) in the 
bottom right to ensure that there are no system errors and warnings 
❑ To prepare the DIC system to take consecutive pictures of the femur being tested in 
the Instron machine again click on the symbol in the right hand corner with 3 
horizontal lines and click on data collection 
❑ Click on the symbol in the banner with 4 vertical lines and then click on start 
measuring sequence 
❑ In the popup window, ensure that the template being used is correct (In this case 
“Femur”) and specify the measuring mode and finish at commands (1/620 HZ frame 
rate and 51 pictures in this case) 
❑ To begin the test in Instron, click on the Start button on the upper right hand corner 
of the screen 
❑ Check where the results will be saved and ensure this is accurate, then click OK (the 
test will now start) 
❑ After starting the Instron waveform test, wait until either 85 seconds or 50 seconds 
into the second step 
❑ Start the DIC system 85 seconds or 50 seconds after the start of the second step in 
the Instron system by clicking on OK in the “Define Measuring Sequence” popup 
window 
❑ When the testing is finished, load the bone again to 700N and take 20 consecutive 
pircutres (10 loading and 10 unloading) as described previously 
❑ Save the DIC system data labeled Femur_Bonelabel 
o Unloading 
❑ When the program is finished running, begin failure testing of the specimen 
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A11
==PAGE:80==
A.4
Extra Images Results
A.4.1
Cyclic Testing Instron Graphs
Images showing the synchronization issues with the cyclic Instron data.
Figure A.9: Image showing an area of bad synchronization of the peaks of the interpolated
M data for all five bones.
Figure A.10: Image showing an area of good synchronization of the peaks of the interpo-
lated M data for all five bones.
A12
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.11: Image showing what happens when the peaks from the bad synchronization
shown in figure A.9 are averaged into one data set. The two peaks seen are a result of
this bad synchronization
Figure A.12: Image showing what happens when the peaks from the good synchronization
shown in figure A.10 are averaged into one data set. One data peak is seen as should be
seen throughout the entire averaged data.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A13
==PAGE:82==
A.4.2
Cyclic Testing DIC Matlab Graphs
Figures showing the normal and shear strains for all 15 bones tested.
Figure A.13: Normal strain values for the average of the fracture gap for all groups.
Figure A.14: Normal strain values for the fracture gap close to the fracture plate for all
groups.
A14
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.15: Normal strain values for the middle of the fracture gap for all groups.
Figure A.16: Normal strain values for the part of the fracture gap far from the fracture
plate for all groups.
Figure A.17: Shear strain values for the average of the fracture gap for all groups.
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A15
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.18: Shear strain values for the fracture gap close to the fracture plate for all
groups.
Figure A.19: Shear strain values for the middle of the fracture gap for all groups.
Figure A.20: Shear strain values for the part of the fracture gap far from the fracture plate
for all groups.
A16
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.21: Normal strain for long group including 1L data which was later removed
Figure A.22: Shear strain for long group including 1L data which was later removed
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A17
==PAGE:86==
A.4.3
Matlab Failure Instron Graphs
Graphs showing the Instron failure data for all bones included.
Figure A.23: Figure showing important points on a stress-strain curve. The end of the
curve shows the failure or fracture point. The highest stress a material can undergo is
called the ultimate strength [114].
Figure A.24: Figure showing all the failure graphs of all bones tested, including 4L. The x
axis shows the position of the piston in the Instron machine and the y axis shows the load
experienced by the bone.
A18
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.25: Load vs position graph for ”all” bones analyzed in the A group (3A and 4A).
Figure A.26: Load vs position graph for short bones 1S, 2S, 3S, and 4S. 5S was excluded
because the bone only broke at the lesser trochanter.
Figure A.27: Load vs position graph for Medium bones 1M, 3M and 4M. 2M and 5M were
excluded because the bones only broke at the lesser trochanter
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A19
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.28: Load vs position graph for long bones 1L and 2L. 3L was excluded be-
cause it broke after being dropped earlier in the project. 4L was excluded because there
were inexplicable jumps in the data. 5L was excluded because it only broke at the lesser
trochanter.
A20
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:89==
A.5
Matlab Code
Section including all of the Matlab codes used in this report.
A.5.1
Cyclic Axial Testing Instron Data Matlab
1 %% Setup
2
3 %Add
f i l e
to
path
(Change t h i s
to
your personal path where your
data
i s
saved )
4
addpath ( genpath ( ’C : \ Users \ isabe \ OneDrive \ Documents \ Thesis \
Femurs_Instron ’ ) )
5
6
7
8 %% Reading tables
f o r
tracking
data
9 %Read Femur tracking
data
f o r
each femur group
i n t o a matlab
c e l l
10 %S= Short= short
working
length
11 %M= Medium= medium working
length
12 %L= Long= long working
length
13 %1L data was not
included
14 %Reading short
tracking
data
15
Shorttrack = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
16
fname1 =
’1STest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
17
Shorttrack {1} = readtable ( fname1 ) ;
18
fname2 =
’2STest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
19
Shorttrack {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
20
fname3 =
’3STest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
21
Shorttrack {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
22
fname4 =
’4STest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
23
Shorttrack {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
24
fname5 =
’5STest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
25
Shorttrack {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
26
27 %Reading medium tracking
data
28
Mediumtrack = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
29
fname1 =
’1MTest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
30
Mediumtrack {1} = readtable ( fname1 ) ;
31
fname2 =
’2MTest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
32
Mediumtrack {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
33
fname3 =
’3MTest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
34
Mediumtrack {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
35
fname4 =
’4MTest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
36
Mediumtrack {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
37
fname5 =
’5MTest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
38
Mediumtrack {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
39
40 %Reading long
tracking
data
41
Longtrack = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
42
fname2 =
’2LTest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A21
==PAGE:90==
43
Longtrack {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
44
fname3 =
’3LTest2 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
45
Longtrack {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
46
fname4 =
’4LTest1 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
47
Longtrack {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
48
fname5 =
’5LTest2 . steps . tracking . xlsx ’ ;
49
Longtrack {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
50
51 %S p l i t
c e l l
i n t o
matrices
f o r
each bone in
short
category
52
fem_track_full1S=Shorttrack { 1 } ;
53
fem_track_full2S=Shorttrack { 2 } ;
54
fem_track_full3S=Shorttrack { 3 } ;
55
fem_track_full4S=Shorttrack { 4 } ;
56
fem_track_full5S=Shorttrack { 5 } ;
57
58 %S p l i t
c e l l
i n t o
matrices
f o r
each bone in medium category
59
fem_track_full1M=Mediumtrack { 1 } ;
60
fem_track_full2M=Mediumtrack { 2 } ;
61
fem_track_full3M=Mediumtrack { 3 } ;
62
fem_track_full4M=Mediumtrack { 4 } ;
63
fem_track_full5M=Mediumtrack { 5 } ;
64
65
66 %S p l i t
c e l l
i n t o
matrices
f o r
each bone in
long
category
67 %fem_track_full1L=Longtrack { 1 } ;
68
fem_track_full2L=Longtrack { 2 } ;
69
fem_track_full3L=Longtrack { 3 } ;
70
fem_track_full4L=Longtrack { 4 } ;
71
fem_track_full5L=Longtrack { 5 } ;
72
73 %% Preprocessing /
removing excess data
( tracking )
74
75 %Extracting
step 4 rows from cycles
(50
cycles
in
t o t a l ) :
76 %Short
77
Step4track1S=fem_track_full1S ( fem_track_full1S { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
78
Step4track2S=fem_track_full2S ( fem_track_full2S { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
79
Step4track3S=fem_track_full3S ( fem_track_full3S { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
80
Step4track4S=fem_track_full4S ( fem_track_full4S { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
81
Step4track5S=fem_track_full5S ( fem_track_full5S { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
82
83 %Medium
84
Step4track1M=fem_track_full1M ( fem_track_full1M { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
85
Step4track2M=fem_track_full2M ( fem_track_full2M { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
86
Step4track3M=fem_track_full3M ( fem_track_full3M { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
87
Step4track4M=fem_track_full4M ( fem_track_full4M { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
88
Step4track5M=fem_track_full5M ( fem_track_full5M { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
89
90
91 %Long
92
Step4track2L=fem_track_full2L ( fem_track_full2L { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
A22
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:91==
93
Step4track3L=fem_track_full3L ( fem_track_full3L { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
94
Step4track4L=fem_track_full4L ( fem_track_full4L { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
95
Step4track5L=fem_track_full5L ( fem_track_full5L { : , 5 } = = 4 , : ) ;
96
97 %% Properly
incrementing S data
( adding
a r t i f i c i a l l y
small
time
increment )
98
small_increment =1.0e−5; %100 times
less
than the
r e s o l u t i o n
of
the
time stamp
99
100 %Copying data
to keep
o r i g i n a l
clean
101
raw_data1S=Step4track1S ;
102
raw_data2S=Step4track2S ;
103
raw_data3S=Step4track3S ;
104
raw_data4S=Step4track4S ;
105
raw_data5S=Step4track5S ;
106
107 %Extracting
time column from
table
108
r1S=raw_data1S { : , 1 } ;
109
r2S=raw_data2S { : , 1 } ;
110
r3S=raw_data3S { : , 1 } ;
111
r4S=raw_data4S { : , 1 } ;
112
r5S=raw_data5S { : , 1 } ;
113
114
115 %Incrementing
Short data
116
f o r
i =2: length ( r1S ) %loop over time
series
117
i f
raw_data1S { i ,1}== raw_data1S { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
118
raw_data1S { i , 1 } = raw_data1S { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
119
end
120
end
121
122
f o r
i =2: length ( r2S ) %loop over time
series
123
i f
raw_data2S { i ,1}== raw_data2S { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
124
raw_data2S { i , 1 } = raw_data2S { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
125
end
126
end
127
128
f o r
i =2: length ( r3S ) %loop over time
series
129
i f
raw_data3S { i ,1}== raw_data3S { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
130
raw_data3S { i , 1 } = raw_data3S { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
131
end
132
end
133
134
f o r
i =2: length ( r4S ) %loop over time
series
135
i f
raw_data4S { i ,1}== raw_data4S { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
136
raw_data4S { i , 1 } = raw_data4S { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A23
==PAGE:92==
137
end
138
end
139
140
f o r
i =2: length ( r5S ) %loop over time
series
141
i f
raw_data5S { i ,1}== raw_data5S { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
142
raw_data5S { i , 1 } = raw_data5S { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
143
end
144
end
145
146 %% Properly
incrementing M data
( adding
a r t i f i c i a l l y
small
time
increment )
147
small_increment =1.0e−5; %100 times
less
than the
r e s o l u t i o n
of
the
time stamp
148
149 %Copying data
to keep
o r i g i n a l
clean
150
raw_data1M=Step4track1M ;
151
raw_data2M=Step4track2M ;
152
raw_data3M=Step4track3M ;
153
raw_data4M=Step4track4M ;
154
raw_data5M=Step4track5M ;
155
156 %Extracting
time column from
table
157
r1M=raw_data1M { : , 1 } ;
158
r2M=raw_data2M { : , 1 } ;
159
r3M=raw_data3M { : , 1 } ;
160
r4M=raw_data4M { : , 1 } ;
161
r5M=raw_data5M { : , 1 } ;
162
163 %Incrementing
Short data
164
f o r
i =2: length ( r1M ) %loop over time
series
165
i f
raw_data1M { i ,1}== raw_data1M { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
166
raw_data1M { i , 1 } = raw_data1M { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
167
end
168
end
169
170
f o r
i =2: length ( r2M ) %loop over time
series
171
i f
raw_data2M { i ,1}== raw_data2M { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
172
raw_data2M { i , 1 } = raw_data2M { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
173
end
174
end
175
176
f o r
i =2: length ( r3M ) %loop over time
series
177
i f
raw_data3M { i ,1}== raw_data3M { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
178
raw_data3M { i , 1 } = raw_data3M { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
179
end
180
end
A24
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:93==
181
182
f o r
i =2: length ( r4M ) %loop over time
series
183
i f
raw_data4M { i ,1}== raw_data4M { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
184
raw_data4M { i , 1 } = raw_data4M { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
185
end
186
end
187
188
f o r
i =2: length ( r5M ) %loop over time
series
189
i f
raw_data5M { i ,1}== raw_data5M { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
190
raw_data5M { i , 1 } = raw_data5M { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
191
end
192
end
193
194
195
196 %% Properly
incrementing L data
( adding
a r t i f i c i a l l y
small
time
increment )
197
small_increment =1.0e−5; %100 times
less
than the
r e s o l u t i o n
of
the
time stamp
198
199 %Copying data
to keep
o r i g i n a l
clean
200
raw_data2L=Step4track2L ;
201
raw_data3L=Step4track3L ;
202
raw_data4L=Step4track4L ;
203
raw_data5L=Step4track5L ;
204
205 %Extracting
time column from
table
206
r2L=raw_data2L { : , 1 } ;
207
r3L=raw_data3L { : , 1 } ;
208
r4L=raw_data4L { : , 1 } ;
209
r5L=raw_data5L { : , 1 } ;
210
211 %Incrementing
Short data
212
f o r
i =2: length ( r2L ) %loop over time
series
213
i f
raw_data2L { i ,1}== raw_data2L { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
214
raw_data2L { i , 1 } = raw_data2L { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
215
end
216
end
217
218
f o r
i =2: length ( r3L ) %loop over time
series
219
i f
raw_data3L { i ,1}== raw_data3L { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
220
raw_data3L { i , 1 } = raw_data3L { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
221
end
222
end
223
224
f o r
i =2: length ( r4L ) %loop over time
series
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A25
==PAGE:94==
225
i f
raw_data4L { i ,1}== raw_data4L { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
226
raw_data4L { i , 1 } = raw_data4L { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
227
end
228
end
229
230
f o r
i =2: length ( r5L ) %loop over time
series
231
i f
raw_data5L { i ,1}== raw_data5L { i −1 ,1} %time
not incremented?
232
raw_data5L { i , 1 } = raw_data5L { i , 1 } + small_increment ; %
add
a r b i t r a r i l y
small
increment
233
end
234
end
235
236
%% Defining
variables x and y
f o r
short
data
237
238
x1S=raw_data1S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
239
y1S=raw_data1S { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
240
241
x2S=raw_data2S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
242
y2S=raw_data2S { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
243
244
x3S=raw_data3S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
245
y3S=raw_data3S { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
246
247
x4S=raw_data4S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
248
y4S=raw_data4S { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
249
250
x5S=raw_data5S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
251
y5S=raw_data5S { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
252
253
254 %% Defining
variables x and y
f o r medium data
255
256 x1M=raw_data1M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
257 y1M=raw_data1M { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
258
259
260 x2M=raw_data2M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
261 y2M=raw_data2M { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
262
263 x3M=raw_data3M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
264 y3M=raw_data3M { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
265
266 x4M=raw_data4M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
267 y4M=raw_data4M { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
268
269 x5M=raw_data5M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
270 y5M=raw_data5M { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
271
272 %% Defining
variables x and y
f o r
long data
A26
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:95==
273
274
x2L=raw_data2L { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
275
y2L=raw_data2L { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
276
277
x3L=raw_data3L { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
278
y3L=raw_data3L { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
279
280
x4L=raw_data4L { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
281
y4L=raw_data4L { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
282
283
x5L=raw_data5L { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
284
y5L=raw_data5L { : , 9 } ; %A l l
p os it i on
data
285
286
287
288
289 %% Subtract 40 seconds from each time stamp
f o r S3 to
synchronize
290 %Since the
rest
period between each
c y c l i c
cycle
f o r some of
the
bones was
291 %80 seconds and f o r
others was 120 , 40 seconds were removed from
the
rest
292 %periods
of each bone that had a rest
cycle
of more than 80
seconds .
For
293 %the S bones , S1, S2, S4, and S5 had rest
cycles
of 80 seconds
and S3 had
294 %rest
cycles
of
120.
295
296 %Removing 40 seconds
297
f o r
i =2: length ( x3S ) %loop over time
series
298
i f
x3S ( i −1 ,1)+90<x3S ( i , 1 ) %Gap between two data values
i s
more than 90s
299
f o r
j = i : length ( x3S ) %Loop over
rest
of
data
set from
point where
300
%the gap was more than 90 seconds
301
x3S ( j , 1 ) =x3S ( j , 1 ) −40; %Remove 40 seconds from each
data value
302
end
303
end
304
end
305
306
307
308 %% Subtract 40 seconds from each time stamp
f o r M1 and M2
309 %Since the
rest
period between each
c y c l i c
cycle
f o r some of
the
bones was
310 %80 seconds and f o r
others was 120 , 40 seconds were removed from
the
rest
311 %periods
of each bone that had a rest
cycle
of more than 80
seconds .
For
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A27
==PAGE:96==
312 %the M bones , M3, M4, and M5 had rest
cycles
of 80 seconds and
M1 and M2 had
313 %rest
cycles
of
120.
314
315 %Removing 40 seconds
316
f o r
i =2: length (x1M) %loop over time
series
317
i f
x1M( i −1 ,1)+90<x1M( i , 1 ) %Gap between two data values
i s
more than 90s
318
f o r
j = i : length (x1M) %Loop over
rest
of
data
set from
point where
319
%the gap was more than 90 seconds
320
x1M( j , 1 ) =x1M( j , 1 ) −40;%Remove 40 seconds from each
data value
321
end
322
end
323
end
324
325 %Removing 40 seconds
326
f o r
i =2: length (x2M) %loop over time
series
327
i f
x2M( i −1 ,1)+90<x2M( i , 1 ) %Gap between two data values
i s
more than 90s
328
f o r
j = i : length (x2M)%Loop over
rest
of
data
set from
point where
329
%the gap was more than 90 seconds
330
x2M( j , 1 ) =x2M( j , 1 ) −40; %Remove 40 seconds from each
data value
331
end
332
end
333
end
334
335
336
337 %% Subtract 40 seconds from each time stamp
f o r 3L and 5L
338 %Since the
rest
period between each
c y c l i c
cycle
f o r some of
the
bones was
339 %80 seconds and f o r
others was 120 and 200 , 40 or 120 seconds
were removed from the
rest
340 %periods
of each bone that had a rest
cycle
of more than 80
seconds .
For
341 %the L bones , L1 , L2 , and L4 had rest
cycles
of 80 seconds , L3
had
342 %rest
cycles
of 120 so 40 seconds were removed , and L5 had rest
cycles
of
343 %200 so 120 seconds were removed
344
345 %Removing 40 seconds
346
f o r
i =2: length ( x3L ) %loop over time
series
347
i f
x3L ( i −1 ,1)+90<x3L ( i , 1 ) %Gap between two data values
i s
more than 90s
348
f o r
j = i : length ( x3L )%Loop over
rest
of
data
set from
A28
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:97==
point where
349
%the gap was more than 90 seconds
350
x3L ( j , 1 ) =x3L ( j , 1 ) −40;%Remove 40 seconds from each
data value
351
end
352
end
353
end
354
355 %Removing 120 seconds (40
three
times )
356
f o r
i =2: length ( x5L ) %loop over time
series
357
i f
x5L ( i −1 ,1)+90<x5L ( i , 1 ) %Gap between two data values
i s
more than 90s
358
f o r
j = i : length ( x5L )%Loop over
rest
of
data
set from
point where
359
%the gap was more than 90 seconds
360
x5L ( j , 1 ) =x5L ( j , 1 ) −40;%Remove 40 seconds from each
data value
361
end
362
end
363
end
364
365
f o r
i =2: length ( x5L ) %loop over time
series
366
i f
x5L ( i −1 ,1)+90<x5L ( i , 1 ) %Gap between two data values
i s
more than 90s
367
f o r
j = i : length ( x5L )%Loop over
rest
of
data
set from
point where
368
%the gap was more than 90 seconds
369
x5L ( j , 1 ) =x5L ( j , 1 ) −40;%Remove 40 seconds from each
data value
370
end
371
end
372
end
373
374
f o r
i =2: length ( x5L ) %loop over time
series
375
i f
x5L ( i −1 ,1)+90<x5L ( i , 1 ) %Gap between two data values
i s
more than 90s
376
f o r
j = i : length ( x5L )%Loop over
rest
of
data
set from
point where
377
%the gap was more than 90 seconds
378
x5L ( j , 1 ) =x5L ( j , 1 ) −40;%Remove 40 seconds from each
data value
379
end
380
end
381
end
382
383
384 %% S data
timestep
synchronization
385
386
Data_points =30000000; %Defining how many new data
points
I
want
+1
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A29
==PAGE:98==
387
x_min1S=x1S (1) ; %F i r s t
time
value
388
x_max1S=x1S ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
389
390
x_min2S=x2S (1) ; %F i r s t
time
value
391
x_max2S=x2S ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
392
393
x_min3S=x3S (1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
394
x_max3S=x3S ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
395
396
x_min4S=x4S (1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
397
x_max4S=x4S ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
398
399
x_min5S=x5S (1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
400
x_max5S=x5S ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
401
402
403 %Finding
frequency
of new sampling needed to
get 30 ,000 ,000 data
points
404
S1step =(x_max1S−x_min1S ) / Data_points ;
405
S2step =(x_max2S−x_min2S ) / Data_points ;
406
S3step =(x_max3S−x_min3S ) / Data_points ;
407
S4step =(x_max4S−x_min4S ) / Data_points ;
408
S5step =(x_max5S−x_min5S ) / Data_points ;
409
410
411 %Defining
the
coordinates
of new data values
412
Npoints1S=x1S (1) : S1step : x1S ( end ) ;
413
Npoints2S=x2S (1) : S2step : x2S ( end ) ;
414
Npoints3S=x3S (1) : S3step : x3S ( end ) ;
415
Npoints4S=x4S (1) : S4step : x4S ( end ) ;
416
Npoints5S=x5S (1) : S5step : x5S ( end ) ;
417
418
419 %% M data
timestep
synchronization
420
421
Data_points =30000000;%Defining how many new data
points
I
want
+1
422
x_min1M=x1M(1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
423
x_max1M=x1M( end ) ; %Last
time
value
424
425
x_min2M=x2M(1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
426
x_max2M=x2M( end ) ; %Last
time
value
427
428
x_min3M=x3M(1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
429
x_max3M=x3M( end ) ; %Last
time
value
430
431
x_min4M=x4M(1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
432
x_max4M=x4M( end ) ; %Last
time
value
433
434
x_min5M=x5M(1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
A30
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:99==
435
x_max5M=x5M( end ) ; %Last
time
value
436
437 %Finding
frequency
of new sampling needed to
get 30 ,000 ,000 data
points
438
M1step=(x_max1M−x_min1M ) / Data_points ;
439
M2step=(x_max2M−x_min2M ) / Data_points ;
440
M3step=(x_max3M−x_min3M ) / Data_points ;
441
M4step=(x_max4M−x_min4M ) / Data_points ;
442
M5step=(x_max5M−x_min5M ) / Data_points ;
443
444
445 %Defining
the
coordinates
of new data values
446
Npoints1M=x1M(1) : M1step :x1M( end ) ;
447
Npoints2M=x2M(1) : M2step :x2M( end ) ;
448
Npoints3M=x3M(1) : M3step :x3M( end ) ;
449
Npoints4M=x4M(1) : M4step :x4M( end ) ;
450
Npoints5M=x5M(1) : M5step :x5M( end ) ;
451
452
453
454 %% L data
timestep
synchronization
455
456
Data_points =30000000;%Defining how many new data
points
I
want
+1
457
x_min2L=x2L (1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
458
x_max2L=x2L ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
459
460
x_min3L=x3L (1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
461
x_max3L=x3L ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
462
463
x_min4L=x4L (1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
464
x_max4L=x4L ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
465
466
x_min5L=x5L (1) ;%F i r s t
time
value
467
x_max5L=x5L ( end ) ; %Last
time
value
468
469 %Finding
frequency
of new sampling needed to
get 30 ,000 ,000 data
points
470
L2step =(x_max2L−x_min2L ) / Data_points ;
471
L3step =(x_max3L−x_min3L ) / Data_points ;
472
L4step =(x_max4L−x_min4L ) / Data_points ;
473
L5step =(x_max5L−x_min5L ) / Data_points ;
474
475 %Defining
the
coordinates
of new data values
476
Npoints2L=x2L (1) : L2step : x2L ( end ) ;
477
Npoints3L=x3L (1) : L3step : x3L ( end ) ;
478
Npoints4L=x4L (1) : L4step : x4L ( end ) ;
479
Npoints5L=x5L (1) : L5step : x5L ( end ) ;
480
481
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A31
==PAGE:100==
482 %% I n t e r p o l a t i n g S data
483
484 %1D i n t e r p o l a t i o n
485
yp1S= interp1 (x1S , y1S ,
Npoints1S ) ;
486
yp2S= interp1 (x2S , y2S ,
Npoints2S ) ;
487
yp3S= interp1 (x3S , y3S ,
Npoints3S ) ;
488
yp4S= interp1 (x4S , y4S ,
Npoints4S ) ;
489
yp5S= interp1 (x5S , y5S ,
Npoints5S ) ;
490
491 %Creating
time
vector
of same length as
i n t e r p o l a t e d
data
f o r
time
of
t e s t
492 %from data
sets
with 40 second wait
time
493
timeS=linspace (0 ,30000001 ,30000001) ’ ;
494
495 %% I n t e r p o l a t i n g M data
496
497 %1D i n t e r p o l a t i o n
498
yp1M= interp1 (x1M, y1M,
Npoints1M ) ;
499
yp2M= interp1 (x2M, y2M,
Npoints2M ) ;
500
yp3M= interp1 (x3M, y3M,
Npoints3M ) ;
501
yp4M= interp1 (x4M, y4M,
Npoints4M ) ;
502
yp5M= interp1 (x5M, y5M,
Npoints5M ) ;
503
504 %Creating
time
vector
of same length as
i n t e r p o l a t e d
data
f o r
time
of
t e s t
505 %from data
sets
with 40 second wait
time
506
timeM=linspace (0 ,30000001 ,30000001) ’ ;
507
508 %% I n t e r p o l a t i n g L data
509
510 %1D i n t e r p o l a t i o n
511
yp2L= interp1 ( x2L , y2L ,
Npoints2L ) ;
512
yp3L= interp1 ( x3L , y3L ,
Npoints3L ) ;
513
yp4L= interp1 ( x4L , y4L ,
Npoints4L ) ;
514
yp5L= interp1 ( x5L , y5L ,
Npoints5L ) ;
515
516 %Creating
time
vector
of same length as
i n t e r p o l a t e d
data
f o r
time
of
t e s t
517 %from data
sets
with 40 second wait
time
518
timeL=linspace (0 ,30000001 ,30000001) ’ ;
519
520
521
522
523 %% Matlab Lowpass
f i l t e r
524
525 %define
normalized passbad frequency
526
wpass =0.1;
527 %Mimimum order lowpass
f i l t e r
stopband
attenuation =60dB
528
f i l t 1 S =lowpass ( yp1S , wpass ) ;
A32
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:101==
529
f i l t 2 S =lowpass ( yp2S , wpass ) ;
530
f i l t 3 S =lowpass ( yp3S , wpass ) ;
531
f i l t 4 S =lowpass ( yp4S , wpass ) ;
532
f i l t 5 S =lowpass ( yp5S , wpass ) ;
533
534
f i l t 1 M =lowpass (yp1M, wpass ) ;
535
f i l t 2 M =lowpass (yp2M, wpass ) ;
536
f i l t 3 M =lowpass (yp3M, wpass ) ;
537
f i l t 4 M =lowpass (yp4M, wpass ) ;
538
f i l t 5 M =lowpass (yp5M, wpass ) ;
539
540
f i l t 2 L =lowpass ( yp2L , wpass ) ;
541
f i l t 3 L =lowpass ( yp3L , wpass ) ;
542
f i l t 4 L =lowpass ( yp4L , wpass ) ;
543
f i l t 5 L =lowpass ( yp5L , wpass ) ;
544
545 %% Averaging data
546
547 %Create
matrix
of
f i l t e r e d
values
548
i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t S =[ f i l t 1 S ;
f i l t 2 S ;
f i l t 3 S ;
f i l t 4 S ;
f i l t 5 S ] ’ ;
549
i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t M =[ f i l t 1 M ;
f i l t 2 M ;
f i l t 3 M ;
f i l t 4 M ;
f i l t 5 M ] ’ ;
550
i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t L =[ f i l t 2 L ;
f i l t 3 L ;
f i l t 4 L ;
f i l t 5 L ] ’ ;
551
552 %Get mean of
f i l t e r e d
values
553
S f i l t =mean( i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t S , 2 ) ;
554
M f i l t =mean( i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t M , 2 ) ;
555
L f i l t =mean( i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t L , 2 ) ;
556
557
558 %% Getting
exponential
f i t
559
560 %Get exponential
f i t
of averaged data
561
F i t o f f i l t S = f i t ( timeS , S f i l t , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
562
F i t o f f i l t M = f i t ( timeM , M f i l t , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
563
F i t o f f i l t L = f i t ( timeL , L f i l t , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
564
565 %% Plots
566 %p l o t t i n g
a l l
f i l t e r e d
data
567
f i g u r e
568
p l o t ( i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t S )
569
legend ( ’1S ’ , ’2S ’ , ’3S ’ , ’4S ’ , ’5S ’ )
570
t i t l e ( ’S data
f i l t e r e d ’ )
571
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ )
572
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ )
573
574
f i g u r e
575
p l o t ( i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t M )
576
legend ( ’1M’ , ’2M’ , ’3M’ , ’4M’ , ’5M’ )
577
t i t l e ( ’M data
f i l t e r e d ’ )
578
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ )
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A33
==PAGE:102==
579
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ )
580
581
582
583
f i g u r e
584
p l o t ( i n t e r p o l a t e d f i l t L )
585
legend ( ’2L ’ , ’3L ’ , ’4L ’ , ’5L ’ )
586
t i t l e ( ’L data
f i l t e r e d ’ )
587
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ )
588
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ )
589
590
591
592
593 %P l o t t i n g
averaged
f i l t e r e d
data
with
f i t
l i n e
594
f i g u r e
595
p l o t ( S f i l t , ’b ’ )
596
hold on
597
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t S ,
’ r ’ )
598
t i t l e ( ’S average
f i l t e r e d ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
599
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
600
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
601
legend ( ’S averaged data ’ , ’ F i t
curve ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
602
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
603
hold
o f f
604
605
f i g u r e
606
p l o t ( M f i l t , ’b ’ )
607
hold on
608
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t M ,
’ r ’ )
609
t i t l e ( ’M average
f i l t e r e d ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
610
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
611
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
612
legend ( ’M averaged data ’ , ’ F i t
curve ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
613
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
614
hold
o f f
615
616
f i g u r e
617
p l o t ( L f i l t , ’b ’ )
618
hold on
619
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t L ,
’ r ’ )
620
t i t l e ( ’L average
f i l t e r e d ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
621
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
622
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
623
legend ( ’L averaged data ’ , ’ F i t
curve ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
624
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
625
hold
o f f
626
627 % p l o t t i n g
a l l
3
f i t
groups
together
628
f i g u r e
A34
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:103==
629
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t S , ’ k ’ )
630
hold on
631
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t M , ’b ’ )
632
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t L , ’ r ’ )
633
legend ( ’L ’ , ’M’ , ’S ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
634
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
635
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
636
t i t l e ( ’ F i t
graphs
f o r S, M, and L groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
637
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
638
xlim ( [ 0
30000000])
639
hold
o f f
640
641
642
643 %p l o t 2L , 3L etc
f i t
and average
f i t
and average data
f o r L , M
and S
644
645
646 %% Exponential
f i t
647 %Creating a two term
exponential model of
the data
648 %creating
c e l l
f o r
a l l
f i t
equations
649
fS= c e l l (1 ,5) ;
650
fM= c e l l (1 ,5) ;
651
fL= c e l l (1 ,5) ;
652
653 %f i n d i n g
exponential
f i t
of
a l l
i n d i v i d u a l
bone data
654
fS {1}= f i t ( timeS , f i l t 1 S ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
655
fS {2}= f i t ( timeS , f i l t 2 S ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
656
fS {3}= f i t ( timeS , f i l t 3 S ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
657
fS {4}= f i t ( timeS , f i l t 4 S ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
658
fS {5}= f i t ( timeS , f i l t 5 S ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
659
660
661
fM{1}= f i t ( timeM , f i l t 1 M ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
662
fM{2}= f i t ( timeM , f i l t 2 M ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
663
fM{3}= f i t ( timeM , f i l t 3 M ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
664
fM{4}= f i t ( timeM , f i l t 4 M ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
665
fM{5}= f i t ( timeM , f i l t 5 M ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
666
667
668
fL {2}= f i t ( timeL , f i l t 2 L ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
669
fL {3}= f i t ( timeL , f i l t 3 L ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
670
fL {4}= f i t ( timeL , f i l t 4 L ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
671
fL {5}= f i t ( timeL , f i l t 5 L ’ , ’ exp2 ’ ) ;
672
673
674 %% P l o t t i n g
a l l
exponentially
f i t t e d
data
675
676 %P l o t t i n g
a l l
f i t t e d
data
677
f i g u r e
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A35
==PAGE:104==
678
p l o t ( fS {1 } , ’b ’ )
679
hold on
680
p l o t ( fS {3 } , ’−−b ’ )
681
p l o t ( fS {2 } , ’ −.b ’ )
682
p l o t ( fS {4 } , ’ : b ’ )
683
p l o t ( fS {5 } , ’ k ’ )
684
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,2 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
685
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t S , ’b ’ )
686
687
688
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
689
p l o t ( fM {1 } , ’ r ’ )
690
p l o t ( fM {2 } , ’−−r ’ )
691
p l o t ( fM {3 } , ’ −. r ’ )
692
p l o t ( fM {4 } , ’ : r ’ )
693
p l o t ( fM {5 } , ’ −.k ’ )
694
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,2 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
695
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t M , ’ r ’ )
696
697
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
698
p l o t ( fL {2 } , ’g ’ )
699
p l o t ( fL {3 } , ’−−g ’ )
700
p l o t ( fL {4 } , ’ −.g ’ )
701
p l o t ( fL {5 } , ’ : g ’ )
702
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,2 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
703
p l o t ( F i t o f f i l t L , ’g ’ )
704
705
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
706
707
legend ( ’1S ’ , ’2S ’ , ’3S ’ , ’4S ’ , ’5S ’ , ’ Average
f i t
of S ’ , ’1M’ , ’2M’ , ’3M
’ , . . .
708
’4M’ , ’5M’ , ’ Average
f i t
of M’ , ’2L ’ , ’3L ’ , ’4L ’ , ’5L ’ , ’ Average
f i t
of L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
709
t i t l e ( ’ F i t t e d
data
f o r
a l l
bones ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
710
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
711
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
712
hold
o f f
713
714
715
716 % p l o t t i n g
f i t t e d
l i n e
and i n t e r p o l a t e d
data
717
f i g u r e
718
p l o t ( fS {1 } , timeS , yp1S , ’ k ’ )
719
hold on
720
p l o t ( fS {2 } , timeS , yp2S , ’b ’ )
721
p l o t ( fS {3 } , timeS , yp3S , ’ r ’ )
722
p l o t ( fS {4 } , timeS , yp4S , ’g ’ )
723
p l o t ( fS {5 } , timeS , yp5S , ’ y ’ )
724
t i t l e ( ’ A l l S bones pl o tt e d
with
f i t ’ )
725
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ )
A36
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:105==
726
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ )
727
legend ( ’1S Data ’ , ’1S F i t ’ , ’2S Data ’ , ’2S F i t ’ , ’3S Data ’ , ’3S F i t ’ ,
’4S Data ’ , . . .
728
’4S F i t ’ , ’5S Data ’ , ’5S F i t ’ )
729
hold
o f f
730
731
732
733
734
735
f i g u r e
736
p l o t ( fM {1 } , timeM , yp1M, ’ k ’ )
737
hold on
738
p l o t ( fM {2 } , timeM , yp2M, ’b ’ )
739
p l o t ( fM {3 } , timeM , yp3M, ’ r ’ )
740
p l o t ( fM {4 } , timeM , yp4M, ’g ’ )
741
p l o t ( fM {5 } , timeM , yp5M, ’ y ’ )
742
743
t i t l e ( ’ A l l M bones pl o tte d
with
f i t ’ )
744
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ )
745
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ )
746
legend ( ’1M Data ’ , ’1M F i t ’ , ’2M Data ’ , ’2M F i t ’ , ’3M Data ’ , ’3M F i t ’ ,
’4M Data ’ , . . .
747
’4M F i t ’ , ’5M Data ’ , ’5M F i t ’ )
748
hold
o f f
749
750
751
752
753
f i g u r e
754
p l o t ( fL {2 } , timeL , yp2L , ’b ’ )
755
hold on
756
p l o t ( fL {3 } , timeL , yp3L , ’ r ’ )
757
p l o t ( fL {4 } , timeL , yp4L , ’g ’ )
758
p l o t ( fL {5 } , timeL , yp5L , ’ y ’ )
759
t i t l e ( ’ A l l L bones pl o tte d
with
f i t ’ )
760
xlabel ( ’ Time ( s ) ’ )
761
ylabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ )
762
legend ( ’2L Data ’ , ’2L F i t ’ , ’3L Data ’ , ’3L F i t ’ , ’4L Data ’ , . . .
763
’4L F i t ’ , ’5L Data ’ , ’5L F i t ’ )
764
hold
o f f
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A37
==PAGE:106==
A.5.2
Cyclic Axial Testing DIC Data Matlab Code
1 %% Setup
2 %Add
f i l e
to
path
3
addpath ( genpath ( ’C : \ Users \ isabe \ OneDrive \ Documents \ Thesis \
New_DIC_data ’ ) )
4
5 %% Reading tables
f o r DIC data
6 %Read Femur DIC data
f o r
each femur group
i n t o a matlab
c e l l
7 %S= Short= short
working
length
8 %M= Medium= medium working
length
9 %L= Long= long working
length
10
11
12 %Reading short DIC data
13
ShortDIC = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
14
fname1 =
’ Femur1Stbl . xlsx ’ ;
15
ShortDIC {1} = readtable ( fname1 ) ;
16
fname2 =
’ Femur2Stbl . xlsx ’ ;
17
ShortDIC {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
18
fname3 =
’ Femur3Stbl . xlsx ’ ;
19
ShortDIC {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
20
fname4 =
’ Femur4Stbl . xlsx ’ ;
21
ShortDIC {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
22
fname5 =
’ Femur5Stbl . xlsx ’ ;
23
ShortDIC {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
24
25 %Reading medium DIC data
26
MediumDIC = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
27
fname1 =
’ Femur1Mtbl . xlsx ’ ;
28
MediumDIC {1} = readtable ( fname1 ) ;
29
fname2 =
’ Femur2Mtbl . xlsx ’ ;
30
MediumDIC {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
31
fname3 =
’ Femur3Mtbl . xlsx ’ ;
32
MediumDIC {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
33
fname4 =
’ Femur4Mtbl . xlsx ’ ;
34
MediumDIC {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
35
fname5 =
’ Femur5Mtbl . xlsx ’ ;
36
MediumDIC {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
37
38 %Reading long DIC data
39
LongDIC = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
40
fname1 =
’ Femur1Ltbl . xlsx ’ ;
41
LongDIC {1} = readtable ( fname1 ) ;
42
fname2 =
’ Femur2Ltbl . xlsx ’ ;
43
LongDIC {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
44
fname3 =
’ Femur3Ltbl . xlsx ’ ;
45
LongDIC {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
46
fname4 =
’ Femur4Ltbl . xlsx ’ ;
47
LongDIC {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
A38
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:107==
48
fname5 =
’ Femur5Ltbl . xlsx ’ ;
49
LongDIC {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
50
51 %% Removing unwanted data from
table
Short
52
53 %row with
zeros
i s
defined as the
reference image and the 47
images
a f t e r
54 %that were taken
during
the 50,000
c y c l i c
loading
cycles .
A l l
other images
55 %were removed
56 %Two extra images were removed from the
c y c l i c
loading
cycle
since
t h i s
57 %data was missing
in some groups
58
59 %Saving new variable
60
ShortDIC1=ShortDIC ;
61
62 %Extracting
data from 50 images of
c y c l i c
loading
63
ShortDIC1 { 1 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
64
ShortDIC1 { 2 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
65
ShortDIC1 { 3 } ( [ 1 : 2 2 ,
71:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
66
ShortDIC1 { 4 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
67
ShortDIC1 { 5 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
68
69
70
71 %% Removing unwanted data from
table Medium
72
73 %row with
zeros
i s
defined as the
reference image and the 49
images
a f t e r
74 %that were taken
during
the 50,000
c y c l i c
loading
cycles .
A l l
other images
75 %were removed
76 %Two extra images were removed from the
c y c l i c
loading
cycle
since
t h i s
77 %data was missing
in some groups
78
79 %Saving new variable
80
MediumDIC1=MediumDIC ;
81
82 %Extracting
data from 50 images of
c y c l i c
loading
83
MediumDIC1 { 1 } ( [ 1 ,
50:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
84
MediumDIC1 { 2 } ( [ 1 ,
50:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
85
MediumDIC1 { 3 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
86
MediumDIC1 { 4 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
87
MediumDIC1 { 5 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
88
89
90
91 %% Removing unwanted data from
table Long
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A39
==PAGE:108==
92
93 %row with
zeros
i s
defined as the
reference image and the 49
images
a f t e r
94 %that were taken
during
the 50,000
c y c l i c
loading
cycles .
A l l
other images
95 %were removed
96 %Two extra images were removed from the
c y c l i c
loading
cycle
since
t h i s
97 %data was missing
in some groups
98
99 %Saving new variable
100
LongDIC1=LongDIC ;
101
102 %Extracting
data from 50 images of
c y c l i c
loading
103
LongDIC1 { 1 } ( [ 1 : 4 2 ,
91:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
104
LongDIC1 { 2 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
105
LongDIC1 { 3 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
106
LongDIC1 { 4 } ( [ 1 : 2 1 ,
70:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
107
LongDIC1 { 5 } ( [ 1 : 3 ,
52:end ] , : ) = [ ] ;
108
109 %% Extracting
displacement
vectors
Short
110
111 %Saving new variable
112
s h o r t a l l = ShortDIC1 ;
113
114 %Creating empty
c e l l
to save
r e s u l t s
in
115
Svectors= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
116
117 %Creating empty tables
in each
c e l l
118
f o r
i =1: height ( Svectors )
119
f o r
j =1: length ( Svectors )
120
Svectors { i , j }= zeros (3 ,6) ;
121
end
122
end
123
124 %Extracting
vectors
f o r 6 points
across the
f r a c t u r e gap f o r
each of
the 50
125 %pictures
during
c y c l i c
loading
126
f o r
i =1: height ( Svectors )
127
f o r
j =1: length ( Svectors )
128
Svectors { i , j } ( 1 , 1 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 2 7 } ;
129
Svectors { i , j } ( 2 , 1 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 2 8 } ;
130
Svectors { i , j } ( 3 , 1 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 2 9 } ;
131
132
Svectors { i , j } ( 1 , 2 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 1 } ;
133
Svectors { i , j } ( 2 , 2 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 2 } ;
134
Svectors { i , j } ( 3 , 2 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 3 } ;
135
136
Svectors { i , j } ( 1 , 3 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 5 } ;
137
Svectors { i , j } ( 2 , 3 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 6 } ;
A40
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:109==
138
Svectors { i , j } ( 3 , 3 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 7 } ;
139
140
Svectors { i , j } ( 1 , 4 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 9 } ;
141
Svectors { i , j } ( 2 , 4 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 0 } ;
142
Svectors { i , j } ( 3 , 4 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 1 } ;
143
144
Svectors { i , j } ( 1 , 5 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 3 } ;
145
Svectors { i , j } ( 2 , 5 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 4 } ;
146
Svectors { i , j } ( 3 , 5 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 5 } ;
147
148
Svectors { i , j } ( 1 , 6 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 7 } ;
149
Svectors { i , j } ( 2 , 6 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 8 } ;
150
Svectors { i , j } ( 3 , 6 ) = s h o r t a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 9 } ;
151
end
152
end
153
154 %Since the
reference
stage
i s a zero the
deformation
i s
j u s t
the
plain
155 %displacement
value
in
the deformed image
156
157 %% Extracting
displacement
vectors Medium
158
159 %Saving new variable
160
mediumall= MediumDIC1 ;
161
162 %Creating empty
c e l l
to save
r e s u l t s
in
163
Mvectors= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
164
165 %Creating empty tables
in each
c e l l
166
f o r
i =1: height ( Mvectors )
167
f o r
j =1: length ( Mvectors )
168
Mvectors { i , j }= zeros (3 ,6) ;
169
end
170
end
171
172
173 %Extracting
vectors
f o r 6 points
across the
f r a c t u r e gap f o r
each of
the 50
174 %pictures
during
c y c l i c
loading
175
f o r
i =2: height ( Mvectors )
176
f o r
j =1: length ( Mvectors )
177
Mvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 1 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 2 7 } ;
178
Mvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 1 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 2 8 } ;
179
Mvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 1 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 2 9 } ;
180
181
Mvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 2 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 3 1 } ;
182
Mvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 2 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 3 2 } ;
183
Mvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 2 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 3 3 } ;
184
185
Mvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 3 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 3 5 } ;
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A41
==PAGE:110==
186
Mvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 3 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 3 6 } ;
187
Mvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 3 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 3 7 } ;
188
189
Mvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 4 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 3 9 } ;
190
Mvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 4 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 4 0 } ;
191
Mvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 4 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 4 1 } ;
192
193
Mvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 5 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 4 3 } ;
194
Mvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 5 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 4 4 } ;
195
Mvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 5 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 4 5 } ;
196
197
Mvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 6 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 4 7 } ;
198
Mvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 6 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 4 8 } ;
199
Mvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 6 ) =mediumall {1 , i } { j , 4 9 } ;
200
end
201
end
202
203
204
205 %Since data
i s
located
in
d i f f e r e n t
places
in
the
o r i g i n a l
data
f o r
206 %d i f f e r e n t
bones ,
m u l t i p l e
loops had to be used
207
f o r
j =1: length ( Mvectors )
208
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 1 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 2 6 } ;
209
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 1 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 2 7 } ;
210
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 1 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 2 8 } ;
211
212
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 2 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 2 9 } ;
213
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 2 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 0 } ;
214
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 2 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 1 } ;
215
216
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 3 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 2 } ;
217
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 3 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 3 } ;
218
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 3 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 4 } ;
219
220
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 4 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 5 } ;
221
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 4 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 6 } ;
222
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 4 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 7 } ;
223
224
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 5 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 8 } ;
225
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 5 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 3 9 } ;
226
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 5 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 4 0 } ;
227
228
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 6 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 4 1 } ;
229
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 6 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 4 2 } ;
230
Mvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 6 ) =mediumall {1 , 1 } { j , 4 3 } ;
231
end
232
233 %Since the
reference
stage
i s a zero the
deformation
i s
j u s t
the
plain
A42
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:111==
234 %Displacement value
in
the deformed image
235 %% Extracting
displacement
vectors Long
236
237 %Saving new variable
238
l o n g a l l = LongDIC1 ;
239
240 %Creating empty
c e l l
241
Lvectors= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
242
243 %Creating empty table
in each
c e l l
244
f o r
i =1: height ( Lvectors )
245
f o r
j =1: length ( Lvectors )
246
Lvectors { i , j }= zeros (3 ,6) ;
247
end
248
end
249
250
251 %Extracting
vectors
f o r 6 points
across the
f r a c t u r e gap f o r
each of
the 50
252 %pictures
during
c y c l i c
loading
253
f o r
i =2:5
254
f o r
j =1: length ( Lvectors )
255
Lvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 1 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 2 7 } ;
256
Lvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 1 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 2 8 } ;
257
Lvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 1 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 2 9 } ;
258
259
Lvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 2 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 1 } ;
260
Lvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 2 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 2 } ;
261
Lvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 2 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 3 } ;
262
263
Lvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 3 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 5 } ;
264
Lvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 3 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 6 } ;
265
Lvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 3 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 7 } ;
266
267
Lvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 4 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 3 9 } ;
268
Lvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 4 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 0 } ;
269
Lvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 4 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 1 } ;
270
271
Lvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 5 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 3 } ;
272
Lvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 5 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 4 } ;
273
Lvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 5 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 5 } ;
274
275
Lvectors { i , j } ( 1 , 6 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 7 } ;
276
Lvectors { i , j } ( 2 , 6 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 8 } ;
277
Lvectors { i , j } ( 3 , 6 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , i } { j , 4 9 } ;
278
end
279
end
280
281 %Since data
i s
located
in
d i f f e r e n t
c e l l s
f o r
d i f f e r e n t
bones ,
mu l t i p l e
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A43
==PAGE:112==
282 %loops had to be used
283
f o r
j =1: length ( Lvectors )
284
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 1 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 2 6 } ;
285
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 1 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 2 7 } ;
286
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 1 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 2 8 } ;
287
288
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 2 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 2 9 } ;
289
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 2 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 0 } ;
290
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 2 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 1 } ;
291
292
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 3 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 2 } ;
293
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 3 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 3 } ;
294
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 3 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 4 } ;
295
296
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 4 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 5 } ;
297
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 4 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 6 } ;
298
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 4 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 7 } ;
299
300
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 5 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 8 } ;
301
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 5 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 3 9 } ;
302
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 5 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 4 0 } ;
303
304
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 1 , 6 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 4 1 } ;
305
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 2 , 6 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 4 2 } ;
306
Lvectors {1 , j } ( 3 , 6 ) = l o n g a l l {1 , 1 } { j , 4 3 } ;
307
end
308
309 %Since the
reference
stage
i s a zero the
deformation
i s
j u s t
the
plain
310 %Displacement value
in
the deformed image
311
312
313
314 %% Finding
vectors
in gap Small
315
316 %Creating empty
c e l l
317
Sgapvectors= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
318
319 %Creating empty tables
in each
c e l l
320
f o r
i =1: height ( Sgapvectors )
321
f o r
j =1: length ( Sgapvectors )
322
Sgapvectors { i , j }= zeros (3 ,3) ;
323
end
324
end
325
326
327 %Taking the
difference
of two vectors
across from the
f r a c t u r e
gap from
328 %eachother
to
get a vector
in
the gap
329
f o r
i =1: height ( Sgapvectors )
A44
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:113==
330
f o r
j =1: length ( Sgapvectors )
331
Sgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Svectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) −Svectors { i , j
} ( : , 2 ) ;
332
Sgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 2 ) =Svectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) −Svectors { i , j
} ( : , 4 ) ;
333
Sgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) =Svectors { i , j } ( : , 5 ) −Svectors { i , j
} ( : , 6 ) ;
334
335
end
336
end
337
338
339 %Creating empty
c e l l
340
Sgapvectorplate= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
341 %Creating empty tables
in each
c e l l
342
f o r
i =1: height ( Sgapvectorplate )
343
f o r
j =1: length ( Sgapvectorplate )
344
Sgapvectorplate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
345
end
346
end
347
348 %Saving
vectors
close
to
plate
in
i t s own c e l l
349
f o r
i =1: height ( Sgapvectorplate )
350
f o r
j =1: length ( Sgapvectorplate )
351
Sgapvectorplate { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Sgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) ;
352
end
353
end
354
355 %creating empty
c e l l
with empty tables
356
Sgapvectormid= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
357
f o r
i =1: height ( Sgapvectormid )
358
f o r
j =1: length ( Sgapvectormid )
359
Sgapvectormid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
360
end
361
end
362
363 %Saving
vectors
in
the middle
of
the
f r a c t u r e
i t
i t s own c e l l
364
f o r
i =1: height ( Sgapvectormid )
365
f o r
j =1: length ( Sgapvectormid )
366
Sgapvectormid { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Sgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 2 ) ;
367
end
368
end
369
370 %creating empty
c e l l
with empty tables
371
Sgapvectorfar= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
372
f o r
i =1: height ( Sgapvectorfar )
373
f o r
j =1: length ( Sgapvectorfar )
374
Sgapvectorfar { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
375
end
376
end
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A45
==PAGE:114==
377
378 %Saving
vectors
f a r
from the
f r a c t u r e
plate
in
c e l l s
379
f o r
i =1: height ( Sgapvectorfar )
380
f o r
j =1: length ( Sgapvectorfar )
381
Sgapvectorfar { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Sgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) ;
382
end
383
end
384
385
386
387
388
389 %% Finding
vectors
in gap Medium
390
391 %Creating empty
c e l l
392
Mgapvectors= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
393 %Creating empty tables
in each
c e l l
394
f o r
i =1: height ( Mgapvectors )
395
f o r
j =1: length ( Mgapvectors )
396
Mgapvectors { i , j }= zeros (3 ,3) ;
397
end
398
end
399
400 %Taking the
difference
of two vectors
across from the
f r a c t u r e
gap from
401 %eachother
to
get a vector
in
the gap
402
f o r
i =1: height ( Mgapvectors )
403
f o r
j =1: length ( Mgapvectors )
404
Mgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Mvectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) −Mvectors { i , j
} ( : , 2 ) ;
405
Mgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 2 ) =Mvectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) −Mvectors { i , j
} ( : , 4 ) ;
406
Mgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) =Mvectors { i , j } ( : , 5 ) −Mvectors { i , j
} ( : , 6 ) ;
407
408
end
409
end
410
411
412 %Creating empty
c e l l
with empty tables
413
Mgapvectorplate= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
414
f o r
i =1: height ( Mgapvectorplate )
415
f o r
j =1: length ( Mgapvectorplate )
416
Mgapvectorplate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
417
end
418
end
419
420 %Saving
vectors
close
to
plate
in
i t s own c e l l
421
f o r
i =1: height ( Mgapvectorplate )
422
f o r
j =1: length ( Mgapvectorplate )
A46
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:115==
423
Mgapvectorplate { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Mgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) ;
424
end
425
end
426
427 %creating empty
c e l l
with empty tables
428
Mgapvectormid= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
429
f o r
i =1: height ( Mgapvectormid )
430
f o r
j =1: length ( Mgapvectormid )
431
Mgapvectormid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
432
end
433
end
434
435 %Saving
vectors
in
the middle
of
the
f r a c t u r e
i t
i t s own c e l l
436
f o r
i =1: height ( Mgapvectormid )
437
f o r
j =1: length ( Mgapvectormid )
438
Mgapvectormid { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Mgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 2 ) ;
439
end
440
end
441
442 %creating empty
c e l l
with empty tables
443
Mgapvectorfar= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
444
f o r
i =1: height ( Mgapvectorfar )
445
f o r
j =1: length ( Mgapvectorfar )
446
Mgapvectorfar { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
447
end
448
end
449
450 %Saving
vectors
f a r
from the
f r a c t u r e
plate
in
c e l l s
451
f o r
i =1: height ( Mgapvectorfar )
452
f o r
j =1: length ( Mgapvectorfar )
453
Mgapvectorfar { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Mgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) ;
454
end
455
end
456
457 %% Finding
vectors
in gap Long
458
459 %Creating empty
c e l l
460
Lgapvectors= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
461
462 %Creating empty tables
in each
c e l l
463
f o r
i =1: height ( Lgapvectors )
464
f o r
j =1: length ( Lgapvectors )
465
Lgapvectors { i , j }= zeros (3 ,3) ;
466
end
467
end
468
469 %Taking the
difference
of two vectors
across from the
f r a c t u r e
gap from
470 %eachother
to
get a vector
in
the gap
471
f o r
i =1: height ( Lgapvectors )
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A47
==PAGE:116==
472
f o r
j =1: length ( Lgapvectors )
473
Lgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Lvectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) −Lvectors { i , j
} ( : , 2 ) ;
474
Lgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 2 ) =Lvectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) −Lvectors { i , j
} ( : , 4 ) ;
475
Lgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) =Lvectors { i , j } ( : , 5 ) −Lvectors { i , j
} ( : , 6 ) ;
476
477
end
478
end
479
480 %Creating empty
c e l l
and empty tables
481
Lgapvectorplate= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
482
f o r
i =1: height ( Lgapvectorplate )
483
f o r
j =1: length ( Lgapvectorplate )
484
Lgapvectorplate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
485
end
486
end
487
488 %Saving
vectors
close
to
plate
in
i t s own c e l l
489
f o r
i =1: height ( Lgapvectorplate )
490
f o r
j =1: length ( Lgapvectorplate )
491
Lgapvectorplate { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Lgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 1 ) ;
492
end
493
end
494
495 %creating empty
c e l l
with empty tables
496
Lgapvectormid= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
497
f o r
i =1: height ( Lgapvectormid )
498
f o r
j =1: length ( Lgapvectormid )
499
Lgapvectormid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
500
end
501
end
502
503 %Saving
vectors
in
the middle
of
the
f r a c t u r e
i t
i t s own c e l l
504
f o r
i =1: height ( Lgapvectormid )
505
f o r
j =1: length ( Lgapvectormid )
506
Lgapvectormid { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Lgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 2 ) ;
507
end
508
end
509
510 %creating empty
c e l l
with empty tables
511
Lgapvectorfar= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
512
f o r
i =1: height ( Lgapvectorfar )
513
f o r
j =1: length ( Lgapvectorfar )
514
Lgapvectorfar { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
515
end
516
end
517
518 %Saving
vectors
f a r
from the
f r a c t u r e
plate
in
A48
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:117==
cellsLgapvectorplate= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
519
f o r
i =1: height ( Lgapvectorfar )
520
f o r
j =1: length ( Lgapvectorfar )
521
Lgapvectorfar { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =Lgapvectors { i , j } ( : , 3 ) ;
522
end
523
end
524
525
526 %% get
the average
vector
f o r
the gap Short
527 %Creating empty
c e l l s
with empty tables
528
Savg= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
529
f o r
i =1: height ( Savg )
530
f o r
j =1: length ( Savg )
531
Savg { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
532
end
533
end
534
535 %Finding
the average
vector
f o r
the
e n t i r e gap
536
f o r
i =1: height ( Savg )
537
f o r
j =1: length ( Savg )
538
Savg { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =mean( Sgapvectors { i , j } ,2) ;
539
end
540
end
541
542 %% get
the average
vector
f o r
the gap Medium
543
544 %Creating empty
c e l l s
with empty tables
545
Mavg= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
546
f o r
i =1: height (Mavg)
547
f o r
j =1: length (Mavg)
548
Mavg{ i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
549
end
550
end
551
552 %Finding
the average
vector
f o r
the
e n t i r e gap
553
f o r
i =1: height (Mavg)
554
f o r
j =1: length (Mavg)
555
Mavg{ i , j } ( : , 1 ) =mean( Mgapvectors { i , j } ,2) ;
556
end
557
end
558
559
560
561 %% get
the average
vector
f o r
the gap Long
562
563 %Creating empty
c e l l s
withe empty tables
564
Lavg= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
565
f o r
i =1: height ( Lavg )
566
f o r
j =1: length ( Lavg )
567
Lavg { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A49
==PAGE:118==
568
end
569
end
570
571 %Finding
the average
vector
f o r
the
e n t i r e gap
572
f o r
i =1: height ( Lavg )
573
f o r
j =1: length ( Lavg )
574
Lavg { i , j } ( : , 1 ) =mean( Lgapvectors { i , j } ,2) ;
575
end
576
end
577
578
579 %% Gram Schmidt
normalization
Short
580 %Defining
the
anatomical
axis
in
world
coordinates
f o r
normalization
581
axis =[0;
1;
0 ] ;
582
L=10; %Length
of
the
f r a c t u r e gap in mm
583
584 %Average vectors
585 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
586
Sstrainnormavg=zeros (5 ,48) ;
587
Sstrainshearavg=zeros (5 ,48) ;
588
Sholdavg= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
589
f o r
i =1: height ( Sholdavg )
590
f o r
j =1: length ( Sholdavg )
591
Sholdavg { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
592
end
593
end
594
595
Shold2avg= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
596
f o r
i =1: height ( Shold2avg )
597
f o r
j =1: length ( Shold2avg )
598
Shold2avg { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
599
end
600
end
601
602
603 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains , same process used
f o r
a l l
of
the
604 %f o l l o w i n g
normal and shear
s t r a i n
c a l c u l a t i o n s
605
f o r
i =1: height ( Sstrainnormavg )
606
f o r
j =1: length ( Sstrainnormavg )
607
Sholdavg { i , j }= dot ( Savg { i , j } , axis ) ; %Dot product
of
average
vector
608
%and anatomical
axis
609
Sholdavg { i , j }= Sholdavg { i , j }* axis ; %M u l t i p l y i n g
scalar
answer with
610
%anatomical
axis
611
Sstrainnormavg ( i , j )=norm ( Sholdavg { i , j } ) / L ; %Dividing by
the
length
612
%of
the
f r a c t u r e gap
A50
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:119==
613
Shold2avg { i , j }=Savg { i , j }−Sholdavg { i , j } ; %subtracting
the
average
614
%vecotr by the
dot
product
of
the average
vecotr and the
anatomical
615
%axis
m u l t i p l i e d
by the
anatomical
axis
616
Sstrainshearavg ( i , j )=norm ( Shold2avg { i , j } ) / L ; %Dividing
by length
of
617
%f r a c t u r e gap
618
end
619
end
620
621 %Plate
vectors
622 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
623
Sstrainnormplate=zeros (5 ,48) ;
624
Sstrainshearplate=zeros (5 ,48) ;
625
Sholdplate= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
626
f o r
i =1: height ( Sholdplate )
627
f o r
j =1: length ( Sholdplate )
628
Sholdplate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
629
end
630
end
631
632
Shold2plate= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
633
f o r
i =1: height ( Shold2plate )
634
f o r
j =1: length ( Shold2plate )
635
Shold2plate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
636
end
637
end
638
639
640 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
641
f o r
i =1: height ( Sstrainnormplate )
642
f o r
j =1: length ( Sstrainnormplate )
643
Sholdplate { i , j }= dot ( Sgapvectorplate { i , j } , axis ) ;
644
Sholdplate { i , j }= Sholdplate { i , j }* axis ;
645
Sstrainnormplate ( i , j )=norm ( Sholdplate { i , j } ) / L ;
646
Shold2plate { i , j }= Sgapvectorplate { i , j }−Sholdplate { i , j } ;
647
Sstrainshearplate ( i , j )=norm ( Shold2plate { i , j } ) / L ;
648
end
649
end
650
651 %mid vectors
652 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
653
Sstrainnormmid=zeros (5 ,48) ;
654
Sstrainshearmid=zeros (5 ,48) ;
655
Sholdmid= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
656
f o r
i =1: height ( Sholdmid )
657
f o r
j =1: length ( Sholdmid )
658
Sholdmid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
659
end
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A51
==PAGE:120==
660
end
661
662
Shold2mid= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
663
f o r
i =1: height ( Shold2mid )
664
f o r
j =1: length ( Shold2mid )
665
Shold2mid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
666
end
667
end
668
669
670 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
671
f o r
i =1: height ( Sstrainnormmid )
672
f o r
j =1: length ( Sstrainnormmid )
673
Sholdmid { i , j }= dot ( Sgapvectormid { i , j } , axis ) ;
674
Sholdmid { i , j }= Sholdmid { i , j }* axis ;
675
Sstrainnormmid ( i , j )=norm ( Sholdmid { i , j } ) / L ;
676
Shold2mid { i , j }= Sgapvectormid { i , j }−Sholdmid { i , j } ;
677
Sstrainshearmid ( i , j )=norm ( Shold2mid { i , j } ) / L ;
678
end
679
end
680
681 %f a r
vectors
682 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
683
Sstrainnormfar=zeros (5 ,48) ;
684
Sstrainshearfar=zeros (5 ,48) ;
685
Sholdfar= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
686
f o r
i =1: height ( Sholdfar )
687
f o r
j =1: length ( Sholdfar )
688
Sholdfar { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
689
end
690
end
691
692
Shold2far= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
693
f o r
i =1: height ( Shold2far )
694
f o r
j =1: length ( Shold2far )
695
Shold2far { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
696
end
697
end
698
699
700 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
701
f o r
i =1: height ( Sstrainnormfar )
702
f o r
j =1: length ( Sstrainnormfar )
703
Sholdfar { i , j }= dot ( Sgapvectorfar { i , j } , axis ) ;
704
Sholdfar { i , j }= Sholdfar { i , j }* axis ;
705
Sstrainnormfar ( i , j )=norm ( Sholdfar { i , j } ) / L ;
706
Shold2far { i , j }= Sgapvectorfar { i , j }−Sholdfar { i , j } ;
707
Sstrainshearfar ( i , j )=norm ( Shold2far { i , j } ) / L ;
708
end
709
end
A52
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:121==
710
711
712
713
714 %% Gram Schmidt
normalization Medium
715
716
axis =[0;
1;
0 ] ;
717
L=10; %Length
of
the
f r a c t u r e gap in mm
718
719 %Average vectors
720 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
721
Mstrainnormavg=zeros (5 ,48) ;
722
Mstrainshearavg=zeros (5 ,48) ;
723
Mholdavg= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
724
f o r
i =1: height ( Mholdavg )
725
f o r
j =1: length ( Mholdavg )
726
Mholdavg { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
727
end
728
end
729
730
Mhold2avg= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
731
f o r
i =1: height ( Mhold2avg )
732
f o r
j =1: length ( Mhold2avg )
733
Mhold2avg { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
734
end
735
end
736
737
738 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
739
f o r
i =1: height ( Mstrainnormavg )
740
f o r
j =1: length ( Mstrainnormavg )
741
Mholdavg { i , j }= dot (Mavg{ i , j } , axis ) ;
742
Mholdavg { i , j }=Mholdavg { i , j }* axis ;
743
Mstrainnormavg ( i , j )=norm ( Mholdavg { i , j } ) / L ;
744
Mhold2avg { i , j }=Mavg{ i , j }−Mholdavg { i , j } ;
745
Mstrainshearavg ( i , j )=norm ( Mhold2avg { i , j } ) / L ;
746
end
747
end
748
749
750
751 %Plate
vectors
752 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
753
Mstrainnormplate=zeros (5 ,48) ;
754
Mstrainshearplate=zeros (5 ,48) ;
755
Mholdplate= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
756
f o r
i =1: height ( Mholdplate )
757
f o r
j =1: length ( Mholdplate )
758
Mholdplate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
759
end
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A53
==PAGE:122==
760
end
761
762
Mhold2plate= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
763
f o r
i =1: height ( Mhold2plate )
764
f o r
j =1: length ( Mhold2plate )
765
Mhold2plate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
766
end
767
end
768
769
770 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
771
f o r
i =1: height ( Mstrainnormplate )
772
f o r
j =1: length ( Mstrainnormplate )
773
Mholdplate { i , j }= dot ( Mgapvectorplate { i , j } , axis ) ;
774
Mholdplate { i , j }= Mholdplate { i , j }* axis ;
775
Mstrainnormplate ( i , j )=norm ( Mholdplate { i , j } ) / L ;
776
Mhold2plate { i , j }= Mgapvectorplate { i , j }−Mholdplate { i , j } ;
777
Mstrainshearplate ( i , j )=norm ( Mhold2plate { i , j } ) / L ;
778
end
779
end
780
781
782 %Mid vectors
783 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
784
Mstrainnormmid=zeros (5 ,48) ;
785
Mstrainshearmid=zeros (5 ,48) ;
786
Mholdmid= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
787
f o r
i =1: height ( Mholdmid )
788
f o r
j =1: length ( Mholdmid )
789
Mholdmid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
790
end
791
end
792
793
Mhold2mid= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
794
f o r
i =1: height ( Mhold2mid )
795
f o r
j =1: length ( Mhold2mid )
796
Mhold2mid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
797
end
798
end
799
800
801 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
802
f o r
i =1: height ( Mstrainnormmid )
803
f o r
j =1: length ( Mstrainnormmid )
804
Mholdmid { i , j }= dot ( Mgapvectormid { i , j } , axis ) ;
805
Mholdmid { i , j }=Mholdmid { i , j }* axis ;
806
Mstrainnormmid ( i , j )=norm ( Mholdmid { i , j } ) / L ;
807
Mhold2mid { i , j }= Mgapvectormid { i , j }−Mholdmid { i , j } ;
808
Mstrainshearmid ( i , j )=norm ( Mhold2mid { i , j } ) / L ;
809
end
A54
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:123==
810
end
811
812
813
814
815 %f a r
vectors
816 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
817
Mstrainnormfar=zeros (5 ,48) ;
818
Mstrainshearfar=zeros (5 ,48) ;
819
Mholdfar= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
820
f o r
i =1: height ( Mholdfar )
821
f o r
j =1: length ( Mholdfar )
822
Mholdfar { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
823
end
824
end
825
826
Mhold2far= c e l l (5 ,48) ;
827
f o r
i =1: height ( Mhold2far )
828
f o r
j =1: length ( Mhold2far )
829
Mhold2far { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
830
end
831
end
832
833
834 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
835
f o r
i =1: height ( Mstrainnormfar )
836
f o r
j =1: length ( Mstrainnormfar )
837
Mholdfar { i , j }= dot ( Mgapvectorfar { i , j } , axis ) ;
838
Mholdfar { i , j }= Mholdfar { i , j }* axis ;
839
Mstrainnormfar ( i , j )=norm ( Mholdfar { i , j } ) / L ;
840
Mhold2far { i , j }= Mgapvectorfar { i , j }−Mholdfar { i , j } ;
841
Mstrainshearfar ( i , j )=norm ( Mhold2far { i , j } ) / L ;
842
end
843
end
844
845 %% Gram Schmidt
normalization Long
846
847
axis =[0;
1;
0 ] ;
848
L=10; %Length
of
the
f r a c t u r e gap in mm
849
850 % Average vectors
851
852 %1L was removed since
there was a disturbance midway through
data
c o l l e c t i o n
853 %causing the
values
to be
o f f
854
Lavgfinalavg=Lavg ;
855
Lavgfinalavg ( 1 , : ) = [ ] ;
856
857 %Last 2 rows were removed b / c 5L data
c o l l e c t i o n
stopped
early
858
Lavgfinalavg ( : , 4 7 : 4 8 ) = [ ] ;
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A55
==PAGE:124==
859
860 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
861
Lstrainnormavg=zeros (4 ,46) ;
862
Lstrainshearavg=zeros (4 ,46) ;
863
Lholdavg= c e l l (4 ,46) ;
864
f o r
i =1: height ( Lholdavg )
865
f o r
j =1: length ( Lholdavg )
866
Lholdavg { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
867
end
868
end
869
870
Lhold2avg= c e l l (4 ,46) ;
871
f o r
i =1: height ( Lhold2avg )
872
f o r
j =1: length ( Lhold2avg )
873
Lhold2avg { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
874
end
875
end
876
877 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
878
f o r
i =1: height ( Lstrainnormavg )
879
f o r
j =1: length ( Lstrainnormavg )
880
Lholdavg { i , j }= dot ( Lavgfinalavg { i , j } , axis ) ;
881
Lholdavg { i , j }= Lholdavg { i , j }* axis ;
882
Lstrainnormavg ( i , j )=norm ( Lholdavg { i , j } ) / L ;
883
Lhold2avg { i , j }= Lavgfinalavg { i , j }−Lholdavg { i , j } ;
884
Lstrainshearavg ( i , j )=norm ( Lhold2avg { i , j } ) / L ;
885
end
886
end
887
888
889
890 %Plate
vector
891
892 %1L was removed since
there was a disturbance midway through
data
c o l l e c t i o n
893 %causing the
values
to be
o f f
894
Lavgfinalplate =Lgapvectorplate ;
895
Lavgfinalplate ( 1 , : ) = [ ] ;
896
897 %Last 2 rows were removed b / c 5L data
c o l l e c t i o n
stopped
early
898
Lavgfinalplate ( : , 4 7 : 4 8 ) = [ ] ;
899
900 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
901
Lstrainnormplate=zeros (4 ,46) ;
902
Lstrainshearplate =zeros (4 ,46) ;
903
Lholdplate= c e l l (4 ,46) ;
904
f o r
i =1: height ( Lholdplate )
905
f o r
j =1: length ( Lholdplate )
906
Lholdplate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
907
end
A56
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:125==
908
end
909
910
Lhold2plate= c e l l (4 ,46) ;
911
f o r
i =1: height ( Lhold2plate )
912
f o r
j =1: length ( Lhold2plate )
913
Lhold2plate { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
914
end
915
end
916
917 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
918
f o r
i =1: height ( Lstrainnormplate )
919
f o r
j =1: length ( Lstrainnormplate )
920
Lholdplate { i , j }= dot ( Lavgfinalplate { i , j } , axis ) ;
921
Lholdplate { i , j }= Lholdplate { i , j }* axis ;
922
Lstrainnormplate ( i , j )=norm ( Lholdplate { i , j } ) / L ;
923
Lhold2plate { i , j }= Lavgfinalplate { i , j }−Lholdplate { i , j } ;
924
Lstrainshearplate ( i , j )=norm ( Lhold2plate { i , j } ) / L ;
925
end
926
end
927
928
929
930
931 %Mid vector
932
933
934 %1L was removed since
there was a disturbance midway through
data
c o l l e c t i o n
935 %causing the
values
to be
o f f
936
Lavgfinalmid=Lgapvectormid ;
937
Lavgfinalmid ( 1 , : ) = [ ] ;
938
939 %Last 2 rows were removed b / c 5L data
c o l l e c t i o n
stopped
early
940
Lavgfinalmid ( : , 4 7 : 4 8 ) = [ ] ;
941
942 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
943
Lstrainnormmid=zeros (4 ,46) ;
944
Lstrainshearmid=zeros (4 ,46) ;
945
Lholdmid= c e l l (4 ,46) ;
946
f o r
i =1: height ( Lholdmid )
947
f o r
j =1: length ( Lholdmid )
948
Lholdmid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
949
end
950
end
951
952
Lhold2mid= c e l l (4 ,46) ;
953
f o r
i =1: height ( Lhold2mid )
954
f o r
j =1: length ( Lhold2mid )
955
Lhold2mid { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
956
end
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A57
==PAGE:126==
957
end
958
959
960 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
961
f o r
i =1: height ( Lstrainnormmid )
962
f o r
j =1: length ( Lstrainnormmid )
963
Lholdmid { i , j }= dot ( Lavgfinalmid { i , j } , axis ) ;
964
Lholdmid { i , j }= Lholdmid { i , j }* axis ;
965
Lstrainnormmid ( i , j )=norm ( Lholdmid { i , j } ) / L ;
966
Lhold2mid { i , j }= Lavgfinalmid { i , j }−Lholdmid { i , j } ;
967
Lstrainshearmid ( i , j )=norm ( Lhold2mid { i , j } ) / L ;
968
end
969
end
970
971
972 %Far
vector
973
974 %1L was removed since
there was a disturbance midway through
data
c o l l e c t i o n
975 %causing the
values
to be
o f f
976
L a v g f i n a l f a r =Lgapvectorfar ;
977
L a v g f i n a l f a r ( 1 , : ) = [ ] ;
978
979 %Last 2 rows were removed b / c 5L data
c o l l e c t i o n
stopped
early
980
L a v g f i n a l f a r ( : , 4 7 : 4 8 ) = [ ] ;
981
982 %Creating empty
c e l l s
and tables
983
Lstrainnormfar=zeros (4 ,46) ;
984
Lstrainshearfar =zeros (4 ,46) ;
985
Lholdfar= c e l l (4 ,46) ;
986
f o r
i =1: height ( Lholdfar )
987
f o r
j =1: length ( Lholdfar )
988
Lholdfar { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
989
end
990
end
991
992
Lhold2far= c e l l (4 ,46) ;
993
f o r
i =1: height ( Lhold2far )
994
f o r
j =1: length ( Lhold2far )
995
Lhold2far { i , j }= zeros (3 ,1) ;
996
end
997
end
998
999
1000 %Obtaining
the normal and shear
strains ,
as described above
1001
f o r
i =1: height ( Lstrainnormfar )
1002
f o r
j =1: length ( Lstrainnormfar )
1003
Lholdfar { i , j }= dot ( L a v g f i n a l f a r { i , j } , axis ) ;
1004
Lholdfar { i , j }= Lholdfar { i , j }* axis ;
1005
Lstrainnormfar ( i , j )=norm ( Lholdfar { i , j } ) / L ;
A58
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:127==
1006
Lhold2far { i , j }= L a v g f i n a l f a r { i , j }−Lholdfar { i , j } ;
1007
Lstrainshearfar ( i , j )=norm ( Lhold2far { i , j } ) / L ;
1008
end
1009
end
1010
1011 %% Averaging average values
f o r
each group Normal
s t r a i n
1012
1013 %Finding
the average S, M, and L group
f o r
the average normal
s t r a i n
1014
Snormstrainavgavg=mean( Sstrainnormavg ) ;
1015
Mnormstrainavgavg=mean( Mstrainnormavg ) ;
1016
Lnormstrainavgavg=mean( Lstrainnormavg ) ;
1017
1018 %Finding
the average S, M, and L group
f o r
the
plate
normal
s t r a i n
1019
Snormstrainavgplate=mean( Sstrainnormplate ) ;
1020
Mnormstrainavgplate=mean( Mstrainnormplate ) ;
1021
Lnormstrainavgplate=mean( Lstrainnormplate ) ;
1022
1023 %Finding
the average S, M, and L group
f o r
the mid normal
s t r a i n
1024
Snormstrainavgmid=mean( Sstrainnormmid ) ;
1025
Mnormstrainavgmid=mean( Mstrainnormmid ) ;
1026
Lnormstrainavgmid=mean( Lstrainnormmid ) ;
1027
1028 %Finding
the average S, M, and L group
f o r
the
f a r
normal
s t r a i n
1029
Snormstrainavgfar=mean( Sstrainnormfar ) ;
1030
Mnormstrainavgfar=mean( Mstrainnormfar ) ;
1031
Lnormstrainavgfar=mean( Lstrainnormfar ) ;
1032
1033 %% Averaging average values
f o r
each group shear
s t r a i n
1034
1035 %Finding
the average S, M, and L group
f o r
the avg shear
s t r a i n
1036
Sshearstrainavgavg=mean( Sstrainshearavg ) ;
1037
Mshearstrainavgavg=mean( Mstrainshearavg ) ;
1038
Lshearstrainavgavg=mean( Lstrainshearavg ) ;
1039
1040 %Finding
the average S, M, and L group
f o r
the
plate
shear
s t r a i n
1041
Sshearstrainavgplate=mean( Sstrainshearplate ) ;
1042
Mshearstrainavgplate=mean( Mstrainshearplate ) ;
1043
Lshearstrainavgplate=mean( Lstrainshearplate ) ;
1044
1045 %Finding
the average S, M, and L group
f o r
the mid shear
s t r a i n
1046
Sshearstrainavgmid=mean( Sstrainshearmid ) ;
1047
Mshearstrainavgmid=mean( Mstrainshearmid ) ;
1048
Lshearstrainavgmid=mean( Lstrainshearmid ) ;
1049
1050 %Finding
the average S, M, and L group
f o r
the
f a r
shear
s t r a i n
1051
Sshearstrainavgfar=mean( Sstrainshearfar ) ;
1052
Mshearstrainavgfar=mean( Mstrainshearfar ) ;
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A59
==PAGE:128==
1053
Lshearstrainavgfar=mean( Lstrainshearfar ) ;
1054
1055 %% Graphing averge
of each group data
1056
1057 %Normal
s t r a i n
average
1058
f i g u r e
1059
p l o t ( Snormstrainavgavg , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1060
hold on
1061
p l o t ( Mnormstrainavgavg , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1062
p l o t ( Lnormstrainavgavg , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1063
legend ( ’S ’ , ’M’ , ’L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1064
t i t l e ( ’ Normal Strain
averaged averages
f o r
each group ’ ,
’
FontSize ’ ,20)
1065
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1066
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1067
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1068
hold
o f f
1069
1070
1071 %Normal
s t r a i n
plate
1072
f i g u r e
1073
p l o t ( Snormstrainavgplate , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1074
hold on
1075
p l o t ( Mnormstrainavgplate , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1076
p l o t ( Lnormstrainavgplate , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1077
legend ( ’S ’ , ’M’ , ’L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1078
t i t l e ( ’ Normal Strain
averaged
plate
f o r
each group ’ ,
’ FontSize ’
,20)
1079
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1080
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1081
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1082
hold
o f f
1083
1084 %Normal
s t r a i n
mid
1085
f i g u r e
1086
p l o t ( Snormstrainavgmid , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1087
hold on
1088
p l o t ( Mnormstrainavgmid , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1089
p l o t ( Lnormstrainavgmid , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1090
legend ( ’S ’ , ’M’ , ’L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1091
t i t l e ( ’ Normal Strain
averaged mid
f o r
each group ’ ,
’ FontSize ’
,20)
1092
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1093
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1094
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1095
hold
o f f
1096
1097
1098 %Normal
s t r a i n
f a r
1099
f i g u r e
A60
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:129==
1100
p l o t ( Snormstrainavgfar , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1101
hold on
1102
p l o t ( Mnormstrainavgfar , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1103
p l o t ( Lnormstrainavgfar , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1104
legend ( ’S ’ , ’M’ , ’L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1105
t i t l e ( ’ Normal Strain
averaged
f a r
f o r
each group ’ ,
’ FontSize ’
,20)
1106
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1107
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1108
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1109
hold
o f f
1110
1111
1112 %shear
s t r a i n
average
1113
f i g u r e
1114
p l o t ( Sshearstrainavgavg , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1115
hold on
1116
p l o t ( Mshearstrainavgavg , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1117
p l o t ( Lshearstrainavgavg , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1118
legend ( ’S ’ , ’M’ , ’L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1119
t i t l e ( ’ Shear Strain
averaged averages
f o r
each group ’ ,
’ FontSize
’ ,20)
1120
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1121
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1122
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1123
hold
o f f
1124
1125
1126 %Shear
s t r a i n
plate
1127
f i g u r e
1128
p l o t ( Sshearstrainavgplate , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1129
hold on
1130
p l o t ( Mshearstrainavgplate , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1131
p l o t ( Lshearstrainavgplate , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1132
legend ( ’S ’ , ’M’ , ’L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1133
t i t l e ( ’ Shear Strain
averaged
plate
f o r
each group ’ ,
’ FontSize ’
,20)
1134
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1135
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1136
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1137
hold
o f f
1138
1139 %Shear
s t r a i n
mid
1140
f i g u r e
1141
p l o t ( Sshearstrainavgmid , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1142
hold on
1143
p l o t ( Mshearstrainavgmid , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1144
p l o t ( Lshearstrainavgmid , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1145
legend ( ’S ’ , ’M’ , ’L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1146
t i t l e ( ’ Shear Strain
averaged mid
f o r
each group ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A61
==PAGE:130==
1147
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1148
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1149
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1150
hold
o f f
1151
1152
1153 %shear
s t r a i n
f a r
1154
f i g u r e
1155
p l o t ( Sshearstrainavgfar , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1156
hold on
1157
p l o t ( Mshearstrainavgfar , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1158
p l o t ( Lshearstrainavgfar , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1159
legend ( ’S ’ , ’M’ , ’L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1160
t i t l e ( ’ Shear Strain
averaged
f a r
f o r
each group ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1161
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1162
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1163
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1164
hold
o f f
1165
1166
1167
1168 %% P l o t t i n g
a l l
data
1169 %Normal
s t r a i n
average
1170
f i g u r e
1171
p l o t ( Sstrainnormavg ( 1 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1172
hold on
1173
p l o t ( Sstrainnormavg ( 2 , : ) , ’−−b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1174
p l o t ( Sstrainnormavg ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1175
p l o t ( Sstrainnormavg ( 4 , : ) , ’ : b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1176
p l o t ( Sstrainnormavg ( 5 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1177
1178
p l o t ( Mstrainnormavg ( 1 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1179
p l o t ( Mstrainnormavg ( 2 , : ) , ’−−r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1180
p l o t ( Mstrainnormavg ( 3 , : ) , ’ −. r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1181
p l o t ( Mstrainnormavg ( 4 , : ) , ’ : r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1182
p l o t ( Mstrainnormavg ( 5 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1183
1184
p l o t ( Lstrainnormavg ( 1 , : ) , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1185
p l o t ( Lstrainnormavg ( 2 , : ) , ’−−g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1186
p l o t ( Lstrainnormavg ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1187
p l o t ( Lstrainnormavg ( 4 , : ) , ’ : g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1188
1189
1190
legend ( ’S1 ’ , ’S2 ’ , ’S3 ’ , ’S4 ’ , ’S5 ’ , ’M1 ’ , ’M2 ’ , ’M3 ’ , ’M4 ’ , ’M5 ’ , ’ L2 ’ , ’
L3 ’ , ’ L4 ’ , . . .
1191
’ L5 ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1192
1193
t i t l e ( ’ Normal Strain avg
f o r
a l l
groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1194
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1195
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
A62
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:131==
1196
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1197
hold
o f f
1198
1199
1200 %Normal
s t r a i n
plate
1201
f i g u r e
1202
p l o t ( Sstrainnormplate ( 1 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1203
hold on
1204
p l o t ( Sstrainnormplate ( 2 , : ) , ’−−b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1205
p l o t ( Sstrainnormplate ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1206
p l o t ( Sstrainnormplate ( 4 , : ) , ’ : b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1207
p l o t ( Sstrainnormplate ( 5 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1208
1209
p l o t ( Mstrainnormplate ( 1 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1210
p l o t ( Mstrainnormplate ( 2 , : ) , ’−−r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1211
p l o t ( Mstrainnormplate ( 3 , : ) , ’ −. r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1212
p l o t ( Mstrainnormplate ( 4 , : ) , ’ : r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1213
p l o t ( Mstrainnormplate ( 5 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1214
1215
p l o t ( Lstrainnormplate ( 1 , : ) , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1216
p l o t ( Lstrainnormplate ( 2 , : ) , ’−−g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1217
p l o t ( Lstrainnormplate ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1218
p l o t ( Lstrainnormplate ( 4 , : ) , ’ : g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1219
1220
1221
legend ( ’S1 ’ , ’S2 ’ , ’S3 ’ , ’S4 ’ , ’S5 ’ , ’M1 ’ , ’M2 ’ , ’M3 ’ , ’M4 ’ , ’M5 ’ , ’ L2 ’ , ’
L3 ’ , ’ L4 ’ , . . .
1222
’ L5 ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1223
1224
t i t l e ( ’ Normal Strain
plate
f o r
a l l
groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1225
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1226
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1227
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1228
hold
o f f
1229
1230
1231
1232
1233 %Normal
s t r a i n
mid
1234
f i g u r e
1235
p l o t ( Sstrainnormmid ( 1 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1236
hold on
1237
p l o t ( Sstrainnormmid ( 2 , : ) , ’−−b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1238
p l o t ( Sstrainnormmid ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1239
p l o t ( Sstrainnormmid ( 4 , : ) , ’ : b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1240
p l o t ( Sstrainnormmid ( 5 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1241
1242
p l o t ( Mstrainnormmid ( 1 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1243
p l o t ( Mstrainnormmid ( 2 , : ) , ’−−r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1244
p l o t ( Mstrainnormmid ( 3 , : ) , ’ −. r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A63
==PAGE:132==
1245
p l o t ( Mstrainnormmid ( 4 , : ) , ’ : r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1246
p l o t ( Mstrainnormmid ( 5 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1247
1248
p l o t ( Lstrainnormmid ( 1 , : ) , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1249
p l o t ( Lstrainnormmid ( 2 , : ) , ’−−g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1250
p l o t ( Lstrainnormmid ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1251
p l o t ( Lstrainnormmid ( 4 , : ) , ’ : g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1252
1253
1254
legend ( ’S1 ’ , ’S2 ’ , ’S3 ’ , ’S4 ’ , ’S5 ’ , ’M1 ’ , ’M2 ’ , ’M3 ’ , ’M4 ’ , ’M5 ’ , ’ L2 ’ , ’
L3 ’ , ’ L4 ’ , . . .
1255
’ L5 ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1256
1257
t i t l e ( ’ Normal Strain mid
f o r
a l l
groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1258
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1259
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1260
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1261
hold
o f f
1262
1263
1264 %Normal
s t r a i n
f a r
1265
f i g u r e
1266
p l o t ( Sstrainnormfar ( 1 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1267
hold on
1268
p l o t ( Sstrainnormfar ( 2 , : ) , ’−−b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1269
p l o t ( Sstrainnormfar ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1270
p l o t ( Sstrainnormfar ( 4 , : ) , ’ : b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1271
p l o t ( Sstrainnormfar ( 5 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1272
1273
p l o t ( Mstrainnormfar ( 1 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1274
p l o t ( Mstrainnormfar ( 2 , : ) , ’−−r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1275
p l o t ( Mstrainnormfar ( 3 , : ) , ’ −. r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1276
p l o t ( Mstrainnormfar ( 4 , : ) , ’ : r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1277
p l o t ( Mstrainnormfar ( 5 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1278
1279
p l o t ( Lstrainnormfar ( 1 , : ) , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1280
p l o t ( Lstrainnormfar ( 2 , : ) , ’−−g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1281
p l o t ( Lstrainnormfar ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1282
p l o t ( Lstrainnormfar ( 4 , : ) , ’ : g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1283
1284
1285
legend ( ’S1 ’ , ’S2 ’ , ’S3 ’ , ’S4 ’ , ’S5 ’ , ’M1 ’ , ’M2 ’ , ’M3 ’ , ’M4 ’ , ’M5 ’ , ’ L2 ’ , ’
L3 ’ , ’ L4 ’ , . . .
1286
’ L5 ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1287
1288
t i t l e ( ’ Normal Strain
f a r
f o r
a l l
groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1289
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1290
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1291
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1292
hold
o f f
A64
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:133==
1293
1294
1295 %Shear
s t r a i n
avg
1296
f i g u r e
1297
p l o t ( Sstrainshearavg ( 1 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1298
hold on
1299
p l o t ( Sstrainshearavg ( 2 , : ) , ’−−b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1300
p l o t ( Sstrainshearavg ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1301
p l o t ( Sstrainshearavg ( 4 , : ) , ’ : b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1302
p l o t ( Sstrainshearavg ( 5 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1303
1304
p l o t ( Mstrainshearavg ( 1 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1305
p l o t ( Mstrainshearavg ( 2 , : ) , ’−−r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1306
p l o t ( Mstrainshearavg ( 3 , : ) , ’ −. r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1307
p l o t ( Mstrainshearavg ( 4 , : ) , ’ : r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1308
p l o t ( Mstrainshearavg ( 5 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1309
1310
p l o t ( Lstrainshearavg ( 1 , : ) , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1311
p l o t ( Lstrainshearavg ( 2 , : ) , ’−−g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1312
p l o t ( Lstrainshearavg ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1313
p l o t ( Lstrainshearavg ( 4 , : ) , ’ : g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1314
1315
1316
legend ( ’S1 ’ , ’S2 ’ , ’S3 ’ , ’S4 ’ , ’S5 ’ , ’M1 ’ , ’M2 ’ , ’M3 ’ , ’M4 ’ , ’M5 ’ , ’ L2 ’ , ’
L3 ’ , ’ L4 ’ , . . .
1317
’ L5 ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1318
1319
t i t l e ( ’ Shear Strain avg
f o r
a l l
groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1320
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1321
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1322
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1323
hold
o f f
1324
1325
1326
1327
1328
1329 %shear
s t r a i n
plate
1330
f i g u r e
1331
p l o t ( Sstrainshearplate ( 1 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1332
hold on
1333
p l o t ( Sstrainshearplate ( 2 , : ) , ’−−b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1334
p l o t ( Sstrainshearplate ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1335
p l o t ( Sstrainshearplate ( 4 , : ) , ’ : b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1336
p l o t ( Sstrainshearplate ( 5 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1337
1338
p l o t ( Mstrainshearplate ( 1 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1339
p l o t ( Mstrainshearplate ( 2 , : ) , ’−−r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1340
p l o t ( Mstrainshearplate ( 3 , : ) , ’ −. r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1341
p l o t ( Mstrainshearplate ( 4 , : ) , ’ : r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A65
==PAGE:134==
1342
p l o t ( Mstrainshearplate ( 5 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1343
1344
p l o t ( Lstrainshearplate ( 1 , : ) , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1345
p l o t ( Lstrainshearplate ( 2 , : ) , ’−−g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1346
p l o t ( Lstrainshearplate ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1347
p l o t ( Lstrainshearplate ( 4 , : ) , ’ : g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1348
1349
1350
legend ( ’S1 ’ , ’S2 ’ , ’S3 ’ , ’S4 ’ , ’S5 ’ , ’M1 ’ , ’M2 ’ , ’M3 ’ , ’M4 ’ , ’M5 ’ , ’ L2 ’ , ’
L3 ’ , ’ L4 ’ , . . .
1351
’ L5 ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1352
1353
t i t l e ( ’ Shear Strain
plate
f o r
a l l
groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1354
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1355
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1356
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1357
hold
o f f
1358
1359
1360
1361
1362
1363 %shear
s t r a i n
mid
1364
f i g u r e
1365
p l o t ( Sstrainshearmid ( 1 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1366
hold on
1367
p l o t ( Sstrainshearmid ( 2 , : ) , ’−−b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1368
p l o t ( Sstrainshearmid ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1369
p l o t ( Sstrainshearmid ( 4 , : ) , ’ : b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1370
p l o t ( Sstrainshearmid ( 5 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1371
1372
p l o t ( Mstrainshearmid ( 1 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1373
p l o t ( Mstrainshearmid ( 2 , : ) , ’−−r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1374
p l o t ( Mstrainshearmid ( 3 , : ) , ’ −. r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1375
p l o t ( Mstrainshearmid ( 4 , : ) , ’ : r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1376
p l o t ( Mstrainshearmid ( 5 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1377
1378
p l o t ( Lstrainshearmid ( 1 , : ) , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1379
p l o t ( Lstrainshearmid ( 2 , : ) , ’−−g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1380
p l o t ( Lstrainshearmid ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1381
p l o t ( Lstrainshearmid ( 4 , : ) , ’ : g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1382
1383
1384
legend ( ’S1 ’ , ’S2 ’ , ’S3 ’ , ’S4 ’ , ’S5 ’ , ’M1 ’ , ’M2 ’ , ’M3 ’ , ’M4 ’ , ’M5 ’ , ’ L2 ’ , ’
L3 ’ , ’ L4 ’ , . . .
1385
’ L5 ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1386
1387
t i t l e ( ’ Shear Strain mid
f o r
a l l
groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1388
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1389
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
A66
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:135==
1390
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1391
hold
o f f
1392
1393
1394
1395 %Shear
s t r a i n
f a r
1396
f i g u r e
1397
p l o t ( Sstrainshearfar ( 1 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1398
hold on
1399
p l o t ( Sstrainshearfar ( 2 , : ) , ’−−b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1400
p l o t ( Sstrainshearfar ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1401
p l o t ( Sstrainshearfar ( 4 , : ) , ’ : b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1402
p l o t ( Sstrainshearfar ( 5 , : ) , ’b ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1403
1404
p l o t ( Mstrainshearfar ( 1 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1405
p l o t ( Mstrainshearfar ( 2 , : ) , ’−−r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1406
p l o t ( Mstrainshearfar ( 3 , : ) , ’ −. r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1407
p l o t ( Mstrainshearfar ( 4 , : ) , ’ : r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1408
p l o t ( Mstrainshearfar ( 5 , : ) , ’ r ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,3)
1409
1410
p l o t ( Lstrainshearfar ( 1 , : ) , ’g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1411
p l o t ( Lstrainshearfar ( 2 , : ) , ’−−g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1412
p l o t ( Lstrainshearfar ( 3 , : ) , ’ −.g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1413
p l o t ( Lstrainshearfar ( 4 , : ) , ’ : g ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2)
1414
1415
1416
legend ( ’S1 ’ , ’S2 ’ , ’S3 ’ , ’S4 ’ , ’S5 ’ , ’M1 ’ , ’M2 ’ , ’M3 ’ , ’M4 ’ , ’M5 ’ , ’ L2 ’ , ’
L3 ’ , ’ L4 ’ , . . .
1417
’ L5 ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1418
1419
t i t l e ( ’ Shear Strain
f a r
f o r
a l l
groups ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1420
xlabel ( ’ Cycle number ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1421
ylabel ( ’ Strain ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1422
set ( gca , ’ DefaultLineLineWidth ’ ,1 ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
1423
hold
o f f
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A67
==PAGE:136==
A.5.3
Failure Testing Instron Data Matlab
1 %% Setup
2
3
4 %Add
f i l e
to
path
(Change t h i s
to
your personal path where your
data
i s
saved )
5
addpath ( genpath ( ’C : \ Users \ isabe \ OneDrive \ Documents \ Thesis \
F a i l u r e _ t e s t i n g ’ ) )
6
7 %% Reading tables
f o r
f a i l u r e
data
8 %Read Femur
f a i l u r e
data
f o r
each femur group
i n t o a matlab
c e l l
9 %S= Short= short
working
length
10 %M= Medium= medium working
length
11 %L= Long= long working
length
12 %5S, 5L , 2M and 5M data was not used due to
improper
f a i l u r e
13 %3L data was not
obtained
since
the bone broke
e a r l i e r
in
t e s t i n g
from
14 %being dropped
15 %Reading short
f a i l u r e
data
16
S h o r t f a i l = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
17
fname1 =
’1STest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
18
S h o r t f a i l {1} = readtable ( fname1 ) ;
19
fname2 =
’2STest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
20
S h o r t f a i l {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
21
fname3 =
’3STest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
22
S h o r t f a i l {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
23
fname4 =
’4STest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
24
S h o r t f a i l {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
25 %
fname5 =
’5 STest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
26 %
S h o r t f a i l {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
27
28 %Reading
f a i l u r e
tracking
data
29
Mediumfail = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
30
fname1 =
’1MTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
31
Mediumfail {1} = readtable ( fname1 ) ;
32
fname2 =
’2MTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
33
Mediumfail {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
34
fname3 =
’3MTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
35
Mediumfail {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
36
fname4 =
’4MTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
37
Mediumfail {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
38
fname5 =
’5MTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
39
Mediumfail {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
40
41 %Reading long
f a i l u r e
data
42
Longfail = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
43
fname1 =
’1LTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
44
Longfail {1} = readtable ( fname1 ) ;
45
fname2 =
’2LTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
A68
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:137==
46
Longfail {2} = readtable ( fname2 ) ;
47 %
fname3 =
’3 LTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
48 %
Longfail {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
49 %
fname4 =
’4 LTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
50 %
Longfail {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
51
fname5 =
’5LTest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
52
Longfail {5} = readtable ( fname5 ) ;
53
54 %Reading
a l l
f a i l u r e
data
55
A l l f a i l = c e l l (1 ,5) ;
56
fname3 =
’3ATest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
57
A l l f a i l {3} = readtable ( fname3 ) ;
58
fname4 =
’4ATest1 . steps . tracking . f a i l . xlsx ’ ;
59
A l l f a i l {4} = readtable ( fname4 ) ;
60
61 %S p l i t
c e l l
i n t o
matrices
f o r
each bone in
short
category
62
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 1 S = S h o r t f a i l { 1 } ;
63
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 2 S = S h o r t f a i l { 2 } ;
64
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 3 S = S h o r t f a i l { 3 } ;
65
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 S = S h o r t f a i l { 4 } ;
66
67 %S p l i t
c e l l
i n t o
matrices
f o r
each bone in medium category
68
fem_fail_full1M =Mediumfail { 1 } ;
69
fem_fail_full2M =Mediumfail { 2 } ;
70
fem_fail_full3M =Mediumfail { 3 } ;
71
fem_fail_full4M =Mediumfail { 4 } ;
72
fem_fail_full5M =Mediumfail { 5 } ;
73
74
75 %S p l i t
c e l l
i n t o
matrices
f o r
each bone in
long
category
76
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 1 L = Longfail { 1 } ;
77
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 2 L = Longfail { 2 } ;
78 % f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 L = Longfail { 4 } ;
79
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 5 L = Longfail { 5 } ;
80
81 %S p l i t
c e l l
i n t o
matrices
f o r
each bone in
a l l
category
82
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 3 A = A l l f a i l { 3 } ;
83
f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 A = A l l f a i l { 4 } ;
84 %% Defining
variables x and y
f o r
short
data
85
86
time1S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 1 S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
87
pos1S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 1 S { : , 7 } ; %A l l
pos iti on
data
88
load1S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 1 S { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
89
90
time2S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 2 S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
91
pos2S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 2 S { : , 7 } ; %A l l
pos iti on
data
92
load2S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 2 S { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
93
94
time3S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 3 S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
95
pos3S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 3 S { : , 7 } ; %A l l
pos iti on
data
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A69
==PAGE:138==
96
load3S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 3 S { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
97
98
time4S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 S { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
99
pos4S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 S { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
100
load4S= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 S { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
101
102
103 %% Defining
variables x and y
f o r medium data
104
105
time1M= fem_fail_full1M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
106
pos1M= fem_fail_full1M { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
107
load1M= fem_fail_full1M { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
108
109
time2M= fem_fail_full2M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
110
pos2M= fem_fail_full2M { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
111
load2M= fem_fail_full2M { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
112
113
time3M= fem_fail_full3M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
114
pos3M= fem_fail_full3M { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
115
load3M= fem_fail_full3M { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
116
117
time4M= fem_fail_full4M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
118
pos4M= fem_fail_full4M { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
119
load4M= fem_fail_full4M { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
120
121
time5M= fem_fail_full4M { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
122
pos5M= fem_fail_full4M { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
123
load5M= fem_fail_full4M { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
124
125
126
127 %% Defining
variables x and y
f o r
long data
128
129
time1L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 1 L { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
130
pos1L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 1 L { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
131
load1L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 1 L { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
132
133
time2L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 2 L { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
134
pos2L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 2 L { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
135
load2L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 2 L { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
136
137 % time4L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 L { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
138 % pos4L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 L { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s iti on
data
139 % load4L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 L { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
140
141
time5L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 5 L { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
142
pos5L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 5 L { : , 7 } ; %A l l
p o s it i on
data
143
load5L= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 5 L { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
144
145
A70
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:139==
146 %% Defining
variables x and y
f o r
A l l
data
147
time3A= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 3 A { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
148
pos3A= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 3 A { : , 7 } ; %A l l
pos iti on
data
149
load3A= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 3 A { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
150
151
time4A= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 A { : , 1 } ; %A l l
time data
152
pos4A= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 A { : , 7 } ; %A l l
pos iti on
data
153
load4A= f e m _ f a i l _ f u l l 4 A { : , 8 } ; %A l l
load data
154 %% P l o t t i n g
raw data
155
156 % f i g u r e
157 % p l o t ( time1S , pos1S )
158 % xlabel ( ’ time ’ )
159 % ylabel ( ’ position ’ )
160
161 % f i g u r e
162 % p l o t ( load1S , pos1S )
163 % xlabel ( ’ load ’ )
164 % ylabel ( ’ position ’ )
165
166
167 %
168 % f i g u r e
169 % p l o t ( time1M , load1M )
170
171
172
173
174
f i g u r e
175
p l o t ( pos1S , load1S )
176
hold on
177
p l o t ( pos2S , load2S )
178
p l o t ( pos3S , load3S )
179
p l o t ( pos4S , load4S )
180
xlabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’
,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
181
ylabel ( ’ Load (kN) ’
,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
182
legend ( ’1S ’ , ’2S ’ , ’3S ’ , ’4S ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
183
t i t l e ( ’ Load vs
Position
Short bones ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
184
set ( gca , ’ XDir ’ , ’ reverse ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
185
hold
o f f
186
187
f i g u r e
188
p l o t (pos1M , load1M )
189
hold on
190
p l o t (pos3M , load3M )
191
p l o t (pos4M , load4M )
192
xlabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
193
ylabel ( ’ Load (kN) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
194
legend ( ’1M’ , ’3M’ , ’4M’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
195
t i t l e ( ’ Load vs
Position Medium bones ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A71
==PAGE:140==
196
set ( gca , ’ XDir ’ , ’ reverse ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
197
hold
o f f
198
199
f i g u r e
200
p l o t ( pos1L , load1L )
201
hold on
202
p l o t ( pos2L , load2L )
203 % p l o t ( pos4L , load4L )
204
xlabel ( ’ Position (mm) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
205
ylabel ( ’ Load (kN) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
206
legend ( ’1L ’ , ’2L ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
207
t i t l e ( ’ Load vs
Position Long bones ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
208
set ( gca , ’ XDir ’ , ’ reverse ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
209
hold
o f f
210
211
212
213
f i g u r e
214
p l o t ( pos3A , load3A )
215
hold on
216
p l o t ( pos4A , load4A )
217
xlabel ( ’ Position (mm) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
218
ylabel ( ’ Load (kN) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
219
legend ( ’3A ’ , ’4A ’ )
220
t i t l e ( ’ Load vs
Position
A l l
bones ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
221
set ( gca , ’ XDir ’ , ’ reverse ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
222
hold
o f f
223
224 %%
225
226 %P l o t t i n g
a l l
bones on one graph
( reds are small ,
blues are
medium ,
greens
227 %are long , and black / grey are
A l l )
228
f i g u r e
229
p l o t ( pos1S , load1S , ’ color ’ , [ . 9
.17
. 3 1 ] )
230
hold on
231
p l o t ( pos2S , load2S , ’ color ’ , [ . 8 3
.13
. 1 8 ] )
232
p l o t ( pos3S , load3S , ’ color ’ , [ . 7 6
.13
. 2 8 ] )
233
p l o t ( pos4S , load4S , ’ r ’ )
234
p l o t (pos1M , load1M , ’ color ’ ,[0
.28
. 7 3 ] )
235
p l o t (pos3M , load3M , ’ color ’ ,[0
.50
1 ] )
236
p l o t (pos4M , load4M , ’b ’ )
237
p l o t ( pos1L , load1L , ’ color ’ ,[0
.5
0 ] )
238
p l o t ( pos2L , load2L , ’ color ’ , [ . 5 5
.71
0 ] )
239 %p l o t ( pos4L , load4L , ’ color ’ , [ . 3 4
.51
. 0 1 ] )
240
p l o t ( pos3A , load3A , ’ k ’ )
241
p l o t ( pos4A , load4A , ’ color ’ ,
[.17
.17
. 1 7 ] )
242
xlabel ( ’ Position
(mm) ’ , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
243
ylabel ( ’ Load (kN) ’ , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
244
legend ( ’1S ’ , ’2S ’ , ’3S ’ , ’4S ’ , ’1M’ , ’3M’ , ’4M’ , ’1L ’ , ’2L ’ , ’3A ’ , ’4A ’ , ’
A72
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:141==
FontSize ’ ,20)
245
t i t l e ( ’ Load vs
Position
f o r
a l l
bones ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
246
set ( gca , ’ XDir ’ , ’ reverse ’ , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
247
hold
o f f
248 %% Getting
f a i l u r e
loads
f o r S
249
250
highpointS=zeros (4 ,1) ;
251
highindexS=zeros (4 ,1) ;
252
253 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks
f o r 1S
254
f o r
i =2: length ( load1S ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
255
i f
load1S ( i , 1 ) +0.05<load1S ( i −1 ,1)
256
highpointS (1 ,1) = load1S ( i , 1 ) ;
257
highindexS (1 ,1)= i ;
258
break
259
end
260
end
261
262
263 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks 2S
264
f o r
i =2: length ( load2S ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
265
i f
load2S ( i , 1 ) +0.05<load2S ( i −1 ,1)
266
highpointS (2 ,1) = load2S ( i , 1 ) ;
267
highindexS (2 ,1)= i ;
268
break
269
end
270
end
271
272
273
274 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks 3S
275
f o r
i =2: length ( load3S ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
276
i f
load3S ( i , 1 ) +0.03<load3S ( i −1 ,1)
277
highpointS (3 ,1) = load3S ( i , 1 ) ;
278
highindexS (3 ,1)= i ;
279
break
280
end
281
end
282
283
284
285 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks 4S
286
f o r
i =2: length ( load4S ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
287
i f
load4S ( i , 1 ) +0.05<load4S ( i −1 ,1)
288
highpointS (4 ,1) = load4S ( i , 1 ) ;
289
highindexS (4 ,1)= i ;
290
break
291
end
292
end
293
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A73
==PAGE:142==
294
295 %% Getting
f a i l u r e
loads
f o r M
296
297
highpointM=zeros (3 ,1) ;
298
highindexM=zeros (3 ,1) ;
299
300 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks
f o r 1M
301
f o r
i =2: length ( load1M ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
302
i f
load1M ( i , 1 ) +0.04<load1M ( i −1 ,1)
303
highpointM (1 ,1) = load1M ( i , 1 ) ;
304
highindexM (1 ,1)= i ;
305
break
306
end
307
end
308
309
310 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks 3M
311
f o r
i =2: length ( load3M ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
312
i f
load3M ( i , 1 ) +0.05<load3M ( i −1 ,1)
313
highpointM (2 ,1) = load3M ( i , 1 ) ;
314
highindexM (2 ,1)= i ;
315
break
316
end
317
end
318
319
320
321 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks 4M
322
f o r
i =2: length ( load4M ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
323
i f
load4M ( i , 1 ) +0.05<load4M ( i −1 ,1)
324
highpointM (3 ,1) = load4M ( i , 1 ) ;
325
highindexM (3 ,1)= i ;
326
break
327
end
328
end
329
330
331
332
333
334
335 %% Getting
f a i l u r e
loads
f o r L
336
337
highpointL=zeros (2 ,1) ;
338
highindexL=zeros (2 ,1) ;
339
340 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks
f o r 1L
341
f o r
i =2: length ( load1L ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
342
i f
load1L ( i , 1 ) +0.022<load1L ( i −1 ,1)
343
highpointL (1 ,1) = load1L ( i , 1 ) ;
A74
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:143==
344
highindexL (1 ,1)= i ;
345
break
346
end
347
end
348
349
350 %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks 2L
351
f o r
i =2: length ( load2L ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
352
i f
load2L ( i , 1 ) +0.03<load2L ( i −1 ,1)
353
highpointL (2 ,1) = load2L ( i , 1 ) ;
354
highindexL (2 ,1)= i ;
355
break
356
end
357
end
358
359
360
361 % %f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks 4L
362 % f o r
i =2: length ( load4L ) %loop over
e n t i r e
load
t e s t
363 %
i f
load4L ( i , 1 ) +0.04<load4L ( i −1 ,1)
364 %
highpointL (3 ,1) = load4L ( i , 1 ) ;
365 %
highindexL (3 ,1)= i ;
366 %
break
367 %
end
368 % end
369
370
371 %% Getting
f a i l u r e
loads
f o r
A l l
bones
372
highpointA=zeros (2 ,1) ;
373
highindexA=zeros (2 ,1) ;
374
375 %manually
f i n d i n g
point where bone breaks 3A
376
highpointA (1 ,1)=load3A (87647 ,1) ;
377
highpointA (2 ,1)=load4A (67360 ,1) ;
378
379
380 %% Getting
ultimate
strength
f o r
a l l
bones
381
382 %1 ,2 ,3 ,4
383 %Short bones
384
minS=zeros (4 ,1) ;
385
386
minS (1 ,1)=min ( load1S ) ;
387
minS (2 ,1)=min ( load2S ) ;
388
minS (3 ,1)=min ( load3S ) ;
389
minS (4 ,1)=min ( load4S ) ;
390
391
392 %1 ,3 ,4
393 %Medium bones
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A75
==PAGE:144==
394
minM=zeros (3 ,1) ;
395
396
minM(1 ,1)=min ( load1M ) ;
397
minM(2 ,1)=min ( load3M ) ;
398
minM(3 ,1)=min ( load4M ) ;
399
400 %1 ,2 ,4
401 %Long bones
402
minL=zeros (2 ,1) ;
403
404
minL (1 ,1)=min ( load1L ) ;
405
minL (2 ,1)=min ( load2L ) ;
406 % minL (3 ,1)=min ( load4L ) ;
407
408 %3 , 4
409 %A l l
bones
410
minA=zeros (2 ,1) ;
411
minA (1 ,1)=min ( load3A ) ;
412
minA (2 ,1)=min ( load4A ) ;
413
414
415 %% P l o t t i n g
boxplots
f o r max and
f a i l u r e
values
416
group =[ ones ( size ( minS ) ) ;
417
2*ones ( size (minM) ) ;
418
3*ones ( size ( minL ) )
419
4*ones ( size ( minA ) ) ] ;
420
421
422
f i g u r e
423
boxplot ( [ minS ; minM ;
minL ; minA ] , group )
424
ylabel ( ’ Load (kN) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
425
set ( gca , ’ XTickLabel ’ ,{ ’ Short ’ , ’Medium ’ , ’ Long ’ ,
’ A l l ’ } , ’ YDir ’ , ’
reverse ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
426
t i t l e ( ’ Ultimate
strength ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
427
428
429
f i g u r e
430
boxplot ( [ highpointS ;
highpointM ;
highpointL ;
highpointA ] , group )
431
ylabel ( ’ Load (kN) ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
432
set ( gca , ’ XTickLabel ’ ,{ ’ Short ’ , ’Medium ’ , ’ Long ’ , ’ A l l ’ } , ’ YDir ’ , ’
reverse ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
433
t i t l e ( ’ Failure
load ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,20)
A76
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
==PAGE:145==
Assessment of micromotion of a femoral fracture in a biomechanical model
A77
==PAGE:146==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygning, Ørsteds Pl. 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
