==PAGE:1==
Technical University of
Denmark
Using Active Plan Recognition to Solve Online
Multi-Agent Collaboration Problems
Supervisor:
Thomas Bolander
Group members:
Emil Damsbo(s164395), Jacob Bruun(s164410)
February 23, 2022
Emil Damsbo
Jacob Bruun
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis explores an aspect of Theory of Mind called Plan Recognition. We design and
implement a novel plan recognition AI which can accurately predict the goals and plans
of other agents while actively collaborating with them based on continuous observations
and re-evaluate hypotheses.
We call this approach Active Goal Mirroring σ (AGM-σ).
Our AI is tested in a cooking-inspired environment called Overcooked. The environment
presents complex collaboration problems consisting of hierarchical tasks. Our theory of mind
allows agents to recognize when they are no longer needed for certain tasks, and can choose
to pursue other useful goals. This solves a problem posed by the existing body of work.
We show that AGM-σ can compete with existing goal recognition AIs in the Overcooked
domain in terms of solution quality while also drastically reducing computation time in a
range of scenarios. We conclude that AGM-σ shows great promise for plan recognition-based
collaboration planners.
==PAGE:3==
1
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, at the Technical University of Denmark, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering.
The project was started on the 23rd of August 2021 and finished on the 23rd of February 2022
for 35 ECTS.
The thesis deals with designing and implementing a decentralized online multi-agent system
capable of ad hoc collaboration without prior knowledge of, or communication with, the other
agents. The system is tested in a cooking inspired environment.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of symbolic AI and probability
theory.
1.1
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank professor Thomas Bolander, DTU, for sparking our interest in the area
of artificial intelligence and for imparting his fascination of socially intelligent robots. We would
also like to thank Nicolai Herrmann for assisting us with setting up his implementation of Multi
Agent Collaboration.
Finally, a thank you to Jens Kornbeck for assisting us with concisely
communicating our work and proofreading this thesis.
Page 3 of 60
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Preface
3
1.1
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Introduction
6
2.1
Overcooked Domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theory
11
3.1
Goal & Plan Recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Problem Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Defining Goals and Subgoals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Plan Recognition as Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Online Goal Mirroring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Active Goal Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
Dynamic Goal Recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Related Works
17
4.1
Too Many Cooks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.1
When is An Agent Needed? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Multi-Agent Collaboration (MAC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.1
Handling Non-Cooperative Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
Predefined Parameters used by MAC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
A Simple Approach to Active Goal Mirroring
23
5.1
Adapting Online Goal Mirroring to An Online Multi-Agent Collaboration Problem 23
Page 4 of 60
==PAGE:5==
5.2
Recognizing the Goals of Single Agents in Multi-Agent System
. . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
When is An Agent Needed (Re-visited)? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Goal Shuffling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.5
Optimality Can Lead to Deadlocks or Live-locks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.6
Completing Goals That Leads to Unsolvable States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Active Goal Mirroring σ
29
6.1
Subgoal Decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Goal Recognition of Single Agents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3
Planner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.3.1
Heuristic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.4
Goal Recognition Inertia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.4.1
Goal Selection Inertia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.5
Detecting When An Agent Is Not Needed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.6
Deadlock Handling and Contingency Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.7
Putting It All Together
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Analysis
45
7.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2.1
Solve Rate of MAC and BD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2.2
Runtime and Efficiency of Ad Hoc Play and Self-Play
. . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2.3
Average Time Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2.4
Impact of Agent Is Needed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Page 5 of 60
==PAGE:6==
7.2.5
Impact of Inertia Queues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2.6
Recognizing Inactivity or Non-usefulness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2.7
Comparing Self-Play for 2 and 3 Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2.8
Weighing MAC and AGM-6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Further Work
51
8.1
Further Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2
Automatically Adjusting the Size of Inertia Queues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.3
Handling Non-Cooperative and Adversarial Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.4
Agent is Not Needed is Domain-Dependent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
9
Conclusion
53
Appendix A Additional Analysis Tables
55
A.1 Ad Hoc Play Aggregates grouped by Goals and Agent Combinations . . . . . . .
55
A.2 Self-Play Aggregates grouped by Goals and Agent Combinations . . . . . . . . .
58
2
Introduction
In recent years our embedded computing devices have seen a large increase in computing power.
(Moore 2020) Many types of programs which were previously unable to run on such embedded
devices, are now becoming increasingly common. One such type of program is socially intelligent
AI, which is able to infer intents, goals and plans of humans or other AIs. Such socially intelligent
AIs are said to possess a theory of mind, referring to the psychological phenomenon known in
humans where we model our belief of each others thoughts. (Frith and Frith 2005) Possessing
even a crude theory of mind is advantageous in developing efficient AI systems, as it allows AI
agents to act more in accordance with how a human agent might expect another human agent
to act. It also allows AI agents to recognize when they might be helpful to other agents, be they
human or AI. We as humans implicitly infer a lot of the motivation behind other people’s actions.
Specifically, we are well-equipped to infer intents and goals; we call these phenomenons intent
recognition and goal recognition. (Baker and Tenenbaum 2014) Furthermore, plan recognition,
Page 6 of 60
==PAGE:7==
the focus of this thesis, is to recognize the intended course of actions to reach one or more goals.
It naturally follows that to recognize the plan of an agent, one must also be able to infer the goal
of that agent.
This thesis will seek to unify recent advances in plan recognition using a simple theory of mind,
and apply them to active participation by the plan observers. Specifically, we will be applying
this work to create a new planner we call Active Goal Mirroring σ (AGM-σ) and test it on
collaborative planning problems. Furthermore, we will be testing our work alongside state-of-
the-art goal recognition-based Overcooked solvers to quantify the success of our novel planner.
2.1
Overcooked Domain
The Overcooked Domain is inspired by the video game Overcooked (Ltd. 2016) and was first
introduced by (Wu et al. 2020). In this domain the agents must collaboratively cook one or more
recipes using the items present in the environment.
Figure 1: Example of an Overcooked environment. There are two agents (or cooks), light squares
are empty and darker squares are counters. The star is the delivery station and the knives are
cutting stations. The state contains 5 ingredients from top to bottom; tomato, lettuce, onion,
plate, and another plate.
The environment is 2D grid-world kitchen where each square is either empty or a counter. A
counter may contain an item but the agents themselves cannot occupy these squares. Items can
be movable food or immovable cooking stations. Some items can be combined according to the
Merge action. See Figure 1, for an example of the state.
Page 7 of 60
==PAGE:8==
The agents, a1, a2, a3, a4, will have the same starting positions in every counter layout and an
instance can be started with any number of agents, |A| where 1 ≤|A| ≤4. See Figure 2 for
starting positions.
Figure 2: Starting positions of agent.
The environment has 3 different counter layouts; Open-Divider, Partial-Divider, and Full-Divider
(see Figure 3). The different layouts highlight different strategies; In Open-Divider, the agents
can easily divide-and-conquer by cutting both tomato and lettuce at the same time. In Partial-
Divider, the agents can again choose to divider-and-conquer due to the hole in the bottom of
the middle counter column. However, it might be better (in terms of actions used) to pass the
ingredients across the counter. In Full-Divider, the agents are forced to collaborate and pass
ingredients across the counter, highlighting direct collaboration.
(a) Open-Divider
(b) Partial-Divider
(c) Full-Divider
Figure 3: Counter Layouts
Page 8 of 60
==PAGE:9==
Agents can move in the four cardinal directions (North, West, South, East) or choose to do
nothing (NOOP). Agents can pick up items by moving into them, that is if an item is on a
counter and the agent executes an action that would have them move into the counter then the
agent will not move but will instead pick up the item on the counter. Similarly, the agents can
put down items by moving into an empty counter while holding an item. Merge actions are
executed by an agent holding an item x moving into a counter containing item y as long as an
action Merge(x,y) exists. E.g. a tomato can be cut when an agent moves it to a Cutting Station
or a ”cut tomato” can be merged with a plate to create a ”plated cut tomato”. Note that Merge
actions can only be executed on a counter.
(a) Simple Tomato
(b) Tomato/Lettuce
(c) Salad
(d) Onion Salad
Figure 4: High-level overview of the recipes in the Overcooked environment
Two agents cannot occupy the same vertex (square) at the same time, nor can two agents move
along the same edge (here an edge is the space between two squares) between two consecutive
points in time (i.e. they cannot ”swap” vertices because they would collide). If two or more agents
cause a conflict, e.g. by moving into the same square, both of their actions will be adjusted to
a NOOP (not moving). The goal of problem instances in this domain is for the agents to cook
one or more recipes in as few time steps as possible. A recipe is finished when it is placed on the
Delivery Station.
The recipes in the domain are hierarchically organized sub-tasks, connected by Merge actions.
Merge actions are represented as Merge(x,y), where if x and y is at the same square, x and y
will be merged resulting in the post-condition of the action. Consider Figure 4: To make Salad
Page 9 of 60
==PAGE:10==
it requires the agents to bring both tomato and lettuce to a cutting station and cutting them.
Then the cut ingredients should be combined with a plate and brought to the delivery station.
Note that a recipe can be combined in any order, e.g. for salad you can combine first the tomato
and lettuce and then the plate or first the tomato and the plate and then the lettuce or any other
order.
Page 10 of 60
==PAGE:11==
3
Theory
In this thesis we will be working with a decentralized multi-agent system in which agents run
their own separate programs which controls their behavior with no central planning.
In the
system all agents might either be all of the same type (running the same program) or of different
types, this is called self-play and ad hoc play, respectively.
We will focus on collaborative play meaning that the agents should collaborate to achieve a joint
goal. In this setting, solutions might be to leverage that agents have a standardized way to
communicate, or they can leverage that they are all running the same program by computing
a policy that will be the same for all agents. However, this is not possible in ad hoc play, as
the agents do not run the same program and/or might not be able to communicate. The agents
will therefore have to collaborate implicitly. In this case the agents will have to collaborate by
observing the actions of the other agents.
3.1
Goal & Plan Recognition
(Mirsky, Keren, and Geib 2021) defines goal recognition as ”identifying the end conditions that
the actor wishes to achieve” and plan recognition as ”identifying the sequence of actions is in
the process of following to achieve its goal”. There is a strong relation between them, e.g. you
cannot have plan recognition without also recognizing the goal of said plan. According to (Mirsky,
Keren, and Geib 2021), the distinction between them depends on the application. For example if
the task (or goal) of cutting tomato is defined as an atomic action then just recognizing the goal
would be sufficient. However in our environment, cutting tomato is comprised of other low-level
actions, such as getting the tomato and bringing it to the cutting station.
To define a plan recognition problem, we first define a Strips planning problem as a tuple P =
(F, I, A, G) where F is the set of fluents, I ⊆F is the initial state, G ⊆F is the goal state,
and A is a set of actions a with precondition, add and delete lists; Pre(a), Add(a), and Del(a),
respectively, all of which are subsets of F. A planning domain is a description of what can be
done in the domain of a planning problem, that is, it is the planning problem without the goal
state, (F, I, A). Conversely, a planning problem can be obtained by concatenating a planning
domain with a goal G ⊆F.
Using these definitions we can then define a plan recognition problem or theory as T = (P, G, O),
where G is the set of possible goals G, G ⊆F and O = o1, . . . , om is an observation sequence
where each oi is an action a ∈A. (Ram´ırez and Geffner 2009)
Page 11 of 60
==PAGE:12==
3.2
Problem Representation
There are different ways of representing domain knowledge. (Mirsky, Keren, and Geib 2021,
p. 31-33) denotes two schools of thought on the subject: Implicit representations and explicit
representations.
Explicit representations rely on rigid formal models (e.g. grammars) to describe the exact tran-
sitions between a distinct number of possible states and plans which have been predetermined
in a plan library. A plan library is a set of plans.
Implicit representations define actions with preconditions and effects without defining explicitly
how certain goals can be achieved. This means that there is no well-defined set of possible states
and plans, and as such one cannot define the library ahead of time.
There is a number of benefits to using explicit representations. The primary benefit is that there
is a finite set of plans since they need to be defined before recognition can begin. This means
that the recognition process is easier to perform.
However, explicit representations inherently limit the set of possible plans via their plan libraries.
This is not conducive to domains which might not be finite in nature (i.e. continuous domains).
In other cases the plan libraries might simply become so large as to become infeasible to define
before runtime. In this paper we expand upon work by Ram´ırez & Geffner to avoid defining plan
libraries. Their approach transforms plan recognition into a Strips planning problem. (Ram´ırez
and Geffner 2009) We will discuss their work in further detail in Section 3.3 Plan Recognition as
Planning. Their transformation approach fits within the definition of an implicit representation.
3.2.1
Defining Goals and Subgoals
The use of the word ”goal” is deliberately broad in this paper. There are many ways to answer
”what is a goal?”, and most of them are domain-specific.
In general, this thesis uses goal
terminology as vaguely as possible in order to let definitions remain as broadly applicable as
possible. The informal definitions are as follows:
• A goal is some desired result or object which can exist in a state. The set of possible goals
is defined in the problem representation.
• A subgoal is a goal which is a (not necessarily direct) predecessor to another goal. A goal
cannot be its own only subgoal, as that would make it impossible to satisfy (analogous to
a logical contradiction).
• A final goal of a problem instance is an end condition of that instance. The final goal(s)
may have subgoals, those subgoals can in turn can have their own subgoals (recursing in a
finite manner).
Page 12 of 60
==PAGE:13==
3.3
Plan Recognition as Planning
One of the first plan recognition system to use an implicit representation of the domain theory
was (Ram´ırez and Geffner 2009). They formalized the line of research called plan recognition
as planning (PRaP). PRaP aims to exploit recent power and generality of planning algorithms
for recognizing the subset G∗of goals G that explain a sequence of observations given a domain
theory.
Ram´ırez and Geffner showed that one can use off-the-shelf planners to solve a plan recognition
problem. PRaP argues that plan recognition can be seen as planning in reverse. For each possible
goal g ∈G PRaP computes two plans. The first plan pg satisfies the observation sequence O and
achieves g with cost c(pg), the second plan p′
g diverges from O by at least one action and still
achieves g with cost c(p′
g).
A plan p = a1, . . . , an is said to satisfy the observation sequence O = o1, . . . , om if ai = oi
for i = 1, . . . , m. Note that the definition in (Ram´ırez and Geffner 2009) allows for missing
observations, however, this is not needed in our environment and as such the given definition
will suffice.
To find the most likely followed plan, PRaP finds the marginal cost of observations towards goal
g by computing the cost difference between the two plans: δ(g|O) = c(pg) −c(p′
g). The cost,
c(p), is computed as the sum of the cost of all actions in p. Then the most likely followed goal
from G is chosen as:
G∗= argming∈G(c(pg) −c(p′
g))
(1)
The goal considered to be the most likely followed is the one with the smallest difference between
the optimal plan that satisfies the observation sequence and the optimal plan that does not. The
intuition being that the smaller the difference, the more closely the observations resemble the
optimal plan for a goal and therefore it is likely that that goal is being followed. Note that G∗
can contain more than one element if more than one goal have minimum marginal cost.
Consider the example in Figure 5, we will calculate the marginal cost of the goal of bringing
salad to the delivery station. The observation sequence is the black line and the green line is pg
that follows the observation sequence has a length of 8. The red line is the plan that diverges
from the observation sequence, p′
g, which has a length of 6. The marginal cost of this goal given
these observations is then: 8 −6 = 2.
In order to find the two plans given a plan recognition problem using off-the-shelf classical
planner, (Ram´ırez and Geffner 2009) proposes to compile away the observations by transforming
the theory T = (P, G, O) into a different theory T ′ = (P ′, G′, O′). Where O′ is empty and the
observations a ∈O is encoded as extra fluents, actions, and goals such that all actions in O must
Page 13 of 60
==PAGE:14==
Figure 5: Goal recognition example using PRaP for goal of bringing salad to the delivery station.
Black: observation sequence. Green: pg, the plan that satisfies the observation sequence. Red:
p′
g the plan that diverges from the observation sequence.
be executed in order before any new actions and plans that achieve the goal G′ in P ′ corresponds
with plans that achieve goal G in P that satisfies the observations O.
3.4
Online Goal Mirroring
One of the major downsides of PRaP presents itself in online settings. In an online setting,
we get the observations one at a time, and would at each time step like to recognize the goal
of the agent. Using PRaP this would mean computing pg and p′
g at every time step for every
goal g, which is not efficient. Another inefficiency of PRaP is the compiling of observations into
a different theory. Online Goal Mirroring (Vered, Kaminka, and Biham 2016) addresses these
problems.
To avoid compiling the observations into a new theory. Online Goal Mirroring instead builds a
plan mg that includes the observations O by appending the actions from O as a prefix plan and
suffix plan computed by planning from the latest observed state to g.
They also propose to substitute p′
g with an optimal plan, m′
g, from the initial state that achieves
g but ignores all observations. As all observations are ignored, m′
g does not change as more
Page 14 of 60
==PAGE:15==
observations are gathered and as such can be pre-computed (or calculated when needed and
cached) and only needs to be computed once. Note that p′
g and m′
g only differs when the optimal
path to achieve g has the observation sequence as a prefix.
Another problem that Online Goal Mirroring solves, is that PRaP can rank two goals differently
if the observations are optimal for both goals. Consider the example in Figure 6, in both pictures
the black line is the observation sequence, the red line is m′
g (plan from initial state that achieves
g but ignores all observations), the blue line is pg = mg (the plan that follows the observations),
and the green line is p′
g. We assume that the NOOP action does not exist and that the agent
won’t move back and forth, e.g. moving up and then down. When using PRaP p′
g must diverge
from the observation sequence with at least one action, this means that p′
g must go through the
upper corridor instead of the bottom one. Now lets go through what PRaP and Online Goal
Mirroring would do in this scenario:
Using PRaP we would get c(pg)−c(p′
g) = 6−14 = −8 for tomato and c(pg)−c(p′
g) = 8−12 = −4
for lettuce, thus PRaP would rank tomato higher than lettuce even though the observation are
optimal for both goals. On the other hand using Online Goal Mirroring we get c(mg) −c(m′
g) =
6 −6 = 0 for tomato and c(mg) −c(m′
g) = 8 −8 = 0 for lettuce, thus ranking the two goals
equally.
(a) Goal: Picking up tomato
(b) Goal: Picking up lettuce
Figure 6: Goal Recognition Example: PRaP vs. Online Goal Mirroring. Black: Observation
sequence. Blue: pg. Red: m′
g. Green: p′
g.
3.5
Active Goal Recognition
In traditional goal recognition, the observer is passive and cannot affect the environment nor the
observed agent. In active goal recognition the observer has the ability to actively sense, act, or
react as part of its goal recognition process. (Shvo and McIlraith 2020) This allows us to see
Page 15 of 60
==PAGE:16==
each agent as a dynamic part of the environment. To all other agents, another agent can at each
step be seen as an obstacle in the environment as no two agents can occupy the same vertex at
the same time nor can they swap places. Agents can also change the environment by picking up
items and achieving subgoals, e.g. cutting lettuce at a cutting station.
3.6
Dynamic Goal Recognition
The field of dynamic goal recognition, introduced by (M´enager et al. 2017), works with online
goal recognition environments in which the agents may change their pursued goals at any time.
The goals of the environment may also change during the execution of the environment. Before
dynamic goal recognition, goal recognition systems have predominantly focused on situations
with static goals. However in our Overcooked environment the available goals can change at any
point whenever an agent achieves a subgoal, e.g. if an agent cuts a tomato, the set of available
goals changes to also include plating said tomato. Whenever an agent switches goals it can be
difficult to recognize this as there may be overwhelming evidence for a previously pursued goal.
Consider an observation sequence [a0, a1, . . . , am] then if [a0, a1, . . . , am−1] was executed while
pursuing g1 and [am] was executed while pursuing g2 it would be difficult to recognize the shift
from g1 to g2 given the significant amount of evidence for g1 as compared to g2.
In (M´enager et al. 2017), the authors propose a windowed strategy where the goal recognition
process uses a sliding window of observations. Given a sequence of observations O1,... ,t they at
each time step of the environment set the state used for goal recognition to be the initial state
where all actions from O1,... ,i is executed. This means that all observations leading up to time
step i is ignored. The sliding window approach then sets i = m −j for an observation sequence
of length m and a constant j, as such they only using the last j actions to estimate the goals of
an agent.
Page 16 of 60
==PAGE:17==
4
Related Works
In this section we will be exploring the current state-of-the-art of collaboration recognition plan-
ners in the Overcooked Domain.
4.1
Too Many Cooks
In the paper Too many cooks: Bayesian inference for coordinating multi-agent collaboration the
authors, (Wu et al. 2020), presents a novel algorithm for multi-agent coordination to make prob-
abilistic inferences about which sub-tasks other agents are performing called Bayesian Delegation
(BD). Bayesiean Delegation builds on sub-task allocations. A sub-task allocation, ta, is defined
as a mapping between all agents and a set of sub-tasks where each agent is assigned to exactly
one sub-task. The set of sub-task allocations, ta, is the set of all possible allocations of agents to
sub-tasks. Bayesian Delegation maintains a probability distribution over sub-task allocations.
At every time step, Bayesian Delegation selects the most likely allocation, ta∗using the observed
history of actions H0:T = [s0, a0], . . . , (sT , aT ) of T time steps where st is the state in time step t
and at is the set of all agents’ actions a time step t. ta∗is computed as ta∗= argmaxtaP(ta|H0:T ).
The posterior P(ta|H0:T ) over ta is computed using Bayes rule:
P(ta|H0:T ) ∝P(ta)P(H0:T |ta) = P(ta)
T
Y
t=0
P(at|st, ta)
(2)
Where P(ta) is the prior over ta and P(at) is the likelihood of actions at at time step t for all
agents. The likelihood of a given ta is then the likelihood that each agent i is following their
assigned task, τi, in that ta. This likelihood is calculated using the softmax over the expected
future rewards of the actions.
P(at|st, ta) ∝
Y
i:τ∈ta
exp(β · Q∗
τi(s, ai))
(3)
Where Q∗
τi(s, ai) is the expected future reward of ai towards the completion of sub-task τi for
agent i and β controls the degree of which the agents believes the other agents will behave
optimally. When β →0, the agent believe that the other agents will behave totally random and
when β →∞then the agent believes others are perfectly optimal or maximizing. The expected
future reward Q∗
τi(s, ai) is estimated using a model-based reinforcement learning algorithm called
BRTDP.
In order to collaborate BD uses Level-K planning (Shum et al. 2019). Level-K planning is based
on policies. A policy, π, is a probability distribution over actions that an agent is expected to
take in state s. In Level-K planning these policies can have different levels; the base policy (or
Page 17 of 60
==PAGE:18==
level-0 policy), π0, are non-strategic and takes takes actions independently of the other agents.
One approach to the base policy is to act randomly. A level-1 policy, π1 is then a best response
to a given level-0 policy. In Level-K planning an agent operating at level-k assumes that all other
agents operates at a level-(k −1) policy.
Agents then uses ta∗to tackle the low-level coordination problems. ta∗contains agent i’s belief
of which sub-tasks the other agents are working on, τ i.
In the case τi ̸= τ i, agent i creates level-0 models of the other agents that are performing τ i,
assuming that all other agents are stationary. The level-0 models are then used to reduce the
multi-agent transition function to a single agent transition function where the transition for the
other agents are assumed to follow the level-0 models. Running BRTDP on this transformed
environment finds an optimal level-1 policy for agent i that works best with the level-0 models
of the other agents.
When τi = τ i, agent i will attempt to collaborate on the same sub-task with other agents. In
this case agent i will create a joint plan with all agents working on the same sub-task.
4.1.1
When is An Agent Needed?
Bayesian Delegation has a shortcoming which concerns detecting when an agent ”is needed”.
(Wu et al. 2020, p. 8) states the following: ”One challenge is that when agents jointly plan for a
single sub-task, they currently have no way of knowing when they have completed their individual
“part” of the joint effort”. Solving this problem would allow agents to recognize that they can
do some other useful work when the task they have been working on no longer requires their
active participation. We will return to this challenge in Section 5.3 When is An Agent Needed
(Re-visited)?
4.2
Multi-Agent Collaboration (MAC)
The master thesis Multi-Agent Collaboration Based on Implicit Coordination (Herrmann 2021),
presents a system for multi-agent collaboration based on the introduced concept of a collaboration
which assigns sets of agents to sets of tasks. This allows the system of agents to pursue more
than one goal at a time and thus enables more complex collaboration. Where MAC differs from
BD is that BD finds the goals that are most likely to be pursued and then finds best actions for
said goals. MAC on the other hand finds the best plans for all goals using all configurations of
agents and then determines which of these are most likely to be followed.
MAC defines a goal as a triple (s, Ag, h) which represents that the agents Ag pursue goal state s
with handoff agent h where h ∈Ag. The handoff agent is an agent that should finish some part
of the goal g before g itself can be achieved. The intuition is that the handoff agent should finish
Page 18 of 60
==PAGE:19==
its part of the plan as fast as possible. MAC defines a handoff agent h for goal g = (s, Ag, h)
such that the joint action that leads to the goal state for g must contain a NOOP for the handoff
agent, h.
Using these notions MAC defines the concept of a collaboration as a tuple (G, l, act, val) where
G is a set of goals, l is the estimated length of the plan to achieve G, act is the actions to be
executed and val is the value assigned to the collaboration. Furthermore, for all g = (s, Ag, h)
and g′ = (s′, Ag′, h′) in G it is true that Ag = Ag′ and h ̸= h′.
At each time step, t, MAC calculates the best plans, P, for all sub-tasks, G′, available in state
st. For all of these plans, P, the agent calculates if other agents are probable to follow them.
For this MAC uses a sliding window approach to goal recognition, maintaining a goal history
GH = (g, hi, prob) for all goals g ∈G where hi contains the last ϵ + 1 solution lengths and prob
is the probability that the goal g is being followed. The prob is calculated for each goal g′ ∈G′
as:
A
hi[1] + A ·

hi[1]
hi[ϵ + 1] + ϵ
1+
|Ag|
2
(4)
Where A is a predefined parameter and ϵ is the size of the sliding window.
MAC then defines a goal, g ∈GH, as probable if:
prob
maxProb ≥C
(5)
Where maxProb is the maximal prob value in GH.
The planner used by MAC to compute plans is an extended A∗using actionCount to break ties
and a special condition on expanding goal nodes such that the actions will adhere to the handoff
requirement. actionCount is the number of non NOOP actions in the plan. This encourages the
handoff agent to finish its part as early as possible.
MAC then generates possible collaborations using the plans P generated earlier with the con-
straint that all sub-tasks g′ in the collaboration must be compatible. Goal compatibility is defined
as:
Goals G′ are compatible in state s for a planning problem P = (F, I, A, G) if G′ is not empty
and completing all g′ ∈G′ in s also completes G or completing all g′ ∈G′ in s leads to a state
s′ where some goals G′′ are compatible.
This definition allows MAC to avoid creating collaborations that would complete sub-tasks that
would make it impossible to complete the final goal of the planning problem.
When the collaboration have been generated MAC assigns actions to agents in the individual
collaborations from the plans generated earlier.
This means that the agents must choose a
sub-task to pursue in the collaboration. The agents choose the goal with the following priority:
Page 19 of 60
==PAGE:20==
1. A goal where the agent is the handoff agent and the agent has a useful action
2. The goal with the highest prop where the agent has a useful action
3. The goal with the earliest action for the agent
Here MAC uses a definition of a useful action which is defined as:
Given an action sequence Act[1,... ,t][1,... ,n] over t time steps for n agents, which when performed
in state s leads to goal state s′ = (s, Act) for goal g, and a state si−1 = (s, Act[1,... ,i−1]). Then
action Act[i][j] for agent j at time step i is useful if removing agent j from si−1 and Act[1,... ,t]
leads to a state sm = (si−1, Act[1,... ,t]) which is not a goal state for g.
Informally we can describe the definition of a useful action as: Given a plan then if at any point,
i, you remove an agent and its action from said plan results in the plan not reaching its goal
then the action of the removed agent were necessary to complete the plan from time step i. Thus
deeming the action useful.
The actions chosen for the agents in a collaboration may not have been chosen from the same
joint plan as they may belong to different sub-tasks in the collaboration. This means that the
actions may conflict. MAC re-plans for each goal in the collaboration to remedy this behavior.
Given a collaboration with agents A and agents A′ ⊆A who are assigned to goal g then MAC
re-plans for goal g such that the first H actions for the agents A\A′ are the same actions as they
were originally assigned.
To estimate the length of a collaboration (G, l, act, val) MAC assigns parts of the length of the
solution to the agents involved, as follows :
For each goal g = (s, Ag, h) ∈G split the solution length, l′, to achieve goal g, into l′ = l1 + l2
such that the l′
1th action in the solution is the last useful action of the handoff agent h. Then
assign l1 to h.
Then for each g ∈G there is the lengths l2 left. These are assigned in descending order such that
at each assignment of a l′
2 the agent with the lowest assigned length is assigned the l′
2. When
assigning a length to an agent, the agent might already have a length l3 assigned. In this case
the assignment becomes max(l3 + l2, l′). Then the estimated length of a collaboration is the
maximum length assigned to an agent i the collaboration.
Using the estimated length of a collaboration, MAC then calculates the value, val, of a collabo-
ration as follows:
F|Ag|
G|G| ·
l
|G|
(6)
Where F and G are predefined parameters and Ag is the set of agents from all g ∈G.
Page 20 of 60
==PAGE:21==
Then MAC chooses a collaboration to follow. In ascending order of length the collaborations are
applied to the current state. If the planning agent is part of a collaboration, that collaboration
is chosen. To try to solve low-level conflicts, MAC checks if the same collaboration length could
be achieved if the agent performed any other action (except NOOP), then choosing randomly
between these.
4.2.1
Handling Non-Cooperative Agents
In order to handle non-cooperative agents MAC introduces the notion of progress towards a given
goal, g = (s, Ag, h), using the goal history GH:
hi[1] −hi[ϵ + 1]
ϵ
(7)
MAC calculates the progress for all goal histories and then takes into account that one set of
agents pursuing a goal might affect the solution length of another group of agents by only counting
the progress of an agent, ag ∈Ag if for a goal history GH = (g, hi, prob) with g = (s, Ag, h) it
holds for all other goal histories GH′ = (g′, hi′, prob′) with g′ = (s′, Ag′, h′) where ag /∈Ag′ that
prob′ < D · prob. Where D is some predefined parameter.
MAC then notes the maximum of all progresses for an agent, ag, as maxProgress and calculates
an idle probability for each agent as follow:
idleProb[ag] = B · (1 −I · maxProgress[ag])
(8)
Then MAC can use the idle probability to determine if a goal, remember here that a goal
also involves the set of agents pursuing it, is probable. If a goal contains an agent ag where
idleProb[ag] = 1 then MAC concludes that the goal is not probable, meaning that MAC will
pick another constellation of agents to solve the goal.
Page 21 of 60
==PAGE:22==
4.2.2
Predefined Parameters used by MAC
MAC uses a number of predefined parameters which is used to tune how the solver works. For
completeness we will list the values of these parameters in Table 1.
A
100
B
0.9
C
0.8
D
1.05
ϵ
4
F
1.01
G
1.05
H
3
I
0.33
Table 1: Predefined parameters used by MAC
Page 22 of 60
==PAGE:23==
5
A Simple Approach to Active Goal Mirroring
In the following, we will be showcasing the initial approach we took to formulating an active
collaborative planner running online goal mirroring. We call this collaborative planner Active
Goal Mirroring (or AGM for short) since it is largely based on online goal mirroring. We will
be describing some of the lessons learned in this simple approach, and describe the limitations
in the first generation of active plan recognition solvers. In the improved solution provided in
Section 6 Active Goal Mirroring σ, we will describe how to rectify the inefficiencies uncovered in
this section.
5.1
Adapting Online Goal Mirroring to An Online Multi-Agent Col-
laboration Problem
For the purposes of this first Active Goal Mirroring implementation we performed online goal
mirroring from each agent using a joint-action planner for all agents at each time step. The
off-the-shelf planner used is a typical A* with a subgoal count heuristic and Manhattan distance.
At the beginning of an execution, the marginal costs as described in online goal mirroring are
all 0. Consequently, an agent at t = 0 will select a random (sub)goal that is directly achievable
from the initial state. In the longer term, using the same planner and heuristic will mean that
for self-play scenarios AGM agents will eventually be pursuing the same goal (unless they are
performing goal shuffling as described in Section 5.4 Goal Shuffling).
The intuition of this approach is that the agents are implicitly electing one (sub)goal to achieve
at a time, and a solution should eventually be reached as long as the environment does not enter
an unsolvable state. However, the simplicity is also a weakness since its theory of mind is quite
limited and makes assumptions which won’t hold for other agent types. As a result, ad hoc play
with other agent types may also lead to problems since reaching a consensus might not be the
goal of the non-AGM agents.
For the rest of this section we shall describe some inefficiencies observed with the AGM imple-
mentation.
5.2
Recognizing the Goals of Single Agents in Multi-Agent System
A problem with AGM is that it’s theory of mind is relatively simple and AGM agents have no
way of recognizing the goals of individual agents, only the goal of the entire multi-agent system.
This means AGM agents cannot argue about whether or not agents should try to collaborate on
some subgoal or if they should divide-and-conquer and solve several subgoals concurrently. We
will introduce a solution to this problem later in Section 6.2 Goal Recognition of Single Agents.
Page 23 of 60
==PAGE:24==
5.3
When is An Agent Needed (Re-visited)?
Figure 7: An example where an agent does not recognize that it is no longer needed (right-side,
AGM), and consequently does not begin a new task despite being able.
We now return to the ”when is an agent needed”-problem mentioned in Section 4.1.1 When is
An Agent Needed?, because the AGM implementation has the same problem. The issue may
be exacerbated when an agent is only actively ”helping” for a short while, leading to inefficient
usage of time if there are other parts of the final goal which can be achieved in the meantime.
Consider Figure 7 which displays 6 consecutive states from a real execution of an Overcooked
problem instance wherein the left-side agent a1 is running AGM and the right-side agent a2 is
also running AGM. The final goal of this example is to deliver a salad consisting of cut tomato
and cut lettuce. In the displayed states a2 is responsible for delivering different vegetables to a1
in order to cut them. a2 starts out holding the tomato, however, after handing off the tomato
at t = 6, a2 does not start on another subgoal.
At t = 7, a2 could start by going and picking up the lettuce in anticipation of it being needed
for the salad. Neither Bayesian Delegation nor Active Goal Mirroring contains any mechanisms
for recognizing that a2 is no longer needed to cut the tomato.
Page 24 of 60
==PAGE:25==
5.4
Goal Shuffling
Figure 8: Illustration of some initial Overcooked state.
There are certain situations where one or more agents alternates between two goals, because
they are switching between which one is better at the current time. We call this phenomenon
goal shuffling. In the following we will provide an example of goal shuffling, using the following
notation:
• ax is the x’th agent
• gt(ax) is the chosen goal of the agent ax at time step t
• oax,t(ay) is the observation function, denoting the observed goal of the agent ay as observed
by agent ax at time step t.
Consequently, if oa1,t(a2) = gt(a2) then a1 has correctly
identified the chosen goal of a2 at the time step t.
Using these definitions, let us lay out an example using the map in Figure 8:
Page 25 of 60
==PAGE:26==
t = 1
oa1,1(a2) = Nil
oa2,1(a1) = Nil
g1(a1) = Cut tomato
g1(a2) = Cut lettuce
t = 2
oa1,2(a2) = Cut lettuce
oa2,2(a1) = Cut tomato
g2(a1) = Cut lettuce
g2(a2) = Cut tomato
t = 3
oa1,3(a2) = Cut tomato
oa2,3(a1) = Cut lettuce
g3(a1) = Cut tomato
g3(a2) = Cut lettuce
· · ·
(9)
At t = 1 both agents don’t have any observations to recognize goals and plans, so they both
default to observing a random initially available goal, because the marginal cost for all of these
are 0 per Section 3.4 Online Goal Mirroring. Consequently, each agent simply chooses a random
optimal subgoal to work on from their perspective, with a1 working on cutting a tomato and a2
working on cutting lettuce.
At t = 2, a1 recognizes that a2 started working on cutting lettuce and a2 recognizes that a1
started working on cutting a tomato.
Due to a programmed eagerness to help, a1 chooses
to adopt the subgoal it has recognized a2 as working on. Likewise, a2 chooses the subgoal it
recognized for a1. This means that a1 and a2 has effectively switched the goals they are trying
to achieve.
At t = 3, the same type of situation occurs with reversed observed and chosen goals.
This illustrates that the ”eagerness to help” of an agent is compromising the agents’ own evalu-
ation of which goal they should pursue.
Page 26 of 60
==PAGE:27==
Figure 9: An example of a deadlock caused by optimal agents.
5.5
Optimality Can Lead to Deadlocks or Live-locks
In a decentralized multi-agent system optimality can sometimes lead to deadlocks. This is espe-
cially apparent if the agents pursue different goals, in this case the optimal paths for the agents
can contain conflicts. In our decentralized online environment they have no way of resolving the
conflict if they are to stay optimal (assuming that there are no other optimal paths) because
they have no means of communication.
Consider the example in Figure 9. Here the agents have to make a salad (combining cut tomato
and cut lettuce). Assume that a1 chooses to pursue cut tomato and a2 chooses to pursue cut
lettuce. The optimal plan for both these agents would be to move into the square where they
can pick up either the tomato or the lettuce leading to a conflict.
These kinds of deadlocks may also appear when multiple optimal plans exists for the same goal,
meaning that the different agents may follow different plans. This makes it hard for the agents
to cooperate.
5.6
Completing Goals That Leads to Unsolvable States
Both BD and AGM suffers from a problem where the agents might complete goals the makes
the state unsolvable. Consider the example in Figure 10, the final goal is for the agents to create
onion salad. If the agent holding the cut onion were to plate the held item, the state would
become unsolvable, as the environment provides no way of splitting already combined items, and
Page 27 of 60
==PAGE:28==
there exists no Merge action where both inputs contains a plate. We will denote an action that
leads directly to an solvable state as a destructive action.
Figure 10: A state where completing plated cut onion leads to an unsolvable state as the overall
goal is to make onion salad. Recall that combined items cannot be separated, i.e. the cut onion
cannot be removed from the plate once combined.
This problem occurs for BD and AGM as it only consider sub-tasks that are directly achievable
in the current state. That is BD and AGM considers all Merge(x,y) where both x and y is
present in the current state. Neither BD nor AGM consider the consequences of executing such
a Merge action.
The original papers for BD and MAC only considered the 3 goal states of Simple Tomato,
Tomato/Lettuce, and Salad. In Simple Tomato, it is possible to reach an unsolvable state by
combining the tomato with lettuce. In tomato & lettuce you may combine tomato and lettuce,
and in salad you may put tomato and lettuce on different plates.
Consider again Figure 10. Then there are 5 sub-tasks available in the state; (1) Cutting the
lettuce, (2) combining plated cut tomato with cut onion, (3) combining the empty plate with
cut onion, or (4) combining cut onion and cut lettuce. Option (3) would result in an unsolvable
state which is undesirable.
Page 28 of 60
==PAGE:29==
6
Active Goal Mirroring σ
In this section we will propose solutions to the problems found in Section 5 A Simple Approach
to Active Goal Mirroring. We will then describe how we used these solutions in tandem to create
our multi-agent collaboration planner with implicit collaboration, which we will call Active Goal
Mirroring σ (AGM-σ). The meaning of σ will be explained in Section 6.4 Goal Recognition
Inertia.
6.1
Subgoal Decomposition
Figure 11: An example of the decomposition graph for the Salad goal
We define a directed acyclic graph of high-level plans which can be executed. We denote this
DAG, Φ, as consisting of a set of vertices VC and a set of edges ET . Each vertex in VC contains
a single positive condition c, from the set of conditions C. In the context of applying Φ to
Overcooked, a single condition c denotes the existence of some object. As such, a state assigns
a truth value to each condition in C. The edges in ET all denote a possible transition from one
positive condition vertex vc1 to another vcx depending on some other positive condition c2 in VC.
In Overcooked each edge represents the transition from two objects to a single merged object
using a Merge-action. Thus, the transition describes Merge(c1, c2) ⇒cx. In the Overcooked
domain, the conditions c1 and c2 are no longer true after the Merge is performed, except when
merging with the cutting station. This is because the objects that c1 and c2 no longer exists
separately, they are either part of a composite object or one of the objects has transformed in
some way, e.g. the object has been cut or plated.
In Figure 11 we have created Φ for the final goal Salad. Starting on the left-side and going
Page 29 of 60
==PAGE:30==
towards the right-side objects gets progressively more complex. Note that each value noted on
a vertex is also the value on one or more edges, but each edge value is equivalent to exactly
one vertex. The exception to this rule is the cutting station and the delivery station which are
objects which cannot be held and are not consumed in a Merge-action. Those objects are treated
differently in the graph as such. The vertices are an agent’s held item and the outgoing edges
are possible targets for a merge if they exist in the game state.
To fully illustrate how Φ is used, let us go through a high-level plan disregarding the movement
aspect of Overcooked, and only focusing on the individual subgoals being worked on. The goal
of the plan is to create Simple tomato. In Figure 12, let the gray vertices denote an object that
exists in the state and a blue vertex is an object held by some agent:
Page 30 of 60
==PAGE:31==
Figure 12: Example of how the subgoal decomposition graph looks during high-level steps of an
overcooked plan.
In Figure 12, the example given is to produce a plated and cut tomato. The high-level plan can
be described as follows:
1. Starting state
2. Pick up the tomato
3. Cut the tomato
Page 31 of 60
==PAGE:32==
4. Put the cut tomato on the plate
5. Pick up the plated cut tomato to prepare for delivery
To underscore what is noteworthy about Φ:
1. The graph does not concern itself with the amount of agents or their location, nor the
location of each object in relation to each other. It simply acts as a way to hierarchically
describe the immediate high-level (sub)goals which are possible.
2. Determining if a state is solvable. This will let AGM-σ pick immediate subgoals while
maintaining that the resulting state should be solvable. Consider again Figure 11, it is
clear that if both Plated Cut Tomato and Plated Cut Lettuce exists in the state, and
consequently Cut Tomato and Cut Lettuce does not exists, then there is no transition that
leads to Salad.
6.2
Goal Recognition of Single Agents
In order to recognize goals for single agents instead of recognizing the goal of the entire multi-
agent system of a whole, we devise the following strategy:
Instead of letting all agents follow their observations, we only bind the agent whose plan we
want to recognize to its observations and let the other agents plan freely. That is, given an
observation sequence O[0,... ,t][0,... ,j] for t time steps and j agents, a set G′ of goals available
in the current state, and suppose we want to recognize the goals of agent an | n ∈[0, . . . , j].
Using the principles of PRaP and Online Goal Mirroring, we calculate a prefix plan pog for each
goal such that |pog| = t and pogi = Oi,an for all i ∈[0, . . . , t], and a suffix plan, pg from the
resulting state of pog that achieves g. As we use Online Goal Mirroring techniques we have
already calculated m′
g for all goals g ∈G we find the most likely goal to be followed by agent a
to be:
argming∈G′(|pog| + |pg| −|m′
g|)
(10)
The intuition is that letting all other agents than a ignore their previous actions and just follow
the given goal means that |pog| + |pg| is only affected by the previous actions of a and as such it
should tell us something about what a is doing.
Consider the example in Figure 13, here we will try to recognize the goal of a1 (the blue agent
on the left). In both pictures the black line is the observation sequence. In the left picture the
green line is both pog +pg and m′
g as these are the same in this instance. In the right picture the
green line is pog +pg and the red line is m′
g. For the goal of cutting lettuce we get a marginal cost
of 12 −12 = 0 and for the goal of cutting tomato we get a marginal cost of 12 −8 = 4. Taking
Page 32 of 60
==PAGE:33==
the goal with the minimum marginal cost of these two correctly gives us that a1 is following the
goal of cutting lettuce.
(a) Goal: Cutting Lettuce
(b) Goal: Cutting Tomato
Figure 13: Recognizing the goal of a single agent (the blue agent on the left side) in a multi-agent
system. In both pictures the black line is the observation sequence. In the left picture the green
line is both pog +pg and m′
g as these are the same in this instance. In the right picture the green
line is pog + pg and the red line is m′
g.
Using the ideas from Dynamic Goal Recognition we also only use a part of the observations
at a given time steps, in order to recognize changing goals. In the Overcooked environment
it is especially apparent when the goals of the environment changes and some new goal might
be better than the previously pursued goal. Instead of using a sliding window of fixed size we
propose a way to automatically set the size of the sliding window. Whenever a set of actions
[a0, . . . , an] where n is the number of agents applied to a state st−1 results in a state st where
a subgoal is achieved in st and not in st−1 then we mark i = t. Then the starting state used
for goal recognition is the initial state where all actions O1,... ,i is executed. The intuition being
that whenever the available goals changes there is a larger probability that the an agent might
change its pursued goal.
6.3
Planner
The planner used for goal and plan recognition is standard A* with an extra condition to comply
with given observations, as described in Section 6.2 Goal Recognition of Single Agents. To comply
with the observations we can simply discard children (A, s), where A is the actions that leads to
state s, if Oi,a ̸= Aa ∧i = st. That is if we have a child and we have observations for the time
Page 33 of 60
==PAGE:34==
step of that child, then if the action for the agent is not the same as the observation then we can
discard the child. The frontier uses standard f(n) = g(n) + h(n) for priority and breaks ties in
a FIFO order. The planner only needs to be able to solve one layer of sub-tasks, that is given a
goal, e.g. salad, it should be possible from the starting state to reach the goal by executing only
one Merge action, as described in Section 6.1 Subgoal Decomposition.
6.3.1
Heuristic
The heuristic used for the planner takes into account the distance between the parts of the goal
that is to be solved and the distance from the agents to some counter where the parts of the
goal can be combined. Keep in mind that the goal should be achievable using a single Merge
action, which means that each goal in this case has 2 parts. The counter that the parts should
be merged on is the closest empty counter in relation to both of the parts meaning that even
if one of the parts is not movable, e.g. a cutting station, the heuristic will assume that it can
move.
To account for the positioning of the agents, we will guide the agents towards the chosen counter
if they hold one of the parts of the goal.
Lastly we will discourage agents from holding items that are not part of the goal. If an agent
holds an item that is not a part of the recipe we add the distance to the nearest counter such
that the item can be put down.
More formally we can decompose a goal g into a tuple (p1, p2) where there exists an action
Merge(p1, p2) with post-condition Add(g). We then find the closest empty counter between p1
and p2. Note that Cutting Stations and Delivery Stations can also be considered empty counters
as items can be placed on top of them if the item does not have a Merge-action with the cutting-
or delivery station.
argminec∈EC(d(loc(ec), loc(p1)) + d(loc(ec), loc(p2)))
(11)
Where EC is the set of empty counters, loc(x) returns the location of x, and d(x, y) is the
distance between x and y. We define the found closest empty counter as c.
Then we guide the agents that are holding a part of g towards c:
X
a∈Ag
d(loc(c), loc(a))
(12)
Where Ag is the set of agents holding a part of g. Then to discourage holding items that are not
needed:
X
a∈Ah\Ag
d(loc(a), loc(ec(a)))
(13)
Page 34 of 60
==PAGE:35==
Where Ah is the set of agents holding an item and ec(a) returns the closest empty counter in
relation to a. Combining it all we get that the heuristic value, h(n), of a state n is:
h(n) =
argminec∈EC(d(loc(ec), loc(p1)) + d(loc(ec), loc(p2)))+
X
a∈Ag
d(loc(c), loc(a))+
X
a∈Ah\Ag
d(loc(a), loc(ec(a)))
(14)
See Figure 14 for an example calculation of the heuristic. In this example we calculate the heuris-
tic of the goal to cut the tomato. In this case the closest empty counter between both the cutting
station and the tomato will be the cutting station itself with a distance of argminec∈EC(d(loc(ec), loc(p1))+
d(loc(ec), loc(p2))) = 3, here exemplified by the green path. Agent a1 is holding cut lettuce which
is not a part of the goal, the closest empty counter is the one right above it with a distance of
1 yielding that P
a∈Ah\Ag d(loc(a), loc(ec(a))) = 1, exemplified by the red path. Lastly, there
are no agents holding items that are part of the goal therefore P
a∈Ag d(loc(c), loc(a)) = 0. This
gives us a heuristic value for the state as h(n) = 3 + 0 + 1 = 4.
Figure 14: Heuristic example where the goal is to cut the tomato.
6.4
Goal Recognition Inertia
As discussed in Section 5.4 Goal Shuffling, there were problems with agents selecting goals in an
alternating fashion. In the following, we describe a way to limit goal shuffling in such a way that
Page 35 of 60
==PAGE:36==
goal shuffling is unlikely to continue indefinitely.
We introduce the notion of an observed goal history, σ, acting as a short-term history of the
output of an observer’s observation function. Recall that the definition of the observation function
oax,t(ay) is the observed goal of the agent ay as observed from agent ax at time step t. In the
following, it holds that x ̸= y. Since σ is meant to be a short-term history, it has a finite size
| σ |, which is experimentally chosen for the purposes of this thesis. Automatically setting | σ |
will be discussed further in Section 8.2 Automatically Adjusting the Size of Inertia Queues. We
define σax,t(ay) as such:
σax,t(ay) = oax,t(ay), oax,t−1(ay), . . . , oax,t−|σ|(ay) where t−| σ |> 1
(15)
Or informally, σax,t(ay) contains the | σ | latest recognized goals of ay as observed by ax. The
history may contain fewer elements if t ≤| σ | or due to a recent belief revision, which we will
outline at the bottom of this section.
We now introduce a selection function so(σax,t(ay)) for evaluating the most likely subgoal given
the observed goal history. We have chosen so to take the mode of σax,t(ay) where ties are broken
uniformly at random. Let us observe what happens when ties are broken by the most recent
oax,t(ay), building upon the example we used in Section 5.4 Goal Shuffling:
Page 36 of 60
==PAGE:37==
t = 0
oa1,0(a2) = Nil,
oa2,0(a1) = Nil
σa1,0(a2) = []
σa2,0(a1) = []
so(σa1,0(a2)) = Nil
so(σa2,0(a1)) = Nil
g0(a1) = cuttomato
g0(a2) = cutlettuce
t = 1
oa1,1(a2) = cutlettuce,
oa2,1(a1) = cuttomato
σa1,1(a2) = cutlettuce
σa2,1(a1) = cuttomato
so(σa1,1(a2)) = cutlettuce
so(σa2,1(a1)) = cuttomato
g1(a1) = cutlettuce
g1(a2) = cuttomato
t = 2
oa1,2(a2) = cuttomato,
oa2,2(a1) = cutlettuce
σa1,2(a2) = cutlettuce, cuttomato
σa2,2(a1) = cuttomato, cutlettuce
so(σa1,2(a2)) = cuttomato
so(σa2,2(a1)) = cutlettuce
g2(a1) = cuttomato
g2(a2) = cutlettuce
t = 3
oa1,3(a2) = cutlettuce,
oa2,3(a1) = cuttomato
σa1,3(a2) = cutlettuce, cuttomato, cutlettuce
σa2,3(a1) = cuttomato, cutlettuce, cuttomato
so(σa1,3(a2)) = cutlettuce
so(σa2,3(a1)) = cuttomato
g3(a1) = cutlettuce
g3(a2) = cuttomato
. . .
(16)
Page 37 of 60
==PAGE:38==
It should be evident that this approach (tie-breaking by newest) at t = 2 would result in shuffling
at every even value of t if | σ | is even. If | σ | is odd the tiebreak wouldn’t need to happen
after t >| σ |, but once all σ’s reached maximum capacity, the newest observed goal would be
the most prevalent. Ergo, tie-breaking by newest observed goal is not desirable and | σ | being
odd is also not desirable.
Now imagine that | σ | is even and so breaks ties uniformly at random. We hypothesize that
so is very unlikely to continue shuffling when using random tiebreaks. It should be evident that
so(σax,t(ay)) = s([cutlettuce, cuttomato]) and so(σay,t(ax)) = s([cuttomato, cutlettuce]) would
be equally likely to produce either cut tomato or cut lettuce at 50% chance each, and the chance
of so(σax(ay)) = so(σay(ax)) is also 50% since there are four possibilities:
1:
cut lettuce, cut tomato
2:
cut tomato, cut tomato
3:
cut tomato, cut lettuce
4:
cut lettuce, cut lettuce
(17)
In both cases 2 and 4, so(σax,t(ay)) = so(σay,t(ax)). This means that at each tiebreak in a
potential shuffling scenario, there is a 50% chance that the shuffling ends. Continuing from the
example above, this means that at t = 2, there is a 50% chance that so(σa1,2(a2)) = so(σa2,2(a1)).
Consequently, the cumulative probability of ending a shuffling scenario is 1 −
  1
2
x where x is
the amount of tiebreaks performed.
Finally, we make sure that agents revise their beliefs about other agents’ goals when a goal
is reached. Whenever some goal gs is fulfilled in the state and it is no longer available to be
fulfilled, each agent revises their observed goal histories by removing gs. This mechanism prevents
”confusion” when agents select their belief about other agents’ goals when the available goals
change. As mentioned previously, this may cause the observed goal histories of some or all agents
to be empty at the time step at which some goal is reached.
6.4.1
Goal Selection Inertia
Using the principles from Section 6.4 Goal Recognition Inertia, we also decided to limit the
amount of goal shuffling that could happen when an agent chooses which goal to pursue. We
introduce the selected goal history which saves an agent’s recently selected goal to pursue. Recall
that σ(oax,t(ay)) denotes the observed goal history of agent y from agent x’s perspective until
time t going back at most | σ | time steps. If we set x = y, then it should be the observed goal
history of the same agent, but one doesn’t need to use plan recognition for that information,
Page 38 of 60
==PAGE:39==
the agent can simply just know its own history.
Thus, when x = y, σ(oax,t(ay)) yields an
exact history of an agent’s past selected goals. Therefore, applying so(σax,t(ay)) will yield a
more consistent goal selection since the process is now less prone to fluctuations in optimality as
described for observed goal history. It is also required to perform belief revision on the selected
goal history. This process occurs in the same way as for the observed goal history described
above.
For the purposes of this paper the size of the selected goal history is the same as the size of the
observed goal history. To easily denote the size of the inertia queue used for a specific instance
of Active Goal Mirroring, we introduce notation for AGM-σ such that AGM-6 is AGM-σ where
| σ |= 6, and AGM-1 results in circumventing the entire inertia concept because the history will
only contain the newest observed goal. AGM-σ refers to Active Goal Mirroring with any | σ |.
For the sake of simplicity, we will refer to the concepts of both observed goal history and selected
goal history simply as inertia queues.
6.5
Detecting When An Agent Is Not Needed
In Section 4.1.1 When is An Agent Needed? and Section 5.3 When is An Agent Needed (Re-
visited)?, we described a problem with how Bayesian Delegation and AGM handles subgoals
in which one or more agents is only needed for a portion of its execution. We saw an AGM
agent neglect to work on another task, while the other agent finished the first task. In this
section, we will be describing our approach to picking ”future” tasks. That is, subgoals which
are not currently being worked on, but will be needed to finish the final goal of the given problem
instance.
An example is given in Figure 15, where there is an AGM-σ agent a1 on the left-side and another
AGM-σ agent a2 on the right-side. The goal is that same as in Section 4.1.1 When is An Agent
Needed?: A salad consisting of cut lettuce and cut tomato. a2 starts by picking up the tomato
at t = 1 and placing it somewhere a1 can pick it up by t = 4. Immediately afterwards at t = 5,
a2 recognizes that it is no longer needed to cut the tomato, and begins to fetch the lettuce at
t = 5 and t = 6.
There are a couple of assumptions required in order to achieve this behavior:
Assumption: An observer can accurately predict an agent’s goal.
Remember that
each agent is also an observer of all other agents. To accurately asses whether the other agents
can achieve a certain goal, the observer needs to be able to rely on the fact that its recognized
goals for those agents are accurate.
Page 39 of 60
==PAGE:40==
Figure 15: An example where an agent recognizes that it is no longer needed (right-side, AGM-σ
agent), and consequently begins a new task.
Assumption: The high-level planner is consistent when selecting a goal.
Consider a
planner which at each time step randomly selects to pursue any goal reachable from the current
state.
A plan from such a planner would make it impossible for an observer to recognize a
consistent goal or plan. Thus, this assumption is needed to satisfy to the first assumption.
The goal selection method heavily discourages an agent from selecting a goal which is
not being worked on by other agents if the goal is unreachable without the assistance
of other agents.
This step is the logical end to which the prior assumptions are required.
To elaborate further upon the last step, consider the following modification of the example in
Figure 15: Starting at t = 1, deliver a salad consisting of cut lettuce and cut tomato using only
agent a2. Given this goal, it should be immediately obvious that there is no way for a2 to reach
the cutting stations or delivery station, and consequently the problem is impossible. Ergo, a1 is
needed to complete this task at t = 1. The reverse case where only a1 is used is also impossible,
Page 40 of 60
==PAGE:41==
since a1 cannot reach the vegetables without assistance.
Now consider the state t = 4; a2 can achieve part of the prerequisites for the salad goal on its
own. The agent can do so by picking up the tomato and cutting it.
Combining the ideas above, we arrive at the informal definition for detecting when an agent is not
needed: In AGM-σ, an agent is not needed for a goal if by removing it from the environment, the
length of the plan to achieve said goal is the same (or smaller) as with the agent included. This
notion has some similarities to the notion of a useful action from (Herrmann 2021). However we
check if an agent is needed to achieve a goal while MAC considers the usefulness of a single action.
Note that the idea of removing an agent from the environment is not domain independent, as
(Herrmann 2021) also notes. This is because in the Overcooked Domain when removing an agent
we also have to consider whether the agent is holding an item, and subsequently also remove any
held items.
6.6
Deadlock Handling and Contingency Planning
In Section 5.5 Optimality Can Lead to Deadlocks or Live-locks, we describe the problem of
deadlocks. A common way of handling this problem is to introduce randomness to the solution.
We propose to always shuffle the order of actions when generating child-states in A*. This allows
us to randomly sample between multiple best plans if they exist, as two equally good states would
have the same f-value but due to the nature of our FIFO tie-breaking, exploring new child-states
in different orders will produce different plans, if multiple best plans exists.
Again consider Figure 9, using plan recognition the agents have successfully inferred the plans
of each other. This means that both agents want to enter the top right square. The problem
is then deciding which agent goes first. We take inspiration from Conflict Based Search (CBS)
(Sharon et al. 2015), which is an approach to solve centralized offline multi-agent path-finding
problems. In CBS, the agents plan their own plan independently of each other and potential
conflicts between two agents are then resolved by performing two new searches one for each agent
where the agent that is re-planning cannot use the conflicting resource. In our case, however,
we cannot try both combinations, as we are in a both online and decentralized environment.
We can, however, use the idea that only 1 agent can occupy the conflicting resource. To do
this we propose that if an agent finds a conflict between its own plan and an inferred plan of
another agent, then the agent assume that there is a 50% chance that it will be allowed to use
the conflicting resource and 50% chance that the other will be allowed to use it. This gives a
randomized decentralized conflict resolution that eventually should lead out of the deadlocking
state.
Page 41 of 60
==PAGE:42==
6.7
Putting It All Together
In this section we will provide a high-level overview of how the techniques and approaches are
used together in AGM-σ. We will describe the procedure from the point of view of a single agent
in a multi-agent system. See Algorithm 1 for pseudocode overview. The entire code repository
is also available at https://github.com/jaxe1234/ActiveGoalMirroring.
At each time step, t, an AGM-σ agent, ai, will calculate the set of available subgoals in the
current state, G′. Using G′ it will prune σai,t(ay) for all agents y ∈[1, . . . , |A|] where A is the
set of agents in the environment. This is under the assumption that if a subgoal no longer exists
in the state then no agents will follow it.
Then the agent will try to recognize the plans of all other agents using the technique described
in Section 6.2 Goal Recognition of Single Agents and use the found plans to both update σ and
to keep track of which actions it predicts that the other agents will perform next. The predicted
actions are from the inferred plans, as we assume that the agents will follow these.
The agent will then create a set CG of currently followed goals by adding so(σai,t(ay)) to CG for
all agents ay ∈[a1, . . . , a|A|. From the set CG the agent will calculate the set of goals in which
the agent is needed to complete said goals, NG, using the definition from Section 6.5 Detecting
When An Agent Is Not Needed.
If NG ̸= ∅then the agent will choose to follow the goal, and consequent plan, with the lowest
cost from NG:
argming∈NG c(g)
(18)
Where c(g) is the cost of pursuing g. We have chosen this cost-function to be the length of the
plan associated with the goal g. The intuition being that we can finish this goal the fastest and
thus the agents can be available to solve other subgoals.
In the event that NG = ∅then the agent will find the goals that it believes no one is currently
working on, G′\CG. If there is any of these goals then it will choose the goal with the lowest
cost, using the same cost-function as above.
Lastly if NG = ∅∧G′\CG = ∅then the agent will conclude that it has nothing to do. In this
case the agent will perform a random action. While this might confuse the plan recognition of
other agents, we have seen that it helps solve low-level conflicts. Just as in Section 6.6 Deadlock
Handling and Contingency Planning, introducing randomness can help solve low-level conflicts
as the agent can avoid being in the way of other agents. This ”confusion” is mitigated by the
aforementioned inertia queues in Section 6.4 Goal Recognition Inertia.
Page 42 of 60
==PAGE:43==
Every time we evaluate a goal and its associated plan we check that the resulting state of the
plan can still lead to the final goal. We do this by using Φ as described in Section 6.1 Subgoal
Decomposition. If a plan does lead to a state that is unsolvable we will discard the goal and its
associated plan.
Lastly, when the agent has chosen a subgoal to follow (or chosen to follow no subgoal), the agent
checks if its own next action conflicts with any of the predicted actions of the other agents. If
there is conflict the agent will employ the conflict resolution described in Section 6.6 Deadlock
Handling and Contingency Planning.
Page 43 of 60
==PAGE:44==
Algorithm 1: Overview of how an AGM-σ agent calculates a new action
input : ai - the planning agent
A - Set of all agents
st - The current state at time step t
O - Observation Sequence for all agents
G - The final goal of the problem instance
output: The next action for agent ai
G′ ←GetAvailableGoals(st);
CG ←∅;
NG ←∅;
pruneSigma(ai, G′);
foreach ay ∈A\ai do
pruneSigma(ay, G′);
(plan, goal) ←recognizePlan(ay, G′);
agentActions[ay] ←plan[0];
updateSigma(ay, goal);
CG ∪{so(σai,t(ay))};
end
CG ∪{so(σai,t(ai))};
foreach g ∈CG do
(plan, goal) ←isAgentNeeded(g, ai);
if plan ̸= Nil ∧isSolvable(plan, G) then
NG ∪{(plan, goal)};
end
end
action ←Nil;
followedGoal ←Nil;
if NG ̸= ∅then
(followedGoal, action) ←min(NG.plan.length);
end
if NG = ∅then
G′′ ←G′\CG;
if G′′ ̸= ∅then
(followedGoal, action) ←min(G′′.plan.length));
end
end
if followedGoal = Nil then
followedGoal ←None;
action ←GetRandomAction(ai, st);
end
updateSigma(ai, goal);
agentActions[ai] ←action;
agentActions ←resolveConflicts(agentActions);
return agentActions[ai];
Page 44 of 60
==PAGE:45==
7
Analysis
In the following we will be describing our testing methodology, the results we have gathered,
and analyze how these results compare to the related works we previously presented in Section
4 Related Works
7.1
Methodology
We have run all combinations of goals (simple tomato, tomato and lettuce, salad, and onion
salad) and divider layouts (full, partial, and open). This contrasts with (Wu et al. 2020) who left
out onion salad in their tests We tested BD, MAC, and two configurations of AGM-σ; AGM-1
and AGM-6 which has | σ | set to 1 and 6 respectively.
All benchmarks were run on a Windows 10 machine with a AMD Ryzen 7 PRO 4750U running
at 4.1 GHz and 16 GB 3200 MHz RAM. We then ran two suites:
• Ad hoc play: All combinations of two different agents types (MAC, BD, and AGM-6)
collaborate on all combinations of goals and layouts with 5 different seeds each (0 through
4). Given that there are 3 different agents, 4 different goals, 3 types of dividers and 5 seeds
each, that yields a total of (32 −3) · 4 · 3 · 5 = 360 ad hoc play scenarios.
• Self-play: Includes all combinations of goals and layouts with the same 5 seeds each. We
wanted to try AGM-1 as a self-play agent, so there are 4 agent types in this suite, and we
test self-play with both 2 and 3 agents. This yields 2 · 4 · 4 · 3 · 5 = 480 self-play scenarios.
During the experiments, we found that some agents were unable to solve certain goals in a
reasonable amount of time.
Specifically, BD was unable to handle most of the onion salad
scenarios after 4 hours and 30 minutes each while most other scenarios finished in less than one
hour. As a result, any benchmark that took longer than 3 hours has been treated as unsolved.
Furthermore, we noticed some strange behavior with the implementation of MAC that we had
acquired: The results did not seem to match the results presented in (Herrmann 2021). We
have no explanation for this discrepancy and due to time constraints we did not have the time
to investigate further. Moreover, the implementation of MAC did not have onion salad as a
valid goal (which BD did), and the implementation did not allow for an easy way to expand the
available goals. As a result, all benchmarks running one or more MAC agents failed all the onion
salad scenarios. This heavily affected the overall solve rate of MAC, which is something that
should be kept in mind when analyzing the results presented below.
In this paper we use a simple measure of time efficiency, or simply ”efficiency”, meant to describe
the rate at which time steps are calculated. The efficiency is calculated as Efficiency = Time Steps
Runtime .
Page 45 of 60
==PAGE:46==
The measure is not perfect. For example, a solution spitting out completely random actions each
time step can do so very quickly, resulting in a very large efficiency. So it is important to take
into account whether the scenario is actually solved or not.
Given the above, we only present the average of the time steps, the runtime, and the efficiency,
along with their standard deviations, of the solved scenarios.
7.2
Results
Time Steps
Runtime [s]
Efficiency
Agents
Solved
Average
SD
Average
SD
Average
SD
AGM-6, MAC
0.73
32.07
9.45
2.917
3.219
25.1180
17.5039
MAC, AGM-6
0.63
27.03
7.04
4.032
7.619
26.4963
19.7742
BD, MAC
0.70
30.69
6.69
483.607
341.592
0.1009
0.0770
MAC, BD
0.70
29.67
7.73
545.712
414.288
0.1217
0.1264
AGM-6, BD
0.92
34.27
10.03
765.762
694.631
0.1297
0.1683
BD, AGM-6
0.98
30.53
8.98
588.944
476.927
0.1226
0.1365
Table 2: The 2 agent ad hoc play results averaged across all goals, divider layouts, and seeds.
Time Steps
Runtime [s]
Efficiency
Agents
Solved
Average
SD
Average
SD
Average
SD
MAC, MAC
0.67
28.80
8.00
6.218
17.334
34.2026
25.3020
BD, BD
0.82
33.55
10.02
1513.838
1498.272
0.0509
0.0588
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
33.50
10.53
78.018
235.983
14.4209
10.5279
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
31.85
8.96
30.709
95.712
16.9121
13.1107
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.37
24.00
4.57
2179.426
3104.180
2.7577
4.6629
BD, BD, BD
0.27
23.44
5.54
4975.844
2258.906
0.0052
0.0012
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
29.82
7.58
823.272
1599.339
0.2821
0.3141
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
30.35
8.48
419.375
655.832
0.3995
0.5166
Table 3: The 2 & 3 agent self-play results averaged across all goals, divider layouts, and seeds.
7.2.1
Solve Rate of MAC and BD
We were surprised to see that MAC has a solve rate of less than 40% on 3 agent self-play. In the
original master thesis, the 3 agent solve rate is reported as 100% (Herrmann 2021). With the
knowledge that it was able to solve tomato, tomato & lettuce, and salad across full, partial, and
open divider layouts, we know that there are 9 different configurations tested on MAC previously.
Page 46 of 60
==PAGE:47==
We had an additional goal of onion salad, which should be 12 configurations. So our expected
solve rate for MAC is 75%, which is much different than the 40% which was found experimentally
in this thesis. Since we obtained the original source code used in (Herrmann 2021) and used it
for our own tests, one could imagine that our arbitrary time limit might have hindered MAC,
but the reported time in the paper is also much less than what we measured on average, and
even lower than the 3 hour time limit.
Upon inspection of the obtained source code we found that there was a separate implementation of
the Overcooked environment for testing MAC self-play in the code base. If such implementation
erroneously reported a level as completed when in fact it isn’t or did not perfectly mirror the
action schema of the original Overcooked environment, then that might explain the difference,
since we used the Overcooked environment supplied in (Wu et al. 2020).
Furthermore, we also see a sharp contrast in solve rate with 3-agent self play of BD as compared
to (Wu et al. 2020). They report a 2-agent self-play solve rate of 98%, whereas we attain just
82%. This means that BD does not solve most of the onion salad scenarios. BD unfortunately
doesn’t scale up quite well enough to retain it’s reported 96% solve rate for 3 agents from the
original paper, as our experiments attain just 27%, even lower than 3 MAC agents. We attribute
these dissimilarities partially to the inclusion of onion salad goals, but also to the 3-hour limit
that we imposed on each scenario.
7.2.2
Runtime and Efficiency of Ad Hoc Play and Self-Play
There seems to be a trend that generally, if a scenario contains a BD agent, it is more likely to run
for long periods of time. This is especially evident in self-play for 3 agents where BD exceeded
the time limit most of the time whereas both AGM-1 and AGM-6 completed all scenarios and
used a fraction of the time.
Furthermore, all ad hoc scenarios containing BD took between one and two orders of magnitude
more time compared to pairings only using MAC and AGM-6.
The result of this much higher runtime means that in comparable scenarios, scenarios containing
a BD agent has much lower efficiency as compared to AGM-6; a difference of orders of magni-
tude. Recall that this is the average runtime of the completed scenarios, meaning that we are
disregarding the many scenarios where BD did not finish in the 3 hour time limit. If one were
to include those in the average time, the efficiency would drop further.
For the following comparisons of runtimes between MAC and AGM-1 & AGM-6, we refer to
Appendix A where we have more granular scenario data. We have placed the relevant data in
Table 4. In this table we look at scenarios where MAC and AGM-6 both have a solve rate of
1.00. In the case of salad on 2-agent play and full divider, MAC is about twice as fast as AGM-6
Page 47 of 60
==PAGE:48==
Full Divider
Partial Divider
Open Divider
Agents
Salad
Tomato & Lettuce
Salad
Tomato & Lettuce
Salad
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, MAC
0.527
0.985
34.925
0.943
4.374
7.401
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.339
1.805
3.575
3.827
2.539
3.112
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.010
1.573
3.327
3.773
2.490
1.739
Table 4: Subset of tables in Appendix A
at 0.527 seconds vs 1.010 seconds for AGM-6, and AGM-1 took 1.339 seconds. However when
the divider is partial, MAC seems to have some trouble. For the salad goal with partial divider,
2 MAC agents spent 34.925 seconds whereas 2 AGM-6 agents spent just 3.327 seconds. The
standard deviation for MAC is also larger than the average, suggesting that one or more seeds
caused MAC to take much longer. This is compared to AGM-6 where the standard deviation
was less than 10% of the average runtime. Finally on open divider, 2 MAC agents solving the
salad goal took just 4.374 seconds and AGM-6 took 2.490 seconds.
For the tomato & lettuce goal, AGM-6 and AGM-1 performs worse than MAC with both full
and partial divider, but MAC is still worse on open divider. For the tomato goal, the differences
are somewhat significant as a percentage, but the raw values are within a second of each other
due to how simple they are to solve.
7.2.3
Average Time Steps
Full Divider
Partial Divider
Open Divider
Agents
Salad
Tomato & Lettuce
Salad
Tomato & Lettuce
Salad
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, BD
32.80
41.40
N/A
43.40
34.50
36.20
MAC, MAC
24.80
45.50
27.80
N/A
31.80
32.60
AGM-1, AGM-1
28.00
39.40
26.60
39.00
32.40
42.80
AGM-6, AGM-6
23.00
38.80
26.40
38.20
30.20
34.20
Table 5: Subset of tables in Appendix A, with N/A meaning that the solve rate is below 80%
There is a problem with directly comparing the average number of time steps in Table 3: When
the solve rate is low, the average number of time steps will tend to also be low. That is because
some of the unsolved scenarios are also more complex and naturally need more time steps to
complete. As a result we don’t feel confident doing direct comparisons of the average number of
time steps when the solve rates are so different. We again refer to Appendix A where we have
more granular data. We have placed a summary of the relevant entries in Table 5.
We have only chosen to display those results where the solve rate is 80% or larger for BD, MAC,
Page 48 of 60
==PAGE:49==
AGM-1 and AGM-6. For most divider layouts and goals MAC outperforms AGM-1, but AGM-6
outperforms both except when solving tomato & lettuce on open divider. This combination of
goal and divider is a clear cut case of divide and conquer, at which MAC excels and AGM-6
is decent, however at times an AGM-6 agent might think it can help by fetching a plate and
briefly stop what it was doing. This leads to suboptimal collaborations, when the two agents
could simply choose to pursue one final goal without regard for the other’s progress. AGM-6
outperforms BD in every scenario in Table 5.
7.2.4
Impact of Agent Is Needed
Full Divider
Partial Divider
Open Divider
Agents
Salad
Onion Salad
Salad
Onion Salad
Salad
Onion Salad
AGM-6, BD
38.60
47.33
27.60
42.40
29.60
46.33
BD, AGM-6
22.00
33.60
26.40
37.25
29.40
37.00
Table 6: Subset of tables in Appendix A
From the ad hoc results we see an interesting phenomenon. The pairings between BD and AGM-6
vs. AGM-6 and BD are quite dissimilar in average time steps. The case where AGM-6 is present
on the right side of the map, the solve rate increases substantially and the average time steps is
significantly lower. We hypothesize that this is due to AGM-6 being able to efficiently recognize
that it is no longer needed for cutting the vegetables as soon as it has placed them on the divider.
The results in Section A Additional Analysis Tables seem to confirm this if you consider the ad
hoc scenarios where AGM is on the right side and BD is on the left side, especially the onion
salad scenarios. We have placed a subset of the appendix tables in Table 6 for your reading
convenience.
7.2.5
Impact of Inertia Queues
From the self-play results it should be apparent that the observed goal history and goal selection
history did in fact have a noticeable impact on the performance of our AGM-σ solver. Recall
that AGM-1 is circumventing the inertia system, since the queues only contain the single latest
goal observation and selected goal. Comparing the self-play with 2 agents, AGM-6 is almost
always superior to AGM-1.
This distinction is less clear with 3 agent self-play, where AGM-1 does provide shorter solutions
but takes on average twice as long to get there. The negligible difference in solution length
might be valuable in some cases, but if you are running in a real time scenario, the required
computation time might not be desirable. Our best speculation as to why the computations
Page 49 of 60
==PAGE:50==
takes so much longer, is that the suffix creation for online goal mirroring become increasingly
complex or erratic as | σ | approaches 1, but further in-depth testing is required to definitively
prove this.
7.2.6
Recognizing Inactivity or Non-usefulness
MAC implements a system which is able to somewhat accurately predict whether an agent is
inactive or at least not pursuing any goals. In the work presented in this thesis, we have chosen
to assume that the other agents are acting somewhat rationally. As such we provide no such
prediction mechanism for AGM-σ.
As a result, brief experimentation shows that AGM-σ will perform very poorly if the other
agent(s) are not moving, which means that MAC has a significant better chance of providing a
good solution in the scenarios where the other agents are not acting in a collaborative fashion.
7.2.7
Comparing Self-Play for 2 and 3 Agents
On average across all self-play benchmarks, 3 AGM-6 agents require less time steps to complete
a certain task as compared to 2 AGM-6 agents (these results are directly comparable as all
instances were solved). This result goes some way to prove that AGM-σ agents can be quite
flexible in their online planning. Our hypothesis is that these results are due to the detection of
when an agent is needed, as an agent can recognize early that it can begin working on other task.
Unfortunately we don’t have any tests without this ”is the agent needed”-detection. Without
concrete statistical proof, we cannot be confident in attributing the decrease in time steps to any
particular feature or set of features of AGM-σ; Further testing is required.
7.2.8
Weighing MAC and AGM-6
In the appendix of their thesis, (Herrmann 2021, p. 60) lists 9 planner parameters which affect
the effectiveness and precision of the MAC solver. AGM-σ simply defines one planner parameter:
the inertia queue size, | σ |.
We have shown that AGM-σ is capable of solving more scenarios than MAC, and we have shown
that on the scenarios which both solve, MAC generally takes more time steps than AGM-6. We
have also shown that for the complex goals that MAC does solve, AGM-6 does so quicker on
average. There are still some scenarios in which MAC provide better solutions or does so quicker
compared to AGM-6, but they are typically the simpler goals like tomato, or tomato & lettuce.
However, MAC does outperform AGM-σ in cases where the other agent(s) are not collaborating
at all, which is something AGM-σ does not account for.
Page 50 of 60
==PAGE:51==
8
Further Work
In this section we discuss various ways we suggest improving upon the work presented in this
thesis. We have tried to provide a solid foundation for applied plan recognition. However, we
did not have time to implement safeguards against non-cooperative behavior.
We may have
made assumptions which might not hold for all related domains in which plan recognition is
desirable. We hope therefore to suggest some ideas for further work which would improve the
quality of solutions provided by AGM-σ, and hopefully help apply our ideas to more domains
besides Overcooked.
8.1
Further Testing
We were unable to test ad hoc play of AGM-σ with 3 agents due to time constraints. While
the ad hoc play with 2 agents suggested that AGM-σ is performing well, more data is needed to
sufficiently prove that it can compete with MAC in this area. We would encourage anyone who
tests ad hoc play with 3 agents to avoid running with Bayesian Delegation due to the time spent
as seen in Table 2 and Table 3.
Furthermore, due to the large volume of scenarios, we had to limit the amount of seeds per
combination of goal, layout, and models. We chose to use 5 seeds, but since all agent types
tested depends on random number generation, our sample size might not be large enough to be
statistically significant.
8.2
Automatically Adjusting the Size of Inertia Queues
As mentioned in Section 6.4 Goal Recognition Inertia, | σ |, has been set experimentally in this
thesis. However, it should be possible to set it according to need. There might be situations
where a longer history might help reduce goal recognition noise. More work is needed to optimize
| σ | at runtime instead of relying on experimental results and a hard-coded value.
There remains the question of whether the observed goal history and the selected goal history
need to be the same length, or whether they can be set independently according to need. We
have not explored such a difference for the sake of simplicity.
8.3
Handling Non-Cooperative and Adversarial Behavior
As previously discussed, MAC provides a mechanism for recognizing agents which are non-
cooperative. This mechanism is based on perceived progress in the goal history described in
Section 4.2.1 Handling Non-Cooperative Agents. AGM-σ contains no such mechanisms, however,
Page 51 of 60
==PAGE:52==
we theorize that one might be able to enhance the observed goal history to also contain a measure
of perceived progress towards the goals in the data structure. If the progress remains unchanged
or becomes worse for a sufficiently long period of time, theoretically AGM-σ might be able to
assume that an agent is acting non-cooperatively.
It would also be interesting to explore agent configurations where one or more agents might be
adversarial and actively try to hinder the other agents in completing the final goal. An adversarial
agent might actively try to pursue destructive actions while the other agents have to physically
block this agent while still achieving the final goal.
8.4
Agent is Not Needed is Domain-Dependent
As briefly mentioned in Section 6.5 Detecting When An Agent Is Not Needed, our system for
detecting whether an agent is needed for a certain task is domain-dependent. The formulation
defined in this thesis uses the method of removing an agent from the state, but doing so also has
to account for whether the agent is holding an item. The notion of holding an item is inherently
domain-dependent and cannot be generalized without significant work.
Page 52 of 60
==PAGE:53==
9
Conclusion
We have developed Active Goal Mirroring σ as a new collaborative planner using existing online
plan recognition techniques, as well as introducing some safeguards against erratic behavior
while maintaining near-optimality on several problem instances. Given the various experimental
results we have discussed in this thesis, we can conclude that we have provided a solver which can
compete with the current state-of-the-art and in some cases surpasses it. We solved a problem
posed by Bayesian Delegation, namely that AGM-σ agents can identify when they are needed
for a certain goal and decide to pursue another helpful subgoal if they are not needed.
The initial results presented in this thesis are very promising, but additional in-depth testing
is required to confirm them. We hope that this encourages further research into similar plan
recognition-based collaborative planners.
AGM-σ has room for improvement in certain edge
cases, for example when one or more of the other agents are not being cooperative.
Page 53 of 60
==PAGE:54==
References
[Baker and Tenenbaum 2014] Baker, C. L., and Tenenbaum, J. B. 2014. Modeling human plan
recognition using bayesian theory of mind. Plan, activity, and intent recognition: Theory and
practice 7:177–204.
[Frith and Frith 2005] Frith, C., and Frith, U.
2005.
Theory of mind.
Current biology
15(17):R644–R645.
[Herrmann 2021] Herrmann, N. 2021. Multi-agent collaboration based on implicit coordination.
Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark.
[Ltd. 2016] Ltd., G. T. G. 2016. The official home page for overcooked by ghost town games.
http://www.ghosttowngames.com/overcooked/.
[M´enager et al. 2017] M´enager, D.; Choi, D.; Floyd, M. W.; Task, C.; and Aha, D. W. 2017.
Dynamic goal recognition using windowed action sequences. In AAAI Workshops.
[Mirsky, Keren, and Geib 2021] Mirsky, R.; Keren, S.; and Geib, C. 2021. Introduction to sym-
bolic plan and goal recognition. Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learn-
ing 16(1):1–190.
[Moore 2020] Moore, S. K. 2020. The node is nonsense. IEEE Spectrum 57(8):24–30.
[Ram´ırez and Geffner 2009] Ram´ırez, M., and Geffner, H. 2009. Plan recognition as planning. In
Twenty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[Sharon et al. 2015] Sharon, G.; Stern, R.; Felner, A.; and Sturtevant, N. R. 2015. Conflict-based
search for optimal multi-agent pathfinding. Artificial Intelligence 219:40–66.
[Shum et al. 2019] Shum, M.; Kleiman-Weiner, M.; Littman, M. L.; and Tenenbaum, J. B. 2019.
Theory of minds: Understanding behavior in groups through inverse planning. In Proceedings of
the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, 6163–6170.
[Shvo and McIlraith 2020] Shvo, M., and McIlraith, S. A.
2020.
Active goal recognition.
In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34(06), 9957–9966.
[Vered, Kaminka, and Biham 2016] Vered, M.; Kaminka, G. A.; and Biham, S. 2016. Online
goal recognition through mirroring: Humans and agents. In The Fourth Annual Conference on
Advances in Cognitive Systems.
[Wu et al. 2020] Wu, S. A.; Wang, R. E.; Evans, J. A.; Tenenbaum, J.; Parkes, D. C.; and
Kleiman-Weiner, M. 2020. Too many cooks: Coordinating multi-agent collaboration through
inverse planning. In CogSci.
Page 54 of 60
==PAGE:55==
Appendices
A
Additional Analysis Tables
This is a selection of tables offering more granular results than those in the main text.
A.1
Ad Hoc Play Aggregates grouped by Goals and Agent Combina-
tions
Full Divider
Time Steps
Runtime
Efficiency
Goal(s)
Models
Solved
Average
SD
Average
SD
Average
SD
Onion Salad
AGM-6, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
MAC, AGM-6
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
MAC, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
AGM-6, BD
0.60
47.33
6.18
1550.613
518.195
0.0324
0.0058
Onion Salad
BD, AGM-6
1.00
33.60
2.50
587.753
54.502
0.0573
0.0022
Salad
AGM-6, MAC
0.80
27.50
2.50
0.939
0.089
29.4630
3.1352
Salad
MAC, AGM-6
1.00
23.20
1.94
0.607
0.032
38.1886
2.2547
Salad
BD, MAC
1.00
24.80
0.75
240.839
5.323
0.1030
0.0027
Salad
MAC, BD
0.80
29.75
1.09
325.194
23.680
0.0918
0.0056
Salad
AGM-6, BD
1.00
38.60
8.14
265.859
32.070
0.1458
0.0283
Salad
BD, AGM-6
1.00
22.00
1.26
165.751
4.296
0.1329
0.0096
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, MAC
1.00
48.00
10.35
1.556
0.336
31.0231
2.8970
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, AGM-6
0.40
41.50
0.50
0.834
0.017
49.7923
0.4287
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, MAC
1.00
35.00
1.10
365.485
43.902
0.0973
0.0131
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, BD
0.80
44.25
1.48
450.409
131.698
0.1088
0.0380
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, BD
0.80
45.25
3.90
390.929
142.565
0.1271
0.0335
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, AGM-6
1.00
41.80
15.51
244.301
11.094
0.1722
0.0665
Tomato
AGM-6, MAC
1.00
24.40
0.80
0.425
0.038
57.6832
3.1695
Tomato
MAC, AGM-6
0.60
21.00
0.82
0.364
0.013
57.6717
2.0548
Tomato
BD, MAC
1.00
25.80
1.60
98.899
22.409
0.2726
0.0521
Tomato
MAC, BD
1.00
21.20
0.75
49.351
6.474
0.4365
0.0535
Tomato
AGM-6, BD
1.00
20.80
1.33
33.699
4.842
0.6256
0.0620
Tomato
BD, AGM-6
1.00
21.80
0.75
68.001
56.265
0.4640
0.1790
Page 55 of 60
==PAGE:56==
Partial Divider
Time Steps
Runtime
Efficiency
Goal(s)
Models
Solved
Average
SD
Average
SD
Average
SD
Onion Salad
AGM-6, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
MAC, AGM-6
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
MAC, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
AGM-6, BD
1.00
42.40
1.85
1740.271
382.857
0.0253
0.0043
Onion Salad
BD, AGM-6
0.80
37.25
1.09
1271.276
64.759
0.0293
0.0007
Salad
AGM-6, MAC
1.00
32.00
7.10
6.614
5.171
9.5378
8.0878
Salad
MAC, AGM-6
1.00
22.00
0.63
8.591
1.906
2.7646
0.9211
Salad
BD, MAC
1.00
33.40
3.38
681.183
118.290
0.0498
0.0063
Salad
MAC, BD
1.00
31.40
2.50
791.651
66.773
0.0398
0.0034
Salad
AGM-6, BD
1.00
27.60
3.72
522.424
64.252
0.0537
0.0102
Salad
BD, AGM-6
1.00
26.40
7.81
644.630
437.658
0.0478
0.0102
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, MAC
1.00
39.40
2.50
4.326
2.109
12.4361
7.5917
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, AGM-6
0.60
41.67
8.06
23.199
15.525
6.0135
6.5290
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, MAC
0.80
39.00
3.94
823.319
182.754
0.0496
0.0115
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, BD
0.80
40.50
2.87
937.489
239.201
0.0450
0.0074
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, BD
1.00
39.00
3.41
724.710
179.870
0.0578
0.0169
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, AGM-6
1.00
37.40
3.77
695.954
103.301
0.0547
0.0081
Tomato
AGM-6, MAC
1.00
23.00
0.00
0.788
0.027
29.2255
0.9923
Tomato
MAC, AGM-6
1.00
20.80
1.60
0.792
0.146
26.8020
3.1261
Tomato
BD, MAC
1.00
23.40
0.49
255.454
52.977
0.0967
0.0244
Tomato
MAC, BD
1.00
20.40
1.02
182.850
51.311
0.1184
0.0247
Tomato
AGM-6, BD
1.00
21.20
1.17
149.733
52.160
0.1552
0.0397
Tomato
BD, AGM-6
1.00
21.00
2.10
113.432
54.304
0.2102
0.0545
Page 56 of 60
==PAGE:57==
Open Divider
Time Steps
Runtime
Efficiency
Goal(s)
Models
Solved
Average
SD
Average
SD
Average
SD
Onion Salad
AGM-6, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
MAC, AGM-6
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
MAC, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
AGM-6, BD
0.60
46.33
6.34
2358.547
170.546
0.0199
0.0043
Onion Salad
BD, AGM-6
1.00
37.00
2.76
1431.747
117.576
0.0259
0.0019
Salad
AGM-6, MAC
1.00
34.40
3.93
4.259
1.163
8.5873
2.0830
Salad
MAC, AGM-6
1.00
28.80
1.17
2.199
0.175
13.1819
1.1814
Salad
BD, MAC
0.60
32.33
1.70
1237.090
313.056
0.0286
0.0098
Salad
MAC, BD
1.00
28.40
1.02
1226.452
187.726
0.0236
0.0033
Salad
AGM-6, BD
1.00
29.60
2.80
1172.964
242.551
0.0258
0.0029
Salad
BD, AGM-6
1.00
29.40
2.06
1183.205
154.791
0.0251
0.0021
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, MAC
1.00
35.80
6.18
6.378
2.805
6.4422
2.0154
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, AGM-6
1.00
30.00
1.79
3.478
1.074
9.5732
3.1841
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, MAC
1.00
40.60
3.07
646.504
240.366
0.0679
0.0141
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, BD
1.00
33.00
2.19
823.022
164.301
0.0418
0.0091
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, BD
1.00
38.60
7.12
916.234
448.603
0.0520
0.0207
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, AGM-6
1.00
35.40
5.46
589.478
154.419
0.0640
0.0171
Tomato
AGM-6, MAC
1.00
23.20
0.40
0.573
0.133
42.5332
9.0122
Tomato
MAC, AGM-6
1.00
26.40
0.80
0.502
0.030
52.7333
3.5128
Tomato
BD, MAC
1.00
24.20
1.17
373.023
184.093
0.1038
0.0865
Tomato
MAC, BD
1.00
23.20
0.40
140.184
3.278
0.1656
0.0054
Tomato
AGM-6, BD
1.00
26.80
1.94
239.244
142.032
0.1525
0.0694
Tomato
BD, AGM-6
1.00
24.60
1.36
208.260
129.742
0.1695
0.0837
Page 57 of 60
==PAGE:58==
A.2
Self-Play Aggregates grouped by Goals and Agent Combinations
Full Divider
Time Steps
Runtime
Efficiency
Map
Models
Solved
Average
SD
Average
SD
Average
SD
Onion Salad
MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, BD
1.00
41.20
4.12
1959.397
370.603
0.0216
0.0037
Onion Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
45.40
15.32
290.766
102.971
0.2384
0.2489
Onion Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
37.60
3.20
99.651
90.899
1.2838
1.2710
Onion Salad
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
33.00
3.85
932.501
808.206
0.0626
0.0412
Onion Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
35.60
6.68
1529.873
617.351
0.0276
0.0125
Salad
MAC, MAC
1.00
24.80
0.40
0.527
0.034
47.3101
3.4018
Salad
BD, BD
1.00
32.80
4.45
763.165
232.298
0.0461
0.0113
Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
28.00
1.26
1.339
0.152
21.1994
2.6736
Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
23.00
1.67
1.010
0.101
22.8724
1.4285
Salad
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.20
29.00
0.00
144.340
0.000
0.2009
0.0000
Salad
BD, BD, BD
0.20
26.00
0.00
10416.160
0.000
0.0025
0.0000
Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
27.00
1.55
72.568
16.341
0.3969
0.1164
Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
22.00
2.00
96.925
44.295
0.2606
0.0748
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, MAC
0.80
45.50
11.84
0.985
0.276
47.1502
6.9038
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, BD
1.00
41.40
2.42
888.214
243.550
0.0493
0.0110
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
39.40
1.02
1.805
0.036
21.8329
0.6773
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
38.80
2.40
1.573
0.094
24.6748
0.6598
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
37.40
4.22
231.795
210.376
0.2794
0.1482
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
37.80
2.48
207.970
111.290
0.2357
0.1115
Tomato
MAC, MAC
1.00
23.00
0.00
0.291
0.005
79.0714
1.2986
Tomato
BD, BD
1.00
20.80
1.17
145.195
104.762
0.1966
0.0804
Tomato
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
20.80
1.17
0.745
0.119
28.8635
6.1653
Tomato
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
22.00
2.28
0.682
0.047
32.5545
5.3343
Tomato
MAC, MAC, MAC
1.00
18.00
0.00
1.615
0.154
11.2662
1.2445
Tomato
BD, BD, BD
1.00
19.00
1.90
3261.245
482.683
0.0059
0.0007
Tomato
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
18.60
1.02
23.863
3.762
0.7918
0.0787
Tomato
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
18.40
1.36
23.343
5.000
0.8216
0.1643
Page 58 of 60
==PAGE:59==
Partial Divider
Time Steps
Runtime
Efficiency
Map
Models
Solved
Average
SD
Average
SD
Average
SD
Onion Salad
MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
37.80
3.66
613.601
519.045
0.3014
0.3281
Onion Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
37.40
2.87
240.841
211.764
0.5505
0.5266
Onion Salad
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
30.20
1.47
3168.395
2844.617
0.0186
0.0125
Onion Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
35.20
3.60
1583.808
830.306
0.0273
0.0107
Salad
MAC, MAC
1.00
27.80
1.47
34.925
37.396
4.3616
3.6350
Salad
BD, BD
0.60
32.33
4.64
1826.870
213.488
0.0178
0.0023
Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
26.60
2.87
3.575
0.397
7.4435
0.1280
Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
26.40
1.62
3.327
0.256
7.9743
0.6787
Salad
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Salad
BD, BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
22.00
1.79
165.606
35.404
0.1379
0.0248
Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
22.00
2.83
91.663
16.334
0.2431
0.0278
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, MAC
0.20
40.00
0.00
0.943
0.000
42.4171
0.0000
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, BD
1.00
43.40
3.98
1935.358
642.614
0.0245
0.0070
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
39.00
2.61
3.827
0.219
10.1870
0.2869
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
38.20
3.25
3.773
0.511
10.1936
0.6516
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
37.40
4.59
227.188
47.820
0.1729
0.0445
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
40.20
5.00
128.946
24.857
0.3198
0.0502
Tomato
MAC, MAC
1.00
23.00
0.00
0.436
0.009
52.8147
1.0311
Tomato
BD, BD
1.00
20.20
0.98
323.069
57.709
0.0648
0.0128
Tomato
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
19.00
0.89
1.215
0.039
15.6683
1.1031
Tomato
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
20.80
1.83
1.299
0.401
17.2144
4.0543
Tomato
MAC, MAC, MAC
1.00
23.00
0.00
28.634
0.153
0.8033
0.0043
Tomato
BD, BD, BD
1.00
21.20
2.79
4250.032
718.696
0.0051
0.0007
Tomato
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
19.40
1.20
63.764
12.892
0.3172
0.0670
Tomato
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
21.40
2.33
37.290
2.752
0.5730
0.0295
Page 59 of 60
==PAGE:60==
Open Divider
Time Steps
Runtime
Efficiency
Map
Models
Solved
Average
SD
Average
SD
Average
SD
Onion Salad
MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, BD
0.40
53.00
0.00
7160.356
512.532
0.0074
0.0005
Onion Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
45.40
4.84
12.879
3.703
3.7856
0.9662
Onion Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
48.80
6.79
11.570
5.263
4.9067
1.6180
Onion Salad
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
BD, BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Onion Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
34.00
2.83
1561.077
2087.173
0.0678
0.0527
Onion Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
38.40
3.14
852.359
635.750
0.1007
0.1005
Salad
MAC, MAC
1.00
31.80
2.32
4.374
1.991
9.7030
6.0562
Salad
BD, BD
0.80
34.50
9.55
3345.154
353.302
0.0102
0.0021
Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
32.40
4.41
2.539
0.772
14.3389
5.2250
Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
30.20
3.54
2.490
1.087
14.5317
5.6125
Salad
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.40
28.00
3.00
6620.295
1321.397
0.0043
0.0004
Salad
BD, BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Salad
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
31.80
1.72
1680.318
1675.314
0.0729
0.0763
Salad
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
30.60
4.67
244.345
96.119
0.1466
0.0579
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, MAC
1.00
32.60
1.62
7.401
3.852
5.8317
2.9764
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, BD
1.00
36.20
5.98
1574.794
180.964
0.0231
0.0033
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
42.80
6.85
3.112
2.010
17.6628
7.1737
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
34.20
5.42
1.739
0.579
21.1025
5.0321
Tomato & Lettuce
MAC, MAC, MAC
0.80
30.75
1.79
7014.474
2253.552
0.0052
0.0027
Tomato & Lettuce
BD, BD, BD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
0.0000
0.0000
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
41.00
4.56
1721.768
1895.988
0.1036
0.1043
Tomato & Lettuce
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
37.40
3.61
218.411
98.667
0.2154
0.1008
Tomato
MAC, MAC
1.00
23.00
0.00
0.813
0.030
28.3249
1.0693
Tomato
BD, BD
1.00
24.60
1.85
610.032
344.169
0.0513
0.0206
Tomato
AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
25.40
1.74
0.814
0.104
31.5287
2.9636
Tomato
AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
24.80
0.75
0.553
0.038
45.0857
3.8056
Tomato
MAC, MAC, MAC
1.00
23.00
0.00
1270.661
152.534
0.0184
0.0024
Tomato
BD, BD, BD
1.00
29.60
4.80
6328.192
2089.038
0.0051
0.0013
Tomato
AGM-1, AGM-1, AGM-1
1.00
26.00
1.90
30.419
10.441
0.9639
0.3208
Tomato
AGM-6, AGM-6, AGM-6
1.00
25.20
1.60
17.563
11.730
1.8229
0.5949
Page 60 of 60
