==PAGE:1==
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile
fracture during plate bending:
Analysis and experiments
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending:
Analysis and experiments
Master Thesis
February 20, 2022
This thesis is written by
Lasse S. Niemann and Christoffer A. H. Grenov
Supervisor
Kim Lau Nielsen
Dr. techn., Associate Professor, DTU, Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Lasse S. Niemann and Christoffer A. H. Grenov, 2022
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nils Koppels Allé, Building
404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
The report represents the work conducted, as the final part of a Master of Science degree
in Engineering (Mechanical Engineering) at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
The work has been carried out in the period from the 30th of August 2021, to 20th of
February 2022.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, mechanics,
finite element analysis and fracture mechanics.
Lasse Szymanski Niemann ­ s144974
Signature
Date
Christoffer Andreas Henneberg Grenov ­ s193742
Signature
Date
ii
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
20/02-2022
20/02-2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Recent studies in the field of fracture mechanics have focused on modelling material mi­
crostructures to better predict and understand fractures on a micromechanical level. This
thesis aims to extend the research by modelling a randomized cluster­filled microstructure
and studying its effect on crack initiation and propagation during plate bending and com­
paring it to experimental results. The Gurson­Tvergaard­Needleman (GTN) model is used
as a damage material model. Dual­phase (DP) steels are both simulated numerically and
tested experimentally with in­situ tomography scans for plates in bending. By introducing
clusters of nucleating elements in the bending simulations, the angle at which fracture
occurs varies widely, fracturing both sooner and later than a homogeneous plate with
nucleating element properties, pointing to the strong effect of damage localization. The
fracture path is altered by interaction between crack tip and clusters through shear bands.
Increasing the number of nucleating elements in the fracture process zone (FPZ) tends
to decrease the angle of fracture, but only a general tendency is seen due to the reper­
cussion of randomization. Examination shows that even relocating nucleating elements
within the same clusters drastically can alter the fracture angle and path. Investigation
shows that the location of nucleating elements is critical for fracture initiation, especially
in the plate thickness direction. Moreover the grouping of nucleating elements plays a
significant role in lowering the fracture angle as well. Comparison between experimental
and numerical results shows coherence in selected cases and points to ideal cluster sizes
and ­numbers for simulating fracture in DP plates, yet more in­depth tomography scans
are required to compare the damage structure at the micromechanical level.
Keywords: Finite element · Micromechanics · Ductile failure · Gurson model · plane strain
failure · Plate bending · In­situ tomography
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
iii
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
Nyere forskning indenfor det brudmekaniske felt har fokuseret på modellering af mikrostruk­
turer i materialer, for bedre at kunne forudse og forstå brud på et mikromekanisk niveau.
Denne afhandlings mål er at bidrage til forskning ved at modellere en tilfældigt fordelt
klyngefyldt mikrostruktur og studere dens effekt på brudinitiering og revnevækst under
pladebøjning, samt at sammenholde mod eksperimentelle resultater. Gurson­Tvergaard­
Needleman (GTN) modellen anvendes til modellering af skadesudvikling. Tofaset (DP)
stål både simuleres numerisk og testes eksperimentelt ved in­situ tomografi­skan for
plader i bøjning. Ved at introducere klynger af nuklerende elementer i bøjningssimula­
tioner, varierer vinklen for brudinitiering bredt, så brud kan opstå både før og efter tilfældet
for en homogen plade med samme egenskaber som de nuklearende elementer, hvilket
peger på en stor effekt af skadeslokalisering. Brudstien ændrer retning undervejs grun­
det interaktion mellem revnespids og klynger gennem forskydningsbånd. Forøgelse af
antallet af nuklerende elementer i brudzonen (FPZ) viser tendenser til lavere brudvinkel,
men kun generelle tendenser er set grundet tilfældighedsfordelingen. Selv en omplacer­
ing af nuklearende elementer inden for de samme klynger kan drastisk ændre både brud­
vinklen og ­stien. Undersøgelse viser at lokationen for nuklerende elementer er kritisk
for brudinitiering, specielt i retningen gennem pladens tykkelse. Dertil spiller gruppering
af nuklerende elementer en signifikant rolle i reduktion af brudvinklen. Sammenligning
mellem eksperimentelle og numeriske resultater peger imod ideelle størrelser og antal af
klynger for brudsimulering af tofasede plader, men mere dybdegående tomografi­skan er
nødvendige for at sammenligne skadestrukturen på det mikromekaniske niveau.
Nøgleord: Finite element · Mikromekanik · Duktilt brud · Gurson modellen · Plan tøjnings­
brud · Pladebøjning · In­situ tomografi
iv
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Kim Lau Nielsen, for the competent supervision
throughout the project and the immense effort put into picking a fitting project. The guid­
ance and frequent motivation is not lost on us. It has been a pleasure to collaborate with
Kim on this project.
A huge thanks to research assistant Jamie Engelhardt Simon and Ph.d. student Vishal
Vishwakarma for the help getting started with and troubleshooting in Abaqus, Fortran
subroutines and high performance computing simulations. We would not have made it
this far, had it not been for your expertise.
We would like to thank research engineer Sina Baier­Stegmaier and senior research engi­
neer Carsten Gundlach for their help with the x­ray tomography scans and their available
help throughout the experimental phase of project.
We would also like to thank engineer assistant Casper Beyer Larsen for the help in man­
ufacturing the test rig and test specimens. An appreciation is also shown to Elisabet
Svärdström from SSAB for providing the DP1000 steel test plate.
Moreover we would like to thank DTU Computing Center for the support and access to
the DTU High Performance Computing cluster. Without it, the more than 26 years of CPU
time used during the period of the project would not have been possible.
From Lasse: A heartfelt thank you to my family for being there through thick and thin,
when everything else seems to fail, you are always there.
Last but certainly not least, from Christoffer: a sincere thanks to Sofie for the endless
support and for taking care of Aya and Zakarias while I worked long hours on the project.
You’re the real MVP.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
5
2.1
Fracture Mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Material models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Finite Element theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Method
13
3.1
General finite element setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Mode I crack setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Uniaxial tensile test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4
Bending setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.5
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Setup validation
34
4.1
Validation of mode I crack setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2
Validation of bending setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.3
Validation of uniaxial setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Analysis
49
5.1
Mode I crack analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Bending analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.3
Experimental . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
5.4
Experimental to numerical comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
6
Final remarks
81
6.1
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
6.2
Experimental . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
7
Conclusion
87
8
Future work
91
8.1
Numerical simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
8.2
Experimental . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Bibliography
93
A Mode I setup simulation details
97
A.1 Examinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
vi
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:9==
A.2 Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
B Bending Analysis plots
111
C Fracture score examinations
117
D Experimental scanning of DP800 and DP1000 plates
121
D.1 Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
D.2 Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
D.3 Tomography scans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
D.4 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
E
Coding
128
E.1 Abaqus user subroutine VDISP for KI displacement field
. . . . . . . . . . 128
E.2 Script for selecting weak elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
E.3 Grassfire algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
E.4 Bending cluster script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
F
Test machine drawings
147
F.1
In­situ plate bending test rig drawings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
F.2
Tensile test specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
G Gantt chart
157
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
vii
==PAGE:10==
Nomenclature
Material parameters
β
Cluster weak element percentage
˙f
Void volume fraction growth rate
ϵN
Mean strain for nucleation
γ
Weak element percentage
ν
Poisson’s ratio
ρ
Density
σy
Yield stress
σC
Considère stress
σm
macroscopic mean stress
σUTS
Ultimate tensile strength
ε
Strain
E
Young’s modulus
f∗
The effective void volume fraction
f∗
U
Ultimate effective void volume frac­
tion
f0
Initial void volume fraction
fC
Critical void volume fraction
fF
Void volume fraction at failure
fN
Void volume fraction that can poten­
tially nucleate
N
Strain hardening exponent
qn
GTN fitting parameters – n = 1, 2, 3
sN
Standard deviation for mean strain
Geometric measures
α
Bending angle
αf
Fracture angle
∆yp
Punch Displacement
ψimperf Imperfection band angle
Areq
required cross sectional area (bar)
As
Reference cross sectional area
Ath
Load carrying area of threads
dc
Cluster diameter
dreq
required diameter (bar)
H0
Total initial height for uniaxial test
setup
h0
Uniaxial FPZ initial height (thinning
region)
Knc
(Number of clusters factor (K­factor)
Le
Element edge length
lc
distance between cluster centers
lmin
minimum distance between cluster
centers
nc
Number of clusters
nel
Number of elements in FPZ
Rp
Punch radius
Rr
Roller radius
Rct
Crack tip radius
rc
Cluster radius
Rout
Outer radius of circular domain
t
Thickness of plate
ux/y
Displacement
W
Width of refined domain in mode I
setup
W0
Total initial width for uniaxial test
setup
Subscripts and superscripts
E
Refers to elastic (superscript)
end
Refers to the final value at the end of
a test or simulation (subscript)
m
Refers to “matrix” material surround­
ing the nucleation sites (superscript)
mean Refers to the mean for a given pa­
rameter (subscript)
viii
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:11==
ns
Refers to void nucleation sites (su­
perscript)
P
Refers to plastic (superscript)
Theory
¯σ
Yield stress
β
Switch determining whether material
is yielding
δij
Kronecker delta
˙σM
Stress rate for matrix material
˙σkk
Hydrostatic stress rate in the mate­
rial
˙εij
Total strain increment
˙a
Crack propagation speed
Mijkℓ
Elastic flexibility tensor
ϕ
Gurson yield surface
σe
Effective stress
σM
Stress for matrix material
σij
Stress tensor
a
Crack length
Et
Tangent modulus
G
Energy release rate
KI
Stress intensity factor for mode I
R
Crack extension resistance
sij
Stress deviator tensor
Tomography
α
Photoelectric absorption coefficient
µ
Linear attenuation coefficient
µs
Scatter coefficient
ω
Beam frequency
A
Atomic weight
h
Planck’s constant
I
Beam intensity
k
Shell involvement constant
x
Material thickness
Z
Atomic number
Abbreviations
DP
Dual­phase
FEM
Finite Element Method
FHI
Fracture Height Index
FPZ
Fracture Process Zone
GTN
Gurson­Tvergaard­Needleman
IQR
Interquartile range
LST
Linear Strain Triangle elements
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Other symbols
¯F
Equivalent bending moment, Equa­
tion (3.6)
ˆλ, ˆG
Effective Lamé parameters
κ
Proportionality constant
µ
Shear modulus
µ
mean of the population
ωmax
Maximum frequency
ρP
Pearson correlation value
σ
Standard deviation
ξmax
Critical damping fraction
cd
Dilatational wave speed
Cmax
Courant­Friedrich­Lewy
convergence limit
DI
Dunn index
Np
Number of nucleation sites
Qn
Boxplot
quartile
(Q1=lower,
Q3=upper)
Sfrac
Fracture score
Sf
Safety factor
T
Nominal traction
v
velocity magnitude
wn
Boxplot whiskers
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Plate structures are seen in a great variety of applications. Aeroplanes, automobiles,
buildings and shipping containers are just a few examples of the diversity in plate utiliza­
tion. Such plate structures undergo a wide variety of complex loading scenarios, including
both bending and tension, making analytical estimations difficult.
Designers and manufacturers know the importance of overall material performance, where
factors such as strength, hardness, and toughness make a difference in the final prod­
uct’s quality. All such factors are affected by material imperfections. These come in a
wide variety of shapes and sizes including micro­mechanical dislocations and inclusions,
poorly bonded atomic interfaces, and more. The interest in investigating and understand­
ing these micro­mechanical contributions to the plate material properties is thus great, but
numerical solution methods rarely include micro­scale damage structures in calculations.
Usually when accounting for material parameters, materials are assumed homogeneous
due to the advantage of simplicity. No material is however fully homogeneous in reality.
This means that dissimilarities are often found between experimental tests and numerical
calculations. Specifically when analyzing crack growth, the fracture path is, at least on a
micro­scale, dependent on the heterogeneous microstructure of the material.
When modelling ductile fracture using the finite element method, a common approach is
to embed cohesive elements into the mesh structure using a traction separation law. The
cohesive elements act as springs, storing energy until a limit is reached and they lose
their load carrying capacity and are deleted. They are based on a material model where
certain parameters need to be calibrated against experimental data in order to provide
accurate results. Furthermore, the fracture initiation and fracture path must be predefined
which is not always a possibility.
Another approach using a traction separation law is the extended finite element method
(XFEM). Here the crack can initiate and propagate within a pre­defined crack domain. Ei­
ther a predefined maximum principal strain or maximum principal stress is used as dam­
age initiation, and the crack can propagate across elements in any direction.
When doing numerical calculations for larger structures using the finite element method,
accounting for a micro­scale damage structure is not an option mainly due to the com­
putational limitations. That said, micro­scale calculations can be performed to expand
the knowledge about damage and fracture, leading to better parameters for estimating or
improving the strength and fracture toughness of materials, which can in turn be used in
macro­scale calculations.
Gurson’s micromechanics­based porous material model, originally proposed in Gurson
1977, aims to model the full process of crack initiation and propagation by including the
nucleation, growth and coalescence of micro­voids in the material. The model, using the
damage parameter Void Volume Fraction (VVF), increases the VVF in an element as the
element plastically deforms, eventually deleting the element. While Gurson’s model is
unsuited for large­scale simulations due to its mesh dependency, it is ideal for simulating
crack initiation and propagation on the micro­scale, as it covers the entire fracture process.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
1
==PAGE:14==
Other models do exist in the study of porous plasticity leading to ductile fracture. One of
such is the continuum thermodynamics based Rousselier model, which in its revisitation
is described and compared to the GTN model, Rousselier 2021.
The Gurson model has been used in many research related projects. V. Tvergaard and
A. Needleman 1984 used and further developed the model to the now acclaimed Gurson­
Tvergaard­Needleman (GTN) material model in order to analyse cup­cone fractures seen
in tensile tests.
The further research into void nucleation and crack propagation led V. Tvergaard and
Hutchinson 2002 to investigate a relation between void­by­void versus multiple­void in­
teraction in a two­dimensional plane strain model using discrete voids in front of a pre­
existing crack tip.
The increasingly available computational power has lead to other studies of the GTN
model, including the mesh influence in modelling crack growth for plane strain specimens
as done in Besson et al. 2001, and brought forth more studies in numerically introduced
heterogeneities. Tekog̃lu and Nielsen 2019 introduced randomly distributed void nucle­
ation sites with a change in number of voids and size, which lead to a cohesive zone
traction­separation relation study of the same heterogeneous setup in Andersen et al.
2020a.
Most recently Simon 2021 has investigated material heterogeneities in ductile fracture dur­
ing plate bending by randomly selecting elements to be weakened using the GTN model
without nucleation. In his work he also explores the introduction of circular imperfections
in the plate.
The recent work has proven that it is possible to cause plate fracture at initial mean porosi­
ties equivalent to those of real ductile materials. Most of the work has focused on randomly
distributed weaknesses in the entire fracture process zone (FPZ). Some microstructures
might however tend to cluster material weaknesses, either as a consequence of the ma­
terial manufacturing process or simply as a result of randomization.
Furthermore the effects of nucleation play a large role in the process of plate fracture.
It is therefore desirable to investigate the effects of clustering the randomly distributed
weaknesses, utilizing the effects of nucleation.
Lastly, the method of X­ray tomography scanning is a proven method in investigating
material microstructure, Toda et al. 2017, and crack propagation, Nielsen and Gundlach
2017. Comparing simulation results with X­ray tomography scans is therefore of great
interest.
1.2
Problem Description
1.2.1
Statement of Work
The work will focus on analyzing fracture of ductile plates subject to bending using primar­
ily numerical analysis. The work builds on the research activities of recent years where
heterogeneities in ductile plates have been in focus. Accounting for realistic microstruc­
tures has proven crucial to accurately predict the overall fracture strain as traditional mod­
els with a homogeneous distribution of damage fail to predict failure at realistic levels of
initial damage.
The outline of the thesis is described in the following bullets:
1. Creating a numerical model suitable for ductile plate bending, using Abaqus or An­
sys, where the clustered microstructure is accounted for ­ here considering 2D cal­
culations.
2
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:15==
→The aim is two­folded; i) To enable the student to master the commercial soft­
ware. ii) To get familiar with the underlying mechanics of material modeling (e.g.,
the Gurson model) and facilitate numerical analysis of realistic microstructures.
2. Create a 2D plane strain model setup for mode I plate tearing and analyze the effect
of having clusters of damage existing from the onset of the deformation.
→The aim is to create a simplified modeling framework and understand the effect
of having clusters in the microstructure. E.g., to understand the impact on the en­
ergy dissipation during ductile tearing and the micro­mechanics governing failure.
A direct comparison to existing literature dealing with homogeneous distribution or
idealized microstructure is a must.
3. Transfer the realistic microstructures to plate bending and focus the attention on the
effect of clustering for an in depth analysis.
→The aim is to demonstrate how randomly distributed clusters will affect the overall
response of the plate during bending.
4. Account for the nucleation of damage within the clusters rather than imposing pre­
existing damage. Traditional nucleation laws are either strain or stress­based, but
only strain­based is typically available in commercial software.
→The aim is to shed light on how nucleation of damage within the clusters will affect
ductile crack propagation during plate bending. It is anticipated that both strain and
stress­based nucleation will be considered to model nucleation already in the elastic
regime.
5. Study the void­by­void versus multiple void crack propagation mechanism when
accounting for individual clusters and stress/strain based nucleation. Potentially
accounting for the variation in the material properties within the individual clusters.
→The aim is to contribute with new insight into ductile plate tearing of heteroge­
neous materials.
6. Define and conduct bending experiments to study the damage development, local­
ization, and crack propagation under plate bending.
→The aim is to facilitate a comparison basis to the numerical modelling. The setup
is imagined used in relation to X­ray tomography scanning and, hence, must be
suitable for that purpose.
Ductile fracture in bending has become an active research area in recent years due to an
observed mismatch between model predictions and experimental findings. The project
focuses on heterogeneities and randomness in the fracture process as both can severely
affect the overall fracture strain.
1.2.2
Limitations
This study investigates the ductile fracture behaviour of metal plates under nominally
plane strain conditions. Plane stress will not be considered. The work focuses on hetero­
geneities and randomness in clusters during the fracture process. Homogeneous inves­
tigations will therefore only be carried out as initial tests, and as a means of comparison
with heterogeneous results.
Furthermore the clusters considered in this work will only be circular in shape, not ac­
counting for any elliptical or other shapes.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
3
==PAGE:16==
Experimental studies will focus on dual­phase (DP) steels, namely DP800 and DP1000.
Lastly, the material damage model in focus will be the GTN model.
1.3
Thesis outline
Chapter 2 describes the relevant theory exploited in this thesis. The chapter includes;
fracture mechanics, material models including J2 ­ flow theory and the Gurson model,
finite element theory and tomography theory related to the experiments.
Chapter 3 describes the methods used throughout the study, starting with an introduction
to the general setup used for finite element simulations (Section 3.1), going into a mode
I displacement field on a circular domain (Section 3.2), followed by a uniaxial tensile test
setup and a plain strain bending setup. Lastly Section 3.5 describes the experimental
setup regarding the tomography equipment and the in­situ plate loading rig.
Validation of the numerical models described is seen in Chapter 4.
In Chapter 5 the analysis of the different contributions takes place. The background for
the analyses as well as expectations and results are included along with a short discus­
sion for each result. Section 5.1 contains a mode I analysis for simulated void­to­void
versus multiple­void interaction as a comparison to V. Tvergaard and Hutchinson 2002.
Section 5.2 inspects the numerical bending simulations completed and the implemented
input and output parameters. Finally Section 5.3 will finish the analysis chapter by exam­
ining the experiments conducted with comparisons to finite element simulations.
That gives way to the final remarks in Chapter 6, where the results presented throughout
the aforementioned chapters will be held against each other and research done on similar
topics. This will finally bring forth the conclusion in Chapter 7, with remarks on future work
on the topic outlined in Chapter 8.
4
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:17==
2
Theory
2.1
Fracture Mechanics
The field of fracture mechanics studies the propagation of cracks in materials, where a
crack is defined as a discontinuity in a displacement field with no cohesive forces acting
on adjacent surfaces (see Anderson 2017, pp. 14–33). Stresses near the crack tip are
depicted in Figure 2.1.
Although the load on a crack tip can be arbitrary, Irwin 1957 found that it can be reduced to
a combination of the three independent modes depicted in Figure 2.2. For mode I fracture
the loading is perpendicular to the crack propagation and parallel to the y­axis. Thus the
free crack surfaces are pulled apart. Both mode I and mode II are in­plane modes, while
mode III goes out of plane. The fracture process in front of an advancing crack subjected
to overall mode I loading, can be approximated by a 2D plane strain finite element model,
as described in Nielsen and Hutchinson 2012.
The stress intensity factor K is a theoretical construct made to describe the stress state
near the crack tip. For pure mode I loading on an edge crack in a semi­infinite body, the
stress intensity factor can be calculated as
KI = 1.12σ√πa
(2.1)
where σ is the load stress and a is the length of the crack as seen in Figure 2.3.
For mode I loading, the displacement field ahead of the crack tip, assuming a linear elastic
isotropic material, can be written as Anderson 2017, tab. 2.2
ux = KI
2µ
r r
2π cos θ
2

κ −1 + 2 sin2
θ
2

(2.2)
uy = KI
2µ
r r
2π sin θ
2

κ + 1 −2 cos2
θ
2

(2.3)
where ux and uy are the displacements in x and y directions, µ is the shear modulus and
the proportionality constant κ = 3 −4ν for plane strain, ν being Poisson’s ratio.
2.2
Material models
2.2.1
J2 flow theory
The material theory for plasticity considered in this thesis has elastic­plastic material be­
haviour, characterized by isotropic hardening following J2 flow theory, V. Tvergaard 2001.
The material follows isotropic hardening, meaning that when effective stresses reach the
yield surface, this surface grows equally in all directions as shown in Figure 2.4.
The material shows linear elastic material behaviour in the elastic domain and follows the
power hardening law
ε =





σe
E
,
σe < σy
σy
E
σe
σy
1/N
,
σe ≥σy
(2.4)
where ε is strain, σe is the effective stress (von Mises stress), σy is the yield stress, E is
Young’s modulus and N is the strain hardening exponent. In J2 flow theory it is assumed
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
5
==PAGE:18==
Crack
x
y
θ
σyy
σxx
τxy
τyx
r
Figure 2.1: Stresses near the crack tip in
an elastic material. Reproduced from An­
derson 2017, fig. 1.9
Mode I
Mode II
Mode III
Figure 2.2: The three loading Modes that
can be applied to a crack, Irwin 1957.
a
σ
σ
Figure 2.3: Edge crack in semi­infinite plate
subject to remote tensile stress
stress path
initial yield surface
subsequent yield surface
σ11
σ12
Figure 2.4: Isotropic hardening in the stress
space.
that the initial yield surface and the subsequent ones are shaped as Mises yield surfaces,
given by the expression
(σe)max =
p
3(J2)max =
r
3
2sijsij
(2.5)
where (σe)max is the historically maximal value of the Mises stress reached so far during
the deformation, J2 is the second invariant of the deviatoric stress tensor and sij is the
stress deviator tensor given by
sij = σij −δij
σkk
3
(2.6)
where δij is Kronecker delta and σij is the stress tensor. The total strain increment ˙εij is
given as the sum of an elastic and plastic part
˙εij = ˙εE
ij + ˙εP
ij
(2.7)
The elastic part of the strain increment depends linearly on the stress increment
˙εE
ij = Mijkℓ˙σkl
(2.8)
6
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:19==
In this Mijkℓis the elastic flexibility tensor, with deformation following Hooke’s law, ex­
pressed as
Mijkℓ= 1
E
1 + ν
2
 δikδjℓ+ δiℓδjk

−νδijδkℓ

(2.9)
Here ν is Poisson’s ratio. The plastic strain increment is given as
˙εP
ij = β 9
4σ2e
 1
Et
−1
E

sijskℓ˙σkℓ
(2.10)
β =
(
1,
for σe = (σe)max
and
˙σe ≥0
0,
for σe < (σe)max
and
˙σe < 0
(2.11)
where β is a switch determining whether the material is yielding and Et = dσ
dε is the tangent
modulus, found from uniaxial tensile test at the stress level σ = σe. This corresponds
to the isotropic hardening, yield surfaces, and flow rule theories described in Abaqus
Documentation 2020, on an elemental basis.
2.2.2
Gurson model
As a material model, a modified Gurson model is used as described in Abaqus Documen­
tation 2020 (in Abaqus named Porous metal plasticity). The model assumes a porous
material to be continuous, averaging the effects of voids throughout the solid. The ma­
terial is thus assumed to be homogeneous. Compared to classical plasticity theory, this
model takes hydrostatic stress into account.
The model was originally developed by A. L. Gurson (see Gurson 1977) and several later
modifications have been added. The version used for this thesis is the Gurson­Tvergaard­
Needleman (GTN) modification introduced by V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 1984.
The model is developed from a spherical or cylindrical void placed at the center of a unit
cell, as seen in Tvergaard 1990. This means that the shape of voids or damage is not
taken into account. Furthermore, it means that the model is mesh­dependent, as will be
discussed in Section 2.2.2.
The yield surface for the model is, Anderson 2017, p. 239
Φ =
σe
¯σ
2
+ 2q1f∗cosh
3q2σm
2¯σ

−(1 + q3f∗2) = 0
(2.12)
where Φ is the yield surface, σe is the effective macroscopic von Mises stress, ¯σ is the
yield stress for the fully dense matrix material, σm is the macroscopic mean stress, f∗is
the effective Void Volume Fraction (VVF) and q1, q2 and q3 are material fitting parame­
ters. It is seen that if f∗= 0, the model corresponds to von Mises’ yield surface for an
incompressible material.
The parameter f∗models void coalescence to predicting final failure more accurate, as
developed by V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 1984. The function of f∗is defined as
f∗(f) =



f,
for f ≤fC
fC + f∗
U −fC
fF −fC
(f −fC),
for f > fC
(2.13)
Here fC is the critical VVF, fF is the VVF for failure of the element and the ultimate effective
VVF is
f∗
U = q1 +
p
q2
1 −q3
q3
(2.14)
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
7
==PAGE:20==
Note that if q3 = q2
1, as is often the case, f∗
U = 1/q1. From Equation (2.13) the effect of
hydrostatic stress is amplified when f > fC, accelerating the onset of plastic instability
from the effect of coalescence, making the material lose strength more rapidly as the VVF
f approaches fF . From V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 1984, the VVF growth rate ˙f
can be described as the sum of growth and nucleation rates
˙f = ˙fgrowth + ˙fnucleation
(2.15)
For the void to change size, the deformation has to enter the plastic range. The rate of
void growth is defined as
˙fgrowth = (1 −f)δij ˙εP
ij = (1 −f) ˙εP
kk
(2.16)
In Equation (2.15) the nucleation term quantifies the contribution of new voids that are
formed, described by the plastic strain. Void nucleation ordinarily transpires at a free
surface formed at an inclusion or a second­phase particle, Andersen 2016. This interface
is formed either by particle cracking or decohesion. The rate of void nucleation is given
by
˙fnucleation = A ˙σM + B ˙σkk
3
(2.17)
where ˙σM is the stress rate for the matrix material and ˙σkk is the hydrostatic stress rate
in the material. The microscopic strain state in the matrix material is represented by the
effective plastic strain εP
M, which is related to σM through the incremental equation
˙εP
M =
 1
Et
−1
E

˙σM
(2.18)
where Et is the tangent modulus at the current stress σM. When void nucleation is con­
trolled by the plastic strain (as with the GTN­model used in Abaqus) the material can be
modelled by Equation (2.17) by taking A > 0 and B = 0. This can be expressed as
A =
 1
Et
−1
E

fN
sN
√
2π exp

−1
2
 
εP
M −εN
sN
!2
,
B = 0
for
εP
M =

εP
M

max
and
˙εP
M > 0
(2.19)
as proposed by Chu and Needleman 1980, assuming a normal distribution of nucleation
where sN is the standard deviation, εN is the mean strain for nucleation and fN is the
volume fraction for void nucleating particles. Combining Equations (2.17) to (2.19), the
strain­based nucleation rate can then be written as
˙fnucleation = ˙εP
M
fN
sN
√
2π exp

−1
2
 
εP
M −εN
sN
!2

(2.20)
In cases where nucleation is controlled by the maximum normal stress at the interface
between the matrix material and the particle, A. Needleman and Rice 1978 proposed
taking the sum of σM+σkk/3 as an approximate measure of the maximum stress, meaning
A = B. For this case the void nucleation rate on the form of Equation (2.17) is expressed
as
A = B =
fN
sN
√
2π exp

−1
2


σM + σkk
3 −σN
sN


2

for
σM + σkk
3
=

σM + σkk
3

max
and

σM + σkk
3

˙> 0
(2.21)
8
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:21==
Here σN is the mean stress for nucleation. For both Equations (2.19) and (2.21), non­
zero values of A and B are only present if the prescribed conditions are met. For Equa­
tion (2.19), B = 0 is always the case. If both strain­ and stress­controlled nucleation is
present in the material, A is the sum of the values given by Equations (2.19) and (2.21).
Gurson mesh dependence
The Gurson model is mesh­dependent. This means that as the mesh is increasingly
refined, damage and strain tends to localize in bands of decreasing width, going towards
zero (Enakoutsa 2014). Several attempts have been made to circumvent this and make
a mesh­independent Gurson model (for instance Enakoutsa 2014 and Samal et al. 2008)
but no such attempt will be used in this thesis.
Though mesh dependency is not entirely avoided, Abaqus minimizes the mesh depen­
dency of the Gurson model in regards to energy, as described in Abaqus Documentation
2020. A characteristic length based on the element size is introduced into the damage
evolution model, and the softening part of the constitutive law is expressed as a stress­
displacement relation rather than stress­strain. The energy dissipated during the damage
process is specified per unit area and is treated as a material parameter, which is used
to calculate the displacement for which full material damage takes place. The formulation
ensures that the correct amount of energy is dissipated, and corresponds to the critical
energy release rate known from fracture mechanics.
2.3
Finite Element theory
2.3.1
Explicit solving
Implicit solvers use a stiffness­based solution technique that is unconditionally stable. On
the contrary an explicit solution technique can be used which uses explicit time integra­
tion which is only conditionally stable (see Abaqus Documentation 20201). The explicit
solution method is a true dynamic procedure where the out­of­balance forces are propa­
gated as stress waves between neighboring elements while solving for a state of dynamic
equilibrium. As the minimum stable time increment is often quite small, most problems
require a large number of increments.
2.3.2
Time increment stability
When using the explicit solving procedure which integrates through time, the central­
difference operator is conditionally stable with the stability limit for the operator given in
terms of the highest frequency of the system as
∆t ≤
2
ωmax
p
1 + ξ2max −ξmax

(2.22)
where ∆t is the time increment, ωmax is the highest frequency and ξmax is the critical
damping fraction in the highest frequency mode. In Abaqus/Explicit a small amount of
damping is introduced through bulk viscosity to control high frequency oscillations. The
explicit differential equation solvers stability is described using the smallest transit time of
a dilatational wave across any element in the mesh, following the Courant­Friedrich­Lewy
convergence condition (see Courant et al. 1928).
v∆t
∆x ≤Cmax
(2.23)
Where v is the magnitude of velocity, ∆x is the length interval, and the Courant­Friedrich­
Lewy convergence limit Cmax = 1 for an explicit solver. This is determined in Abaqus/Ex­
plicit with the dilatational wave speed cd by calculating the effective hypoelastic material
1See Abaqus Explicit dynamic analysis
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
9
==PAGE:22==
moduli in terms of the effective Lamé parameters ˆG = 2ˆµ and ˆλ. The effective moduli
represent the element stiffness and determine the current dilatational wave speed in the
element as
cd =
s
ˆλ + 2ˆµ
ρ
(2.24)
where ρ is the density of the material and for an isotropic elastic material the effective
Lamé’s constants are determined by
ˆλ = λ0 =
Eν
(1 + ν)(1 −2ν)
,
ˆµ = µ0 =
E
2(1 + ν)
(2.25)
E being Young’s modulus and ν Poisson’s ratio.
The time increment based on the element­by­element stability can then be written as
∆t = min

Le
r
ρ
ˆλ + 2ˆµ

(2.26)
taking the minimum over all elements in the mesh, where Le is the characteristic edge
length for an element, making the entire calculation time dependent on Le. Note that
Equation (2.26) is an approximation of the stable time increment, where Equation (2.22)
is more accurate.
In a quasi­static analysis it can be expedient to reduce simulation cost by either reducing
the simulation time or scaling the mass. In both cases the kinetic to internal energy ratio
needs to be monitored so that it does not become too large (typically less than 5­10%,
see Abaqus Documentation 2020).
Mass scaling is done through artificially increasing the material density ρ, which can be
applied in rate­dependent problems, but inertia forces can dominate and change the so­
lution if care is not taken.
2.4
Tomography
X­ray computed tomography (CT) is an imaging method where individual projections (ra­
diographs) are registered from different view directions in order to reconstruct the internal
structure of an object of interest, with the additional advantage of being noninvasive and
nondestructive, as described in Stock 2008. During the interaction with matter, the at­
tenuation of the material, determining the difficulties for the x­ray beam to penetrate the
material, is of importance. As discovered by Röntgen 1898, the attenuations of x­rays
with wavelength λ can for a homogeneous object be expressed by the equation
I = I0 exp (−µx)
(2.27)
where I is the beam intensity after transversing through the material, I0 is the initial beam
intensity, x is the thickness of the material and µ is the linear attenuation coefficient, often
presented in the unit m−1. From Buzug 2008, the attenuation coefficient can be split into
two components
µ = µs + α
(2.28)
where µs is the scatter coefficient and α is the photoelectric absorption coefficient, relating
to the scattering and absorption of the beam respectively. The absorption coefficient is
given as
α = k ρ
A
Z4
(hω)3
(2.29)
10
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:23==
where k is the constant related to the shell involved, ρ is the material density, A is the
atomic weight of the material, Z is the atomic number, h is Planck’s constant, and ω is the
beam frequency.
The scatter coefficient µs is more difficult to determine, but with the tomography instru­
ments used for the work of this thesis (see Section 3.5.3) the photoelectric absorption α
will be the dominant factor compared to µs in the attenuation coefficient.
Other effects such as contrast between background and feature signal and photon energy
also contribute to the feasibility of the CT­scan.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
11
==PAGE:24==
12
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:25==
3
Method
3.1
General finite element setup
ABAQUS 2020 is used for the finite element analysis. This section describes the setup
used. The finite element method (FEM) is used in three different setups to examine clus­
tering and nucleation effects on crack growth. The first setup is a mode I crack setup in a
circular domain. The second is uniaxial tension and the third is bending. All three will be
described in further detail in the following sections.
3.1.1
Solver method
Specifically, Abaqus/Explicit is used for the analysis. The explicit solver is chosen for its
included failure models, because it allows for element deletion without having to remesh
the entire domain. However, Abaqus/Explicit also has other advantages, Abaqus Docu­
mentation 2020.
One advantage is scalability. For small­scale problems, using an implicit solver can be
faster, but as the problem scales the explicit solver gains the advantage both in terms of
computational time and memory usage1. Other perks include a robust contact function­
ality and reduction of computational time by parallel solving.
An important note is that the Abaqus/Explicit solver is dynamic, and so to obtain the de­
sired results the solving time must be high enough for the analysis to be considered quasi­
static, as described in Section 2.3.2.
3.1.2
Material parameters
The same material parameters are used in every simulation setup unless otherwise spec­
ified.
The chosen material is elastic­plastic, following a power hardening law (Equa­
tion (2.4)) and with the GTN model applied.
3.1.3
General material parameters
General used material parameters are seen in Table 3.1. Dual­phase (DP) steel plates,
specifically DP800 steel and DP1000, will be tested experimentally (see experimental
setup Section 3.5). Since a DP800 material will be tested experimentally, material pa­
rameters are chosen to represent such a material. Yield stress σy and strain hardening
exponent N are borrowed from Cha and Kim 2014 where a DP780 steel, very similar to
DP800, is simulated. Remaining parameters are chosen to represent typical steel values.
Abaqus does not use units explicitly (see Abaqus Documentation 2020) but indirectly by
being consistent with the units used. In the work of the current thesis SI units are used
with the exception of length where mm is used, which means pressure is measured in
MPa and density in t/mm3. The values seen in Table 3.1 are thus the ones used directly
in Abaqus.
GTN parameters
Nine material parameters are used in the Gurson­Tvergaard­Needleman (GTN) material
model. The GTN parameters will be fitted to DP800 steel as well.
Several attempts at defining GTN parameters for DP800 and similar materials have al­
ready been made, for instance Santos et al. 2019 and Cha and Kim 2014. The latter
two are compared in Table 3.2. As can be seen, though the materials are similar in yield
1See Abaqus documentation Cost of mesh refinement in implicit and explicit analyses
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
13
==PAGE:26==
Parameter
Value
Hypothetical unit
Description
E
210e3
MPa
Young’s modulus
ν
0.3
­
Poisson’s ratio
σy
580
MPa
Material yield stress
N
0.137
­
Strain hardening exponent
ρ
7.8e­9
t/mm3
Density
Table 3.1: Fixed material parameters used in all cases
Material
q1
q2
q3
f0
fC
fF
εN
sN
fN
DP780
1.50
1.00
2.25
0.003000
0.0130
0.207
0.102
0.206
0.0180
DP800
1.76
0.83
3.09
0.007178
0.0239
0.026
0.085
0.200
0.0445
Table 3.2: GTN parameters from Cha and Kim 2014 (DP780) and Santos et al. 2019
(DP800)
strength, ultimate tensile strength and ductility, they vary widely in the determined material
parameters. Namely fF deviates largely between the two material parameter sets. The
differences can be contributed to the different methods used for determining the parame­
ters, and the ambiguity of the parameters themselves.
In both cases the parameters are chosen based on Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
scans and tensile tests. However, while Santos et al. 2019 chooses parameters based
on these directly, Cha and Kim 2014 uses the response surface method to find optimal
parameters for fitting the curve. Both cases manage to fit the load­displacement curves
of experimental tests rather well, which points to the ambiguity of the model: Relatively
dissimilar parameters can lead to almost identical results. One must therefore consider
which parameters are best suited for the model as intended, rather than fitting parameters
to a single test case. For instance Cha and Kim 2014 makes an almost perfect fit to the
load­displacement curve of a tensile test, but show a greater dissimilarity when comparing
with a bending test using the same parameters.
Additionally, Kusche et al. 2021, examining strain and void evolution in a DP800 steel,
finds different relations between plastic strain and void fraction when using tensile speci­
mens of different geometries. For this reason, all parameters used in the GTN model are
discussed in this section, arguing for the values chosen for each case. The GTN model
yield surface from Equation (2.12) is repeated here as Equation (3.1) for convenience.
Φ =
σe
¯σ
2
+ 2q1f∗cosh
3q2σm
2¯σ

−(1 + q3f∗2) = 0
(3.1)
Parameters q1, q2 and q3 are the fitting parameters of the GTN model seen in Equa­
tion (2.12). According to V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 2001, the parameters q1 and
q2 (with q3 = q2
1) were added to the Gurson model to bring results closer to that of a full
numerical analysis of a periodic array of voids. q1 linearly scales the 2nd term in Equa­
tion (2.12), 2q1f∗cosh

3q2σm
2¯σ

, so that for q1 > 0 (and f∗> 0) the yield surface of the
material is decreased. q2 affects the stress mean stress part of the term (cosh
3q2σm
2¯σ

),
so that q2 > 1 will increase the effect of hydrostatic stress, further softening the material,
and vice versa. q3, unlike the other two, increases the yield surface as it increases.
The most commonly used values for these parameters when working with steels are q1 =
14
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:27==
1.5, q2 = 1.0 and q3 = q2
1 = 2.25 (see for instance Yildiz and Yilmaz 2020, Tab. 1).
According to V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 2001, common ranges for the values are
1.25 < q1 < 2 and 0.9 < q2 < 1. Though these are not hard limits, they give an indication
of the range of which the model was designed to be used and strong deviations from these
values should only be made with thorough consideration.
Experimental data is usually required to determine the best­fitting parameters for a spe­
cific material. To circumvent this, an attempt has been made by Faleskog et al. 1998 to
determine q1 and q2 from the relation between yield strength and Young’s modulus σy/E
and the strain hardening exponent N. This approach has been adopted by Santos et al.
2019, yielding the qi parameters seen for DP800 in Table 3.2. While this is a viable alter­
native, the common parameters q1 = 1.5, q2 = 1.0 and q3 = 2.25 will be used in this thesis
for the sake of simplicity. These parameters yield f∗
U = 2/3 (see Equation (2.13)).
Parameter f0 has been examined in Cha and Kim 2014 and Santos et al. 2019 for DP780
and DP800 materials respectively, both using microscopy methods. The former finds an
initial VVF of f0 = 4.00 × 10−3 for DP780 while the latter determines f0 = 7.178 × 10−3
for DP800. While the VVF of the material used in the experimental setup is unknown, this
gives an indication of the average VVF to be expected for the material. On this basis it is
chosen to use an average initial VVF of f0 = 0.005 (i.e. 0.5%).
Nucleation parameters εN sN and fN define the void nucleation mechanism of the ma­
terial. The mean strain for nucleating particles εN determines the equivalent plastic strain
for the peak of the normal­distributed nucleation term seen in Equation (2.19). sN defines
the standard deviation of the void nucleation, as illustrated in Figure 3.1 and fN is the
volume fraction of void nucleating particles. Put in other terms, fN determines the total
VVF contribution from void nucleation.
The actual contribution may however vary. If sN is too high, or εN is too low or high, the
contribution from the nucleation function will not reach the limit of fN since the integral of
εP
eq will not utilize contributions from before 0 plastic strain or from contributions that should
happen after the ultimate plastic strain εP
u. The actual contribution can be expressed as
NV V F =
fN
sN
√
2π
Z εP
u
0
exp

−1
2
 
εP
M −εN
sN
!2
dεP
M
(3.2)
This contribution effect can have a severe effect for the overall contribution of nucleation
as discussed by Santos et al. 2019, where taking sN = 0.028, fN = 0.014 and sN =
0.2, fN = 0.042 yielded the same NV V F .
According to V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 2001, nucleation parameters vary signifi­
cantly between different materials. It is suggested that these parameters be estimated by
studying micrographs for test specimens at different stages of deformation.
The damage mechanisms of a dual­phase steel (DP600) are investigated in Toda et al.
2017 by making tomography scans at different deformation stages. While the investigated
steel is not a DP800, the general damage mechanisms present in dual­phase steels are
valid. Five void nucleation sites are identified: Intergranular in ferrite, transgranular in
ferrite, grain boundary of ferrite/martensite intersection, ferrite/martensite interface and
martensite cracking.
Nucleation happens at different strains for each site, and the size of nucleated voids differ
significantly as well, with early nucleation yielding smaller void fractions and later nu­
cleation yielding larger void fractions. To account for all possible nucleation sites (and
inclusions) individually, the GTN model would have to be expanded to take separate εN,
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
15
==PAGE:28==
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
2
4
6
8
Figure 3.1: Normalized nucleation function Equation (2.19) compared to equivalent plastic
strain εP
eq, shown for εN = 0.2.
sN and fN values into account for each case. However, since there is a tendency for early
nucleation to yield little damage and later to yield more, this will instead be modeled with
a single set of parameters representing all damage mechanisms.
According to Heibel et al. 2018, inclusions do not account for the majority of the nucleation
damage in dual­phase steels, and so their volume fraction will not give an accurate esti­
mate of fN. In Toda et al. 2017 void nucleation and growth are found for different strain
values for a DP600 steel. At a strain level of ε = 0.278 it is seen that the total volume
fraction is f ≈0.024, where fnucleation accounts for approximately half that, the remaining
half being attributed to growth. This gives a nucleation contribution of fN = 0.24/2 = 0.12.
Furthermore, at the given strain level the nucleation has not yet finished, and so it is
assumed that another 30% of nucleation is remaining, yielding fN = 0.12 · 1.3 = 0.156.
Finally, Toda et al. 2017 uses x­ray microtomography on round tensile bars in­situ to de­
termine the damage. The resolution of using this technique is however limited to a spatial
resolution of 2.8 µm. A DP800 steel is examined in Kusche et al. 2021 using SEM photos
analyzed with a neural network. This results in a finer resolution than provided in Toda
et al. 2017, registering voids down to an area size of about 0.05 µm2. With this technique,
the number of small voids with an area of less than 1 µm far outweighs the number of
larger voids. While larger voids do have a larger volume fraction per void, it is still esti­
mated that about half of the actual VVF has not been registered in Toda et al. 2017. The
final estimate of volume fraction of void nucleating particles thus becomes
fN = 0.024
2
1.3 · 2 = 0.0312
(3.3)
This is then approximated to fN ≈0.03 as an initial estimate. This value is in line with the
general range of fN seen in Yildiz and Yilmaz 2020.
From Toda et al. 2017 void nucleation peaks around 25% strain for a DP600 steel. With
the bigger martensite phase of DP800, it fractures at a lower strain as seen in Heibel et al.
2018. DP600 fractures around ε = 0.24 while DP800 fractures at ε = 0.18 (engineering
strain). From this, a mean strain for void nucleation is estimated to εN = 0.250.18
0.24 ≈0.19.
16
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:29==
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Figure 3.2: Comparison of void nucleation rate to equivalent plastic strain for nucleation
parameters from Santos et al. 2019, Cha and Kim 2014, V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman
1984 and parameters chosen for current thesis
Finally, the standard deviation for nucleation is determined. In Toda et al. 2017 only small
VVFs are observed before the strain reaches εN, at which point nucleation happens more
rapidly. To represent this, a relatively low standard deviation of sN = 0.05 is chosen,
yielding close to no nucleation at the onset of plastic strain but with a strong peak around
εN.
The chosen nucleation parameters are compared to existing literature in Figure 3.2.
Critical and final VVFs fC and fF determine the VVF at which the effective VVF starts
rising beyond the actual VVF (see Equation (2.13)) and the VVF at which the element is
deleted. The increase in effective VVF at fC simulates the coalescence of existing voids,
which causes a more rapid weakening of the material. Figure 3.3 compares fC and fF
values for different articles. As discussed above, Cha and Kim 2014 and Santos et al.
2019 describe similar materials (DP780 and DP800) but as can be seen from the figure
and Table 3.2, the ratios between fC and fF , as well as the values chosen for fF , differ
vastly. Since no clear conclusion can be drawn from this, the methods used in the articles
are examined and other sources are consulted to determine the parameters.
Santos et al. 2019 determine fC and fF from experimental values of the ultimate tensile
strength and the ultimate fracture strain respectively, using interrupted tensile tests. The
initial VVF is obtained by measuring the void area fraction fA using SEM. The void area
fraction is then converted to an equivalent 3­dimensional volume fraction by the equation
f0 = (d/D)3 = f3/2
A
where D and d are diameters of equivalent circular total area and
void area respectively. After determining the initial VVF, four interrupted tensile tests are
performed at different strain levels to create a linear function for the void area fraction as
a function of the longitudinal plastic strain.
The obtained values are, however, relatively low. V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 2001
states that fF = 0.25 often is a reasonable value, but Santos et al. 2019 uses fF = 0.026.
Moreover fC = 0.0239 is chosen, which is very close to the selected fF value. As seen in
Figure 3.3, this gives a very sudden rise in effective VVF right before element fracture.
With fC so close to fF one can argue that with the effective VVF staying very low for
almost the entire lifespan of an element, only rising almost immediately prior to failure,
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
17
==PAGE:30==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Santos et al. 2019
Cha and Kim 2014
Chosen values
Figure 3.3: Normalized VVF f/fF compared to effective VVF f∗for Santos et al. 2019,
Cha and Kim 2014 and values chosen for this thesis. Asterisks mark f = fC for each
case.
another damage model such as J­integral might as well be used instead. The conceptual
idea of the Gurson model is to model void nucleation, growth and coalescence, taking
into account the damage caused by these in the material. If the effective VVF f∗seen in
Equation (2.12) is always low, the damage effect from the GTN model is itself low.
Pütz et al. 2020 uses interrupted tensile tests to obtain area fractions of DP800 steel, but
uses light optical microscopy instead of SEM to cover a larger area. This reveals two
things: First of all the area fractions detected are much larger than the ones in Santos et
al. 2019. Secondly, the void area fraction increases gradually for increasing plastic strain
for DP800, compared to a DP1000 which increases suddenly at a certain strain. The
void area fractions determined at 95 % and 100 % of fracture strain are fA = 0.385 and
fA = 0.520 respectively. Using the same conversion method as Santos et al. 2019 above,
this yields the VVFs f95% = 0.239 and f100% = 0.375. These values are much closer to
the fF = 0.25 suggested by V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 2001. It should be noted
that the determined area fractions cover both inclusions and actual voids, but, assuming
the bonding between inclusions and matrix material is weak, this is roughly equivalent.
Furthermore, it is not possible to measure the area fraction at 100 % fracture strain, as the
specimen will break by then. The value given at 100 % fracture strain is therefore likely
obtained by following the tendency from measurements at lower percentages.
The gradual rise in VVF discovered by Pütz et al. 2020 points to fC being farther from fF
than assumed by Santos et al. 2019. While the rise is gradual compared to the more brittle
DP1000 steel, it is not linear from start to finish, and so a relatively low fC as proposed
by Cha and Kim 2014 does not seem to do justice to the development seen in Pütz et al.
2020 (see Figure 3.3).
As discussed above, there is no clear agreement in literature about the values of fC and
fF for DP800 steel. For the current work, however, it is chosen to use fF = 0.25. The
choice of fF is supported by the above mentioned articles leaning towards the higher end
of the spectrum. Cha and Kim 2014 looks at the global scale, using tensile tests and
18
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:31==
q1
q2
q3
f0
εN
sN
fN
fC
fF
1.5
1.0
2.25
0.005
0.19
0.05
0.03
0.15
0.25
Table 3.3: Initial GTN parameters chosen to represent DP800 steel material.
the response surface method, while Pütz et al. 2020 looks at the micro scale, measuring
the void fraction at varying strain levels close to fracture. Lastly, V. Tvergaard and A.
Needleman 2001, who took part in developing the GTN model, suggest a general value
of fF = 0.25, which confirms that the chosen value is in accord with the original intent of
the GTN model.
Moving to the final parameter fC, several factors are accounted for. The ratio fC/fF
should be higher than for Cha and Kim 2014 and lower than for Santos et al. 2019, which
is also in accord with the suggestion by V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 2001 of a value
within the range fC = [0.03, 0.15].
Secondly, the Gurson model is built on void nucleation, growth and coalescence, which is
presumed to take place in that order2. Based on this, the VVF for the onset of coalescence
is assumed to take place after nucleation and some growth. This means that f0 + fN =
0.035 < fC. Combining this with the previous point provides the range 0.035 < fC < 0.15.
This range is still large, and so preliminary bending simulations are completed for fC =
0.05, 0.10, 0.15 where the bending angle for fracture is compared to Heibel et al. 2018,
which finds a bending angle of α = 139° for crack initiation in a 1 mm DP800 plate.
The results show crack initiation angles of α = 90°, 128°, 146° for fC = 0.05, 0.10, 0.15
respectively. Of these, fC = 0.10 and fC = 0.15 give the results closest to that of Heibel
et al. 2018. Since Heibel et al. 2018 got a fracture angle of αf = 139° for a 1 mm plate, a
1.5 mm plate should bend at a lower angle. However, a preliminary test made by bending
a test plate made of 1.5 mm DP800 (Section 5.3.3) proves a higher bending angle for the
specific steel investigated, and so fC = 0.15 is chosen as the critical VVF.
Note that the chosen values for fC and fF are identical to those chosen by Andersen et al.
2020b and V. Tvergaard and A. Needleman 1984.
As a summary, the chosen parameters are shown in Table 3.3. To see the effect of the var­
ious parameters a study is performed where each parameter is increased and decreased
while remaining parameters are kept constant. All parameters are varied by ±20%, while
fC and fN are also varied by ±10%.
3.1.4
Material property assignment
In all three test setups, a section of interest with a fine mesh size is chosen, denoted
the Fracture Process Zone (FPZ). It is within this section that element weaknesses are
introduced by increasing the initial VVF f0 of selected elements (mode I), or adding void
nucleation effects through the GTN model (bending). Elements outside the region of in­
terest and those within that are not weakened thus have the same material properties and
are labeled the background material.
The weakened elements are chosen using Python scripts as seen in Appendix E.2. Ele­
ments are chosen randomly within clusters based on a number of parameters:
• Number of clusters nc
• Cluster diameter dc
2Though growth happens from start to finish, it accelerates at the onset of nucleation (see Figure 5.5)
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
19
==PAGE:32==
lc
≥lmin
dc/2
dc/2
Figure 3.4: Example of randomized cluster formation with zoom on distance between
clusters, showing lc ≥dc + lmin.
• Percentage of weakened elements within clusters β
• Distance between clusters, center to center lc
• Minimum distance between clusters lmin (for uniaxial tension and bending)
For the mode I setup, clusters are put with equal distance between them in a straight line,
while the tension and bending cases locate clusters randomly within the refined mesh
domain with a minimum distance lmin between clusters. An example of such randomized
cluster formation is seen with crucial dimensions in Figure 3.4.
The random localization of clusters is done by first selecting random coordinates for all
clusters so that all clusters fit fully within the FPZ border. A loop cycles through every
cluster, checking the distance to other clusters. If the distance to another cluster is lc <
dc+lmin, new random coordinates are chosen for the cluster and it is checked again. This
continues until all clusters are located within the FPZ and with the distance between all
clusters being lc ≥dc + lmin.
β determines the percentage of elements within the selected clusters that will be weak­
ened. The actual β of a cluster will vary slightly from the selected value since the number
of elements within the cluster limits the precision of the selected percentage. To ensure
greatest precision, the selected β values are chosen such that they fit well with the number
of elements in the smallest cluster size.
An element is regarded to be within the cluster if the centroid coordinates of the element
is within the radius of the cluster location. A mean is used when calculating the number of
elements to be made weak, so that the same number of elements are weakened in each
20
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:33==
Rct
Rout
W
L
Figure 3.5: Mode I setup with symmetry, displayed with geometrical reference variables.
The dashed box with length L and width W marks the refined mesh area. Dash­dot line
in bottom marks symmetry line.
cluster. Elements within clusters are chosen randomly. One element is chosen at a time
from the given cluster, until the desired number of elements has been selected, making
sure no element is selected twice.
3.1.5
Meshing
In every finite element setup, the model geometry must be discretized using a mesh.
To ensure consistency in the mesh, all geometries are manually meshed, ensuring that
obtained results do not depend on the uncontrolled meshing methods provided in Abaqus.
3.1.6
Element type
The element type used in the analysis is plane strain, 4­node bilinear with reduced in­
tegration (only one integration point) and hourglass control, in Abaqus called CPE4R.
Plane strain elements are chosen since all cases are made as plane strain setups. The
hourglass control is essential for elements with only one integration point, as hourglass
deformations can otherwise take place with no energy required. The default hourglass
control is utilized in this case (see Abaqus Documentation 2020).
Higher order elements could have been used, but since element removal is used for
crack growth using the Gurson model, and due to mesh dependence, small elements
are needed for accurate results. Thus, in this case, having many lower order elements
is beneficial to having few higher order elements. Furthermore, the only higher­order
element types available in Abaqus/Explicit are modified 6­node triangular elements.
3.2
Mode I crack setup
It is desired to investigate the interaction between weakened elements and the interaction
between clusters of weak elements. To investigate this a setup is made with a crack tip
loaded in pure mode I, so that the crack will propagate in a straight path. Clusters of
weak elements can then be located along the fracture path and the interaction between
the clusters and the crack tip can be examined in more detail.
To do this, a circular domain is created with a crack going halfway through the domain, as
displayed in Figure 3.5. Symmetry is utilized in Figure 3.5 but examinations are completed
for a full domain as well. A zoom on the crack tip mesh is seen in Figure 3.6
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
21
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.6: Crack tip mesh for mode I setup. Symmetry utilized. Dashed lines (left)
mark crack tip mesh. Dotted lines (right) mark the (beginning of the) square refined mesh
domain. Zoom on transition between crack tip mesh and square refined mesh domain.
3.2.1
Boundary conditions
A mode I crack tip displacement field is applied to the outer boundary of the domain, as
seen in Figure 3.7, according to Equations (2.2) and (2.3). Displacements are increased
by gradually increasing KI in the equations. The field is applied using the Abaqus user
subroutine VDISP, which is seen in Appendix E.1.
Since the analysis is dynamic, an amplitude of the applied displacements is required.
The most simple amplitude would be a uniformly increasing displacement. However, to
prevent excessive accelerations at the beginning of the analysis, a smooth amplitude
curve is applied as seen in Figure 3.9. The amplitude seen in the figure is based on the
smooth amplitude curve used in Abaqus (see Abaqus Documentation 2020) and follows
Equation (3.4):
a = A0 + (A1 −A0) · ξ3 ·
 10 −15 · ξ + 6ξ2
(3.4)
ξ = t −t0
t1 −t0
(3.5)
where a is the amplitude, t is time, A0 and A1 are start and end amplitudes respectively,
and t0 and t1 are start and end time respectively.
3.2.2
Essential dimensions
All dimension parameters are scaled relative to the crack tip radius Rct. Cluster diameter is
denoted dc The outer radius of the domain Rout must be sufficiently large for the applied
displacement field to cause the desired mode I loading in the region of interest. The
distance between clusters lc is varied to examine the cluster­to­cluster versus multiple­
cluster interaction mechanisms. The distance is illustrated in Figure 3.8.
22
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.7: Initial mode I crack tip displacement field displayed with direction and rela­
tive amplitude on the outer edge. Symmetry utilized. Mesh partitioning shown for full
symmetric domain, and zoomed in on refined mesh region.
2Rct
lc
lc
dc
Figure 3.8: Geometry of the two­dimensional, plane strain small scale yielding model,
showing the cracktip ahead of the clusters.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
23
==PAGE:36==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 3.9: Smooth amplitude curve used
for analyses
y
x
W0
L0
l0
∆y/2
∆y/2
Figure 3.10:
Schematic of the far­field
plane strain tensile test setup used for
numerical calculations, with FPZ within l0
boundaries.
3.3
Uniaxial tensile test setup
A plane strain domain is created for a uniaxial tension test to define the setup. The setup
can be viewed on Figure 3.10, with initial length denoted by L0, initial width W0, a finely
meshed FPZ bounded by l0, and the boundary displacement by ∆y being pulled evenly
in the positive and negative y­direction following a smooth amplitude curve (Figure 3.9).
L0 is chosen to be sufficiently large to engulf the thinning region developing in the plate,
including plane strain necking, shear localization, and fracture related to ductile tearing,
with elastic unloading taking place once thinning initiates, as discussed in Nielsen and
Hutchinson 2012. Rigid body translations in the x­direction are prevented by fixing a
single finite element node at both ends of the domain.
3.4
Bending setup
3.4.1
Components and dimensions
On Figure 3.11 the setup can be seen for the plane strain bending case. Here the rollers
and punch are assumed infinitely rigid, represented in Abaqus as infinite rigid analytical
surfaces where the parameters used can be found in Table 3.4. The contact between the
plate to punch/rollers is introduced by a hard to normal contact, allowing separation but
preventing penetration. In addition a rolling coefficient of friction is added between plate
and roller, using the penalty approach, allowing the plate to slide tangential to the rollers,
as seen in Andersen et al. 2020b. The rolling coefficient µfr = 0.02 represents non­sliding
of the roller and punch which allows fully locking all degrees of freedom for the rollers.
The force exerted from the punch is converted into an equivalent bending moment. The
bending angle associated with the setup in relation to the punch­deformation can accord­
24
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:37==
L
x
y
Roller
Rr
Plate
Punch
FPZ
Roller
Rr
t
2lr
Rp
∆yp
2t
Figure 3.11: Bending setup for plain strain tests, with: Fracture Process Zone (FPZ),
punch displacement ∆yp, punch radius Rp, roller radius Rr, distance between rollers 2lr,
plate length L, and plate thickness t. The origin of the global Cartesian coordinate system
is at the center of the plate. Model parameters are listed in Table 3.4.
Parameter
Value
Hypothetical unit
Description
Rp
0.43
mm
Punch radius
Rr
20
mm
Roller radius
L
60
mm
Plate length
t
1.4 to 1.5
mm
Plate thickness
2lr
5.06
mm
Distance between rollers
Table 3.4: Geometrical Parameters for the plane strain bending case. See Figure 3.11 for
geometrical representation.
ing to Andersen et al. 2020b and ISO 7438:2020(E) be expressed as
¯F =
Fpunch
 (Rr + lr)
(2σ0A0t)
(3.6)
α = 2 sin−1
 
pc + w (∆yp −c)
p2 + (∆yp −c)2
!
180
π
with





p = Rr + lr
c = Rp + Rr + t
w =
q
p2 + (∆yp −c)2 −c2
(3.7)
where ∆yp is the punch displacement.
3.4.2
Element size
The element size of the refined area of the bending setup is initially determined from
a mesh refinement test. The setup is tested with a uniform material with the material
parameters shown in Table 3.5. No nucleation is included.
The setup is tested with 32, 64, 128 and 160 elements over the thickness of the plate. The
results for 64 and 128 elements are seen in Figure 3.12. The plate initiates a cracks at an
angle beyond 90° which means the elements on the fracture surface get very elongated
before fracture happens. For 32 elements, no fracture happens. For 64 elements the
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
25
==PAGE:38==
E
ν
σy
q1
q2
q3
N
f0
fC
fF
210 GPa
0.3
630 MPa
1.5
1
2.25
0.05
0.02
0.15
0.25
Table 3.5: Material parameters used for element size test, bending setup
(a) 64 elements over the thickness of the plate,
at bending angle α = 139°
(b) 128 elements over the thickness of the plate,
at bending angle α = 114°
Figure 3.12: Deformed stress plots for crack initiation of plate in bending. Plots show only
area around initiated crack.
crack initiates and grows mainly vertically, but does take a few steps sideways, affected
by the shear bands seen on the crack surface. For 128 elements, though it still initiates
vertically, the shear bands become clear and the crack propagates through these. The
crack also propagates much further. Figure 3.12a shows the crack at a bending angle
of α = 139° for 64 elements, while Figure 3.12b shows the crack for 128 elements at
α = 114°. If continued to α = 139° the crack has grown through most of the plate.
The second parameter used to decide the element size is the inclusion size. As described
in Section 2.2.2, the Gurson model is developed from a spherical void at the center of a
unit cell. The plate bending setup uses a thickness of t = 1.5 mm. With 128 elements
over the thickness of the plate, this corresponds to an element size of
Le =
t
128 = 11.72 µm
In SEM photos from Heibel et al. 2018, Fig. A4(a) and Santos et al. 2019, Fig. 6+9, inclu­
sions in DP800 materials are seen in sizes ranging from approximately 3 −8 µm. Compar­
ing this to the Gurson concept of a spherical void (or cylindrical void for two dimensions) in
an element, these sizes correspond to an ≈5 µm diameter void in a 11.72 µm × 11.72 µm
element. Naturally, the size of inclusions can vary beyond the previously mentioned inter­
val, but for the sake of simplicity in the model, an average inclusion size can be modelled.
With this in mind, these dimensions fit well for representing inclusions in single elements,
and are thus suitable for modeling discrete inclusions through the plate.
In terms of calculation time, more elements naturally increases the calculation time. By
optimizing the calculations through time and mass scaling, the calculation time for a sim­
ulation with 128 elements over the thickness of the plate can be performed in about 9­20
hours using 24 cores, depending on the setup. For the simulation with 160 elements over
26
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:39==
the thickness a calculation time of more than 17 days was conducted using 24 cores.
The resulting change from 128 to 160 elements over the width did not improve the results
significantly.
Furthermore, 128 elements over the thickness of the plate yields accurate results following
the shear bands while maintaining a calculation time that allows for enough calculations
to be completed.
3.4.3
Analysis methods
The analysis of the bending simulations will be based on the material parameters de­
scribed in Section 3.1.2, with additional cluster parameters described in Section 3.1.4.
3.5
Experimental setup
An experimental test rig is designed to allow for in­situ tomography scanning of a plate in
bending.
3.5.1
Investigated materials
Two types of plate material are investigated: A DP800 1.5 mm sheet and a DP1000
1.0 mm sheet, both provided directly by SSAB.
Both materials are cut into two different test specimen types: One for bending and one
for tensile tests, the latter used for determining material properties not provided by the
manufacturer. Test specimens are cut both along and normal to the rolling direction of the
plate to test effects of anisotropy in the plates.
3.5.2
Preliminary plate bending
Preliminary bending tests are performed to get an idea of the fracture angles of the plates
before making an x­ray tomography scan.
For the DP800 plates the test is performed by manually bending the plates using pliers
and a vise. A picture is taken when a crack is visible on the tension surface of the plate
and the angle is measured from the picture. For the DP1000 plates the test is performed
in the test rig for the normal to rolling direction plates, but rolling direction plates are bent
like the DP800 plates due to the limitation of the test rig bending angle. At least three
plates are tested for each case.
3.5.3
Tomography equipment
The scans are performed using the test rig described in Section 3.5.4. An additional
converter tool is made, as scans are performed on two different scanners requiring two
different fixture solutions. The adapter tool is seen in Figure D.1. The test rig fits in the
top of the tool, and the rod in the bottom can be fixed in the scanner. To prevent sliding
between the test rig and the converter tool adhesive tape is used to fix the two components
during scans.
All scans are performed at the DTU Imaging Center3 using the two scanners described
in Table 3.6. The Nikon scanner has a higher energy output and can thus perform scans
faster, while the ZEISS scanner in some cases allow for better resolution.
For further information on the in­situ tomography scans see Appendix D, and for the
analysis itself see Section 5.3.5.
3.5.4
Plate bending test rig
The test rig used to load the plate during in­situ tomography scans is displayed in Fig­
ure 3.14. It consists of the following components:
3See DTU Imaging Center web page imaging.dtu.dk
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
27
==PAGE:40==
Scanner
X­ray max energy
Max power
ZEISS XRadia 410 Versa
150 keV
10 W
Nikon XT H 225
225 keV
225 W
Table 3.6: X­ray instruments used for in­situ plate bending tomography scans
(a) Punch
(b) Block
(c) Top
(d) Shoulder bolt
Figure 3.13: Components used in test rig. Circle around holes or on cylinder end surface
indicated threads.
• Plate
• Punch
• Block
• Top
• Shoulder bolts
• M12 bolt
Test rig components are seen in Figure 3.13 and Figure 3.15 while technical drawings are
seen in Appendix F.1.
The test rig functions are as follows: The punch (Figure 3.13a) is fastened to the fixture in
the tomography scanner through four M3 bolts going through the holes in the component
and fasten into the scanner fixture below. Shoulder bolts (Figure 3.13d) are put through
the holes in the block (Figure 3.13b) and top (Figure 3.13c) and are fastened into the
punch with M4 threads. The plate is mounted between the punch and block, held in place
by the friction between the components. The M12 bolt is screwed through the threaded
hole in the Top component until it touches the top of the Block and tightened until the Top
component touches the lower surface of the Shoulder bolt heads.
The plate is now loaded by turning the M12 bolt a defined number of rotations, increasing
the displacement of the Block downwards, bending the plate.
All components except the M12 bolt and the plate are produced in 7075­T6 aluminum. The
material is chosen due to its attenuation being µ lower than that of steel (see Section 2.4),
while the strength remains high.
FEM testing
The finite element method (FEM) is used to test the forces required to bend the test plate,
and subsequently to test the durability of the test rig against the forces transferred through
the plate. SolidWorks 2021 is used for setup and simulations.
Plate bending test: The plate setup is seen in Figure 3.16. Due to the shape of the plate,
28
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.14: Test rig used for in­situ plate
bending tomography scanning.
Threads
not shown.
30
4
R2
10
20
Figure 3.15: Test plate dimensions. All di­
mensions are in mm.
Plate thickness is
1 mm.
double symmetry is utilized. Translation in the directions normal to the symmetry surfaces
is restricted, and translation in the y­direction is constricted at the area where the plate
will come into contact with the punch (here defined by an area reaching 0.5 mm from the
plate center, as seen on Figure 3.16c). The load is placed at a 1 mm thick area (See
Figure 3.16b), centered 8 mm from the center of the plate, as this is where the support
initially will be located. All material beyond the loading area in the Z­direction is removed,
as it is a free edge and has next to no effect on results.
The simulation is done with material parameters corresponding to a strong DP1000 steel
(from Cold­rolled DP1000­GI 2019): Young’s modulus E = 200 GPa, Poisson’s ratio
ν = 0.3, yield strength σy = 850 MPa, tensile strength σUTS = 1130 MPa, density
ρ = 7800 kg/m3. The material follows isotropic hardening, and a plasticity model with
tangent modulus Et = E
20 = 10 GPa. The simulation is run using displacement control
in the y­direction (see Figure 3.16), bending the plate to an approximate 45 deg angle
(4.25 mm displacement). The geometry is meshed using LST elements (2nd order trian­
gular elements).
Convergence of results is ensured by refining the mesh to half the previous size until
resulting force deviates by less than 1%. This happens at a mesh size of 0.25 mm.
The required load to enforce the displacement is plotted against the displacement itself
in Figure 3.17. The required load increases as the displacement does, as the plasticity
model with a tangent modulus has no limit. In reality, cracks will begin emerging on the
tension surface once ultimate tensile strength is reached. Moreover, the load is placed
8 mm from the plate center, but as the plate starts bending, this distance decreases in the
simulation, thereby decreasing the arm of the momentum of the force. In reality however,
the 8 mm remain constant for the setup. These two factors mean that the required load
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
29
==PAGE:42==
(a) FEM simulation section cut out from full plate. Red dot indicates
point where displacements are controlled.
Y
X
Z
(b) Upper side of plate setup. Blue area marks
loading area and pink arrows mark loading di­
rection.
Y
X
Z
(c) Lower side of plate setup, rotated 180°
around Y axis compared to Figure 3.16b. Blue
areas mark fixture area and green arrows mark
the fixed degrees of freedom directions for the
respective areas.
Figure 3.16: Setup used for plate bending test
seen in Figure 3.17 becomes less accurate the larger the displacement becomes. With
this in mind, a realistic estimate of a necessary force will be 250 N. Since double symmetry
is utilized, this corresponds to a force of 1000 N. Finally, a safety factor Sf = 1.5 is used
to give a more conservative estimate, yielding a force of F = 1500 N. This will be used
for further calculations.
Block and punch test: Both block and punch parts are tested using FEM with the load
found from the plate test. The punch is tested only at a purely vertical load, while the block
is tested both at a vertical load and a 45° load since the reaction force from the plate will
be angled once bending initiates. Both stresses and displacements are examined.
In both cases, the material used has Young’s modulus E = 72 GPa, Poisson’s ratio ν =
0.33 and yield strength σy = 500 MPa, according to GRANTA Edupack 2021. Stresses
prove not to cross yield strength and no large deformations are seen. Thus a static study
is sufficient in this case.
The setup for block and punch simulations are seen in Figure 3.18. For both block and
30
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:43==
0
1
2
3
4
|uy| displacement [mm]
0
100
200
300
400
Load [N]
e > UTS
Figure 3.17: Load­displacement plot for plate bending FEM test. Displacement measured
in Y­direction at the point indicated in Figure 3.16a. The displacement where effective
stresses (σe) at the tension­side of the plate exceed ultimate tensile strength (UTS) is
marked with blue dashed line.
punch, a circular cut is made out from the part to be used for the finite element analysis.
Symmetry is utilized once for the block and twice for the punch, except in the case of
buckling, where no symmetry has been utilized. The bottom and sides of the circular
cut­outs are constrained in every degree of freedom, while the top surface is kept free
of constraints to allow stresses to be evaluated on curved surfaces near the base plate
surface.
In every setup a 1 mm global mesh size is used with the local mesh size being refined in
areas of interest.
The converged stresses for the block are 88 MPa for a vertical force and 130 MPa for a
45° force. The punch stresses reach 55 MPa. In every case the stresses are well below
the yield limit with a minimum safety factor of Sf,min = 3.85.
Moving to displacements, the maximum resulting displacements found for the block are
45.19 µm and 89.65 µm for vertical and 45° forces respectively.
For the punch it is 11.90 µm. It should be noted that the displacements here do not take
into account the base plates of the punch and block parts, but since these are relatively
thick, displacements from these are assumed negligible. Thus no critical displacements
are observed.
Lastly a buckling study is made for the punch. The full 1500 N load is placed on top of
the punch and a 1 N load is placed at a corner of the punch facing towards the punch to
create an imbalance, as displayed in Figure 3.18c. The first buckling mode is found at a
load 24 times larger than the one applied ­ i.e. 36 000 N. Therefore there is no real risk of
buckling in the setup, even with the full base plate not being taken into account.
Thread calculations
Based on the 1500 N load obtained from the FEM results, calculations are made to dimen­
sion the load carrying components of the rig. Block and punch are tested using the finite
element method, but Shoulder bolts are dimensioned through analytical calculations.
The weakest point of the shoulder bolt component is the threaded section, and so dimen­
sioning is based on the threads. Shoulder bolts are distributed with two on one side of
the rig and one on the other side. A conservative assumption is made that the load is
distributed evenly on either side, leaving half the load to a single shoulder bolt so that
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
31
==PAGE:44==
(a) Loaded block setup. Pink ar­
rows show vertical load. Red ar­
rows show 45 deg load.
(b) Loaded punch setup
(c) Punch buckling setup.
Or­
ange arrow shows location and
direction of 1 N imbalance force.
Figure 3.18: Setups for block and punch. Green areas show symmetry planes. Blue areas
show fully fixed surfaces. Pink areas show loading area. Arrows are colored according
to applied areas and show constrained degrees of freedom or loading directions.
Fsb = 750 N. The shoulder bolts are made in an Aluminum 7075­T6 alloy with a yield
strength of σy = 500 MPa (cf. GRANTA Edupack 2021). A safety factor of Sf = 4 is
chosen based on Krex 1986, p. 439.
The required cross­sectional area of the shoulder bolt is calculated as
Areq = Fsb Sf
σy
= 6.00 mm2
which yields a diameter of
dreq = 2
r
Areq
π
= 2.76 mm
With this in mind, M4 threads are chosen. The reference cross­sectional area is calculated
by
As = π
d2 + d3
4
2
= 8.78 mm2
with diameters d2 and d3 found in Klit and Pedersen 2014, p. 121. Since Areq < As, this
requirement is fulfilled.
The load carrying area of the threads are calculated as
Ath = z d2 π h = 6.76 mm2
where z = 1.0 is the number of load­carrying threads, d2 = 3.545 mm is the pitch diameter
and h is the thread profile height. A less conservative approach could be made since only
32
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:45==
Material
a0
b0
B
L0
Lc
Full length
Arc radius
DP800
1.50
12.5
20
50
75
140
20
DP1000
1
12.5
29
50
75
200
20
Table 3.7: Dog bones for tensile testing made according to ISO 6892­1:2019 with dimen­
sions in mm.
a portion of the load is carried by the first thread, but since this portion varies depending
on the thread type, this approach is chosen.
Since Areq < Ath, this requirement is also fulfilled. M4 threads are thus sufficient for
carying the load.
3.5.5
Tensile tests
Tensile tests are performed on the SHY­039­Instron­8872 machine at DTU structural lab.
The machine is a 25 kN machine, fit for dog bone tests specimens according to ISO 6892­
1:2019. Following the limitations of the plate size of the DP800 (1000 × 150 × 1.5 mm) the
dog bones for the DP800 are created according to ISO 6892­1:2019, but with limited grip
area (see Table 3.7). Which is also why the DP1000 plate have changed parameters only
for grip area, compared to the DP800 tensile tests, because of no plate width limitations,
as seen on Table 3.7 (for machine drawings see (Appendix F.2).
Dog bones are made both in the rolling direction and in 90° to the rolling direction (normal
to the rolling direction). Strain deformation speed are set to 1.2 mm/min according to ISO
6892­1:2019.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
33
==PAGE:46==
4
Setup validation
In this section, the validity of the models is ensured.
4.1
Validation of mode I crack setup
4.1.1
Displacement field
The mode I displacement field is applied according to Equations (2.2) and (2.3). To en­
sure that the implementation is done correctly through the VDISP user subroutine (Ap­
pendix E.1), two methods are used. First, the resulting displacements are plotted directly
from the equations to compare with the Abaqus output. Secondly, the equations are also
applied as expressions in Abaqus in a different study to check if the results are identical.
For the former method, a comparison of the theoretical displacements and the Abaqus
results is seen in Figure 4.1. Here the general shape of the displacement field is seen
to coincide with Abaqus results. The figure shows only the shape, but actual values for
displacements are compared for identical radius and KI values at certain boundary points.
The displacements match well with Abaqus displacements being 0.0557% higher. The
higher displacement is the result of the VDISP updating the radius in the displacement
calculation for each iteration while the theoretical calculations only use the initial radius.
The difference is small however, since a outer radius of Rout/Rct = 1000 and stress
intensity factor KI = 12 000 N/mm3/2 only increases the radius at θ = 0 with 0.56 mm.
For the second method the expressions used as displacements in Abaqus yield the same
displacements as the VDISP, again only slightly lower due to the same effect described
above, since expressions also use initial coordinates. The mode I displacement field is
thus validated.
Note that the VDISP is used for calculations as opposed to expressions since they provide
easier access to change values such as KI or end time without redoing the entire setup.
4.1.2
Amplitude
The amplitude provided in the Abaqus user subroutine VDISP (Appendix E.1) is validated
by plotting the displacement of a single node from an Abaqus simulation and comparing
to the desired amplitude seen in Figure 3.9. The Abaqus amplitude is seen in Figure 4.2
and corresponds clearly to the desired amplitude.
4.1.3
Analysis time and outer radius
The analysis time is varied from 0.1 s to 2.0 s to test the different results. It is seen that the
resulting fracture paths vary only little, but kinetic energy raises with decreased time. The
simulation time is set to 0.5 s since this yields kinetic energy below the recommended limit
(5­10%, see Abaqus Documentation 2020) while maintaining a good calculation time.
Likewise the outer radius Rout is varied from Rout/Rct = 100 to Rout/Rct = 1000. Little
variance is seen in resulting fracture paths. No noticeable change is seen when increasing
the outer radius beyond Rout/Rct = 500, but Rout/Rct = 1000 is chosen as a conservative
approach, since calculation time does not increase much between the two.
4.1.4
Plastic zone
To validate the setup, the plastic zone that the displacement field causes is compared
to the plastic zone according to theory. A test setup is made with Rout/Rct = 100. The
mesh is adaptive with 50 elements on the outer edge and a mesh size of Rct/5 around the
34
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:47==
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Angle [deg]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Displacement [mm]
U1
U2
Ures
(a) Magnitude of displacements in u1 (x), u2 (y) and
ures (resulting) directions.
(b) Mode I displacement field shape. Blue circle
= domain boundary. Arrows show displacement
magnitude and direction.
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
Ures
(c) Displacements, resulting
Figure 4.1: Comparison between theoretical displacements according to Equations (2.2)
and (2.3), and displacements from FEM simulations
crack tip. The mode I crack tip displacement field is applied with a smooth amplitude going
from KI = 0 to KI = 2 × 104. A linear elastic material is used with Young’s modulus E =
200 × 103 MPa, Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.3 and density ρ = 7.8 × 10−9 t/mm3. Symmetry has
been utilized in the setup. The result is displayed in Figure 4.3 while Figure 4.4 shows the
theoretical plastic zone for a plane strain loaded crack tip, according to Anderson 2017
ry(θ) =
KI
σy
2 
(1 −2ν)2 (1 + cos θ) + 3
2 sin2 θ

(4.1)
The comparison shows clear coherence between the finite element results and theory,
and so the applied displacement field functions as intended.
The displacements on a full domain is surveyed as well to ensure proper functionality. The
displacements prove to correspond to the prescribed displacement field (see Figure 3.7)
and so once again confirms the proper functioning of the subroutine.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
35
==PAGE:48==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Abaqus displacement
Analytical amplitude
Figure 4.2: Normalized displacement over time for outer edge node for Abaqus simulation
using VDISP user subroutine. Compared to analytical amplitude (Figure 3.9).
Figure 4.3:
Stress plot zoomed in on
crack tip of mode I displacement field ap­
plied to circular domain. Gray area marks
the plastic zone with effective Von Mises
stress above yield limit (630 MPa).
Figure 4.4:
Plastic zone shape around
mode I loaded crack tip in plane strain
for Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.3. According to
Equation (4.1). Radial axis normalized as
ry(θ)/
KI
σy
2
36
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:49==
σy [MPa]
E [MPa]
N
Rout
Rct
W
Rct
L
Rct
cd
vmax
630
200 000
0.05
1000
8
48
8.04E5
f0
fC
fF
q1
q2
q3
KI,end [NN/mm3/2]
0.02
0.15
0.25
1.50
1.00
2.25
12 000
Table 4.1: Parameters used for initial Mode I setup uniform test. cd is the dilatational wave
speed, Equation (2.24), and the reference velocity vmax is the maximum velocity on the
domain boundary during simulation.
0.020
0.250
0.135
0.078
0.193
VVF
Figure 4.5: VVF plot for result of initial mode I uniform test. Zoom on crack tip (left) and
initial crack kinking (right).
4.1.5
Crack path for homogeneous material
The setup is tested with a homogeneous material setup to ensure that the crack prop­
agates as expected before introducing material heterogeneities that will alter the crack
path. For pure Mode I loading, the crack is expected to propagate in a straight line ahead
of the crack tip.
The setup is tested with the dimensions and material parameters shown in Table 4.1.
Material parameters represent a mild steel, and GTN parameters are adapted from V.
Tvergaard and A. Needleman 2001 and Andersen et al. 2020b. 64 elements are used
across the width of the FPZ. No mass scaling has been applied. The result from the
simulation is seen in Figure 4.5. Though a straight crack is expected, the results show a
curved crack close to the initial crack tip, transitioning into a straight crack, which shortly
thereafter kinks into a zigzag pattern.
The development of the crack tip is investigated further. First of all, it is noted that the time
from the crack initiates until it reaches the end of the FPZ is about 1/12 500 of the total time
of the simulation. At its peak, the crack advances with a velocity of ˙a ≥5625 m/s. In an
article, Xu and Alan Needleman 1994 investigates fast crack growth in brittle solids, finding
crack velocities of about 750 m/s, also noting the connection between crack propagation
speed and crack branching. Similarly, Meyers 1994 lists experimental results for brittle
crack velocities, the highest being that of glass with a velocity of 1500 m/s. The velocity
found here is significantly above what would be expected for a ductile steel, as ductile
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
37
==PAGE:50==
materials in general have lower crack speeds. Wang et al. 2019 explains this from an
energy approach, crack branching stems from the difference between the energy release
rate G and the crack extension resistance R. Essentially, when the difference G −R is
large enough, the excess energy is sufficient to drive a secondary crack, and bifurcation
occurs. Yoffe 1951 explains crack branching through analysis of the crack tip mechanical
field, coming to the conclusion that at low crack velocities, the hoop stress σθθ is largest
at θ = 0°, but at higher velocities, the maximum σθθ is found at angles θ > 0 where θ is the
relative to the crack tip, see Figure 2.1. Bifurcation is thus explained to be related to the
crack velocity. With all of this in mind, it would seem that the zigzag pattern appearing at
the right hand side of the FPZ (Figure 4.5) could be a result of the crack velocity ˙a being
too large.
An actual bifurcation is not seen in Figure 4.5, but close examination reveals that the
crack has stopped right before kinking, and the VVF has grown in two lines at θ = ±45°
from the original crack tip direction, which can be seen as an attempt at bifurcation. The
upper line becomes dominant with slightly higher VVF values, and leaves the lower VVF
line behind, as is seen in Figure 4.5. The fact that the upper path becomes dominant is
possibly due to the crack being slightly below the original crack tip height. That said, it
resembles the uniaxial tension case where shear bands will develop at ±45° angles at
the center of the necking region, where one shear band eventually becomes dominant as
seen in Figure 4.20.
The VVF damage evolution is examined in Figure 4.6. In the first picture (I) VVF has barely
evolved, but centers at the center of the crack tip as is to be expected. In picture II, two
arcs are seen to emerge from the crack tip VVF field at ±45°, intersecting at distance
ahead of the crack tip. The VVF at this stage is approximately equal at the intersection
and at the crack tip center. In picture III the VVF at the intersection is now large relative
to the rest of the domain. The two arcs are more clear as well. Picture IV shows the VVF
distribution right before fracture. The arrow indicates the point where fracture initiates.
The crack has grown forwards and backwards in picture V , and new arcs have appeared
connecting the backwards crack tip to the original crack tip. Finally, VI shows the fractured
crack.
While a moving crack tip grows from the tip itself, it is not unexpected that crack initiation
occurs at a small distance in front of the crack tip itself. The macroscopic mean stress σm
plays an important role in the GTN model, and since there can be no stress component
normal to the crack surface, the magnitude of σm is limited there. Conversely, at the time
localization happens in Figure 4.6 II and III, σm peaks exactly around the localization
point.
That said, it is unexpected how far in front of the crack tip the crack initiates. In Figure 4.6
II the maximum VVF is found slightly ahead of the original crack tip, in the red area (not
at the arc intersection though it is only slightly below at this point). The maximum VVF is
exactly what is expected, and so the VVF peaking at the arc intersection comes more as
a surprise.
It is noticed that once fracture has occurred, the crack sides initiate a vertical wiggling
motion. Figure 4.7 displays this by showing the vertical displacement (U2) for the node at
the center of the crack tip. Had the simulation been quasi­static, the displacement would
have been less sudden, and no wiggling would occur after fracture. It is thus clear that a
dynamic effect is at play.
To confirm this, energies are examined for the simulation, revealing a sudden burst in
kinetic energy when the crack initiates, as seen in Figure 4.8. Until fracture the kinetic
38
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:51==
2.00
2.08
2.16
2.24
2.31
VVFx10-2
2.00
2.57
3.15
3.72
4.29
VVFx10-2
2.00
3.35
4.70
6.05
7.40
VVFx10-2
2.00
7.23
12.45
17.67
22.90
VVFx10-2
III
I
II
IV
2.00
7.21
12.41
17.62
22.83
VVFx10-2
2.00
5.71
9.41
13.12
16.82
VVFx10-2
VI
V
Figure 4.6: Evolution of VVF at crack tip. Arrow at IV indicates fracture initiation. VVF
scaled for each picture.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.58 0.59 0.6
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
Figure 4.7: U2 displacement for center crack tip node. Zoom in red on wiggling motion
after fracture.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
39
==PAGE:52==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10-10
10-6
10-2
102
Internal energy
Kinetic energy
Figure 4.8: Comparison between internal and kinetic energy for initial Mode I uniform
simulation
energy is well below the internal energy, as should be the case for a quasi­static analysis.
At fracture, however, the kinetic energy bursts up to reach 6% of the internal energy.
This is at the boundary of the 5­10% prescribed by Abaqus (see Abaqus Documentation
2020). Even if the energy is considered to be within the limits, the sudden burst of kinetic
energy, rising to more than 7000 times its previous value, must necessarily be considered
a dynamic effect.
Determination of root cause
Several factors could be the root of the behavior described above, thereby a number
of subsequent simulations are performed in an attempt to find the cause and possibly
improve the setup. The general attempts made are listed here:
• Increasing time and scaling final KI
• Increase of outer radius Rout
• Increase refinement of domain width W
• Use adaptive mesh
• Exclude GTN damage from model
• Make the setup symmetric
• Change crack tip size relative to element size Rct/Le
• Increase strain hardening exponent N
• Try alternative material properties (σy, E, ...)
• Try alternative GTN parameters
• Add randomly distributed weaknesses in FPZ
• Weaken elements in crack tip
• Change amplitude from smooth to linear with ramp
• Use velocity­controlled VDISP (instead of displacement­controlled)
40
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:53==
VVF
0.118
0.020
0.150
0.085
0.053
Figure 4.9: VVF result for simulation with strain hardening exponent N = 0.2
0.138
0.100
0.150
0.125
0.113
VVF
Figure 4.10: VVF plot for f0 = 0.10
• Use triangular higher­order elements (CPE6M)
• Use plane stress elements
• Make rectangular mode I setup
• Make charpy specimen in bending setup
Besides what is listed here, selected combinations of above­mentioned attempts are tried
as well. In total more than 90 simulations are performed. Details on simulations, the
reasoning behind them and the results for each test are included in Appendix A.
A few of the simulations yield results that cause a straight fracture path, as is expected
for a pure mode I setup. However, even though the fracture paths are made straight, the
results are not fully satisfying.
The first result yielding a straight crack is made by changing the strain hardening exponent
from N = 0.05 to N = 0.20. The result, seen in Figure 4.9, shows traces of attempts
at bifurcation manifested as the VVF bands at θ = ±45° along the crack edge. For
each attempt, the crack has taken a halt, VVF bands have developed, and the crack has
continued forward. The crack propagation speed is still very large.
The next result yielding a straight fracture is obtained by using f0 = 0.10, as seen in
Figure 4.10. In this case it seems that the crack does not halt because it takes significantly
less energy to fracture the element in front of the crack tip. The momentum of the crack
tip growth is thus not stopped. If using f0 = 0.05, smaller kinks start to appear, though the
crack is straighter than in the initial test using f0 = 0.02.
While the crack is straight, f0 = 0.10 is an unrealistically high initial porosity for a material,
and once again, the crack propagation speed is very high.
A straight crack can also be obtained by using certain combinations of GTN parame­
ters. An optimization of parameters for a straight crack has been performed (see Ap­
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
41
==PAGE:54==
0.775
0.100
1.000
0.550
0.325
x10
-2
VVF
Figure 4.11: VVF plot for optimized GTN parameters
Figure 4.12: Progressing VVF plots for simulation with plane stress elements.
pendix A.1.9), and parameters f0 = 0.001, fC = 0.01 and fF = 0.015 are found to be
ideal. The result is seen in Figure 4.11.
The crack grows at a steady pace at initiation, but the propagation speed accelerates as
the crack develops, resulting in a high speed once the end of the FPZ is reached. The
used parameters are optimized for obtaining a straight crack, but do not necessarily reflect
any real material, and so their significance is questionable.
The last straight crack is obtained by using plane stress elements rather than plane strain.
Shear localization does not develop as easily in plane stress elements due to the lack of
out­of­plane hydrostatic tension. Specifically for the GTN model, removing the out­of­
plane stress also lowers the mean stress σm, and as a result the term 2q1f∗cosh

3q2σm
2¯σ

(from Equation (2.12)) also decreases, resulting in a larger yield surface.
Figure 4.12 shows the crack development with plane stress elements. Besides the prop­
agation speed being significantly slower in this case, Figure 4.12 II also shows that there
is an effect of the crack tip mesh, where some elements in the crack tip area are still not
fractured while some elements in the square refined mesh domain have started fractur­
ing (see Figure 3.6 for mesh). This effect is caused by the difference in element size
in the transition between crack tip mesh and square refined mesh domain, where larger
elements require more energy to fracture.
Plane stress elements cause both a straight crack and a lower crack propagation speed.
Besides the mesh effect at the crack tip, this is essentially the desired behavior of the
42
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:55==
mode I setup. Furthermore the kinetic energy is examined at fracture, revealing a much
lower increase in kinetic energy compared to that of the initial simulation (for details see
Figure A.16).
While plane stress elements work well they do not solve the issue, as the goal is to sim­
ulate a plane strain setup, but it points to the root issue being one of development of
shear localization. It should also be noted that the mode I displacement field applied
corresponds to plane strain and not plane stress.
It is not clear what the root cause of the unexpected fracture behavior is, but the GTN
model seems to be part of it. Without the GTN model implemented, the setup behaves
as expected (see Appendix A.1.5).
One theory is that for the applied mode I loading several elements weaken simultaneously
and so when the first element fractures, the next elements fracture almost immediately as
well, causing rapid crack growth.
Another effect of the GTN model is that once the VVF of an element grows, it is weakened
and subsequently other elements will gradually take over its load. This causes the stress
distribution to change, and along with it the pressure and triaxiality distributions. This
can heavily affect the yield surface of the GTN model (see Equation (2.12)) and cause
unexpected fracture patterns. This has however not been tested.
A different explanation would be that the simulation time is too short but when comparing
the initial test with the results of a simulation with 20 times the simulation time, no change is
seen (Appendix A.1.1). Therefore the effect seen is deemed to stem from a dynamic effect
appearing during fracture process rather than being the result of a too fast simulation.
The unexpected behavior has not been fully explained or understood, and so the usability
of the mode I setup is severely limited.
4.1.6
Comparison to literature
A comparison is made to existing literature where the mode I crack tip displacement field
has been used to show void growth. In V. Tvergaard and Hutchinson 2002, two distinct
crack tip interaction mechanisms are shown: void­by­void and multiple­void interaction.
The former represents interaction with a single void at a time while the latter represents
interaction between the crack tip and multiple voids.
Following the geometry showed in Figure 3.8 for a symmetrical setup, clusters are fully
filled with elements on the verge of fracturing (f0,weak = 0.24 with fF = 0.25) and no other
Gurson parameters for the rest of the domain, making it abide by J2­flow theory in order
to approach the setup done by V. Tvergaard and Hutchinson 2002. Instead of following
the initial void volume fraction f0 definition that Tvergaard and Hutchinson uses, the Dunn
index (DI) is used, with the Dunn index given by
DI = lc −dc
dc
(4.2)
Using the mode I setup with the material parameters presented in Section 3.1.2 but without
nucleation, DI = 3 shows multiple void interaction as seen in Figure 4.13. The result is
similar to that of V. Tvergaard and Hutchinson 2002 with 0.5dc/lc = 0.1. The examination
in Figure 4.13 has 0.5dc/lc = 0.125. Another literature example is Srivastava et al. 2017
where the crack path is controlled through the micro­structure in a sinusoidal pattern. Due
to the engineering of the crack path, the latter article is not ideal for comparison.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
43
==PAGE:56==
(a) Undeformed
(b) Deformed
Figure 4.13: Mode I results with (a) initial mesh and (b) deformed mesh when the first
ligament has been reduced to 1/3 of its original width. Weak elements at the hole positions
not shown. Dunn index DI = 3
4.2
Validation of bending setup
4.2.1
Time and mass scaling
A number of tests are performed to optimize analysis time and mass scaling to achieve
the shortest computational time while keeping the simulation quasi­static. The optimized
yields the ratio cd/vmax = 5351 where cd is the dilatational wave speed and vmax is the
maximum punch displacement speed. The kinetic energy at its worst is here about 0.5%
of the internal energy, i.e. much lower than the recommended 5­10% (see Abaqus Doc­
umentation 2020).
4.2.2
Imperfection band test
Following the setup described in Section 3.4, a homogeneous model is tested against the
imperfection bands described in Andersen et al. 2020a. An imperfection band is applied
as shown in Figure 4.14.
The imperfection band is added to avoid symmetrical fracture initiation as seen Figure 4.15.
The intend is not to drive the crack path, but to act as a trigger for localization. As seen
in Figure 4.16, fracture initiates outside the imperfection band and without following the
imperfection band path. The imperfection band is introduced at the bottom surface of
the plate, extending t/6 into the plate in the y­direction, with an angle of ψimperf = 45°.
The imperfection band does this by having a 2­element width in the x­direction shifting
one element to the left as it moves one element up from the free surface at the bottom
of the plate. The imperfection band has an initial porosity of f0,imperf = f0 + ∆f0 where
∆f0 = 0.01f0.
Figures 4.15 and 4.16 are shown for the same punch displacement but a noticeable longer
crack is seen with the imperfection band present. As noted in Andersen et al. 2020b,
the imperfection causes a noticeable reduction of the critical bending angle as seen in
Figure 4.17. Since results coincide with literature, the setup is deemed valid.
4.3
Validation of uniaxial setup
4.3.1
Time and mass scaling
As with mode I and bending setups, time is optimized to yield optimal computational time
while ensuring a quasi­static simulation with kinetic energy well below 5­10%. No mass
scaling is used.
44
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:57==
x
y
ψimperf
x = 0
t/6
t
Figure 4.14: Refined mesh region with imperfection band at bottom surface of the plate,
extending t/6 into the plate in the y­direction, the angle of the imperfection band is
ψimperf = 45◦, relative to the free surface of the plate and the y­axis at x=0.
εP
eff/ε0
240
360
0
60
120
180
300
Figure 4.15: Homogeneous bending test, with parameters from Andersen et al. 2020a,
using material parameters N = 0.05 and f0 = 0.02, showing symmetrical fracture initia­
tion, before a dominating crack path takes over.
εP
eff/ε0
240
360
0
60
120
180
300
Figure 4.16: Imperfection band bending test, with parameters from Andersen et al. 2020a
being ∆f = 0.01, N = 0.05 and f0 = 0.02, red band over the fracture path shows the
imperfection band.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
45
==PAGE:58==
15
30
45
60
75
90 105 120 135
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Figure 4.17: Normalized punch force versus bending angle shown for a homogeneous
setup and an imperfection band setup.
4.3.2
Convergence study
As a validation of the uniaxial setup described in Section 3.3, a convergence analysis is
carried out in order to depict the mesh effect of the Gurson model under uniaxial tension.
Seven different meshes are used in the convergence analysis, starting from 36 elements
through the width and ending with 144 elements (nel,x = [36, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 144]).
In Figure 4.18 the two different fractures are shown, with Figure 4.18a showing the cup­
cup fracture that happens for Le ≤96/W0, and Figures 4.18b and 4.18c showing slant
fracture for Le ≥112/W0.
The maximal nominal traction is given by Tmax = Fmax/W0, sometimes denoted as the
nominal Considère stress σC = Fmax/W0, which can be identified as the Considère load
per original area A0 at the onset of necking, where the cohesive separation process begins
at δ = 0 as described in Nielsen and Hutchinson 2012. In most applications of cohesive
traction separation laws, the two most important features are the maximum traction and
the work over original area of the tractions
Z
Tdδ ≡Γ0 = ΓI + ΓII
(4.3)
which is calculated by the use of the trapezoidal method for numerical approximation of
the cohesive fracture energy
Γ0 =
Z b
a
f(x)dx ≈1
2
k
X
n=1
(xn+1 −xn) (fn + fn+1)
(4.4)
where a and b are the boundaries for the curve, here represented by the onset of necking
(δ = 0) and at first element fracture, respectively, and k is the number of entries in the
numerical data.
In Figure 4.19 traction­separation curves from the analysis are presented. The force is
normalized with the yield stress and the initial stressed area in the x­z plane recalling
Figure 3.10 (z­direction being out of plane). With the material parameters used being the
same as Table 3.5, a maximum traction of Fmax/(σyA0) = 1.2303 is obtained, shown as
the Considère separation point in Figure 4.19 at εtrue = 0.0276.
46
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:59==
(a) Le = W0/96.
(b) Le = W0/112.
(c) Le = W0/144.
Figure 4.18: Fracture for uniaxial tension with varying W0/Le ratios. (a) Cup­cup fracture
with no slanted fracture (b) Cup­cup fracture followed by slanted fracture (c) Small cup­cup
fracture followed by slanted fracture. Color difference represents VVF.
The curves in Figure 4.19 represent the discretization convergence analysis where the
same tendency is seen until the onset of necking. The curves for nel,x ≤96, yielding the
cup­cup fracture seen in Figure 4.18a, show an approximately linear drop in force once
the crack initiates. The curves for nel,x ≥112 show the same tendency initially until the
slanted fracture takes over, and a significant drop in force is seen.
From the traction­separation curve it can be seen that the energy before the Considère
separation point is not mesh dependent, but from there the energy is clearly mesh de­
pendent. For nel,x ≥80, ΓI is only reduced slightly as the mesh is refined. ΓII changes
significantly with different mesh sizes, but only a small change is seen from nel,x = 128 to
nel,x = 144.
The cohesive fracture energy Γ0 is depicted in Figure 4.20, based on the data presented
in Figure 4.19. As suggested by Nielsen and Hutchinson 2012, when Le ≈0 the only
contribution to Γ0 is ΓI, because of the mesh dependency of ΓII.
In this analysis an imperfection band is not introduced, as it was in Nielsen and Hutchinson
2012, therefore, showing the straight horizontal fracture at low discretization and a larger
contribution from ΓII from the straight fracture initiation before following the shear band.
Besides this, results are similar.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
47
==PAGE:60==
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
True strain []
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Considère
Figure 4.19: Traction­separation curves for different mesh sizes in Mode I at a initial
porosity of f0 = 0.02. Engineering strain to true strain calculated as εtrue = ln (1 + εeng)
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
Le/W0
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Without slanted fracture
With slanted fracture
Figure 4.20: Cohesive fracture energy for different mesh sizes, shown with two different
markers for fractures through the shear band and for straight horizontal fractures.
48
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:61==
5
Analysis
This chapter will contain the analysis of mode I crack simulations (Section 5.1), bending
simulations (Section 5.2), and experiments (Section 5.3).
5.0.1
Data treatment
In Chapter 5, results are displayed in the following manner:
Boxplots show the median, the lower quartile Q1 and the upper quartile Q3, where Q1 and
Q3 are the 25th and 75th percentile, respectively. Whiskers are included and calculated
as
wmax = max(xi < Q3 + 1.5 IQR)
(5.1)
wmin = min(xi > Q1 −1.5 IQR)
(5.2)
where xi is each value used for the boxplot, and the InterQuartile Range (IQR) is given
by IQR = Q3 −Q1. Values outside the whisker range (i.e. xi > Q3 + 1.5 IQR] or xi <
Q1 −1.5 IQR) are shown as outliers.
Where standard deviation is used, it is calculated as
σ =
sP(xi −µ)2
Npop
(5.3)
where σ is the population standard deviation, xi is each value of the population, µ is the
mean of the population and Npop is the size of the population.
5.1
Mode I crack analysis
As a continuation of the mode I validation (Section 4.1), an investigation is made in order
to examine an isolated cluster/void interaction without the effect of randomized cluster
locations. With a straight crack path, effects can be investigated independently.
As in Section 4.1, symmetry is utilized. The same parameters are used as in Section 4.1.6
(without nucleation and with f0,weak = 0.24), with the exception of a background porosity
of f0 = 0.005 in all elements outside of the clusters. The investigation is carried out for
three different Dunn indexes DI = {1, 3, 5} as depicted in Figure 5.1. Six clusters are
present in simulations, but only the first three are shown.
For DI = 1, Figure 5.1a top picture shows the unloaded configuration with the weak clus­
ter elements before they start fracturing. In remaining plots these are excluded. Secondly
Figure 5.1a shows the crack initiation with first element failure, with an already increasing
void volume fraction for the second ligament. Finally Figure 5.1a shows the second ele­
ment failure, with an increasing void volume fraction for both the third and fourth ligament.
Figure 5.1b shows the deformation and VVF for the setup with DI = 3, with first element
failure at the first ligament closest to the crack tip, without having a significant increase
in void volume fraction for the second ligament. Then when second ligament has an
element failure, it fractures further in a shorter time frame, showing an increase in void
volume fraction for the third ligament.
For DI = 5 seen in Figure 5.1c, tendencies mentioned in Section 4.1.5 starts to show,
with an increased crack speed and a divergence from the straight crack path, leaving
groups of elements at the symmetry line, split from the rest of the setup.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
49
==PAGE:62==
VVF
0.25
0.209
0.168
0.128
0.867
0.459
0.005
(a) DI = 1, with undeformed plot showing weak cluster elements, followed by deformation plots.
(b) DI = 3, deformation of clusters.
(c) DI = 5, deformation of clusters.
Figure 5.1: VVF progression as the ligaments deteriorate. Same VVF scale for all subfig­
ures. Crack tip shown along with first three out of six total clusters. weakened elements
with f0 = 0.24 only shown for first plot in Figure 5.1a.
A clear progression is seen with the interaction shifting from multiple­cluster interaction for
DI = 1 to cluster­to­cluster interaction for DI = 5, as similarly observed in V. Tvergaard
and Hutchinson 2002. A large discrepancy from this to V. Tvergaard and Hutchinson
2002 is that ligaments here fracture from the middle and out. This is likely the effect of the
ligaments approximating a loading state of uniaxial tension, causing increased triaxiality
and hydrostatic tension at the center of the ligament. With the effects of the GTN model,
this causes the ligament to fracture from the middle and out.
This might also be part of the explanation for why kinks are seen in ligaments when reach­
ing DI = 5. Shear bands at 45° angles are observed to appear before first element failure
in a ligament, paving the way for the symmetric fracture path deviations. However, other
effects seem to be at play as well, as the speed of crack growth increases significantly
with increasing DI. This effect is likely part of the effects observed for the homogeneous
test in Section 4.1.5. Due to these effects, no further investigations are made for the mode
I setup.
50
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:63==
q1
q2
q3
f0
εN
sN
fN
fC
fF
1.5
1.0
2.25
0.005
0.19
0.05
0.03
0.15
0.25
Table 5.1: Initial GTN parameters chosen to represent DP800 steel material.
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
+20% value
-20% value
10% values
Reference
Figure 5.2: Variation in fracture angle as a result of varying parameters by up to ± 20%.
Fracture angle for unchanged parameters shown with dashed line. No fracture observed
for decreasing fN by 20%.
5.2
Bending analysis
Following the active research in the area of ductile fracture in bending, where observable
differences have been found between model predictions and experimental findings, this
analysis works on incorporating heterogeneities and randomness to facilitate numerical
analysis of realistic microstructures through the effect of clusters.
Note in the following that the fracture angle αf is defined as the bending angle at which
the first element is deleted from the simulation as a result of the VVF reaching fF .
5.2.1
Parameter study
An initial parameter analysis is carried out for the bending setup to analyze the effect of
varying the GTN parameters chosen to represent the DP800 steel. All parameters are
varied by ±20%, while fC and fN are also varied by ±10%. Table 3.3, which shows the
initial parameters, is repeated in Table 5.1 for convenience. The resulting variation in
fracture angle is shown in Figure 5.2.
From Figure 5.2 it is clear that not all parameters matter equally when changed with a fixed
percentile. For instance changing fC is more significant than changing fF . The rapid VVF
growth encountered when reaching fC causes the element to break shortly thereafter, as
is observed when inspecting the simulations qualitatively. Thus with such a rapid growth,
the final VVF matters less than the onset of coalescence.
The relation between fC and fF is explored further in Figure 5.3, where it is examined
whether there is correlation between the ratio fC/fF and fracture angle αf. While clear
tendencies are seen when fC and fF are varied individually, the relation between the two
is no indicator of an early or late fracture. Figure 5.3 however still confirms the greater
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
51
==PAGE:64==
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
135
140
145
150
155
160
Figure 5.3: Fracture angle compared to relation fC/fF . Shown for varying fC and fF by
±20% relative to standard parameters (reference) shown in Table 5.1.
influence of fC while also showing non­linearity as lowering fC gives a greater decrease
in αf than the increase provided by increasing it with the same amount.
Moving to nucleation parameters εN and sN, Figure 5.2 shows that εN has a much greater
influence on αf than sN. This is easily explained through Figure 3.1. Changing the stan­
dard deviation with ±20% has little effect on the total VVF contribution from void nucle­
ation, but mainly changes how focused void nucleation is around the mean strain for void
nucleation εN. The mean strain has a larger variation effect than sN. Lowering the mean
will cause nucleation to occur sooner, allowing void growth to have a larger effect earlier,
resulting in an earlier fracture, and vice versa. If εN is not too low, the total contribution
from nucleation will not be affected much.
Lastly, fN and f0 are the parameters with the most direct influence on VVF, and are ob­
served to have great effect when varied as well. When fN decreases by 20 % no fracture
is observed at all (the simulation is run until a bending angle of α = 173°) while increasing
by 20 % yields a much sooner fracture. fN seems to have greater effect than f0, but this
is also due to the fact that fN is six times as large as f0. If they were to be varied by the
same fixed amount rather than percentage, f0 would likely have a slightly greater effect,
since this takes place immediately, where the contribution from fN is only applied once
reaching a certain plastic strain. Void growth will therefore impact more sooner if f0 is
increased as compared to fN.
The parameter variation is explored further through moment­angle plots in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4a shows an overview of all variations in a single plot. This reveals that all
simulations are close to identical up until the point of fracture. Besides this, Figure 5.4
shows a clear drop in normalized moment after first element fracture (i.e. fracture angle
αf, marked by vertical lines).
While each parameter has varying effect, it is clear that the same fracture angle αf can be
obtained by a variety of combinations of parameters. As observed by Santos et al. 2019,
load­displacement curves can be close to identical with widely varying parameters, once
again pointing to the ambiguity of the GTN model and confirming that one must carefully
choose parameters based on realistic values rather than what fits a curve. Furthermore, it
must be considered that the GTN model is only a model and will never perfectly fit reality,
however close it might get.
52
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:65==
0
30
60
90
120
150
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) All parameter variations, each plotted with
a different color. Dashed lines mark the range
shown in Figures 5.4b to 5.4d.
120
130
140
150
160
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(b) Variation of fC
120
130
140
150
160
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(c) Variation of f0
120
130
140
150
160
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(d) Variation of nucleation parameter fN
Figure 5.4: Plots with normalized bending moment against bending angle α for varying
GTN parameters. Vertical lines mark fracture angle αf for each simulation. Reference
line is the simulation with no changed parameters.
5.2.2
Homogeneous to heterogeneous bending with GTN model
Going from the homogeneous bending setup used for parameter estimations to the het­
erogeneous cluster setup, material parameters are altered. The weakened elements are
chosen to have a volume fraction of void nucleating particles of fN = 0.04 compared to the
fN = 0.03 decided for a homogeneous material, with the argument that fN = 0.03 repre­
sents the average nucleation while fN = 0.04 simulates the localization of said nucleation
in specific areas. Furthermore, no nucleation is included in the background material. The
VVF of background material is thus only affected by f0 = 0.005 and void growth.
An analysis of the change in VVF behaviour within a fracturing element is made and shown
in Figure 5.5 (For a non­nucleating element see Figure B.1, showing only void growth and
coalescence). From Figure 5.5 the VVF, f, seems to follow the same overall trends for
the homogeneous and heterogeneous cases, with the exceptions of equivalent plastic
strain εP
eq at failure, which is εP
eq,h = 0.909 for the homogeneous case and εP
eq,c = 0.817
for the heterogeneous cluster case. Furthermore, after coalescence fC is reached, the
homogeneous case gives a more immediate response towards the final fracture VVF fF
than for the heterogeneous case.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
53
==PAGE:66==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Total VVF
Growth
Nucleation
(a) Homogeneous case, with no data points be­
tween the two dots.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Total VVF
Growth
Nucleation
(b) Element with nucleation, for a heteroge­
neous cluster case.
Figure 5.5: VVF as equivalent plastic strain εP
eq increases, with void nucleation and growth
for a single element in the fracture path
This effect could be caused by cavitation instability as discussed in Viggo Tvergaard and
Vadillo 2007, where it is seen that in cases with stress levels sufficiently high, the work
released in the field surrounding the expanding void is enough to drive the continued
expansion. In Viggo Tvergaard 2012 cavitation instability is further discussed with void
interaction. There it is discussed that small voids in elastic­plastic solids under pure hy­
drostatic tension have a critical stress level at which the voids grow without bound for the
stationary overall strain. It has been shown that such cavitation instabilities also occur
under axisymmetric stress states, when the stress triaxiality is high, making the stress
level high relative to the yield stress.
5.2.3
Cluster test
An analysis is performed testing various randomized cluster formations to examine the
fracture behavior according to different cluster parameters. A total of 36 different input
parameter combinations are tested and each combination is used to create three distinct
randomized cluster formations, totalling 108 simulations. The parameter combinations
tested are seen in Table 5.2. In every case, the minimum distance between clusters
lmin = dc/4. The distance is measured between outer radii of the clusters, so that lmin = 0
means the clusters can touch but not overlap.
When varying β, the same cluster locations are used for the sake of comparability.
In order to relate the number of clusters to the size of the clusters a factor is introduced
nc = t
dc
Knc
(5.4)
Where nc is the number of clusters, and Knc is the factor for number of clusters.
5.2.4
Qualitative Analysis
A qualitative analysis is performed from individual inspection of each simulation, noting
general remarks and tendencies.
Looking at the fracture paths from the simulations, most of the fracture initiations happen
close to the center of the plate bottom free surface, as seen in Figure 4.15 for a homoge­
neous case, and in Figure 5.6 for a heterogeneous case. While fracture initiation occurs
54
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:67==
Parameter
Values to be tested
dc
t
0.05, 0.1, 0.2
Knc
1, 2, 4, 8∗, 16†
β
6.25 %, 12.5 %, 25 %
Randomization
A, B, C
Table 5.2: Testing Parameters for Bending­cluster test, leading to 34 + 33 = 108 simula­
tions. *Only for dc/t = 0.05, 0.1. † Only for dc/t = 0.05.
close to the plate bottom center, it varies more in the direction along the plate surface than
in the thickness direction. It thus seems that how close a weak element is to the bottom
is more significant than where along the bottom the element is located. Figure 5.6 (A)
shows that the clusters located closer to the center of the free surface opposite the punch
has a higher VVF.
This coincides well with the fact that the elements with peak strain are located at the free
surface opposite the punch. Figure 5.6 (B) shows that crack tip to cluster interaction does
not happen until the cluster is in a shear band path from the crack tip, with (B­1) showing
no interaction with the top left cluster, but (B­2) showing elements fractured in the top
left cluster and a shear path formed towards those elements. Figure 5.6 (C) depicts the
same as (B­2) with crack tip to cluster interaction, but one can vaguely see interaction
with another cluster in the same shear path, though without interaction to the cluster that
the crack path will eventually take as seen on (A).
Depending on the randomization and parameters in the simulation, a wide variety of crack
paths is seen. Some simulations do not initiate fracture. This happens if clusters are
located far away from the plate bottom center. Some simulations develop one long crack
(see Figure 5.6) or multiple cracks (see Figure 5.7). There are also cases where elements
fracture, but the fracture never reaches the free surface.
In some simulations it is not the weak element closest to the bottom surface center that
fractures first, but if multiple weak elements neighbor each other this can trigger an earlier
fracture. Furthermore it is noted that elements neighboring horizontally do not trigger
fracture as early as elements neighboring vertically. Elements neighboring diagonally
have some effect, but it does not appear significant compared to that of horizontally or
vertically neighboring elements.
The cluster interaction seen is more selective than anticipated. The crack tip only inter­
acts with clusters through shear bands. The cluster interaction distance is limited by the
boundary between tension and compression in the plate, as only elements in tension can
interact. The interaction is diminishing as the distance increases, but always seems to
interact with multiple weak elements, which could be categorized as multiple­void interac­
tion as described by V. Tvergaard and Hutchinson 2002. The maximum distance noticed
from a crack tip to a cluster having a fractured element is 17% of the plate thickness.
The interaction thus often causes elements to fracture in the cluster before the crack tip
reaches the cluster.
Lastly, it is noticed that in cases where multiple fractures initiate in a plate, the elements
at the secondary initiation points have a VVF at or higher than fC at the point of fracture
of the first initiation.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
55
==PAGE:68==
B
B-1
B-2
C
C
A
Figure 5.6: Undeformed grayscale VVF plot. Black elements are completely fractured
elements. Circles represent cluster locations. A) The full FPZ. B) Cluster shear path
interaction. C) Crack tip shear path interaction with two clusters, dashed circle represents
cluster location with only background porosity.
5.2.5
Quantitative Analysis
A quantitative analysis is performed on the background of numerical data extracted from
the simulations.
Fracture Height Index (FHI)
A fracture height index is introduced, indicating how much of the plate thickness the crack
has grown through. FHI is calculated as
FHI = hf
t
(5.5)
where hf is the fracture height and t is the plate thickness, as show in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.8 compares fracture angle αf to FHI. A clear tendency is seen with a low fracture
angle leading to a higher FHI. There is however some variation caused by phenomenons
such as weak elements being close to the bottom but with no surrounding weak elements,
56
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:69==
h
t
f
Punch
Figure 5.7: Parameters used for calculating fracture height index (FHI) displayed for un­
deformed VVF result of crack growth simulation. Blue is background material, broken
elements (crack) marked with red.
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 5.8: Scatter plot of fracture angle αf compared to fracture height index (FHI).
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
57
==PAGE:70==
resulting in a low fracture angle but with limited subsequent growth yielding a low FHI.
Furthermore, if several cracks form on the bottom surface of the plate, growing simulta­
neously, these will sometimes not grow as far through the plate thickness, as they allow
for greater flexibility in the plate than if only a single fracture had been present.
It is noted that FHI will generally not reach 100%. When only a few elements remain
between the crack and the top surface, these elements act as a ”hinge”, not breaking but
deforming freely with little VVF growth.
Influence of γ
The fraction of weak elements within the FPZ is denoted as γ, indicating how filled the
FPZ is with nucleating elements. γ is calculated as
γ = nel,weak
nel
(5.6)
Where nel,weak and nel are the number of weak elements and the total number of elements
in the FPZ respectively. The quantification of γ indicates the applied weakness to the
domain since the nucleation parameters are kept constant. γ is chosen as it quantifies all
input parameters nc, dc/t, and β in a single measure.
Figure 5.9 compares γ to fracture angle αf for tests where at least one element fractures,
and γ with VVF at its peak fmax for tests without fracture. Note that the number of simu­
lations at different values of γ are not the same.
It is expected that a higher γ will cause a higher percentage of plates to fracture, and that
the fracture angle will be significantly reduced as γ increases. A tendency is seen with
less non­fracturing simulations for higher γ but also a surprising drop in mean fmax as γ
increases.
Figure 5.10 takes the fractured tests from Figure 5.9, and by a boxplot shows the change
in fracture angle αf as γ increases, with a mean value plotted on top. This shows a
decrease in αf for an increasing γ, but not as drastic as imagined.
The interquartile range (IQR) shows tendencies to decrease in size closer to the median
as γ increases (also seen in Figure 5.11), but nothing is seen to be statistically significant.
Note that only one test fractured for γ = 0.125 and is therefore not included in Figure 5.10.
What is more, only five tests fractured at γ = 0.244.
Figure 5.11 compares γ to the fracture height index (FHI), shown as a box plot with mean
FHI as a line plot. Mean FHI shows a clear increase with increased γ, which corresponds
well with the negative trend for fracture angle αf (see Figure 5.9), and the negative trend
αf has with FHI (see Figure 5.8). An earlier fracture initiation leads to a longer fracture,
and the more nucleating elements there are in the FPZ, the weaker the plate is, and the
farther the plate will fracture. This effect leaves a higher correlation between γ and FHI
than between γ and αf.
γ is compared to standard deviations for αf and FHI. It is expected that a higher γ will lead
to a lower standard deviation σ in both cases, as the weak elements become more tightly
packed and the location of each void becomes less significant. The correlation between
γ and the standard deviation for αf (σαf ) is ρP = −0.30 while the correlation between γ
and the standard deviation for FHI (σFHI) is ρP = −0.27. The correlations are not very
significant, but do hint at the expected effect of lower standard deviations with increasing
γ.
One thing worth noting is that if the correlations above are calculated for each cluster
diameter separately, they change as shown in Table 5.3. For dc/t = {0.05, 0.1} the corre­
58
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:71==
0.125
0.25
0.5
1
2
4
8
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Fractured
Not fractured
Figure 5.9: Scatter plot of domain weak element percentage γ compared to Fracture angle
αf (first element failure) for fractured tests, and VVF for non­fractured tests.
0.244
0.488
0.977
1.95
3.91
7.81
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
Figure 5.10: Box plot of domain weak element percentage γ compared to Fracture angle
αf (first element failure) for fractured tests.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
59
==PAGE:72==
0.244
0.488
0.977
1.95
3.91
7.87
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Boxplot
Mean
Figure 5.11: Box plot of domain weak element percentage γ compared to Fracture Height
Index (FHI) for fractured tests.
Correlation
All diameters
dc/t = 0.05
dc/t = 0.1
dc/t = 0.2
ρP (αf)
­0.30
­0.50
­0.50
­0.08
ρP (FHI)
­0.27
­0.34
­0.27
­0.55
Table 5.3: Correlations between γ and standard deviations for αf and FHI
lation between γ and σFHI is almost unchanged while the correlation between γ and σαf
changes to ρP = −0.50, a tangible change from ρP = −0.30. In contrast, for dc/t = 0.2,
the correlation between γ and σFHI increases while the correlation between γ and σαf
approaches zero. This seems to be an effect of clusters being unable to cross the FPZ
boundary, and so the chance of an element lying close to the critical bottom plate edge is
lower for a larger cluster diameter (see Section 5.2.9). Yet it is important to mention that
the amount of data collected is not statistically significant, especially when data is split
into the three cluster diameters.
Distance from free surface center to weak element
With the qualitative analysis (Section 5.2.4) showing fracture starting at a weak element
close to the center of free surface, the distance from free surface center to the closest
weak element is measured. In order to study the effect of the resulting distance and its
components, variables lres, lx and ly are introduced, signifying the resulting distance to
the closest weak element, and its x and y components. These are depicted normalized
with the plate thickness t in Figure 5.12 in relation to fracture angle αf and VVF at final
bending angle fmax. It is expected to see a correlation between the distance, and αf and
fmax.
The effect of |lx|/t shows no clear tendencies, whereas ly/t seems to show correlation for
both the fractured and non­fractured cases. lres/t shows correlation as well, though for
both ly/t and lres/t there is a significant spread, especially for fractured cases (compared
to αf).
60
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:73==
The Pearson correlation between lres/t and αf is ρP = 0.41 while between lres/t and
fmax it is as high as ρP = −0.89. The higher correlation for fmax non­fractured cases
might be attributed to most of the VVF values being below fC where the growth is more
linear. The actual first fracture might have more complex mechanisms at play, distorting
the correlation.
The greatest outlier see in Figure 5.12 is the simulation with the lowest fracture angle,
where |lx|/t = 0.22, which is also depicted on the lres plot at almost the same value,
showing a low value of ly. Several similar cases are seen. From this, as well as the much
clearer correlation found with ly/t compared to |lx|/t, it is concluded that the position of
a cluster in the y­direction is more significant that x. A relatively large spread is still seen
though.
An analysis of the effect for cluster size in relation to lres and fracture angle αf is also con­
ducted, to see if cluster size has an effect on distance to the free surface center. It is seen
that the largest clusters dc/t = 0.2 generally have weak elements located farther away
from the plate bottom center than the remaining two cluster sizes. This is caused by the
effect of clusters not being able to cross the FPZ boundary. More in this in Section 5.2.9.
Weak element groups
In an attempt to determine which factors have the greatest influence on when fracture
happens, a grassfire algorithm is developed which groups weakened elements that are
next to one another vertically or horizontally. Diagonals are not included, since qualitative
inspection of results prove that weak elements that are diagonally attached do not have a
significant effect on fracture initiation compared to that of horizontally or vertically attached
elements. The code, along with an example of a result from the algorithm, is shown in
Appendix E.3.
The number of weak elements in a given group is denoted nw. In an attempt to quantify
when a plate with a given cluster formation will fracture, the groups in the cluster closest
to the plate bottom center are examined, as this cluster location likely is the most critical
(see Section 5.2.4). Two values are extracted from each randomized cluster formation:
The max nw found in the closest cluster, nw,max, and the mean nw for the cluster, nw,mean.
The resulting score for each randomized formation is compared to the resulting fracture
angle αf, separated into cluster diameters, in Figure 5.13.
The expectation is that a higher nw,max or nw,mean yields a lower αf. At quick glance,
Figure 5.13 reveal that there does not seem to be a high coherence for neither nw,max nor
nw,mean. Calculating the correlations reveal that the correlation between nw,max and αf is
ρP = −0.23 while the correlation between nw,mean and αf is ρP = −0.29. These are low
correlations, and so this method does not accurately predict how soon fracture will occur.
Moreover Figure 5.13 also reveals that for many cases, nw,max = nw,mean = 1 where the
fracture angle can vary widely. Furthermore, this method does not account for the fact
that though a cluster may be close, the elements within the cluster may be either close
to the plate bottom center, or at the opposite end of the cluster. This is especially critical
for clusters with large diameters. Larger diameters also increase the chance of obtaining
larger element groups without necessarily lowering the fracture angle, as is clear from
Figure 5.13a.
The greatest lack of the model is that it does not take the specific distance to the elements
into account, but only assumes that the closest cluster will be where fracture happens,
which is not always the case.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
61
==PAGE:74==
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
100
120
140
160
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Fractured
Not fractured
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
100
120
140
160
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
100
120
140
160
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Figure 5.12: Distance from bottom point on plate directly below punch to center of closest
weakened element, compared to fracture angle for fractured plates and highest VVF found
at final angle for non­fractured plates. Resulting distance lres plotted as well as x and y
components here of lx and ly. Distance shown relative to plate thickness t.
62
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:75==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
(a) nw,max compared to αf
1
2
3
4
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
(b) nw,mean compared to αf
Figure 5.13: Max and mean number of elements found in weak element groups in clus­
ter closest to plate bottom center compared to fracture angle αf, separated into cluster
diameters
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
63
==PAGE:76==
0
0.5
1
0.5
0
1
0.5
0
Punch
Figure 5.14: Scoring variables for Equation (5.7) for a 20x10 element mesh example
Fracture score
A fracture score is introduced as an attempt to improve the quantification of when a plate
with a given cluster formation will fracture, combining both the number of weak elements
in a group nw and the position of these.
The grassfire algorithm described above (Section 5.2.5) is used to determine nw for all
groups in a randomized cluster formation. The centroid of all groups are saved as well,
both x and y coordinates, relative to the plate bottom center. These factors, shown in
Figure 5.14, are the basis of the fracture score. A score is assigned to each group of
weak elements, and the group with the highest score defines the fracture score for a
given randomized cluster formation.
Several versions of the fracture score are tested. Only the most significant one is included
here, while the remaining versions are discussed in Appendix C. The fracture score is
calculated as
Sfrac = max




1 +
1 −
xi
t
2
c1
−yi/t

nc2
w,i


, i = 1..ng
(5.7)
where Sfrac is the fracture score, xi and yi are the x and y coordinates relative to the plate
bottom center (see Figure 5.14 for group i, nw,i is the number of weak elements in group
i, ng is the number of weak element groups in the cluster formation, and c1 and c2 are
fitting constants).
The constants are determined through numerical optimization to be c1 = 2.60 and c2 =
0.0538. This achieves a Pearson correlation between fracture score Sfrac and fracture
angle αf at ρP = −0.8624. The correlation between the two is also clear in Figure 5.15.
The developed fracture score formulation is based on the qualitative analysis seen in Sec­
tion 5.2.4, which reveals that the position of weaknesses in the y­direction is more critical
for the fracture angle than the position in the x­direction. The difference in significance
between the x­ and y­directions are thus scaled by the constant c1. The other constant,
c2, determines the effect of larger weak element groups nw.
64
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:77==
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1.45
1.5
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
Figure 5.15: Fracture angle αf compared to fracture score Sfrac
The optimized parameters c1 > 1 which confirms that the y­direction is more significant
than the x­direction. Furthermore, c2 < 1 which means that while there is an effect of
larger weak element groups, the effect diminishes with larger groups.
A contour plots of the fracture score for nw = 1 is seen in Figure 5.16 where it is compared
to an undeformed VVF plot for a cluster formation right before first element fracture. The
similarity of the contour plot for the fracture score and the VVF plot is striking, and explains
why this fracture score specifically fits the results well1.
The proposed fracture score is rather simple, and there are several factors not taken into
account, that have been observed through qualitative result inspection. As described in
Section 3.4.2, there is an effect of the mesh being stretched, causing the crack to grow
vertically when initiating. Ideally the crack wants to grow in a ∼45° shear band, but when
the elements are as deformed as they are on the bottom surface before fracture, the shear
band will cross several elements in the y­direction before reaching the next element in the
x­direction. This effect is also seen when looking at weak element groups, where vertically
aligned elements cause fracture sooner than horizontally aligned elements. Another effect
not considered in the equation is the effect of elements or even groups surrounding the
weak element. While the effect is larger for vertically or horizontally touching elements,
there still is an accumulative weakening effect for elements located in close proximity
though they do not touch. Lastly, the equation assumes that the ideal weakness location
for fracture is directly at the bottom center of the plate, but in the uniform test case fracture
initiates at an approximate ±t/25 offset in the x­direction. However, since this is a fairly
small offset and since the x­direction is not as dominant as the y­direction, the error from
this effect is negligible.
The fracture score Sfrac has a decent correlation with fracture angle αf, but it is impor­
tant to note that the model parameters c1 and c2 have been specifically optimized for
the current material­ and GTN­parameters. For instance, it is likely that if the nucleation
parameter fN is increased, the parameter c2 will increase with it, and vice versa. The
1See Appendix C for more details on the alternative fracture score variations attempted
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
65
==PAGE:78==
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
(a) Variation C (x nonlinear, y linear)
(b) Undeformed VVF plot for cluster formation right before fracture
Figure 5.16: Comparison between contour plot of fracture score and undeformed VVF
plot for bending case with clusters.
current parameters might therefore not be directly applicable to a different setup, but will
need tweaking to give satisfying results.
Correlation heat map
A correlation heat map is made for selected parameters as seen in Figure 5.17. The in­
cluded parameters are selected on basis on which parameters yield the highest correlation
and are of most interest.
Parameters nc, dc/t, and β are direct input parameters. γ combines all three input param­
eters in one factor and fracture score Sfrac is calculated for the specific randomizations
created by the input parameters. Finally, αf and FHI are the two parameters mainly used
to quantitatively measure the resulting fracture behavior. These two parameters are the
ones the remaining parameters are compared to.
Starting with the input parameters nc, dc/t, and β, no significant correlation is seen. The
low correlation is especially affected by the fact that all three parameters are mixed, and
several combinations of β and dc/t are used for the same nc value, etc. That said, β
is seen to have some effect on both αf and FHI with a correlation of ±0.53. Note that
a higher β yields a lower fracture angle but a higher FHI, as would be expected. The
66
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:79==
-0.53
-0.86
-0.53
-0.86
-0.80
-0.80
 1.00
-0.50
 0.00
 0.38
 0.31
-0.23
 0.35
-0.50
 1.00
 0.00
 0.17
-0.40
 0.21
-0.09
 0.00
 0.00
 1.00
 0.54
 0.40
 0.53
 0.38
 0.17
 0.54
 1.00
 0.42
-0.48
 0.65
 0.31
-0.40
 0.40
 0.42
 1.00
 0.76
-0.23
 0.21
-0.48
 1.00
 0.35
-0.09
 0.53
 0.65
 0.76
 1.00
nC
dc/t
Sfrac
f
FHI
nC
dc/t
Sfrac
f
FHI
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Figure 5.17: Correlation heat map for selected parameters
same tendency is seen for nc but with much lower correlations. Finally, a higher cluster
diameter dc/t seems to yield a higher αf. This might not intuitively make sense, but it
might be the effect of clusters not being allowed to cross the FPZ domain boundary and
so larger clusters generally have elements placed further from the boundary, causing later
fracture. See Section 5.2.9 for more on this. However, the correlation is quite low and
cannot be fully trusted. The correlation between dc/t and FHI is practically zero, which
makes sense as the location is not as significant for this parameter as for αf.
Moving to γ, this parameter has a greater correlation with FHI than with αf. This is be­
cause the fracture angle αf is highly dependent on how close weak elements are to the
center of the bottom plate surface (see Section 5.2.5) while FHI is more dependent on the
amount of weak elements throughout the plate. While having more weakened elements
(i.e. higher γ) increases the odds of weak elements being close to the bottom surface, it
still depends on randomization to a greater extend.
The fracture score Sfrac described in Section 5.2.5 has a great correlation with αf at ­
0.86, revealing that this parameter to some extend can help predict the fracture angle of a
randomization. The correlation with FHI is lower since Sfrac is created to fit αf. The seen
correlation can thus be regarded as a bi­product of the relatively high correlation between
αf and FHI.
αf and FHI have a correlation of ­0.80, pointing to the fact that if a fracture happens early,
it will also cause the crack to fracture further as seen in Figure 5.8. As the γ correlations
reveal though, there are some distinctions between what causes an early fracture and
what causes a far crack propagation.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
67
==PAGE:80==
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
A B C
A B C
A B C
, weak element selection
, cluster location
Figure 5.18: Effect of randomizing weak element selection within fixed cluster locations,
tested for three different β values. In each case, dc/t = 0.1 and nc = 20. Standard
deviation σ displayed for element selection (×) and cluster locations (—). For cluster
locations, σ is calculated by taking the mean αf for cluster formation A, B and C and
calculating the standard deviation from the three means.
5.2.6
Effects of randomized weak element locations within clusters
In every randomized cluster formation, there are two randomization parts: The random­
ized cluster locations and the randomized selection of weak elements within the clusters
(as described in Section 3.1.4). In an attempt to determine the effect of the two parts sep­
arately, simulations are made where cluster location and diameter is kept constant while
the selected weak elements within each cluster is randomized. The result is displayed
in Figure 5.18. Here A, B and C represent three different randomized cluster locations.
Locations A, B and C are tested for three different β values where six weak element ran­
domizations are made in each case resulting in 3 · 3 · 6 = 54 simulations.
Different β values are tested as it is expected that a larger β value will result in a smaller
standard deviation. This assumption is based on the fact that if β = 100%, there will be
no room for variation, and if β is close to 100%, only a few elements will not be weakened,
which will likely not change the overall fracture pattern. If however only few elements are
weakened within the cluster, their selected location will be critical for the fracture path.
As the results show, there is no clear correlation between β and the standard deviations.
If more simulations are run with more cluster locations, weak element selections and/or
higher β, a tendency might be clearer or even statistically significant. However, with the
current data nothing can be concluded on this front.
When comparing the influence of randomizing cluster locations versus randomizing the
selected elements with the clusters, it is clear that both have a significant influence. Clus­
ter locations seem to not only influence the general range in which fracture happens, but
also the resulting standard deviation when randomizing the weak element selection. Fig­
ure 5.18 reveals that the standard deviation σ resulting from randomizing cluster locations
generally is lower than the σ resulting from selecting random weak elements. This cannot,
68
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:81==
0
0.5
1
100
110
120
130
140
150
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Fractured
Not fractured
Figure 5.19: Minimum distance between clusters lmin compared to fracture angle αf for
fractured plates and maximum VVF found in domain fmax for plates not fractured.
however, be seen as a general conclusion, since this is only tested for a single combi­
nation of cluster diameter ratio dc/t = 0.1 and number of clusters nc = 20. It is likely for
instance that the standard deviation for cluster location randomization will be larger if the
number of clusters decreases, so that the location of the clusters become more crucial.
That said, the standard deviation seen, especially from weak element selection is rather
high. With this in mind, it is important to not draw conclusions with too little data, but look
for general trends when enough data points are provided.
Lastly, only the cluster size dc/t = 0.1 has been tested, and results might vary for different
cluster diameters. It would be expected that the standard deviation would be larger for
larger cluster diameters and vice versa, since the location for the selected weak elements
can vary significantly more within a larger cluster. This has however not been tested, and
can thus not be confirmed.
5.2.7
Effect of minimum cluster distance lmin
For the initial 108 simulations, a minimum distance between clusters lmin = dc/4 is used.
To examine the effect of this, simulations are run with lmin
dc/2 = {0, 0.5, 1} and results are
compared as shown in Figure 5.19. For all simulations parameters dc/t = 0.1 and β =
12.5% are used.
The spread of the results is too large to say anything statistically significant. As can be
expected, unless a certain percentage of the refined domain is filled with clusters, the
minimum distance will in many cases not have any effect as the clusters will be laying
apart from one another. Though nothing can be concluded from the current results, partly
due to insufficient amounts of data, it is expected that with a domain almost entirely filled
with clusters, the minimum distance will ensure a smaller standard deviation since clusters
will have approximately the same distance between them all. On the other hand, if the
distance is lowered or removed, clusters can group together. If they group at the bottom
surface, fracture might occur sooner, or fracture faster. If on the other hand they group at
the top of the domain, fracture will likely occur later and not fracture as far.
Besides this, the largest effect currently seen from lmin is that it limits the number of
clusters that can be fit within the domain borders.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
69
==PAGE:82==
0.488
0.977
1.95
3.91
7.81
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
Figure 5.20: γ compared to fracture angle αf for boxplot of cluster simulations (CR) versus
scatter plot for simulations without clusters FR.
5.2.8
Randomized weak element locations without clusters
15 simulations with fully randomized weak element locations are run to draw compar­
isons to weak elements in cluster formations. The simulations are run for three different
randomizations of weak element locations for five different weak element percentages
γ = {0.488, 0.977, 1.95, 3.91, 7.81}.
The expected outcome of the test is to see a smaller spread in fracture angle due to cluster
locations not affecting the random weak element locations. It is also expected that since
there is a higher chance for a weak element to be located near the high strain locations,
earlier fracture angle αf will be seen.
Results for random weak element locations are compared to αf for different γ in Fig­
ure 5.20, where results from cluster simulations are shown as a box plot. Mean values
for each γ are also included as lines, for results with and without cluster formations.
When looking at the means they do not deviate much from each other. This is unexpected,
but could be an effect of the grouping of elements. As shown by the fracture score (Sec­
tion 5.2.5), the grouping of weak elements has an impact on fracture angle, which might
just outbalance the deficiency of having elements further from the boundary.
Nevertheless, there seems to be a clear tendency for simulations without clusters to have
a smaller variation than that observed for simulations with clusters, as was predicted
above. Only three simulations are made without clusters for each γ though, and so while
a tendency is clear, nothing is statistically significant.
A similar comparison is seen with FHI in Figure 5.21. Here the means deviate further
from each other, but as γ increases they slowly meld closer together with the mean of FR
staying below the mean of CR. Furthermore, FR shows noticeably lower FHI compared
to the spread of CR. In one case all three FHI for FR falls below the 25th percentile of CR.
For every γ, FR has at least one result that falls outside the whiskers of the CR boxplot
and FR,mean is lower than CR,mean. The lower FHI has two possible explanations. The
first is once again related to the grouping of weak elements in clusters. When elements
70
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:83==
0.488
0.977
1.95
3.91
7.81
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 5.21: γ compared to fracture height index FHI for boxplot of cluster simulations
(CR) versus scatter plot for simulations without clusters FR.
are grouped in cluster formations they cause a more forceful interaction with the crack tip,
possibly resulting in a longer fracture. The other explanation is that multiple cracks often
initiate on the surface for simulations without clusters. The FHI will therefore not be as
high as the plate will unload by fracturing in several locations rather than a single large
one. A comparison is however made replacing FHI with the total number of fractured
elements in the simulation, but the same tendency as before is seen with a lower mean
for simulations without clusters. With this in mind it seems that clusters tend to localize
the damage, causing a longer fracture but at approximately the same fracture angle. Yet
once more, nothing is statistically significant with the amount of gathered data.
5.2.9
Clusters crossing FPZ boundary
Clusters are not able to cross the FPZ boundary, meaning that clusters can only be po­
sitioned fully within the FPZ. This reduces the chance of weak elements being located at
the domain boundaries, which is especially critical for the free plate surface where weak
elements are most critical.
In order to check the effect this has on the fracture angle αf, the cluster location boundary
is redefined so that cluster centers can be outside the fracture process zone, as depicted in
Figure 5.22. Along with this, the weak element randomization is altered so that the number
of weak elements in each cluster is dependent on how many elements are within each
cluster radius, as this now varies significantly. Furthermore, more clusters are added to
compensate for the loss of weak elements for clusters partially out of the FPZ. The number
of clusters is added so that γ is roughly the same in each case. The expectation is that
this new setup will reduce the fracture angle, as the chance for clusters to be located at
the critical free plate surface increases
The result of the analysis is compared to that of the original analysis, and for the analysis
of weak elements with fully randomly distributed weak elements (Section 5.2.8), as seen
in Figure 5.23.
The large cluster diameter dc/t = 0.2 shows the expected trend of lower fracture angle
when cluster can cross FPZ borders. That tendency is only present for that diameter
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
71
==PAGE:84==
Figure 5.22: Fracture process zone, with clusters going outside the edge of the free sur­
faces.
95
110
125
140
RW
Clusters within edges
Clusters over edges
Random weaknesses
(a) Comparison of fracture angle αf
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
RW
Clusters within edges
Clusters over edges
Random weaknesses
(b) Comparison of fracture height index (FHI)
Figure 5.23: Comparison of αf and FHI for clusters within FPZ boundaries, over boundary
edges and weaknesses randomly distributed without cluster formations. In every case
γ ≈3.91%. RW = random weaknesses (i.e. without clusters).
though, as remaining diameters show no noticable difference. With only three simulations
run for each case it is hard to conclude much, but it makes sense that smaller cluster
diameters are not as affected by the FPZ boundary limit.
In every case γ ≈3.91% and for simulations with clusters β = 12.5%. The domain is thus
relatively filled with clusters, which likely lowers the effect of borders, since clusters will
likely be placed close to the border. Nevertheless, it is expected that if enough simulations
are run, there should be a difference between the mean fracture angle for simulations with
clusters within the FPZ and for those with clusters across borders, even for the smaller
cluster diameters.
5.3
Experimental
5.3.1
Tensile tests
Tensile tests are performed for both DP800 and DP1000 to determine material properties.
The tensile tests are conducted in accordance with ISO 6892­1:2019, as described in
72
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:85==
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Engineering strain [ ]
0
200
400
600
800
Engineering stress [MPa]
Rolling direction
Normal to
Yield
Fracture
Figure 5.24: Stress­strain diagram for DP800 tests
Section 3.5.5. The velocity was constant v = 1.2 mm min−1 that corresponds to a strain
rate of ˙ε = 2.667 × 10−4 s−1. 16 tensile tests were conducted. Eight from the DP800
steel plate and Eight from the DP1000 steel plate. Half of the tests for each material was
from specimens cut out in the rolling direction, the other half of the tests from specimens
normal to the rolling direction.
Figure 5.24 shows the stress­strain curve for the tests involving the DP800 material. Two
out of the eight DP800 tests are not shown because of a velocity of v = 1 mm min−1
( ˙ε = 2.217 × 10−4 s−1), which were conducted to check for strain rate effect. The yield
strength is found to be σy ≈565 MPa. Which correlates well with the test SSAB made on
the same batch of material.
For the DP1000 tensile tests stress­strain curve in Figure 5.25, the overall trend with nor­
mal to rolling direction reaching a higher strain, but lower maximum stress still applies,
though there seems to be a bigger spread for the DP1000 than seen for the DP800 tests.
One outlier is seen for the DP1000 in the normal to direction and a slight spread in the
rolling direction, this could be caused by numerous reasons including, material hetero­
geneity, machine grips, slightly angled placement of the test specimens, etc. The yield
strength is found to be σy ≈750 MPa. Where the variance could be between 700 –
900 MPa in Data sheet 2117 Docol 1000DP 2021.
As expected of the name the DP800 has a ultimate tensile strength of σUTS ≈830 MPa
as well as DP1000 having σUTS ≈1000 MPa. In comparison, the DP800 is more ductile
than DP1000 as seen by the strain in Figures 5.24 and 5.25.
5.3.2
Uniaxial tension simulation comparison
Uniaxial tension simulations were run to compare the tensile tests with the material param­
eters used for the bending simulations. The main effect studied is the strain hardening
exponent as seen in Figure 5.26. The strain hardening exponent used in the bending
simulations (N = 0.137) overshoot the DP800 by quite a margin, when comparing with
Figure 5.24. By following the strain hardening exponent used in Cha and Kim 2014, with­
out the same GTN parameters, the stress and strain can be seen to diverge. Where as
a strain hardening exponent of somewhere between N = [0.09, 0.1] would yield closer
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
73
==PAGE:86==
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Engineering strain [ ]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Engineering stress [MPa]
Rolling direction
Normal to
Yield
Fracture
Figure 5.25: Stress­strain diagram for DP1000 tests
Material
DP800 R
DP800 N
DP1000 R
DP1000 N
Fracture angle αf
142°
168°
145°
129°
Table 5.4: Average fracture angles for DP800 and DP1000 materials, rolling direction (R)
and normal to rolling direction (N).
results to that seen in the experiments.
The engineering stress does yield closer to that of the DP1000 experiments, except for
the slightly higher strain, which in turn can be useful for comparing with the tomography
scan of DP1000 plates.
5.3.3
Preliminary bending tests
Preliminary bending tests are performed to get an idea of the fracture angles of the plates
before making an x­ray tomography scan.
The resulting fracture angles are shown in Table 5.4. Here rolling direction means that
the bending line lies transverse to the rolling (i.e. grain) direction, and normal direction
means the grains are parallel with the bending line. Due to the inaccuracy of this test
(fracture determined by eye and at inconsistent bending rates) this is not fully accurate
for representing the actual fracture angles, but gives an idea of the approximate range
in which fracture happens, which is used in determining which plates to use for the x­ray
tomography scans. Moreover it shows that the DP800 plate has sooner surface fracture
in the rolling direction, which is opposite of DP1000.
5.3.4
Moment­angle bending test
The bending test rig is mounted in a uniaxial test machine and force­displacement curves
are extracted while the plate is being bent. Tests are performed with a punch displace­
ment of 1 mm/s and a data acquisition rate of 102.4 Hz. The test is performed for both
DP800 and DP1000 materials and the result are converted from force and displacement
to normalized bending moment and bending angle as is seen in Figure 5.27.
The force peaks around a 47° bending angle. At first it increases due to material hard­
74
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:87==
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Figure 5.26: Stress­strain diagram for uniaxial tension simulations with different strain
hardening exponents N.
0
30
60
90
120
0
1
2
3
4
5
Rolling
Normal-to
(a) DP800
0
30
60
90
120
0
1
2
3
4
5
Rolling
Normal-to
(b) DP1000
Figure 5.27: Normalized moment versus bending angle for DP800 and DP1000 materials.
Results separated in rolling direction and normal to rolling direction plates.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
75
==PAGE:88==
Figure 5.28: Overview of DP800 tomography scan. Only middle section of bending plate
included in the scanning domain.
ening, but then it decreases as the vertical component of the force required to bend the
plate becomes smaller compared to the horizontal force component which is handled by
the block arms. As is expected, the plates bent normal to the rolling direction yield a lower
maximum force due to their sooner fracture.
The maximum force reached for the DP800 plates is about 1500 N which matches well
with the prediction made by FEM in Section 3.5.4. The dimensioning of the test rig thus
seems well balanced.
5.3.5
In­situ bending tomography scans
In­situ tomography scans are performed on DP800 and DP1000 sheet metal plates in an
attempt to compare the damage structure of the plates during bending to the simulations
performed in Section 5.2. Main results are shown here, while more details and result
pictures are found in Appendix D.
DP800 results
The DP800 scan is performed at a bending angle of 139° which is not enough for the plate
to fracture, as discovered in Section 5.3.3. The scan is performed at the limit bending
angle for the test rig. While no surface crack is present the scan is still performed to see
if any damage is visible beneath the surface. The resolution for the scan is however only
9 µm and so only larger voids are visible.
An overview of the DP800 plate scan is seen in Figure 5.28 and an example of a void in
the plate is seen in Figure 5.29. Only three voids are found in total, all having an elongated
shape and the largest one measuring 172 µm. Besides this, nothing of interest is found in
the scans since the resolution is too poor. Since not much can be learned from this, the
DP1000 plate is scanned instead, which is less ductile and allows for a surface fracture
within the bending angle range of the test rig.
DP1000 results
The DP1000 plate scan has a resolution of 7.34 µm. An overview of the scan is seen in
Figure 5.31. The scan focuses only on the bent plate section to ensure the best possible
resolution. It is clear from this that the crack has initiated several places along the edge
of the plate and have grown together to form one crack with switching location. This is
76
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:89==
Figure 5.29: Example of void found in DP800 scan
Figure 5.30: Slice of DP1000 plate from the top (XZ plane)
similar to the result obtained by Soyarslan et al. 2012 who examined another DP1000
steel.
A slice of the tomography scan is seen in Figure 5.30, revealing one fracture across the
entire plate length.
Selected slices from the XY plane of the scan is seen in Figure 5.32. The diversity is clear
from these photos, emphasizing the heterogeneous nature of the material. The shape
of the crack can be relatively straight (Figure 5.32b), have a single kink (Figure 5.32a)
or show much zigzagging (Figure 5.32d). Through most of the plate only one crack is
present, but at some points two cracks can be seen in a single slice (Figure 5.32b). No
more than two cracks are seen at the same time except in the transition between two
cracks coalescing (Figure 5.32c). When the two cracks are present, one is clearly domi­
nant.
Finally, all cracks initiate close to the center of the plate but with some variation, as is clear
from Figure 5.32b. Close inspection reveals that no crack initiates further than a distance
of t/2 from the plate center, and most much lower.
The tendencies discovered here are compared to the numerical simulations in Section 5.4.
Tomography scan quality
Some noise is present in the tomography scan results. Figure 5.30 shows clear ring
artifacts, which yields some noise around the center of rotation for the scan. This is
especially clear in Figure 5.32c which is close to the critical center point. Some noise is
seen around the middle of the slice, and crosshatching patters appear as well. Besides
this, the fact that the scanned object as well as the test rig are not axisymmetric causes
the X­ray penetration to vary through different sections of the plate, resulting in lighter and
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
77
==PAGE:90==
x
y
z
Figure 5.31: Overview of DP1000 tomography scan. Coordinate system shown.
(a) Slice z position: −3.68 mm
(b) Slice z position: 0.55 mm
(c) Slice z position: 1.06 mm
(d) Slice z position: 1.29 mm
Figure 5.32: Slices of DP1000 tomography scan from the side. Picked from 1998 total
slices. Position in z direction measured from middle of plate, see Figure 5.31
78
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:91==
darker areas in the plate scan slices. The contrast between dark and light areas is not
critical, and the cracks are still clearly visible.
That said, the noise seen in the setup cannot be entirely ignored, especially not the noise
in the middle of the plate. The resolution is also limited, and so the surface cracks are
visible, but no voids or inclusions are visible besides this.
To achieve better results one solution is to increase the exposure time as this allows for
scans at a better resolution, or at the same resolution with less noise. Another way to
increase the quality of the scan is to make the setup more axisymmetric, for instance by
replacing the three rods in the test rig with a tube around the setup. The plate in itself
can however not be made axisymmetric and neither can the punch or block parts (see
Figure 3.13), and so the best way to improve the tomography scan quality seems to be
increasing the exposure time. During the work of this thesis however several hindrances
has prevented making such a scan as errors occurred to both the Nikon and ZEISS scan­
ner before or during scans.
The scans performed here show a proof of concept for the setup. Making a decent quality
scan is definitely possible but more exposure time will be needed to achieve greater detail
in scans. Moreover it is of great interest to scan a plate at different stages of the surface
crack development provided that the resolution is good enough to see material voids.
These scans would then be comparable to the simulations performed.
5.4
Experimental to numerical comparison
A comparison between the experimental x­ray tomography scans and the numerical plate
bending model is made to determine which cluster randomization parameters yield realis­
tic results or which will need tweaking. The comparison is conducted with the experiments
described in Section 5.3.5 and simulations described in Section 5.2.3. The comparison
is solely made with the DP1000 plate scan since only this yielded an actual crack for
comparison.
Figure 5.33 shows different numerical bending simulations side­by­side with different
slices in the DP1000 tomography scan. Here Figure 5.33a shows cases with only a single
kink in the fracture path. The numerical test initiates in a more straight fracture path, but
after crack tip to cluster interaction it kinks to the side.
Figure 5.33b shows a case with two cracks, where for the numerical simulation the two
cracks develop simultaneously before one crack grows to be the dominant one. The
dominant crack kinks when it interacts with the shear path of the non­dominant crack. A
small kink is likewise seen at the tip of the dominant crack in tomography slice, possibly
caused by the same phenomenon. It is however seen elsewhere that two cracks grow
and one kinks independently of the other.
Figure 5.33c represents a case with zigzagging fracture path.
In general a relatively straighter crack initiation is seen on the numerical simulations com­
pared to the tomography scans. This is due to the mesh effect described in Section 3.4.2.
Furthermore it should be recalled that the 108 simulations shows a wide variety of crack
paths, with some not even fracturing. The three numerical cracks depicted in Figure 5.33
are chosen to represent different cluster sizes going from the biggest cluster size (a) to
smallest (c) and picked for their similarities with the tomography scan. In general the
biggest clusters dc/t = 0.2 showed less comparability to the scans, partly because of less
fractures and partly because of less interaction from one cluster to another due to the
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
79
==PAGE:92==
(a) Bending simulation with dc/t = 0.2 vs z = −3.68 mm
(b) Bending simulation with dc/t = 0.1 vs z = 0.55 mm
(c) Bending simulation with dc/t = 0.05 vs z = 1.29 mm
Figure 5.33: Comparison of simulations to slices of DP1000 tomography scan from the
side. Picked from 108 different simulations and from 1998 total slices. Position in z di­
rection measured from middle of plate, see Figure 5.31. Tomography scans are turned
180°.
low number of clusters. The smallest clusters dc/t = 0.05 with a high number of clus­
ters nc and high β in many cases showed multiple surface fractures and therefore did not
compare to the tomography scan.
80
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:93==
6
Final remarks
This chapter will go through the results, discussing how they came about and comparing
them to one another along with relevant literature. First the simulations are discussed in
Section 6.1, then the experimental findings in Section 6.2, finishing off with a comparison
between the two.
6.1
Simulations
6.1.1
Model setup
Model functionality
The setups for bending and uniaxial tension have proven to function as intended while
the mode I simulations resulted in a dynamic fracture behavior caused by a large sudden
energy release at fracture.
A variety of methods have been tested to circumvent this issue but none prevail, and so
the usability of the setup is severely limited. For this reason it has not been possible to
examine void and cluster interactions in a simple manner. While it is possible to make
such investigations in bending or uniaxial environments, more factors are at play in those
setups altering the fracture path and making it difficult to accurately analyze interplay
between clusters and crack tip.
No literature has been found to use the GTN model in a pure mode I loading setup. The
closest one is Srivastava et al. 2017 but here imperfections are located along the crack
path. Since no direct comparison is found it is difficult to determine whether the dynamic
effect discovered here is an inherent effect of the GTN model or an effect of the setup and
material and GTN parameters chosen.
Material parameters
Basic material parameters (σy, E and N) and GTN parameters (q1, q2, q3, f0, fC, fF , fN,
εN, and sN) have been selected to represent real materials. For the initial mode I tests,
parameters are based on a mild steel and for remaining mode I and bending tests on a
DP800 steel.
The material parameters used to represent mild steel are tested by e.g. Andersen et al.
2020b and should on that basis yield decent results, yet as discussed above this setup
yield an unexpected fracture path. Different GTN parameters are tested as seen in Ap­
pendix A.1.9 but with no better result. The issue of this setup might therefore have to be
found elsewhere than with the material parameters.
The strain hardening exponent N = 0.137 chosen for the bending tests proves to be
too high (see Section 5.3.2). The strain hardening exponent has been implemented on
the basis of Cha and Kim 2014 but other GTN parameters are used in this article as
well, and in a homogeneous setup, making the implementation less straightforward. A
strain hardening for better representing DP800 material would be N ≈0.095, according
to Section 5.3.2. Nevertheless the higher N also means that the material might better
emulate the DP1000 material scanned in Section 5.3.5.
Remaining basic material parameters seem to fit well with the tensile tests performed (see
Section 5.3.1). The volume fraction of void nucleating particles fN is the most uncertain
parameter, as it is difficult to determine the nucleation effect in a material since several
tomography scans or SEM photos will have to be examined throughout the fracture pro­
cess, as has been done by Toda et al. 2017 and Kusche et al. 2021. While these sources
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
81
==PAGE:94==
have been consulted in the determination of fN, assumptions are made to convert results
from DP600 to DP800. Furthermore there are many DP800 steel types, which vary in
microstructure. What is more, fN proves to be one of the parameters most sensitive to
variation. There is much potential for further investigation in future works.
Material model
Generally there are some limitations to the GTN model. The GTN model used for this work
does not include shear, as has been implemented by e.g. He et al. 2021. Furthermore
the model is mesh dependent so that smaller elements require less energy to fracture.
This is the cause of issues with the crack tip mesh in the mode I setup. Moreover if the
number of elements over the thickness of the plate is altered for the bending setup, this
changes the fracture angle. The number of elements has been selected carefully, but is
also limited by the computational power available.
Background material nucleation
A simplification chosen for the bending cluster simulations is that nucleation is only at­
tributed to the weakened elements. In reality nucleation can occur anywhere in the plate
since the microstructures allowing nucleation are significantly smaller than the element
size used for these simulations (see e.g. Kusche et al. 2021). It would easily have been
possible to induce a smaller nucleation in the background material, as done by Andersen
et al. 2020a, but this would increase model complexity and the need for another set of
GTN parameters to be determined, making the influence of each parameter more difficult
to distinguish. This would however be possible to examine in the future.
With all the limitations and simplifications present, it is still seen from the comparison in
Section 5.4 that the results can match the experiment rather well. The setup is thus still
useful for the purpose it has been designed for.
6.1.2
Bending
Localization of damage
The first overall trend noticed when going from homogeneous bending simulations to the
heterogeneous bending simulations was the earlier fracture coming from localization of
damage. For a homogeneous setup using the weak element material parameters, a frac­
ture angle of αf = 125.57° is found, while with the implementation of clusters, the fracture
angle varies from 98° to 156°. This shows that the introduction of randomized hetero­
geneities can cause the fracture to happen both earlier and later than for a homogeneous
case, depending on the randomization, in spite of the average material strength being
higher. On average, a weak element percentage of γ ⪆2% yields a lower fracture angle
than the homogeneous case.
Randomization input parameters
The direct input parameters varied for randomizations are nc, dc/t and β. A high nc (con­
trolled by Knc) tends to yield less variation in results, since the location of individual clus­
ters becomes less significant, and the chance of an ideally located cluster increases.
Several issues were found with the large cluster diameter dc/t = 0.2, mainly caused by
the tendency to diverge away from the free plate surface due to the limitation of clusters
being located fully within the FPZ. Allowing clusters to cross the FPZ border showed a
tendency to earlier fracture for dc/t = 0.2 while remaining cluster diameters seemed much
less affected by the limitation. Experimental comparison also proved that larger clusters
were unsuited for matching the diversity of fracture paths discovered in the bent DP1000
plate.
Of the three direct input parameters, β yields the highest correlation of ρP = ±0.53 for
αf and FHI. The correlation might partially be attributed to the fact that the same cluster
locations have been used for varying β values.
82
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:95==
Nevertheless, all three parameters are affected by one another when calculating corre­
lations, and so the percentage of weak elements in the FPZ, γ, is a better parameter for
summing up all three input parameters in one. γ yields a correlation of ρP = −0.48 for αf
and ρP = 0.65 for FHI. Here it is worth commenting that if all simulations with dc/t = 0.2
are excluded from the calculation, the correlations rise to ρP = −0.63 for αf and ρP = 0.70
for FHI, proving that the larger radius tends to lower correlation due to the cluster location
effect described above.
The larger correlation with FHI compared to αf is considered a result of αf being highly
dependent on the location of the most ideally places element(s), where FHI is more af­
fected by weaknesses in the entire domain.
A general tendency is noticed where parameter settings resulting in low variation, such as
increasing γ, also cause an earlier fracture. This makes sense since more weaknesses
means each weak element has less significance, but more weaknesses also cause earlier
fracture on average. The study in Section 5.2.6 however reveals that while increasing β
on average lowers the fracture angle, it does not appear to lower the standard deviation.
Output parameters
The primary parameter used for quantifying fracture is the fracture angle αf. In simu­
lations this is measured by the bending angle at first element fracture, but experimental
studies such as Heibel et al. 2018 measure this as the point of surface fracture. The
two must be distinguished, as the angle at first element fracture and surface fracture can
vary significantly in simulations. The worst case is a plate with first element fracture at
α = 146° but which has not yet reached the surface at α = 170°, yet for most simulations
it seems that the surface is reached within 15° of first element fracture.
The fracture height index (FHI) has been used to quantify the fracture as well. While it has
a correlation of ρP = −0.80 with αf, it differs in that it takes the cluster structure throughout
the plate into account rather than mainly the structure around the plate bottom as αf. FHI
can thus to some extend be viewed as a measurement for crack propagation, though it
does not take into account if there are several cracks, or how long a crack develops in the
x­direction.
Quantification of randomization
Relatively low correlations are found between γ and input parameters, and the output pa­
rameters αf and FHI, mainly due to the influence of randomization. To circumvent this, the
fracture score Sfrac, yielding a correlation of ρP = −0.86 with the fracture angle αf, was
introduced and helped gain insights into the critical difference between x­ and y­position
of weak elements, as well as the effect of grouped weak elements.
Since the fracture score bases its guess on the group with the highest score in a given
randomized formation, it is possible to use the score as a means of predicting where frac­
ture will initiate. This has been examined qualitatively. For many cases the fracture score
guesses the right group for initiation, but for others it does not. Main reasons for wrong
guesses are that it does not take the orientation of weakened groups into account, nor
the number of weak elements in the general area around the individual groups. For some
cases the right group has been chosen, but due to a lack of other weakened elements in
the area, the fracture angle αf ends up being higher than the fracture score would have
predicted. It is especially difficult for the score to guess the location if many small clusters
are present, as this often yields many groups with almost matching scores.
With some tweaks, it is possible that the fracture score could estimate where and when
fracture would occur before running a simulation.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
83
==PAGE:96==
Result influences
A number of simulations are completed in an effort to review the influences on simulation
results. These include allowing clusters to cross FPZ borders, randomizing weak ele­
ments within clusters and entirely without clusters, and examining the effect of minimum
distance between clusters lmin. In summary, no factors seem to have a critical effect on
the results, with the exception of the larger cluster diameter dc/t = 0.2 being affected by
the FPZ border limitation. This large diameter however also has other issues attached to
it as previously described, and generally seems too large to fit reality.
Randomization is seen to have significant effect on αf and FHI, both when randomiz­
ing cluster locations and weak elements within clusters. This confirms that a significant
amount of simulations will be needed to be able to measure statistical significance. The
lack of statistical significance is a hurdle seen throughout the numerical investigations.
Still, general tendencies are in many cases clear, and will likely be confirmed by increas­
ing the number of simulations performed.
Initiation always occurs vertically for the first line of elements due to the horizontal stretch­
ing of the bending free surface. This effect cannot be easily avoided, as it will require a
change of the mesh, either from the start or a remeshing at a certain angle of bending.
The mesh­dependence of the GTN model further complicates such an approach. While
it is not easily fixed, this discrepancy between simulation and reality, as also noted from
experimental tests, must be kept in mind when examining results.
All clusters are simulated as having a circular shape and all clusters are of equal size.
In reality clusters can have many different shapes and sizes within the same microstruc­
ture. Even voids can be shaped differently than the spherical/cylindrical void assumption
made in the used version of the GTN model (see for instance Scheyvaerts et al. 2011).
The simplification however makes it easier to compare different sizes of clusters. The
positioning of voids within a given cluster can also affect the actual shape of the cluster
in simulations, which is especially seen for low β values.
6.2
Experimental
The x­ray tomography scans completed were to some extend limited by break­downs of
tomography instruments as well as the time limit on the thesis. Due to these, the scans
have been limited in amount as well as resolution. As a consequence of the latter no
small voids are detected within the material in either of the scans but only cracks and
larger voids are visible. This hinders the detection of damage initiation beneath the crack
surface, and so the DP1000 scan has been completed with an explicitly open crack. This
crack is comparable to the fracture patterns seen during bending simulations.
6.2.1
Comparison
As Section 5.4 shows, there are some clear similarities between numerical simulations
and experimental results. Yet though some hand­picked numerical results match the ex­
periments well, others do not seem to produce results in step with reality.
The largest discrepancies were observed with the large cluster diameter dc/t = 0.2, where
less interaction is seen between the larger clusters due to the low amount, resulting in
less versatile fracture paths. For this reason a general observation is that the simulations
with cluster diameters dc/t = {0.1, 0.05} generally fit better with the experimental cracks
observed.
Generally throughout the slices of the experimental plate fracture, only one crack is present
at a time, though some places two cracks can be seen in the same slice. This is gener­
84
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:97==
ally also the case for the numerical simulations with the exception of when many smaller
clusters are present (dc/t = {0.1, 0.05} and Knc = {8, 16}) at higher β values. In these
cases two cracks initiate more often than not, sometimes even three. From the experi­
mental results this seems to be too many nucleation sites. Moreover if weak elements
are located completely randomly within the FPZ (no clusters, see Section 5.2.8) this effect
intensifies and up to five different crack initiations are seen on the fracture surface. This
connection makes sense, as the chance of weak elements appearing at the bottom plate
surface intensifies with these randomization settings.
With the currently used material parameters, this would mean that a more realistic mi­
crostructure is one with medium to small sized clusters but with a limited amount of clus­
ters and β (γ ≈2%). This is however only true for the current set of material parameters.
For instance, lowering fN or introducing nucleation in the background material would likely
yield different results. That said, then from the perspective of the current parameters, the
examined DP1000 steel seems to have a heterogeneity that is not represented by more
or less equally distributed weaknesses (as Section 5.2.8), but where some areas are no­
ticeably weaker than others, causing the variety in fracture initiation point relative to the
plate bottom center as observed in Section 5.3.5 while localizing the damage to one or
two points.
The point of crack initiation relative to the punch position (i.e. the distance in x­direction
from the punch) is examined for both experiment and simulations. For the DP1000 plate
no crack is seen to fracture at a point farther than the distance t/2 from the bottom plate
center. This is approximate, as it is measured in the deformed state of the plate. The
actual distance might thus be less. In simulations the maximum found distance is 0.3t
which seems to be in accord with the experimental results.
While conclusions can be drawn to which simulations best match the experimentally ob­
tained fracture, it is important to note that only a single plate has been scanned with a
fracture. While the plate generally represents the material, other plates might yield differ­
ent fracture paths or patterns. The fracture path slices seen from the DP1000 scan are
also affected out of plate by the growing together of individual fractures, while simulations
keep everything in a single plane.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
85
==PAGE:98==
86
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:99==
7
Conclusion
The work presented in this thesis aims at assessing the effect from clustering and nu­
cleation in ductile fracture during plate bending. Numerical models, including mode I
crack growth, uniaxial tension and plate bending, were created in the commercial soft­
ware Abaqus, utilizing the strain­based GTN material model.
The material used during this thesis represents that of a DP steel. Material GTN param­
eters were selected on the basis of literature examining the microstructure of DP steels
as well as comparison to existing GTN parameters for studies using DP steel. Nucleating
elements in randomized cluster formations were introduced to simulate heterogeneities
in the material.
The mode I model was expected to produce a straight fracture at a speed representative
of a ductile steel material. Instead, a rapid­growing zigzag pattern emerged as a result
of the simulation. In spite of numerous attempts, it has not been possible to rectify the
predicament, nor define the root cause of it.
Nevertheless, simulations were made with the mode I setup modelling fully weakened
clusters as a comparison to V. Tvergaard and Hutchinson 2002 to investigate cluster­by­
cluster versus multiplecluster interaction with the GTN model. From these it was clear
that, as in V. Tvergaard and Hutchinson 2002, decreasing the distance between clusters
made a transition from cluster­by­cluster to multiple­cluster interaction. However, when
the distance became too large, shear bands formed in between voids, and 45° kinks
appeared as part of the fracture path, once again pointing to the unexpected behavior of
the model.
The intend of using the mode I setup to investigate cluster­to­cluster and multiple­cluster
interactions in a straight fracture setup has for this reason proved impracticable. No lit­
erature has been found to address pure mode I loading using the GTN model, and so it
cannot be concluded whether this is an effect of the GTN model itself, or a consequence
of the specific setup used. The investigation of these interactions has therefore solely de­
pended on the bending model where interaction mechanics are more complex and thus
more difficult to analyze.
For the bending setup, many cluster formation parameters where tested to see their re­
spective significance on the fracture. Of the tested parameter values, some proved more
favourable than others. The general effect of localization means that for a weak element
percentage γ ⪆2% the average fracture angle αf is lower than that of a homogeneous
case. Increasing the weak element percentage γ showed trends of decrease in fracture
angle αf.
A Fracture height index (FHI) was introduced to quantify the fracture in a manner distinct
from the fracture angle αf, revealing how far the crack has propagated through the plate.
Results reveal that there is a greater correlation between FHI and the percentage of weak
elements (γ) in the fracture process zone (FPZ) than between αf and γ. While this is true,
the correlation between fracture angle αf and FHI is relatively high, revealing that an early
fracture also yields a farther propagation of the crack through the plate.
A fracture score Sfrac was introduced as a means of evaluating the significance of position
and group size of weak elements in predicting the fracture angle and location of fracture
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
87
==PAGE:100==
initiation. A correlation of ρP = −0.86 is obtained between the fracture angle αf and
Sfrac proving a reasonable ability to predict fracture. The results from Sfrac show that
the position of the weaknesses in the thickness direction of the plate is more crucial for
predicting fracture than the position along the length of the plate. Moreover it is seen that
the number of weak elements grouped together has tangible influence, but the effect has
diminishing returns for larger groups of weak elements.
The high variation in fracture angles is from a conservative standpoint not great, as it
lowers the point of possible fracture. Though the bending model is made to represent
heterogeneities in reality, tweaking some of the factors can yield a later fracture angle.
Tendencies were seen for settings with low variation, such as increasing γ, also caused
earlier fracture.
Increasing the cluster weak element percentage β yielded a lower mean fracture angle,
but the standard deviation around the mean remained similar.
Introducing damage through void nucleation rather than an initial porosity f0 gives a de­
layed response in void growth, detaining it until the onset of nucleation. In terms of void
growth, the bending simulations generally show multiple­void interaction with the weak
elements closest to the crack tip being the most affected. Void­by­void interaction is only
present in special cases with extremely few weakened elements (e.g. for γ = 0.12%).
For clusters, the crack mainly propagated through cluster­by­cluster interaction. Generally
interaction between crack tip and clusters was only present through shear bands, and so
multiple­cluster interaction has only been observed where two or more clusters lie in the
same shear band relative to the crack tip. The range of shear bands seemed only to be
limited by the boundary between tension and compression in the plate, but with elements
closer to the crack tip being affected more than those further away, in line with the level
of tension in the shear band.
A comparison to randomized weak element locations without clusters shows that for equiv­
alent levels of damage in the FPZ, simulations without clusters show no different fracture
angles than with clusters, but simulations without clusters do not fracture as far through
the plate, partially due to initiating fracture at several locations. This points to the inclusion
of clusters causing a localization of damage, leading not to an earlier fracture, but to a
deeper plate fracture instead of several surface­level fractures.
In­situ plate bending x­ray tomography scanning experiments were conducted. Due to
certain circumstances, the resolution of the scans were limited so no micro­voids could
be spotted in the bent material. Cracks were however clear and these have been used as
a basis of comparison for the numerical simulations to determine realistic microstructures.
The fracture paths of selected simulations were seen to match those of experimental re­
sults reasonably well. The largest general dissimilarity between simulations and experi­
ments was the initiation were simulations tend to initiate with a vertical fracture path before
initiating a more directly diagonal fracture, while experimental results show crack following
shear bands at ∼45° from the start. The vertical initiation in numerical investigations is
caused by the horizontal deformation of elements at the fracture surface, causing shear
bands to cross several elements vertically before reaching a new element horizontally.
Not all simulations matched the experiments equally well. Specifically the clusters with
the largest tested diameter dc/t = 0.2 did not match the fracture paths well as they lacked
the versatility of interaction between clusters. Diameters dc/t = {0.1, 0.05} resulted in
fracture paths more often kinking or changing direction.
If too many smaller clusters were present with a high enough percentage of the elements
88
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:101==
in clusters being weak (i.e. high β), cracks in many cases initiated several places on
the plate surface which was more rare in the experimental result. Additionally, if weak
elements were not limited to clusters but distributed randomly in the entire FPZ, cracks
would initiate at up to five different places.
This all points to the heterogeneous microstructure of the experimentally examined DP1000
steel to be best resembled by smaller grouped weaknesses rather than an equally dis­
tributed random weak element distribution. The effect of many crack initiations with fully
randomly distributed weaknesses might however also be attributed to the large difference
between weakened elements and background material and so be dependent on the GTN
parameters chosen for the work. Moreover, the circular cluster formation is a simplification
as well, where real microstructure weaknesses might take any shape imaginable.
While the x­ray tomography scans have not been in the desired quality, the setup works
as a proof of concept ready for future work.
Some limitations presented themselves during the project, involving computational time
for simulations, mode I simulations behaving unexpectedly, x­ray tomography facility fail­
ures, etc. many of which hold further potential or give cause for further investigation.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
89
==PAGE:102==
90
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:103==
8
Future work
While some conclusions can be drawn from the work of this thesis, there is yet much
that can be investigated and results can be improved. The most relevant potential future
works are discussed in this section.
8.1
Numerical simulations
8.1.1
Material parameters
The material parameters determined in Section 3.1.2, and specifically the GTN parame­
ters, are to a wide extend determined on the basis of literature examining similar materials.
However, DP800 or DP1000 materials can vary a lot in material behavior depending on
the manufacturer or type, and so to determine fitting parameters for a specific material,
investigations on the micro­scale like SEM could be utilized.
In this work no nucleation has been included in the background material, which is worth
including and testing. Furthermore, only one set of GTN parameters has been utilized,
while varying number of weak elements and their randomizations. Another approach is to
keep a constant average f0 and/or fN and vary the GTN parameters of the background
material relative to the weakened elements. This allows investigation of the effect of
relative difference between the two material definitions while finding parameters fitting
experimental results.
The strain hardening exponent used to simulate the DP800 material was too high, and
so this could be updated and the effect tested. That said, the experimental study shows
that the DP1000 material was a better fit for the in­situ tomography scans due to its lower
ductility, allowing for fracture to occur within the bending range of the test rig. Thus, if the
test rig is not altered, it will be advantageous to determine GTN parameters fitting for a
DP1000 material to be able to compare with future experimental work.
8.1.2
Mode I
The mode I setup did not function as intended, as described in much detail in Appendix A.
The root cause of the dynamic effect discovered here has not been fully determined, and
so further investigations could be made to improve this. One area of improvement is the
mesh around the crack tip, which had an effect on the fracture path due to a change in
element size. An improved mesh could be made here to dull or remove this undesired
effect.
An attempt at defining the root cause of the issue would be to use the same setup and
displacement field, but using the XFEM crack propagation method instead of the GTN
model. If the fracture is straight with this method, it points to the issue being rooted in the
GTN model and its parameters. On the contrary, if the crack is not straight, the explanation
of the unexpected fracture behavior must be located in the setup itself.
The dynamic effect observed at fracture for the mode I setup could be related to cavitation
instability, as discussed by Viggo Tvergaard and Vadillo 2007 and Viggo Tvergaard 2012.
This will however have to be investigated further.
8.1.3
Bending
Many tendencies are discovered in the bending analysis Section 5.2 but few are statis­
tically significant due to a lack of data. It would therefore be desirable to perform more
simulations with new randomizations to increase the statistical significance of the result.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
91
==PAGE:104==
In the work of this thesis, all nucleation used in the GTN model is strain based. Using
stress­based nucleation and comparing the result to strain­based, or combining strain­
and stress­based, would be a possible future investigation.
8.2
Experimental
The x­ray tomography scans performed during the work of this thesis were of limited reso­
lution, and so it is desired to perform additional scans with better resolution. Moreover it is
desired to perform scans at different stages of the fracture to follow the development of the
plate fracture. Lastly, only a single fractured plate has been examined, and so scanning
more plates would better represent the fracture behavior than focusing all experiments on
a single test specimen.
All of these things (better resolution, more fracture stages and more plates) require more
scanning time and so priorities must be made. The first priority will be to make a scan in
better resolution (ideally ∼2 µm) and then to scan at different fracture stages.
Besides this, improvements can be made to the test rig. First of all, the quality of scans
can be improved by making it more axisymmetric. This can for instance be achieved by
replacing the shoulder bolts with a cylinder surrounding the setup. Some parts like punch,
block and the plate itself can however never become axisymmetric and so the possibilities
are limited.
The x­ray attenuation of the setup can be reduced as well by removing excess material
from shoulder bolts, punch and block. This will however also reduce the factor of safety
and increase deflection of components and must therefore be done with much care.
Another point of improvement is force measurement, which is currently not part of the
setup. This can be achieved by adding a load cell between bolt and block (though this will
require a bearing as well to prevent torque on the load cell). Alternatively strain gauges
can be attached to punch, shoulder bolts, or the screw if it is custom made to allow for
attachment in between block and top parts.
The wear between the bolt and block can be significantly reduced by adding an axial
bearing between the bolt at the punch.
Lastly, the bending angle limit is currently about 140° depending on the plate thickness.
This could be improved by reducing the distance between the block arms, but that would
also increase the required load on these to bend the plate, and is therefore not necessarily
recommended.
92
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
Gurson, Arthur L (1977). “Continuum theory of ductile rupture by void nucleation and
growth: Part I—Yield criteria and flow rules for porous ductile media”. In:
Rousselier, Gilles (2021). “Porous plasticity revisited: Macroscopic and multiscale mod­
eling”. eng. In: International Journal of Plasticity 136, p. 102881. ISSN: 18792154,
07496419. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijplas.2020.102881.
Tvergaard, V. and A. Needleman (1984). “Analysis of the cup­cone fracture in a round
tensile bar”. eng. In: Acta Metallurgica 32.1, pp. 157–169. ISSN: 18780768, 00016160.
Tvergaard, V. and J. W. Hutchinson (2002). “Two mechanisms of ductile fracture: Void by
void growth versus multiple void interaction”. eng. In: International Journal of Solids and
Structures Vol. 39. ISSN: 00207683, 18792146. DOI: 10.1016/S0020-7683(02)00168-3.
Besson, J., D. Steglich, and W. Brocks (2001). “Modeling of crack growth in round bars and
plane strain specimens”. eng. In: International Journal of Solids and Structures 38.46­
47, pp. 8259–8284. ISSN: 18792146, 00207683. DOI: 10.1016/S0020-7683(01)00167-6.
Tekog̃lu, C. and K. L. Nielsen (2019). “Effect of damage­related microstructural parame­
ters on plate tearing at steady state”. eng. In: European Journal of Mechanics, A/solids
77, p. 103818. ISSN: 18737285, 09977538. DOI: 10.1016/j.euromechsol.2019.103818.
Andersen, R. G., C. Tekoğlu, and K. L. Nielsen (2020a). “Cohesive traction–separation re­
lations for tearing of ductile plates with randomly distributed void nucleation sites”. eng.
In: International Journal of Fracture 224.2, pp. 187–198. ISSN: 15732673, 03769429.
DOI: 10.1007/s10704-020-00454-2.
Simon, Jamie E. (2021). “Modeling the material heterogeneity in ductile fracture during
plate bending”. eng.
Toda, Hiroyuki et al. (2017). “Damage micromechanisms in dual­phase steel investigated
with combined phase­and absorption­contrast tomography”. In: Acta Materialia 126,
pp. 401–412.
Nielsen, K. L. and C. Gundlach (2017). “Crack Tip Flipping under Mode I Tearing: Inves­
tigated by X­Ray Tomography”. eng. In: International Journal of Solids and Structures
118­119, pp. 119–127. ISSN: 18792146, 00207683. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2017.04.014.
Anderson, T.L. (2017). Fracture Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications. CRC Press/­
Taylor & Francis. ISBN: 9781498728133.
Irwin, G. (1957). “Analysis of Stresses and Strains near the End of a Crack Traversing
a Plate”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Mechanics 24.1, pp. 361–364. ISSN: 14321807,
00255831. DOI: 10.1007/BF01448839.
Nielsen, K. L. and J. W. Hutchinson (2012). “Cohesive traction–separation laws for tearing
of ductile metal plates”. eng. In: International Journal of Impact Engineering 48, pp. 15–
23. ISSN: 18793509, 0734743x. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijimpeng.2011.02.009.
Tvergaard, V. (2001). Plasticity and creep in structural materials. Polyteknisk Kompendie.
ISBN: 9788770781572.
Abaqus Documentation (2020). Dassault Systèmes.
Tvergaard, V (1990). “Material failure by void growth to coalescence”. eng. In: Advances
in Applied Mechanics 27, pp. 83–151. ISSN: 00652156.
Andersen, R. G. (2016). “Ductile Plate Tearing under Multi­Axial Loading”. eng.
Chu, CC and A Needleman (1980). “Void nucleation effects in biaxially stretched sheets”.
eng. In: Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology­transactions of the Asme
102.3, pp. 249–256. ISSN: 15288889, 00944289. DOI: 10.1115/1.3224807.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
93
==PAGE:106==
Needleman, A. and J. R. Rice (1978). “Limits to Ductility Set by Plastic Flow Localization”.
In: Mechanics of Sheet Metal Forming: Material Behavior and Deformation Analysis.
Ed. by Donald P. Koistinen and Neng­Ming Wang. Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 237–
267. ISBN: 978­1­4613­2880­3. DOI: 10.1007/978- 1- 4613- 2880- 3_10. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-2880-3_10.
Enakoutsa, Koffi (2014). “An improved nonlocal Gurson model for plastic porous solids,
with an application to the simulation of ductile rupture tests”. In: Applied Mathematical
Modelling 38.11­12, pp. 2791–2799.
Samal, MK et al. (2008). “A Mesh Independent GTN Damage Model and Its Application
in Simulation of Ductile Fracture Behaviour”. In: ASME Pressure Vessels and Piping
Conference. Vol. 48265, pp. 187–193.
Courant, R., K. Friedrichs, and H. Lewy (1928). “Über die partiellen Differenzengleichun­
gen der mathematischen Physik”. ger. In: Mathematische Annalen 100.1, pp. 32–74.
ISSN: 14321807, 00255831. DOI: 10.1007/BF01448839.
Stock, Stuart R. (2008). Microcomputed tomography: Methodology and applications. eng.
CRC Press, pp. 1–349. ISBN: 9781420058765.
Röntgen, W. C. (1898). “Ueber eine neue Art von Strahlen”. ger. In: Annalen Der Physik
300.1, pp. 1–11. ISSN: 15213889, 00033804. DOI: 10.1002/andp.18983000102.
Buzug, Thorsten (2008). Computed tomography: From photon statistics to modern cone­
beam CT. eng. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1–521. ISBN: 9783540394075. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-540-39408-2.
Cha, Wan­gi and Naksoo Kim (2014). “Quantification of micro­cracks on the bending sur­
face of roll formed products using the GTN model”. In: Metals and Materials International
20.5, pp. 841–850.
Santos, R. O. et al. (2019). “Damage identification parameters of dual­phase 600–800
steels based on experimental void analysis and finite element simulations”. In: Journal
of Materials Research and Technology 8.1, pp. 644–659.
Kusche, Carl F et al. (2021). “On the effect of strain and triaxiality on void evolution in a
heterogeneous microstructure–A statistical and single void study of damage in DP800
steel”. In: Materials Science and Engineering: A 799, p. 140332.
Tvergaard, V. and A. Needleman (2001). “SECTION 6.5 ­ The Modified Gurson Model”.
eng. In: Handbook of Materials Behavior Models, pp. 430–435. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
012443341-0/50048-X.
Yildiz, R. A. and S. Yilmaz (2020). “Experimental Investigation of GTN model parameters
of 6061 Al alloy”. eng. In: European Journal of Mechanics, A/solids 83, p. 104040. ISSN:
18737285, 09977538. DOI: 10.1016/j.euromechsol.2020.104040.
Faleskog, Jonas, Xiaosheng Gao, and C. Fong Shih (1998). “Cell model for nonlinear frac­
ture analysis ­ I. Micromechanics calibration”. eng. In: International Journal of Fracture
89.4, pp. 355–373. ISSN: 15732673, 03769429. DOI: 10.1023/A:1007421420901.
Heibel, Sebastian et al. (2018). “Damage mechanisms and mechanical properties of high­
strength multiphase steels”. In: Materials 11.5, p. 761.
Pütz, Felix et al. (2020). “The differences of damage initiation and accumulation of DP
steels: a numerical and experimental analysis”. In: International Journal of Fracture
226.1, pp. 1–15.
Andersen, R. G. et al. (2020b). “Fundamental differences between plane strain bend­
ing and far­field plane strain tension in ductile plate failure”. eng. In: Journal of the
Mechanics and Physics of Solids 141, p. 103960. ISSN: 18734782, 00225096. DOI:
10.1016/j.jmps.2020.103960.
Metallic materials – Bend test (ISO 7438:2020) (2020). eng.
94
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:107==
Cold­rolled DP1000­GI (2019). URL: https://www.tatasteeleurope.com/sites/default/files/
tata-steel-automotive-cr-dp1000-gi-cr590y980t-hct980x+z-cr700y980t-hct980xg+z-dual-
phase-datasheet-EN.pdf (visited on 11/09/2021).
GRANTA Edupack (2021). Ansys.
Krex, H.E. (1986). Maskin ståbi. Teknisk Forlag. ISBN: 9788757105681.
Klit, P. and N.L. Pedersen (2014). Machine Elements: Analysis and Design. Polyteknisk
Forlag. ISBN: 9788750210689.
Metallic materials ­ Tensile testing (ISO 6892­1:2019) (2019). eng.
Xu, X­P and Alan Needleman (1994). “Numerical simulations of fast crack growth in brittle
solids”. In: Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 42.9, pp. 1397–1434.
Meyers, Marc A (1994). Dynamic behavior of materials. John wiley & sons.
Wang, Lili et al. (2019). “Chapter Nine ­ Crack dynamics and fragmentation”. In: Dynamics
of Materials. Ed. by Lili Wang et al. Academic Press, pp. 387–493. ISBN: 978­0­12­
817321­3.
Yoffe, Elizabeth H (1951). “LXXV. The moving griffith crack”. In: The London, Edinburgh,
and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 42.330, pp. 739–750.
Srivastava, A, S Osovski, and A Needleman (2017). “Engineering the crack path by con­
trolling the microstructure”. In: Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 100,
pp. 1–20.
Tvergaard, Viggo and G. Vadillo (2007). “Influence of porosity on cavitation instability pre­
dictions for elastic­plastic solids”. eng. In: International Journal of Mechanical Sciences
49.2, pp. 210–216. ISSN: 18792162, 00207403.
Tvergaard, Viggo (2012). “On cavitation instabilities with interacting voids”. eng. In: Euro­
pean Journal of Mechanics a ­ Solids 32, pp. 52–58. ISSN: 18737285, 09977538.
Data sheet 2117 Docol 1000DP (2021). URL: https : / / www . ssab . com / api / sitecore /
Datasheet/GetDocument?productId=152FB02C6CCD4A39B67D861046E73FA5&language=
en (visited on 12/15/2021).
Soyarslan, C, M Malekipour Gharbi, and AE Tekkaya (2012). “A combined experimental–
numerical investigation of ductile fracture in bending of a class of ferritic–martensitic
steel”. In: International Journal of Solids and Structures 49.13, pp. 1608–1626.
He, Zao, Hao Zhu, and Yumei Hu (2021). “An improved shear modified GTN model for
ductile fracture of aluminium alloys under different stress states and its parameters
identification”. In: International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 192, p. 106081.
Scheyvaerts, F et al. (2011). “The growth and coalescence of ellipsoidal voids in plane
strain under combined shear and tension”. In: Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of
Solids 59.2, pp. 373–397.
Abbassi, Fethi, Sebastien Mistou, and Ali Zghal (2013). “Failure analysis based on mi­
crovoid growth for sheet metal during uniaxial and biaxial tensile tests”. In: Materials &
Design 49, pp. 638–646.
Zhao, PJ, ZH Chen, and CF Dong (2016). “Failure analysis based on microvoids damage
model for DP600 steel on in­situ tensile tests”. In: Engineering fracture mechanics 154,
pp. 152–168.
Andersen, R. G., C. L. Felter, and K. L. Nielsen (2019). “Micro­mechanics based cohe­
sive zone modeling of full scale ductile plate tearing: from initiation to steady­state”. In:
International Journal of Solids and Structures 160, pp. 265–275.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
95
==PAGE:108==
96
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:109==
A
Mode I setup simulation details
The mode I setup described in Section 3.2 and tested in Section 4.1 proves to act dif­
ferently than expected in a uniform material setup, and so subsequent simulations are
performed in an attempt to explain the unexpected behavior of the setup and improve it if
possible. In short, the crack was expected to initiate closer to the original crack tip, and
was expected to grow in a straight line (θ = 0) rather than the observed zigzag pattern.
Furthermore the crack growth speed ˙a > 5000 m/s proves to be much larger than would
be expected for any ductile material. For convenience, Figure 4.5, which shows the initial
test result, is reprinted here as Figure A.1.
0.020
0.250
0.135
0.078
0.193
VVF
Figure A.1: VVF plot for initial mode I uniform test. Zoom on crack tip (left) and initial
crack kinking (right).
A.1
Examinations
The following simulations have been completed to examine the setup and find the cause
behind the behavior.
A.1.1
Time and final KI scaling
A dynamic effect is observed in the initial study, which is most often simply caused by
a too short simulation time. Though an initial study was made to ensure that the time
used for simulations was sufficient, these did not look at the crack behavior but mainly at
energies being well below 10% in the worst case. For this reason it is attempted to look
at simulations running longer.
It is also seen in Figure 4.7 and Figure 4.8 that the simulation continues for quite a while
after fracture has occurred. The stress intensity factor controlling the displacement field
is thus also scaled appropriately, so that displacements do not largely exceed the ones
needed for the simulation.
Combining both of these, several simulations were made with increasing time. The longest
completed study used the relation between dilatational wave speed cd and max velocity
on domain boundary vmax:
cd
vmax
= 1.93E7 compared to the original
cd
vmax
= 8.04E5, but
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
97
==PAGE:110==
it showed essentially no change from the initial test. A 10 s simulation takes about a week
to complete with 32 parallel cores. An attempt was made to complete a 20 s simulation
with 32 cores, but the attempt was abandoned after 15 days, as the simulation had not yet
completed, and any simulation that takes more than that amount of CPU time essentially
will not be of any value, considering the amount of simulations that need to be completed
to collect sufficient data. That said, since no change was observed when tend = 10 s, it is
unlikely that only doubling the time would make any difference.
From this it is considered that the root cause of the dynamic effect might be something
else than simply too short time. If it is indeed time that is the issue though, there is not
sufficient computational power available to complete the simulation in a satisfying manner.
A.1.2
Outer radius
If the outer radius Rout is not sufficiently large, the displacements at the center of the
circular domain will not result in pure mode I loading, which can cause kinking. It is thus
attempted to increase the outer radius. In the original setup, Rout/Rct = 1000, which
is now increased to Rout/Rct = 24000. Once again, however, this yields practically no
difference compared to the initial test, and so this does not seem to be the issue.
A.1.3
Domain width
The refined mesh domain has a width of W/Rct = 8, but if this is not sufficient, the crack
can interact with the refined domain boundary, causing undesired interaction. To test if the
width is insufficient, it is increased to W/Rct = 16 while keeping the ratio between element
size and crack tip radius Rct/Le = 8 constant. The result, displayed in Figure A.2, shows
a slightly different fracture path, with a longer straight part, and an actual bifurcation of
the crack. While this might be an effect of the wider domain, this can also be an effect
of the mesh at the crack tip, since the wider domain means the transition distance from
the crack tip to the square refined domain increases as well. In either case, the kinking
followed by zigzag remains, and the issue is still present.
Figure A.2: Crack path for simulation with width W/Rct = 16 and Rct/Le = 8
A.1.4
Adaptive mesh test
Another way to test whether the mesh is the reason for the observed behavior is to change
everything but the square refined mesh domain into an adaptive mesh generated by
Abaqus. The result is displayed in Figure A.3. No large difference is seen between this
and the initial test. Kinking with zigzag still occurs after a straight path. Nevertheless a
difference is seen around the original crack tip where only one small curve is observed,
followed by a downwards kink before the straight part takes over. The mesh around the
crack tip therefore does seem to have an effect on the crack path. The crack tip meshes
are compared in Figure A.4.
98
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:111==
Figure A.3: Crack path resulting from adaptive mesh test
(a) Structured mesh
(b) Adaptive mesh
Figure A.4: Structured and adaptive mesh around crack tip. Only top half shown.
The elements in the original, structured crack tip mesh grow smaller as they approach
the crack tip. Furthermore, a mesh refinement is performed at the boundary between the
crack tip region and the square mesh domain. Conversely, the adaptive mesh manages
to keep an element size approximately equal to that of the square refined domain. As is
known, the GTN model is mesh­dependant, and so the varying size of elements might be
part of the explanation for the observed variation. The initiation process still has similarities
in that it seems to initiate a distance in front of the original crack tip and grow forwards
and backwards at the same time. Furthermore the new crack tip configuration has not
removed the zigzag pattern, and crack propagation still happens at an undesirably high
speed. The mesh dependency of the crack tip therefore does not seem to be the root
cause of the high crack speed and zigzag pattern.
A.1.5
No GTN damage test
A test is performed without the GTN model to see how stresses and strains behave when
no damage is introduced. The test reveals that all parameters act as would be expected
with the highest stress being at the center of the crack tip and the stress field having a
shape corresponding to theory (Figure 4.4). Furthermore the triaxiality field is observed to
be almost constant for the entire simulation here, where the initial test shows a change in
triaxiality when the material starts taking damage. The changing triaxiality – or, more pre­
cisely, mean stress σm – can be part of the explanation for the unexpected crack initiation
a distance from the original crack tip.
A.1.6
Symmetric setup
Symmetry is applied to the setup to see if the crack will propagate straight when symmetry
is forced. Kinking still occurs, and so this does not change anything.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
99
==PAGE:112==
A.1.7
Number of elements over crack tip
The number of elements covering the crack tip, measured by the ratio Rct/Le = 8, is
varied to test the effect. Simulations show that for the smaller ratio Rct/Le = 4, the
crack tip path becomes straighter and a secondary straight segment appears between
two zigzag formations. For Rct/Le = 2, seen in Figure A.5, the effect enhances, causing
a straight fracture path at the crack tip and creating straight parts in between each crack
kink. The crack propagates in steps, stopping at every kink, building up VVF in bands at
θ = ±45° until the crack kinks and propagates at high velocity until the next kinking point.
0.020
0.150
0.085
0.053
0.118
VVF
Figure A.5: VVF result for Rct/Le = 2, mode I setup
While this improves the straightness of the crack, it does not remove the kinking altogether.
What is more, this seems to be more an effect of too low discretization than actually
improving the model.
A.1.8
Material parameters
Strain hardening exponent N
Increasing the strain hardening exponent of a material can force a crack to propagate
in a more straight manner due to the increased stiffness of the material. Simulations
are performed with increased strain hardening exponents from the original N = 0.05 to
N = 0.1 and N = 0.2. Figure A.6 shows the result.
0.020
0.150
0.085
0.053
0.118
VVF
N = 0.05
N = 0.20
N = 0.10
Figure A.6: VVF plots for simulations with varying strain hardening exponent N
Increasing N to 0.1 causes the zigzag pattern to reduce its amplitude while N = 0.2
causes the crack to propagate completely straight with the exception of a small curve
around the point of crack initiation.
100
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:113==
While the crack is straight, there are still traces of attempts at bifurcation shown by the
VVF bands at θ = ±45° along the crack edge. Close inspection reveals that at each of
these points the crack halts, the VVF bands form, and the crack then propagates forward
before taking a halt at the next point. Furthermore, the crack still propagates at a very high
pace. This shows that while the fracture path is straight, the root cause of the observed
zigzag has not been determined or solved.
Other parameters
Different material parameters for Young’s modulus E, yield stress σy and density ρ, taken
from steel or aluminum materials, are used in simulations. They do not yield any signifi­
cantly different results.
A.1.9
GTN parameters
f0, fC, and fF
Since the model appears to work as intended when the GTN damage model is not included
(Appendix A.1.5), the reason for the unexpected behavior could be found in the used GTN
parameters. For this reason a total of 25 different GTN parameter combinations are tested
to see the effect of these and better understand the GTN model. The initial parameters
used are f0 = 0.02, fC = 0.15, and fF = 0.25 with no nucleation.
Before a localization of damage happens a certain distance from the crack tip (see Fig­
ure 4.6), the largest VVF is found right in front of the crack tip. With this in mind, it is
attempted to tweak the GTN parameters to force fracture to initiate at the crack tip.
First of all, it is attempted to lower the critical VVF to fC = {0.125, 0.1, 0.05}. This barely
changes the overall response compared to fC = 0.15, and so this has practically no effect.
Secondly, the initial VVF is increased to f0 = {0.05, 0.10, 0.14, 0.24}, the latter two being
the VVF values right before reaching fC and fF respectively. f0 = {0.10, 0.14, 0.24} all
yield a completely straight crack while f0 = 0.05 yields an almost straight crack but with
slight deviations or wiggles along the crack path. Attempts at bifurcation can also be
observed at f0 = 0.05, as seen in Figure A.7. In every case the crack propagation speed
˙a is still high, albeit slightly slower than for the initial simulation. For f0 = {0.05, 0.10}
initiation still occurs at the intersection point a distance from the original crack tip, while
for f0 = {0.14, 0.24} initiation occurs close to or at the original crack tip.
Additionally for the latter two, it is noticed that the crack propagates slowly until it reaches
the square refined mesh domain, where the crack propagates through the entire length of
the FPZ almost immediately. This appears to be a mesh effect, as the smaller elements
in the square domain require less energy to fracture than the larger ones at the transition
to the crack tip mesh. This effect is clearly undesirable, and it would be beneficial to part
ways with it through a new meshing or structuring of the setup.
A higher f0 value has two straightening effects: It both straightens the crack around the
initiation point, and it flattens the zigzag patterns. With this in mind it appears that the
deviations from the straight crack path occur only if the crack is allowed to halt and develop
VVF bands at θ = ±45°. If f0 is sufficiently high, the next element in front of the crack will
break before VVF bands form.
Table A.1 compares the kinetic energy right before and after fracture occurs for simulations
with varying f0. It is noted that the energy after fracture is higher for lower f0 values, and
that the ratio between the energy right before and after fracture likewise intensifies with
decreasing f0. An element with a higher f0 requires less energy to tear, and that is the
effect observed here. That said, the relative increase in kinetic energy is still very high
and the crack propagation speed is large in every case.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
101
==PAGE:114==
0.138
0.100
0.150
0.125
0.113
0.125
0.050
0.150
0.100
0.075
VVF
VVF
f =0.05
0
f =0.10
0
Figure A.7: VVF plots for f0 = {0.05, 0.10}, mode I setup
f0
Ekin,b (before) [mJ]
Ekin,a (after) [mJ]
Ekin,a/Ekin,b
0.05
1.66E­2
206.17
12433
0.10
1.72E­2
84.63
4926
0.14
1.41E­2
52.68
3761
0.24
4.16E­4
6.38E­2
153
Table A.1: Kinetic energies before and after fracture for varying initial VVF, f0.
While a straight crack can be obtained by increasing f0, the required values for a straight
crack are unrealistically high for a real material. What is more, the crack propagation
speed is still out of proportions and so while some insight is provided into the mechanics
of the GTN model, it does not solve the root issue.
A series of six tests is performed with varying GTN parameters. The parameters from the
result yielding the most straight crack are then fine­tuned by making small changes to the
parameters. All test parameters are displayed in Table A.2 with test ID 1 yielding the best
result for the first round and test ID 1.1 yielding the best result for the fine­tuning. The
final result (ID 1.1) is displayed in Figure A.8 (reprint of Figure 4.11).
0.775
0.100
1.000
0.550
0.325
x10
-2
VVF
Figure A.8: VVF plot for optimized GTN parameters, mode I setup (test ID 1.1, Table A.2)
For the optimized GTN parameters, the crack is straight and does grow at a slower pace
initially. However, as the crack grows, the speed of the crack propagation increases,
102
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:115==
Test ID
f0
fC
fF
fN
εN
sN
1
0.002
0.01
0.015
­
­
­
2
0.002
0.01
0.05
­
­
­
3
0.002
0.01
0.25
­
­
­
4
0.002
0.04
0.05
­
­
­
5
0.002
0.04
0.25
­
­
­
6
0.002
0.15
0.25
­
­
­
1.1
0.001
0.01
0.015
­
­
­
1.2
0.004
0.01
0.015
­
­
­
1.3
0.002
0.01
0.015
0.04
0.2
0.1
1.4
0.002
0.01
0.05
0.04
0.2
0.1
1.5
0.002
0.008
0.015
­
­
­
1.6
0.002
0.012
0.015
­
­
­
1.7
0.002
0.01
0.012
­
­
­
1.8
0.002
0.01
0.018
­
­
­
Table A.2: GTN parameters used for parameter test for mode I setup.
resulting in a high crack velocity when the crack reaches the end of the FPZ. Furthermore
there still is a significant jump in kinetic energy when the crack initiates (Ekin,a/Ekin,b =
1930). Once again, it seems that the root cause of the issue has not been identified.
Additionally, the parameters chosen for test ID 1.1 are not specifically rooted in literature,
but are a fine­tuned estimates of what could be realistic values. They might therefore not
be comparable to any real material.
The remaining tests presented in Table A.2 show varying results, some initiating two crack
tips at θ = ±45° from the original crack tip, some showing later bifurcations, and some
growing vertical cracks from the crack tip sides after the crack has passed (caused by sur­
face tractions). These results are not of great interest since they do not behave as would
be expected for mode I crack growth and – once again – parameters are not comparable
to any real material.
A few more simulations are performed with other GTN nucleation parameters, but nothing
of interest is found.
q1, q2, and q3
The initial GTN fitting parameters q1 = 1.5, q2 = 1, and q3 = 2.25 are altered to see
if changing these will affect the crack path positively. Three simulations are made: One
where q1 = q2 = q3 = 1 (1), one where q2 = 0.9 to check if reducing the mean stress effect
will solve the issue (2), and one where parameters q1 = 1.76, q2 = 0.83, and q3 = 3.09
are taken from Santos et al. 2019 (3). Every case yields results different from the initial
test, but none of them for the better. In case (1) and (2), the crack propagates at the
angle θ = −45° to the bottom of the refined mesh domain right after initiation. For case
(3) a wide band of weak elements form around the crack. The path is straighter but the
wide band of weak elements hardly has any physical meaning. None of the tested qi
parameters therefore solve the issue.
Parameter sets from literature
Additional GTN parameter sets are tested taken from literature, as these are preciously
used and tested values. Specifically parameters from Cha and Kim 2014, Abbassi et al.
2013 (without nucleation and f0 = 0.001, and with nucleation and f0 = 0), Zhao et al. 2016,
and Andersen et al. 2019 are tested. Some parameters yield heavy crack tip branching
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
103
==PAGE:116==
with a slower growth speed (since the energy now disperses through several cracks),
while others more closely resemble the initial test. None of them yield any improvement
of the model.
While the issues occurring in the model are not visible when the GTN model is not applied,
varying the parameters might after all not solve the problem, as a wide variety have been
tested without removing the dynamic issue at hand. Other explanations and solutions are
therefore tested.
A.1.10
Randomly distributed weak elements
Since the issue of dynamic crack growth seems to happen in spite of a longer simulation
time (Appendix A.1.1) and testing different GTN parameters (Appendix A.1.9), the root
cause might be found elsewhere.
The kinetic energy is seen to be very low compared to internal energy right until fracture.
Once the first element breaks it seems to release a large amount of energy, causing a
chain reaction that quickly propagates the crack until the end of the FPZ. Once the crack
reaches the end of the domain, elements grow larger and more energy is thus required
to propagate the crack further due to the mesh dependence of the GTN model.
The rapid crack growth might be caused by several elements being damaged almost
equally simultaneously, so that once the first element breaks they all do. This can be
prevented by introducing material heterogenities in the setup. This is done by randomly
distributing weakened elements in the FPZ so that the percentage of weakened elements
γ is 1.5% and 3%. f0 is then separated into the background material and the weakened
material so that f0,background = 0.005 and f0,weak = 0.02. Results are displayed in Fig­
ure A.9.
 = 1.5%
 = 3.0%
Figure A.9: VVF plots for randomly distributed weak elements. Percentage of elements
weakened γ = 1.5% and 3.0%. Weakened elements marked with red.
The weakened elements cause the fracture path to wiggle significantly, as the ideal crack
path depends much on there the weaker elements are located. For both γ = 1.5% and
γ = 3%, a straight part is seen around the same place as where the straight part is seen in
the initial test (Figure A.1). In both cases, larger zig­zag or wiggling patterns appear later
as well, and he crack propagation speed is not any slower compared to the initial test.
This indicates that this solution does not solve the underlying issues, but only introduces
randomization into it.
104
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:117==
Attempts are made at adding nucleation to weak elements as well, but results are no
better.
A.1.11
Weakened crack tip
One possible explanation for the zigzag pattern observed in the initial test is that it is
caused by the crack initiation. The crack initiates a distance from the original crack tip
and grows both forwards and backwards simultaneously. Kinking is seen to initiate before
the crack has grown all the way back to the original crack tip. This means that the stress
distribution might be affected by the remaining ligament between the crack and the original
crack tip, causing the kinking behavior.
To solve this issue, elements are weakened at the original crack tip to force crack initiation
here. Weakened elements are given initial VVF f0,weak = fC = 0.15. Two attempts are
made: One where only the first two elements right at the crack tip are weakened, and one
where a line of elements is weakened from the crack tip to the square refined domain (to
avoid mesh dependencies). In the first case the crack kinks upwards almost immediately,
way before reaching the square refined mesh domain, which only makes the problem
worse. The second case is more interesting and is displayed in Figure A.10.
0.020
0.250
0.135
0.078
0.193
VVF
Figure A.10: VVF plot for simulation with weakened crack tip elements. Zoom on first
three kinks.
With the crack weakened until the square refined mesh domain, the crack propagates in
steps. For every kink (or bifurcation attempt) seen in Figure A.10, the crack halts and
builds up VVF in lines at θ = ±45°. Once the VVF values in the line reaches a certain
height (typically when a few elements have VVF close to fC) the crack kinks and propa­
gates up until the next kinking point.
The observed result closely resembles that found when using the crack tip radius to el­
ement side length ratio Rct/Le = 2 (compared to Rct/Le = 8 for this and the initial test,
see Figure A.5). For that case the crack also initiated close to the original crack tip and
propagated forward in steps with kinks along the path.
From this it seems that when the entire FPZ fractures through the entire FPZ in one go,
rather than stopping at kink locations, it is an effect of the crack tip mesh. Due to the mesh
refinement transition between the crack tip mesh and the square refined mesh domain,
elements are larger on the left side of the transition. The energy required to fracture the
larger elements is larger, and so when a large energy burst is released from the fracture
of the elements, as is observed, the energy required to fracture the smaller elements is
lower and the crack does not take a halt at the bifurcation point (at least not for nearly as
long as observed here).
Keep in mind though that the result obtained by using an adaptive mesh with almost
equally­sized element at the crack tip and in the square refined domain (Appendix A.1.4)
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
105
==PAGE:118==
yields a different result (Figure A.3) much more similar to the initial test. The effect ob­
served in this case is therefore also affected by the forced straight initiation of the crack
tip.
Either way, the crack is yet seen to kink and propagate at very high speeds in between
kink points. The fundamental issue of dynamic crack growth thus still remains.
It is also attempted to combine the weakened crack tip with the randomly distributed weak
elements (Appendix A.1.10) but this does not yield better results. Wiggles are observed
as in Figure A.9 but the crack still propagates in steps as before.
A.1.12
Amplitude adjustment: Ramp + linear
For all prior simulations, a smooth amplitude curve has been used, ramping the displace­
ment up and down in one smooth motion. While ramping up is crucial to avoid jerking
at the initiation of the simulation, there is no need to ramp down towards the end of the
simulation, as the simulation is already to be quasi­static. The constant adjustment of
velocity is however suspected of being the root of the dynamic effect seen in the setup.
For this reason a new amplitude curve is created, ramping up the velocity of edge dis­
placements and then keeping them constant for the remainder of the simulation. Ampli­
tude curves are compared in Figure A.11.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Ramp time
Smooth amp
Ramp+linear
Figure A.11: Displacement amplitudes: Smooth amplitude curve compared to amplitude
with ramping followed by linear part. Ramp time tramp = 0.3 used as an example.
A simulation is run using ramp time tramp = 0.01 s compared to the simulation time tsim =
0.5 s to make sure that no dynamic effect emerging from change in velocity is present
when fracture occurs.
The result emerging from the simulation is identical to the initial test, and so the amplitude
curve does not bring dynamic effect.
A.1.13
Velocity controlled VDISP
In another attempt to see if the displacement field is the root issue of the dynamic effect,
the VDISP is altered to be velocity controlled rather than displacement controlled. This
once again yields identical results to the initial test, and so this has no effect.
106
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:119==
A.1.14
Higher order element: CPE6M
The dynamic effect might be caused by the limitations of the 4­node reduced integration
elements used (CPE4R, see Abaqus Documentation 2020). With Abaqus/Explicit it is not
possible to use 8­node elements, but modified triangular 6­node elements are available
(CPE6M) using a modified second­order interpolation. A mesh is generated with triangular
elements (splitting the squares of the original mesh in half) and the simulation is run.
The result is that the crack initiates as in the initial simulation, and then kinks at θ = −45°
to the bottom of the FPZ. This does not solve any issue.
A.1.15
Rectangular mode I setup
The circular mode I setup is not functioning as expected. To circumvent the issues in this
setup, a rectangular setup is made as an alternative setup for mode I crack propagation.
The setup is seen in Figure A.12a and the result is seen in Figure A.12b. Displacement
control is used with a smooth amplitude curve, and the mesh around the crack tip is
identical to the previously used one (for the initial test).
FPZ
W=102 Rct
H=102 Rct
(a) Setup for rectangular test.
Arrows on
top/bottom surface indicate displacement direc­
tion and relative amplitude.
(b) VVF plot for rectangular test.
Figure A.12: Setup and VVF result for rectangular test.
The crack propagates at a much lower velocity than for the initial test with a circular do­
main. Yet the crack kinks into a zigzag pattern almost immediately, and so results are not
satisfying.
The test is run again with a weakened crack tip (see Appendix A.1.11) but results from
this only differ little and are no better than the test without weakened crack tip.
A.1.16
Charpy notch setup for bending
Once again, since the circular mode I setup is not functioning as expected, an alternate
setup is attempted. For the bending setup described in Section 3.4 a modification is made
adding a charpy notch at the bottom surface, as seen in Figure A.13. Besides the notch,
all other dimensions and parameters from the bending setup are copied.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
107
==PAGE:120==
Punch
FPZ
45
o
t/5
t
2t
Figure A.13: Setup for charpy test. Fracture process zone (FPZ) border marked with
dashed line.
Figure A.14: Deformed results for charpy setup. Left: Crack slowly initiated. Punch
touches plate. Right: Straight fast crack has propagated through most of the plate. Plate
has let go of punch.
108
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:121==
Appendix A.1.16 shows deformed results of the charpy test. The crack grows in a straight
line from the charpy point. At first it grows at a slow pace, but then it suddenly fractures
through most of the plate at a high velocity. The release of energy is so sudden that the
plate looses contact with the punch – something that would only be expected for a very
brittle material and not for a ductile steel. Though the bending setup is tested to work well
with similar GTN and material parameters without the notch, adding the notch seems to
add an instability to the setup, causing a sudden, fast fracture.
Though the fracture is straight, the fracture speed is nevertheless still far too large to be
quasi­static, and so this setup will not do either as a means to test cluster interaction
behavior.
A.1.17
Plane stress elements
Shear localization more easily develops in plane strain elements compared to plane stress
elements due to the lack of out­of­plane hydrostatic tension. Specifically for the GTN
model, removing the out­of­plane stress also lowers the mean stress σm, and as a result
the term 2q1f∗cosh

3q2σm
2¯σ

(Equation (2.12)) also decreases, resulting in a larger yield
surface. To see how the setup will respond with limited possibility of shear localization, a
simulation is run using plane stress elements. The result is seen in Figure A.15.
Figure A.15: Progressing VVF plots for simulation with plane stress elements. Reprint of
Figure 4.12.
The fracture is completely straight, and the speed is lowered. This points to shear local­
ization being the root cause of the issue at hand.
The energy is examined as well, revealing a much lower jump in kinetic energy during frac­
ture. Figure A.16 compares the internal and kinetic energy for both plane strain elements
(initial test) and plane stress elements, revealing the significant difference. With
A.2
Concluding remarks
Summing up what has been discussed in the section above, removing the dynamic is­
sues from the mode I setup has not been successful, not even by changing the setup
altogether (see Appendix A.1.15 and Appendix A.1.16). Some things have however been
determined in the process:
1. There is a mesh effect around the original crack tip affecting the fracture (see Ap­
pendix A.1.4, Appendix A.1.11)
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
109
==PAGE:122==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10-10
10-6
10-2
102
 IE, plane E
 IE, plane S
KE, plane E
KE, plane S
Figure A.16: Internal and kinetic energies for plane strain (initial) and plane stress element
simulations. IE = internal energy, KE = kinetic energy. Plane E = plane strain. Plane S =
plane stress.
2. The kinking seems to stem from shear localization (Appendix A.1.17), likely as a
result of the high crack propagation speed
3. The dynamic issue is not removed by increasing calculation time (Appendix A.1.1),
setup radius (Appendix A.1.2), or domain width (Appendix A.1.3)
4. The setup seems to function as intended when the GTN model is excluded (Ap­
pendix A.1.5).
5. It is possible to force a straight crack by increasing the strain hardening exponent
N (Appendix A.1.8), or varying GTN parameters (Appendix A.1.9), but none of the
tested solutions show satisfying fracture behavior
Generally the material seems to act in a brittle manner, though when the same parameters
are used for bending or uniaxial tension, the brittleness is not present.
The specific reasons for this behavior have not been determined, and there are still various
possibilities for the observed behavior.
110
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:123==
B
Bending Analysis plots
In this chapter depictions of other investigations from the bending simulations can be
found.
0
0.5
1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Total VVF
Growth
Nucleation
Figure B.1: Void volume fraction as equivalent plastic strain εP
eq increases, for an element
with no nucleation, for cluster­case 06B.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
111
==PAGE:124==
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
Figure B.2: Distance from bottom point on plate directly below punch to center of clos­
est weakened element, compared to fracture angle for fractured plates, sorted by plate
thickness to cluster diameter ratio dc/t. Distance lres shown relative to plate thickness t.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Figure B.3: Scatterplot of cluster area fraction Afrac = Ac/Atotal compared to Fracture
angle αf (first element failure) for fractured tests, and VVF for non­fractured tests.
112
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:125==
1
2
4
8
16
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Boxplot
Mean
Figure B.4: Box plot of K factor compared to percentage of plate width broken through,
with mean shown on top.
6.25
12.5
25
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
Figure B.5: Box plot of cluster weak element percentage β compared to Fracture angle
αf (first element failure) for fractured tests.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
113
==PAGE:126==
1
2
4
8
16
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Fractured
Not fractured
Figure B.6: Scatterplot of cluster number to cluster size index Knc compared to Fracture
angle αf (first element failure) for fractured tests, and VVF for non­fractured tests.
0
20
40
60
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Fractured
Not fractured
Figure B.7: Scatterplot of cluster number nC compared to fracture angle αf (first element
failure) for fractured tests, and VVF for non­fractured tests.
114
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:127==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.2
A B C
A B C
A B C
, weak element selection
, cluster location
Figure B.8: Effect of randomizing weak element selection within fixed cluster locations,
tested for three different β values against FHI. In each case, dc/t = 0.1 and nc = 20.
Standard deviation σ displayed for element selection (×) and cluster locations (—). For
cluster locations, σ is calculated by taking the mean FHI for cluster formation A, B and C
and calculating the standard deviation from the three means.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
115
==PAGE:128==
-0.53
-0.57
-0.52
-0.73
-0.89
-0.58
-0.73
-0.86
-0.57
-0.52
-0.89
-0.53
-0.86
-0.80
-0.58
-0.80
 1.00
 0.56
 0.00
 0.38
 0.52
 0.53
-0.42
 0.31
-0.25
-0.11
 0.81
-0.23
 0.35
-0.45
-0.04
 0.56
 1.00
 0.00
-0.16
-0.22
-0.23
-0.40
 0.26
-0.45
-0.02
 0.72
-0.08
 0.01
-0.26
-0.12
 0.00
 0.00
 1.00
 0.54
 0.00
-0.00
-0.04
 0.40
 0.64
 0.64
-0.12
 0.53
-0.01
-0.35
 0.38
-0.16
 0.54
 1.00
 0.74
 0.72
-0.20
 0.42
 0.48
 0.24
-0.50
-0.48
 0.65
-0.30
-0.27
 0.52
-0.22
 0.00
 0.74
 1.00
 0.97
-0.24
 0.24
 0.12
-0.06
-0.19
 0.48
-0.25
 0.13
 0.53
-0.23
-0.00
 0.72
 0.97
 1.00
-0.23
 0.20
 0.10
-0.11
-0.18
 0.47
-0.28
 0.12
-0.42
-0.40
-0.04
-0.20
-0.24
-0.23
 1.00
 0.28
 0.10
 0.41
 0.39
 0.27
 0.31
 0.26
 0.40
 0.42
 0.24
 0.20
 1.00
 0.09
 0.30
 0.76
 0.76
-0.19
-0.37
-0.25
-0.45
 0.64
 0.48
 0.12
 0.10
 0.28
 0.09
 1.00
 0.64
-0.38
-0.23
 0.24
 0.17
-0.14
-0.11
-0.02
 0.64
 0.24
-0.06
-0.11
 0.10
 0.30
 0.64
 1.00
-0.20
-0.29
 0.26
 0.30
 0.02
 0.81
 0.72
-0.12
-0.50
 0.76
-0.38
-0.20
 1.00
-0.23
-0.08
-0.48
-0.19
-0.18
 0.41
-0.23
-0.29
 1.00
 0.26
 0.28
 0.35
 0.01
 0.53
 0.65
 0.48
 0.47
 0.76
 0.24
 0.26
 1.00
-0.29
-0.24
-0.45
-0.26
-0.01
-0.30
-0.25
-0.28
 0.39
-0.19
 0.17
 0.30
 0.26
-0.29
 1.00
 0.57
-0.04
-0.12
-0.35
-0.27
 0.13
 0.12
 0.27
-0.37
-0.14
 0.02
 0.28
-0.24
 0.57
 1.00
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
nC
t/dc
Afrac
DImean
lres
Sfrac
nw,max
nw,mean
ffinal
f
FHI
f
FHI
nC
t/dc
Afrac
DImean
lres
Sfrac
nw,max
nw,mean
ffinal
f
FHI
f
FHI
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure B.9: Heat map including most parameters discussed in Section 5.2.5
116
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:129==
C
Fracture score examinations
The fracture score introduced in Section 5.2.5 has been developed through an iterative
process where several fracture scores have been tested.
All fracture scores build on the weak element groups, which are evaluated on number of
weak elements in the group nw and the position in the x­ and y­direction relative to the
plate bottom middle. It is desired to make a distinction between the x­ and y­direction of
the bending domain since qualitative inspection (Section 5.2.4) shows that the y­direction
is more significant that the x­direction. The general build­up of the fracture score is
Sfrac = max (f(xi, yi) {+|·} f(nw,i)) , i = 1..ng
(C.1)
where f(xi, yi) is a function of x and y position for group number i, and f(nw,i) is a function
of nw for group number i. The two functions can either be added together or multiplied.
ng is the number of groups.
To get an idea of how best to relate the x­ and y­directions, undeformed VVF plots are
made and observed for different stages during the bending process. The result is shown
in Figure C.1.
(a) Homogeneous case, long before fracture
(b) Homogeneous case, right before fracture
(c) Heterogeneous (cluster) case, long before
fracture
(d) Heterogeneous (cluster) case, right before
fracture
Figure C.1: Undeformed VVF plots for bending cases, long before fracture and right before
fracture.
Observing the homogeneous material case, the VVF distribution clearly changes from
an elliptical shape into a more triangular shape. The former could be described by an
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
117
==PAGE:130==
approximate elliptical formulation (i.e. V V F(x, y) =
x
a
2
+
y
b
2
) while the VVF for
the latter more accurately would be described as a linear function between x and y (i.e.
V V F(x, y) = a · x + b · y).
Moving to the heterogeneous case, the VVF shape seems to be somewhere in between
the elliptical and linear case.
Several attempts at scoring the positioning is made, represented by f(xi, yi) in Equa­
tion (C.1). The attempts – or variations – are listen in Table C.1 and are visualized with
contour plots in Figure C.2. Similarly the contribution from nw (f(nw,i) in Equation (C.1))
is modelled with different variations, as shown in Table C.2.
Variation
f(xi, yi) formulation
Description
A
1 +
1−|xi|
t
c1
−yi
t
Linear formulation: No power on x or y
B
1 +
1−(
xi
t )
2
c1
−
yi
t
2
Elliptical formulation
C
1 +
1−
(xi
t
)2
c1
−yi/t
y linear, x nonlinear
Table C.1: Different formulations of f(xi, yi) for fracture score (see Equation (C.1)).
Variation
f(nw,i) formulation
Description
J
nc2
w,i
Raised to power c2
K
nw,i · c2
Multiplied by c2
L
(1 + nw,i · c2)
Linear scaling by c2
Table C.2: Different formulations of f(nw,i) for fracture score (see Equation (C.1)).
Formulations from Tables C.1 and C.2 are combined into the variations seen in Table C.3.
The best correlation is found for the C·J combination. The contour plot of position variation
C (Figure C.2c) also most closely resembles the undeformed VVF plots for the heteroge­
neous cases and the homogeneous case long before fracture in Figure C.1.
Combination of variations
A·J
A+J
A+K
B·J
C·J
C+L
Pearson correlation
­0.8596
­0.8565
­0.7543
­0.8580
­0.8624
­0.7876
Table C.3: Pearson correlation for different combinations of variations shown in Tables C.1
and C.2
On basis on the above, the final fracture score chosen is
Sfrac = max




1 +
1 −
xi
t
2
c1
−yi/t

nc2
w,i


, i = 1..ng
(C.2)
It is worth noting though, that the difference in correlation between the best case and
some of the other ones is very small, and so the higher correlation for this variation could
be the effect of the specific randomizations performed for this thesis work. That said, the
shapes seen in Figures C.1 and C.2 seem to suggest that this is the better fitting model.
118
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:131==
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) Variation A (Elliptic)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Variation B (Linear)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
(c) Variation C (x nonlinear, y linear)
Figure C.2: Contour plots of different f(xi, yi) formulations (see Equation (C.1) and Ta­
ble C.1).
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
119
==PAGE:132==
Other fracture score variations than the ones shown here have been attempted, but the
ones included here are the ones with the highest correlation and the most physical mean­
ing.
120
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:133==
D
Experimental scanning of DP800 and
DP1000 plates
In­situ tomography scans are performed on ductile sheet metal plates to investigate the
damage structure in the materials during bending.
D.1
Materials
Two plate materials are used for the experiments: A DP800 material and a DP1000 ma­
terial. Both materials are described in further detail in Sections 3.5.1 and 5.3.1.
D.2
Equipment
The tomography quipment used is described in Section 3.5.3, with adapter shown here in
Figure D.1
D.3
Tomography scans
Four scans are made in total, as shown in Table D.1. Scan A is performed as an initial test
and proves that four hours of exposure time is not enough to achieve a satisfying result.
Scan B is once more performed for DP800, this time with the plate bent as much as is
allowed in the test rig. This is not enough to see a crack on the surface of the plate, but
a few voids can be spotted. The resolution is however still limited to about 9 µm, and so
only larger voids can be detected.
ID
Material
X­ray instrument
Exposure time
Comment
A
DP800
ZEISS XRadia 410 Versa
4 hours
Initial scan, plate not bended
B
DP800
ZEISS XRadia 410 Versa
24 hours
Plate bent to ≈135°
C
DP1000
ZEISS XRadia 410 Versa
60 hours
Plate bent to 139°
D
DP1000
Nikon XT H 225
24 hours
Plate bent to 139°
Table D.1: In­situ tomography tests performed
Scan C is performed for DP1000 and was supposed to run for 60 hours, but the ZEISS
scanner broke down towards the end of the scan, making it impossible to recreate the
model without the missing last part. Lastly scan D is performed for DP1000 in the Nikon
scanner, which was succesful. However the scanner was only available for 24 hours,
limiting the possible resolution.
In the following results scan B is shown in the DP800 plate and scan D is shown for the
DP1000 plate.
D.4
Results
D.4.1
DP800
Overview is seen in Figure D.2. Only three voids are detected in the scan. These are
portrayed in Figure D.3.2
D.4.2
DP1000
An overview of the DP1000 tomography scan is seen in Figure D.4. Slices of the scan
from the top are seen in Figure D.5 while slices from the side are seen in Figure D.6.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
121
==PAGE:134==
5,00 
 
 
65,00 
B
B
SECTION B-B
 11,00 
 6,00 
 50,00 
 
50,00 ±0,30 
Figure D.1: Sketch of adapter component to be able to use bending test rig in Versa
scanner. Dimensions are in mm.
122
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:135==
Figure D.2: Overview of DP800 scan
172 m
74 m
Figure D.3: Voids detected in DP800 plate scan. Length of each void indicated.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
123
==PAGE:136==
x
y
z
Figure D.4: Overview of DP1000 tomography scan with coordinate system (right)
D.4.3
Noise
Figures D.7 to D.9 show the different areas of noise in the tomography scan. Figure D.7
shows the underside of the scan, revealing noise in the area where the punch touches
the plate (seen as darker areas). The transition between punch and plate is fuzzy and
unclear. This is not critical however, as this noise is only present on the compression side
of the plate. Note that some noise is also visible right at the center of the plate.
Figure D.8 shows a slice from the middle of the scan, revealing noise in the middle of the
plate as well. This is the most critical point of the scan in regards to noise since it is the
focal point of the rotations. Noise is seen both in the actual plate in a vertical line through
the center, and below the plate as white points (bottom middle of Figure D.8). Besides
this a kind of crosshatching is seen as well in the top half of the plate. This noise is only
present in the slices closest to the center and so have no effect on the remaining slices.
Figure D.9 shows a slice of the scan taken from the top, right below the crack depth. Here
ring artifacts are very visible, confirming the noise around the center of the scan. Besides
this, the scan is seen to be darker across the diagonals of the scan slice. This is an effect
of the object not being axisymmetric. The distance across the diagonals is longer than the
distance across the middle or length of the slice, and so the X­ray penetration is limited
here. This effect however mainly seems to affect visuals but not the overall quality of the
scan, as cracks are still clearly visible.
A similar effect is see Figure D.6c where a while line is clearly seen across the middle
of the plate, which is not seen in all slices. This is most likely the effect of the block and
punch components as well as the three rods blocking penetration in some directions while
not in others.
124
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:137==
Figure D.5: Slices of DP1000 tomography scan from fracture surface and downwards
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
125
==PAGE:138==
(a) Slice z position = −3.68 mm
(b) Slice z position = −1.41 mm
(c) Slice z position = −0.63 mm
(d) Slice z position = 0.55 mm
(e) Slice z position = 1.06 mm
(f) Slice z position = 1.10 mm
(g) Slice z position = 1.29 mm
(h) Slice z position = 1.72 mm
Figure D.6: Slices of DP1000 tomography scan from the side. Picked from 1998 total
slices. Position in z direction measured from middle of plate. z ranges from ­5 to 5 mm.
126
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:139==
Figure D.7: Underside of DP1000 scan
Figure D.8: Noise seen in the middle slice of DP1000 plate scan
Figure D.9: Ring artifacts seen from top side scan
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
127
==PAGE:140==
E
Coding
E.1
Abaqus user subroutine VDISP for KI displacement field
Below the Fortran code used to define the Abaqus user suboutine for defining the KI
displacement field is shown. The variables used are
• E: Young’s modulus
• nu: Poisson’s ratio
• mu and kappa: Constants from Equations (2.2) and (2.3)
• KIend: Final KI value for analysis
• te: End time for analysis st: Time stamp at current iteration
• am: Amplitude expression
• x: x coordinate of selected node at current iteration
• y: y coordinate of selected node at current iteration
• r: Radius from node to original crack tip
• ang: Angle between node position and crack tip front (see Figure 2.1)
Remaining elements of the VDISP subroutine are explained in Abaqus Documentation
2020.
1
subroutine vdisp(nblock, nDof, nCoord , kstep, kinc,
2
2
stepTime , totalTime , dtNext, dt,
3
3
cbname, jBCType , jDof, jNodeUid , amp,
4
4
coordNp , u, v, a, rf, rmass, rotaryI ,
5
c Write only variable -
6
5
rval )
7
c
8
include 'vaba_param.inc'
9
parameter( zero = 0.d0, half = 0.5d0, one = 1.d0 )
10
c
11
character*80 cbname
12
dimension jDof(nDof), jNodeUid(nblock),
13
1
amp(nblock), coordNp(nCoord,nblock),
14
2
u(nDof,nblock), v(nDof,nblock), a(nDof,nblock),
15
3
rf(nDof,nblock), rmass(nblock), rotaryI(3,3,nblock),
16
4
rval(nDof,nblock)
17
c
18
c
Constant definitions
19
E = 200000.0
20
nu = 0.3
21
mu = E/(2*(1+nu))
22
kappa = 3.0-4.0*nu
23
pi = 4.d0*daTan(1.d0)
24
KIend = 7000
25
te = 0.5
26
if( jBCType .eq. 0 ) then
27
if( stepTime .lt. zero ) then
28
do 100 k = 1, nblock
29
do 100 j = 1, nDof
30
if( jDof(j) .gt. 0 ) then
128
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:141==
31
rval(j,k) = 0.0
32
end if
33
100
continue
34
else
35
do 110 k = 1, nblock
36
st = stepTime
37
am = (6.0*st**5-15*st**4*te+10*st**3*te**2)/te**5
38
x = coordNp(1,k)
39
y = coordNp(2,k)
40
r = SQRT(x**2.0+y**2.0)
41
ang = SIGN(ACOS(x/r),y)
42
c1 = 1.0/(2.0*mu) * SQRT(r/(2.0*pi))
43
c2 = COS(ang/2.0) * (kappa -1.0+2.0*SIN(ang/2.0)**2.0)
44
c3 = SIN(ang/2.0) * (kappa+1.0-2.0*COS(ang/2.0)**2.0)
45
rval(1,k) = c1*c2*am*KIend
46
rval(2,k) = c1*c3*am*KIend
47
110
continue
48
end if
49
end if
50
c
51
return
52
end
Coding_n_PDFs/vdispK.f
E.2
Script for selecting weak elements
In this section an example of a python script used for generating input files specifying weak
elements is shown. Small variations are made between mode I, uniaxial and bending
cases due to different geometry, but the essence is the same. The code shown below is
the one used for the bending setup.
1
"""
2
This script imports element labels from Abaqus and creates weaknesses within
3
cluster domains
4
5
Created: 09/09/2021
6
Author: Christoffer Grenov
7
Updated: 04/11/2021
8
Editor: Lasse S. Niemann
9
10
"""
11
# Import modules
12
import numpy as np
13
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
14
15
# Define function
16
# Function for converting SelLab to a tuple
17
def totuple(a):
18
try:
19
return tuple(totuple(i) for i in a)
20
except TypeError:
21
return a
22
23
# Input
24
nc = 20
# Number of clusters
25
beta = 0.125
# Percentage of elements in cluster to be weak
26
rc = 1.5/2.0/5
# Radius of clusters
27
cdist = 0.5*rc
# Minimum distance between clusters
28
NO = 'BRY'
# Numbering order of labels
29
"""
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
129
==PAGE:142==
30
The numbering order of labels can go in eight different manners. It can
31
start in four different corners and then follow x or y. Corners are denoted
32
TL TR BL BR (T=top, B=bottom , L=left, R=right). Direction is noted by x/y.
33
"""
34
35
# Dimensions of refined mesh area
36
W = 3.0
# Width of domain (Length in x-direction)
37
nely = 128
# Number of elements over thickness
(y direction)
38
nelx = 256
# Number of elements over width of FPZ (x direction)
39
t = 1.5
# Height of domain (t for bending , y-direction)
40
Le = t/nely
# Sidelength of a single element
41
42
nel = nelx*nely
# Number of elements in FPZ
43
44
# Define cluster space
45
Wc = W-2*rc
# Width of cluster center domain
46
tc = t-2*rc
# Breadth of cluster center domain
47
48
# Check against cluster radius (fit within domain)
49
if Wc <=0 or tc <=0:
50
raise ValueError('Cluster radius too large to fit withon domain')
51
52
# Import file exported from Abaqus or define manually
53
# - Import
54
# ELab = np.load('/work3/s193742/Python/ELabs.npy',None,True)
55
# ELab = ELab.astype(int)
56
# lownum = ELab[0]
# The lowest label number
57
# - Define manually
58
lownum = 10496
# The lowest label number (11144)
59
ELab = np.linspace(lownum,nel+lownum -1,nel,dtype=int)
60
61
# Create element coordinate array with three columns: (x,y,label)
62
if NO == 'TRX':
63
xCo = np.linspace((W-Le)/2,-(W-Le)/2,nelx)
# x coordinates (negative dir)
64
yCo = np.linspace((t-Le)/2,-(t-Le)/2,nely)
# y coordinates (negative dir)
65
ELabCo = np.zeros([nel,3])
# Element label coordinates array
66
for i in range(nely):
67
ELabCo[i*nelx:(i+1)*nelx ,0] = xCo
68
ELabCo[i*nelx:(i+1)*nelx ,1] = yCo[i]
69
elif NO == 'BRY':
70
xCo = np.linspace((W-Le)/2,-(W-Le)/2,nelx)
# x coordinates (negative dir)
71
yCo = np.linspace(-(t-Le)/2,(t-Le)/2,nely)
# y coordinates (positive dir)
72
ELabCo = np.zeros([nel,3])
# Element label coordinates array
73
for i in range(nelx):
74
ELabCo[i*nely:(i+1)*nely ,0] = xCo[i]
75
ELabCo[i*nely:(i+1)*nely ,1] = yCo
76
else:
77
raise ValueError('Chosen numbering order (NO) not defined (only TRX/BRY')
78
ELabCo[:,2] = ELab.T
79
80
# Choose cluster center coordinates
81
cCo = np.random.rand(nc,2)
# Generate random numbers
82
cCo[:,0] = (cCo[:,0]-0.5)*Wc
# Fit x-coordinates to domain
83
cCo[:,1] = (cCo[:,1]-0.5)*tc
# Fit y-coordinates to domain
84
85
# If you want to pre-load cluster centers use this
86
#cCo = np.load('cCo.npy')
# Import data for Cluster centers (strong)
87
88
89
90
# Check if clusters within range of one another
91
for x in range(nc-1): # -1 because the last one does not need a check
130
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:143==
92
# Calculate distance to all clusters
93
dist = np.sqrt((cCo[:,0]-cCo[x,0])**2+(cCo[:,1]-cCo[x,1])**2)
94
95
it = 0; # Iteration number
96
while sum(dist <2*rc+cdist) > 1: # while two clusters coincide
97
it += 1 # Iteration counter
98
# print('Iteration ',it, ' x = ',x)
99
cCo[x,0] = (np.random.rand() -0.5)*Wc
# New x coord.
100
cCo[x,1] = (np.random.rand() -0.5)*tc
# New y coord.
101
dist = np.sqrt((cCo[:,0]-cCo[x,0])**2+(cCo[:,1]-cCo[x,1])**2)
102
103
if it >= 1000: # Breaks and warns of max iterations used
104
print('Max iterations reached - clusters not correctly located!')
105
break
106
107
# Determine which elements belong to each cluster
108
cEls = np.zeros([nel,nc],dtype=bool) # Array determining elements in each
cluster
109
for x in range(nc):
110
# Calculate distance from cluster center to element centers
111
dist = np.sqrt((ELabCo[:,0]-cCo[x,0])**2+(ELabCo[:,1]-cCo[x,1])**2)
112
# Save those within range in array
113
cEls[:,x] = dist <= rc
114
115
# Determine number of selected (weak) elements per cluster
116
nSel = round(np.mean(np.sum(cEls ,0))*beta)
117
print('Actual beta = '+str(nSel*nc/sum(sum(cEls))))
118
119
# Select elements within each cluster
120
Selidx = np.array([],dtype=int)
# Initialize selected label index array
121
Remidx = np.array([],dtype=int)
# Initialize remaining label index array
122
for x in range(nc):
123
ccEl = ELab[cEls[:,x]] - lownum # Current cluster element indices
124
if len(ccEl) < nSel:
# Check if nSel too high
125
raise ValueError('More selected elements than available in cluster')
126
for i in range(nSel):
127
ridx = np.random.randint(len(ccEl))
# Random index
128
Selidx = np.append(Selidx,ccEl[ridx])
# Append selected index
129
ccEl = np.delete(ccEl,ridx)
# Remove from remaining
130
Remidx = np.append(Remidx ,ccEl)
# Add to total remaining
131
132
# Add elements outside clusters to Remidx
133
Remidx = np.append(Remidx,ELab[np.invert(np.sum(cEls ,1).astype(bool))]-lownum)
134
135
# Convert indices to labels
136
SelLab = Selidx + lownum
# Selected labels
137
RemLab = Remidx + lownum
# Remaining labels
138
139
# Save arrays
140
np.save('cCo.npy',cCo)
141
np.save('SelLab.npy',SelLab)
142
np.save('RemLab.npy',RemLab)
143
144
145
###################
146
## Visualization ##
147
###################
148
plt.figure(figsize=(24,12))
149
ax = plt.axes()
150
ax.axis('equal')
151
plt.xlim((-W/2-Le,W/2+2*Le))
152
ax.set_ylim([-t/2-Le,t/2+2*Le])
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
131
==PAGE:144==
153
plt.title('rc = '+str(rc)+', nc = '+str(nc))
154
155
156
for i in range(nelx+1):
157
plt.vlines(i*Le-W/2,-t/2,t/2,colors='silver',zorder=0)
158
159
for i in range(nely+1):
160
plt.hlines(i*Le-t/2,-W/2,W/2,colors='silver',zorder=0)
161
162
for i in range(len(Selidx)):
163
square = plt.Rectangle((ELabCo[Selidx[i],0]-Le/2,ELabCo[Selidx[i],1]-Le/2)
,
164
Le, Le, fc = 'red', ec = "black")
165
ax.add_patch(square)
166
167
for x in range(nc):
168
circles = plt.Circle((cCo[x,0],cCo[x,1]),rc,color='b',fill=False)
169
ax.add_patch(circles)
170
171
print('Percentage fill of the whole')
172
gamma = len(SelLab)/nel
173
print(gamma*100,'%')
174
print('area of clusters compared to total domain')
175
A_diff = rc**2*np.pi*nc/(W*t)
176
print(A_diff*100)
Coding_n_PDFs/ClusterWeakeningBending_DP.py
E.3
Grassfire algorithm
A grassfire algorithm is developed to determine weak element groups in a given random­
ization. An example of the result of running the grassfire algorithm on a single random
cluster formation is shown in Figure E.1b.
132
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:145==
(a) Binary plot of grassfire result. Darker color means more weak elements in group.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
0
100
200
300
400
(b) Bar chart showing number of groups with nw number of weak elements in them
Figure E.1: Example of result from running the grassfire algorithm on a single randomiza­
tion. Here dc/t = 0.2, nc = 10 and β = 0.25.
The grassfire algorithm is displayed below:
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Jan 11 09:34:34 2022
4
5
@author: s193742
6
7
The script loads SelLab from a designated folder and finds the connectivity of
8
the weakened elements.
9
10
The algorithm follows the grassfire method , starting in the top left corner
11
going along the first row, and upon reaching the end moves to the
12
next row below from left to right.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
133
==PAGE:146==
13
14
The code only checks for directly adjecent weakened elements , not diagonal
15
ones, as qualitative studies show that the directly adjecent ones are
16
dominant in defining code.
17
18
"""
19
20
# Modules
21
import numpy as np
22
import os
23
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
24
25
# Input data
26
nelt = 128
# Number of elements over plate thickness
27
nell = 256
# Number of elements over length of FPZ
28
nel = nelt*nell
# Total number of elements
29
lownum = 10496
# Lowest element number in the FPZ
30
31
# Import
32
ID = 'B128_23B'
# Simulation ID to import
33
path = os.getcwd()+'\\'+ID+'\\'
# Path for importing file
34
SelLab = np.load(path+'SelLab.npy') # File containing weak element locations
35
36
37
# Make matrix with rows and columns representing actual element grid, with 1
38
# meaning weak and 0 meaning strong
39
labels = np.linspace(lownum,nel+lownum -1,nel,dtype=int)
# all labels in
domain
40
weakidx = np.array([])
# initialize array for saving weak element indices
41
for i in range(len(SelLab)):
42
weakidx = np.append(weakidx ,np.where(labels == SelLab[i])[0][0])
43
44
weakidx = weakidx.astype(int)
# Convert to integers
45
weakbool = np.zeros(nel)
# Initialize boolean array for weak elements
46
weakbool[weakidx] = 1
# Save weak elements in boolean array
47
48
A = np.fliplr(np.flipud((np.reshape(weakbool ,[nell,nelt])).T))
# Weakness
matrix (boolean , representing weak elements)
49
B = np.zeros([nelt,nell])
# Group matrix
: Saves group number for respective elements
50
C = np.zeros([nelt,nell])
51
# Plot for boolean array A
52
# fig = plt.figure(figsize=(20,10))
53
# ax = fig.add_subplot(111)
54
# ax.imshow(A, aspect=1, cmap=plt.cm.gray, interpolation='nearest')
55
56
57
# Define grassfire algorithm
58
def gf(A,r,c,cGr,count):
59
ng = 0
# New group indicator
60
if A[r,c] == True:
# If element is weak
61
ng = 1
# New group found
62
count += 1
63
A[r,c] = 0
# Consider counted
64
cGr = np.append(cGr,np.array([[r,c]]),0)
# append row and column to
current group
65
try:
66
A,cGr,lol = gf(A,r,c+1,cGr,count)
67
except IndexError:
68
pass
69
try:
70
A,cGr,lol = gf(A,r+1,c,cGr,count)
134
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:147==
71
except IndexError:
72
pass
73
try:
74
A,cGr,lol = gf(A,r,c-1,cGr,count)
75
except IndexError:
76
pass
77
try:
78
A,cGr,lol = gf(A,r-1,c,cGr,count)
79
except IndexError:
80
pass
81
return A,cGr,ng
82
83
# Run grassfire code
84
grc = 1;
# Group counter: Adds an integer to represent
each group
85
cGr = np.empty([0,2],int)
# Current group array: Saves all rows and
columns for current group
86
aGr = np.empty([0,2],int)
# All group array: Saves number of elements
for each group
87
count = 0
88
89
for r in range(nelt):
90
for c in range(nell):
91
A,cGr,ng = gf(A,r,c,cGr,count)
92
if ng == 1: # If new group identified
93
cGr
94
# print(len(cGr))
95
aGr = np.append(aGr,[[grc,np.size(cGr,0)]],0)
# Save group
number and number of elements in group
96
for i in range(np.size(cGr,0)):
97
idx1,idx2 = cGr[i,0:2]
98
B[cGr[i,0],cGr[i,1]] = grc
# Add group number to array
99
C[cGr[i,0],cGr[i,1]] = np.size(cGr,0)
100
grc +=1
# add to group counter
101
cGr = np.empty([0,2],int)
# Reset current group array
102
count = 0
103
104
###################
105
## Visualization ##
106
###################
107
108
109
# Plot for array C
110
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(20,10))
111
ax = fig.add_subplot(111)
112
ax.imshow(C, aspect=1, cmap=plt.cm.binary , interpolation='nearest')
113
114
# Bar plot
115
nMax = np.max(aGr[:,1])
# Highest number of weak elements in one group
116
binC = np.bincount(aGr[:,1])
# Number of each size groups
117
binC = np.delete(binC ,0)
118
119
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(20,10))
120
plt.bar(np.arange(nMax)+1,binC)
Coding_n_PDFs/grassfire.py
E.4
Bending cluster script
In this section an example of a python script used to generate input files for the bend­
ing simulations. It will integrate the selected weak elements found by the script in Ap­
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
135
==PAGE:148==
pendix E.2.
1
# -*- coding: mbcs -*-
2
Mdb() #Clear Mdb
3
from part import *
4
from material import *
5
from section import *
6
from assembly import *
7
from step import *
8
from interaction import *
9
from load import *
10
from mesh import *
11
from optimization import *
12
from job import *
13
from sketch import *
14
from visualization import *
15
from connectorBehavior import *
16
17
# import os
18
#os.chdir(r"C:\Users\s144974\OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Msc
Project\Abaqus og Python\Bending")
19
session.journalOptions.setValues(replayGeometry=COORDINATE ,recoverGeometry=
COORDINATE)
20
21
### Parameters
22
Nameinput = 'B'
23
ID = '23C3'
# ID number
24
ed = ''
# Edited variable(s)
25
PunchDisp = -30.0 # [mm], prescribed punch displacement
26
27
28
# Analysis parameters
29
AnalysisTime = 0.5
# Time period for analysis (Jamie ran 2.0)
30
nFrames = int(1000)
# Number of frames (output) (If linear time
output)
31
32
### Model parameters
33
L = 60.0
# [mm], length of bending specimen
34
t = 1.5
# [mm], thickness of bending specimen
35
W = t
# [mm], Half-width of refined domain
36
Rroller = 20.0
# [mm], roller radius
37
dbr = 5.36
# [mm], distance between rollers
38
Rpunch = 0.43
# [mm], punch radius
39
40
### Material parameters for DP780
41
mu_fr = 0.02
# [-], coefficient of friction
42
E = 210.0e3
# [MPa], Young's modulus
43
nu = 0.3
# [-], Poisson's ratio
44
dens = 7.85e-7
# [t/mm^3], density (Forkert densitet = ?)
45
f0 = 0.005
# [-], initial void volume fraction
46
fC = 0.15
# [-], critical void volume fraction
47
fF = 0.25
# [-], final void volume fraction
48
q1 = 1.5
# [-], fitting parameter
49
q2 = 1.0
# [-], fitting parameter
50
q3 = q1*q1
# [-], fitting parameter
51
f0weak = 0.005
# initial void volume fraction , weakened material
52
## Void Nucleation for DP800
53
eps_N=0.19
# mean strain for Nucleation
54
s_N=0.05
# Standard deviation for void nucleation
55
f_N=0.04
# VF for void nucleation particles
56
57
136
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:149==
58
59
60
### Mesh parameters
61
numel = 128
# number of elements through thickness , must be an
integer when divided by 16!
62
L_e = t/float(numel)
# element size in fine region
63
elsize_fine = L_e
# element size in fine region (Can change for other
cases, fx. K1)
64
dxy = 1e-5
# Adjustment parameter for GetByBoundingBox and edge
picking
65
66
### Names
67
JobName = Nameinput+str(numel)+ed+'_'+ID
# Name of job
68
PartName = 'Plate'
# Name of part
69
InstanceName = PartName + '-1'
# Name of instance
70
m = mdb.models['Model -1']
# Set dummy parameter for model
71
72
#os.chdir(r"C:\Users\s144974\OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Msc
Project\Abaqus og Python\Bending")
73
fullFilePath="C:\Users\s193742\OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Msc
Project\Abaqus og Python\Bending"+"\\"+JobName+"\\"
74
path=os.path.dirname(fullFilePath)
75
os.chdir(path)
76
77
78
#################### Generate model / Creating part
79
#################### The model is shifted a distance of one half element to
avoid nodes lying at x=0 and y=0
80
m.ConstrainedSketch(name='__profile__', sheetSize=L)
81
m.sketches['__profile__'].rectangle(point1=(-L/2.0, -t/2.0), point2=(L/2.0, t
/2.0))
82
#m.sketches['__profile__ '].rectangle(point1=(-L/2.0, -t/2.0+elsize_fine/2.0),
point2=(L/2.0, t/2.0+elsize_fine/2.0))
83
m.Part(dimensionality=TWO_D_PLANAR , name=PartName , type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
84
p = m.parts[PartName] # Set dummy
85
p.BaseShell(sketch=m.sketches['__profile__'])
86
del m.sketches['__profile__']
87
p.regenerate()
88
89
# more dummy parameters (need to be after part creation)
90
f, e, d = p.faces, p.edges, p.datums
91
92
#################### Material definition
93
m.Material(name='GursonSteel')
94
m.materials['GursonSteel'].setValues(description='')
95
m.materials['GursonSteel'].Density(table=((dens, ), ))
96
m.materials['GursonSteel'].Elastic(table=((E, nu), ))
97
m.materials['GursonSteel'].Plastic(table=((580.0,
98
0.0), (585.0, 0.000178583), (590.0, 0.000367045), (595.0, 0.000565841), (
99
600.0, 0.000775443), (605.0, 0.000996341), (610.0, 0.001229044), (615.0,
100
0.001474077), (620.0, 0.001731986), (625.0, 0.002003335), (630.0,
101
0.002288709), (635.0, 0.002588712), (640.0, 0.00290397), (645.0,
102
0.00323513), (650.0, 0.003582863), (655.0, 0.00394786), (660.0,
103
0.004330836), (665.0, 0.004732532), (670.0, 0.005153711), (675.0,
104
0.005595161), (680.0, 0.006057697), (685.0, 0.006542161), (690.0,
105
0.00704942), (695.0, 0.00758037), (700.0, 0.008135935), (705.0,
106
0.008717068), (710.0, 0.009324752), (715.0, 0.009959999), (720.0,
107
0.010623855), (725.0, 0.011317395), (730.0, 0.012041728), (735.0,
108
0.012797997), (740.0, 0.013587377), (745.0, 0.01441108), (750.0,
109
0.015270352), (755.0, 0.016166478), (760.0, 0.017100777), (765.0,
110
0.018074609), (770.0, 0.019089372), (775.0, 0.020146503), (780.0,
111
0.02124748), (785.0, 0.022393824), (790.0, 0.023587096), (795.0,
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
137
==PAGE:150==
112
0.024828904), (800.0, 0.026120896), (805.0, 0.027464769), (810.0,
113
0.028862263), (815.0, 0.030315167), (820.0, 0.031825319), (825.0,
114
0.033394603), (830.0, 0.035024955), (835.0, 0.036718364), (840.0,
115
0.038476867), (845.0, 0.040302558), (850.0, 0.042197582), (855.0,
116
0.044164141), (860.0, 0.046204495), (865.0, 0.048320958), (870.0,
117
0.050515904), (875.0, 0.052791769), (880.0, 0.055151046), (885.0,
118
0.057596294), (890.0, 0.060130131), (895.0, 0.062755244), (900.0,
119
0.065474382), (905.0, 0.068290362), (910.0, 0.07120607), (915.0,
120
0.07422446), (920.0, 0.077348557), (925.0, 0.08058146), (930.0,
121
0.083926337), (935.0, 0.087386434), (940.0, 0.090965073), (945.0,
122
0.09466565), (950.0, 0.098491642), (955.0, 0.102446606), (960.0,
123
0.106534181), (965.0, 0.110758086), (970.0, 0.115122127), (975.0,
124
0.119630195), (980.0, 0.124286268), (985.0, 0.129094412), (990.0,
125
0.134058784), (995.0, 0.139183633), (1000.0, 0.1444733), (1005.0,
126
0.149932223), (1010.0, 0.155564934), (1015.0, 0.161376064), (1020.0,
127
0.167370344), (1025.0, 0.173552606), (1030.0, 0.179927784), (1035.0,
128
0.186500918), (1040.0, 0.193277154), (1045.0, 0.200261746), (1050.0,
129
0.207460056), (1055.0, 0.21487756), (1060.0, 0.222519845), (1065.0,
130
0.230392615), (1070.0, 0.23850169), (1075.0, 0.246853008), (1100.0,
131
0.292459644), (1125.0, 0.345084678), (1150.0, 0.405615397), (1175.0,
132
0.475028), (1200.0, 0.554394292), (1225.0, 0.644888707), (1250.0,
133
0.747795689), (1275.0, 0.864517433), (1300.0, 0.996581998), (1325.0,
134
1.145651804), (1350.0, 1.313532519), (1375.0, 1.502182343), (1400.0,
135
1.713721714), (1425.0, 1.950443429), (1450.0, 2.214823196), (1475.0,
136
2.509530631), (1500.0, 2.83744071), (1525.0, 3.201645678), (1550.0,
137
3.605467438), (1575.0, 4.052470414)))
138
m.materials['GursonSteel'].PorousMetalPlasticity(relativeDensity=1.0-f0, table
=((q1, q2, q3), ))
139
m.materials['GursonSteel'].porousMetalPlasticity.PorousFailureCriteria(
criticalFraction=fC, fraction=fF)
140
## Nucleation for all elements
141
# m.materials['GursonSteel '].porousMetalPlasticity.VoidNucleation(table=((
eps_N, s_N, f_N), ))
142
## Material for weak elements (different f0)
143
m.Material(name='GursonSteel -weak',
144
objectToCopy=m.materials['GursonSteel'])
145
m.materials['GursonSteel -weak'].porousMetalPlasticity.setValues(
146
relativeDensity=1.0-f0weak)
147
## Nucleation for only weak elements
148
m.materials['GursonSteel -weak'].porousMetalPlasticity.VoidNucleation(table=((
eps_N, s_N, f_N), ))
149
## Copy Material for ends (ends)
150
m.Material(name='GursonSteel -ends', objectToCopy=
151
m.materials['GursonSteel'])
152
m.materials['GursonSteel -ends'].porousMetalPlasticity.setValues(
153
relativeDensity=1.0-f0)
154
155
156
#################### Create sections
157
m.HomogeneousSolidSection(material='GursonSteel', name=
158
'Section -strong', thickness=None)
159
m.HomogeneousSolidSection(material='GursonSteel -ends', name=
160
'Section -top', thickness=None)
161
m.HomogeneousSolidSection(material='GursonSteel -ends', name=
162
'Section -bot', thickness=None)
163
m.HomogeneousSolidSection(material='GursonSteel -weak', name=
164
'Section -weak', thickness=None)
165
166
167
#### Partitioning the refined region (FPZ)
168
## Set element size
169
elsize_fine = L_e
# Should not change for bending case
138
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:151==
170
## Set partitioning operators
171
par_1 = W
172
#### Partition #1: Box
173
## Create sketch
174
s = m.ConstrainedSketch(gridSpacing=W/4, name='__profile__',
175
sheetSize=L, transform= p.MakeSketchTransform(
176
sketchPlane=f.findAt((0.0, elsize_fine , 0.0),
177
(0.0, 0.0, 1.0)), sketchPlaneSide=SIDE1,
178
sketchOrientation=RIGHT, origin=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0)))
179
## Create refined mesh region (rectangle)
180
s.rectangle(point1=(-par_1, -t/2.0), point2=(par_1, t/2.0))
181
## Create partitioning
182
p.PartitionFaceBySketch(faces=f.findAt(((0.0, 0.0,
183
0.0), )), sketch=s)
184
del s
185
186
#################### Create surfaces for contact
187
p.Surface(name='UpperPlateSurface', side1Edges=
188
e.findAt(((0.0, t/2.0, 0.0), ), ))
189
190
p.Surface(name='LowerLeftSurface', side1Edges=
191
e.findAt(((-L/2.0+dxy, -t/2.0, 0.0), ), ))
192
193
p.Surface(name='LowerRightSurface', side1Edges=
194
e.findAt(((L/2.0-dxy, -t/2.0, 0.0), ), ))
195
196
## Partition #2: Meshing
197
sign = [-1,1]
198
for si in sign:
199
elsize_fine=L_e
200
par_1= -W*si
201
## Create Sketch
202
s = m.ConstrainedSketch(gridSpacing=W/4, name='__profile__',
203
sheetSize=2*L, transform= p.MakeSketchTransform(
204
sketchPlane=f.findAt((par_1-si*elsize_fine , 0.0, 0.0),
205
(0.0, 0.0, 1.0)), sketchPlaneSide=SIDE1,
206
sketchOrientation=RIGHT, origin=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0)))
207
208
#### Create partitioning - First row (1)
209
cs = -t/2.0
# CountStart
210
s.Line(point1=(par_1-si*2*elsize_fine ,-t/2.0),point2=(par_1-si*2*
elsize_fine ,t/2.0))
#-- Horizontal
211
## Set counting operators for inner fine region
212
count1 , count2, count3, count4 , count5 = cs+elsize_fine , cs+2.0*
elsize_fine , cs+3.0*elsize_fine , cs+0.0, cs+elsize_fine
213
## ~ Transition from inner fine region ~ lines
214
LoopEndBottom = t/2.0
215
while count1 <=LoopEndBottom:
216
# ## ------------------------------------------- Top1
---------------------------------------------------------------
###
217
s.Line(point1=(par_1,count1),point2=(par_1-si*elsize_fine ,count1))
#-- Vertical
218
s.Line(point1=(par_1,count2),point2=(par_1-si*elsize_fine ,count2))
#-- Vertical
219
s.Line(point1=(par_1,count3),point2=(par_1-si*elsize_fine ,count3))
#-- Vertical
220
s.Line(point1=(par_1-si*elsize_fine ,count1),point2=(par_1-si*
elsize_fine ,count3))
#-- Horizontal
221
s.Line(point1=(par_1-si*2*elsize_fine ,count1 -elsize_fine),point2=(
par_1-si*elsize_fine ,count1)) #-- 45 degree sceewed
222
s.Line(point1=(par_1-si*elsize_fine ,count3),point2=(par_1-si*2*
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
139
==PAGE:152==
elsize_fine ,count3+elsize_fine)) #-- 45 degree sceewed
223
## Update counters
224
count1 = count1 + 4*elsize_fine
225
count2 = count2 + 4*elsize_fine
226
count3 = count3 + 4*elsize_fine
227
228
while count4 <=LoopEndBottom:
229
## left
230
#s.Line(point1=(par_1 -2*elsize_fine ,count4),point2=(par_1 -2*
elsize_fine ,count4)) #-- Vertical
231
s.Line(point1=(par_1,count4),point2=(par_1-si*4*elsize_fine ,count4))
#-- Vertical
232
count4 = count4 + 2*elsize_fine
233
234
#### Partitioning
~ Second row (2)
235
par_2 = par_1-si*4*elsize_fine
236
#s.rectangle(point1=(par_2, 0.0), point2=(par_2+4*elsize_fine , W/2.0))
237
s.Line(point1=(par_2,cs),point2=(par_2,LoopEndBottom))
#--
Vertical
238
s.Line(point1=(par_2-si*4*elsize_fine ,cs),point2=(par_2-si*4*elsize_fine ,
LoopEndBottom))
#-- Vertical
239
#### Reset counting operators for outer fine region.
240
count1 , count2, count3, count4 , count5 = cs+2.0*elsize_fine , cs+4.0*
elsize_fine , cs+6.0*elsize_fine , cs+0.0, cs+elsize_fine
241
while count1 <=LoopEndBottom:
242
### ------------------------------------------- Top2
---------------------------------------------------------------
###
243
s.Line(point1=(par_2,count1),point2=(par_2-si*2*elsize_fine ,count1))
#-- Vertical
244
s.Line(point1=(par_2,count2),point2=(par_2-si*2*elsize_fine ,count2))
#-- Vertical
245
s.Line(point1=(par_2,count3),point2=(par_2-si*2*elsize_fine ,count3))
#-- Vertical
246
s.Line(point1=(par_2-si*2*elsize_fine ,count1),point2=(par_2-si*2*
elsize_fine ,count3))
#-- Horizontal
247
s.Line(point1=(par_2-si*4*elsize_fine ,count1 -2*elsize_fine),point2=(
par_2-si*2*elsize_fine ,count1)) #-- 45 degree sceewed
248
s.Line(point1=(par_2-si*2*elsize_fine ,count3),point2=(par_2-si*4*
elsize_fine ,count3+2*elsize_fine)) #-- 45 degree sceewed
249
##Update counters
250
count1 = count1 + 8*elsize_fine
251
count2 = count2 + 8*elsize_fine
252
count3 = count3 + 8*elsize_fine
253
254
while count4 <=LoopEndBottom:
255
## right
256
s.Line(point1=(par_2,count4),point2=(par_2-si*8*elsize_fine ,count4))
#-- Vertical
257
count4 = count4 + 4*elsize_fine
258
259
260
#### Partitioning
~ Third row (3)
261
par_3 = par_2-si*8*elsize_fine
262
s.Line(point1=(par_3,cs),point2=(par_3,LoopEndBottom))
#--
Vertical
263
s.Line(point1=(par_3-si*8*elsize_fine ,cs),point2=(par_3-si*8*elsize_fine ,
LoopEndBottom))
#-- Vertical
264
# Reset counting operators for outer fine region.
265
count1 , count2, count3, count4 , count5 = cs+4.0*elsize_fine , cs+8.0*
elsize_fine , cs+12.0*elsize_fine , cs+0.0, cs+elsize_fine
266
while count1 <=LoopEndBottom:
140
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:153==
267
### ------------------------------------------- Right
---------------------------------------------------------------
###
268
s.Line(point1=(par_3, count1),point2=(par_3-si*4*elsize_fine , count1))
#-- Vertical
269
s.Line(point1=(par_3, count2),point2=(par_3-si*4*elsize_fine , count2))
#-- Vertical
270
s.Line(point1=(par_3, count3),point2=(par_3-si*4*elsize_fine , count3))
#-- Vertical
271
s.Line(point1=(par_3-si*4*elsize_fine , count1),point2=(par_3-si*4*
elsize_fine , count3))
#-- Horizontal
272
s.Line(point1=(par_3-si*8*elsize_fine , count1 -4*elsize_fine),point2=(
par_3-si*4*elsize_fine , count1)) #-- 45 degree sceewed
273
s.Line(point1=(par_3-si*4*elsize_fine , count3),point2=(par_3-si*8*
elsize_fine , count3+4*elsize_fine)) #-- 45 degree sceewed
274
##Update counters
275
count1 = count1 + 16*elsize_fine
276
count2 = count2 + 16*elsize_fine
277
count3 = count3 + 16*elsize_fine
278
279
while count4 <=LoopEndBottom:
280
## right
281
s.Line(point1=(par_3, count4),point2=(par_3-si*16*elsize_fine , count4)
)
#-- Vertical
282
count4 = count4 + 8*elsize_fine
283
#End line partition
284
par_4 = par_3-si*16*elsize_fine
285
s.Line(point1=(par_4,cs),point2=(par_4,LoopEndBottom))
#--
Vertical
286
287
# Create partitioning
288
p.PartitionFaceBySketch(faces=f.findAt(((par_1-si*elsize_fine , 0.0,
289
0.0), )), sketch=s)
290
del s
291
292
## Element type
293
dxy = 1e-5
294
xmin,ymin,zmin,xmax,ymax,zmax = -L/2.0-dxy,-t/2.0-dxy,0.0-dxy,L/2.0+dxy,t/2.0+
dxy ,0.0+dxy
295
p.setElementType(elemTypes=(ElemType(
296
elemCode=CPE4R, elemLibrary=EXPLICIT , secondOrderAccuracy=OFF,
297
hourglassControl=DEFAULT , distortionControl=DEFAULT), ElemType(
298
elemCode=CPE3, elemLibrary=EXPLICIT)), regions=(
299
p.faces.getByBoundingBox(xmin,ymin,zmin,xmax,ymax,zmax), ), )
300
301
302
303
## Seeding
304
pickedEdges1 = e.findAt(((0.0, t/2.0, 0.0), ))
# Finer region
305
p.seedEdgeBySize(edges=pickedEdges1 , size=L_e, deviationFactor=0.1,
306
minSizeFactor=0.001, constraint=FINER)
307
pickedEdges2 = e.findAt(((L/2.0-dxy, t/2.0, 0.0), ), # Outer region sides
308
((L/2.0-dxy, -t/2.0, 0.0), ),
309
((-L/2.0+dxy, t/2.0, 0.0), ),
310
((-L/2.0+dxy, -t/2.0, 0.0), ),)
311
L_par=(L/2.0-abs(par_2))
# length from par_2 to L/2.0
312
L_e4x=L_par/(int(L_par/(8*L_e)))
# Element length in x direction outside
partitioning
313
p.seedEdgeBySize(edges=pickedEdges2 , size=L_e4x, deviationFactor=0.1,
314
minSizeFactor=0.001, constraint=FINER)
315
316
pickedEdges3 = e.findAt(((L/2.0, 0.0, 0.0), ), # Outer region ends
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
141
==PAGE:154==
317
((-L/2.0, 0.0, 0.0), ))
318
p.seedEdgeBySize(edges=pickedEdges3 , size=8.0*L_e, deviationFactor=0.1,
319
minSizeFactor=0.001, constraint=FINER)
320
321
322
323
# Global
324
p.seedPart(deviationFactor=0.1, minSizeFactor=0.1, size=8*L_e)
325
326
## Mesh control
327
p.setMeshControls(regions=f, elemShape=QUAD)
# Quadratic element control
328
#################### Mesh all
329
mdb.models['Model -1'].parts['Plate'].generateMesh()
330
331
# #################### Section assignments
332
### For the set/section in the middle
333
# xmin, xmax = -abs(par_1)-dxy, abs(par_1)+dxy
334
# ymin, ymax = -t/2.0-dxy, t+dxy
335
# zmin, zmax = -dxy, dxy
336
# p.Set(faces=
337
# p.faces.getByBoundingBox(xmin, ymin, zmin, xmax, ymax, zmax), name='Set-
mid')
338
# p.SectionAssignment(offset=0.0, offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE ,
region=
339
# p.sets['Set-mid'], sectionName='Section -strong', thicknessAssignment=
FROM_SECTION)
340
## For the set/section in the ends
341
## Top half/left
342
xmin_top , xmax_top = -L/2.0-dxy, -abs(par_1)+dxy
343
ymin_top , ymax_top = -W/2.0-dxy, W/2.0+dxy
344
p.Set(faces=
345
p.faces.getByBoundingBox(xmin_top , ymin_top , zmin, xmax_top , ymax_top ,
zmax), name='Set-top')
346
p.SectionAssignment(offset=0.0, offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE ,
region=
347
p.sets['Set-top'], sectionName='Section -top', thicknessAssignment=
FROM_SECTION)
348
#Bottom half/right
349
xmin_bot , xmax_bot = abs(par_1)-dxy, L/2.0+dxy
350
ymin_bot , ymax_bot = -W/2.0-dxy, W/2.0+dxy
351
p.Set(faces=
352
p.faces.getByBoundingBox(xmin_bot , ymin_bot , zmin, xmax_bot , ymax_bot ,
zmax), name='Set-bot')
353
p.SectionAssignment(offset=0.0, offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE ,
region=
354
p.sets['Set-bot'], sectionName='Section -bot', thicknessAssignment=
FROM_SECTION)
355
356
357
358
#################### Create rollers
359
#################### Left roller
360
m.ConstrainedSketch(name='__profile__', sheetSize=L)
361
m.sketches['__profile__'].ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0)
362
, direction=CLOCKWISE , point1=(Rroller*cos(100*pi/180), Rroller*sin(100*pi
/180)), point2=(Rroller*cos(0*pi/180), Rroller*sin(0*pi/180)))
363
m.Part(dimensionality=TWO_D_PLANAR , name='LeftRoller', type=
ANALYTIC_RIGID_SURFACE)
364
m.parts['LeftRoller'].AnalyticRigidSurf2DPlanar(sketch=
365
m.sketches['__profile__'])
366
del m.sketches['__profile__']
367
m.parts['LeftRoller'].ReferencePoint(point=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0))
142
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:155==
368
m.parts['LeftRoller'].Surface(name='LeftRollerSurface',
369
side1Edges=m.parts['LeftRoller'].edges.findAt(((Rroller*cos(5*pi/180),
Rroller*sin(5*pi/180), 0.0), )))
370
371
#################### Right roller
372
m.ConstrainedSketch(name='__profile__', sheetSize=L)
373
m.sketches['__profile__'].ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0)
374
, direction=CLOCKWISE , point1=(Rroller*cos(180*pi/180), Rroller*sin(180*pi
/180)), point2=(Rroller*cos(80*pi/180), Rroller*sin(80*pi/180)))
375
m.Part(dimensionality=TWO_D_PLANAR , name='RightRoller', type=
ANALYTIC_RIGID_SURFACE)
376
m.parts['RightRoller'].AnalyticRigidSurf2DPlanar(sketch=
377
m.sketches['__profile__'])
378
del m.sketches['__profile__']
379
m.parts['RightRoller'].ReferencePoint(point=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0))
380
m.parts['RightRoller'].Surface(name='RightRollerSurface',
381
side1Edges=m.parts['RightRoller'].edges.findAt(((Rroller*cos(175*pi/180),
Rroller*sin(175*pi/180), 0.0), )))
382
383
#################### Create Punch
384
m.ConstrainedSketch(name='__profile__', sheetSize=L)
385
m.sketches['__profile__'].Line(point1=(Rpunch*cos(-1*pi/180), L/2.0), point2=(
Rpunch*cos(-1*pi/180), Rpunch*sin(-1*pi/180)))
386
m.sketches['__profile__'].ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0)
387
, direction=CLOCKWISE , point1=(Rpunch*cos(-1*pi/180), Rpunch*sin(-1*pi
/180)), point2=(Rpunch*cos(181*pi/180), Rpunch*sin(181*pi/180)))
388
m.sketches['__profile__'].Line(point1=(Rpunch*cos(181*pi/180), Rpunch*sin(181*
pi/180)), point2=(Rpunch*cos(181*pi/180), L/2.0))
389
m.Part(dimensionality=TWO_D_PLANAR , name='Punch', type=ANALYTIC_RIGID_SURFACE)
390
m.parts['Punch'].AnalyticRigidSurf2DPlanar(sketch=m.sketches['__profile__'])
391
del m.sketches['__profile__']
392
m.parts['Punch'].ReferencePoint(point=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0))
393
m.parts['Punch'].Surface(name='PunchSurface',
394
side1Edges=m.parts['Punch'].edges.findAt(((Rpunch*cos(270*pi/180), Rpunch*
sin(270*pi/180), 0.0), )))
395
396
################## Create assembly
397
m.rootAssembly.DatumCsysByDefault(CARTESIAN)
398
399
m.rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON, name='Plate -1', part=p)
400
401
m.rootAssembly.instances['Plate -1'].translate(vector=(0.0, -elsize_fine/2.0,
0.0))
402
m.rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON, name='LeftRoller -1', part=m.parts['
LeftRoller'])
403
m.rootAssembly.instances['LeftRoller -1'].translate(vector=(-Rroller -dbr/2.0, -
t/2.0-Rroller , -0.0))
404
m.rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON, name='RightRoller -1', part=m.parts['
RightRoller'])
405
m.rootAssembly.instances['RightRoller -1'].translate(vector=(Rroller+dbr/2.0, -
t/2.0-Rroller , -0.0))
406
m.rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON, name='Punch -1', part=m.parts['Punch'])
407
m.rootAssembly.instances['Punch -1'].translate(vector=(0.0, t/2.0+Rpunch , -0.0)
)
408
409
################## Create step
410
m.ExplicitDynamicsStep(description='Loading step', name='Loading', previous='
Initial', timePeriod=AnalysisTime)
411
412
################## Output
413
m.fieldOutputRequests['F-Output -1'].setValues(numIntervals=nFrames ,
414
variables=('S', 'TRIAX', 'PE', 'PEEQ', 'NE', 'LE', 'U', 'V', 'A', 'RF', '
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
143
==PAGE:156==
VVF', 'VVFG', 'VVFN', 'STATUS', 'NFORC'))
415
416
m.historyOutputRequests['H-Output -1'].setValues(
417
variables=('ALLAE', 'ALLDMD', 'ALLFD', 'ALLIE', 'ALLKE', 'ALLPD', 'ALLSE',
'ALLVD', 'ALLWK', 'ETOTAL'))
418
419
################## Amplitude function
420
m.SmoothStepAmplitude(data=((0.0, 0.0), (AnalysisTime , 1.0)), name='
Amplitude_smooth', timeSpan=STEP)
421
m.TabularAmplitude(data=((0.0, 0.0), (AnalysisTime , 1.0)), name='
Amplitude_linear', smooth=SOLVER_DEFAULT , timeSpan=STEP)
422
m.SmoothStepAmplitude(data=((0.0, 1.0), (AnalysisTime , 1.0)), name='
Amplitude_BC', timeSpan=STEP)
423
424
################## Prescribed displacement for punch
425
m.DisplacementBC(amplitude='Amplitude_smooth', createStepName='Loading',
distributionType=UNIFORM , fieldName='',
426
fixed=OFF, localCsys=None, name='Punch', region=Region(referencePoints=(m.
rootAssembly.instances['Punch -1'].referencePoints[2],
427
)), u1=0.0, u2=PunchDisp , ur3=0.0)
428
429
################## Fixed boundary conditions for rollers
430
m.DisplacementBC(amplitude='Amplitude_BC', createStepName='Loading',
distributionType=UNIFORM , fieldName='',
431
fixed=OFF, localCsys=None, name='LeftRoller_BC', region=Region(
referencePoints=(m.rootAssembly.instances['LeftRoller -1'].
referencePoints[2],
432
)), u1=0.0, u2=0.0, ur3=0.0)
433
434
m.DisplacementBC(amplitude='Amplitude_BC', createStepName='Loading',
distributionType=UNIFORM , fieldName='',
435
fixed=OFF, localCsys=None, name='RightRoller_BC', region=Region(
referencePoints=(m.rootAssembly.instances['RightRoller -1'].
referencePoints[2],
436
)), u1=0.0, u2=0.0, ur3=0.0)
437
438
################## Define contact
439
m.ContactProperty('ContactProperty')
440
m.interactionProperties['ContactProperty'].TangentialBehavior(
441
dependencies=0, directionality=ISOTROPIC , elasticSlipStiffness=None,
442
formulation=PENALTY , fraction=0.005, maximumElasticSlip=FRACTION ,
443
pressureDependency=OFF, shearStressLimit=None, slipRateDependency=OFF,
444
table=((mu_fr, ), ), temperatureDependency=OFF)
445
m.interactionProperties['ContactProperty'].NormalBehavior(allowSeparation=ON,
446
constraintEnforcementMethod=DEFAULT , pressureOverclosure=HARD)
447
# Left roller contact
448
m.SurfaceToSurfaceContactExp(clearanceRegion=None, createStepName='Loading',
datumAxis=None,
449
initialClearance=OMIT, interactionProperty='ContactProperty', master=
450
m.rootAssembly.instances['LeftRoller -1'].surfaces['LeftRollerSurface']
451
, mechanicalConstraint=PENALTY , name='LeftRollerContact', slave=
452
m.rootAssembly.instances['Plate -1'].surfaces['LowerLeftSurface']
453
, sliding=FINITE)
454
# Right Roller contact
455
m.SurfaceToSurfaceContactExp(clearanceRegion=None, createStepName='Loading',
datumAxis=None,
456
initialClearance=OMIT, interactionProperty='ContactProperty', master=
457
m.rootAssembly.instances['RightRoller -1'].surfaces['RightRollerSurface']
458
, mechanicalConstraint=PENALTY , name='RightRollerContact', slave=
459
m.rootAssembly.instances['Plate -1'].surfaces['LowerRightSurface']
460
, sliding=FINITE)
461
# Punch contact
144
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:157==
462
m.SurfaceToSurfaceContactExp(clearanceRegion=None, createStepName='Loading',
datumAxis=None,
463
initialClearance=OMIT, interactionProperty='ContactProperty', master=
464
m.rootAssembly.instances['Punch -1'].surfaces['PunchSurface']
465
, mechanicalConstraint=PENALTY , name='PunchContact', slave=
466
m.rootAssembly.instances['Plate -1'].surfaces['UpperPlateSurface']
467
, sliding=FINITE)
468
469
################## Create job
470
mdb.Job(activateLoadBalancing=False, atTime=None, contactPrint=OFF,
description='', echoPrint=OFF, explicitPrecision=DOUBLE_PLUS_PACK ,
471
historyPrint=OFF, memory=90, memoryUnits=PERCENTAGE , model='Model -1',
modelPrint=OFF, multiprocessingMode=DEFAULT , name=JobName ,
472
nodalOutputPrecision=FULL, numCpus=1, numDomains=1,
parallelizationMethodExplicit=DOMAIN , queue=None, resultsFormat=ODB,
scratch='',
473
type=ANALYSIS , userSubroutine='', waitHours=0, waitMinutes=0)
474
475
################## Create restart file
476
m.steps['Loading'].Restart(numberIntervals=int(nFrames/5), overlay=ON)
477
478
479
## Assign sections within refined domain
480
# Import label data
481
import numpy as np
482
SelLab = np.load('SelLab.npy')
# Import data for selected labels (weak)
483
RemLab = np.load('RemLab.npy')
# Import data for remaining labels (strong)
484
485
# Function for converting LabSel to a tuple
486
def totuple(a):
487
try:
488
return tuple(totuple(i) for i in a)
489
except TypeError:
490
return a
491
492
# Convert to tuple
493
WeakLabels = totuple(SelLab)
494
StrongLabels = totuple(RemLab)
495
496
# Save set
497
WeakSet
= p.SetFromElementLabels(name='WeakSection',
elementLabels=
WeakLabels)
498
StrongSet = p.SetFromElementLabels(name='StrongSection',elementLabels=
StrongLabels)
499
500
# Assign section to set
501
p.SectionAssignment(offset=0.0, offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE ,
region = WeakSet , sectionName = 'Section -weak', thicknessAssignment=
FROM_SECTION)
502
p.SectionAssignment(offset=0.0, offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE ,
region = StrongSet , sectionName = 'Section -strong', thicknessAssignment=
FROM_SECTION)
503
504
505
################## Write input
506
mdb.jobs[JobName].writeInput(consistencyChecking=OFF)
507
508
509
print(JobName)
510
print('number of elements in y: '+str(numel)+', Number of elements in x:'+str
(2.0*abs(par_1)/L_e))
511
print('Total number of elements in refined area: '+str(numel*abs(par_1)*2.0/
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
145
==PAGE:158==
L_e))
Coding_n_PDFs/B_setup_weak.py
146
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:159==
F
Test machine drawings
F.1
In­situ plate bending test rig drawings
This section contains the drawings for the components used in the test rig, except that
of the M12 bolt, as it is a standard component. Plate is not included in the assembly
drawing. Punch and block components are designed using topology optimization, and so
not all geometric parameters are included for these components.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
147
==PAGE:160==
In-Situ Bending 
assembly
CONTACT INFO:
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
Aluminum 7075-T6
WEIGHT: 
ISB-00-01
mail: s193742@student.dtu.dk
    or: s144974@student.dtu.dk
Phone: 31 31 35 28
ITEM NO.
Part Name
Drawing number
QTY.
1
Punch
ISB-01-01
1
2
Block
ISB-02-01
1
3
Top
ISB-03-01
1
4
Bar
ISB-04-01
3
2
3
1
4
==PAGE:161==
DEBURR AND 
SCALE:  2:1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
CONTACT INFO:
TOLERACES ACCORDING TO 
ISB-01-01
Q.A
ISO-2768-1-C
Punch
BREAK SHARP 
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
Aluminum 7075-T6
Phone: 31 31 35 28
A3
SHEET 1 OF 1
WEIGHT: 
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
mail: s193742@student.dtu.dk
    or: s144974@student.dtu.dk
Quantity: 1
A
0.1
0.1 A
3xM4 threads
+
0,00 THRU
0,10
 
 
49,60 ±0,10 
 
43,60 
15
15
11
11
4x
3,00 
57,00
 R1,55 
 95° 
 20,00 
A
 R1,00 
 10,00 
 6,00 
 5,00 
 
65,00 
 R2,00 
==PAGE:162==
Phone: 31 31 35 28
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
ISB-02-01
WEIGHT: 
SHEET 1 OF 1
ISO-2768-1-C
CONTACT INFO:
TOLERACES ACCORDING TO
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
Block
SCALE:  2:1
A3
Aluminum 7075-T6
BREAK SHARP 
DEBURR AND 
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
mail: s193742@student.dtu.dk
    or: s144974@student.dtu.dk
Quantity: 1
A
 R2,00 
 16,00 
 12,00 
 
50,00 
 R2,00 
0.1 A
15
11
g6 THRU
11
H7
15
3x
6,00 
 8,00 
 18,00 
==PAGE:163==
CONTACT INFO:
Quantity: 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Phone: 31 31 35 28
DEBURR AND 
ISO-2768-1-C
Q.A
Top
BREAK SHARP 
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
ISB-03-01
TOLERACES ACCORDING TO 
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
mail: s193742@student.dtu.dk
    or: s144974@student.dtu.dk
Aluminum 7075-T6
A
0.1
0.3 A
 15,00 
 15,00 
 11,00 
3x
6,50 THRU
 11,00 
 M12 Threads 
A
50,00 
 
 10,00 
==PAGE:164==
Q.A
TITLE:
DEBURR AND 
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
CONTACT INFO:
Quantity: 3
1
MFG
Aluminum 7075-T6
TOLERACES ACCORDING TO
BREAK SHARP 
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
SHEET 1 OF 1
DWG NO.
SCALE: 5:1
ISO-2768-1-C
A3
WEIGHT: 
ISB-04-01
Bar
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
mail: s193742@student.dtu.dk
    or: s144974@student.dtu.dk
Phone: 31 31 35 28
SCALE 2:1
M4 Machine Threads
 R0,25 
 6,00 
g6 
 8,00 
 
6,00 
 
 75,00 
 10,00 
==PAGE:165==
4
5
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
ISO-2768-1-M
FINISH:
TOLERACES ACCORDING TO
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
SHEET 1 OF 1
DWG NO.
A3
SCALE:5:1
WEIGHT: 
A
A
B
6
5
6
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
PlateDrawing
 10,00 
 R2,00 
 20,00 
 4,00 
 30,00 
 1,00 
==PAGE:166==
F.2
Tensile test specimens
This section contains the drawings for the dogbones used for the tensile tests.
154
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
==PAGE:167==
 12,50 ±0,05 
 75,00 
 R20,00 
 20,00 
 140,00 
 21,00 
Rz  6.3
Plate thickness: 1.5 mm
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERACES ACCORDING TO
ISO-2768-1-M
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
DP800 sheet
WEIGHT: 
PL-02
Tension rod
mail: s193742@student.dtu.dk
    or: s144974@student.dtu.dk
Phone: 31 31 35 28
CONTACT INFO:
==PAGE:168==
 12,50 ±0,05 
 29,00 
 R20,00 
 200,00 
 46,32 
 75,00 
Plate thickness: 1 mm
Rz  6.3
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERACES ACCORDING TO
ISO-2768-1-M
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
DP1000 sheet metal
Name: Christoffer Grenov
mail: s193742@student.dtu.dk
Phone: +45 31 31 35 28
WEIGHT: 
PL2-02
Tension dog bone
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
Contact info:
==PAGE:169==
G
Gantt chart
The Gantt chart presented below show’s the original plan on the 21st of September 2021.
The original plan had 2 main objects other than getting acquainted with Abaqus and writing
the report. The first of the main objects where the High Performance Computing (HPC)
which included the ”K1 cluster simulations” later renamed to mode I, the uniaxial tensile
simulations and the bending simulations. The second main objective was the experimen­
tal part of the object.
Those two main objectives where overlapping in time frame, on the thought that exper­
iments could be conducted while simulations where running.
The acquaintance with
Abaqus went decently with having completed scripts for uniaxial and bending, though
later tweaking were implemented. The Mode I code setup took longer than previously
anticipated to code, due to the geometry of the setup along with controlling the mesh. On
top of this an Abaqus subroutine had to be implemented. For the bending simulations,
a parameter study took longer than anticipated, but the cluster simulations themselves
where conducted on schedule. Post processing was notoriously underestimated for all
parts of the HPC, though most were finished by the HPC deadline. Experimental time
frame went smoothly until the machining, where some delays happened. Then having al­
ready delayed the testing part, the tomography scanners had a power­out that made the
Nikon scanner malfunction. This made it necessary to manufacture adapters for others
scanners as well as having the newly delivered DP1000 plate cut into specimens delaying
scans further. The last bending experiment was conducted a week before deadline.
Other work has been conducted which was not added to the Gantt chart, including tensile
tests, Mode I parameter studies, etc.
Clustering and nucleation effects in ductile fracture during plate bending
157
==PAGE:170==
ID
Task 
Mode
Task Name
Duration
Start
Finish
1
Project
126 days
Mon 30-08-21 Sun 20-02-22
2
Meeting_01
0 days
Mon 30-08-21 Mon 30-08-21
3
Meeting_02 (With Kim & Jami0 days
Mon 06-09-21 Mon 06-09-21
4
Meeting_03
0 days
Thu 16-09-21
Thu 16-09-21
5
Meeting_04
0 days
Mon 20-09-21 Mon 20-09-21
6
Abaqus (Getting acquainted)
16 days
Tue 31-08-21
Tue 21-09-21
7
Introduction
5 days
Tue 31-08-21
Mon 06-09-21
8
General cases
12 days
Thu 02-09-21
Fri 17-09-21
9
Coding
12 days
Mon 06-09-21 Tue 21-09-21
10
HPC
106 days?
Mon 06-09-21 Mon 31-01-22
11
Introduction
4 days
Mon 06-09-21 Thu 09-09-21
12
Running Simulations
105 days
Tue 07-09-21
Mon 31-01-22
13
K1 Cluster simulation
26 days?
Fri 17-09-21
Fri 22-10-21
14
Code setup
5 days
Fri 17-09-21
Thu 23-09-21
15
Number of voids in 
clusters
10 days
Fri 24-09-21
Thu 07-10-21
16
Distance/Size/Dunn 
between clusters
10 days
Fri 08-10-21
Thu 21-10-21
17
Post Processing
1 day?
Fri 22-10-21
Fri 22-10-21
18
Uniaxial tensile simulation
55 days
Mon 06-09-21 Fri 19-11-21
19
Code setup
5 days
Mon 06-09-21 Fri 10-09-21
20
Homogen Tests
9 days
Wed 08-09-21 Mon 20-09-21
21
Cluster test
20 days
Mon 18-10-21 Fri 12-11-21
22
Post processing
5 days
Mon 15-11-21 Fri 19-11-21
23
Bending simulations
81 days?
Mon 06-09-21 Mon 27-12-21
24
Code setup
2 days
Mon 06-09-21 Tue 07-09-21
25
Homogen test
7 days
Wed 08-09-21 Thu 16-09-21
26
Cluster Test 1
30 days
Mon 01-11-21 Fri 10-12-21
27
Cluster test 2
30 days
Mon 15-11-21 Fri 24-12-21
28
Post Processing
1 day?
Mon 27-12-21 Mon 27-12-21
29
Experimental
71 days
Mon 13-09-21 Mon 20-12-21
30
Introduction
5 days
Mon 13-09-21 Fri 17-09-21
31
3D Print access guide
0 days
Tue 14-09-21
Tue 14-09-21
32
Design
10 days
Mon 20-09-21 Fri 01-10-21
33
Machining design
11 days
Mon 04-10-21 Mon 18-10-21
34
Testing
30 days
Tue 19-10-21
Mon 29-11-21
35
Analyzing
15 days
Tue 30-11-21
Mon 20-12-21
36
Report
118 days
Wed 08-09-21 Sun 20-02-22
37
Writing
116 days
Wed 08-09-21 Wed 16-02-22
38
Introduction
17 days
Mon 15-11-21 Tue 07-12-21
39
Problem Description
5 days
Mon 13-09-21 Fri 17-09-21
40
Theory
60 days
Wed 08-09-21 Tue 30-11-21
30-08
06-09
16-09
20-09
14-09
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Qtr 3, 2021
Qtr 4, 2021
Qtr 1, 2022
Task
Split
Milestone
Summary
Project Summary
Inactive Task
Inactive Milestone
Inactive Summary
Manual Task
Duration-only
Manual Summary Rollup
Manual Summary
Start-only
Finish-only
External Tasks
External Milestone
Deadline
Progress
Manual Progress
Page 1
Project: Gantt_chart_v2
Date: Tue 28-09-21
==PAGE:171==
ID
Task 
Mode
Task Name
Duration
Start
Finish
41
Analysis
71 days
Mon 01-11-21 Mon 07-02-22
42
Discussion
31 days
Mon 03-01-22 Mon 14-02-22
43
Conclusion
21 days
Mon 17-01-22 Mon 14-02-22
44
Further work
6 days
Mon 07-02-22 Mon 14-02-22
45
Abstract
3 days
Mon 14-02-22 Wed 16-02-22
46
Readthrough / report 
polishing
16 days
Mon 31-01-22 Sun 20-02-22
47
Hand in date
0 days
Sun 20-02-22
Sun 20-02-22
20-02
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Qtr 3, 2021
Qtr 4, 2021
Qtr 1, 2022
Task
Split
Milestone
Summary
Project Summary
Inactive Task
Inactive Milestone
Inactive Summary
Manual Task
Duration-only
Manual Summary Rollup
Manual Summary
Start-only
Finish-only
External Tasks
External Milestone
Deadline
Progress
Manual Progress
Page 2
Project: Gantt_chart_v2
Date: Tue 28-09-21
==PAGE:172==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk
