==PAGE:1==
A Gradient-Free Optimization
Method
for Machine Learning
A thesis for M.Sc. Human-Centered Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Holger Krener-Iversen (s164143)
Supervisors: Darko Zibar & Mikkel N. Schmidt
Department of Applied Mathematics & Computer Science
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
28th of January 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The most widespread training method for neural networks is the backpropagation method
in combination with gradient descent.
Some optimization problems, however, are set in
an environment where such gradient-based training algorithms are infeasible. This creates a
challenge for several problems where machine learning could be utilized, but is not able to be
trained via traditional means. This work presents and discusses the application of gradient-
free algorithm Diﬀerential Evolution for the training of neural networks, applied to a digital
communication system with a non-diﬀerentiable channel. A framework for applying diﬀeren-
tial evolution on neural networks is developed and tested. A series of experiments concerning
neural networks trained with this framework, within a 4-PAM digital communication system,
is performed. Traditional PAM components such as pulse shaping with the root-raised cosine
ﬁlter and a euclidean distance-based symbol-detector are replaced with neural networks. It
is shown that this conﬁguration is able to achieve the same level of performance as a system
of traditional, mathematically derived components. Training through diﬀerential evolution
is shown to be able to achieve approximately the same level of performance as traditional
gradient-based training methods. This work takes the ﬁrst steps towards providing a frame-
work for a neural-network based communication system which might be able to outperform
current transmission systems in certain, non-linear communication channels [34] [33].
1
==PAGE:3==
Table Of Contents
1
Introduction
6
1.1
Computer speciﬁcations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Derivative-Free Optimization
8
2.1
Applications of Derivative-Free Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Diﬀerential Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Training Methods in Digital Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Pulse Amplitude Modulation
15
3.1
Digital Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
PAM Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
The Transmission Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.3
The Optimal Transmission System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.4
Inter-symbol Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.5
Theoretical Error Probability of the M-PAM System
. . . . . . . . .
25
4
Implementation & Frameworks
28
4.1
Diﬀerential Evolution Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Vector-Based Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Tensor-based Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Communications System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Neural Network Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Testing of Diﬀerential Evolution Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.1
Optimizing Simple Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.2
Training Neural Networks with Diﬀerential Evolution . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Communication System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.1
Pulse Amplitude Modulation System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
37
5.1
Decision Making
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
2
==PAGE:4==
Table Of Contents
5.2
Downsampling and Decision Making
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Receiver Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Sender- and Receiver Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.1
Jointly Trained Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4.2
Joint Training with Diﬀerential Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.5
Training Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Discussion
62
7
Conclusion
64
References
66
Appendices
71
.1
Appendix A: Communication System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
.1.1
PAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
.1.2
ML Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
.1.3
Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
.2
Appendix B: Diﬀerential Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
.2.1
Receiver Filter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
.2.2
Joint Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
.3
Appendix C: Backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
.4
NumPy Neural Network Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
Page 3
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
¯r(t)
Output of matched ﬁlter
β
Roll-oﬀfactor
1
m
Sampling Rate
1
T
Symbol Rate
ˆsk
Sampled value at time k
Fc
Cut-oﬀFrequency
M
Number of symbols in the PAM alphabet
m
Number of samples per symbol
r(t)
Received signal
s(t)
Transmitted signal
sk
Transmitted symbol at time k
ut
i
Trial agent i at generation t
vt
i
Donor agent i at generation t
xt
i
Target agent i at generation t
[1,2,1] [Input Neurons, Hidden Neurons, Output Neurons]
Communication Systems/Communications Systems/Transmission Systems are all used
interchangeably in this work
Cost function/Loss Function are both used interchangeably in this work
AWGN Additive White Gaussian Noise
BP
Backpropagation
CE
Cross Entropy
Cr
Crossover Rate
4
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
DE
Diﬀerential Evolution
F
Mutation Factor/Diﬀerential Weight
FIR
Finite Impulse Response
G(f)
Frequency response of ﬁlter g
g(t)
Impulse response of ﬁlter g
IIR
Inﬁnite Impulse Response
ISI
Intersymbol Interference
LPF
Low-Pass Filter
LR
Learning Rate
MSE Mean Squared Error
NP
Population Size
PAM Pulse Amplitude Modulation
RC
Raised Cosine
RRC Root-Raised Cosine
S
Symbol Sequence
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
T
Symbol Period / Symbol Time
Page 5
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The utilization of machine learning assisted processes has escalated within recent years in
many diﬀerent industries. Many ﬁnancial services utilize machine learning and data ana-
lytics to improve their services, pharmaceutical companies use deep learning for molecular-
structure discoveries and many e-commerce sites use sequential neural networks to optimize
for ad-targeting. Machine-learning-based processes are able to eﬀectively and eﬃciently op-
timize or even replace existing systems in many diﬀerent sectors.
One of the most prominent and most wide-spread machine learning models, is the Artiﬁcial
Neural Network, including its many variants. Multilayer perceptrons are often used for tab-
ular data, convolutional neural networks are used for images or signals, and recurrent neural
networks are used for sequential data. The by-far most widespread training algorithm for
neural networks is backpropagation in combination with gradient descent, which relies on
using the gradient information of the error function, with regards to the parameters of the
network. This training method is the industry standard and has been proven to enable pow-
erful learning for most use-cases. However, there are situations in which a gradient-based
training approach is not feasible. The gradient information is, in some cases, not available
or tractable to compute. There are thus many diﬀerent reasons for choosing to train a model
with a diﬀerent, gradient free method.
A case in which gradient information is rarely available is that of communication systems.
The ﬁeld of communications is one that has been studied extensively for decades. As such,
experts within the ﬁeld have perfected the art of modelling diﬀerent types of channels, and
designing components for optimal transfer of information in various settings. Thus tradi-
tional systems have historically relied on mathematically provably optimal models. Often,
designed systems are optimized for linear systems with an assumed Gaussian environment.
However, not all communication channels have been properly captured by such models.
Practical communication systems exhibit unknown properties and non-linearities, and few
channels follow the linear systems of additive-, white-, Gaussian noise (AWGN). For this
6
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1. Introduction
reason, a communication system consisting of machine-learning based components might
provide an advantage over traditional systems, as it might be able to optimize for the non-
linearity of the system. However for most communication systems the transmission channel
is not tractable for diﬀerentiation, which prevents any gradient-based learning like backprop-
agation, through the channel. The channel is essentially a black-box through which only the
inputs and outputs are known.
This work will focus on the application of gradient-free training of neural networks, speciﬁ-
cally with digital communications as a use-case. The algorithm of choice is diﬀerential evolu-
tion as it has proven itself to be an excellent optimization algorithm, with good convergence
properties. The implemented framework for this algorithm will be tested for functionality in
a few low-dimensional optimization problems. It will also be tested in a number of scenarios
within the digital communication scheme ”Pulse Amplitude Modulation”. A framework for
PAM communications system, and a framework for training neural networks with diﬀerential
evolution were both developed from the ground up for this work. The idea is to get a sense
of the practicality of training neural networks in a setting where traditional gradient-free
training methods are not available to use. The work will strive to determine if for an AWGN
channel, where the optimal symbol error rate is known, a system based on neural networks
that are trained with diﬀerential evolution can achieve the same, optimal level of perfor-
mance. The project will evaluate the trained networks’ ability to perform symbol detection
(decision-making) to the same performance level (error rate) as an euclidean-distance based
decision-maker, and will aim to learn ﬁlters on both transmission and receiver-end to achieve
the same, optimal performance as traditional 4-PAM.
Since the featured communication system is simulated in software, the backpropagation
algorithm can in fact be applied for this project, and will be used for comparisons and proof-
of-concept. The project will exclusively concern itself with the 4-PAM scheme and channels
of additive-, white-, gaussian noise (AWGN). The mapping of bit-sequences to symbols is not
implemented in this work either - only the symbol error rate will be considered. Although no
non-linear channels are implemented in this project, the intention of this work is to take the
ﬁrst steps towards providing a framework for a neural-network based communication system
which might be able to outperform current transmission models in non-linear communication
channels [34] [33].
1.1
Computer speciﬁcations
Experiments were run on a Intel core i7 Windows laptop with 12 CPUs at 2.2Ghz, 16Gb
of RAM and NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1060 graphics card with 6Gb of VRAM. Experiments
that allowed for it, were run on GPU.
Page 7
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Derivative-Free Optimization
Many mathematical problems require the use of mathematical optimization methods, in
which one optimizes the value of some objective function L (e.g. the loss function in ma-
chine learning problems), with respect to a set of adjustable parameters θ. Many of such
optimization algorithms are gradient-based, i.e. are based on the assumption that the gra-
dient of the loss function is available with respect to the parameters ∂L
∂θ . For the training
of neural networks the conventional practice is to use a gradient descent method, where
gradients of the loss function, with respect to the network weights are used to step towards
a minimum. However such information may not always be available for a number of reasons.
In some cases the measured objective function (loss function) is, for all intents and purposes,
a black-box in which one does not possess information concerning input-output relationships.
This is the case for many communication systems involving some physical layer. In other
cases, the computation of the gradient information might be computationally intractable.
Gradient-free optimization methods thus rely on measured function values of L, but without
access to derivatives. Some of these methods rely on approximation of such derivatives,
whereas other metaheuristic methods perform a random search of the parameter-space [2]
[3].
2.1
Applications of Derivative-Free Optimization
Derivative-free methods such as evolutionary methods, will often have the advantage over
gradient-based methods when the loss function is complicated and the problem is prone to
trapping in local minima. Gradient-based optimizers are great for ﬁnding solutions in convex
problems. For non-convex problems, the gradient-based descent might lead to the ﬁnding of a
local minimum, depending on the initial state of the parameters. Gradient-based algorithms
are sensitive to initialization and might get stuck in a local minimum. Many gradient-free
methods will avoid this trapping, as they are by nature global optimizers e.g. evolutionary
8
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2. Derivative-Free Optimization
algorithms. Although evolutionary algorithms (algorithms which imitate the basic Darwinian
principle of evolution and natural selection) have no practical guarantee of ﬁnding the global
minimum, the inherent randomness of the algorithm increases the odds of ﬁnding a global
minimum. [18]. For certain problems, the gradient will simply be hard to deﬁne, or point
away from the correct solution. This is often the case with reinforcement learning where
the cost function can exhibit a step-like behaviour, or hyper-parameter optimization of a
model. Evolutionary or Genetic algorithms do not possess these problems. Algorithms of
these kinds can be applied to any optimization problem, although an interesting application
is the use of such on machine learning models, in settings where traditional gradient-based
methods are intractable. [7] [6] [17] [18]
Thus, most derivative-free optimization methods are more robust than the typical gradient
descent methods, and are able to converge in an increased number of scenarios such as ill-
deﬁned gradients, non-smooth cost functions and non-diﬀerentiable environments. So why
would one use a gradient-based optimization algorithm in the ﬁrst place? The answer of
course is the computational complexity. The nature of gradient descent implies taking a
’step’ in a calculated direction at each iteration. Although, for non-convex problems, this
might not lead to a global minimun, it will lead to some solution, and usually a good one.
Most gradient-free methods involve a level of random search, at each iteration taking note
of the current best solution. The algorithm thus searches globally in the solution space,
but without a clearly deﬁned direction. For this reason, most gradient-free optimization
algorithms will take a lot longer to converge to a solution than gradient descent, especially
for high-dimensional problems. For many deep learning practices, for instance, the number
of adjustable parameters (the weights) is incredibly high. In computer vision problems, the
number of free parameters often exceeds several million, rendering stochastic search methods
completely infeasible. Of course there exists optimizers built upon gradient descent, which
serve the purpose of attempting to break out of local minima (Adam, Momentum etc), but
still, neither of these can be considered to search the solution-space globally.
The appeal of many machine learning models is that they are able to solve complex problems,
and for this a large number of parameters is usually required. Derivative-free optimization
methods are therefore in general used in applications where gradient-based methods are
not possible to use, or when the problem is suﬃciently low-dimensional. As touched upon,
this could be in situations where the environment is not diﬀerentiable, and thus gradients
cannot be computed. Gradient descent is not robust in situations where the loss function is
noisy or not a smooth surface, and therefore gradient-free methods could be advantageous.
Typical problems in which gradient-free methods involve structural engineering tasks, where
the function to be optimized is measurable, but intractable to compute. This could e.g.
be the task of ﬁnding the structural design of a helicopter rotor blade that best minimizes
the vibration of the attachment point, or the minimization of the structural weight of a
building, under constraints such as stresses and displacements. Methods like these can even
Page 9
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2. Derivative-Free Optimization
be used in tandem with gradient-based optimization, such as hyper-parameter optimization
for machine learning models. Derivative-free methods can thus be applied on many diﬀerent
use-cases, in several ﬁelds [1] [8].
Examples of derivative optimization algorithms include particle swarm optimization (PSO),
Simultaneous Pertubation Stochastic Approximation (SPSA), Simulated Annealing (SA) and
of course Diﬀerential Evolution. PSO monitors a population (swarm) of particles which are
moved around in parameter space, with each particle’s trajectory guided by its best known
position, as well as the best known position of the swarm as a whole [9] [19]. SPSA is a
stochastic method which performs approximations of the gradient based on measurements
of the loss function, and using this to perform a version of stochastic gradient descent.
SPSA is advantageous when the loss function is expensive to compute, because the gradient
approximation requires only two measurements of the loss function per iteration, regardless
of the dimensionality of the problem-space [3], [4]. The idea behind Simulated Annealing is
to ﬁnd the (global) minimum of some loss function by mimicking the concept of annealing
(from metallurgy) through a ”temperature” parameter, in a stochastic and iterative manner.
Bad moves in parameter space are accepted with some probability, which gradually lowers
during training. This makes the algorithm highly explorative at ﬁrst, and gradually becomes
more exploitative [15].
2.2
Diﬀerential Evolution
The optimization method implemented in this project is Diﬀerential Evolution. At its core,
diﬀerential evolution is rather simple, and yet has proven to be a robust optimizer, in the
non-diﬀerential settings. Its versatility combined with its ease of implementation has made
it applicable for a variety of ﬁelds, such as chemical engineering in which it has been used to
estimate kinetic model parameters of certain chemical processes, the optimization of network
capacity within telecommunications, or the training of neural networks. [7]. Diﬀerential evo-
lution operate on a set of real agents in the space RD, and thus not on a form of genetic
encoding of the agents. This characteristic, means it can operate directly on the neural-
network parameters. Its stability and robustness to multi-modal problems could also be
an advantage if the proposed methodologies of this project were to be applied in future
settings, e.g. non-linear systems, where the problem might be multi-modal. These charac-
teristics make it an obvious candidate for this project [22].
Diﬀerential evolution is an example of a genetic algorithm. Genetic algorithms are a subset
of evolutionary algorithms, and can be utilized for complex non-linear optimization prob-
lems, by imposing a population of solutions, and iteratively evolving the population. Often
GAs encode the solution space as arrays of bits to represent each solution, which is then re-
ferred to as a chromosome, and a set of genetic operators, crossover, mutation and selection.
Generally a genetic algorithm deﬁnes a ﬁtness function, encodes the solutions into chromo-
Page 10
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2. Derivative-Free Optimization
somes, randomly generates the set of solutions (population) and perform the evolutionary
operations on the populations. The crossover operation swaps out parts of chromosomes,
while mutation performs random mutations on the chromosomes to gain a higher diversity in
solution space. The selection function is used to determine which chromosomes is chosen for
the next generation. The next generation of solutions is thus the result of the evolutionary
operators upon the previous generation. The algorithm runs iteratively until convergence
or until some termination criteria. Genetic Algorithms have many forms and variations,
depending on the problem at hand, the choice of objective function and implementation of
the operators. Other evolutionary algorithms also make use of genetic representations and
operators such as crossover and mutation, diﬀerential evolution among them.
Origins
Diﬀerential Evolution was ﬁrst proposed by Storn and Price in 1995 [6], as an evolution
strategy for the optimization of problems. As diﬀerential evolution is a stochastic search
method, it was speciﬁcally designed to handle minimization problems with non-diﬀerentiable
and non-linear loss functions, in many dimensions. It can be seen as an example of a genetic
algorithms, in which the algorithm operates on real-valued vectors.
Like genetic algorithms, diﬀerential evolution iteratively proposes a set of candidate solutions
(agents), referred to as the population. The parameter space is searched by exploring diﬀerent
populations, achieved by combining populations in accordance with a speciﬁed procedure.
The agents that yield the most desired value of the objective function (e.g.
lowest loss
function) is used for the next iteration of the algorithm. This is performed until convergence,
or until a certain termination point is reached. [1]
How it works
One of the biggest advantages of the diﬀerential evolution algorithm is its relatively low
number of hyper-parameters, being population size, mutation factor and crossover probabil-
ity making it easier to tune for optimal performance. These hyper-parameters provide the
algorithm’s trade-oﬀbetween exploration and exploitation. An additional advantage is the
algorithm’s implicit regularization. Due to the nature of the algorithm, it is highly explo-
rative in early iterations, and utilizing its learned features in later iterations (exploitation).
On the other hand, however, the same feature can be disadvantageous. If the algorithm fails
to ﬁnd improvement in the ﬁrst exploratory steps, the same annealing eﬀect could lead to a
non-convergent solution. Several variations of DE such as Composite Diﬀerential Evolution
(CODE) have been proposed, which vary the settings of such hyper parameters and schemes,
during the optimization procedure, to further improve performance [1] [7].
The parameter space is searched through the manipulation of the population, in a process
that resembles natural selection. There are two diﬀerent types of operators in evolutionary
Page 11
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. Derivative-Free Optimization
algorithms; search operators and selection operators.
The initial population consists of NP D-dimensional agents x ∈RD, each sampled from
a random, uniform distribution.
At each iteration (here referred to as generation), a
new population is proposed by generating new agents using the three operators, mutation,
crossover and selection sequentially. The i’th agent at generation t is thus represented as
D-dimensional vector xt
i = (xt
i,1, xt
i,2...xt
i,D).
For each of the agents in the population, a new agent is proposed by virtue of each of the
operators applied in succession. The mutation operator randomly combines chosen vectors;
vt+1
i
= xt
a + F · (xt
b −xt
c)
(2.1)
where xa, xb and xc are distinct vectors, diﬀerent from the given agent at the running index,
xi, and the diﬀerential weight F is a hyper-parameter. There are in fact many schemes
describing the DE algorithm, the most common one being the ”DE/rand/1/bin” variant.
Here ”rand” signiﬁes the random selection of agents used for the mutation operator, and ”1”
the number of diﬀerence vectors used. This stands opposed to other variants that use the
best performing vector for the mutation, and multiple diﬀerent vectors. ”Bin” refers to the
binomial probability scheme used in the crossover operator. The perturbation given from
the mutation, yields the donor vector.
The crossover operator serves to mix the parameters of the donor vectors with the given
agent-vector, increasing the multifariousness of the population. Each component in the D-
dimensional, mutated donor vector is swapped with the given agent xi (often referred to as
the target vector), by a certain probability. Using the binomial scheme, the j’th component
is swapped if a number randomly sampled from a uniform distribution ri ∈[0, 1], is higher
than some criterion Cr, with j ∈{1, 2, ..., D}.
ut+1
j,i =



vt
j,i,
if ri ≤Cr
xt
j,i,
otherwise
(2.2)
The resulting vector (called the trial vector) will thus often contain a mixture of the elements
within the donor vt
i and the target xt
i vectors.
The operations mutation and crossover both serve to explore the search space, taking in-
spiration from the random mutations of evolution. This is then utilized by the selection
operator to ultimately move in a direction that optimizes the value of the objective function
(e.g. lowers the cost of a minimization problem).
xt+1
i
=



ut+1
i
,
if f(ut+1
i
) < f(xt
i)
xt
i,
otherwise
(2.3)
Page 12
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Derivative-Free Optimization
One of the biggest advantages of DE is the fact that it only has three hyper-parameters
to tune; the population size NP, the diﬀerential weight F and the crossover probability
Cr. This eases the task of tuning the optimization problem, especially as it allows for easy
utilization of methods like grid search etc.
The hyper-parameters F, Cr and NP facilitate the level of trade-oﬀbetween exploration and
exploitation. The mutation factor F scales the diﬀerence vector in the mutation operator
and as such has to assume a value that is explorative enough without overstepping a good
minimum. The crossover rate Cr ∈[0, 1] also directly controls the level of diversity, as it
determines how many parameters change, per iteration. Mutation factor usually lies in the
range F ∈[0, 1], (sometimes [0, 2]) and a popular setting is somewhere in the range F ∈
[0.5, 1]. Storn and Price originally suggested a population size NP = 10D i.e. a population
size 10 times as large of the dimensionality of the problem. This holds for low-dimensional
problems, but is generally impractical for larger dimensional problem, because of the linear
increase in computation time. For high-dimensional problems (approximately D > 100),
a population size of NP < D is usually suﬃcient. For most problems in engineering, a
population size of 30-50 agents is suﬃcient [1] [21]. All of the hyper-parameters should be
carefully chosen for the given problem, to ﬁnd the correct compromise between exploration
and exploitation.
Re-initializing all agents in the population except for the current best, might be helpful in
order to break the algorithm out of a local minimum, should all agents have found their way
to the same local minimum. This is called a population reset.
2.3
Training Methods in Digital Communication
Traditionally, communication systems have relied on mathematically derived components,
such as pulse shaping with RRC and performing symbol-detection based on an euclidean-
distance metric. Methods for utilizing deep learning for communication systems has been
studied in a number of scenarios, including end-to-end deep learning systems. End-to-end
learning was ﬁrst introduced by O’shea and Hoydis in 2017 [33], who propose the repre-
sentation of a learned communication system as an autoencoder, where the transmitter is
regarded as an encoder neural-network, transforming symbols to an ideal representation for
transmission, and the receiver regarded as a decoder-network, reconstructing the received
symbols. The physical channel is regarded as a non-trainable layer. The conﬁguration was
however trained via backpropagation in a simulated system, since in real digital communica-
tion systems the gradient of the transfer function of the channel is rarely known. [37] expands
upon this methodology by proposing a training method that overcomes the challenge of the
unknown properties of the channel. Here, the transmitter and receiver are ﬁrst trained in a
joint training loop through a simulated stochastic (AWGN) channel, using backpropagation
and gradient descent. Afterwards the receiver model is trained over the real channel, to
Page 13
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Derivative-Free Optimization
ﬁne-tune to the channel characteristics. Some deep learning practices within digital com-
munication rely on methods which are not exactly gradient-free optimization methods, but
rather a circumvention of gradient-based training through the channel. [38] proposes to use
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to provide a diﬀerentiable model for the channel,
which can be used to train the networks. Although a model of the channel was approximated,
this conﬁguration was very training-expensive, requiring more training samples to converge.
[35] proposes the combination of reinforcement learning with traditional supervised learning.
The transmitter is perceived as an agent in a reinforcement learning environment, which is
used to obtain an estimate of the gradient of the given loss function, and the receiver is
trained through traditional backpropagation. Instead of relying on an approximation of the
channel model, and training methods which require a lot of data, as in [37], [38] and [35],
Raj et al ([40]) use the stochastic, derivative-free training method Simultaneous Perturba-
tion (SPSA) to approximate the gradient through the system [4]. This method thus follows
a gradient-descent type method, based on gradient approximations. In Raj et al’s experi-
ments it managed to converge to a good solution in both AWGN and Rayleigh Block Fading
channels, with only slightly longer training time. It was however found that the variance
of the estimated gradients increased linearly with the number of parameters of the prob-
lem, making it impractical for high dimensional models [36]. [34] adopts a derivative-free
optimization method using a cubature Kalman ﬁlter (CKF). The weights of the networks
(autoencoder) are expressed as state-space models and the CKF is used for estimation. The
trained autoencoder achieves near-identical performance to training with backpropagation
through a diﬀerentiable channel, and signiﬁcant results through a non-diﬀerentiable channel.
Page 14
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Pulse Amplitude Modulation
3.1
Digital Communication
All forms of communication are essentially the exchange of signals. A signal is deﬁned as a
function of time s(t) carrying some type of information. In its most basic form, communica-
tion is about conveying information from one party to another. Every communication system
will thus often have a sender, who will transmit a signal through an often noisy transmission
channel, and a receiver who will attempt to analyse, and make sense of the transmitted
signal. This is generally done through a predetermined, and mutually agreed-upon protocol.
Naturally occurring signals are usually both continuous and analog, meaning the signal is
quantiﬁable at any given point in time, and the signal-values can theoretically assume all real
numbers. Examples of analog signals used in communication are land-line telephones signals,
composite video, or even human speech. For digital signals used in digital communication
systems, as this paper will engage in, signals are discrete in time and quantized, meaning the
signal will only ever take on values from a certain set of deﬁned values (sometimes referred
to as an alphabet). Thus, in order to translate an analog signal to a digital signal, it must
be both sampled and quantized.
All digital information is, in the most basic form, a sequence of bits, as computers operate
on binary information. Ideally, when transmitting digital information, one would be able to
simply transmit the sequence through some medium, with no corruption or loss of data. One
can imagine transmitting digital information through an analog medium by transmitting a
series of square pulses, each pulse indicating a one, and each pause indicating a zero.
However this method proves rather infeasible in practice. Square pulses like those obvious
for transmission of ones and zeros, are inﬁnite in the frequency domain. There are signiﬁcant
parts of the spectrum that are necessary to explain the signal, which although decreasing,
continues inﬁnitely in frequency. Since real-world applications of any digital communications
system would have to co-exist with many types of transmissions, each one using a speciﬁc
15
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
frequency band (bandwidth), the application of square pulses is simply infeasible due to its
excessively large frequency band. The vertical sides of the pulse cause an asymptotic de-
crease to each side in the frequency spectrum, in the form of a sinc function which cause the
occupied bandwidth of the frequency spectrum to be unacceptably large, and thus a softer
pulse would be better suited for transmission [24].
Figure 3.1: Simple Transmission System
3.2
PAM Systems
Pulse Amplitude Modulation (PAM), is a type of base band communication in which the
message is encoded in the amplitude of pulses. Herein, symbols from a given alphabet are
transmitted, each one being represented by the amplitude of a pulse. A symbol is transmitted
at each time-period, T, called the symbol time. The full signal thus consists of a series of
pulses. Each pulse is multiplied with the value of a symbol and the full signal is thus given
as the shape of a summation of such pulses. Transmitting a signal in this particular way,
is done because of the noisy communication channel, which can cause the received signal to
look signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the sent signal. Since there is a ﬁnite number of symbols in
the alphabet, the amplitude modulation of PAM allows the receiver to choose the most likely
transmitted symbol, based on the received value of a pulse, sampled at each time-period T.
One could utilize pulse shapes to directly transmit ones and zeros, i.e. a binary alphabet
0, 1, however this would be an ineﬃcient use of resources. Since one symbol is transmitted
per symbol-period T, the symbol rate is given as
1
T baud, however it is clear that having
a larger symbol alphabet, means transmitting more information per symbol. Each symbol
corresponds to a small bit sequence e.g. ”010”, and the length of the bit sequences depend
on the size of the alphabet. A commonly used communications system is e.g. 8-PAM, with
alphabet {-7, -5, -3, -1, 1, 3, 5, 7}. A more descriptive method for information transfer
however, is bitrate R =
1
T · log2M bit/s, M being the size of the alphabet. This project,
however, will only concern itself with the symbol error rate (SER), also called the probability
of symbol error Pe, for a 4-PAM system [24].
3.2.1
The Transmission Process
A practical implementation of a digital transmission system involves a series of procedures
to enact the full pipeline necessary for end-to-end communication.
In order to transmit a signal through physical media, the signal needs to assume analog
values. In order to generate a signal of simulated analog values, the initial symbol sequence
Page 16
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
is thus upsampled, by zero-padding each symbol in the sequence with m −1 zeros, in order
to achieve a sampling rate of 1
m. To generate a PAM signal, i.e. a signal of pulse shapes, the
upsampled symbol sequence is ﬁltered with the impulse response of a chosen ﬁlter g(t). A
popularly chosen ﬁlter is the root-raised cosine ﬁlter. This operation yields a signal of pulse
shapes s(t), in which for each period T, one symbol is transmitted, and the signal amplitude
at each multiple of T indicates the value of the transmitted symbol.
During transmission the signal is bound to be subjected to noise, and thus a matched ﬁlter
g(−t) is applied on the received signal, to remove as much noise as possible. Having de-
noised the received signal r(t), the receiver samples the signal at a speciﬁc point in time each
symbol-period T. Afterwards the sampled values are compared to the symbol-values in the
agreed-upon symbol-alphabet and the receiver thus decides which symbols are most likely
to have been sent. A typical PAM communications system thus looks like the following:
Figure 3.2: PAM Communication System
3.2.2
Filters
In general a ﬁlter is a component that ﬁlters out or removes part of a signal, and can thus
be used for a variety of applications in signal processing. Filters are often applied in such a
way that it restricts a given signal in frequency domain, succumbing to the need for narrow
bandwidths in communication systems, or to remove excess noise from received signals. An
example of a ﬁlter acting in the frequency domain is a low-pass ﬁlter which suppresses the
frequency of a signal, while a ﬁlter acting in time-domain can be used for the separation of
combined signals.
The simplest representation of a ﬁlter in time-domain is its impulse response g(t). As the
name implies, it is what the ﬁlter returns, if a very brief signal (an impulse) is put through
it. Generally when referring to a ﬁlter, it is the impulse response of the ﬁlter which is being
discussed. The ﬁlter applied for pulse shaping in this project is the root-raised cosine ﬁlters
(RRC), which is a Finite Impulse Response (FIR) ﬁlter, meaning that it can be represented
Page 17
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
as a ﬁnite-length vector of coeﬃcients.
Filtering with a FIR ﬁlter is performed by the
convolution operation which is given as:
f ⊛g =
N
X
k=0
f(k) · g(N −k)
(3.1)
and in the continuous setting, the convolution operation is given as;
f ⊛g =
Z ∞
−∞
f(τ) · g(t −τ)dτ
(3.2)
Intuitively, a convolution is an operation between two functions that combines them in such
a way that tracks their interactions upon each other, throughout time. In other words, a
convolution is a sliding integration of two functions, and the application of a (FIR) ﬁlter
is simply a convolution of that ﬁlter’s impulse response on a signal [28] [24]. Convolving
Figure 3.3: Frequency Response of RRC
the impulse response of a ﬁlter with a sequence of (upsampled) symbols (i.e. a series of
brief pulses), yields the ”contribution” of the impulse response upon the sequence, often
transforming the sequence into a series of pulse shapes.
When limiting a signal in bandwidth, a low-pass ﬁlter (LPF) is applied in some way, for
any real transmission system. An ideal low-pass ﬁlter would therefore stop the frequency-
spectrum at exactly the speciﬁed cutoﬀfrequency, without any transitional region. The
ideal LPF would thus look like a rectangle and is also called a ”brick-wall” ﬁlter.
The
impulse response of the ideal LPF takes the shape of a sinc function sinc(t) =
sin(πt/T)
πt/T
,
which continues to oscillate for eternity in both directions. This means that the ideal low-
pass ﬁlter is impossible to implement in any real system, as the convolution with its impulse
response would have to operate on the signal inﬁnitely, both backwards and forwards in
time. It can eﬀectively be approximated for ”pre-recorded”, vector-based simulations like
the one in this project. Obviously a real transmission system operates on a continuously
Page 18
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
incoming stream of symbols, whereas the communication system implemented in this project,
operates on vectors of a given length. Using the sinc function for pulse shaping can therefore
be utilized if the ﬁlter is given an appropriate length, in order to accommodate the longer
sidebands of the pulse. The raised cosine ﬁlter is a combination of the sinc function and a
cosine function. Giving raised cosine a roll-oﬀfactor of β = 0 is equivalent to using the sinc
function. For all experiments in this project, a roll-oﬀfactor of β = 0.35 was chosen as it
allows for a shorter ﬁlter, and is more applicable to real systems.
The frequency- and impulse response of raised cosine is given as the following [28] [29] :
G(f) =





T,
0 ≤|f| ≤(1−β)
2T
T
2
 1 + cos(πT
β (|f| −1−β
2T ))

,
(1−β)
2T
≤|f| ≤(1+β)
2T
0,
|f| > (1+β)
2T





(3.3)
g(t) = sinπt/T
πt/T
·
cos(πβt/T)
1 −(4β2t2/T 2)
(3.4)
The frequency response of root-raised cosine is thus simply the square root of equation 3.3.
G(f) =







√
T,
0 ≤|f| ≤(1−β)
2T
q
T
2
 1 + cos(πT
β (|f| −1−β
2T ))

,
(1−β)
2T
≤|f| ≤(1+β)
2T
0,
|f| > (1+β)
2T







(3.5)
RRC’s impulse response is found via the inverse Fourier transform of eq 3.5
Another low-pass ﬁlter which is realistically applicable to real systems is the Butterworth
low-pass ﬁlter. The Butterworth low-pass ﬁlter adds a level of relaxation to the ideal LPF,
as it introduces a transitional roll-oﬀat the cutoﬀfrequency, and is more easily implemented
in real communication systems [31].
Figure 3.4 shows the Butterworth- and ideal LPF in frequency domain.
A transmission system is said to be time-invariant if the impulse response does not vary with
time, i.e. the system has the same eﬀect on the input signal, regardless of the input signal
being shifted in time y(t −∆) = L(x(t −∆) for all t and ∆, L being the system’s eﬀect on
the signal. Furthermore, a system is said to be linear if y1 + y2 = L(x1 + x2) for any given
inputs x1 and x2. In other words, the system scales its response based on the input. This is
called the law of additivity. A PAM transmission system is both linear and time-invariant,
LTI. Thus the ﬁlters used in the transmission- and receiving end of the system have to follow
these properties [26].
Page 19
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
Figure 3.4: Ideal and Butterworth low-pass ﬁlters in frequency domain
3.2.3
The Optimal Transmission System
As mentioned, a signal of digital information must be shaped into a series of pulses for
transmission via physical media. Mathematically, the signal can be described as
s(t) =
X
k
sk · g(t −kT)
(3.6)
The k’th symbol in the transmission sequence sk is transmitted at time kT by the multipli-
cation of a pulse shape g(t) oﬀset to time kT. This is equal to a convolution of the symbol
sequence and the impulse response of a given ﬁlter g(t).
In any real-world application of digital communication, one can expect the addition of noise
upon the transmitted signal. The physical transmission channels used for the transmission
of either digital or analog information are inevitably noisy, due to interference with extrane-
ous signals. This could be either due to interference with other transmissions, background
noise from natural phenomenon or even thermal noise. The noise can, for this project, be
considered additive, i.e. the received signal can be decomposed as the original signal added
with a certain noise signal r(t) = s(t) + n. Furthermore, the values of the noise signal will
often follow a Gaussian distribution, and can be considered white i.e. the noise has equal
intensity at all frequencies. The type of channel examined in this project is an additive-,
white-, Gaussian noise channel (AWGN) n ∼N(0, σ2), with µ = 0 and variance σ2 [24] [28].
On the sender-side, the transmitted pulse shapes are produced from the utilization of a dis-
crete impulse response of a ﬁlter. The resulting signal is then sent through the channel. The
party at the receiving end of a transmission system, however, can not simply transcribe the
signal directly, but must be capable of interpreting the signal, accounting for the distortive
Page 20
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
noise.
In the discrete scenario, the optimal receiver ﬁlters the received signal with the impulse
response of a matched ﬁlter gM = g(−t), which is the pulse shape used on the transmis-
sion side reversed in time. The ﬁltered signal obtained on the receiver-end is thus given as
¯r(t) = r(t) ⊛gM where ⊛indicates a convolution operation [28]. This operation essentially
computes the correlation between the received signal, and the pulse, accentuating the parts
of the signal that resembles the matched ﬁlter.
Having ﬁltered the received signal for noise, the receiver samples the signal ¯r(t) to retrieve
the discrete symbol values at each symbol-period T. Knowing the symbol-period, the re-
ceiver simply has to sample once every symbol-period T. Given m samples per symbol, it
has a sampling rate of
1
m. This process is called downsampling. The problematic aspect of
downsampling, however, is that even though the receiver might know how often to sample,
no information is available as to when, speciﬁcally. The receiver might sample at a sub-
optimal moment with regards to ISI (as will be explained later), causing confusion as to
which symbol should be interpreted. Knowing when to start the downsampling process is
thus necessary. In real-life applications such as radio or telecommunications, the receiver
has access to this kind of information with a complicated phase-locking procedure. For the
simulations carried out in this project, it is assumed that the two systems (transmitter and
receiver) are kept in a phase-locked loop [28]. The convolution operation oﬀset the ﬁltered
signal with half of the length of (the impulse response of) the ﬁlter K
2 . The chosen pulse
shape (the root-raised cosine) is centered around its maximum value. Therefore the receiver
can assume the ﬁrst sampling point to be at index K, and thus samples the received signal
at {K, K + T, K + 2T...}, K being the length of the impulse response of the discrete ﬁlter
g(t). Another way to say it, is that there are m samples per symbol, so the receiver samples
every m’th sample, starting from index K.
Given a sequence of sampled values, the optimal receiver will employ a probability-based
strategy to decide on what the transmitted symbol is most likely to have been, given the
sampled value. Often a euclidean distance metric is applied. Lastly, the deciphered symbol
sequence is mapped back into a sequence of bits [24].
3.2.4
Inter-symbol Interference
As touched upon, restrictions in the time domain (such as limiting signals to square pulses)
yields an excessively wide spectrum in frequency domain, and restrictions in frequency band-
width yields an excessively wide signal in time. Since limiting the bandwidth is desirable, to
avoid interference between broadcasters, pulse shapes used for transmission must inevitably
be extended in time domain. The initial sequence of symbols can be regarded as a set of
square-pulses, having an inﬁnite frequency spectrum. Thus, in order to reduce the band-
width of the frequency spectrum, the initial sequence is passed through a low-pass ﬁlter g(t),
Page 21
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
transforming the initial symbol sequence to a series of pulses, satisfying the condition of
being limited in frequency bandwidth. Since the pulses are extended in time, and one often
wants information transmitted in a timely manner, the pulses will overlap with each other
in certain intervals. This combined with the fact that the convolution operation (equation
(3.6)) describes that overlapping parts are are summated, can cause the receiver to interpret
the sample as a wrong symbol. This is referred to as Intersymbol Interference (ISI). ISI can
be mitigated by carefully choosing the pulse shape g(t) best suited for the application [24].
Figure 3.5: Overlapping sinc pulse shapes [32]
ISI hence refers to the fact that adjacent symbols interfere with each other, aﬀecting the
interpreted result of the receiver. The interpreted symbols can be seen as being a sum of the
neighbouring symbols weighted with an ”inﬂuence factor”, indicating the weight with which
each symbol is considered by the receiver. This is realized through the amplitude of the
received signal at the time of sampling. Thus, when sampling for symbol k, the measured
symbol ˆsk is given as;
ˆsk =
Ns
X
i=−Ns
sk−i · xi
(3.7)
By choosing a pulse shape designed to minimize the risk for misinterpretation of symbols
on the receiver side in a transmission system, intersymbol interference can be signiﬁcantly
reduced. The optimal environment is one in which there is no inﬂuence from other symbols,
at the time of sampling [24];
xi =



c
if i = 0
0
otherwise
(3.8)
c being some constant. This criterion is called Nyquist’s criterion for suppression of ISI and
speciﬁes that there should only be a contribution from one symbol at a time. This essentially
Page 22
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
means that at every multiple of the symbol-period T, the pulses need to sum to zero, except
for one of the pulses, as seen in Figure 3.5. The resulting sampled signal value, can then be
assumed to only indicate one symbol [24]. Figure 3.5 displays a number of transmitted sinc-
Figure 3.6: Correct sampling points for a received signal
pulses in time-domain. All pulses but one pass through zero at the intervals of T, ensuring
no interference from other symbols in the signal.
Another way to express Nyquist’s condition, is that the required pulse shape for eliminating
ISI is the impulse response of the ideal low-pass ﬁlter, with a cutoﬀfrequency of Fc =
1
2T .
The ideal low-pass ﬁlter decays rapidly after the cut-oﬀfrequency in frequency domain, and
meets the zero-crossings criteria. However as mentioned, the ideal low-pass ﬁlter is a per-
fectly rectangular pulse in frequency-domain and its corresponding sinc-function is therefore
inﬁnite in time, with slow attenuation. Although the ideal low-pass ﬁlter meets the criterion
of zero-crossings, implementing one in practice is impossible, as one would be reliant on
signals also extending inﬁnitely into the past and present in order to perform a convolution
with it.
Luckily, it can be shown that as long as the pulse shape meets a symmetry-condition
1
2T in
frequency domain, the impulse response will be zero at equally spaced intervals, meaning it
meets the condition of zero-crossings. This condition is called Nyquist’s second condition
[24] [28]. A ﬁlter which fulﬁls this criterion is the raised cosine function. Such a pulse shape
would be optimal to use in a transmission system.
As with the sinc function, the raised cosine function has one large pulse in the center, and
Page 23
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
Figure 3.7: Raised Cosine crosses zero at nT for all β
then with decreasing amplitude oscillates around zero to each direction. The pulse shape
crosses through zero at all multiples of T nT except for n = 0, meeting Nyquist’s criterion
and easing the job of the receiver to downsample the ﬁltered, received signal ¯r(t). In contrast
to the sinc function, the tails of this function decrease faster, depending on the chosen value
of the roll-oﬀfactor, β, making it much more suitable for transmission. As raised cosine
ﬁlters are a relaxation of the ideal low-pass ﬁlter, the roll-oﬀfactor indicates the level of
relaxation, or in other words, it indicates the level of bandwidth occupied past ± 1
2T . The
impulse response of the raised cosine (eq. 3.4) has a sinc term (sinπt/T
πt/T ) which ensures it
fulﬁlls the zero-crossings condition, while also having a cosine term, decaying its tails [29].
In Figure 3.6 we see the received signal for a short symbol sequence, in a communications
system with raised cosine as transfer function (with no noise). Since the signal has been
ﬁltered, the actual pulses can’t be seen, instead is seen the summation (convolution) of the
contributions of each pulse. The vertical lines show the optimal sampling points, to avoid
interference from other pulses; when all but one pulse pass through zero. This illustrates
the importance of the receiver sampling the received signal at the right points in time, as
mentioned above.
The raised cosine pulse shape describes the response of the entire transmission system. How-
ever, since a transmission system not only applies a ﬁlter once, but rather applies a ﬁlter on
both sender- and receiver-end, the root raised cosine ﬁlter is used on either end.
Since convolutions are associative s⊛(g⊛h) = (s⊛g)⊛h, the order of which the convolutions
are performed are irrelevant. Furthermore, since convolution in time domain is equivalent
to multiplication in frequency-domain, deconvolution in time-domain is similarly achieved
Page 24
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
(a) RRC Impulse Response
(b) RC Impulse Response
with division in frequency domain. The act of ”splitting” a ﬁlter in half can be regarded
as the deconvolution of two identical ﬁlters, and thus, the raised cosine ﬁlter is eﬀectively
”split in half”, by simply taking the square root of the frequency response [24]. The two
resulting ﬁlters can then be used on both sender and receiver end. Although the impulse
response of the root raised cosine ﬁlter on its own does not cross zero at intervals of T,
the symbol sequence ﬁltered with the sender-ﬁlter and ﬁltered again with the receiver-ﬁlter
(matched ﬁlter) yields the same result as ﬁltering with the raised cosine ﬁlter, thus fulﬁlling
the condition of zero-crossings for the receiver end [24].
3.2.5
Theoretical Error Probability of the M-PAM System
Assuming a system of equiprobable symbols, and a transmission channel aﬀecting the signal
with additive, white, Gaussian noise (AWGN), with mean µ = 0 and variance σ2, the re-
ceiver decides the transmitted symbol using optimal decision boundaries. The most eﬀective
way for the receiver to determine the transmitted symbol at any given sampling-time, is to
decide the transmitted symbol sk to be the alphabet element nearest the received symbol
ˆsk. The receiver will thus mistakenly classify a symbol, when the received symbol-value is
outside the decision boundaries for the given symbol. The symbols in the alphabet are each
spaced with 2∆.
Page 25
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
Figure 3.9: Signal Space
When transmitting symbol sk = a , the received symbol-value is given as ˆsk = a + ek with
the error following a Gaussian distribution ek ∼N(a, σ2). The conditional probability of
observing symbol s given the transmission of a is thus given as
P(s|a) ∼N(a, σ2) =
1
√
2πσ2 · exp (−1
2
(s −a)2
σ2
)
Given an interior element of the alphabet, i.e. a symbol which lies in between two other
symbols in the alphabet (e.g. {-3, -1, 1, 3}), the receiver will mis-classify a symbol when
sk < a −∆or sk > a + ∆. The probability of sampling a value larger than the upper bound
is given as an integral of the Gaussian
P(s > a + ∆) =
Z ∞
a+∆
P(s|a) ds = N(a, σ2) =
Z ∞
a+∆
1
√
2πσ2 · exp (−1
2
(s −a)2
σ2
) ds
This can be solved using the inverse of the cumulative normal distribution function, the
Q-function Q(x−µ
σ ), which provides the probability of a normal random variable taking a
value greater than x. The probability of a given sampling-point taking a value greater than
a + ∆is thus given as Q((a+∆)−a
σ
) = Q(∆
σ ). The probability of sampling a point lower than
a −∆is given by the cdf of the normal distribution, however by symmetry, this error event
is also given by Q(∆
σ )
Page 26
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3. Pulse Amplitude Modulation
Figure 3.10: Probability of sampling a point larger than a + ∆
Because these probabilities of errors are independent, the overall probability of error on an
interior symbol can thus be found as the sum of the two: P(interior) = 2Q(∆
σ ).
The error probability for exterior symbols is naturally half of P(interior), since there is only
one decision boundary to be crossed. P(exterior) = Q(∆
σ )
The probability of encountering any error in the system follows the law of total probability
and is thus given as the sum of conditional probability errors multiplied with the probability
of the symbol being transmitted. Given the equiprobability of the symbol transmission,
P(A = a) =
1
M ∀a, the symbol error is given as
P(symbol error) =
m
X
0
P(error|A = a)P(A = a) = 1
M
M
X
1
P(error|A = a)
Knowing that two symbols will always lie at either end of the alphabet, and M-2 symbols
will always be interior, the ﬁnal expression for symbol error probability can be formulated
[30] [28]:
P(symbol error) = 1
M
 
2 Q
∆
σ

+ (M −2) · 2Q
∆
σ
!
= 2
M −1
M

Q
∆
σ

(3.9)
Thus for a 4-PAM system, the symbol-error probability is given as
P(symbol error) = 2
4 −1
4

Q
 1
σ

= 1.5 · Q
 1
σ

(3.10)
Page 27
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Implementation & Frameworks
In order to carry out the chosen experiments for gradient-free optimization on neural net-
works, several frameworks were implemented from scratch. Here-among, a framework for
the optimization method, Diﬀerential Evolution, which was implemented in Python in two
forms. Although the vast majority of this project will concern itself with diﬀerential evolu-
tion applied on neural networks for transmission systems, it was considered appropriate to
ﬁrst gain an understanding of the basic version of the algorithm and its capabilities. Thus
the ﬁrst implementation features the classic, vanilla optimization process on a given problem,
searching for the parameter settings for a (local) optimum. This framework operates on a
set of given parameters, mutating the population in order to ﬁnd the vector of parameters
which would yield the lowest value of a given objective function.
The second implementation of the diﬀerential evolution framework is intended for optimiza-
tion or training of neural networks. Here the operations are applied on the parameters (the
weights and biases) of a population of neural networks.
A framework for a digital communications system is likewise implemented, containing all the
necessary functionalities of a PAM transmission-system. This framework serves as the basis
for neural-network applications, and serves as a use-case for gradient-free training. The im-
plementation of all frameworks, classes, methods and functions in this project is implemented
in Python 3.7. For most machine learning purposes, Python is the industry-standard, given
its high level of versatility, its pre-existing frameworks for machine learning, and its easy
data handling with tools suchs as NumPy and PyTorch. All functional code was kept in
.py ﬁles, handled through the IDE PyCharm, while most data exploration and testing was
performed in Jupyter Notebooks.
28
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Implementation & Frameworks
4.1
Diﬀerential Evolution Framework
The framework is a class with a function for each of the functionalities associated with
diﬀerential evolution. Although the speciﬁc implementations are diﬀerent, both versions of
the framework feature the following functions:
init
which sets the class variables. This includes the choice of hyper-parameters; mutation
factor, crossover rate, population size, the objective function to minimize and of course the
generation of the population.
mutation and crossover which perform the operators of the same names.
evolution; for each epoch, this function iterates over all agents in the population, samples
three agents for mutation, calls the mutation- and crossover functions and ﬁnally performs
selection, by updating the given agent if the mutated agent has a lower cost. evaluation
plots the loss as a function of training epochs, and if applicable plots a visualization of the
optimized/learned function.
4.1.1
Vector-Based Implementation
The vector-based implementation provides an optimization algorithm, for simple problems,
ﬁnding the optimal N-dimensional solution to e.g. a random walk problem. The framework
includes only the core functionalities inherent to diﬀerential evolution. Given an objective
function and a set of hyper-parameters (mutation factor, crossover rate and population size),
the class includes the functionalities mutation, crossover, selection and a function evolution
which iteratively performs the operators, until convergence or a certain amount of epochs
(iterations) has passed.
Furthermore, the framework includes a simple evaluate method
which displays the achieved results graphically.
4.1.2
Tensor-based Implementation
The tensor-based implementation contains the same core functionalities as the vector-based
implementation, however the data structures that the algorithm works upon, have been
signiﬁcantly rewritten for the purpose of operating on the weights and biases of neural
networks, instead of optimizing a given problem directly. Instead of a vector of coeﬃcients,
the population consists of a set of neural networks with associated parameters. The main
operators, crossover and mutation operate on the parameter tensor for each agent in the
population, achieving permutation by looping over all weight- and bias-matrices. This means
that certain parts of the logic of the operators had to be rethought - for instance, at a given
generation t, the mutation update rule can mathematically be described as
vt
ij = xt
aj + F · (xt
bj −xt
cj)
(4.1)
Page 29
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4. Implementation & Frameworks
where j ∈{1...D}. vi,j thus describes the j’th parameter-matrix of the resulting donor-agent
vi, and xa,j, xb,j and xc,j similarly describe the j’th parameter matrix for the three randomly
chosen agents xa, xb and xc from the population. For each of the parameter-matrices, the
parameters are combined as per the mutation-algorithm in an element-wise fashion.
The crossover operation had to be similarly changed in order to operate on a set of weights
and biases. The mixing of elements in the vector-based binomial crossover was achieved
by swapping the mutated vector (the donor vector) with elements from the target vector
if a randomly sampled number is higher than the crossover probability.
For the tensor-
implementation, a probability-matrix Ri containing numbers sampled from a uniform distri-
bution Ri ∈[0, 1], is generated and compared (element-wise) with the crossover probability,
yielding a boolean matrix Bi = Ri < Cr, which in turn is used to determine which elements
from the donor and target matrix respectively is used for the trial matrix. The trial matrix
is thus generated using element-wise multiplication and addition of the boolean, donor and
target matrices:
ut
i = Bi · vt
j + (∼Bi) · xt
j
(4.2)
Where ∼Bi indicates the ﬂipped boolean matrix i.e. ones are zeros and vice versa. This
operation is performed for all parameter-matrices associated with the agents.
The value of the objective function is measured by performing a feed-forward operation of
the data, and comparing the output with the provided labels. The selection operator up-
dates the agent in the same way as the vector-based version, i.e. if the cost of the perturbed
agent is lower than the cost of the target agent.
The class was, for use in later experiments, expanded with a stochastic mini-batch imple-
mentation. The algorithm thus operates on smaller batches from the full data-set, allowing
the population to be evolved based on only a subset of the data-set, while still learning from
the whole data-set in the long run. This signiﬁcantly sped up training time, although in
theory sacriﬁcing the accuracy of selection. In practice, mini-batch training was used for the
majority of training, while ﬁne-tuning with the full data-set.
GPU support was also added to the framework, by adding the option to allocate all PyTorch
tensors to CUDA, including data matrices and the neural network models.
4.2
Communications System
As the project will focus on PAM transmission systems as a use-case for gradient-free deriva-
tion, a Pulse Amplitude Modulation framework was implemented in Python. The framework
implements the traditional, ”vanilla” M-PAM transmission system to serve as base for exper-
iments conducted with machine learning. Throughout the experiments, components of the
communication system will be successively substituted with neural-network models (4-PAM
only) and tested against the vanilla implementation. The base M-PAM implementation fea-
Page 30
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4. Implementation & Frameworks
tures the following essential functions:
init : Sets the set of symbols used in transmission (e.g. -3, -1, 1, 3 for 4-PAM), the symbol
sequence used for transmission, the number of samples per symbol m, and the ﬁlters used
for pulse shaping on either end of the channel.
upsampling: Pads the symbol sequence with m −1 zeros per symbol.
rrcos: Deﬁnes the root raised cosine ﬁlter in time domain with a length of 8 · m = 64 taps.
downsampling: Measures the received signal at every multitude of T.
decision making: Measures the euclidean distance from the downsampled values to each
symbol in the symbol set, and returns the decided symbols.
transmission: Implements the transmission system from end-to-end. The given symbol se-
quence is upsampled and ﬁltered, gaussian noise is added to the signal to simulate the
transmission channel, and ﬁnally the signal is ﬁltered with the matched ﬁlter and symbols
are detected using the euclidean decision maker.
Samples per symbol (m)
Rolloﬀβ
Symbol Time T
RRC Filter Taps
Alphabet
Channel
8
0.35
1 Second
64
{-3, -1, 1, 3}
AWGN
Table 4.1: Settings for the implemented PAM system
Several experiments necessitated the implementation of low-pass ﬁlters diﬀerent from root-
raised cosine. The implementation of the ideal low-pass ﬁlter was approximated using a
discrete Fourier transform, dﬀt. The signal-vector was converted to frequency domain using
the discrete Fourier transform, and any frequencies above the cutoﬀ, was simply set to
zero. The signal was afterwards converted back to time-domain using the inverse Fourier
transform.
Slow(f) =



S(f)
if |f| ≤Fc
0
if |f| > Fc
It should be noted that the ”ideal low-pass ﬁlter” is not possible to implement for any
physical or simulated systems, and is simply an approximation achieved via the discrete
Fourier transform. Any further mention of the ideal LPF in this project hence refers to this
approximation.
The Butterworth ﬁlter was implemented for certain experiments, as well. In contrast to
raised cosine or root-raised cosine, which are both FIR ﬁlters, the Butterworth ﬁlter is an
Inﬁnite Impulse Response Filter, deﬁned by ﬁlter coeﬃcients a and b. The library SciPy was
utilized in order to derive ﬁlter coeﬃcients and apply the ﬁltering of the signal.
4.3
Neural Network Frameworks
Two diﬀerent types of neural networks were used in the experiments for this project, and
because of that, two diﬀerent types of frameworks were used. A few of the experiments make
Page 31
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4. Implementation & Frameworks
use of fully-connected feed-forward neural network, and for this, a framework based exclu-
sively on NumPy was utilized. To read more about the implementation of this framework,
see reference [25]. For the experiments concerned with the learning of ﬁlters, convolution
neural networks were obvious, and thus PyTorch’s Conv1D structure was used.
4.4
Testing of Diﬀerential Evolution Framework
For training neural networks using the conventional backpropagation method in Python,
there exists several of such frameworks, like PyTorch and TensorFlow, which are imple-
mented by Facebook and Google respectively. These frameworks consist of expertly-crafted
implementations, optimized in time- and space-complexity by a team of experts. When using
such framework, one is generally free to assume that all functionalities function as intended
for most applications.
The diﬀerential evolution framework implemented from scratch for this project has no such
advantage and must therefore be thoroughly tested. In order to validate the performance of
the framework, and assess the eﬃciency of the base diﬀerential evolution algorithm, it was
used for optimizing a selected set of simple test problems, before moving on to optimizing
neural networks.
4.4.1
Optimizing Simple Problems
A simple problem to sanity-test the implementation and to assess the eﬃciency of the algo-
rithm, is a simple ”random walk” on an open surface, e.g. a paraboloid z = x2 + y2. This
provides a problem with two parameters to optimize, x and y in order to ﬁnd the optimal
value of z.
Figures 4.1a and 4.1b showcase diﬀerential evolution’s solution to the relatively simple prob-
lem. The worst agent at the time of initialization, and the best agent after convergence
respectively, are visualized in three-dimensional space. The algorithm easily converged to
the global minimum, yielding the solution argminx,yf(x, y) = {0, 0}
The algorithm was run with default values of its hyperparameters (F = Cr = 0.5) and a
small population size of 10 agents. Hyper-parameter tuning was not conducted in this simple
experiment, as the algorithm seemingly converges swiftly for an abundance of combinations.
The simplicity of the problem makes tuning superﬂuous.
The training converged after just a few number of epochs, which speaks to the eﬃciency of
population-based optimization (in low-dimensional problems). An epoch here describes a
full iteration of the entire population, i.e. when mutation, crossover and selection has been
performed on every agent in the population once, using the whole data-set.
The paraboloid optimization problem is of course a very simple problem, helped by the
Page 32
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4. Implementation & Frameworks
(a) Initial solution
(b) Best solution
Figure 4.1: Diﬀerential Evolution on the Paraboloid Problem
fact that the paraboloid surface is especially smooth, with no local optima. The algorithm
was therefore tested on a slightly more complex, non-convex problem, the two-dimensional
Ackley problem: f(x, y) = −20exp(−0.2
r
1
2x2 + y2
−exp

1
2cos(2πx + y)

+ 20 + e.
Ackley is a function often used to test optimization algorithms, such as e.g. diﬀerential
evolution or simulated annealing, as it features multiple local minima, which could cause
convergence issues [20].
The diﬀerential evolution algorithm perfectly manages to converge, overstepping the local
minima of the function, in pursuit of the global minimum f(x, y) = 0. This indicates that
the algorithm is explorative enough in its search to increase diversity of the population and
extricate agents from local optima. The algorithm consistently converged to the correct
result over a series of runs.
4.4.2
Training Neural Networks with Diﬀerential Evolution
The framework used for neural networks has already been thoroughly tested in [25], but
the eﬃciency of optimizing a loss function through diﬀerential evolution instead of back-
propagation has not. In order to assess the gradient-free algorithm’s eﬀectiveness on neural
networks, a series of test-problems were similarly proposed. Two very simple feed-forward
neural network models were trained to approximate two simple functions; the second degree
polynomial f(x) = x2 and a sine wave f(x) = sin(x). Networks of architecture [1, 2, 1] and
[1, 3, 1], with tanh activation function, were used for the parabola- and sine approximation
respectively, and only slight experimentation with hyper-parameters were performed.
The models were each trained on thirty data points, and slight noise was added to both
Page 33
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4. Implementation & Frameworks
Figure 4.2: Diﬀerential Evolution Training Graph
training and testing data, to assess the risk of overﬁtting. It was found that an increase in
noise reduced learning, which could simply be counteracted with more training data.
In order to test the capabilities of the algorithm on neural networks, a slightly more complex
approximation problem was tested. A network of architecture [2, 20, 1] with tanh activation
function was trained on 300 examples from a 2D Gaussian distribution (x1, x2). Since the
problem is more complex, a more complex architecture was chosen (more hidden units), and
thus this is a signiﬁcantly higher-dimensional problem for the algorithm to optimize. As can
be seen, the algorithm converges nicely, yielding an approximated multivariate Gaussian in
3D space.
4.5
Communication System
Having determined the eﬀectiveness of the diﬀerential evolution algorithm for the training
of neural networks, and concluded that it indeed functions as a viable solution, it is time to
carry out experiments of machine learning within digital communication.
4.5.1
Pulse Amplitude Modulation System
To serve as a benchmark for future neural-network components in a PAM communication
system, the traditional, ”vanilla” implementation of PAM system is implemented and tested.
This includes upsampling, pulse-shaping, downsampling and decision-making/detection. The
implementation of the conventional PAM system will be referred to as ”euclidean”, referenc-
ing the euclidean-distance metric used in the decision-maker component.
The euclidean implementation nicely follows the theoretical curve for symbol-error proba-
bility Pe as a function of noise Signal-To-Noise Ratio. This provides a sanity-check for the
Page 34
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4. Implementation & Frameworks
(a) Initial solution
(b) Best solution
Figure 4.3: Diﬀerential Evolution on the Ackley Problem
Figure 4.4: Approximated Functions
implementation, indicating that the implementation of the traditional PAM system functions
as intended. As can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6 there is no indication of inter-symbol interference
or errors associated with either downsampling or decision-making. Had there been a small
error in, say the implementation of the ﬁlters in such a way that the total impulse response
of the system did no longer fulﬁll the conditions of zero-crossings, the performance of the
system would have been much more prone to mis-classiﬁcations of received signal-values.
Thankfully that is not the case, as one would observe upon inspection of the full system
response, as well. Figure 4.6 shows the performance of the euclidean decision maker com-
pared with the theoretical error, in a 4-PAM transmission system, however same results are
achieved with PAM systems of larger symbol-sets such as 6-PAM and 8-PAM.
Page 35
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4. Implementation & Frameworks
Figure 4.5: Approximation of 2D Gaussian
Figure 4.6: Performance plot of PAM system
Page 36
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5
Neural Networks in 4-PAM
Transmission Systems
This project will carry out a series of experiments of varying extents, for the application of
diﬀerential evolution for gradient-free training of neural networks. Machine-learning assisted
communication systems show a high degree of potential beneﬁts, but is regrettably often in
a setting in which traditional gradient-based training, like gradient descent, are not available
to use, due to the unknown properties of the physical transmission channel. The experiments
will progressively replace a number of the components within a traditional PAM system, at
each point assessing the performance and reliability of the new system. This project will
solely focus on linear transmission systems, and thus any neural networks trained in this
setting will not be able to outperform traditional, existing methods. The idea is to pro-
vide a proof-of-concept and a framework for a neural-network based communications-system
which might be able to outperform current transmission systems in non-linear transmission
channels. Because the communication systems are simulated in code with no physical layer,
training with backpropagation and gradient descent is in fact possible. Although not pos-
sible for any real systems, training with backpropagation is performed for a number of the
experiments.
It is important to distinguish between the operations inherent to a communications sys-
tem in a real-world application, and a simulation of one as is inspected for this project. As
mentioned, a real transmission system operates continuously on an incoming stream of infor-
mation, whereas the simulation carried out in this project operates on vectors and matrices
of a ﬁnite length. This quality is practical for machine learning practices, as it allows for the
generation of training data to be stored in a data matrix, or vector X, which is the standard
for machine learning practices.
Through the conducted experiments, the performance of the diﬀerential evolution algorithm
is assessed throughout diﬀerent settings, and compared with backpropagation, in terms of
37
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
achieved performance. All experiments, were conducted on the 4-PAM communication sys-
tem, in a linear AWGN setting. The roll-oﬀfactor β was chosen to have its value of 0.35
with the reasoning that it provided an appropriate trade-oﬀbetween span in time-domain
and excess bandwidth. m = 8 samples were used to represent a symbol, yielding a sampling
rate of 1
8. A traditional 4-PAM system is capable of functioning with lower sampling rates,
yet for the sake of elegance, any machine learning models in this project were trained in a
system of eight samples per symbol. It was furthermore assumed that all symbols have equal
probability of having been sent, i.e. all transmitted symbols are equiprobable.
5.1
Decision Making
To put machine learning assisted PAM transmissions to the test, the decision making
progress, which was previously based on a euclidean-distance measure, was replaced with a
neural network classiﬁer.
Figure 5.1: System
To replace the euclidean-based decision-making component, a neural-network classiﬁer of
four classes (one for each symbol in the symbol-set) was deployed. In order to train such a
model, the neural network must be presented with a collection of downsampled values from
a received signal. A symbol sequence was thus transmitted over the 4-PAM communication
system, ﬁltered on the receiver-end with the matched ﬁlter and downsampled using the
implemented downsample-function. Instead of feeding each of the downsampled values to
the euclidean-distance decision maker, however, the data was gathered in a training set X.
The transmitted symbol sequence was similarly gathered in a set, constituting the training
labels y, which were later one-hot encoded.
The model is supposed to learn the best decision boundaries for values between symbols. In
the case of 4-PAM, the decision boundaries which minimize the error rate are -2, 0 and 2.
Page 38
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
If the trained model learns these decision-boundaries it should converge to the same level of
performance as the euclidean decision-maker.
With the outcome of learning the optimal decision-boundaries in mind, the Signal-to-Noise
Ratio (SNR) of the system was chosen in such a way that the downsampled values would cross
the decision boundaries, such as in ﬁgure 5.2. When the networks compares the downsampled
values to the labels (the symbol sequence), the overlap between the sampled values, forces
the network to learn the correct boundaries when minimizing symbol errors. An SNR=10dB
was chosen.
Figure 5.2: Symbol Distribution
A feed-forward neural network of architecture [1, 8, 4] was used for the classiﬁer, keeping
the topology relatively simple while maintaining a high enough complexity to suﬃciently
model the problem. Both a linear model (activation function being identity f(x) = x), and
a non-linear was tested, and both converged to same level of performance. Since this project
will work with linear transmission channels (AWGN), linear ﬁlters and models are provably
suﬃcient for achieving optimal results. The network was trained with the diﬀerential evolu-
tion framework, with cross entropy as loss function, a mutation factor of F = 0.55, crossover
rate Cr = 0.85, population size NP = 50, and a data-set consisting of 10,000 symbols.
As is shown, the maximum likelihood classiﬁer achieves the same level of performance as
the theory suggests is attainable for a 4-PAM communications system, suggesting that the
model learned the optimal decision boundaries. Upon inspection, it can be seen that the
neural-network based decision-maker, does in fact base its decisions on the optimal bound-
aries, which can explain how the model is able to achieve the same level of performance as
the euclidean-distance decision-maker.
Since the model is a maximum likelihood classiﬁer (with softmax function on the last layer
of the network), there is a multitude of solutions which would result in the same level of
performance. Two of such solutions can be seen in ﬁgure 5.4
Page 39
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
Figure 5.3: Performance of neural-network based decision-maker
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Two sets of Decision Boundaries for the neural-network based decision-maker
Both sets of learned decision boundaries result in the same level of performance as shown in
ﬁgure 5.3. Due to the network having the softmax activation function at the last layer, at
any point the sum of the probabilities sum to one. One might think that a network which
is 100% certain in its decisions like ﬁgure 5.4a would be preferable to 5.4b. However due
to the fact the the models are based on maximum likelihood, the two models displayed in
ﬁgure 5.4 are deterministically identical. In other words, the two models will always output
the same response for a given input, i.e. the same decision for a given sampling of the signal.
The probability curves are simply an expression of the level of noise the model experienced
during training.
Page 40
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
5.2
Downsampling and Decision Making
Replacing the euclidean-distance decision-maker component with a neural network-based
classiﬁer achieved signiﬁcant results. With the goal of progressively replacing components
inherent to PAM-systems with machine learning models, the following experiment consists
of having a neural network perform downsampling and decision making, simultaneously.
The traditional downsampling process entails the receiver sampling the received, ﬁltered sig-
nal once every symbol-period T (in a phase-locked protocol). To achieve a model capable of
performing downsampling, a network must be presented with data pertaining to the periods
of the received (and ﬁltered) signal. A solution to this problem is a time-delayed neural
network. The time-delayed network will allow the model to infer its decision-making classi-
Figure 5.5: System
ﬁer once every m samples, based on the full range of information of the pulse shape. If the
network was implemented in a receiver that continuously listened to a broadcasted signal, it
would thus only infer the network classify a symbol, symbol every multitude of time T, once
all m samples have been retrieved. Instead of an explicit downsampling process followed
by a decision-making process, the network yields an implicit downsampling, by providing a
mapping directly from signal-values to decided symbols.
To simulate a time-delayed neural network inside a real-time, 4-PAM digital communications
systems in software, the transmission process was commenced similar to previous experi-
ments; a symbol sequence was transmitted, and the received and noisy signal was ﬁltered
with a root-raised cosine ﬁlter. The resulting signal was thus gathered in a data matrix X.
The received signal, represented in code as a vector of size Sm, was eﬀectively reshaped to
a m × S matrix, by gathering blocks of m = 8 samples in a matrix of S rows. (S being
the number of transmitted symbols). Each row in the data matrix thus corresponds to a
symbol period. The labels are again the originally transmitted symbol sequence. A simple
linear network of architecture [8, 8, 4] is instantiated and trained with diﬀerential evolu-
Page 41
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
tion. Again the model is trained as a maximum likelihood classiﬁer for the four symbols in
4-PAM. A network of architecture [8, 1, 4] would in theory maintain the logic of the tradi-
tional, euclidean-based 4-PAM system. In such case the hidden node of the network would
likely hold a value representing that of the best sampling point within the period, similar
to traditional downsampling. However, due to such a model being harder to train and the
non-necessity of it, the [8, 8, 4] architecture was chosen.
Figure 5.6: Performance of time-delayed neural network
Similar to the previous experiment, the network was trained with diﬀerential evolution with
cross entropy as loss function, and the hyper-parameters F = 0.55, Cr = 0.85, NP = 50 and
a data-set of 10,000 symbols. The learned model is able to quite accurately extract the sent
symbols from the received signal.
Page 42
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
5.3
Receiver Network
For real-world applications, any signal that is transmitted via a physical medium will un-
doubtedly be subjected to a noisy environment. The matched ﬁlter on the receiving end
of a communications system serves to suppress the noise, by accentuating the parts of the
signal that resembles the pulse shape. As mentioned, for linear systems, the overall impulse
response of the system should be raised cosine, and as a result each of the ﬁlters at sender-
and receiver-side should be root-raised cosine. For non-linear systems, in which the noise
of the channel is not necessarily additive or Gaussian, other types of ﬁlters would likely be
better suited.
Figure 5.7: System
In order to assess whether machine learning can be utilized to properly learn the optimal
ﬁlters for a communication system, a model was trained to learn to denoise a received, noisy
signal and from that, classify to the most likely symbols. The root-raised cosine impulse
response FIR ﬁlter is used for pulse-shaping on transmission side, and thus in order to
minimize the number of symbol errors, the model should in theory learn the coeﬃcients
of the impulse response of the root-raised cosine ﬁlter. If the receiver network is able to
learn the root-raised cosine ﬁlter, the overall system response will be raised cosine, which,
as discussed, should minimize ISI.
A random sequence of equiprobable symbols from the set -3, -1, 1, 3 was zero-padded (up-
sampled) and convolved with the impulse response of the root-raised cosine, before adding
noise to the signal to simulate a physical AWGN transmission channel. The model is fed
the transmitted, noisy signal which is gathered in an input-vector X, with the originally
transmitted symbol sequence constituting the training labels. For the sake of eﬃciency, the
classic multi-layer neural networks were discarded in favor of a convolutional neural net-
work model, implemented using PyTorch. A network consisting of two convolutional layers
Page 43
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
with a topology speciﬁcally designed for the intended learning was instantiated. The ﬁrst
convolutional layer consists of one kernel of length 64, which is equal to the length of the
implemented RRC impulse response in this project. This choice of structure thus supports
the learning of a single ﬁlter of the same dimensions of the ﬁlter on transmission-side. In
theory, it should allow the network to learn a ﬁlter reminiscent of the transmission-ﬁlter
RRC.
Type
Filter Length
Stride
Filters
Output Shape
Parameters
Layer 1
Conv1D
64
1
1
[1, 800000]
65
Layer 2
Conv1D
8
8
4
[4, 100000]
36
Table 5.1: Receiver Network speciﬁcations
The second layer is a convolution layer of four kernels with each a length of eight and a
stride of eight. This is equivalent to the multilayer perceptron used in section 5.2, and thus
the model outputs probabilities for each of the classes (symbols) in the symbol set. The full
network has a total number of 101 trainable parameters.
The model is tasked with learning both the matched ﬁlter, downsampling and decision-
making simultanously. The network was trained with both diﬀerential evolution and back-
propagation, in order to compare the two methods in terms of performance.
Figure 5.8: Training Graph for Receiver Network
Both of the models were able to converge to a solution which reaches the same level of perfor-
mance as the traditional, euclidean based receiver-network. Both models were trained using
a GPU, which signiﬁcantly sped up convergence. Using backpropagation, the best results
were achieved when there was an abundance of training data and a large initial learning
rate. The large amount of training data minimizes the risk of the algorithm falling into a
local minimum, and thus allows for a larger learning rate, speeding up convergence signif-
icantly. Furthermore, in order to properly incentivize the model to learn the best decision
Page 44
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
boundaries, the model was trained on a noisy signal with an SNR of 7 dB. The network
smoothly converges to a high-quality optimum with no diﬀerence in accuracy/symbol errors
on train- and test-set. A network was trained with diﬀerential evolution as well, using the
implemented framework of this project, which also converges nicely to an optimum. The
hyper-parameters for the two models can be seen in table 5.2
LR
F
Cr
NP
Epochs
Cost
SNR
Training Symbols
BP (Adam)
0.01
900
CE
7dB
1,000,000
DE
0.55
0.85
50
900
CE
7dB
100,000
Table 5.2: Hyper-Parameters
The weights of the ﬁrst layer of the network constitutes the ﬁlter taps - the learned FIR ﬁlter
coeﬃcients. Having extracted those, the learned ﬁlter can be visualized. Figure 5.9 shows
the result of training the receiver network on a received signal of 1,000,000 symbols, using
backpropagation. As can be seen, the receiver network was able to learn a ﬁlter exceptionally
reminiscent of the impulse response of root-raised cosine. The ﬁlter is phase-shifted compared
to RRC however, and does not seem to oscillate in quite the same manner. According to
the performance of the network (ﬁgure 5.11), this does not seem to be an issue.
Figure 5.9: Learned Filter (Backpropagation)
A separate network was trained with diﬀerential evolution. The hyper-parameters can be
seen in table 5.2 as well [21]. The dataset for this model was smaller (100,000 symbols) in
order to avoid extreme training times. Like backpropagation, diﬀerential evolution managed
to converge to a solution which provides the theoretical performance. Convergence can be
seen in ﬁgure 5.8
The learned ﬁlter from diﬀerential evolution is notably diﬀerent from the expected, as shown
in ﬁgure 5.10. Although clearly a pulse shape resembling that of the impulse response of root-
raised cosine, the learned ﬁlter is quite noisy. Furthermore it is phase-shifted compared to the
Page 45
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
Figure 5.10: Learned Filter (Diﬀerential Evolution)
expected result, much like the learned ﬁlter from backpropagation, and appears to oscillate a
lot faster than root-raised cosine. Interestingly enough, despite of its apparent shortcomings,
both ﬁlters achieve a level of performance that is equal to that of the theory (ﬁgure 5.11) and
converge to the same cost (ﬁgure 5.8). It is intriguing to consider the explainability of the
Figure 5.11: Performance of both Receiver Neural Networks
found solutions of the trained models. Although the ﬁlter of the backpropagated model is
smooth and possesses an almost uncanny resemblance to RRC, it is still phase-shifted which
in theory should provide issues. Since the learned ﬁlter is phase-shifted, the overall impulse
response will no longer fulﬁll Nyquist’s criterion of zero-crossing at multitudes of T, kT.
With traditional thinking, it is curious how the model does not seem to perform any worse
than the classic PAM implementation. Even more curious, is that performance of the model
trained using diﬀerential evolution is perfectly aligned with the euclidean decision-maker, as
Page 46
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
well. Given the level of noise in the learned ﬁlter and its level of deviation from a root-raised
cosine, the model still hits the same amount of classiﬁcation errors as traditional methods
would have, for a given noise-level.
The reasoning as for why both models perform well, is most likely due to the second layer of
each of the networks - the decision maker. As mentioned, this convolutional layer consists of
four ﬁlters, operating on blocks of eight samples. This layer can be regarded as a time-delayed
network, similar to the method in Section 5.2, in which a time-delayed network performed
an implicit downsampling followed by decision-making. The decision-maker found in the
second layer, contains learned knowledge based on the full period of the network and does
therefore not require an explicit sampling of the signal. This eﬀectively allows the network
to learn a ﬁlter deviating from root-raised cosine ﬁlter in some measure, since the learned
ﬁlter and the learned decision-maker work in tandem.
Figure 5.12: Full System Responses
Through vigorous training and an extreme amount of training data, it was found it is possible
for the backpropagated model to learn a smooth ﬁlter, extremely similar to root-raised
cosine. However, performances perfectly aligned with the theoretical error rates for 4-PAM
are achievable far before that amount of training, when the learned ﬁlter deviates more
from root-raised cosine. This is supported by the observation that the ﬁlter trained with
diﬀerential evolution is far more jagged and noisy, yet achieve the same level of performance
as the backpropagated model and the traditional 4-PAM setup. Figure 5.12 shows the overall
impulse response of the system, for each of the settings. As can be seen the overall impulse
response of the system for both the backpropagated network and the network trained with
diﬀerential evolution, yields a response extremely similar to the impulse response of the raised
cosine ﬁlter, with almost no perceptible diﬀerence. As were to be expected, both system-
responses are phase-shifted in comparison to the actual raised cosine. However, as discussed,
Page 47
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
due to the decision-maker being a learned layer, this does not seem to be of any issue, as
the decision-maker with all likelihood is adjusted to phase-shifting and change in oscillation
frequency. The learned receiver ﬁlters will not be examined in frequency domain, as the
occupied bandwidth is somewhat irrelevant on receiver-side. Since the aforementioned setup
includes root-raised cosine on sender-side, the transmitted signal is band-limited through
the channel.
Figure 5.13: Both Learned Filters
For a ﬁnal experiment, a low-pass ﬁlter was added on transmission side, to test the capa-
bilities of the models. Nyquist’s second criterion in frequency domain says that it takes
frequencies of up to
1
2T to transmit 1
T baud (symbols per second). The rolloﬀfactor in the
raised- and root-raised cosines indicate the bandwidth occupied past Nyquist’s bandwidth,
such that with a given roll-oﬀfactor β, a root-raised cosine uses 1+β
2T frequencies. Therefore,
root-raised cosine is deemed to have an eﬀective cutoﬀfrequency of 1+β
2T .
For most of this project, the chosen roll-oﬀfactor of the pulse shapes have been kept at
β = 0.35, thus yielding an eﬀective cutoﬀof 1+0.35
2·1
= 0.675Hz ( Had e.g. β = 0, the eﬀective
cutoﬀwould have been 1+0
2·1 = 0.5Hz). Since this project operates with a sampling rate of
1
8, this corresponds to 0.675
8/2 = 16.875% of the overall bandwidth. Adding a low-pass ﬁlter
with a cutoﬀabove this will thus have no eﬀect on the bandwidth of the transmitted signal,
showcasing the lowpass ﬁltering eﬀect of RRC.
The ideal lowpass ﬁlter with a cutoﬀof 1+β
2T
encloses the higher-magnitude frequencies in
the RRC frequency band. Thus, adding an ideal LPF with a cutoﬀany lower than this, will
limit the bandwidth of the transmitted signal, more than the root-raised cosine would have
on its own. An ideal lowpass ﬁlter is not possible to implement in any real communication
systems, however. The Butterworth ﬁlter tapers oﬀcompared to the immediate blockage
Page 48
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.14: A signal before and after ideal lowpass ﬁlter (Fc = 0.675)
Figure 5.15: Filters
of the ideal, but is more representative of a real-world application. Due to the imperfect
ﬁltering of a 10th-order Butterworth ﬁlter, a lower cutoﬀfrequency was found more suitable.
The Butterworth LPF with a cutoﬀof approximately 0.55Hz encapsulates the higher-magnitude
frequencies of RRC (with roll-oﬀ0.35), akin to the ideal LPF with a cutoﬀequal to RRC’s
eﬀective cutoﬀ. In order to ascertain the level of performance when lowpass ﬁltering the
signal with a Butterworth of this cutoﬀprior to transmission, a model was trained with this
setup. It was found that a network of same speciﬁcations as in previous trainings, converged
to the optimal level of performance. It is interesting to note, that with a Butterworth ﬁlter,
a cutoﬀfrequency of around 0.55Hz permits no more bandwidth than what is necessary,
while still allowing for optimal performance. Such a ﬁlter could therefore be used when
experimenting with two learned ﬁlters 5.4.
Page 49
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
Figure 5.16: Filters (cutoﬀ=0.55)
For the sake of completion, the performance of a trained network is tested when the Nyquist
criterion is violated. A Butterworth ﬁlter with a cutoﬀfrequency of 0.45 is included in the
transmission. Not surprisingly performance is signiﬁcantly hindered.
Page 50
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
5.4
Sender- and Receiver Network
Having proven that trained models are able to overtake the entire receiver-side of a 4-PAM
transmission system, the natural next step is to establish a trained model on transmission
side of the communication system. The next experiment aims to observe if a learned trans-
mission ﬁlter is able to work in tandem with a learned receiver-network (constituting both
matched ﬁlter, downsampling and decision-making).
Figure 5.17: System
The neural network deployed on transmission-side consists purely of one convolutional layer
with a ﬁlter of length 64 with a skip of one, exactly like how the root-raised cosine was
implemented in previous experiments. The receiver network was implemented in the same
manner as in section 5.3. The idea is to make certain that the ﬁlters are trained in a setting
which is equivalent to the traditional PAM setting, in order to best be able to compare the
learned ﬁlters to existing solutions. There is a total of 166 weights and biases to optimize,
making it the highest-dimensional experiment in this work.
Type
Filter Length
Stride
Filters
Output Shape
Parameters
TX Network
Layer 1
Conv1D
64
1
1
[1, 800063]
65
RX Network
Layer 1
Conv1D
64
1
1
[1, 800000]
65
Layer 2
Conv1D
8
8
4
[4, 100000]
36
The two neural networks in this experiment are trained in a joint manner, within the com-
munications system. Given a sequence of symbols, the sequence is upsampled as per the
usual manner, and the transmission network is fed the raw, upsampled signal. The receiver
network is trained in the same way as previously (section 5.3), being fed the received signal.
The training labels are again the original symbol sequence. The cost is then calculated for
the overall system, meaning the cost describes the overall error for both of the networks.
The parameters in both networks are updated at each iteration. Thus, for each training
Page 51
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
epoch, the signal is ﬁltered, transmitted, ﬁltered again with the matched ﬁlter and symbols
are decided. Due to the nature of this type of training, the additive noise from the channel
is diﬀerent for each epoch. For this reason, the training data deviates for each epoch, and
thus a validation-set is deemed unnecessary. Only after training, will the model be tested
against a ﬁnal test set, upon which performance is determined.
In the joint training loop, the transmission network is used to ﬁlter/pulse-shape the upsam-
pled symbol sequence, before ﬁltering the signal with a low-pass ﬁlter, normalizing the signal
with the root-mean-square of its power and ﬁnally transmitting the signal. Since the root-
raised cosine ﬁlter is completely excluded from this experiment, a low-pass ﬁlter is included
on transmission-side. This is necessary in order to prevent training the transmitter network
to create a signal occupying an excessive amount of bandwidth, which is undesirable for a
communications system. Similarly the conﬁguration necessitates normalization of the signal.
Without constraining the signal in strength, one would observe a performance of the system
seemingly above the theoretical limit, for the lower signal strength. This would be incredibly
misleading. The transmission network would likely learn to simply increase the power of the
signal, eﬀectively lowering the relative level of noise (increasing SNR), which would appear
to artiﬁcially improve performance, if compared to e.g. the euclidean model in which the
same noise-level would be eﬀectively higher.
5.4.1
Jointly Trained Networks
To assess the performance of such a transmission system, the system was ﬁrst trained using
backpropagation and gradient descent. In order to limit the bandwidth of the learned ﬁlter,
an (approximated) ideal low-pass ﬁlter was added on transmission side. As per the deﬁnition
of the frequency response of the raised cosine and root-raised cosine ﬁlters respectively (3.3,
3.5), their eﬀective cut-oﬀfrequencies are given as 1+β
2T
= 0.675 with the chosen value of
roll-oﬀfactor β. The roll-oﬀfactor serves as a parameter to adjust the trade-oﬀbetween the
level of excess bandwidth and elongation of the pulse-shape in time, with β = 0.35 being a
popular compromise. Thus, the previously chosen value of β = 0.35, will be continued for
the coming experiments. Figure 5.15 shows that the ideal LPF encloses the bandwidth of
RRC (for β = 0.35). Therefore the cutoﬀvalue was chosen to be 0.675Hz.
When trained with backpropagation, the two networks were able to jointly converge to a
solution which provides the same level of performance expected from a traditional 4-PAM
system. The loss function was cross entropy, and the optimizer was Adam with an initial
learning rate of 0.01. 100,000 symbols were used for the transmission, with an SNR of 7dB.
The performance of the learned system is comparable to that of the theoretical error-rate
of a traditional 4-PAM system. Although this has been trained with backpropagation and
gradient descent, it serves as a proof-of-concept. A learned set of ﬁlters, and a neural-network
based classiﬁer is able to match the performance-level of existing systems, consisting of root-
Page 52
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
Figure 5.18: Training Graphs for the two chosen settings
raised cosines on either end of the system, and a decision-maker based on simple euclidean-
distance.
(a) Learned Sender Filter (Time)
(b) Learned Sender Filter (Frequency)
Figure 5.20: Learned Sender Filter
The weights of the networks constitute the learned ﬁlters. Upon inspection it can be seen
that the transmission ﬁlter itself is quite noisy, and occupies a wider frequency band than
had there been a root-raised cosine. This is to be expected, however, since the transmission
ﬁlter is not directly motivated to limit bandwidth. Instead, the transmission ﬁlter is likely
incentivized to contain information crucial to the transmitted signal within the boundaries
of the lowpass ﬁlter, while simply outputting noise in the higher frequencies. Eﬀectively
anything outside of the cutoﬀfrequency will die oﬀ(or be signiﬁcantly attenuated), and so
the network learns to ensure that all information in the signal will be represented via pulses
whose frequency spectrum lie within the speciﬁed bandwidth of the LPF.
Page 53
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
Figure 5.19: Performances
The overall response of the sender is given as the learned network weights ﬁltered with the
LPF. Thus, the learned weights ﬁltered with the ideal lowpass ﬁlter in this case, yields a much
smoother ﬁlter as seen in ﬁgure 5.21. When setting the sender-response side by side with the
learned receiver ﬁlter, it can be seen that the receiver ﬁlter makes up the matched ﬁlter, i.e.
it is the sender response inverted in time g(−t), as is a requirement for the optimal receiver
[24]. Of course, both of these ﬁlters are a result of training neural networks, and it cannot be
ruled out that there is slight room for improvement. The overall sender response is, because
of the lowpass ﬁlter, nicely limited in bandwidth, which conﬁrms that the transmitted signal
is not occupying more of the channel than a root-raised cosine transmission ﬁlter would have.
Any diﬀerences in bandwidth are at very low magnitudes.
(a) Sender Response
(b) Receiver Filter
Figure 5.21: Learned Filters (with Ideal LPF)
The pulse shape with which a signal is transmitted is given by the full impulse response of
the sender, and thus the low-pass ﬁlter is a necessity, not only for training but for inference
Page 54
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
as well. The (approximated) ideal lowpass ﬁlter, which is used in this experiment, is not
possible to implement for any real-world practices. For this reason another experiment, with
a diﬀerent ﬁlter was conducted. The communications system was similarly trained with
a Butterworth ﬁlter on transmission-side, instead of the Ideal LPF. In section 5.3 it was
assessed that a 10th order Butterworth ﬁlter with a cutoﬀof approximately 0.55 enclosed
the necessary frequencies to replicate the bandwidth of a root-raised cosine ﬁlter with rolloﬀ
factor β = 0.35. The cutoﬀfrequency for experiments conducted with the Butterworth ﬁlter
was chosen as Fc = 0.6, as an extra precaution.
Both the impulse response of the system trained with the ideal lowpass ﬁlter and the impulse
response of the system trained with a Butterworth ﬁlter, bore a great level of similarity to
the raised cosine impulse response. As was also observed in section 5.3, the learned system
Figure 5.22
responses look very similar to the raised cosine function, but seem to be slightly phase-
shifted.
Again, this is likely due to the neural-network based decision-maker operating
diﬀerently from the simple, traditional downsampling method. The trained neural networks
are capable of achieving optimal results, and the ﬁlter trained with the Ideal LPF yields a
ﬁlter exceptionally reminiscent of raised cosine. The learned transfer function of the system
trained with a Butterworth ﬁlter on tranmission side, diﬀers from the true raised cosine
function by a small margin, however still seems to achieve the optimal level of performance.
It is interesting to note that both of the trained systems converged to a solution similar to
the raised cosine impulse response, yet none of the trained ﬁlters are similar in shape, to
Page 55
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
the root-raised cosine ﬁlter. Root-raised cosine is deﬁned as the square root of raised cosine
(in frequency-domain), and it thus follows naturally, that RRC convolved with itself would
yield raised cosine. However, there are a multitude of solutions yielding the raised cosine
transfer function. RRC is a special case of being its own matched ﬁlter, and there are in
theory many solutions the networks could converge to.
(a) Sender Bandwidth
(b) Full System Bandwidth
Figure 5.23
In a traditional system, the overall impulse response of the system, should be the impulse
response of the raised cosine ﬁlter, in order to minimize intersymbol interference.
If a
function meets Nyquist’s criterion of odd-symmetries, it will cross zero at just the right
intervals needed for downsampling. That is necessary for the traditional systems, however,
when considering that the neural net-based decision-maker does not depend on an explicit
sampling of the signal (as discussed in section 5.3), and that the ﬁlters are learned, a diﬀerent
overall impulse response of the system might be found. There are multiple solutions for the
optimal transmission system, and thus a transfer function completely identical to raised
cosine is not the only solution. The learned system responses of the system, in both settings,
are almost identical to the raised cosine. This is likely a result of the set-up, guiding the
network to converge to that solution. Choosing a cutoﬀfrequency equal to that of RRC
and choosing network parameters (ﬁlter length etc) equal to the traditional setup, emulates
the classical circumstances, and it is not surprising that the networks would ﬁnd a similar
solution to that. As the performance of both of the trained systems are in line with the
theoretical, euclidean error rate as seen in ﬁgure 5.19, it can safely be concluded that both
of the found solutions are satisfactory.
5.4.2
Joint Training with Diﬀerential Evolution
The experiments are repeated with the diﬀerential evolution algorithm, to properly simulate
a situation in which gradients of the loss function are not available, as would be the case for
most real communications systems. Similar to the previous experiments, the networks were
Page 56
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
trained in a joint manner, inside of the transmission-system.
The previous results from the experiments with backpropagation were achieved by utilizing
a large amount of training data, and choosing a relatively large value for the learning rate,
in order to speed up convergence. Given the lack of a similar learning-rate parameter in
diﬀerential evolution, the framework was instead expanded with a mini-batch implementa-
tion. This allows the algorithm to perform multiple weight updates per epoch. I.e. the
population was updated on the basis of the networks’ performance on the data within the
mini-batch, instead of updating the network once per epoch, allowing the models to learn
from the full data-set, but without having training speed being limited by the processing
time of the whole data-set.
LR
F
Cr
NP
Epochs
Cost
SNR
Training Symbols
BP (Adam)
0.01
400
CE
7dB
100,000
DE
0.55
0.85
20
400
CE
7dB
100,000
Table 5.3: Hyper-parameters
The chosen values for the hyper-parameters is seen in table 5.3. These values were generally
found to perform well for the experiments in this project. Although a deeper investigation
of hyper-parameters could be beneﬁcial, it was not performed for this experiment, due to
computational constraints. Likewise, in order to ease computation-time, a smaller population
size was chosen.
Again, to showcase the found solutions and performance under diﬀerent circumstances, the
experiment was conducted in two diﬀerent settings. An experiment for when Butterworth
is used to constrain bandwidth, and an experiment for when Ideal LPF is used.
As can be seen from ﬁgure 5.24 the networks trained using diﬀerential evolution achieved
the same level of performance as would be expected from a traditional 4-PAM system, when
trained with an ideal low-pass ﬁlter. The error-rate of the models align very well with the
performance proposed with the theoretical error. The performance of two networks that
were trained with the Butterworth low-pass ﬁlter appears to deviate diminutively from the
theoretical 4-PAM error rate, at high levels of SNR. This could indicate a small level of
intersymbol interference, although the deviation is rather small. The model could arguably
learn to ﬁnd a better optimum with more training and/or more hyper-parameter tuning.
As was also experienced with the models trained with backpropagation, it is evident that
the Butterworth ﬁlter adds an additional constraint to the training of the networks. Unlike
gradient descent, diﬀerential evolution is an evolutionary algorithm that does not calculate
a direction in which to move, but rather performs a random search in parameters space.
Diﬀerential evolution is therefore often not as eﬃcient in converging to a good minimum.
It is likely this phenomenon that is seen here. The computational resources of this project
were somewhat limited, and one could imagine that with excessive training, even the model
trained with a Butterworth LPF on transmission-side, would converge to the theoretical
Page 57
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
Figure 5.24: Performances of learned ﬁlters from DE
error rate.
Figure 5.25: Full Responses for the DE-trained systems
The learned transfer functions of the models trained with diﬀerential evolution, are both
quite similar to raised cosine. The observation of a very slight increase in error-rate at high
levels of SNR, for the model trained with a Butterworth ﬁlter, is corroborated by the in-
spection of the full system responses. The learned transfer function of the system trained
with a Butterworth ﬁlter has a slight asymmetry. The left tail of the pulseshape does not
quite intersect at y = 0 for its ﬁrst oscillation, meaning it misses a zero-crossing where
other learned transfer functions have one. Thus, the small amount of deviation from the
Page 58
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
theoretical symbol error rate at low amounts of noise, is likely caused by some intersymbol
interference introduced by the slightly imperfect pulseshape. However, given that the model
managed to converge to this level of performance, there is no doubt that with more training
and/or hyper-parameter tuning, the model would converge.
The two algorithms, backpropation and diﬀerential evolution, seem to be able to converge to
the same level of performances. There is, however, no getting around the fact that gradient
descent with backpropagation will often converge much faster, and sometimes to a better
solution. However, Diﬀerential Evolution is not to be discarded and can be an adequate
alternative, when backpropagation is not possible. One of the major disadvantages of dif-
ferential evolution in this project, is that because it performs a search of the parameters
space, rather than calculate a direction, it has no parameter to speed up training. It is very
likely that this phenomenon is one of the factors that causes diﬀerential evolution to fail to
achieve the same level of performance in the experiment involving Butterworth LPF. How-
ever, it should be noted that even in this case, the deviation from the theoretical error-rate
is extremely minuscule.
(a) Sender Response
(b) Sender Frequency Response
Figure 5.26: Sender Responses for DE-trained model (with Butterworth)
Figure 5.27: Receiver Filter for DE-trained model (with Butterworth)
Page 59
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
5.5
Training Complexity
Training with the DE-framework that is proposed in this project was able to converge to
good solutions in all experiments - as good as backpropagation (with the exception of the
ﬁnal experiment in section 5.4).
However, due to the nature of the algorithm, training
time was a lot longer, than traditional backpropagation for all of the experiments in digital
communication. For demonstration purposes, the networks were trained once again, each
with a dataset of the same size (100,000 symbols), until the same level of convergence was
reached for each model.
BP
DE
Receiver Network (GPU)
8.4 seconds
9.01 minutes
Receiver Network (CPU)
3.0 minutes
53.4 minutes
Joint Networks (CPU)
3.5 minutes
∼120 minutes
Table 5.4: Training Times for BP and DE
In general, diﬀerential evolution is slower than backpropagation by a large margin. Similar
to backpropagation it beneﬁts signiﬁcantly from GPU training, but the disparity in time
remains. As these networks are relatively high-dimensional, the diﬀerence in training time
is apparent. The jointly trained networks were unfortunately not able to be trained using
the GPU, due to memory constraints. The training time for the jointly trained networks
using diﬀerential evolution was sped up by quite a margin, using the stochastic mini-batch
implementation. Mini-batches of size 10,000 was thus used for each evolution, giving the
population 10 evolutions per epoch. Batch training was not even considered for this experi-
ment, as it would have required an extreme amount of training. The two hours of training
time for the joint networks did, however, include multiple population resets and retraining
with new data, in order to improve convergence. This likely doubled the total training time,
but did help bring the cost down further.
The two diﬀerent algorithms, backpropagation and diﬀerential evolution were both applied to
a problem of varying complexity, in order to fully assess the scalability of the two algorithms
in time. Classic multilayer perceptrons of varying dimensionality were trained to approx-
imate a parabola, just like in ﬁgure 4.4. As such a simple problem can be approximated
with an extremely low-dimensional network as seen previously, as well as a high-dimensional
one, it serves as a great way to benchmark complexity. Both algorithms trained the net-
works to the same level of performance for each level of complexity.
As can be seen in
ﬁgure 5.28, diﬀerential evolution scales considerably faster than backpropagation, as the al-
gorithm requires more iterations to ﬁnd the right solution, since it searches stochastically.
The stochastic search also means that time to converge can deviate by quite lot, depending
on how beneﬁcial its early random mutations happened to be, as well as the initialization of
the population.
Page 60
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5. Neural Networks in 4-PAM Transmission Systems
Figure 5.28: Time Complexity for DE and BP
DE’s scaling is even more pronounced for ﬁne-tuning of a problem. The diﬀerence in training
time is even more pronounced, as diﬀerential evolution has to search the parameter-space
more scrutinously to optimize for performance, whereas backpropagation does not have this
issue. This is likely the eﬀect seen with the learned ﬁlters in sections 5.3 and 5.4. This is
likely something that could be improved with an adaptive hyper-parameter scheme, capable
of trading exploration for exploitation, when needed.
Page 61
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
Discussion
It is evident that a gradient-free optimization algorithm like diﬀerential evolution is useful
for the training of neural networks in a setting where gradients are not available, as seen
from the experiments. In general, diﬀerential evolution was able to achieve the same results
as conventional backpropagation. However, the superior training speeds of backpropagation
shines at higher dimensional problems, as is to be expected. As backpropagation is able to
nicely step in a clearly deﬁned direction, diﬀerential evolution has to search the parameter
space somewhat blindly. It was evident that as the number of parameters increased, dif-
ferential evolution found it harder to converge, whereas gradient descent found a solution
with relative ease. In lower-dimensional problems, the diﬀerence between the two training
methods were even negligible in terms of speed. Even for experiment 5.3 with 101 parame-
ters, DE was able to converge without much diﬃculty (although backpropagation was still
signiﬁcantly faster). During joint training of sender-and-receiver networks, under the extra
constraint of the Butterworth, the algorithm clearly struggled to converge, requiring exces-
sive training and population resets. Although, DE performed perfectly adequately, based
on the results from this project, gradient descent is advisable to use when available, as it is
far less computationally expensive. Although, it is not unlikely that the framework could
be improved in terms of time-complexity, the nature of diﬀerential evolution simply makes
it more computationally expensive. For derivative-free settings, algorithms like diﬀerential
evolution is a good alternative.
The framework developed in this project has certainly proven itself to be capable of training
neural networks within a 4-PAM digital communication system. This project managed to
replace existing components with trained neural networks, and would most likely be able to
ﬁnd a solution for a non-linear communication channel as well.
Other derivative-free methods like Simultaneous Perturbation do not perform a stochastic
search of parameter space, but rather perform an approximation of the gradient of the loss
function, and uses this information to update the network parameters. Although out of
62
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 6. Discussion
scope for this project, it would be interesting to see the performance of that algorithm com-
pared to diﬀerential evolution. One would likely see a faster convergence speed, although it
is uncertain if it would converge to something useful in this setting. [40]
Futhermore several advances of diﬀerential evolution have been proposed, although they
were not included in this project. Several variants such as CODE and JDE aim to utilize a
variation of crossover schemes and control parameters, either via random selection or self-
adaption [1]. Future work could include utilizing a self-adaptive scheme to see if that would
help speed up convergence, particularly in higher dimensions. It might also provide beneﬁts
for ﬁne-tuning as one could suspect that more exploitative settings for the hyper-parameters
might ease convergence in later stages of training. Mousavirad et al [23] propose the utiliza-
tion of diﬀerential evolution in combination with other types of learning. Future work could
include using their proposed opposition-based and centroid-based learning in combination
with diﬀerential evolution on experiments within digital communicaiton.
This project did not include the mapping of bits to symbols and back, nor was upsampling
implemented any diﬀerently from traditional systems. Including a trainable mapping com-
ponent and a trainable upsampling method would be worth looking into for future work.
Such a system could possibly learn a speciﬁc mapping to eliminate bit errors, or a more
intelligent upsampling.
Page 63
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
A framework for training neural networks using diﬀerential evolution as well as a framework
for M-PAM communication systems were both implemented and tested. The diﬀerential
evolution framework was tested on a few simple optimization problems, in order to verify
its implementation and its capability to optimize low-dimensional problems. It was further
tested on the training of neural networks to approximate simple functions such x2 or sin(x).
The algorithm was clearly capable of optimizing simple problems, as well as train neural
networks, showcasing the eﬃciency of the algorithm and indicating that the implementation
works as intended. The PAM communication system works as intended as well, its error
rate as a function of SNR (for a 4-PAM system) lying perfectly in line with the theoretical
4-PAM error rate.
The 4-PAM system with continuously more components replaced with neural networks were
able to achieve a level of performance that is in line with the error-rate of a traditional
euclidean-distance-based 4-PAM system. Training with diﬀerential evolution, the networks
were able to achieve the same performances as when trained with backpropagation, except
for a slight diﬀerence in the ﬁnal experiment, in which the constraint of the Butterworth
ﬁlter complicated training for diﬀerential evolution. The performance of the joint networks
trained with the Butterworth ﬁlter on transmission-side, could arguably be aligned with the
networks trained with the ideal LPF with more training and possibly hyper-parameter tun-
ing, or certain improvements to the algorithm such as an adaptive hyper-parameter scheme
[21] [1]. It is evident that training with diﬀerential evolution is slower and requires more
computational resources, but is ultimately able to converge to the same level of performance.
Although the two methods achieve the same level of loss and performance, it is interesting
to note that they arrive at diﬀerent solutions. When learning the receiver ﬁlters, the learned
ﬁlter by diﬀerential evolution is uneven and rough, compared to the smooth ﬁlter of the
backpropagated model. Both of these solutions are valid, and result in the same, correct
system-response. The same can be said for the results achieved with the jointly trained
64
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 7. Conclusion
networks, although the added constraint of the Butterworth ﬁlter provided a slight conver-
gence issue for diﬀerential evolution. It is thus clear that diﬀerential evolution is a valid and
eﬀective training method for neural networks deployed in a communication system where
gradients are not possible to calculate. The methods proposed in this work thus take the
ﬁrst steps towards showcasing how neural networks could be trained in a non-linear system.
It is not a far stretch to surmise that this method could train networks to reach a higher
level of performance than traditional performance, in a non-linear setting.
Page 65
==PAGE:67==
References
[1] Manolis Georgioudakis and Vagelis Plevris. ”A Comparative Study of Diﬀerential Evolu-
tion Variants in Constrained Structural Optimization”, 2020.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fbuil.2020.00102/full
[2] Andrew R. Conn, Katya Scheinberg, Luis N. Introduction to Derivative-Free Optimiza-
tion, 2009.
[3] James C. Spall An Overview of the Simultaneous Perturbation Method for Eﬃcient Op-
timization, 1998.
https://www.jhuapl.edu/content/techdigest/pdf/V19-N04/19-04-Spall.pdf
[4] James C. Spall Multivariate stochastic approximation using a simultaneous perturbation
gradient approximation, 1992
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/119632
[5] James C. Spall Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation
https://www.jhuapl.edu/SPSA/
[6] Storn, R. and Price K. Diﬀerential Evolution – A Simple and Eﬃcient Heuristic for
Global Optimization over Continuous Spaces, 1997
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008202821328
[7] Neri, F., Tirronen, V. Recent advances in diﬀerential evolution: a survey and experimen-
tal analysis, 2010
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-009-9137-2
[8] Plagianakos, V., Tasoulis, D. and Vrahatis, M.N A Review of Major Application Areas
of Diﬀerential Evolution - Advances in Diﬀerential Evolution, 2008
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-68830-3_8
[9] James Kennedy and Russel Eberhart Particle Swarm Optimization, 1995
[10] Bonyadi, M. R and Michalewicz, Z. Particle Swarm Optimization for Single Objective
Continuous Space Problems: A Review, 2007
66
==PAGE:68==
References
[11] George Lindﬁeld and John Penny Introduction to Nature-Inspired Optimization - Chap-
ter 3, 2017
[12] Xin-She Yang Nature-Inspired Optimization Algorithms (Second Edition) - Chapters 6,
8, 2020
[13] Aly, Ahmed and Guadagni, Gianluca and Dugan, Joanne B
Derivative-Free Optimization of Neural Networks Using Local Search, 2019
[14] Gavin Taylor, Ryan Burmeister, Zheng Xu, Bharat Singh, Ankit Patel, Tom Goldstein
Training Neural Networks Without Gradients: A Scalable ADMM Approach, 2016
[15] Yavuz Eren, ˙Ibrahim B. K¨u¸c¨ukdemiral, ˙Ilker ¨Usto˘glu, Optimization in Renewable En-
ergy Systems - Chapter 2, pages 49-51, 2017
[16] Yuntian Chen, Haibin Chang, Jin Meng, Dongxiao Zhang Ensemble Neural Networks
(ENN): A gradient-free stochastic method, 2019
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1908.01113.pdf
[17] Jiawei Zhang Derivative-Free Global Optimization Algorthms: Bayesian Method and
Lipschitzian Approaches, 2019 https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09365
[18] Sushruta Mishra, Soumya Sahoo, Mamata Das Genetic Algorithm: An Eﬀective Tool
for Global Optimization, 2017
https://www.ripublication.com/acst17/acstv10n8_02.pdf
[19] Mustafa E. Abdual-Salam and Hatem M. Abdul-Kader and Waiel F. Abdel-Wahed
Comparative study between Diﬀerential Evolution and Particle Swarm Optimization al-
gorithms in training of feed-forward neural network for stock price prediction, 2010. Pages
1-8
[20] Ackley, D. H. A connectionist machine for genetic hillclimbing, 1987
[21] Centeno-Telleria, Manu and Zulueta, Ekaitz and Fernandez-Gamiz, Unai and Teso-Fz-
Beto˜no, Daniel and Teso-Fz-Beto˜no, Adri´an
Diﬀerential Evolution Optimal Parameters Tuning with Artiﬁcial Neural Network, 2021
https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7390/9/4/427
[22] Anit Kumar Encoding Schemes in Genetic Algorithm, 2013
https://garph.co.uk/ijarie/mar2013/1.pdf
[23] Mousavirad, Seyed jalaleddin & Oliva, Diego & Hinojosa, Salvador & Schaefer, Ger-
ald. Diﬀerential Evolution-based Neural Network Training Incorporating a Centroid-based
Strategy and Dynamic Opposition-based Learning, 2021
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2106.15392.pdf
[24] Knud J. Larsen 34210 Introduktion til digital kommunikation, Chapters 1, 2, 4, 5, 2017
Page 67
==PAGE:69==
References
[25] Holger Krener-Iversen Training of Neural Networks using Backpropagation, 2019
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2450155167
[26] John G. Proakis, Dimitris G. Manolakis
Digital Signal Processing: Principles, Algorithms and Applications (Third Edition), 1992
[27] Soury, H., Yilmaz, F., & Alouini, M.-S. Error Rates of M-PAM and M-QAM in Gen-
eralized Fading and Generalized Gaussian Noise Environments, 2023
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6589292/
[28] John G. Proakis, Masoud Salehi Digital Communications (Fifth Edition), 2007
pages 11-18, 179, 188-190, 298-300, 607
[29] Ali Grami Introduction to Digital Communications - Chapter 6 - Baseband Digital
Transmission, 2016. Pages 265-297
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-407682-2.00006-5
[30] Simon Haykin, Michael Moher An Introduction to Analog and Digital Communications,
2nd Edition (second edition), 2019. Pages 399-405, 419
[31] George Ellis Control System Design Guide (Fourth Edition) - Chapter 9 - Filters in
Control Systems, 2012. Pages 165-183
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385920-4.00009-6
[32] Chris828, CC BY-SA 3.0 ¡https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0¿, via Wiki-
media Commons https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Raised-cosine-ISI.
svg
[33] Tim O’Shea and Jakob Hoydis, An Introduction to Deep Learning for the Physical Layer,
2017
[34] Ognjen Jovanovic, Metodi P. Yankov, Francesco da Ros and Darko Zibar
Gradient-free training of autoencoders for non-diﬀerentiable communication channels,
2021 https://arxiv.org/pdf/2012.11227.pdf
[35] Fay¸cal Ait Aoudia and Jakob Hoydis, End-to-End Learning of Communications Systems
Without a Channel Model, 2018 https://arxiv.org/pdf/1804.02276.pdf
[36] Fay¸cal Ait Aoudia and Jakob Hoydis Model-free Training of End-to-end Communication,
2019 https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.05929
[37] Sebastian Dorner, Sebastian Cammerer, Jakob Hoydis, and Stephan ten Brink
Deep Learning-Based Communication Over the Air, 2017 https://arxiv.org/pdf/
1707.03384.pdf
Page 68
==PAGE:70==
References
[38] Timothy J. O’Shea, Tamoghna Roy, Nathan West, Approximating the Void: Learning
Stochastic Channel Models from Observation with Variational Generative Adversarial
Networks, 2018 https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.06350
[39] Nariman Farsad, Andrea Goldsmith
Detection Algorithms for Communication Systems using Deep Learning, 2017
https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.08044
[40] V. Raj and S. Kalyani ”Backpropagating Through the Air: Deep Learning at Physical
Layer Without Channel Models” https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8452950
Page 69
==PAGE:71==
Appendices
70
==PAGE:72==
.1
Appendix A: Communication System
.1.1
PAM
import numpy as np
import matplotlib . pyplot as
plt
from commpy. f i l t e r s
import
r r c o s f i l t e r
from ML components import ML decision making , ML downsampling
from ML components import network receiver ,
network sender receiver
from scipy . s t a t s import norm
from scipy . s i g n a l import
l f i l t e r ,
f i l t f i l t
from
f i l t e r s
import butter lowpass ,
ideal lowpass
class Comms System :
def
i n i t
( s e l f ,
symbol set ,
symbol seq ,
num samples=8, beta =0.35):
s e l f . symbol set = symbol set
s e l f . symbol seq = symbol seq
s e l f .m = num samples
s e l f . h = s e l f . rrcos ( beta=beta )
#i f
norm h :
s e l f . h = s e l f . h / np . s q r t (np . sum(np . square ( s e l f . h )))
# normalize
the
f i l t e r
s e l f . f i l t e r o f f s e t = len ( s e l f . h) // 2
s e l f . start sample point = s e l f . f i l t e r o f f s e t
∗2
pass
def upsample ( s e l f , v=False ) :
zero pads = np . zeros (( s e l f .m −1 , len ( s e l f . symbol seq ) ) )
upsampled = np . vstack (( s e l f . symbol seq ,
zero pads ) ) .T. f l a t t e n ()
i f v :
plt . f i g u r e ( f i g s i z e =(13 , 8))
plt . stem ( upsampled )
plt . ylabel ( ’ Symbol Value ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =18)
plt . xlabel ( ’ Timesteps ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =18)
plt . t i t l e ( ’ Upsampled Signal ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =24)
plt . show ()
return upsampled
Page 71
==PAGE:73==
def plot spectrum ( s e l f ,
signal time ,
sample rate ) :
return plt . magnitude spectrum ( signal time , Fs=sample rate ,
color=’C1 ’ )
def
rrcos ( s e l f ,
beta , v=False ) :
Ts
= s e l f .m
h = r r c o s f i l t e r (N=8 ∗Ts ,
alpha=beta , Ts=1, Fs=Ts ) [ 1 ]
i f v :
t = np . arange(−4 ∗Ts , 4 ∗Ts
+ 1)
# remember
i t ’ s not
i n c l u s i v e
of
f i n a l
number
plt . f i g u r e ( f i g s i z e =(13 , 8))
plt . plot ( t , h)
plt . t i t l e ( ’ Root Raised Cosine
F i l t e r ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =24)
plt . show ()
return h
def SNRdb to sigma ( s e l f , SNRdb,
energy=None ,
use gain=False ) :
i f
energy
is None :
energy = np . mean(np . array ( s e l f . symbol seq ) ∗∗2)
SNR = 10 ∗∗(SNRdb / 10)
i f
use gain :
g a i n f a c t o r = np .max(np . convolve ( s e l f . h ,
s e l f . h ))
sigma = np . sqrt ( energy ∗g a i n f a c t o r / SNR)
# ∗g a i n f a c t o r
else :
sigma = np . sqrt ( energy / SNR)
# ∗g a i n f a c t o r
return sigma
def sigma to SNRdb ( s e l f ,
sigma ) :
avg symbol energy = np . mean(np . array ( s e l f . symbol seq ) ∗∗2)
g a i n f a c t o r = np .max(np . convolve ( s e l f . h ,
s e l f . h ))
SNR = avg symbol energy / ( sigma ∗∗2)
SNR with gain = ( avg symbol energy ∗g a i n f a c t o r ) / ( sigma ∗∗2)
SNRdb = 10 ∗np . log10 (SNR)
SNRdb with gain = 10 ∗np . log10 ( SNR with gain )
Page 72
==PAGE:74==
return SNRdb,
SNRdb with gain
def downsample ( s e l f , Rx ) :
downsampled = np . zeros ( len ( s e l f . symbol seq ))
for
i
in range( len ( s e l f . symbol seq ) ) :
downsampled [ i ] = Rx[ s e l f . start sample point + i ∗
s e l f .m]
return downsampled
def
get periods ( s e l f , Rx ) :
blocks = [ ]
s t a r t = s e l f . start sample point −( s e l f .m//2)
for
i
in range( len ( s e l f . symbol seq ) ) :
blocks . append (Rx[ s t a r t+i ∗s e l f .m:
s t a r t + ( i +1)∗s e l f .m] )
return blocks
def
g e t s i g n a l i n b l o c k s ( s e l f , Rx ) :
blocks = [ ]
jump = s e l f . start sample point
for
i
in range( len ( s e l f . symbol seq ) ) :
blocks . append (Rx[ i ∗s e l f .m:
( i ∗s e l f .m)+jump ] )
return blocks
def decision making ( s e l f , downsampled , v=False ) :
chosen symbols = np . zeros ( len ( downsampled ))
for
i
in range( len ( downsampled ) ) :
d i s t s = {}
for s in
s e l f . symbol set :
d i s t s [ s ] = np . l i n a l g . norm( downsampled [ i ] −s )
chosen symbols [ i ] = min( dists ,
key=d i s t s . get )
i f v :
print ( d i s t s )
return chosen symbols
Page 73
==PAGE:75==
def transmission ( s e l f , SNRdb, mode=’ euclidean ’ , model=None ,
j o i n t c u t o f f =2, r x c u t o f f=None , v=False ,
lowpass=’ butter ’ ) :
g a i n f a c t o r = np .max(np . convolve ( s e l f . h ,
s e l f . h ))
upsampled = s e l f . upsample ()
Tx = np . convolve ( upsampled ,
s e l f . h)
i f mode == ’ j o i n t ’ :
sigma = s e l f . SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb,
s e l f .m,
use gain=False ) # pre
i f v :
print ( sigma )
d e c i s i o n s = network sender receiver ( upsampled ,
s e l f . symbol set ,
sigma ,
c u t o f f f r e q=j o i n t c u t o f f ,
models=model ,
lowpass=lowpass )
return d e c i s i o n s
i f mode == ’ network ’ :
sigma = s e l f . SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb,
s e l f .m,
use gain=False ) # pre
#sigma = s e l f . SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb, np . mean( s e l f . symbol seq ∗∗2
i f v :
print ( sigma )
i f
r x c u t o f f
is not None :
b , a = butter lowpass ( rx cutoff ,
s e l f .m,
10)
Tx = f i l t f i l t (b , a , Tx)
#Tx = ideal lowpass (Tx ,
r x c u t o f f ,
s e l f .m)
Tx = Tx / np . sqrt (np . mean(np . square (Tx) ) )
# normalize
s i g n a l
Tx = Tx + np . random . normal (0.0 ,
sigma , Tx. shape )
d e c i s i o n s = network receiver (Tx,
s e l f . symbol set ,
model=model )
return d e c i s i o n s
sigma = s e l f . SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb, np . mean( s e l f . symbol seq ∗∗2) ,
use gain=True )
i f v :
print ( sigma )
Tx = Tx + np . random . normal (0.0 ,
sigma , Tx. shape )
Rx = np . convolve (Tx,
s e l f . h)
downsampled = s e l f . downsample (Rx)/ g a i n f a c t o r
d e c i s i o n s = s e l f . decision making ( downsampled )
Page 74
==PAGE:76==
i f mode == ’ euclidean ’ :
return d e c i s i o n s
e l i f mode == ’ NN decision making ’ :
NN decisions = ML decision making ( downsampled ,
s e l f . symbol set ,
model=model )
return NN decisions
e l i f mode == ’ blocks ’ :
blocks = s e l f . get periods (Rx/ g a i n f a c t o r )
b l o c k d e c i s i o n s = ML downsampling ( blocks ,
s e l f . symbol set ,
model=model )
return b l o c k d e c i s i o n s
print ( ’ no mode s e l e c t e d ’ )
def
t r a n s m i t a l l ( s e l f , SNRdb,
rx model=None ,
joint models=None ,
j o i n t c u t o f f =2, r x c u t o f f=None ,
lowpass=’ butter ’ ) :
# f o r d i
vi
har
normaliseret
er sample
energi
sat
t i l
1 , og
vi
har 8
# a l t s˚a er
avg symbol energy
s˚a 1∗8 for
det
normaliserede
netværk ( n
#sigma euclid = s e l f . SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb, np . mean( s e l f . symbol seq ∗∗
# symbol energy og gain
#sigma network = s e l f . SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb,
8 ,
use gain=False )
e u c l i d d e c i s i o n s = s e l f . transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ euclidean ’ )
NN decisions = s e l f . transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ NN decision making ’ )
b l o c k d e c i s i o n s = s e l f . transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ blocks ’ )
network decisions = s e l f . transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ network ’ ,
model=rx model ,
r x c u t o f f=r x c u t o f f )
j o i n t d e c i s i o n s = s e l f . transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ j o i n t ’ ,
j o i n t c u t o f f=j o i n t c u t o f f ,
model=joint models ,
lowpass=lowpass )
return e u c l i d d e c i s i o n s ,
NN decisions ,
block decisions ,
network decisions ,
j o i n t d e c i s i o n s
Page 75
==PAGE:77==
def transmit small components ( s e l f , SNRdb, NN model=None ,
block model=None ,
block=False ) :
sigma = s e l f . SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb, np . mean( s e l f . symbol seq ∗∗2) ,
use gain=True )
g a i n f a c t o r = np .max(np . convolve ( s e l f . h ,
s e l f . h ))
upsampled = s e l f . upsample ()
Tx = np . convolve ( upsampled ,
s e l f . h)
Tx = Tx + np . random . normal (0.0 ,
sigma , Tx. shape )
Rx = np . convolve (Tx,
s e l f . h)
downsampled = s e l f . downsample (Rx) / g a i n f a c t o r
d e c i s i o n s = s e l f . decision making ( downsampled )
NN decisions = ML decision making ( downsampled ,
s e l f . symbol set ,
model=NN model)
i f
block :
blocks = s e l f . get periods (Rx / g a i n f a c t o r )
b l o c k d e c i s i o n s = ML downsampling ( blocks ,
s e l f . symbol set ,
model=block model )
return decisions ,
NN decisions ,
b l o c k d e c i s i o n s
return decisions ,
NN decisions
def evaluate ( s e l f ,
d e c i s i o n s ) :
num errors = np .sum(np . array ( d e c i s i o n s ) != np . array ( s e l f . symbol seq )
e r r o r r a t e = num errors / len ( s e l f . symbol seq )
# print (’{}% error
rate ’. format (np . round ( error rate ∗100 ,
4)))
return num errors ,
e r r o r r a t e
def SNR plot ( num symbols=10000, rx model=None ,
joint models=None ,
j o i n t c u t o f f =0.675 ,
r x c u t o f f=None ,
all components=False ,
lowpass=’ butter ’ , range=[0 ,
19] , num SNRs=50):
symbol set = [3 ,
1 , −1, −3]
# a l l
symbols
that we use
Page 76
==PAGE:78==
symbol seq = np . random . choice ( symbol set ,
num symbols ,
replace=True )
CS = Comms System( symbol set=symbol set ,
symbol seq=symbol seq ,
num samples=8, beta =0.35)
SNRdbs = np . linspace (range [ 0 ] , range [ 1 ] , num SNRs) # 0 , 19 , 50
e u c l i d e r r o r r a t e s = np . zeros ( len (SNRdbs))
NN error rates = np . zeros ( len (SNRdbs))
b l o c k e r r o r r a t e s = np . zeros ( len (SNRdbs))
network error rates = np . zeros ( len (SNRdbs))
j o i n t e r r o r r a t e s = np . zeros ( len (SNRdbs))
avg symbol energy = np . mean( symbol seq ∗∗2)
print ( ’Avg symbol energy ’ ,
avg symbol energy )
g a i n f a c t o r = np .max(np . convolve (CS. h , CS. h ))
print ( ’ gain ’ ,
g a i n f a c t o r )
# f o r d i
vi
har
normaliseret
er sample
energi
sat
t i l
1 , og
vi
har 8 samp
# a l t s˚a er
avg symbol energy
s˚a 1∗8 for
det
normaliserede
netværk ( norm
for i , SNRdb in enumerate(SNRdbs ) :
#sigma euclid = CS. SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb,
avg symbol energy ,
use gain
# symbol energy og gain
#sigma network = CS. SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb,
8 ,
use gain=False )
e u c l i d d e c i s i o n s = CS. transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ euclidean ’ )
network decisions = CS. transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ network ’ ,
model=rx model ,
r x c u t o f f=r x c u t o f f )
j o i n t d e c i s i o n s = CS. transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ j o i n t ’ ,
j o i n t c u t o f f=j o i n t c u t o f f ,
model=joint models ,
lowpass=lowpass )
i f
all components :
NN decisions = CS. transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ NN decision making ’ )
b l o c k d e c i s i o n s = CS. transmission (SNRdb, mode=’ blocks ’ )
NN error rates [ i ] = CS. evaluate ( NN decisions ) [ 1 ]
b l o c k e r r o r r a t e s [ i ] = CS. evaluate ( b l o c k d e c i s i o n s ) [ 1 ]
e u c l i d e r r o r r a t e s [ i ] = CS. evaluate ( e u c l i d d e c i s i o n s ) [ 1 ]
network error rates [ i ] = CS. evaluate ( network decisions ) [ 1 ]
j o i n t e r r o r r a t e s [ i ] = CS. evaluate ( j o i n t d e c i s i o n s ) [ 1 ]
Page 77
==PAGE:79==
sigmas = np . array ( [CS. SNRdb to sigma (SNRdb,
avg symbol energy ,
use gain=True ) for SNRdb in SNRdbs ] )
error theory = 1.5 ∗(1 −norm . cdf (np . sqrt ( g a i n f a c t o r / sigmas ∗∗2)))
return SNRdbs ,
e u c l i d e r r o r r a t e s ,
network error rates ,
NN error rates ,
.1.2
ML Components
import numpy as np
from Network import NeuralNetwork
import torch
import torchaudio
from
f i l t e r s
import butter lowpass
def load params ( w e i g h t f i l e ,
b i a s f i l e ) :
w container = np . load ( w e i g h t f i l e )
b container = np . load ( b i a s f i l e )
weights = [ w container [ key ]
for key in w container ]
biases = [ b container [ key ]
for key in b container ]
s i z e s = [ weights [ 0 ] . shape [ 0 ] ]
for
i
in range( len ( weights ) ) :
s i z e s . append ( weights [ i ] . shape [ 1 ] )
return weights ,
biases ,
s i z e s
def network sender receiver ( upsampled ,
classes ,
sigma =0.89 ,
c u t o f f f r e q =2, p
c l a s s e s = np . array ( c l a s s e s )
upsampled = torch . Tensor ( upsampled ) . view (1 ,
1 , −1)
i f
models
is None :
NN tx = torch . load ( path + ’ DE SenderButter0675 Best ’ )
NN rx = torch . load ( path + ’ DE ReceiverButter0675 Best ’ )
else :
NN tx , NN rx = models
Page 78
==PAGE:80==
i f
lowpass == ’ butter ’ :
b , a = butter lowpass ( c u t o f f f r e q ,
8 , 10) # 8 er sample
rate .
Skal æ
b = torch . tensor (b ,
requires grad=True ) . float ()
a = torch . tensor (a ,
requires grad=True ) . float ()
Tx = NN tx( upsampled )
i f
lowpass == ’ butter ’ :
# Send
f i l t e r e d
s i g n a l
through
lowpass
f i l t e r
Tx = torchaudio . functional . f i l t f i l t (Tx, a , b)
e l i f
lowpass == ’ i d e a l ’ :
Tx freq = torch . f f t . r f f t (Tx)
xf = torch . f f t . r f f t f r e q (Tx. shape [ 2 ] ,
1 / 8)
Tx freq [ 0 ] [ 0 ] [ xf > c u t o f f f r e q ] = 0
Tx = torch . f f t . i r f f t ( Tx freq , n=Tx. shape [ 2 ] )
# Normalize
s i g n a l
Tx = Tx / torch . sqrt ( torch . mean( torch . square (Tx) ) )
# Transmit
s i g n a l
Tx = Tx + torch . normal (0.0 ,
sigma , Tx. shape )
output = NN rx(Tx ) [ 0 ] .T
d e c i s i o n s = c l a s s e s [ output . argmax ( axis =1)]
return d e c i s i o n s
def ML filtering ( blocks ,
classes ,
model=None ) :
X = np . array ( blocks )
c l a s s e s = np . array ( c l a s s e s )
i f
model is not None :
return
c l a s s e s [ model . feedforward (X) . argmax ( axis =1)]
w, b ,
s i z e s = load params ( ’ . . / Weights/ b e s t f i l t e r w e i g h t s 8 . npz ’ ,
’ . . / Weights/ b e s t f i l t e r b i a s e s 8 . npz ’ )
best agent = NeuralNetwork ( sizes ,
startweights=w,
s t a r t b i a s e s=b ,
type=’ c l a s s i f i c a t i o n ’ , afunc=’ relu ’ )
Page 79
==PAGE:81==
return
c l a s s e s [ best agent . feedforward (X) . argmax ( axis =1)]
def network receiver (Rx,
classes ,
model=None ,
path=’ . . / Conv1DModels/ ’ ) :
X = torch . tensor (Rx ) . view (1 ,
1 ,
−1). float ()
c l a s s e s = np . array ( c l a s s e s )
i f
model is None :
model = torch . load ( path + ’ Best DE Model2 ’ )
return
c l a s s e s [ model (X) . argmax ( axis =1)]
def ML downsampling ( blocks ,
classes ,
model=None ) :
X = np . array ( blocks )
c l a s s e s = np . array ( c l a s s e s )
i f
model is not None :
return
c l a s s e s [ model . feedforward (X) . argmax ( axis =1)]
w, b ,
s i z e s = load params ( ’ . . / Weights/ block decision making weights . npz ’
’ . . / Weights/ block decision making biases . npz ’ )
best agent = NeuralNetwork ( sizes ,
startweights=w,
s t a r t b i a s e s=b ,
type=’ c l a s s i f i c a t i o n ’ , afunc=’ relu ’ )
return
c l a s s e s [ best agent . feedforward (X) . argmax ( axis =1)]
def ML decision making ( downsampled ,
classes ,
model=None ,
w path=’ . . / Weights/ decision making weights . npz ’ ,
b path=’ . . / Weights/ decision making biases . npz ’ ) :
X = np . array ( downsampled , ndmin=2).T
c l a s s e s = np . array ( c l a s s e s )
i f
model is not None :
NN decisions = c l a s s e s [ model . feedforward (X) . argmax ( axis =1)]
Page 80
==PAGE:82==
else :
weights ,
biases ,
s i z e s = load params ( w path ,
b path )
best agent = NeuralNetwork ( sizes ,
startweights=weights ,
s t a r t b i a s e s=biases ,
type=’ c l a s s i f i c a t i o n ’ , afunc=’ relu ’ )
NN decisions = c l a s s e s [ best agent . feedforward (X) . argmax ( axis =1)]
return NN decisions
.1.3
Filters
from scipy import s i g n a l
import scipy
import torch
def butter lowpass ( c u t o f f f r e q ,
sampling rate ,
order =4):
nyquist freq = 0.5 ∗sampling rate
normalized cutoff = c u t o f f f r e q
/ nyquist freq
b , a = s i g n a l . butter ( order ,
normalized cutoff ,
’ low ’ )
return b , a
def
ideal lowpass ( signal ,
c u t o f f f r e q ,
sampling rate ) :
Tx freq = scipy . f f t . r f f t ( s i g n a l )
xf = scipy . f f t . r f f t f r e q ( s i g n a l . shape [ 0 ] ,
1 / sampling rate )
Tx freq [ xf > c u t o f f f r e q ] = 0
Tx low = scipy . f f t . i r f f t ( Tx freq , n=s i g n a l . shape [ 0 ] )
return Tx low
def
ideal lowpass torch ( signal ,
c u t o f f f r e q ,
sample rate ) :
s i g n a l = s i g n a l . view (1 ,1 , −1)
Tx freq = torch . f f t . r f f t ( s i g n a l )
xf = torch . f f t . r f f t f r e q ( s i g n a l . shape [ 2 ] ,
1 / sample rate )
Tx freq [ 0 ] [ 0 ] [ xf > c u t o f f f r e q ] = 0
Tx low = torch . f f t . i r f f t ( Tx freq , n=s i g n a l . shape [ 2 ] )
return Tx low
Page 81
==PAGE:83==
.2
Appendix B: Diﬀerential Evolution
.2.1
Receiver Filter
class DE:
def
i n i t
( s e l f ,
objective function ,
population function , X, y ,
Xtest=None ,
ytest=None ,
pop size =50,
F=0.5 ,
cr =0.5 ,
start agent=None ,
use cuda=False ) :
i f
use cuda and torch . cuda . i s a v a i l a b l e :
s e l f . device = torch . device ( ’ cuda ’ )
print ( ’ Using GPU’ )
else :
s e l f . device = torch . device ( ’ cpu ’ )
s e l f . obj = o b j e c t i v e f u n c t i o n
s e l f .X = X. to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . y = y . long ( ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f .N = pop size
s e l f . pop func = population function
s e l f .F = torch . Tensor ( [F ] ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . cr = torch . Tensor ( [ cr ] ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . pop = [ population function ( ) . to ( s e l f . device ) for
i
in
range( pop size ) ]
s e l f . testNN = population function ( ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . t e s t c o s t = False
i f
start agent
is not None :
s e l f . pop [ 0 ] = copy . deepcopy ( start agent )
i f
Xtest
is not None and ytest
is not None :
s e l f . Xtest = Xtest . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . ytest = ytest . long ( ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . t e s t c o s t = True
def save model ( s e l f , fname ,
path=’ . . / Conv1DModels/ ’ , agent=None ) :
i f
agent
is None :
agent = s e l f . best agent
torch . save ( agent ,
path+fname )
def load model ( s e l f , fname ,
path=’ . . / Conv1DModels/ ’ ) :
return torch . load ( path+fname )
Page 82
==PAGE:84==
def NN obj ( s e l f ,
agent ) :
yhat = agent ( s e l f .X) [ 0 ] .T
return
s e l f . obj ( yhat ,
s e l f . y)
def mutation ( s e l f ,
nets ) :
for
testp , p1 , p2 , p3 in zip ( ∗[ net . parameters ()
for net in nets ] ) :
testp . data = p1 + s e l f .F ∗(p2 −p3 )
pass
def crossover ( s e l f ,
target ) :
for dw, tw in zip ( s e l f . testNN . parameters () ,
target . parameters ( ) ) :
c r i t = torch . rand (dw. shape ,
device=s e l f . device ) < s e l f . cr
t r i a l w = c r i t
∗dw + ˜ c r i t
∗tw
dw. data = t r i a l w
pass
def evolution ( s e l f ,
num epochs ,
verbose=False ,
print epoch =1000):
# evaluate
the
i n i t i a l i z e d
population
with
the
o b j e c t i v e
function
o b j a l l = torch . Tensor ( [ s e l f . NN obj ( agent ) for agent in
s e l f . pop ] )
# find
the
best
agent
within
the
i n i t i a l
population
s e l f . best agent = s e l f . pop [ torch . argmin ( o b j a l l ) ]
best obj = torch .min( o b j a l l )
prev obj = best obj
s e l f . best objs = np . zeros ( num epochs + 1)
s e l f . best objs [ 0 ] = best obj
i f
s e l f . t e s t c o s t :
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s = np . zeros ( num epochs + 1)
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s [ 0 ] = s e l f . obj ( s e l f . best agent (
s e l f . Xtest ) [ 0 ] . T,
s e l f . ytest )
Page 83
==PAGE:85==
for
i
in range( num epochs ) :
for j , x in enumerate( s e l f . pop ) :
choice = np . random . choice (np . delete (np . arange ( s e l f .N) ,
j ) ,
3 ,
replace=False )
a , b ,
c = itemgetter (∗choice )( s e l f . pop)
# a , b ,
c = s e l f . pop [ np . random . choice (np . d e l e t e (np . arange ( s e
# Mutation
s e l f . mutation ( [ s e l f . testNN , a , b ,
c ] )
# Crossover
s e l f . crossover (x)
# Selection
obj u = s e l f . NN obj ( s e l f . testNN )
i f
obj u < s e l f . NN obj (x ) :
s e l f . pop [ j ] = copy . deepcopy ( s e l f . testNN )
o b j a l l [ j ] = obj u
# update
the
current
best
o b j e c t i v e
function
value
best obj = torch .min( o b j a l l )
s e l f . best objs [ i + 1] = best obj
i f
best obj < prev obj :
# update
best
agent
s e l f . best agent = s e l f . pop [ torch . argmin ( o b j a l l ) ]
# update
previous
solution
to
use
for
next
i t e r a t i o n
prev obj = best obj
i f
s e l f . t e s t c o s t :
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s [ i + 1] = s e l f . obj ( s e l f . best agent ( s e l f . X
i f
verbose and i % print epoch == 0:
# report
progress
at each
i t e r a t i o n
print ( ’%d :
cost= %.5 f ’ % ( i ,
best obj ))
print ( ’%d :
t e s t c o s t= %.5 f ’ % ( i ,
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s [ i + 1 ] )
print ( ’%d :
acc= %.5 f ’ % ( i ,
s e l f . accuracy ( s e l f . best agent ( s e
print ( ’%d :
testacc= %.5 f ’ % ( i ,
s e l f . accuracy ( s e l f . best agen
Page 84
==PAGE:86==
plt . plot ( l i s t ( s e l f . best agent . parameters ( ) ) [ 0 ] . cpu ( ) . detach (
plt . show ()
return
s e l f . best agent
def evaluate ( s e l f ,
plot function=None ,
agent=None ,
bounds=None ,
t i t l e=’
’ ) :
i f
agent
is None :
agent = s e l f . best agent
plt . f i g u r e ( f i g s i z e =(13 , 8))
plt . plot (range( len ( s e l f . best objs )) ,
s e l f . best objs )
plt . plot (range( len ( s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s )) ,
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s )
plt . t i t l e ( ’ Training Graph ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =24)
plt . xlabel ( ’ I t e r a t i o n s ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . ylabel ( ’ Cost ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . legend ( [ ’ Train ’ ,
’ Test ’ ] ,
f o n t s i z e =14)
plt . show ()
i f
plot function
is not None :
plot function ( agent ,
s e l f . Xtest ,
s e l f . ytest ,
t i t l e=t i t l e ,
s a v e f i g=False )
print ( f ”Best agent
i s
{agent} with a train
cost
of
{np . round ( s e l f . NN obj ( agent ) . cpu ( ) . detach () ,
5)}. ” )
print ( f ”And a t e s t
cost
of {np . round ( s e l f . obj ( agent ( s e l f . Xtest ) [ 0 ] . T
s e l f . ytest ) . cpu ( ) . detach () ,
5)}” )
# print ( f ”Worst
i n i t i a l i z a t i o n
was { s e l f . i n i t i a l w o r s t a g e n t } with a
# {np . round ( s e l f . obj ( s e l f . i n i t i a l w o r s t a g e n t ) ,
2)}.”)
pass
def accuracy ( s e l f ,
predictions ,
ytest ) :
predictions = predictions . argmax ( axis =1)
correct preds = ytest == predictions
return torch .sum( correct preds ) / len ( ytest )
def
e a r l y s t o p t r a i n i n g ( s e l f ,
patience ,
measure=’ cost ’ , eval=True ,
Page 85
==PAGE:87==
v=True ) :
n = 1
i t e r a t i o n s = 0
i f
measure == ’ cost ’ :
n o i t e r a t i o n s r i s i n g = 0
v a l e r r o r = 20000
o b j a l l = torch . Tensor ( [ s e l f . NN obj ( agent ) for agent in
s e l f . pop ] )
s e l f . opt agent = copy . deepcopy ( s e l f . pop [ torch . argmin ( o b j a l l ) ] )
o p t i t e r a t i o n s = i t e r a t i o n s
t e s t c o s t s = [ ]
while ( n o i t e r a t i o n s r i s i n g < patience ) :
s e l f . evolution ( num epochs=n ,
verbose=False ,
print epoch =1)
i t e r a t i o n s = i t e r a t i o n s + n
val error new = s e l f . obj ( s e l f . best agent ( s e l f . Xtest ) [ 0 ] . T,
s
t e s t c o s t s . append ( val error new . item ( ) )
i f
( val error new < v a l e r r o r ) :
i f v :
print ( f ”{ i t e r a t i o n s }:
Test Cost
Falling
{ val error new }” )
n o i t e r a t i o n s r i s i n g = 0
s e l f . opt agent = copy . deepcopy ( s e l f . best agent )
o p t i t e r a t i o n s = i t e r a t i o n s
v a l e r r o r = val error new
else :
n o i t e r a t i o n s r i s i n g += n
t e s t c o s t s = np . array ( t e s t c o s t s )
i f v :
print ( ”Optimal number of
i t e r a t i o n s : ” ,
o p t i t e r a t i o n s )
print ( ”Best
error : ” ,
v a l e r r o r )
print ( ” Error at stop : ” ,
val error new )
e l i f
measure == ’ accuracy ’ :
n o i t e r a t i o n s f a l l i n g = 0
val acc = 0
o p t i t e r a t i o n s = i t e r a t i o n s
t e s t c o s t s = [ ]
Page 86
==PAGE:88==
o b j a l l = torch . Tensor ( [ s e l f . NN obj ( agent ) for agent in
s e l f . pop ] )
s e l f . opt agent = copy . deepcopy ( s e l f . pop [ torch . argmin ( o b j a l l ) ] )
while ( n o i t e r a t i o n s f a l l i n g < patience ) :
s e l f . evolution ( num epochs=n ,
verbose=False ,
print epoch =1)
i t e r a t i o n s = i t e r a t i o n s + n
val acc new = s e l f . accuracy ( s e l f . best agent ( s e l f . Xtest ) ,
s e l f . ytest )
t e s t c o s t s . append ( val acc new . item ( ) )
i f
( val acc new > val acc ) :
i f v :
print ( f ”{ i t e r a t i o n s }:
Test Accuracy Rising
{ val acc new }” )
n o i t e r a t i o n s f a l l i n g = 0
s e l f . opt agent = copy . deepcopy ( s e l f . best agent )
o p t i t e r a t i o n s = i t e r a t i o n s
val acc = val acc new
else :
n o i t e r a t i o n s f a l l i n g += n
# print (” Falling
or the same”)
i f v :
print ( ”Optimal number of
i t e r a t i o n s : ” ,
o p t i t e r a t i o n s )
print ( ”Best accuracy : ” ,
val acc )
print ( ”Accuracy at stop : ” ,
val acc new )
i f
eval :
plt . f i g u r e ( f i g s i z e =(13 , 8))
plt . plot ( t e s t c o s t s )
plt . t i t l e ( ’ Test Cost Graph ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =24)
plt . xlabel ( ’ I t e r a t i o n s ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . ylabel ( ’ Test Cost ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . show ()
return
s e l f . best agent ,
s e l f . opt agent
.2.2
Joint Training
Page 87
==PAGE:89==
class DE:
def
i n i t
( s e l f ,
objective function ,
pop fun , X, y ,
Xtest=None ,
ytest=None ,
pop size =50,F=0.5 , cr =0.5 ,
use cuda=False ,
lowpass=’ butter ’ ,
c u t o f f f r e q =0.675 ,
sample rate =8, SNRdb=10, start agent=None ,
noise=’ constant ’ ) :
i f
use cuda and torch . cuda . i s a v a i l a b l e :
s e l f . device = torch . device ( ’ cuda ’ )
print ( ’ Using GPU’ )
else :
s e l f . device = torch . device ( ’ cpu ’ )
s e l f . obj = o b j e c t i v e f u n c t i o n
s e l f .X = X. to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . y = y . long ( ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f .N = pop size
s e l f .F = torch . Tensor ( [F ] ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . cr = torch . Tensor ( [ cr ] ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . pop = [ pop fun ()
for
i
in range( pop size ) ]
s e l f . pop = [ ( net tx . to ( s e l f . device ) ,
net rx . to ( s e l f . device ))
for
net tx ,
net rx in
s e l f . pop ]
s e l f . testNN = ( pop fun ( ) [ 0 ] . to ( s e l f . device ) ,
pop fun ( ) [ 1 ] . to ( s e l f . device ))
s e l f . lowpass = lowpass
s e l f . c u t o f f = c u t o f f f r e q
s e l f . sample rate = sample rate
SNR = 10 ∗∗(SNRdb / 10)
s e l f . sigma = np . sqrt ( sample rate / SNR)
s e l f . noise = noise
i f
start agent
is not None :
s e l f . pop [ 0 ] = copy . deepcopy ( start agent )
i f
Xtest
is not None and ytest
is not None :
s e l f . Xtest = Xtest . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . ytest = ytest . long ( ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . t e s t c o s t = True
i f
s e l f . lowpass == ’ butter ’ :
s e l f . b ,
s e l f . a = butter lowpass ( c u t o f f f r e q ,
sample rate ,
10)
s e l f . b = torch . tensor ( s e l f . b ) . float ( ) . to ( s e l f . device )
s e l f . a = torch . tensor ( s e l f . a ) . float ( ) . to ( s e l f . device )
Page 88
==PAGE:90==
def save model ( s e l f , fname ,
path=’ . . / Joint Models / ’ , agent=None ) :
i f
agent
is None :
agent = s e l f . best agent
torch . save ( agent ,
path+fname )
def load model ( s e l f , fname ,
path=’ . . / Joint Models / ’ ) :
return torch . load ( path+fname )
def get x chosen ( s e l f ,
y chosen ) :
y chosen = y chosen [ y chosen < s e l f . y . shape [ 0 ] ]
y start ,
y end = y chosen [ 0 ] ,
y chosen [ −1]
x chosen = torch . arange ( y s t a r t ∗8 , ( y end + 1) ∗8 ,
device=s e l f . device )
x chosen = x chosen [ x chosen < s e l f .X. shape [ 2 ] ]
return x chosen
def NN obj ( s e l f ,
agent ,
x chosen ,
y chosen ,
noise=’ variable ’ ,
Xtest=None ,
ytest=None ) :
NN tx , NN rx = agent
i f
Xtest
is not None :
X = Xtest
y = ytest
else :
X = s e l f .X
y = s e l f . y
Tx = NN tx(X[ : , : , x chosen ] )
i f
s e l f . lowpass == ’ butter ’ :
Tx low = torchaudio . functional . f i l t f i l t (Tx,
s e l f . a ,
s e l f . b)
e l i f
s e l f . lowpass == ’ i d e a l ’ :
Tx freq = torch . f f t . r f f t (Tx)
xf = torch . f f t . r f f t f r e q (Tx. shape [ 2 ] ,
1 /
s e l f . sample rate )
Tx freq [ 0 ] [ 0 ] [ xf > s e l f . c u t o f f ] = 0
Tx low = torch . f f t . i r f f t ( Tx freq , n=Tx. shape [ 2 ] )
Page 89
==PAGE:91==
Tx low = Tx low / torch . sqrt ( torch . mean( torch . square ( Tx low ) ) )
# normalize
i f
noise == ’ constant ’ :
Tx low = Tx low + s e l f . n o i s e s i g n a l
e l i f
noise == ’ variable ’ :
Tx low = Tx low + torch . normal (0.0 ,
s e l f . sigma ,
Tx low . shape ,
device=s e l f . device )
received = NN rx( Tx low ) [ 0 ] .T
return
s e l f . obj ( received , y [ y chosen ] )
def mutation ( s e l f ,
nets ) :
for
testp , p1 , p2 , p3 in zip ( ∗[ net . parameters ()
for net in nets ] ) :
testp . data = p1 + s e l f .F ∗(p2 −p3 )
pass
def crossover ( s e l f ,
donor ,
target ) :
for dw, tw in zip ( donor . parameters () ,
target . parameters ( ) ) :
c r i t = torch . rand (dw. shape ,
device=s e l f . device ) < s e l f . cr
t r i a l w = c r i t
∗dw + ˜ c r i t
∗tw
dw. data = t r i a l w
pass
def evolve ( s e l f ,
x chosen ,
y chosen ) :
for j , x in enumerate( s e l f . pop ) :
choice = np . random . choice (np . delete (np . arange ( s e l f .N) ,
j ) ,
3 ,
replace=False )
a , b ,
c = itemgetter (∗choice )( s e l f . pop)
# Mutation
s e l f . mutation ( [ s e l f . testNN [ 0 ] ,
a [ 0 ] , b [ 0 ] ,
c [ 0 ] ] )
# for Tx
s e l f . mutation ( [ s e l f . testNN [ 1 ] ,
a [ 1 ] , b [ 1 ] ,
c [ 1 ] ] )
# for Rx
Page 90
==PAGE:92==
# Crossover
s e l f . crossover ( s e l f . testNN [ 0 ] , x [ 0 ] )
# Tx
s e l f . crossover ( s e l f . testNN [ 1 ] , x [ 1 ] )
# Rx
# Selection
obj u = s e l f . NN obj ( s e l f . testNN ,
x chosen ,
y chosen ,
noise=s e l f .
i f
obj u < s e l f . NN obj (x ,
x chosen ,
y chosen ,
noise=s e l f . noise ) :
s e l f . pop [ j ] = copy . deepcopy ( s e l f . testNN )
s e l f . o b j a l l [ j ] = obj u
def evolution ( s e l f ,
num epochs ,
batch size ,
verbose=False ,
print epoch =1000, print mini=False ,
k print =10, noise=’ constant ’ ) :
idx x = np . arange ( s e l f .X. shape [ 2 ] )
idx y = np . arange ( s e l f . y . shape [ 0 ] )
i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h = s e l f . y . shape [ 0 ]
// batch size
s e l f . n o i s e s i g n a l = torch . normal (0.0 ,
s e l f . sigma ,
torch . Tensor ( batch size ∗8+63). shape ,
device=s e l f . device )
y chosens = [ ]
for k in range( i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h ) :
y chosens . append ( torch . arange (k ∗batch size ,
(k + 1) ∗
batch size ,
device=s e l f . device ))
# evaluate
the
i n i t i a l i z e d
population
with
the
o b j e c t i v e
function . O
s e l f . o b j a l l = torch . Tensor ( [ s e l f . NN obj ( agent ,
idx x ,
idx y ) for
agent in
s e l f . pop ] )
# find
the
best
agent
within
the
i n i t i a l
population
s e l f . best agent = s e l f . pop [ torch . argmin ( s e l f . o b j a l l ) ]
best obj = torch .min( s e l f . o b j a l l )
prev obj = best obj
s e l f . best objs = np . zeros ( num epochs + 1)
s e l f . best objs [ 0 ] = best obj
i f
s e l f . t e s t c o s t :
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s = np . zeros ( num epochs + 1)
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s [ 0 ] = s e l f . NN obj ( s e l f . best agent ,
idx x ,
Page 91
==PAGE:93==
idx y ,
Xtest=s e l f . Xtest ,
ytest=s e l f . ytest )
for
i
in range( num epochs ) :
#idx y = torch . arange ( s e l f . y . shape [ 0 ] ,
device=s e l f . device ) . f l o a t
np . random . s h u f f l e ( y chosens )
for k in range( i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h ) :
x chosen = s e l f . get x chosen ( y chosens [ k ] )
s e l f . evolve ( x chosen ,
y chosens [ k ] )
# update
the
current
best
o b j e c t i v e
function
value
best obj = torch .min( s e l f . o b j a l l )
s e l f . best objs [ i + 1] = best obj
i f
print mini and k % k print == 0:
print ( ’%d :
cost= %.5 f ’ % ( i ,
best obj ))
i f
best obj < prev obj :
# update
best
agent
s e l f . best agent = s e l f . pop [ torch . argmin ( s e l f . o b j a l l ) ]
# update
previous
solution
to
use
for
next
i t e r a t i o n
prev obj = best obj
i f
s e l f . t e s t c o s t :
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s [ i +1] = s e l f . NN obj ( s e l f . best agent ,
idx x ,
idx y ,
Xtest=s e l f . Xtest ,
ytest=s e l f . ytest )
i f
verbose and i % print epoch == 0:
# report
progress
at each
i t e r a t i o n
print ( ’%d :
cost= %.5 f ’ % ( i ,
best obj ))
print ( ’%d :
t e s t c o s t= %.5 f ’ % ( i ,
s e l f . b e s t t e s t o b j s [ i + 1 ] )
#print (’%d :
acc= %.5 f ’ % ( i ,
s e l f . accuracy ( s e l f . best agent [ 1
#p l t . p l o t ( l i s t ( s e l f . best agent [ 0 ] . parameters ( ) ) [ 0 ] . cpu ( ) . det
#p l t . p l o t ( l i s t ( s e l f . best agent [ 1 ] . parameters ( ) ) [ 0 ] . cpu ( ) . det
plt . show ()
return
s e l f . best agent
Page 92
==PAGE:94==
.3
Appendix C: Backpropagation
import torch
import torch . nn
import torchaudio
import matplotlib . pyplot as
plt
from
f i l t e r s
import butter lowpass
import numpy as np
def compute loss ( model , X, y ,
c r i t e r i o n ) :
output = model (X) [ 0 ] .T
l o s s = c r i t e r i o n ( output , y)
return
l o s s . item ()
def
t r a i n l o o p ( model ,
optimizer ,
cost ,
Xtrain ,
ytrain ,
Xtest=None ,
ytest=None ,
epochs =100, use cuda=False ,
eval=False ,
p l o t i t e r a t i o n =1000):
# device = torch . device ( ’ cuda ’)
i f
torch . cuda available
e l s e
torch . devic
i f
torch . cuda . i s a v a i l a b l e and use cuda :
device = torch . device ( ’ cuda ’ )
print ( ’ Using GPU’ )
else :
device = torch . device ( ’ cpu ’ )
print ( ’ Using CPU’ )
Xtrain ,
ytrain = Xtrain . to ( device ) ,
ytrain . to ( device )
Xtest ,
ytest = Xtest . to ( device ) ,
ytest . to ( device )
e p o c h l o s s e s t r a i n = torch . zeros ( epochs )
e p o c h l o s s e s t e s t = torch . zeros ( epochs )
for
i
in range( epochs ) :
model . train ()
inputs = Xtrain #. view (1 , 1 ,
−1). f l o a t ()
l a b e l s = ytrain
optimizer . zero grad ()
Page 93
==PAGE:95==
output = model ( inputs ) [ 0 ] .T
l o s s = cost ( output ,
l a b e l s . long ( ) )
l o s s . backward ()
optimizer . step ()
# model .
i f
eval :
model . eval ()
with torch . no grad ( ) :
t e s t l o s s = compute loss ( model ,
Xtest ,
ytest . long () ,
cost )
e p o c h l o s s e s t r a i n [ i ] = l o s s . item ()
e p o c h l o s s e s t e s t [ i ] = t e s t l o s s
i f
i % p l o t i t e r a t i o n == 0:
print ( ”Epoch %d : \n Train Loss : %s \n Test Loss : %s” %
( i ,
l o s s . item () ,
t e s t l o s s ))
plt . plot ( l i s t ( model . parameters ( ) ) [ 0 ] . cpu ( ) . detach ( ) [ 0 ] [ 0
# p l t . p l o t ( l i s t (NN. parameters ( ) ) [ 1 ] . detach ())
plt . show ()
#print ( l o s s . item ())
return e p o c h l o s s e s t e s t ,
e p o c h l o s s e s t r a i n
def
j o i n t t r a i n l o o p (NN tx , NN rx , X, y ,
optimizer ,
cost ,
epochs =100,
SNRdb=10,
c u t o f f f r e q =2,
p l o t i t e r a t i o n =300, sample rate =8, use cuda=False ,
v=False ,
lowpass=’ butter ’ ) :
SNR = 10 ∗∗(SNRdb / 10)
sigma = np . sqrt ( sample rate / SNR) # 8 here
being
the sample
rate .
Chang
print ( sigma )
i f
torch . cuda . i s a v a i l a b l e and use cuda :
device = torch . device ( ’ cuda ’ )
Page 94
==PAGE:96==
print ( ’ Using GPU’ )
else :
device = torch . device ( ’ cpu ’ )
print ( ’ Using CPU’ )
NN tx , NN rx = NN tx . to ( device ) , NN rx . to ( device )
X, y = X. to ( device ) , y . long ( ) . to ( device )
e p o c h l o s s e s t r a i n = torch . zeros ( epochs ) . to ( device )
i f
lowpass == ’ butter ’ :
b , a = butter lowpass ( c u t o f f f r e q ,
sample rate ,
10)
b = torch . tensor (b ,
requires grad=True ) . float ( ) . to ( device )
a = torch . tensor (a ,
requires grad=True ) . float ( ) . to ( device )
for
i
in range( epochs ) :
Tx = NN tx(X)
# Send
f i l t e r e d
s i g n a l
through
lowpass
f i l t e r
i f
lowpass == ’ butter ’ :
Tx low = torchaudio . functional . f i l t f i l t (Tx, a , b)
e l i f
lowpass == ’ i d e a l ’ :
Tx freq = torch . f f t . r f f t (Tx)
xf = torch . f f t . r f f t f r e q (Tx. shape [ 2 ] ,
1/ sample rate )
Tx freq [ 0 ] [ 0 ] [ xf > c u t o f f f r e q ] = 0
Tx low = torch . f f t . i r f f t ( Tx freq , n=Tx. shape [ 2 ] )
Tx low = Tx low / torch . sqrt ( torch . mean( torch . square ( Tx low ) ) ) # nor
Tx low = Tx low + torch . normal (0.0 ,
sigma ,
Tx low . shape ,
device=device )
received = NN rx( Tx low ) [ 0 ] .T
optimizer . zero grad ()
l o s s = cost ( received , y)
l o s s . backward ()
optimizer . step ()
e p o c h l o s s e s t r a i n [ i ] = l o s s . item ()
i f v and i % p l o t i t e r a t i o n == 0:
Page 95
==PAGE:97==
print ( i , ” l o s s : ” ,
l o s s . item ( ) )
acc = torch .sum( received . argmax ( axis =1) == y) / len (y)
print ( i , ” acc : ” , acc . item ( ) )
plt . f i g u r e ()
plt . t i t l e ( ’ Sender Weights ’ )
plt . plot ( l i s t (NN tx . parameters ( ) ) [ 0 ] . to ( ’ cpu ’ ) . detach ( ) [ 0 ] [ 0 ] )
plt . show ()
plt . magnitude spectrum ( l i s t (NN tx . parameters ( ) ) [ 0 ] . to ( ’ cpu ’ ) . det
Fs=sample rate ,
color=’C1 ’ ,
s i d e s=’ twosid
plt . show ()
plt . f i g u r e ()
plt . t i t l e ( ’ Receiver Weights ’ )
plt . plot ( l i s t (NN rx . parameters ( ) ) [ 0 ] . to ( ’ cpu ’ ) . detach ( ) [ 0 ] [ 0 ] )
plt . show ()
plt . magnitude spectrum ( l i s t (NN rx . parameters ( ) ) [ 0 ] . to ( ’ cpu ’ ) . det
Fs=sample rate ,
color=’C1 ’ ,
s i d e s=’ twosid
plt . show ()
return
e p o c h l o s s e s t r a i n
.4
NumPy Neural Network Framework
import numpy as np
import random
import matplotlib . pyplot as
plt
import pandas as pd
from tqdm import tqdm
from sklearn . metrics import confusion matrix
# # The Framework
class NeuralNetwork :
def
i n i t
( s e l f ,
sizes ,
l r =0.01 , type=’ c l a s s i f i c a t i o n ’ , afunc=’ tanh ’ ,
Page 96
==PAGE:98==
s e l f . num layers = len ( s i z e s )
s e l f . s i z e s = s i z e s
s e l f . biases = [ np . random . randn (1 , y) for y in
s i z e s [ 1 : ] ]
# List
of
bias −l i s t s .
s e l f . weights = [ np . random . randn (x , y)/np . sqrt (x) for x , y in zip ( s i z e s
# s e l f . biases = [ np . random . uniform ( bounds [ 0 ] ,
bounds [ 1 ] ,
(1 , y ))
for
# s e l f . weights = [ np . random . uniform ( bounds [ 0 ] ,
bounds [ 1 ] ,
(x , y ))
fo
s e l f . l r = l r
s e l f . type = type
s e l f . use softmax = softmax
i f
afunc == ’ tanh ’ :
s e l f . afunction = ActivationFunctions . tanh
s e l f . derivfunction = ActivationFunctions . tanhPrime
e l i f
afunc == ’ relu ’ :
s e l f . afunction = ActivationFunctions . ReLu
s e l f . derivfunction = ActivationFunctions . ReLuPrime
e l i f
afunc == ’ i de nti ty ’ :
s e l f . afunction = ActivationFunctions . i de nt it y
s e l f . derivfunction = ActivationFunctions . derivIdentity
i f type == ’ c l a s s i f i c a t i o n ’ :
s e l f . cost = CostFunctions . crossEntropy
s e l f . derivCost = CostFunctions . derivCE
e l i f type == ’ r e g r e s s i o n ’ :
s e l f . cost = CostFunctions .MSE
s e l f . derivCost = CostFunctions . derivMSE
# I t
i s
important
that
s t a r t w e i g h t s and
s e l f . weights
have the same d
i f
( startweights != None ) :
s e l f . weights = startweights
# Same for
bias
i f
( s t a r t b i a s e s != None ) :
s e l f . biases = s t a r t b i a s e s
pass
def feedforward ( s e l f , a ) :
Page 97
==PAGE:99==
s e l f . ac ti va ti on s = [ a ]
# List
to
hold
a c t i v a t i o n s
s e l f . zs = [ ]
# List
to
hold
induced
l o c a l
f i e l d
s e l f . a = np . array (a , ndmin = 2)
# Feedforward
for b ,w in zip ( s e l f . biases ,
s e l f . weights ) :
s e l f . z = np . dot ( s e l f . a , w) + b
s e l f . a = s e l f . afunction ( s e l f . z )
s e l f . zs . append ( s e l f . z )
s e l f . ac ti va ti on s . append ( s e l f . a )
i f
s e l f . type == ’ c l a s s i f i c a t i o n ’ :
i f
s e l f . use softmax :
# softmax
for
c l a s s i f i c a t i o n
return ActivationFunctions . stablesoftmax ( s e l f . z )
else :
return
s e l f . z
e l i f
s e l f . type == ’ r e g r e s s i o n ’ :
# Linear
output
layer
return
s e l f . z
def
train ( s e l f , X, y ) :
n = s e l f . num layers −1
# n i s
the
index
of
output
a c t i v a t i o
X = np . array (X, ndmin = 2)
# Convert to 2D Numpy for
good measu
changesw = [ ]
changesb = [ ]
s e l f . yhat = s e l f . feedforward (X) # Forward Propagate
##### Backpropagation ####
# Output Layer
delta = s e l f . derivCost ( s e l f . yhat , y)
dJdW = np . dot ( s e l f . ac ti va ti on s [ n−1].T,
delta )
Page 98
==PAGE:100==
dJdB = np .sum( delta ,
axis = 0)
changesw . i n s e r t (0 , dJdW)
changesb . i n s e r t (0 , dJdB)
# Hidden Layers
p = 2
for w in reversed ( s e l f . weights [ 1 : ] ) :
delta = np . dot ( delta , w.T) ∗
s e l f . derivfunction ( s e l f . zs [ n−p ] )
dJdW = np . dot ( s e l f . ac ti va ti on s [ n−p ] . T,
delta )
dJdB = np .sum( delta ,
axis = 0)
changesw . i n s e r t (0 , dJdW)
changesb . i n s e r t (0 , dJdB)
p = p + 1
####
Gradient Descent ####
# number of
training
examples
m = y . shape [ 0 ]
for
i
in range(n ) :
s e l f . weights [ i ] = s e l f . weights [ i ] −(1.0/m) ∗
s e l f . l r
∗changesw
s e l f . biases [ i ] = s e l f . biases [ i ] −(1.0/m) ∗
s e l f . l r
∗changesb [ i
pass
def MSE( s e l f , X, y ) :
# Forward Propagate
yhat = s e l f . feedforward (X)
# Calculate MSE
return np . mean(( y−yhat )∗∗2) # ∗0.5
Page 99
==PAGE:101==
def
t r a i n l o o p ( s e l f ,
Xtrain ,
Ytrain ,
Xtest ,
Ytest ,
epochs ,
batch size ,
w
acc = False ,
a c c l a s t = False ,
plot=False ) :
i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h = Xtrain . shape [ 0 ]
// batch size
t e s t c o s t s = np . zeros ( i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h )
t e s t a c c s = np . zeros ( i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h )
t r a i n c o s t s = np . zeros ( i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h )
trainaccs = np . zeros ( i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h )
epochcosts = np . zeros (( epochs ,
len ( t e s t c o s t s ) ) )
epochtraincosts = np . zeros (( epochs ,
len ( t e s t c o s t s ) ) )
epochaccs = np . zeros (( epochs ,
len ( t e s t c o s t s ) ) )
epochtrainaccs = np . zeros (( epochs ,
len ( t e s t c o s t s ) ) )
idx = np . arange ( Xtrain . shape [ 0 ] )
for k in range( epochs ) :
i f
with tqdm :
#use tqdm
for
i
in tqdm(range( i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h ) ) :
chosen = np . random . choice ( idx ,
batch size ,
replace=False
Xbatch = Xtrain [ chosen ]
Ybatch = Ytrain [ chosen ]
s e l f . train ( Xbatch ,
Ybatch )
i f
cost :
t e s t c o s t s [ i ] = s e l f . cost ( Xtest ,
Ytest )
e l i f
acc :
t e s t a c c s [ i ] = accuracy ( Xtest ,
Ytest )
else :
print ( ”{}/{}” . format(k+1, epochs ) , end=”\r ” ,
flush=True )
#no tqdm
for
i
in range( i t e r a t i o n s p e r e p o c h ) :
i f
batch size == Xtrain . shape [ 0 ] :
Xbatch = Xtrain
Ybatch = Ytrain
else :
Page 100
==PAGE:102==
chosen = np . random . choice ( idx ,
batch size ,
replace =
Xbatch = Xtrain [ chosen ]
Ybatch = Ytrain [ chosen ]
s e l f . train ( Xbatch ,
Ybatch )
i f
cost :
t e s t c o s t s [ i ] = s e l f . cost ( s e l f ,
Xtest ,
Ytest )
t r a i n c o s t s [ i ] = s e l f . cost ( s e l f ,
Xtrain ,
Ytrain )
i f
acc :
t e s t a c c s [ i ] = accuracy ( s e l f . feedforward ( Xtest ) . argma
trainaccs [ i ] = accuracy ( s e l f . feedforward ( Xtrain ) . arg
epochcosts [ k ] = t e s t c o s t s
epochtraincosts [ k ] = t r a i n c o s t s
epochtrainaccs [ k ] = trainaccs
epochaccs [ k ] = t e s t a c c s
#print ( accuracy ( XtestMnist ,
YtestMnist , ”MNIST”))
i f
c o s t l a s t :
return CostFunctions . crossEntropy ( Xtest ,
Ytest )
i f
a c c l a s t :
return accuracy ( Xtest ,
Ytest )
i f
acc and cost :
i f
plot :
p l o t c o s t s ( epochtrainaccs . mean( axis =1), epochaccs . mean( axis =
p l o t c o s t s ( epochtraincosts . mean( axis =1), epochcosts . mean( axi
return epochcosts . mean( axis =1), epochtraincosts . mean( axis =1), ep
e l i f
acc :
return epochaccs . mean( axis =1), epochtrainaccs . mean( axis =1)
return epochcosts . mean( axis =1), epochtraincosts . mean( axis =1)
def
p l o t c o s t s ( train ,
test ,
t i t l e=’ Cost ’ ) :
plt . f i g u r e ( f i g s i z e =(13 , 8))
plt . t i t l e ( t i t l e ,
f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . plot ( train )
Page 101
==PAGE:103==
plt . plot ( t e s t )
plt . xlabel ( ’ Epochs ’ ,
f o n t s i z e =16)
plt . ylabel ( t i t l e ,
f o n t s i z e =16)
plt . legend ( [ ’ Train ’ ,
’ Test ’ ] ,
f o n t s i z e =14)
plt . show ()
# # The Functions
class
CostFunctions :
@staticmethod
def MSE(NN, X, y ) :
# Forward Propagate
yhat = NN. feedforward (X)
# Calculate MSE
return np . mean(( y−yhat )∗∗2) # ∗0.5
@staticmethod
def RMSE(X, y ) :
yhat = NN. feedforward (X)
return np . square (np .sum(pow( yhat −y ,
2)) / yhat . shape [ 0 ] )
@staticmethod
def derivMSE ( yhat , y ) :
return ( yhat −y)
@staticmethod
def crossEntropy (NN, X, y ,
epsilon = 1e −15):
#Forward Propagate
a = NN. feedforward (X)
# Calculate
CrossEntropy
error
return np . mean(np . nan to num(−y∗np . log ( a+epsilon )−(1−y)∗np . log ((1−
Page 102
==PAGE:104==
a)+ epsilon ) ) )
@staticmethod
def crossEntropy2 (X, y ) :
yhat = NN. feedforward (X)
return −np . dot (np . divide (1 , yhat . shape [ 0 ] ) , np .sum(np . multiply (y , np
#np . divide (cm, sum rows ,
out=np . z e r o s l i k e (cm) , where=sum rows !=0)
@staticmethod
def derivCE ( yhat , y ) :
return ( yhat −y)
class
ActivationFunctions :
@staticmethod
def
i d en ti ty ( z ) :
return z
@staticmethod
def
derivIdentity ( z ) :
return 1
@staticmethod
def tanh ( z ) :
return np . tanh ( z )
@staticmethod
def tanhPrime ( z ) :
return 1 −(np . tanh ( z )∗∗2)
Page 103
==PAGE:105==
@staticmethod
def ReLu( z ,
alpha = 0 ) :
return np .maximum( alpha∗z ,
z )
#return np .maximum(0 , z )
@staticmethod
def ReLuPrime( z ,
alpha = 0 ) :
# return
alpha
i f
x < 0 e l s e 1
dx = np . o n e s l i k e ( z )
dx [ z < 0] = alpha
return dx
@staticmethod
def softmax ( z ) :
exps = np . exp ( z ) .T
return ( exps / np .sum( exps ,
axis = 0 ) ) .T
#def
stablesoftmax ( z ) :
#exps = np . exp ( z −np .max( z ) ) .T
#return
( exps / np . sum( exps ,
axis = 0)).T
@staticmethod
def stablesoftmax (x ) :
mx = np .max(x ,
axis=−1, keepdims=True )
numerator = np . exp (x −mx) #. round (3)
denominator = np .sum( numerator ,
axis=−1, keepdims=True )
return numerator/denominator
’ ’ ’ def
stablesoftmax2 ( xs ,
axis =−1):
xs = xs −np .max( xs ,
axis=axis ,
keepdims=True)
xs exp = np . exp ( xs )
return
xs exp / xs exp . sum( axis=axis ,
keepdims=True) ’ ’ ’
Page 104
==PAGE:106==
@staticmethod
def sigmoid ( z ) :
return (1.0/(1.0+ np . exp(−z ) ) )
@staticmethod
def sigmoidPrime ( z ) :
return np . exp(−z )/((1+np . exp(−z ))∗∗2)
def accuracy ( predictions ,
Ytest ,
problem = None ,
plot = False ) :
#predictions = model . feedforward ( Xtest ) . argmax ( axis = 1)
true = Ytest . argmax ( axis = 1)
correct preds = np . equal ( true ,
predictions )
i f
( plot == True ) :
i f
( problem == ”IRIS” ) :
c l a s s e s = np . array ( [ ’ setosa ’ ,
’ v e r s i c o l o r ’ ,
’ v i r g i n i c a ’ ] )
e l i f
( problem == ”MNIST” ) :
c l a s s e s = np . array ( [ ”0” , ”1” , ”2” , ”3” , ”4” , ”5” , ”6” , ”7” , ”8” ,
e l i f
( problem == ”XOR” ) :
c l a s s e s = np . array ( [ ”0” , ”1” ] )
print ( ”Accuracy : ” , (sum( correct preds ) / len ( true )) ∗100 , ”%” )
print ( ”Cross Entropy : ” , CostFunctions . crossEntropy ( Xtest ,
Ytest ))
plotConfusionMatrix ( true ,
predictions ,
classes ,
t i t l e = ”Confusion M
plt . show ()
return (sum( correct preds ) / len ( true ))
Page 105
