==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Department Environmental Engineering
Section of Circularity and Environmental Impact
Technical University of Denmark
Eﬀective plastic legislation in the EU
from an environmental and human health perspective
Author
Ida Due s136577
Supervisors
Ass. Prof. Steﬀen Foss Hansen
PhD Student Maria Bille Nielsen
February 13, 2022
==PAGE:2==
¿0 .
Preface and acknowledgments
The thesis is for 30 ECTS points and constitutes the ﬁnal work of my MSc in Environmental Engi-
neering. The work took place from August 2021-February 2022 at the department of Circularity and
Environmental Impact, DTU Environment, at the Technical University of Denmark.
I would like to thank my supervisors Associate Professor Steﬀen Foss Hansen and PhD Student
Maria Bille Nielsen, for their valuable and generous feedback, diﬀerent perspectives, interesting dis-
cussions and for sharing their contacts with me in relation to the stakeholder analysis. I would also
like to thank Lauge Clausen from DTU Environment for sharing his knowledge on stakeholder analysis
and on the discipline of performing stakeholder interviews. I cannot express my gratitude enough for
the generous and most valuable contribution from all the stakeholders who participated in the inter-
views and survey. Finally, I would like to thank my dear friend Anjila Hjalsted and my partner in life
Mathias Kirk Jensen, who both have been very supportive academically and emotionally throughout
the project period.
Ida Due, February 13th 2022
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The growing scientiﬁc and political recognition of issues arising from the full life cycle of plastics calls
for immediate action. The negative eﬀects of plastics aﬀects the environment and human health and
are of both physical and chemical nature. Plastics are a relatively novel material, widely used in all
sectors, with an indeﬁnite number of diﬀerent types based on the polymer resin and which chemicals
that have been added to it. However, existing EU legislation mainly focuses on plastic pollution from
macroplastics with beginning recognition of issues related to microplastics, but arguably does not
suﬃciently cover the chemical nor the human health aspects.
The aim of this thesis is to develop policy relevant recommendations for an eﬃcient EU plastic
legislation focused on protecting human health and the environment from physical and chemical risks
posed by plastics. For this purpose a literature study on plastics and its management in the EU
was conducted to get an overview of negative impacts on the environment and human health from
plastics and the status of current handling of plastic in the EU. This revealed that the dramatic in-
crease in plastic use in the EU is a serious issue putting pressure on the infrastructure and the waste
management systems, with negative environmental impacts and eﬀects and highlighted indications
that human health could also be adversely aﬀected. The EU legislation must be based on scientiﬁc
proof, but the current knowledge on the behavior of plastics is characterized by knowledge gaps. In
order to address this a stakeholder analysis was conducted in the form of interviews and a survey with
stakeholders related to the plastic sector. Here ﬁve plastic policy relevant EU legal acts were identiﬁed
by the stakeholders, and these constituted the foundation of the legal analysis. The ﬁndings from the
literature study, the stakeholder analysis and the legal analysis were used to develop policy recom-
mendations with the purpose of increasing eﬀective protection of human health and the environment
from the full life cycle of plastic through future EU legislation.
The thesis concludes that there is a need of political action, and that the ﬁndings and recom-
mendations presented will support the regulatory decision making in the development of plastic EU
legislation eﬀectively protecting human health and the environment hazards from plastics. These in-
cludes the implementation of policy recommendations at Member State level, amendments to existing
EU legal acts, and the development of a holistic Plastic Framework Directive, with the aspiration that
this three-folded approach will contribute to make an eﬀective plastic legislation in the EU.
Figure 1: Graphical abstract
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
BAU Business as Usual
CE
Circular Economy
CMR Carcinogenic, mutagenic and toxic for reproduction
DTU Technical University of Denmark
EC
European Commission
ECHA European Chemical Agency
EDC Endocrine Disruptor
EEA
European Environment Agency
EHS
Environment Health Safety
EPR
Extended Producer Responsibility
EU
European Union
FCM Food Contact Materials
FD
Framework Directive
GDP Gross domestic product
GHG Greenhouse gas
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPEN International Pollutants Elimination Network
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LRT
Long-range transport
MPW Mismanaged Plastic Waste
MS
Member State
NGO Non-governmental organizations
PB
Planetary Boundary
PBT
Persistent Bioaccumulative and Toxic
PFAS Per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances
POPs Persistent Organic Pollutants
PRR Polymers Requiring Registration
iii
==PAGE:5==
REACH Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals
SOS
Safe Operating Space
SPI
Sustainable Products Initiative
SPI code Society of the Plastics Industry
SUP
Single-use plastic
TEU Treaty on European Union
TFEU Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
UN
United Nations
UNEA United Nations Environmental Assembly
vPvB very persistent and very bio-accumulative
WP
Work package
Terminology
Absolute Sustainability Not exceeding the limits of allocated resources in compliance with the safe
operating space (e.g. the critical impact levels deﬁned for the planetary boundaries), in contrast to
relative sustainability where the level of sustainability is compared between diﬀerent processes.
Backcasting Future planning methodology.
Burden shifting When an impact reducing activity in one environmental area leads to an impact
increase in another.
Circular Economy is a systemic approach to economic development designed to beneﬁt businesses,
society, and the environment.
Compostable Both the compostability of the material and the shape and form. Additionally, it
must be described explicitly whether the material is suitable for industrial and/or home composting.
Either way, it must live up to certain criteria e.g. degradation rate and processes (aerobic or anaerobic
digestion) (SIO 18606, New Plastic Economy)
Down-cycling Material recycling where the recycled material has a lower quality or functionality
compared to the original material
Downgauging To make e.g. plastic ﬁlm thinner
Eﬀective To do the right things
Eﬃcient To do things right
iv
==PAGE:6==
Fly-tipping The illegal deposit of any waste onto land that does not have a license to accept it
Goods The CJEU has deﬁned them as ’products’ which can be priced.
Human rights Rights inherent to all human beings, regardless of race, sex, nationality, ethnicity,
language, religion, or any other status
Lex specialis Speciﬁc rules are given priority over general rules
Pollution Something in the wrong place at the wrong time in the wrong quantity
Polyoleﬁn A polyoleﬁn is a type of polymer with the general formula where R is an alkyl group.
Common polyoleﬁns are polypropylene (PP) and polyethylene (PE).
Post consumer recycled content Proportion by mass of materials generated by households or by
commercial, industrial and institutional facilities in their role of being the end user of a product that
can no longer be used for intended purpose (ISO 14021:2016)
Recycling Any recovery operation by which waste materials are reprocessed into products, mate-
rials or substances whether for the original or other purposes.
Recovery Process of incinerating non-recyclable waste to recover energy and produce electricity.
Renewable material Materials composed of biomass, which counts material of biological origin,
living or dead, e.g. trees, tree litter, crops, grasses, algae, animals, manure, etc. If virgin renewable
materials are used, they shall come from sources that are replenished at a rate equal to or greater
than the depletion rate. The deﬁnition is excluding material embedded in geological formations or
transformed to fossiled materials (ISO 14021:2016).
Reuse Product or packaging is used for the same purpose or reﬁlled for which it was originally
intended (with or without auxiliary products, e.g. a plastic bag) (ISO 18603:2013 Packaging and the
environment).
Society of the Plastics Industry (SPI) code Code to identify plastic resin of speciﬁc plastic item
making it easier to sort the materials for recycling.
Stakeholder a person, group or organization that can aﬀect or be aﬀected of any aspect of a project
(ISO, 2021).
Sustainable Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability
of future generations to meet their own needs
Up-cycling Secondary resources made into something new from its current state with a higher
quality, eg. artistic or environmental value
Zero waste The conservation of all resources by means of responsible production, consumption,
reuse, and recovery of materials without incineration or landﬁlls.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research questions and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope and delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Literature study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Stakeholder analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Legal analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Development of policy recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Background knowledge on plastic and EU law
6
3.1
Plastic materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Current state for plastic handling in the EU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Environmental, human and safety risks from plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
EU law and plastics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Stakeholder analysis and results
18
4.1
Stakeholder identiﬁcation and motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Plastic related legislative change suggestions by the stakeholders
. . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
Regulation on Food Contact Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.2
REACH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.3
Eco-design Directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.4
Single-use Plastic Directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.5
Extended Producer Responsibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Concerns related to the plastic sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
The stakeholder’s future visions for plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Survey answers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Legal analysis
35
5.1
Regulation on food contact materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
REACH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Eco-design Directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Single-use Plastic Directive
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5
Extended Producer Responsibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6
Key ﬁndings from the legal analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Policy relevant recommendations, justiﬁcation and discussions
40
6.1
Overview of key ﬁndings and objectives for the policy recommendations . . . . . . . .
40
6.1.1
Objectives for the policy recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Policy recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2.1
Policy recommendations and the six objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2.2
Policy recommendations as suggested amendments for the ﬁve legal acts . . . .
48
6.2.3
Suggestions for a future EU plastic legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
6.3
Final recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusions
58
8
Bibliography
60
Appendices
73
A Stakeholder analysis
74
B Statistics applied for the stakeholder survey
76
List of Figures
1
Graphical abstract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
2
European plastic demand by segment and polymer types in 2019 of total 50.7 Million
tonnes. Data for EU28+NO/CH (Plastics Europe, 2020)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
The Waste Hierarchy from the Waste Framework Directive by the European Commission
(EC, 2015)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
The stakeholders participating in the interview and survey (expect the Danish Plastic
Federation that did not wish to participate in part 2) divided into stakeholder groups
based on the deﬁnitions from (Ginige et al., 2018)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Histogram, selected descriptive statistics and a box plot of the ratings [1-10] or ”Do not wish to
answer” [-] by the stakeholders for the ﬁve questions in the survey. Statistical symbols: mean
(µ), standard deviation (σ), minimum (Min), 1st quantile (Q1), median, 3rd quantile (Q3),
maximum (Max). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Selected policy recommendations from Table 10 divided into the ﬁve identiﬁed relevant
pieces of EU legislation from the stakeholder interviews, and linked to the Waste Hier-
archy were relevant. These policy recommendations are suggestions for amendments for
the respective legal acts. FCM (Regulation for food contact materials), REACH (Reg-
ulation on registration, evaluation, authorization and restriction on chemicals), ECO
(Eco-design Directive), SUP (Single-use Plastic Directive), EPR (Extended Producer
Responsibility)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Inspiration for developing a future Plastic Framework Directive in the EU comes from
the policy recommendations and existing framework directives (FWD) like the Waste
WFD and the Water FWD. Amendments to the ﬁve legals acts identiﬁed in this thesis
work (including the Regulation on Food Contact Materials REACH, Eco-Design Direc-
tive, Single-use Plastic Directives and the coming Extended Producer Responsibility) are
meant to complement the draw up of the Plastic Framework Directive, as well as other
relevant legal acts regarding the full life cycle of plastic not covered in this thesis. . . .
53
8
Graphical illustration of article suggestions for a future Plastic Framework Directive. .
54
9
Overview of the three-folded policy relevant recommendations denoted A. (Policy rec-
ommendations), B. (Amendments), and C. (Plastic Framework Directive). Variations
of these recommendations are presented as work packages (WP) 1-6. The ﬁnal recom-
mendation is WP6 including both A., B. and C. and is marked with a red box. . . . . .
56
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Most common types of thermoplastics and their Society of the Plastics Industry (SPI)
code, function and applications (Plastindustrien, 2021b; EEA, 2021b; Buss et al., 2019)
8
2
General principles of EU law and environmental principles applied in EU law, treaty
articles and their deﬁnitions (EC, 2016a; EC, 2016b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Questions developed for the stakeholder interview. Part 1 has ﬁve open questions and
was carried out as a dialogue in an online recorded Zoom meeting.
Part 2 is the
anonymous survey with statements ranked from 1 [no, not at all] to 10 [yes, to a high
degree] or [Do not wish to answer]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
All identiﬁed stakeholders divided by their respective stakeholder group and its deﬁni-
tion (Ginige et al., 2018). The stakeholders participating in the stakeholder interviews
are marked in bold with their representative and their title. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Stakeholder motivation based on interviews and background research, in the categories:
Economic proﬁt, Environmental protection, Human health and Innovation and technology. 22
6
Selected EU legislation based on main focus areas from the stakeholders perspective
.
24
7
The stakeholders concerns on the plastic sectors negative impacts towards the envi-
ronment and human health in the categories ethical-, scientiﬁc-, technical- and social
concern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Common future vision for the stakeholders on society, simpliﬁcation and technology
.
32
9
Key ﬁndings from the legal analysis including pros, cons and prospects.
. . . . . . . .
39
10
Overview of the policy recommendations developed from the literature study, stake-
holder analysis and the legal analysis, and the objectives (1-6) presented in the method-
ology. [x] indicates that the policy recommendation may support fulﬁlling the objective
if integrated.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
11
The seven phases of an interview as described in the interviewguide by Kvale and
Brinkmann (2009)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
12
Quality criteria for an interview (from textbox 9.1 in Kvale and Brinkmann, 2009) . .
74
13
Qualiﬁcations and skills by the interviewer (based on textbox 9.2 in Kvale and Brinkmann
(2009) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
14
Survey responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Negative impacts from the life cycle of plastics are of growing concern, as the materials great pos-
sibilities come with unpredictable consequences. The concern of numerous issues related to plastics
is spreading like a wildﬁre in civic, scientiﬁc and political communities (Persson et al., 2022; UN,
2021; Dasgupta, 2021; Arp et al., 2021). Persson et al. (2022) has recently identiﬁed that pollutants,
including plastics, have exceeded the safe operating space of the planetary boundary (PB) for novel
entities, which includes plastic, thus raising risks to the stability of Earth systems. This has been
a concern for decades, with the Brundtland report (Brundtland, 1987), and since Rockstrom et al.
(2009) introducing the PBs and stated that the exponential growth of human activities could desta-
bilize critical biophysical systems and make irreversible changes as a result of the increasing pressure
hereof. Guerry et al. (2015) says, that the central challenge of our time is to ”develop economic,
social, and governance systems capable of ending poverty and achieving sustainable levels of popula-
tion and consumption while securing the life-support systems underpinning current and future human
well-being” (Guerry et al., 2015). As a result of globalization, trade patterns and consumerism, there
are now strong indications of plastics being a problem at planetary scale of both physical and chemical
character (Diamond et al., 2015; Persson et al., 2013; Persson et al., 2022).
On the bright side, plastic is extremely versatile, light-weight and cheap, and is used all around
the globe in all layers of society in all sectors (CIEL, 2021; Plastics Europe, 2020). In the period 1970-
2015, the plastic market increased at twice the pace of the global GDP, making it the fastest growing
bulk material in the world. Today, plastic is considered a geological marker of the Anthropocene age
(Villarrubia-G´omez et al., 2018). Currently, nearly 370 million metric tons are produced each year
and studies from the Ellen MacArthur Foundation expect it to double by 2030 and quadruple by 2050
(MacArthur, 2013). Despite the fact that plastic only accounts for 9% of the petrochemical industry,
huge investments of several hundreds of billions of US dollars are currently made by oil companies,
anticipating a continuously growing market (IEA, 2018). The former head of UN Environment, Erik
Solheim, identiﬁed plastic as a magic material for its beneﬁcial use within the sectors of health, sus-
tainable energy and foods, and stated that ”Plastic isn’t the problem. It’s what we do with it. And
that means the onus is on us to be far smarter in how we use this miracle material.”, and points at
mismanagement as key to the growing plastic pollution (Giacovelli et al., 2018). There is no doubt
that plastics are ending up where it should not as the material is found at the most remote places on
Earth as well as inside living organisms (Allen et al., 2019; Vethaak and Leslie, 2016; Catarino et al.,
2018; Ryberg et al., 2019). Public awareness has mainly been on the plastic islands in the oceans and
suﬀering marine life, but several studies have been able to detect more far-reaching negative eﬀects
from the use of the material. For the environment the negative eﬀects include deteriorating living
conditions for a range of organisms, and ecosystem decline. For humans the general well-being of
humans due to pollution and concern is aﬀected and growing indications of health eﬀects, and plastics
also limit the socioeconomic sectors such as tourism, aquaculture and navigation (Villarrubia-G´omez
et al., 2018; Rochman et al., 2013a; Gregory, 2009; Cabernard et al., 2021; Azapagic et al., 2004).
In the European Green Deal, plastics have been marked as a key priority in the action plan for a
Circular Economy (CE) and the European Commission (EC) have proclaimed to address the related
challenges, showing political recognition of the issues and also the will to take action (Hesselink and
van Duuren, 2021). This statement pitches into the growing awareness and call-for-action, raised by
a number of national and international stakeholders - requesting systemic changes and holistic ap-
proaches, focused on prevention rather than cure (Break Free From Plastic, 2021; MacArthur, 2013;
Plastic Change, 2021b; WWF, 2021a). The report on ’Attitudes of European citizens towards the
Page 1 of 76
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Research questions and objectives
environment’ from 2017 by the Euro-barometer found that 94% think protecting the environment
is important for the respondent personally, while 81% agree that environmental issues have a direct
negative impact on their daily lives and health, 74% are worried directly about the impact on their
health from general consumer products made out of plastics, and 87% are worried on the eﬀect on the
environment by plastic (European Union, 2017). Citizens makes claims on consumer rights demanding
extended warranty, regional and national action towards a CE, increasing political will with recent and
coming legislative acts (e.g. Single-use Plastic Directive, Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR),
etc.), and new and enhanced technologies, technical solutions, design guides and more waiting to be
implemented (Christensen and Katan, 2021; EC, 2019b; EPR Info, 2021; Watkins et al., 2020). Com-
bined, these developments indicate a general momentum between a broad range of stakeholders, with
consensus on taking the steps moving towards a CE recognizing the shared responsibility of taking care
of our planet. Sveinung Rotevatn, the president of UNEA5, said during the Committee of Permanent
Representatives meeting, that the ”push for a legally binding agreement has gotten ever stronger over
the past year. A lot of countries, including my own (red. Norway), are pushing for a new agreement.
There is a lot of momentum, which is a good thing.” (UNEA, 2021). Increasing resource costs are
threatening competition resilience, combined with stressors from urbanization, growing middle-class
and challenging impacts caused by climate change, forces the industry to reﬂect on business-as-usual
(BAU) and the linear economy versus the beneﬁts of CE (DI, 2021b).
1.1
Research questions and objectives
The aim of this thesis is to develop policy relevant recommendations for future policy and regulatory
development to reach the objectives of protecting human health and the environment from physical
and chemicals risks posed by plastics. The suggestions are collected for the development of future
EU legislation, anchored in environmental science and a stakeholder analysis. The speciﬁc research
questions are:
1. How can risks and negative impacts on the environment and human health from the full life
cycle of plastics be reduced through EU legislation?
2. How can the suggestions from the stakeholder analysis be integrated in legislation development?
1.2
Scope and delimitations
To reﬂect the complexity of the issues related to plastics, the scope of this thesis is relatively broad.
Plastic is widely used in many applications and in this thesis, the scope covers plastic products available
to or in contact with the general consumer within the EU, and the policy recommendations could cover
products like single-use packaging, beverage bottles, plastic bags, containers, kitchenware, synthetic
textiles, furniture, footwear, electronics, and more. It excludes single-use packaging of other material
types than plastics, and plastic products kept in an industrial or organizational system like medical
equipment, the energy sector (e.g. wind mills and solar power installations), and transportation. The
EU level was chosen based on the European legal system between the Union and the Member States
(MS), where environmental legislation and the internal market are matters of the EU and the MS
national legislation highly rely on EU law. According to The New Plastic Economy by the Ellen
MacArthur Foundation (Industry Agenda, 2016), the threshold to assess recyclability of plastic in
practice requires 400 million citizens. With approximately 446 million citizens in the EU it qualiﬁes
to be assessed on those grounds(Europa, 2021). However, the majority of the stakeholders are Danish,
so several of the concrete examples are reﬂecting the current state in Denmark.
Page 2 of 76
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodology
In this section, the methodology is described for the development of a policy roadmap proposal for
the future plastic handling in the EU with concern towards human health and the environment. To
answer the research questions, the following approach was used:
a. Literature study on plastics and its management in the EU, including the risks and negative
impacts on the environment and human health, and a small overview of EU law.
b. Bottom-up stakeholder analysis with a broad range of interested parties related to the plastic
sector, environmental protection and human health, including interviews and a survey.
c. Legal analysis based on the plastic relevant legal acts identiﬁed in the stakeholder interviews.
d. Presentation and discussions of the collected policy recommendations based on the ﬁndings in
the thesis.
e. Final recommendations on how to increase eﬀectiveness of environmental and human health
protection from plastics through EU legislation.
2.1
Literature study
The intention with the literature study was to make an overview of the broad variety of both applica-
tions and issues related to plastics. Therefore, an integrative approach was applied to synthesize the
complex and multi-disciplinary perspectives that characterize plastics (Snyder, 2019). The literature
study work both as the foundation and as supplementary knowledge to support the information gained
from the stakeholder interviews. Information was collected from a broad range of scientiﬁc articles,
textbooks, articles, debates on LinkedIN, various national and international news media, and selected
websites for updates and overviews (e.g. Eur-lex on European law, ChemicalWatch with news related
to chemicals). The literature search engines used were DTU Find it and Google Scholar with search
on diﬀerent keyword combinations, see lists below. The literature search was dynamic and consisted
of both backward citation search by ﬁnding new literature by following references in read articles and
by forward citation search by investigating where the articles had been cited.
Overview of keywords for the literature study:
• Plastic (value chain, life cycle, polymers, deﬁnition, use, production, end of life, waste man-
agement, mechanical recycling, chemical recycling, additives, virgin materials, reuse, energy
recovery, pollution, environmental hazards, marine ecosystems, terrestrial ecosystems, health
concerns, nano, micro, macro, zero waste, biobased, biodegradable)
• EU legislation (plastic, packaging, circular economy, waste, environment, chemicals, climate,
resources, environmental principles, standards, trade, subsidies, governance, Montreal Protocol,
Stockholm Convention, Basel Convention, single-use, extended producer responsibility, essential-
and non-essential use)
• Sustainability (framework, assessment, science, policy, development, planetary boundaries, thresh-
olds, safe operating space, carrying capacity)
• Ethics (environmental protection, human health protection, advocacy, nature rights)
• Other (risks handling, handling of uncertainties, gaps of knowledge, eﬀective legislation, man-
agement, leadership, systemic thinking, holistic approach)
Page 3 of 76
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Stakeholder analysis
2.2
Stakeholder analysis
The method applied for the stakeholder analysis is inspired from the methodology described by
Rietbergen-McCracken et. al. (1998) including the Stakeholder identiﬁcation and Mapping of stake-
holder interests and motives. It excludes the Importance and inﬂuence matrix as it can result in an
subjective assessment thus not provide clear and transparent insights. The Stakeholder strategy was
not included, however both important and relevant, but at this early stage in the process.
The deﬁnition of a stakeholder used follows the ISO 21500 standard: a person, group or organi-
zation that can aﬀect or be aﬀected of any aspect of a project (ISO, 2021). The stakeholder analysis
approach ’bottom-up’ was chosen, to involve the stakeholders and get deeper insights and more nu-
ances to their perspectives than could have been obtained by a ’top-down’ approach which is based on
a literature study of the stakeholders perspectives. The aim was to include a broad range of stakehold-
ers to represent the most interest groups as possible and hereby get a broad and holistic foundation
for the analysis. Furthermore, the hope was to increase transparency by involving stakeholders in
the policy development phase, capture innovative ideas, learn from the industry, disclosure potential
pitfalls, learnings from the past and reveal gaps of knowledge, being in alignment with stakeholder
involvement theory (Rietbergen-McCracken and Narayan-Parker, 1998; Clausen et al., 2020; Lienert,
2015; Clausen, 2021). The methodology of a bottom-up stakeholder analysis in this thesis includes
the following steps:
1. Stakeholder identiﬁcation:
Identiﬁcation was carried out through: literature research, media analysis, recommendations
from other stakeholders, attending conferences and seminars with stakeholders examining the
speakers list and list of participants, and recommendations from supervisors. Inspired by Ginige
et al. (2018), the identiﬁed stakeholders were categorized according to their stake in the case and
was divided stakeholder groups including National and local government, Non-governmental or-
ganizations, Community, Civic society, Private and corporate sector, Academia and professional
associations.
2. Mapping of stakeholder interests and motives:
Conducted by investigating interests, motivation and concerns by researching their websites and
from the interviews (speciﬁcally question 1.a., see Table 3).
3. Interview:
The interview represents the qualitative research and was carried out to gain an understanding
of the stakeholders motivation and to get insights on their opinions and thoughts. The interview
was designed based of the seven phases on planning, conducting and handling output of an
interview, described by Kvale and Brinkmann (2009), see Table 11 in Appendix A. They were
carried out in an online Zoom meeting and included follow up-, exploratory- and direct questions
when appropriate. Reﬂections on how to communicate, interact and involve with each of the
identiﬁed stakeholders was made inspired by ’good interviewer qualiﬁcations’, with the intention
to follow them to the best of my capacity (see Table 12 and 13 in Appendix A). Before the ﬁrst
contact, research was carried out on potential stakeholders, primarily on their background, work
related to plastics, and their attitude towards plastic related issues in regards to the potential
negative impacts towards the environment and human health. The questions were formulated to
be broad an opinion inclusive to allow for room for each stakeholders perspective. Furthermore,
an attempt was made not to put the stakeholders in ethical dilemmas between them self and who
they were representing in the design of the questions. All questions were sent to the stakeholder
before hand for full transparency.
Page 4 of 76
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Legal analysis
4. Survey:
The survey represents the quantitative research where the stakeholders were asked to answer an
anonymous survey by ranking ﬁve statements from 1-10, where 1 represents [no, not at all] to 10
[yes, to a high degree], or [Do not wish to answer]. The data collected was handled statistically
(see formulas in Appendix B), with the intention to reveal any trends in the opinions of the
stakeholders, and to investigate if the stakeholder group was homogeneous or not. All questions
were sent to the stakeholder beforehand for full transparency.
5. Analysis of the interview:
The structure of the analysis follow the order of the questions from the interviews. The key
pieces of EU law mentioned by the stakeholders in section 4.2 (question 1.b in Table 3) works
as the backbone for the rest of the thesis from this point on.
2.3
Legal analysis
The methodology used for the legal analysis is inspired on two out of three main goals for the legal
doctrine as described by Smits (2017), including Descriptions of the existing law identiﬁed in the
stakeholder interviews, Prescriptive with policy recommendations based on the ﬁndings from the
literature study and the stakeholder analysis, and Justiﬁcations of the policy recommendations by
ﬁnding legitimization in current EU law and discussions of their relevancy. This doctrinal approach
was be used to describe or legitimize the existing law or to indicate other solutions to address issues
not covered suﬃciently in the functioning law. Here, the main task was to investigate and systematize
selected applicable EU legislation’s based on the ﬁndings from the stakeholder analysis. Furthermore,
key aspects of the laws were highlighted for improvement for the sake of protection of human health
or the environment. These aspects were selected based on the ﬁndings from the stakeholder interview
and the literature study, with focus on selected environmental and EU principles.
2.4
Development of policy recommendations
The policy recommendations constitute the results of this thesis, and combines key ﬁndings from the
literature study, the stakeholder analysis and the legal analysis:
• Objectives: The development of the objectives for the policy recommendations were based on the
following principles: they must be anchored in current EU legislation; their legitimacy must be
broadly recognized by the scientiﬁc community, and they must have the potential to signiﬁcantly
minimize the negative impacts on human health and the environment from plastics.
• Policy recommendations: The results from the stakeholder- and legal analysis is used as inputs
to the knowledge bank and the policy recommendations. To check their relevancy, they are
presented in a matrix overview with the objectives. All recommendations are discussed.
• Suggested amendments:
Selected policy recommendations are highlighted and discussed as
amendment suggestions for existing EU legal acts.
• Development of holistic plastic EU legislation: Based on the ﬁndings from the thesis work a holis-
tic piece of EU legislation is developed and discussed with the focus of an increased eﬀectiveness
of protection of human health and the environment from plastics in EU plastic legislation.
• Final recommendations: are presented.
Page 5 of 76
==PAGE:15==
3
Background knowledge on plastic and EU law
In this chapter, the theoretical background for the current state of plastic is presented. First, plastic
as a material is described, including information on the properties, additives, use and applications,
processing, options for reuse or recycling, and potentially problematic eﬀects and risks in relation to
the environment and human health. Secondly, the current handling of plastics in the EU is outlined
based on the steps in the Waste Hierarchy. Thirdly, a short introduction to EU law, environmental
principles and the latest announcements and proposals by the EC relating to human health and
environmental protection in relation to plastic is described.
3.1
Plastic materials
The general notion of the beginning of plastics dates back to the discovery of cellulose in 1855, other
sources point even further back. However, it is still considered a relatively novel material as ﬁrst hit
the general consumer market in the 1950s, where it was branded as cheap enough to replace rather
than too repair. The material is praised for its great versatility, low cost and low weight, convenience,
innovation possibilities, and the increasing level of safety and hygiene enabled by the material. It
has substituted both renewable and non-renewable resources like ivory and a variety of inorganic
substances including various metals. (British Plastics Federation, 2021b; Plastics Europe, 2021)
Plastic is a widely used material for several applications and in many sectors including packaging,
agriculture, building and construction, mobility and transport, electronics, healthcare, energy, sport
and more. Plastics are made of synthetic or semi-synthetic materials consisting of polymer chains
or networks made of a huge amounts of repeating basic organic units called monomers. These are
often, but not solely, coming from raw materials like crude oil, cellulose, coal and natural gas. The
physical-chemical properties of the plastic materials varies depending on how the chains are structured,
from which molecules they are formed and which additives that have been added to the polymer
resins (Plastics Europe, 2021; Plastindustrien, 2021b; Fink, 2018). Additives are chemical substances
added to the plastic resins to give speciﬁc qualities and characteristics.
Common additives used
in plastics are colorants, monomers, surfactants, solvents, plasticizers, ﬂame retardants, stabilizers,
ﬁllers, reinforcements, accelerators, biocides, and others (Groh et al., 2019; Hahladakis et al., 2018;
British Plastics Federation, 2021a).
Classic ways of categorizing plastics are by their chemistry, structure or behavior. However, it is
often grouped into two main families depending on thermal processing behavior; thermoplastics and
thermosets (Plastics Europe, 2021). This is relevant knowledge regarding plastics in a CE, as the
thermal processing behavior has to due with matierial quality and recycling options. Thermoplastics
is a family of plastic types that hardens when cooled and melts when heated. This is, in principle,
a reversible process, as it is more chemically stable compared to its un-recyclable cousin group -
thermosets. Therefore, thermoplastics are considered the more suitable plastic type for recycling, as
its long chain polymers are kept under the heating, cooling and reshaping processes and maintaining
its chemical properties (Plastics Europe, 2020). Examples of thermoplastics are Polyethylene (PE),
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), Polyvinyl chloride (PVC), Polypropylene (PP), and Polystyrene
(PS) (Plastics Europe, 2021). Thermosets, on the other hand, are described as a polymer formed
as an irreversible hardening process called curing - a chemical process creating a three-dimensional
structure when the polymer is heated, making it extremely durable and heat-resistant ﬁt for some
purposes and applications, e.g. car tires and electronic devices (Plastics Europe, 2020; Panyakapo
and Panyakapo, 2008; Buss et al., 2019). However, it cannot be melted down and re-formed as it
would simply burn, but can be grinded in a mechanical recycling process and used as powdered ﬁllers
or ﬁbrous products. There are examples where it has been used as reinforcement in the construction
Page 6 of 76
==PAGE:16==
3.1
Plastic materials
industry, e.g. as admixture in the mix proportion of lightweight concrete (Panyakapo and Panyakapo,
2008; Buss et al., 2019).
Examples of thermosets are Epoxide (EP), Phenol-formaldehyde (PF),
Polyurethane (PUR) and Unsaturated polyester resins (UP) (Plastics Europe, 2021).
Figure 2: European plastic demand by segment and polymer types in 2019 of total 50.7 Million tonnes.
Data for EU28+NO/CH (Plastics Europe, 2020)
The most common types of plastic resins in quantity are the thermosets PE (HDPE and LDPE),
PP, PVC and PET (Plastics Europe, 2020). The demand by segment and polymer types for the
European market in 2019 is illustrated in Figure 2. The largest segment is packaging accounting for
nearly 40% of the European plastic demand and is mainly covered by PE, PP and PET polymer
resins. The building and construction segment counts for more than 20% and is dominated by PVC
followed by those also represented for the packaging. The third largest segment is categorized as other
applications, where the polyoleﬁns (PP and PE) again dominate. In Table 1, the most common ther-
moplastics with their Society of the Plastics Industry (SPI) code (for polymer resin identiﬁcation),
are presented alongside their general functions and selected examples of applications (Plastindustrien,
2021b; EEA, 2021b; Buss et al., 2019).
The combination of the climate crisis and focus on the necessity of reduced use of non-renewable
sources has led to the development of bio-plastics. Bio-based plastics are made of renewable resources
like sugar beets, cane, corn, cellulose or from residues from agriculture, which are processed into the
polymers - just like those from non-renewable source, but renamed into bio-PE, bio-PET and bio-PA.
Biodegradable plastics can be made from both renewable and non-renewable sources, and these plastic
types cannot be recycled with their cousin resins, but must undergo degradation by microorganisms or
certain fungi. Biocompostable plastic packaging must live up to the criteria for the European standard
EN 13432 in order to classify as biocompostable. These requirements cover composting to a certain
degree in a period of 10 weeks under speciﬁc controlled conditions including temperature, moisture
level and right microorganisms present. This can only be fulﬁlled in commercial plants designed
Page 7 of 76
==PAGE:17==
3.1
Plastic materials
Table 1: Most common types of thermoplastics and their Society of the Plastics Industry (SPI) code,
function and applications (Plastindustrien, 2021b; EEA, 2021b; Buss et al., 2019)
Name
Function
Applications (selected)
Polyethylene Terephthalate
(PET) [1]
High strength and rigidity make it very
resistant towards high pressure and tur-
bulence while preserving its heat stability
and barrier properties. One of the most
used types of plastic in the European
packaging industry today.
Beverage bottles, medicine
jars, ropes, polyester in textiles,
bottles for cleaning detergents.
High-Density Polyethylene
(HDPE) [2]
The semi-crystalline structure allows
closer stacking of the polymers and thereby
making the plastic stronger, but also results
in a lower opacity. The physical-chemical
properties make it very form stable,
resistant to moisture, frost-proof, making
it a very versatile plastic type.
Containers for food,
beverages and cosmetics,
waste bins, gasoline dunks,
petrol tanks, garbage bags,
bottle caps, toys, pipes, various
housewares.
Polyvinyl Chloride
(PVC) [3]
Made of 57% salt and 43% crude oil, making
it hard, strong and stiﬀ. It is an amorphous
polymer, characterized by long polymer chains
that are often interlinked or tangled. It has
good optical properties, but varying heat- and
weather stability, which is compensated for
by adding various additives. PVC can be
made into hard or soft products, depending on
the additives used. Currently, the third most
used plastic type in the world.
Pipes, tiles, medical
equipment, construction, window
frames, ﬂoor and wall covering,
cable insulation, garden hoses,
inﬂatable pools.
Low-Density Polyethylene
(LDPE) [4]
The low-density PE has a long-branched structure,
making it more ﬂexible and translucent due to the
high opacity. The see through quality makes this
type very suitable for foodpackaging. It is tougher,
ﬂexible and softer than its sister compound HDPE,
but also less strong.
Cling-ﬁlm, soft packaging,
food packaging, trays, containers,
squeezable bottles, reusable
bags, coating of cardboard.
Polypropylene
(PP) [5]
The second most used plastic type in the world,
due to its good physical-chemical properties.
It is hard, strong and heat resistant, making it
suitable for sterilization and can go into the micro-
wave.
Food containers, bottle caps,
cups, textiles, rugs, ropes,
medical equipment, car
components, wrappers, pipes,
microwave containers, bank notes.
Polystyrene
(PS) [6]
High opacity, stiﬀ, brittle material with a low
melting point. It also has low barrier properties
towards water and oxygen, but the low price
makes this type widespread in society, especially
for single-use or short lived items.
Packaging foam, single-use
food and beverage
containers, cutlery, CD cassettes,
electronic devices, insulation,
inner lining in fridges, eyeglass
frames.
Other [7]
Polyethylene (PE), Acrylonitrile butadiene
styrene (ABS), Polyamide (PA), nylons,
Polybutylene terephthalate (PBT), plexiglass
(PMMA), Polycarbonat (PC), Polytetraﬂuoro-
ethylene (PTFE).
Toys, baby bottles, compacts
discs, medical storage
containers, textiles, optical ﬁbers,
cable coating, touch screens,
medical implants, surgical devices,
membranes, valves, protective
coatings, etc.
Page 8 of 76
==PAGE:18==
3.2
Current state for plastic handling in the EU
for this exact purpose, with the output of water, biomass, carbon dioxide and methane. Oxo-
degradable plastics contains additives that split the plastics into smaller parts when exposed to oxygen,
and is therefore not degraded instead undergoes fragmentation. (Plastindustrien, 2021b)
Currently, plastic made from renewable sources or designed to be degradable, does not mean
that they are more natural or necessarily have lesser of on an impact on the environment. Examples
on unwanted migration of chemicals and poorer quality of bio-based plastics have been recorded.
Furthermore, miscommunication between producers and consumers on what bio-degradable means
and how to properly dispose of the products by the end-of-life stage and the extensive demand for
land use, are some of the current obstacles for these innovations. (Bigum, 2018; CSR, 2020)
3.2
Current state for plastic handling in the EU
Today, around 60% of all plastic products used in the EU have a use phase from 1-50 years before
they enter the waste management system or end up in the natural environment. A study from 2002
by Brunner and Rechberger estimated that around 80% of chemical stocks (including plastics) is
found within the anthroposphere, making the urban stock a gigantic reservoir of materials, but also a
potential wasp nest when it comes to hazardous chemicals long taken oﬀthe market. The two major
plastic stocks are found in the deposits of plastic wastes and in the accumulation in the consumption
process, including general consumer products, households, electronics, construction, industry and more
(Brunner and Rechberger, 2002).
In 2018, 29.1 million tons of plastic waste were collected in the EU (28MS+NO/CH) for further
treatment counting: waste to energy (incineration) (42%), recycling (32%) and landﬁll disposal (25%).
Since 2006, the landﬁll fraction has decreased with 44%, where incineration and recycling has increased
with respectively 77% and 100%. However, the increasing recycling rate, does not reﬂect how much
is being recycled in reality.
For decades, Western countries have been exporting waste fractions,
primarily to Asia, in compliance with legal principles. But since China’s ’Operation National Sword’
the import ban from 2018 (24 categories of solid waste fractions including certain plastic types), waste
ﬂows worldwide have been greatly aﬀected - including the EU where around 80% of plastic waste were
formerly sent to China (Brooks et al., 2018).
The EC has stated that the people of the EU need to rethink the sorting and recycling systems,
especially when it comes to household plastic waste, since more than 40% of plastic packaging waste
now ends up in the mixed household waste fraction. They point at limited sorting discipline, changing
guidelines and a lack of space for separate collection in urban areas, as key reasons to explain this large
percentage in the mixed fraction. The structural systems for sorting and recycling varies between the
countries in the EU, and on top of that, there can be regional changes as well within the MS. Most
MS has both collecting and recycling systems for commercial and household waste, whereas others
are lacking behind on mature systems (Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021). The waste management
procedure for recycling broadly follows these steps across the EU (Plastics Europe, 2020):
1. Collection of end-of-life plastic products from mixed and separate waste streams.
2. Sorting with separation by type of material and then by polymer type.
3. Shredding were the plastics are grounded into smaller pieces.
4. Washing to remove dirt and dust.
5. Second sorting and control.
6. The ﬁnal step is extrusion, where the plastic ﬂakes are converted into homogeneous pellets and
ready to be sold as a secondary source material.
Page 9 of 76
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Current state for plastic handling in the EU
A way to segment the diﬀerent plastic types is by labeling by the EU voluntary identiﬁcation sys-
tem for plastics (EC, 1997). Here, the codes from SPI (Society of the Plastics Industry) are marked on
the plastic product based on six diﬀerent material categories (see Table 1), with guidelines on how they
may be recycled (EC, 1997). The ﬁeld within automated identiﬁcation and sorting methods for post-
consumer plastics in waste streams are under development and includes tracers, ﬂuorescence markers,
time-gated ﬂuorescence spectroscopy, optical ﬁngerprints among other techniques (Fink, 2018).
In Figure 3 the steps of the Waste Hierarchy is shown. A concept ﬁrst presented in the 1975/442/EEC
Waste Framework Directive from 1975 (now 2008/98/EC Waste Framework Directive) (Directive,
2008). The ﬁve options for waste are ordered by the most preferred in the top and the least in the
bottom (EC, 2015). In this section a brief overview of current state and actions in the MS is presented.
Figure 3: The Waste Hierarchy from the Waste Framework Directive by the European Commission
(EC, 2015)
Prevention is on top of the hierarchy, and thus the most preferred option for handling wastes
is to eliminate it. This is supported by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation and is in alignment with
latest announcements from the EC that wish to improve the CE and have ambitions on zero pollution
(MacArthur, 2013; Loonela and Stoycheva, 2021). Today, almost 40% of the European plastic demand
is on the packaging segment, primarily on the plastic types PE, PP and PET, and one of the objectives
of the Single-use Plastic Directive is to eliminate certain single-use plastic items (Plastics Europe, 2020;
EC, 2019b). Initiatives on prevention are:
• The Zero waste movement with Zero Waste Europe, Break Free from Plastic, among others
(Zero Waste Europe, 2021; Break Free From Plastic, 2021).
• French ban on plastic packaging of fresh produce which entering into force 2022 and a graduate
phase out all single-use plastics by 2040 (Chrisaﬁs, 2021).
Reuse models and initiatives are blooming within the Union.
The ISO standard ’18603:2013
Packaging and the environment’ deﬁnes reuse as a product or packaging that must be used for the
same purpose or reﬁlled for what is was originally intended (ISO, 2013). There are conﬂicting ﬁndings
in studies on plastic reusal. Some Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) studies have found the longevity and
durability of plastic to be too low compared to glass or stainless steel, and therefore recommend those
alternative materials over plastics, where other studies conclude that the smaller carbon footprint of
plastics compared to alternative materials, outweigh the lower durability and conclude that plastic
is better option for reuse (Hopewell et al., 2009; Lord et al., 2016). It is crucial to pay attention to
Page 10 of 76
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Current state for plastic handling in the EU
the scope, delimitations and which phases has been included of these studies, as they often cannot be
compared one to one, which may be one explanation for the opposite conclusions (Zhu et al., 2020).
Some examples of instruments applied for plastic reuse in the EU are:
• EUs Plastics Strategy aiming at protecting the environment, lower GHG emissions and reduce
dependency on fossil fuels, and transform the full life cycle of plastics in the EU including design,
production, use and recycling (EC, 2018).
• France announced their reuse goals in 2020 for packaging where 5% shall be reused by 2023
and 10% by 2027. Furthermore, a minimum 5% of the revenue goes into developing the reuse
system and hereby place the ﬁnancial burden and the responsibility on the producer. Since
2021, businesses oﬀering reusing solutions and employs vulnerable groups and individuals are
exempted from VAT. It is also required that take-away beverages shall be oﬀered served in a
reusable alternative and that it must be cheaper than single-use item (Mouritsen et al., 2020).
• The Danish NGO Plastic Change made a consumer survey in 2021 and found that 90% of
Danish consumer would return reusable food packaging if it were part of a deposit scheme
(Plastic Change, 2021a).
Recycling refers to a recovery operation (physical or chemical) were waste materials are reprocessed
into new resources (Plastics Europe, 2021; Fink, 2018). For years, a crucial issue has been the cost
eﬃciency of recycling - the price for collecting, sorting, and further processing household plastic waste,
has been too costly compared to incineration or landﬁll disposal (Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021).
This is connected to the current material quality of recycled plastics being insuﬃcient for wide usage
and cannot qualify as a primary resource at this point. This fact, combined with the relatively low
prices for the virgin plastic materials, makes it a though market for secondary materials that mostly
qualify for down-cycling where the recycled material has a lower quality or functionality compared to
the original material. The lower quality for recycled plastics can be due to inhomogeneities, mix of
colors, and strong smells. On top of that, the amounts of hazardous constituents from the feedstock
currently represent a huge knowledge gap, as the level of additives in the waste stream has not yet
been quantiﬁed (Groh et al., 2019; Brunner and Rechberger, 2002; Chemsec, 2020). A vicious cycle of
high recycling prices, poor- and low-quality output, low proﬁtability, and low investments keeps the
quality and the demand low. The EC now recognize the need to legally enforce higher usage of recycled
materials, by creating a market allowing former disposed resources to be up-cycled to secondary, and
eventually, primary resources (Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021; EC, 2018).
There are diﬀerent forms of recycling options when it comes to processing the of plastic products
into secondary resource plastic polymers or pellets, that can be used in the manufacturing of new
plastic products or conversion into energy. There are three main categories of plastic recycling and
they include: mechanical recycling (where the molecular structure is preserved), chemical recycling
(where the polymers are split), and pyrolysis (where the material is converted into a liquid product
that can be reﬁned) (Fink, 2018; Miandad et al., 2019). Mechanical recycling is the primary form
of recycling used in the EU today, for which thermoplastics can be recycled (Plastics Europe, 2021).
Recycling rates were updated in the EU in 2018, and now set at 50% in 2025 and 55% in 2030
(Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021).
• In 2020 a new calculation method was implemented for the recycling rate in the EU. The change
in methodology has resulted in a reduction in the estimated packaging recycling rate from 2018
42% to 29%. (Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021)
• The European Green Deal, via the Circular Economy Plan, will introduce the legislation on
minimum share of recycled content of plastic in the range 15-30% by 2022 at the latest, with
Page 11 of 76
==PAGE:21==
3.3
Environmental, human and safety risks from plastics
the exemption of food packaging that are under strict food safety regulations (Hesselink and van
Duuren, 2021)
Currently, most municipal residual waste ends up in the bottom of the waste hierarchy: either
energy is recovered by incineration or it is disposed of landﬁlls. Especially the waste fraction of plastics
is considered often too contaminated and too complex in mixture, compromising the feasibility of
reuse or recycling (Plastics Europe, 2020; Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021). With the current agenda
presented by the EC in the Green Deal, this fraction must go from being disposed, to be integrated on
the market as a secondary resource by closing the loop and fulﬁlling their visions of a CE (Hesselink
and van Duuren, 2021). Landﬁlls have been used, and are still being used today, but to a decreasing
extend in the EU, as the ﬁnal destination for the lowest quality and contaminated plastic materials.
An unknown quantity and collection of additives are present in the landﬁlls with risk of leakage or
dispersion of hazardous chemical substances. Landﬁlls were originally created for degradable products,
but this is not the case with plastics. There is currently missing information on the composition of
the ﬂows and the present stock in the landﬁll in order to make a foundation for environmental and
resource management (Brunner and Rechberger, 2002). There is still a way to go before all plastic
packaging is reused, recycled, or composted in practice in the EU.
• Restrictions on landﬁlls will be implemented from 2030, all waste suitable for recycling or other
recovery shall not be accepted at a landﬁll in the EU (Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021)
3.3
Environmental, human and safety risks from plastics
Plastic is found everywhere today: in the air, freshwaters, the oceans, on land, and in diﬀerent living
organisms including humans (Vega et al., 2021; Wright and Kelly, 2017; Jakobsen, 2020; Talsness
et al., 2009; Jensen et al., 2019; Prata et al., 2021; Catarino et al., 2018; Weis and Palmquist, 2021;
K¨ogel et al., 2020). Roughly two-thirds of all plastics ever produced has entered the environment,
and only 9% has been recycled since 1950 (CIEL et al., 2019b; Ritchie and Roser, 2018). Here it
remains in the form of macroplastic as litter or debris, and as micro- and nanoplasticparticles in the
air, agricultural soil, water supply and in the oceans in various shapes and sizes (CIEL et al., 2019b;
Allan et al., 2021). The speciﬁc amount of plastic entering the marine environment is unknown, but
estimates are that it was around 4.8-12.7 million MT in 2010 and is projected to increase by an order
of magnitude by 2025, where the amount of mismanaged plastic waste is even higher of 100 million
MT in 2020 and around 220 million MT in 2060 if continuing with business-as-usual (Jambeck et al.,
2015; Lebreton and Andrady, 2019; Vega et al., 2021). Common sources of plastics ending up in the
environment are synthetic ﬁbers from laundering textiles, sanitary items and cosmetic products, abra-
sion of vehicle tires, plastic coatings and paints, release from artiﬁcial turfs and playgrounds, ﬁshing
and shipping activities, pellet loss from plastic production facilities, uncontrolled dumping, ﬂy-tipping
and littering, and mismanaged plastic waste (MPW) (EEA, 2021a). Common routes are migration,
emissions, leaching, degradation, fragmentation and release, which may come from food contact, litter
in the marine or terrestrial environment, mechanical or chemical reprocessing, incineration, landﬁll or
open burning (Hahladakis et al., 2018), and the distribution of plastics in the environment can hap-
pen via littering, run-oﬀfrom the recipient, snow disposal, atmospheric disposition, and more (EEA,
2021a). This is a problem as it poses a threat towards human health and for life in various ecosystems
(Lambert et al., 2014; Auta et al., 2017; Crawford and Quinn, 2017; Ryberg et al., 2019). Plastic
pollution is a complex problem, characterized by both physical issues (macro and micro pieces) and
chemical issues (additives). Furthermore, it is also important to assess the potential alternatives to
plastic, as well as their impacts. In a comprehensive study in 2018 packaging alternatives to plastic
were found to have a greater environmental impact by nearly four times including costs, energy and
Page 12 of 76
==PAGE:22==
3.3
Environmental, human and safety risks from plastics
material use, and ocean damage (Lord et al., 2016). Some scientists and environmental advocates even
argue that critics fail to see the positive environmental impacts of plastic in the modern era. Plastics
have even been imagined by some to serve as a solution to climate change, through storing sequestered
carbon for centuries in the very same plastics we abhor for indestructibility (Rollin and Gallegos, 2018).
For animals, harmful eﬀects include suﬀocation and other injuries caused by macroplastic es-
pecially for marine life, starvation caused by ingestion of microplastics, and plastics as carrier of
contaminants (Jensen et al., 2019; Prata et al., 2021). Recent studies have found indications that mi-
croplastics can interfere with the functioning of ecosystems e.g. aﬀect the permeability in soil matrices
and aﬀect biogeochemical processes, and that marine microplastics can aﬀect phytoplankton photo-
synthesis and growth, have toxic eﬀects on zooplankton, aﬀect marine biological pump and impact
the sedimentation ﬂuxes in oceans, particles on the bottom of the ocean in caves and pockets aﬀecting
the marine ecosystems, and aﬀect carbon stock in the oceans (Prata et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2020;
Long et al., 2015).
A study by Catarino et al. (2018), found that humans are exposed to up to 100 plastic ﬁbers
per meal via their homes from dust, surfaces, material breakage, erosion, etc. Their ﬁndings further
indicate that household ﬁbers are a greater pathway of plastic ﬁbers than from foods, in this case,
mussels. Wright and Kelly (2017) made a cross-disciplinary scientiﬁc review to outline and discuss
potential human health impacts from microplastics on the areas of accumulation, particle toxicity,
and chemical and microbial contaminants.
A special concern when it comes to additives, is the distribution in the natural environment and
exposure to humans with potentially following negative health eﬀects. A study by Groh et. al. (2019)
have found huge gaps of knowledge within this area, where there is a lack of transparency when it
comes to additives in plastics, both concerning the use and the toxicity of the substances. Crucial
information on the use and the hazard eﬀects of a thousands of substances are incomplete or missing.
Reliable data on how the chemicals are used, in which applications in what quantities and what levels,
are found in the ﬁnal products are needed in order to make exposure- and chemical risk assessments,
and these assessments are key to give a qualiﬁed input on the impacts towards the environment and
human health (Zhu et al., 2020; Diamond et al., 2015; Groh et al., 2019) Negative human health- and
environmental eﬀects are well known for a long list of these additives including: endocrine disruptors
(EDC), carcinogenic, mutagenic and toxic for reproduction (CMR) and persistent bio-accumulative
and toxic (PBT) (Vethaak and Leslie, 2016; Talsness et al., 2009; CIEL et al., 2019b). Some of these
substances are identiﬁed and controlled under EU law, others are under evaluation or on observer lists
for consideration1. The harmful or potentially toxic substances and additives, creates complications
throughout the life cycle of plastics. The undesirable release may come from inappropriate use, dis-
posal or through recycling (Hahladakis et al., 2018; Groh et al., 2019; Hopewell et al., 2009).
Examples of problematic additives used in plastic, their function, and negative EHS eﬀects:
• Alkylphenols are used as a surfactant in plastics in contact with liquids among other products.
It is classiﬁed PBT and EDC, where negative human health eﬀects include low sperm count,
prostate development, breast cancer for both men and women (Danish EPA, 2021; Thompson
et al., 2009; Hahladakis et al., 2018).
• Bisphenols, like BPA, BPS and BPF, are intermediates or monomers used in the production
of polycarbonate plastic and epoxy resins and as food can linings for beverages bottles, sports
equipment and more (Plastindustrien, 2021a). The bisphenols are identiﬁed as very harmful by
the EU due to EDC eﬀects (Danish EPA, 2021; Groh et al., 2019). The substitutes to BPA
1An overview of the candidate list can be seen on ECHAs website (ECHA, 2021a)
Page 13 of 76
==PAGE:23==
3.4
EU law and plastics
are often BPS and BPF, which are often found in plastic products advertising BPA free, are
just as harmful if not more. Negative eﬀects towards the human health are impacts on the
brain development and human behavior, anxiety, depression, hyperactivity, reproductive health,
reduced fertility, PCOS, cancer, increase rate of cell division, and more (Thompson et al., 2009;
Hahladakis et al., 2018).
• Phthalates are used as a plasticizer to promote the ﬂexibility in plastic to reduce brittleness and
is widely used in various diﬀerent applications, despite some are restrictricted within REACH
but may still be used in some food contact materials (FCM) (Groh et al., 2019). Some studies
have found high migration rates of phthalates to foods from FMC (Fankhauser-Noti and Grob,
2006; Li et al., 2016). It is classiﬁed EDC and the negative health eﬀects includes reduction of
testosterone and estrogen, linked to cause obesity and diabetes, black thyroid hormone action
and more (Danish EPA, 2021; Thompson et al., 2009; Hahladakis et al., 2018).
• The perﬂuoronated compounds, like per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS), are ﬂameretar-
dants and classify as Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) and are listed under the Stockholm
Convention (Stockholm Convention, 2001). They are known as ”forever chemicals” due to their
very strong C-F bond and are both water and oil repellent. These qualities have been used since
the 1940s in food contact wraps and cookware like Teﬂon pans, but has been out phased after
the POPs classiﬁcation in 2009, though still found in the environment due to their high persis-
tency. The EDC eﬀects includes disruption of immune system, reduced birth weight, alteration
of puberty, increase of hormone related cancers (like breast-, prostate-, ovarian-, and testicular
cancer) (Danish EPA, 2021; Thompson et al., 2009; ECHA, 2021b).
• Another type of ﬂameretardant are the brominated ﬂameretardants (BFRs). Some are added,
but not all, are added to the Stockholm Convention as they are PBT (Stockholm Convention,
2001). They are used in plastics e.g. electronic casings, toys, synthetic foams and synthetic
textiles. They are also EDC and can disrupt female and male reproductive development, alter
thyroid development and aﬀect neuro development (Danish EPA, 2021).
• UV stabilizers are used in plastics to protect against damage and fading caused by sun rays.
A commonly used UV stabilizer is UV-328 which has been proposed to be included in the
Stockholm Convention due to its persistency. The additive has been detected in human bodies
and breast milk, but the eﬀects are unknown (Thompson et al., 2009; Hahladakis et al., 2018;
Groh et al., 2019).
• Heavy metals (HM), like lead and cadmium, are used as additives in plastic for stabilization and
pigmentation. Lead is a known neurotoxin and cadmium is a kidney toxicant. The HM can
cause hormone dependent cancer and aﬀect fertility (Thompson et al., 2009; Hahladakis et al.,
2018; Groh et al., 2019).
3.4
EU law and plastics
The risks posed towards human health and the environment from the life cycle of plastic polymers are
a matter of the EU based on treaties currently in force. The objectives of the EU are listed in Article 3
in the TEU and includes ”high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment”
(EC, 2016a). Article 4, point e, in the TFEU lists the principle areas of shared competences between
the MS and the Union including the internal market, environment, consumer protection and common
safety concerns in public health matters and more (EC, 2016b). The environment is an example of on
area of shared competences, where the MS can exercise their competence where the EU has not yet or
Page 14 of 76
==PAGE:24==
3.4
EU law and plastics
will not exercise its competence. When it comes to health, there is a distinction between public health
concern, which is a shared competence, and general protection and improvement of human health,
which is a complimentary competence.
The EU has the power to make legislation in deﬁned areas stated in the TEU and the TFEU. It
can take form of legal acts including regulations, directives, decisions, recommendations and opinions
as described in Article 288 in the TFEU (Foster, 2020; EC, 2016b). Regulations are binding in its
entirety and directly applicable in all MS, where directives must be transposed into national law and
the individual MS must achieve the results aimed for in the directive but chose measures it sees ﬁt.
Decisions are binding in its entirety, where recommendations and proposals have no binding force
(EC, 2016b). The competences exercised by the EU must follow fundamental principles within EU
law. The general principles of EU law and environmental principles are presented in Table 2 with at
overview of respective treaty articles and deﬁnitions.
Table 2: General principles of EU law and environmental principles applied in EU law, treaty articles
and their deﬁnitions (EC, 2016a; EC, 2016b)
Principle
Article
Deﬁnition
General principles of EU law
Principle of Proportionality
Article 5, TEU
EU law shall only cover the necessary to meet the objectives.
Principle of Subsidiarity
Article 5, TEU
The EU shall only legislate on matters where the MS cannot
eﬀectively meet the objectives.
Principle of Conferral
Article 5, TEU
The EU can only legislate on subjects on which powers
has been conferred to it by the MS.
Principle of Supremacy
-
EU law is supreme to national law.
Principle of Sincere cooperation
Article 4, TEU
MS shall operate sincerely.
Principle of Eﬀectiveness
Article 4, TEU
EU law shall eﬀectively meet its objectives.
Principle of Equivalence
Article 4, TEU
National law shall be equivalent to EU law.
Environmental principles
Polluter Pays Principle
Article 191(2), TFEU
Makes the polluter responsible paying for their pollution,
and is a mean to avoid unfair competition advantages
on the expense of the environment and general well-being
of society.
Precautionary Principle
Article 191(2), TFEU
Precaution ought to be taken where there is risk of irreversible
harm, and high levels of uncertainty and complexity.
Prevention Principle
Article 191(2), TFEU
Allow action to protect the environment at an early
stage to prevent serious harm, but is not as far-
reaching as the Precautionary Principle.
Rectiﬁcation at Source Principle
Article 191(2), TFEU
Environmental damage should be resolved at the source.
The EU shall only act on subjects which are better handled at EU level if MS cannot eﬀectively
meet the objectives (Principle of Subsidiarity), and actions may not go further than to achieve the
objectives deﬁned in the treaties (Principle of Proportionality). These two principles are fundamental
in describing the extend of powers of the EU in relation to the autonomy of the MS. However, EU law
is supreme to national law (Principle of Supremacy), MS are obliged to operate sincerely to achieve the
Page 15 of 76
==PAGE:25==
3.4
EU law and plastics
objectives set by EU legal acts (Principle of Sincere cooperation), and national law shall be equivalent
to EU law (Principle of Equivalence). The EU only has the power which has been conferred to it
(Principle of Conferral) and thus can only legislate on areas given in the treaties. The EU is also
obliged to ensure that EU law eﬀectively meets its objective (Principle of Eﬀectiveness) (EUR-Lex,
2016; EC, 2016a; EC, 2016b; Foster, 2020).
The polluter can be made responsible for the clean up or for covering the health costs of those
aﬀected (Polluter Pays Principles), and is implemented as a mean to avoid unfair competition advan-
tages on the expense of the environment and general well-being of society. This is done by controlling
the pollution discharge, charging the polluters to pay for the environmental protection and to make
polluters liable for the damage they cause by internalizing costs. Critique points raised for this princi-
ple are that pollution is legitimized for wealthy companies, doubt on who the polluter is, and in some
cases, discussions on liability.
The Precautionary Principle emerged in European Environmental Law in the late 1970s, but
was broadly recognized after the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in 1992
where it was included in the Rio Declaration. In the TEU, the principle is the legal basis for European
Environmental law, and plays an increasingly important role in the environmental health polices (EC,
2016a; Foster et al., 2000). The principle speciﬁed that scientiﬁc uncertainty is not an excuse for
inaction on problems with concerns towards the environment or human health. Precaution ought to
be taken where there is risk of irreversible harm, high levels of uncertainty and complexity. Advocates
see it as the most responsible response to technological risk, where critiques are concerned that fear of
taking risks may lead to stagnation in technological development (Foster et al., 2000; Kaebnick et al.,
2016). The aim is to shift the burden of proof to favor the environment and human health, but it
can also result in the opposite, where scientiﬁc uncertainty can be used by lobbyists as arguments for
lack of proof of risks and thus lead to political and legal inaction. The Prevention Principle is used to
allow action to protect the environment at an early stage to prevent serious, but is not at far-reaching
as the Precautionary Principle.
The Rectiﬁcation at source Principle states that environmental damage should be resolved at
the source and is used in policy to direct measures toward the cause of the problem as opposed to
minimizing derived consequences after the damage has occurred.
The deﬁnition of polymers used in the EU comes from the deﬁnition made by The Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 1990, and further description on polymers
is provided by ECHA in their guidance paper on implementation of REACH (OECD, 2021; ECHA,
2012). In EU law a polymer is deﬁned as a ”a substance consisting of molecules characterized by the
sequence of one or more types of monomer unit. Such molecules must be distributed over a range of
molecular weights. Diﬀerences in the molecular weight are primarily attributable to diﬀerences in the
number of monomer units.” (ECHA, 2012). Furthermore, it must meet the following criteria, a) Over
50% of the weight for that substance consists of polymer molecules, and b) The amount of polymer
molecules presenting the same molecular weight must be less than 50 weight percent of the substance,
in accordance with Article 3(5) in REACH (ECHA, 2012; EC, 2006).
Polymers are currently exempted from the registration and evaluation under REACH, but it is
under revision as the EC has set a goal to include them by 2022 (EC, 2006; Oziel, 2019). Which
criteria should be used for the identiﬁcation of polymers requiring registration (PRR) is currently
being discussed (Oziel, 2019; Wood, 2020; Steensgaard et al., 2017). They are not exempted from
the classiﬁcation, labeling and packaging of chemical substances and mixtures (CLP) regulation (EC,
2008a).
The issue with plastic pollution as both a physical and chemical pollutant is recognized by the
EC (EC, 2013; Rochman et al., 2013b). The EC has performed several actions towards creating a
Page 16 of 76
==PAGE:26==
3.4
EU law and plastics
more sustainable future based on the principles from CE. These include environmental policy guidance
and strategic vision for achieving a climate neutral economy by 2050 with the European Green Deal,
European Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, and the 8th Environment Action Program among
others (Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021; Loonela and Stoycheva, 2020; EC, 2020).
It is underlined in the European Green Deal, that legislation and policies are enforced and delivered
eﬀectively and the EC has further announced that better and improved regulatory guidelines and tools
shall be enforced to address the issues in relation to sustainability and innovation (Hesselink and van
Duuren, 2021). In the letter of intent, the president of the EC, Ursula von der Leyen, announced
key agendas of the EC for 2022 including the intent to come with a ”legislative proposal to reduce the
release of microplastics in the environment and to restrict the addition of microplastics to products”
(von der Leyen, 2021). Furthermore, it has announced that all EU initiatives shall live up to a green
oath to ”do no harm” (EC, 2020).
In October 2020, the EC adopted the European Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability as part of
the European Green Deal (Loonela and Stoycheva, 2020). Several initiatives are speciﬁcally focused
on chemical substances of concern due to the challenges they pose toward human health and the envi-
ronment. One of these initiatives are to strengthen the principle of ”no data, no market” known from
REACH, to make group classiﬁcations by introducing the ”one substance one assessment” process,
and to make a legislative proposal to minimize the release of microplastic (Loonela and Stoycheva,
2020; von der Leyen, 2021).
The Circular Economy Action Plan includes the objectives to ensure less waste, make sustainable
products them norm and focus on the sectors with high gains in transitioning to circularity including
plastics among others. The initiatives towards plastics are based on the serious public concern and the
challenges related the drastic increase in material use. For packaging, materials used in construction
and vehicles, they will come with waste reduction measures and propose mandatory requirements
for recycled content. Furthermore, they have announced three key areas in which their work will
be focused, including: micro plastics, develop a policy framework for the emerging sustainability
challenges for new plastic types e.g. biobased- and biodegradable plastics, and the marine plastic
pollution problem.
On the global level, the EC wish to take lead and inspire other nations with
their ”European Plastics Strategy”, ensure free trade agreements and explore and deﬁne the ”Safe
Operating Space” (SOS) known from the Planetary Boundaries (PB), for natural resource use and
management. (EC, 2020). However, despite the intentions and regulatory activities at EU level, the
damage has not yey been controlled and the EHS risks from plastics are still uncertain (SAPEA, 2021;
Bille Nielsen et al., 2021).
The article by Weis et al. from 2021, identiﬁed a gap between science and reality when it comes to
designing experimental studies on microplastics. They found a lack of connection between scientitiﬁc
studies and natural environments, where they point at the mismatch between microplastics found in
nature and the laboratory tests performed, resulting in major discrepancies. An example hereof is
that mostly microplastic ﬁbres are found in nature, but microbeads are often used in the laboratory.
Furthermore, there is a huge knowledge gap when it comes to toxic chemicals from microplastics and
the contaminants they are carriers of, leading to inabilities to make potential crucial ﬁndings (Weis
and Palmquist, 2021; K¨ogel et al., 2020; Steensgaard et al., 2017). Furthermore, despite the ban of
known hazardous additives, tests repeatedly ﬁnd them in products where they should not be found or
in levels above the limit value. Several studies have found legacy chemicals, like ﬂame retardants, in
recycled plastics, which compromise the CE by distribution of unwanted harmful chemical substances
with known EHS risks (Andra et al., 2012; Filella and Turner, 2018; Leslie et al., 2016; Pivnenko
et al., 2017; Samsonek and Puype, 2013; EC, 2021; Budin et al., 2020; Poulsen et al., 2020).
Page 17 of 76
==PAGE:27==
4
Stakeholder analysis and results
In this section, the results from the stakeholder interviews and survey are presented and analyzed.
This constitutes the identiﬁcation of stakeholders, categorizing into stakeholder groups, mapping of
their motivation and interest toward the plastic sector, and an analysis of their answers from the
interview (part 1). Lastly a small statistical analysis of the survey answers (part 2) is presented.
Table 3: Questions developed for the stakeholder interview. Part 1 has ﬁve open questions and was
carried out as a dialogue in an online recorded Zoom meeting. Part 2 is the anonymous survey with
statements ranked from 1 [no, not at all] to 10 [yes, to a high degree] or [Do not wish to answer].
PART 1 - Open questions
1.a.
What is your organization/company’s role in the plastic sector?
1.b.
Which legislative changes related to plastics are crucial in your opinion?
1.c.
What ethical, scientiﬁc, technical, and social concerns do you have towards human
health and the natural environment related to the plastic sector?
1.d.
What are your future visions for plastics?
1.e.
Which concrete activities do you propose to reach the objective of an absolute sus-
tainable2 plastic sector (changes including legal, structural, societal, company/organi-
zation level, consumer behavior, etc.)?
PART 2 - Survey
2.a.
Is there a plastic crisis aﬀecting the environment and human health?
2.b.
Do the beneﬁts of plastic outweigh the potential negative consequences?
2.c.
Can plastics be absolute sustainable?
2.d.
Is the current plastic legislation in the EU eﬀectively protecting the environment and
human health?
2.e.
Is the handling of negative impacts towards the environment and human health from the
plastic sector a matter of the EU?
2 Absolute sustainable in terms of not exceeding the limits of allocated resources in compliance with the safe
operating space (e.g. the critical impact levels deﬁned for the planetary boundaries), in contrast to relative
sustainability where the level of sustainability is compared between e.g. processes (Rockstr¨om et al., 2009)
4.1
Stakeholder identiﬁcation and motivation
In Table 4 all identiﬁed stakeholders are presented and divided into the respective stakeholder groups,
following Ginige et al. (2018) deﬁnition: National authorities, Non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
Community, Private and corporate sector and Academia and professional associations. In total 57 dif-
ferent stakeholders were identiﬁed and contacted the, where 19 participated in the interviews (marked
in bold with their representatives listed) where 17 of those ﬁlled out the anonymous survey.
Page 18 of 76
==PAGE:28==
4.1
Stakeholder identiﬁcation and motivation
Table 4: All identiﬁed stakeholders divided by their respective stakeholder group and its deﬁnition
(Ginige et al., 2018). The stakeholders participating in the stakeholder interviews are marked in bold
with their representative and their title.
Stakeholder group and deﬁnition
Stakeholders
Represented by
NATIONAL AUTHORITIES
are public and semi-public
entities with interests in
global challenges and research.
They develop and enforce
rules, laws, and regulation,
and mediate between public
and private interests on
local, national and inter-
national level
Amager Resource Center (A-R-C)
Asthma-Allergy Denmark
Consumer Ombudsman
Danish Env. Protection Agency (EPA)
Danish Parliament
Ecolabelling Denmark
European Environment Agency
European Chemicals Agency
Municipality of Copenhagen
Municipality of Vesthimmerland
Danish Health Authority
Ida Leisner (special consultant)
Jesper Skovby Jørgensen (Circularity, Economy and
Waste AC-technician)
Lisbeth Engel Hansen (criteria manager) and
Heidi Belinda Bugge (senior env. expert)
Jonas ˚Abo Mortensen (special consultant for
resources and waste)
NGOs
operate at grassroots level
with locals and communities,
represents the vulnerable, and
take participatory action in
planning and research. Their
work is non-proﬁt or voluntary
Center for Int. Env. Law (CIEL)
Danish Consumer Council THINK Chemistry
Danish Society for Nature Cons.
Ecological Council
European Consumer Org.
Oceana
Plastic Change
Thinktank Ocean
World Wild Fund for Nature (WWF)
Zero Waste Europe
David Azoulay (senior attorney for Health and env.)
Claus Jørgensen (project manager on chemistry)
Lone Mikkelsen (senior consultant on chem. and
circular economy)
Naja Andersen (senior policy advisor)
Linea Therkelsen (political assistant)
Pernille Haagen (circular economy and materials
advisor)
COMMUNITY
consists of individuals and
groups that have a direct interest
in a certain challenge or activity,
where they participate, have
experience within or some level
of leadership position connected
to the respective topic
CO-Industri
DAKOFA
Danish Ass. of Cosmetics and Detergents
Danish Chamber of Commerce
Danish Industry
Danish Plastic Federation
Danish Restaurateurs trade ass.
Danish Waste Ass.
HORESTA
Plastics Converters
PlasticsEurope
Plastics Recyclers Europe
Polyoleﬁns Circ. Eco. Platform
Styrenics Circular Solutions
The Com. of PET Manufact. in Europe
VinylPlus
Louise B¨unemann (head of EU env. policy)
Christina Busk (chief of env. policy) and
Anders Kildegaard Knudsen (env. consultant)
Page 19 of 76
==PAGE:29==
4.1
Stakeholder identiﬁcation and motivation
PRIVATE AND
CORPORATE SECTOR
includes the privately owned
business and industrial groups,
and they are focused on internal
proﬁts. They are the driving
force behind socio-economic
development and are responsible
the implementation of standards,
policies, and regulations
Biofabrik
Coloplast
COOP
Danish Deposit System
Faerch Plast
Genplast
Kleen Hub
Plastix
Plus Pack
Salling Group
Schwarz
Tetra Pak
Hanne Marianne Svenningsen (chief of env.)
Stig Steendahl Nielsen (owner)
Robert Dichtl (co-founder)
Lars Sickert (early innovation portfolio management)
ACADEMIA AND
PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATIONS
counts organizations, associations
and universities engaged in research,
education, training and development
of standards, methods and guidelines
Aalborg University
Aarhus University
Center for Endocrine Disruptors (CEHOS)
Graduate Institute of Geneva
National Museum of Denmark
Plastic HEAL
Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts
Technical University of Denmark
Jakob Strand (senior researcher on env. bio. and chem.)
Anna-Maria Andersson (center leader of CEHOS)
Yvonne Shashoua (research professor in
synthetic materials)
The participating stakeholders and their relation to the plastic sector are presented in the overview
Figure 4. The National authorities are represented by a resource center (A-R-C), a governmental insti-
tution (Danish EPA), a semi-public not-for-proﬁt entity (Ecolabelling Denmark), and a municipality
(Municipality of Copenhagen). The NGOs represents the largest stakeholder group in this work, as
six out of 10 of the identiﬁed stakeholders within this group were willing to participate, which may
explained by alignment between their work the scope of this thesis on developing policy recommenda-
tions focused on environmental and human health protection, and that they are not at risk if being in
ﬁnancial or conﬁdentiality conﬂict like some of the stakeholder groups. They include national NGOs
(Danish Consumer Council THINK Chemistry, Ecological Council and Plastic Change) and interna-
tional NGOs (CIEL, Oceana and WWF). The Community groups is the least represented but also
the group where most identiﬁed stakeholder were contacted, since only two out of 16 were able to
participate. One of the identiﬁed stakeholders in the this group were not able to participate due to
the scope of the thesis including the regulatory aspect and another showed interest in participating but
had to cancel. The two stakeholders that did participate an industry association for the plastic sector
(Danish Plastic Federation) and a national industry association (Danish Industry). The Private and
corporate sector are represented by the company with single right on the Danish deposit system (Dan-
ish Deposit System), a private plastic recycling business (Genplast), a reuse business (Kleen Hub) and
a packaging company (Tetra Pak). The Academia and professional associations are represented by a
Danish university (Aarhus University), a research center (Center) and a national research institution
(National Museum of Denmark).
The identiﬁed motivations in the categories: Economic proﬁt, Environmental protection, Human
health and Innovation and technology, for the stakeholders are seen in Table 5. The identiﬁcation
were based on the interviews and on background research on the stakeholders, and show that the
Community and Private a corporate sector are motivated by economic proﬁt, and this did not apply
for the other stakeholder groups as the other groups are working not-for-proﬁt.
All groups were
motivated by environmental protection, but one stakeholder, CEHOS, that are focused on human
health. Stakeholders motivated by human health include Ecolabelling Denmark by reducing consumer
exposure from harmful and hazardous chemicals from everyday products. This is in alignment with
some of the NGOs motivation including CIEL, THINK Chemistry, Plastic Change and WWF’s, but
deviates by the NGOs political work. The main focus for CEHOS is human health, especially related to
health problems aﬀected by hormonal disorders. All groups had stakeholders motivated by Innovation
and technology except for the NGOs. Several of the NGOs pointed at the critical need to stop the
Page 20 of 76
==PAGE:30==
4.1
Stakeholder identiﬁcation and motivation
outlet of plastics and related chemicals, and to dramatically decrease the consumption applications
made from plastic materials. A-R-C and Municipality of Copenhagen were motivated by new sorting
methods that could increase the eﬀectiveness of the waste management sector and improve recycling
in the future, where stakeholders form the Community, Private and corporate sector and Academia
and professional associations were conﬁdent in the developing of plastics materials from e.g. secondary
resources in a CE.
Figure 4: The stakeholders participating in the interview and survey (expect the Danish Plastic Feder-
ation that did not wish to participate in part 2) divided into stakeholder groups based on the deﬁnitions
from (Ginige et al., 2018)
Page 21 of 76
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Plastic related legislative change suggestions by the stakeholders
Table 5: Stakeholder motivation based on interviews and background research, in the categories:
Economic proﬁt, Environmental protection, Human health and Innovation and technology.
Stakeholder group
Stakeholderreference
Motivation
Economic
proﬁt
Env.
protection
Human
health
Innovation
and tech.
National authorities
A-R-C3
x
x
Danish EPA4
x
Ecolabelling Denmark5
x
x
Municipality of Copenhagen6
x
x
NGOs
CIEL7
x
x
Danish Consumer Council THINK Chemistry8
x
x
Ecological Council9
x
Oceana10
x
Plastic Change11
x
x
WWF12
x
x
Community
Danish Industry13
x
x
x
Danish Plastic Federation14
x
x
x
Private and corp. sector
Danish Deposit System15
x
x
x
Genplast16
x
x
x
Kleen Hub17
x
x
x
Tetra Pak18
x
x
x
Acad. and prof. ass.
Aarhus University19
x
x
CEHOS20
x
National Museum of Denmark21
x
x
x
3 (Due and Leisner, 2021; A-R-C, 2021)
4 (Due and Jørgensen, 2021b; Det Nationale Plastikcenter, 2021)
5 (Due and Hansen, 2021; Ecolabelling Denmark, 2021)
6 (Due and ˚
Abo Mortensen, 2021; Municipality of Copenhagen, 2019)
7 (Due and Azoulay, 2021; CIEL, 2021)
8 (Due and Jørgensen, 2021a; Forbrugerr˚adet Tænk Kemi, 2021)
9 (Due and Mikkelsen, 2021; The Ecological Council, 2021)
10 (Due and Andersen, 2021; Oceana, 2021)
11 (Due and Therkelsen, 2021; Plastic Change, 2021b; Plastic Change, 2021c)
12 (Due and Haagen, 2021; WWF, 2021b; WWF, 2021a)
13 (Due et al., 2021; Plastindutrien, 2019)
14 (Due and B¨unemann, 2021; DI, 2021a; DI, 2021b)
15 (Due and Svenningsen, 2021; Dansk Retursystem, 2021)
16 (Due and Nielsen, 2021; Genplast, 2021; Jakobsen, 2020)
17 (Due and Dichtl, 2021; Due and Dichtl, 2021)
18 (Due and Sickert, 2021; Tetra Pak, 2021)
19 (Due and Strand, 2021; MarinePlastic, 2021; DCE, 2021)
20 (Due and Andersson, 2021; CEHOS, 2021)
21 (Due and Shashoua, 2021; MarinePlastic, 2021)
4.2
Plastic related legislative change suggestions by the stakeholders
All stakeholders supported the waste hierarchy, but diﬀerent opinions were revealed when they were
asked which speciﬁc legislative changes they would suggest for it to be reﬂected in the legal acts.
Here it became clear that they have diﬀerent focus points when it comes to which problems current
Page 22 of 76
==PAGE:32==
4.2
Plastic related legislative change suggestions by the stakeholders
legislation is missing to address, how to prioritize between them, the premises of the discussion about
plastics and where the political focus should be.
General notions on the current state in the legislative landscape in relation to plastics in the EU
includes Genplasts statement ”The current legal system is not suited to support the green transition
required for creating a circular economy”,and elaborated that ”there are simply too many unknowns
and too large risks for the private companies to go into the market of recycled plastics from the house-
hold waste fraction and ﬁshing gear, since there are too many unknowns in the input fraction”. They
further pointed at the fact that plastic recycling is still a very costly process, despite the technological
progress. Furthermore, they do not believe the general market is mature for products made of recycled
plastics from this fraction, as they do not think it is likely the consumers are willing to pay the extra
price for products with a diﬀerent quality than they are used to (including diﬀerent smell, colors,
chemicals, etc.). Genplast underlined that the market for recycled plastic and a functioning CE will
never be realized by itself because there is too little proﬁt for the businesses. Financial support is
crucial, for the CE to become a reality. Ecolabelling Denmark suggested that the governmental and
public institutions should take the lead and commit to the green transition and support sustainable
business by making green public procurement obligatory.
Overall, the focus must be on the entire value chain when looking at CE and for that, a holistic
and systemic framework is needed, said WWF and Danish Deposit System. Ecolabelling Denmark,
WWF and Kleen Hub suggested reusable options for take away, which should not be more expensive
than the single-use alternative, could be implemented by law. Aarhus University and the Danish
Plastic Federation, pointed at the fact that plastics have many diﬀerent applications and are used in
many diﬀerent sectors, and for that reason it was diﬃcult for them to answer this question speciﬁcally.
Lastly, the Danish EPA had no comments to this question, as they follow the agenda determined by
the Danish Ministry of Environment.
The stakeholders mentioned diﬀerent EU legal acts, where these ﬁve were mentioned most; food
contact materials which are covered in Regulation 1935/2004/EC Materials and articles intended to
come into contact with food (FCM Regulation) (EC, 2008b), additives which are covered in Regu-
lation 197/2006/EC Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH)
(EC, 2006), the good design (Eco-design) which is covered in Directive 2009/125/EC Framework for
the setting of eco-design requirements for energy-related products (Eco-design Directive) (EC, 2009),
single-use plastic products covered in Directive 2019/904/EU Reduction of the impact of certain plastic
products on the environment (Single-use Plastic Directive) (EC, 2019b) and producer responsibility
that will be covered by the coming in the Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) scheme (EPR
Info, 2021). An overview of the ﬁve legislative acts are presented in Table 6, followed by summary
of the stakeholder change proposals for each respectively. Other pieces of legislation mentioned were
the international conventions; the Basel Convention on the protection of human health and the en-
vironment against adverse eﬀects of hazardous wastes (Basel Convention, 1989), and the Stockholm
Convention on the protection of human health and the environment from persistent organic pollutants
(Stockholm Convention, 2001).
4.2.1
Regulation on Food Contact Materials
Additives in food contact materials (FCM) are strictly regulated under the FCM Regulation, and
include a positive list over allowed additives in the FCM. This has increased the transparency on
what the plastic contain, and some FCM plastic containers are regarded as high-quality plastics thus
Page 23 of 76
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Plastic related legislative change suggestions by the stakeholders
Table 6: Selected EU legislation based on main focus areas from the stakeholders perspective
Title
Reference
In function
Notes
Materials and articles
intended to come into
contact with food (FCM).
Regulation (EC) No
1935/2004
2004
-
Registration, Evaluation,
Authorisation and Restri-
ction of Chemicals (REACH).
Regulation (EC)
No 1907/2006
2006
Registration and evaluation
of plastic polymers are
currently under revision.
Framework for the setting
of eco-design requirements
for energy-related products
(Eco-design).
Directive 2009/125/EC
2009
Currently under revision
to include more product
types (Sustainable Product
Initiative (SPI)).
Reduction of the impact of
certain plastic products on
the environment (SUP).
Directive (EU) 2019/904
2019
-
Extended Producer Re-
sponsibility (EPR).
-
(2024)
Under revision.
highly demanded for the plastic recycling for other applications. Several of the stakeholder states
that it is crucial to avoid downcycling by keeping FCM quality plastics in the same loop. However,
not all plastic used as FCM poses this high quality. Especially packaging and wrapping are generally
of low quality and are in some cases considered unnecessary, e.g. multi-packaging for single-items,
food packaging, and more. The necessity of food packaging is an example of disagreement between
the stakeholders, where the Danish Plastic Federation, Danish Industry and Tetra Pak points at food
packaging as a savior of food waste. Here, CIEL disagreed and pointed at the need for a larger societal
and cultural shift of changing shopping habits to completely avoid packaging. Plastic Change brought
up the increased plastic packaging for ecological food products that has become essential to keep the
products clean enough to live up to the set quality criteria. A-R-C thinks the strict requirements
for food may be a barrier for a large-scale implementation of reuse in society and reﬂected on the
possibilities to a technological solution to battle issues related to hygiene and foods.
Key points on legislative changes in regard to FCM and plastics:
• Low quality plastic packaging should be eliminated.
• Increased plastic packaging for ecological produce may be an issue.
• Closed loops for high quality FCM plastics.
• Strict rules on hygiene for FMC may limit reusable options.
Page 24 of 76
==PAGE:34==
4.2
Plastic related legislative change suggestions by the stakeholders
4.2.2
REACH
All stakeholders agreed that hazardous or harmful chemicals should not be allowed in plastics. Some
(Danish EPA, Danish Plastic Federation and Genplast) where conﬁdent that current legislation under
REACH is fulﬁlling its scope and suﬃciently protects the environment and human health from harm-
ful or hazardous substances. Others (CEHOS, Danish Consumer Council THINK Chemistry and the
Ecological Council) were not conﬁdent of the eﬃciency of REACH and mentioned speciﬁc areas of
concern: not suﬃciently taking combined eﬀects into account (mixture eﬀects), single classiﬁcations,
frequently given exemptions, and that the precautionary principle is not applied to a required extend
for chemical substances with suspected harmful eﬀects. Their concerns were especially on use phase
of plastics regarding human health, how to avoid accumulation of harmful chemicals in the waste
stream risking to enter the material loop through recycling, and how to avoid exposure towards liv-
ing organisms and accumulation in the ecosystems from the very persistent material. The concerned
stakeholders, highlighted transparency as crucial in regard to minimizing the exposure of harmful and
hazardous additives from plastics and expected that an ingredients list on plastic materials, including
respective additives, would lead to higher knowledge among consumers and result in selection of the
cleaner alternatives. The transparency and knowledge on what plastic contains, is also crucial for the
entire foundation of the CE. The Danish Deposit System, the Ecological Council, and the Danish Con-
sumer Council THINK Chemistry stresses, that additives may limit the recycling potential for some
plastics. They pointed at the necessity for further regulation on which additives should be allowed in
plastics.
Key points on legislative changes regarding additives in plastic:
• Ban on harmful and hazardous additives from plastics.
• Transparency on what plastic types contain.
• Securing the foundation for the CE by restricting which additives enter the loop.
4.2.3
Eco-design Directive
The Eco-design Directive was mentioned as an example of EU law that has proved to have made a
great diﬀerence. The directive is currently applies to electronics, but several of the stakeholders see an
opportunity for a broadening of the concept to include other products with deﬁnitions on what good
design is when it comes to plastics. Danish Industry and WWF mentioned the upcoming Sustainable
Products Initiative (SPI), which will revise the Eco-design Directive by including more product groups,
make them more energy eﬀective, more durable, focus on reuse, repair, and recycling, and look into
the harmful chemicals in certain product groups - aiming at making sustainable products the norm
on the European market. The extended warranty was mentioned speciﬁcally by Kleen Hub and the
Danish Consumer Council THINK Chemistry, and they believe it must be determined politically at
EU level to have a real eﬀect. Lastly, the product passport was highlighted as a promising piece of
legislation by the Danish Industry and the Danish Consumer Council THINK Chemistry.
The good design with end-of-life in mind at the designing phase is supported by several of the
stakeholders, but what this includes varied among them. Some stakeholders focused on the design
for recycling (Danish Plastic Federation and Genplast), and others focused on the reuse and repair
aspects (Ecological Council and WWF). Ecolabelling Denmark, Danish Deposit System and the Dan-
ish Plastic Federation pointed at the need for strict standards, design guidelines and a deﬁnition of
high-quality plastic. This should be described in the legislation, to ensure the foundation of a CE
Page 25 of 76
==PAGE:35==
4.2
Plastic related legislative change suggestions by the stakeholders
for plastics - control over the input gives a better output fraction for recycling. A-R-C, Danish Con-
sumer Council THINK Chemistry, Municipality of Copenhagen and WWF stated that plastic types
for certain applications should be regulated and some, like composite, completely out-phased due to
un-recyclability. Several of the stakeholders stated certain plastic types could be reserved for some
applications, like PET for food packaging. Genplast and WWF believe that rules and standards for
good-design is key, and sanctions could be used to enforce compliance. The National Museum of
Denmark also follow this line of argumentation, by referring to the polluter pays principle. In their
opinion, this principle should be followed to a larger extend than what is currently the case.
Key points on legislative changes for the design:
• Good design starts with considering end-of-life
• Missing deﬁnition for high-quality plastic
• Reserve some plastic types for certain applications
• Eco-design and sustainable products should be the norm in the EU
• Extended product warranty in all MS
4.2.4
Single-use Plastic Directive
The Danish Plastic Federation stated that ”the key problem is not plastic, but the over-consumption
and single-use products and packaging - disregarding the material” (Due et al., 2021).
Several of
the stakeholders supported this idea, including the National Museum of Denmark, Plastic Change,
Oceana, Municipality of Copenhagen, and Kleen Hub. For Denmark in speciﬁc, several stakeholders
point out the tendency to make minimum implementation on the area related to plastics. WWF,
Oceana and Plastic Change were disappointed on the Danish minimum implementation of the Single-
use Plastic Directive, and Plastic Change elaborated that they think essential concepts have been
watered down already at EU level, and underlined there is still a lot more to be done, where the
Danish Plastics Federation stated that ”the Single-use Plastic Directive was a self-goal as it is has not
given the expected outcome”. Tetra Pak shared how much work they have put into living up to the
new requirements from the directive, but reveal that it is very diﬃcult to get the same functionality
on the straws now they cannot be made of plastics. They have started to make the straws out of
paper with an inner plastic coating, and therefore they are still not entirely plastic free. They are
currently investigating substitutes to the plastic coating, like a wax coating, but also realize that most
industrial waxes come from the petrochemical industry so it would not solve the problem of using
non-renewable resources, only shift it. And, they add, straws made of paper are still a single-use item.
Another point of critique was regarding Article 6(1) in the directive, that single-use products may
only be placed on the market if caps and lids remain attached to the containers during the products’
intended use stage (EC, 2019b), where the Danish Deposit System stated ”In Denmark, 9 out of 10
bottles are returned with the cap on, so in a Danish context, the demand of attached caps has only
increased the material use by the requirement of attachment”. Plastic Change, Oceana, WWF, and the
Ecological Council are all calling for higher political ambitions and more visionary goals when it comes
to handle the problems related to single-use products and for legislation that supports moving away
altogether from single-use consumption, notably for packaging, and shift to more reusable/reﬁllable so-
lutions and deposit return systems e.g. for take-away coﬀee and food, e-commerce packaging and more.
The elimination of single-use products led to reﬂections on the alternatives. Several of the stake-
holders (Kleen Hub, CIEL, Aarhus University, THINK Chemistry, the Ecological Council, and the
Page 26 of 76
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Plastic related legislative change suggestions by the stakeholders
National Museum of Denmark) highlighted the higher durability of alternative materials, such as glass
and metals, in comparison to plastics. The Ecological Council elaborated ”maybe a product becomes
more expensive and there is a higher material use, but it would give more long-lasting products.” and
continued ”Plastic recycling is not sustainable and it does not make sense to follow that path”, and
Kleen Hub added that ”metals and glass are more recyclable than plastics as these materials keeps
their intrinsic properties much better”. A-R-C pointed at the dramatic increase of plastic waste, and
think it is unrealistic to recycle and market the increasing amounts of plastic for recycling without a
risk of overﬂowing the market. They highlighted the cruciality of decreasing the quantity of current
plastic production, as society simply does not have the capacity to handle such enormous amounts
and underlined ”we already have a capacity problem within the EU ”. They shared their experience
on important factors such as time when it comes to handling certain types of plastic. They gave an
example of plastic ﬁlm that becomes brittle over time, thus making it unﬁt for recycling with current
technologies. Further, composite plastic, PVC and a wide range of additives in various plastic types
are currently contaminating the plastic waste fraction, constituting a serious barrier for integrating
plastics in a CE. Finally, WWF addressed the diﬀerence in external resource use; water and cleaning
detergents are needed for reusable products, but recycling requires both water, electricity, and several
chemicals. On the other side, Oceana, the Ecological Council and WWF stated that there is too
much focus on recycling, which they believe come from the politically set recycling targets. Oceana
further state that the current Danish legislation is not reﬂecting the intention with the waste hierar-
chy that should ﬁrst and foremost favor the reduction and secondly the reuse. Tetra Pak agrees that
prevention is crucial and underlines that they also must decrease their own plastic use. The Ecolog-
ical Council adds the necessity to also look at repairing products. The Municipality of Copenhagen
supported this statement and added the need for regional regulation on reusable cups for larger events.
Key points on legislative changes for the Single-use Plastic Directive:
• Address single-use products in general disregarding material
• Eﬀectiveness of this directive is questioned based on low minimum standards
• Disagreement among stakeholders on alternatives to single-use products
4.2.5
Extended Producer Responsibility
From 2024, the producers of packaging, batteries and electronics will be responsible for the entire
life cycle including the collection and recycling of the products they place on the market, and the
speciﬁcation for the coming EPR scheme are currently debated. One aspect is the sorting of the waste
fraction, where a key point, is whether the sorting should take place at the resource facility or by the
consumers at their private residency. A-R-C and the Municipality of Copenhagen are supportive of
the new sorting technologies at the resource facilities, and highlights that proper sorting should not
be the consumers responsibility, and further stated that a large fraction is not sorted at the moment,
so a re-sorting at the facility is needed anyhow.
Many of the stakeholders mentioned the EPR scheme, but some also criticized it. Danish Industry
are optimistic about it, where WWF are worried it will not have the ﬁnancial eﬀect on the business as
it will likely include a graduated contribution, and A-R-C pointed out the diﬃculties other countries
have experienced in implementing this scheme. Genplast supports the EPR, but think it is coming 30
years too late and Ecolabelling Denmark were disappointed that it is not covering products in general.
Kleen Hub and Genplast believe that current plastic pricing is not reﬂecting its true costs, and they
Page 27 of 76
==PAGE:37==
4.3
Concerns related to the plastic sector
think an environmental fee is missing and should reﬂect the entire life cycle of the product and the
negative impacts on the environment and human health.
Oceana pointed at the need for the EPR system to not only focus on managing packaging waste
but also on promoting those solutions that prevent packaging from becoming waste after short usage.
This includes eliminating unnecessary packaging and supporting reuse systems and infrastructure such
as deposit return systems, supported by Tetra Pak and Genplast, and further points at the behavioral
aspects and stressed that for a reuse system to work, it must be easy and convenient for the user.
The Danish Deposit System stated that their system works well for beverage bottles with a return
rate of 96%. They further underlined that ”it is politically decided which products that are part of the
deposit scheme, and we have no opinion on this subject, as it is a political decision”, where the Danish
Consumer Council THINK Chemistry stated that they think the deposit system for plastics should
be implemented in the EPR scheme. The importance of closed loops was generally supported by the
stakeholders, and Tetra Pak said that they should reclaim their own products and recycle them into
new Tetra Pak products. Kleen Hub pointed at other European countries, like France and Germany,
that have succeeded in making national and regional regulations for reuse, with several good examples
of what can be achieved with eﬀective legislation.
Key points on legislative changes regarding the Extended Producer Responsibility:
• Enlarging current deposit system to include more products
• Make closed loops for reuse/recycling of same product group
4.3
Concerns related to the plastic sector
The stakeholder were asked what ethical, scientiﬁc, technical, and social concerns they had towards
human health and the natural environment in relation to the plastic sector, and their concerns var-
ied. An overview of the concerns are presented in Table 7, were the ﬁrst row is regarding ethical
concern for both for the environment and human health. The Ecological Council, THINK Chemistry
and CEHOS think it is ethically indefensible toward both human health and the environment that
hazardous or harmful additives are found in certain plastics, where Aarhus University was concerned
of the up-concentration of substances in the food chain (bioaccumulation- and -magniﬁcation) and
the persistency of these substances in the environment in general. A-R-C and WWF brought up the
huge export of plastic waste to countries lacking necessary waste management infrastructure and the
knowledge on proper handling regarding safety at work and protection of surrounding ecosystems,
and stated that it is unsound and cannot not be defended morally. For the environment in particular,
the widespread distribution of the persistent material is a warning signals as it enables long-range
transport and accumulation in vulnerable ecosystems. Aarhus University mentioned that plastic can
work both as carrier, vector and source of hazardous and harmful substances, which adds additional
pressure. The eﬀects of EDC were a special concern for CEHOS. They explained, that since ”the
endocrine disruptors are not covalent bound the harmful substance will migrate from the material and
this should raise tremendous concern”, especially seen in the light of decreasing fertility of current
and potentially future generations. Due to delay of long-term eﬀects of fetal exposure to EDC in the
womb, the eﬀect will ﬁrst begin to show decades after exposure, which is why CEHOS thinks the
precautionary principle should be applied to a larger extend. CIEL pointed at the negative impacts
from plastic production derived extraction, shipping, reﬁning, etc., and that these activities combined
has huge local, regional, national and international eﬀects on the employees, local environments, ter-
restrial and marine ecosystems and more. Lastly, a point of concern was raised on the responsibility
between countries, with obligations towards those suﬀering from the plastic crisis, including countries
Page 28 of 76
==PAGE:38==
4.3
Concerns related to the plastic sector
outside of the EU with poor waste management infrastructure, and countries that get their shores
overﬂown by plastic waste.
Scientiﬁc concerns were on the huge knowledge gaps in relation to the fate and long-term eﬀects
of macro-, micro- and nanoplastics. Plastic Change, Ecological Council and others were concerned of
how plastic will behave over time in the environment and in the human body. The knowledge gaps
can lead to the risk of tunnel visioning, which was brought up by the National Museum of Denmark.
Stakeholders with knowledge on the chemical aspect: CEHOS, Consumer Council Chemistry, CIEL
and the Ecological Council, worry that the single focus on climate eﬀects, with LCA studies and car-
bon emission reductions, can be misleading. This one-sided focus on a very complex and multifaceted
range of issues related to plastics can lead to misguided policy recommendations, wrong investments
or technologies. Some stakeholders also drew attention to wrong premises on the scalability potential
of recycling of plastics, since it is currently unclear how recycled plastic will act. In the worst case
scenario, lack of scientiﬁc knowledge, in-capabilities to provide the scientiﬁc proof requested by law
makers, or knowledge gaps of un-investigated connections, may limit the eﬀectiveness of regulations.
Technical concerns also included substantial knowledge gaps, especially on the eﬀect on the en-
vironment and human health in relation to the full-scale application of reuse systems in society and
the recycling of plastics in a CE. Speciﬁc concerns on the reuse system were on how to secure a
high hygienic standard and the practicalities on collection and distribution of the reusable containers,
raised by Ecolabelling Denmark. For recycling, the concern was speciﬁcally on the quality of recycled
plastics compared to plastics made from virgin resources. Here Genplast stated that probable changes
are limited choice of color, hazy or muddy colors and diﬀerent smell, which may aﬀect the consumers’
willingness to buy products from recycled plastics. Another concern is the massive quantity of plastic
waste and the expected dramatic increase in the coming decades, especially since the waste manage-
ment system is already overburdened in the EU as there is a limited carrying capacity, especially in
the urban areas. Furthermore, there is currently no overview of existing plastic materials with respec-
tive additives available on the market or found in private households etc. This missing knowledge on
the input fraction, may limit the development of innovative technological solutions and represent a
pitfall for the CE for plastic. There were also concerns related to the clean-up of plastics from the
environment, as the material is so vastly spread and degraded/eroded into smaller pieces. Genplast
and the Danish Industry are conﬁdent that new technologies can be used to mitigate these current
issues, where WWF think the technophile tendencies with faith in technological-rescue as a detour.
WWF points at the increasing complexity of various plastic types and further stated that ”plastic is
a fantastic material, but the system is too complex, plastic has too little value and it is used for a too
short time”. CIEL neither favors the technophile direction, and are concerned that new technologies
will end up creating more problems of higher complexity than the problems they were invented to
solve. They gave the example of the intervention of cars as a solution to get rid of the unhygienic and
malodorous horse manure in the cities. They emphasize that even though the introduction of cars
managed to solve the issue of horse manure in the cities, this solution came with new larger problems
like; soil degradation from paved roads and the missing fertilizer from the manure, not to mention the
extensive air pollution from the engine combustion. From a full life cycle perspective on plastics, the
material brings more problems than it solves, CIEL stated.
The social concerns and the environment were related to lack of public and governmental aware-
ness, willingness to act and placement of responsibility. Aarhus University brought up the intentional
spreading of plastics like ﬁreworks, harpoons, soft gun bullets, confetti and more, and think there
is a lack of reasoning between ﬁghting plastic pollution but still allowing the intentional spreading.
Another point is the extensive greenwashing seen in marketing, where producers label their prod-
Page 29 of 76
==PAGE:39==
4.3
Concerns related to the plastic sector
Table 7: The stakeholders concerns on the plastic sectors negative impacts towards the environment
and human health in the categories ethical-, scientiﬁc-, technical- and social concern
The environment
Human health
Other
Ethical
Hazardous and harmful additives
Bioaccumulation and -magniﬁcation
Endocrine disruptors
Huge export of plastics
Persistent
Widespread distribution
Long-range transport
Accumulation in ecosystems
Marine life heavily exposed
Huge negative eﬀect on ecosystems
Carrier, vector and source of hazard-
ous and harmful chemicals
Hazardous and harmful additives
Bioaccumulation
Endocrine disruptors
Huge export of plastics
Impact on future generations
The production of plastic
Obligation toward those countries
who suﬀers from the plastic crisis
Scientiﬁc
Huge knowledge gap on fate and long
term eﬀects
Risk of blind angles from the scientiﬁc
community
Misleading studies on the scalability of
plastics recycling
Huge knowledge gap on fate and long
term eﬀects
Scientiﬁc knowledge gaps limits
eﬀectiveness of regulation
Technical
Huge knowledge gap on reuse and
recycling in full scale
Overburdened waste management
system
Limited knowledge and solution to
tackle clean up
How to include plastic waste from
the environment in the circular
economy
Huge knowledge gap on reuse and
recycling in full scale
Lack of quality plastic to ﬁll
demand for recycled plastics
Skew in market for recycled
plastics leading to downcycling
Limited mapping of existing
plastics
Technophile approach leading
to increased complexity and even
larger problems
Social
Lack of public awareness and perso-
nal responsibility of proper disposal
Intentional spreading
Urban areas suﬀering from over-
burdened waste management systems
Greenwashing
Insuﬃcient protection of vulnerable
in society
Large sink of plastics in private
households containing banned
chemicals
Unintended use of plastics
Paradox of those paying the
price not getting the beneﬁts
Strong market forces leading
development
Sustainable development push-
ing oil into the plastic industry
Page 30 of 76
==PAGE:40==
4.3
Concerns related to the plastic sector
ucts as environmentally friendly when they are not, leading to a breach of trust with consumers
and may complicate the market of recycled or reusable products. The bad media attention on the
end-destination for European plastics sorted for recycling is another point of concern, raised by A-R-C.
Social concerns related to human health pointed at the insuﬃcient protection of the vulnerable
in society. CEHOS and the Ecological Council raised concern towards the current EU regulation that
is focused on protecting children under the age of three and pregnant from EDC and other, but fails
to protect other vulnerable groups. Furthermore, the vulnerable groups are still exposed to chemicals
in society as they are not solely in contact with products for their consumer group, thus not properly
protected from exposure. The Ecological Council stated that large sink of plastics in private house-
holds (e.g. toys and kitchen ware) represents a knowledge gap, since there is no overview of which
chemicals, in what mixtures, and in what quantities are out there. Concerns regarding unintended
use of plastic products, for example food and beverage contact with non-food contact materials or old
toys containing hazardous substances were also raised by the Ecological Council. Furthermore, they
brought attention to a recent example of ”black toys” placed on the EU market. These toys were
marketed as eco-friendly and sustainable as they were made from recycled plastics, but it turned out
that the phthalate concentration was on the same level as for hazardous waste. Another concern raised
is the paradox of those beneﬁting from a blooming plastic market are not those paying the price for a
harmed environment or negative eﬀects on human health. That strong market forces are leading the
development and expansion of plastics and is not concerned with the environment nor human health.
And ﬁnally, the development of sustainable energy solutions, like windmills and solar panels, are built
from composite plastics, which are known to be extremely diﬃcult to recycle. Further, the petrochem-
ical industry is facing a decrease in the demand of their products with the increasing electriﬁcation.
CIEL are concerned that their allocation of oil will go into increasing the plastic production even more.
Where Plastic Change sees an inter-linkage between human health and a thriving environment
and raises concern on this behalf from the extensive plastic pollution, Genplast are not worried when
it comes to human health and the environment in relation to plastic. They stated that the issues
seen with plastic pollution is not related to plastics, but rather is a result of poor governance and
mismanagement of plastic waste. They further point at the recyclability of plastics and waste-to-energy
solution with incineration and stated that ”managed plastics should be of no concern”. Furthermore,
they see that the market for plastic is increasing and believe that it is an amazing material, and that
any health or environmental related concerns should be handled by the politicians. In the long run,
Genplast are not worried, as they believe that nature will adjust and Earth is resilient, but they are
worried in the shorter perspective as they doubt so see suﬃcient political will. They are conﬁdent
that scientists and companies will develop new technologies which will mitigate the issue related to
the mismanaged plastic waste. Danish Industry see a trend of increased political will and eﬀort in
trying to solve the problems related to plastics but think there is a lack of uniform solutions and need
to pay careful attention to burden shifting, as some of the political initiatives are not truly solving the
problems as they in trying to as they are creating new ones. They further state that they are skeptical
of the EU making eﬀective regulations to solve these issues, as it may conﬂict with the Principle of
Subsidiarity. Lastly, Danish Industry stated that regulations should be made with the economy and
the respective market in mind, where A-R-C was concerned that the strong market forces will result
in in-eﬀective protection of human health and the environment if plastics are not carefully regulated
in the future.
Page 31 of 76
==PAGE:41==
4.4
The stakeholder’s future visions for plastics
4.4
The stakeholder’s future visions for plastics
The general future vision for plastics were overall similar for the stakeholders, but distinguished by how
to get there, see more in section 6. An overview of the stakeholders common future vision for plastics
can be seen in Table 8. The vision is divided into three categories namely society, simpliﬁcation, and
technology.
Table 8: Common future vision for the stakeholders on society, simpliﬁcation and technology
Society
Simpliﬁcation
Technology
Waste free society with reduced consumption
and elimination of throw away culture.
Eliminate non-essential use
plastics (turn oﬀthe tap).
Higher integration of recycled plastics.
Increased transparency, education and
consumer rights.
Essential-use plastics shall be
of high quality and great design.
Make closed loops for plastic types and/
or applications.
Focus on climate, environment and human
health.
Few types of plastics on the
market.
Smart plastic collection and sorting.
To reach the future vision of a waste free society following the CE mindset, over consumption
and throw-away culture were highlighted as key factors to change. Furthermore, emphasis was put
on the need for transparency on substances used in plastic materials, since that information is not
easily obtained by neither consumers, reuse or recycling facilities today. The focus area of concern
varied between the stakeholders, where some were focused on reducing the climate impact, others on
the overall environmental impact, some had human health as their main priority, and some focused
on the co-dependency and interrelation between the diﬀerent areas thus having a more holistic focus.
Overall, a simpliﬁcation of the entire system related to plastics is needed - what is placed on
the market and how it is managed in the end-of-life. Several of the stakeholders stated, that the
amount of plastics (and waste in general) has come out of control and that the quantity must be
drastically decreased (WWF, Oceana, A-R-C, Aarhus University, among others). The Municipality
of Copenhagen and Kleen Hub further added that a minimization of the plastic waste fraction would
be an enormous saving as the waste management otherwise needs to be enlarged due to continuously
drastic increase in plastic waste. Elimination of non-essential use products was pointed out as a key
factor in the reduction, followed by a comprehensive limitation of the additives used in plastics and
a reduction of plastic types placed on the market. The good design of plastics was supported by all
stakeholders, with emphasis on creating high-quality plastics of essential-use plastics.
Several of the stakeholders visioned an optimization of the current waste management system,
with smarter technologies for collection and sorting of plastics and with closed loops for better reuse
and recycling of plastics. The vision was clear on a CE, were what cannot be eliminated is reused,
repaired, or recycled. However, this is not yet possible due to the poor quality and high contamination
of the input fraction of plastics, making it unsuitable for a near transition into circularity, where others
believed that required technologies will be developed. In a circular system the input deﬁnes the output,
but is also aﬀected about the heights of innovation.
Page 32 of 76
==PAGE:42==
4.5
Survey answers
4.5
Survey answers
The results from the second part included the anonymous survey with ﬁve questions (2.a-e) ranked
from 1 (no, not at all) to 10 (yes, to a high degree) (see Table 3 in section 2). Out of the 19 stake-
holders, 17 responded on the survey, one stakeholder declined to answer, and one did not answer the
survey. The distribution of the ratings for each of the ﬁve questions in the survey can be seen in
Figure 5 below, where the statistical symbols are mean (µ), standard deviation (σ), minimum (Min),
1st quantile (Q1), median, 3rd quantile (Q3), and maximum (Max).
The histogram in Figure 5a shows the distribution of ratings for 2.a. on whether the stakeholder
believe there is a plastic crisis aﬀecting the environment and human health, with a negative skew, tail
on the left side of the distribution and the mass centered on the right side (also shown in the box plot).
This indicates that the mean is less than the median, which is also the case as µ = 8.3 < median = 9,
meaning more higher ratings were given. 83% of the stakeholders rated in the span 6-10, 6% in the
span 1-5 and 11% did not want to answer the questions. Overall, this indicates a general agreement
among the stakeholders towards accepting the statement of a plastic crisis aﬀecting the environment
and human health. However, this question was the only one out the ﬁve where a stakeholder chose
the option ”Do not wish to answer”. The distributions for question 2.b., 2.c., and 2.d., see Figure 5b-
5d, all indicate disagreement among the stakeholders on whether; the beneﬁts of plastic outweighing
potential negative consequences, if plastic can be absolute sustainable, and if the current plastic legis-
lation in the EU is eﬀectively protecting the environment and human health. The standard deviation
is the statistic measure of the dispersion of the data relative to the mean, and for all three questions
(µ2.b. ± σ2 = 6.1 ± 2.4, µ2.c. ± σ3 = 5.9 ± 2.9 and µ2.d. ± σ4 = 4.3 ± 2.2), the standard deviations are
large compared to those for question 1 and 5 (µ2.a. = 8.3 ± 1.8 and µ2.e. = 9.2 ± 1.6). For question
2.b. and 2.c., there is a slight indication of more agreement towards the statements of the potential
negative consequences from plastic are outweighed by the beneﬁts and that plastic can be absolute
sustainable (5 < median2.b. = median2.c. = 6), see the box plots that range slightly higher compared
to the box plot for q4 (5 = median2.d. = 5). Question 2.e. was on whether the handling of negative
impacts towards the environment and human health from the plastic sector a matter of the EU, which
was the statement with the highest agreement towards among the stakeholders receiving the highest
rating scores, where the quantiles Q1 = median = Q3 = max = 10, see Figure 5e, as 67% of the
stakeholders gave the rating score 10 ”yes, to a high degree”.
The results from the survey show general agreement among the stakeholders regarding acknowl-
edging that plastic is currently aﬀecting the environment and human health. There was disagreement
between the stakeholders on whether the beneﬁts of plastics outweigh the negative consequences to-
wards the environment and human health, with a slight overweight towards agreeing, which was also
the case for whether the stakeholder believed plastics can be absolute sustainable. There was a slight
tendency leaning towards stating, no, the current plastic legislation in the EU is not eﬀectively protec-
tion human health nor the environment. However, there was strong agreement regarding the placement
of responsibility of the protection of human health and the environment and that the handling of the
negative impacts from plastic is a matter of the EU. The variation in the responses, especially for 2.b.,
2.c. and 2.d., indicates a non-homogeneous group of stakeholders, representing diﬀerent opinions and
perspectives to the subject.
Page 33 of 76
==PAGE:43==
4.5
Survey answers
(a) Q.2.a. Is there a plastic crisis aﬀecting the environment and human health?
(b) Q.2.b. Does the beneﬁts of plastic outweigh the potential negative consequences?
(c) Q.2.c. Can plastics be absolute sustainable?
(d) Q.2.d. Is the current plastic legislation in the EU eﬀectively protecting the environment and
human health?
(e) Q.2.e. Is the handling of negative impacts towards the environment and human health from the
plastic sector a matter of the EU?
Figure 5: Histogram, selected descriptive statistics and a box plot of the ratings [1-10] or ”Do not wish to
answer” [-] by the stakeholders for the ﬁve questions in the survey. Statistical symbols: mean (µ), standard
deviation (σ), minimum (Min), 1st quantile (Q1), median, 3rd quantile (Q3), maximum (Max).
Page 34 of 76
==PAGE:44==
5
Legal analysis
In this section, the legal acts mentioned by the stakeholders during the interviews (Table 6 in section
4) are analyzed based on the ﬁrst out of three main goals for the legal doctrine as described by Smits
(2017). This counts the Regulation on food contact materials, REACH, the Eco-design Directive,
the Single-use Plastic Directive and the Extended Producer Responsibility scheme. With focus on
the aspects on plastic polymers, each legal acts is shortly described by presenting the objectives, the
legality, and examples of legal instruments applied to reach the objectives.
5.1
Regulation on food contact materials
The objectives and purpose of the Regulation (EC) No1935/2004 on Materials and articles intended
to come into contact with food (EC, 2008b) are described in Article 1(1), and is to ensure the eﬀective
functioning of the internal market of food contact materials and articles, and to secure a high level
of protection of human health and interest of the consumers. The general requirements are described
under Article 3(1), including good manufacturing practice securing no transfer of constituents that
could endanger human health. Plastic are speciﬁcally referred to under Annex I with a list of materials
and articles that may be covered by speciﬁc measures. In Article 5, the speciﬁc measures for groups
of materials and articles (as listed in Annex I) are described including a list of authorized substances,
generally referred to as the ”positive list”, purity standards and limits on the migration of constituents
into or onto the food from contact materials. The requirements for adequate labelling are described
in Article 15, and the traceability in Article 17 stating that articles placed on the market shall be
traceble for quality control and in case of recall (EC, 2008b). In paragraph 24 of the preamble, it
is stated that for environmental reasons, recycled materials and articles listed in Annex I should be
favored. Though, to ensure food safety and the protection of consumers, strict requirements should
be followed. Speciﬁcally for plastic, it is underlined, that ”priority should be given to the harmoniza-
tion of rules on recycled plastic material and articles as their use is increasing and national laws and
provisions are lacking or are divergent”, followed by a calling for speciﬁc measures on recycled plastic.
Here the principle of subsidiarity could be used, as this is an example of a matter of the EU where the
MS cannot eﬀectively meet the objectives without risking compromising the free movement of goods,
which is a fundamental cornerstone for the internal market of the EU.
The legality of the Regulation on food contact materials is found in Article 114 in the TFEU on
the internal market of the EU. Article 114(1) refers to the establishment and functioning of the internal
market, and 114(3) is concerning health, safety, environmental protection and consumer protection,
where a high priority must be given towards securing a high level of protection and take new ﬁndings
based on science into account. The European Parliament and the Council are responsible for acting
on these matters and seek to achieve the objectives of high protection of health, safety, environmental
protection and consumer protection. Since it is a regulation, it is directly applicable and binding in
its entirety on MS and individuals, as described in Article 288 in the TFEU.
5.2
REACH
The objectives of Regulation (EC) No1907/2006 on the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and
Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) (EC, 2006) are given in Article 1(1). Here the purpose is speciﬁed
to improve the protection of human health and the environment, which is done by the four processes of
REACH. These include registration, evaluation, authorization and restriction of chemicals. It also aims
Page 35 of 76
==PAGE:45==
5.3
Eco-design Directive
at enhancing competitiveness and innovation on the internal market of the EU. In Article 1(3), it is
stated that the regulation is based on the Precautionary Principle and that only substances that do not
adversely aﬀect human health or the environment may be found on the market, used or manufactured
in the EU (EC, 2006). One of the main reasons for the developing and adapting this extensive piece
of EU law, was the concern relating to the large number of substances that had been manufactured
and placed on the internal market of the EU, without suﬃcient hazard information regarding risks
and eﬀects toward human health and the environment. This is being addressed in Article 5 that
states ”No data, no market”, which is placing the responsibility and burden of proof on the industry
as they must provide safety information on the substances. However, this does not apply to plastic
polymers as they are currently exempt from registration and evaluation under REACH. According
to paragraph 41 in the preamble, plastic polymers are exempt from these parts of REACH until the
selection of polymers for registration can be based on scientiﬁc knowledge on the risks posed towards
human health or the environment. In Article 138(2) it is stated that the EC may propose legislative
changes for registration of polymers and that their proposal must be made on the basis of a scientiﬁc
report presenting: the risks of polymers compared to other substances and the need for registration
”taking account of competitiveness and innovation on the one hand and the protection of human health
and the environment on the other” (EC, 2006). However, it has been diﬃcult to demonstrate these
requirements, were it is further speciﬁed that identiﬁcation must be at substance level.
This has
been a major challenge in the case of polymers, and it has been diﬃcult to assess which impact
registration of polymers would have for the competitiveness and innovation in the EU (Oziel, 2019).
Furthermore, the earlier convincing that ”polymer molecules are generally regarded as representing
a low concern due to their high molecular weight” combined with the extensive number of diﬀerent
plastic polymers on the market, the exemption from parts of REACH was justiﬁed (ECHA, 2012).
In 2013, the REACH review concluded that at that time, the available information was insuﬃcient
to proceed with the development of a registration process for polymers. However, the EC have since
stated their commitment to publish a proposal by 2022 on the registration of some polymers based
on the rising concerns related to plastics (Oziel, 2019). REACH has legal basis in Article 114 in the
TFEU and is also a regulation, thus the description in section 5.1 for the Regulation of food contact
materials also apply for REACH.
5.3
Eco-design Directive
The objectives of the Directive 2009/125/EC Framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for
energy-related products(Ecodesign) are given in Article 1 with the purpose to establish a framework
for ecodesign requirements of energy-related products (EC, 2009). Further, the aim is to ensure the
free movement of these goods within the internal market. The deﬁnition of ecodesign in the directive
is ”the integration of environmental aspects into product design with the aim of improving the envi-
ronmental performance of the product throughout its whole life cycle.”, and energy-related products as
”any good that has an impact on energy consumption during use which is placed on the market and/or
put into service, and includes parts intended to be incorporated into energy-related products covered by
this Directive which are placed on the market and/or put into service as individual parts for end-users
and of which the environmental performance can be assessed independently.” (EC, 2009). Article 10
describes the harmonized standards meaning that products must follow a common standards at com-
munity level to prevent trade barriers and unfair competition at the internal market of the EU. The
ecodesign criteria are described in Part 1 in Annex I.
The legality of the Eco-design Directive is found in Article 114 in the TFEU, see the description
of this legal basis in section 5.1 for the Regulation on food contact materials. Opposed to regulations,
Page 36 of 76
==PAGE:46==
5.4
Single-use Plastic Directive
directives must be transposed into national law and it is up to the individual MS to achieve the re-
sults aimed for in the directive as long as it meets the objectives given. In Article 288 in the TFEU
directives are described that the ’choice of form and method is up to the MS’, which gives the MS a
larger margin of discretion compared to regulations that are directly applicable with immediate eﬀect.
Furthermore, the MS must do so while following the principle of sincere cooperation in achieving the
goals of the Union.
Even though polymers are not included in this directive, several of the stakeholders referred to this
piece of EU legislation as successful, and that a future framework for plastic could be developed with
inspiration from it. With the coming Sustainable Products Initiative (SPI), certain product groups
will be included under this directive, and thus provide an opportunity to deﬁne what eco-design and
sustainable products are for plastics .
5.4
Single-use Plastic Directive
The objectives of the Directive (EU) 2019/904 on the Reduction of the impact of certain plastic prod-
ucts on the environment are primarily to limit the negative impact on the environment from certain
plastics (EC, 2019b). This is addressed by reducing the quantity of waste generated, and by promoting
a circular life cycle for plastic. The deﬁnition of plastic follows the deﬁnition given in Article 3(5)
of Regulation (EC) 1907/2006 (REACH), were plastics are deﬁned as polymeric materials to which
additives or other substances have been added (EC, 2019b; EC, 2006). Moreover, the Single-use Plas-
tic Directive follow the principles of the waste hierarchy, described in the Waste Directive (2008/98)
aiming at the ﬁrst step ’prevention’ by reducing production, consumption and use of single-use plastic
products (Directive, 2008). Furthermore, the objectives must also contribute to the eﬃcient function-
ing of the internal market of the Union, a key stone in EU law according to Article 3 in the TEU (EC,
2016a).
The legality of the Single-use Plastic Directive is based on its primary aim that is to protect the
environment. Thus the legality is based on Article 192 in the TFEU as it manages the objectives set
out in Article 191 regarding the environment (EC, 2019b). This article states that Union environmen-
tal policy shall contribute to the pursuit of preserving, protecting and improving the quality of the
environment and also the protection of human health (EC, 2016b). Article 5 of Directive 2019/904
on prohibiting the placing speciﬁc single-use plastic-products on the market of is thus referring to the
Principle of Rectiﬁcation at Source. Further, there is a reference to the Polluter Pays Principle in
paragraph 20 in the preamble, which states ”MS should, in line with the Polluter Pays Principle, also
introduce extended producer responsibility schemes to cover the necessary costs of waste management
and clean-up of litter as well as the costs of awareness raising measures to prevent and reduce such
litter.” (EC, 2019b).
A wide variety of legal instruments to meet the objectives are given in the SIP directive, which
allow for variety on how the individual MS choose to transpose it into national law. An example
of a legal instrument giving the least discretion to MS when it comes to the implementation of the
directive, was found in Article 5. Here, it is described how certain single-use plastic products (cotton
buds, plates, beverage stirrers, cutlery, and more - see full list in the Annex, part B) are prohibited from
being placed on the market. This example has characteristics of total harmonization, as prohibition
is the most strict rule which can be applied. Furthermore, this directive is a lex specialis on the
areas of consumption reduction measures, product requirements, marking requirements and extended
producer responsibility, and hereby overrides general rules from the Directive 94/62/EC on packaging
Page 37 of 76
==PAGE:47==
5.5
Extended Producer Responsibility
and packaging waste and Directive 2008/98/EC on waste on those speciﬁc areas (EC, 2019b; Directive,
1994; Directive, 2008; Dalberg-Larsen and Nielsen, 2021). The deadline for transposition of the Single-
use Plastic Directive into national law of the MS was 3rd of July 2021. From the stakeholder analysis,
see section 4.2, critique points were raised on the low minimum standards in the directive giving MSs,
here Denmark was mentioned as an example, the opportunity to go with minimum implementation
and still be in compliance, and thus not exploiting the full potential of fulﬁlling the objectives.
5.5
Extended Producer Responsibility
The EPR is a policy tool to be implemented in several legal acts in the EU over the coming years,
including the Waste Framework Directive and the Single-use Plastic Directive (europen, 2021). The
concept is deﬁned by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), as ”an
environmental policy approach in which a producer’s responsibility, physical and/or ﬁnancial, for a
product is extended to the post-consumer stage of a product’s life cycle” (OECD, 2014). The aim of
the implementation of EPR in EU legal acts is to combat the increasing amounts of wastes, growing
costs for residential waste collection and loss of valuable resources as seen under the linear economy,
by partially or fully shifting the ﬁnancial burden from local governments to the producers (EPR
Info, 2021; europen, 2021). The anticipation is that the EPR can assist in reducing the scope of the
problem of the current increase in Europeans plastic waste, and it is seen as a key principle for the
implementation of a CE in the EU (Pouikli, 2020; Leal Filho et al., 2019). It follows the polluter
pays principle by placing the responsibility and economic burden on the producer, as the producer
is in this regard identiﬁed as the polluter. Article 8(1) in the Single-use Plastic Directive exempliﬁes
this core principle of EU environmental law, by placing the cost of waste collection and litter cleanup
litter on the producer of their own products, and that producers of single-use food containers must
pay the costs of the awareness raising campaigns as speciﬁed in Article 10 of the directive. The EPR
scheme can thus be applied with diﬀerent instruments, but will generally be constituted by placing
the economic burden and operational responsibility on the producer.
The ﬁndings from the stakeholder analysis regarding the EPR, see section 4.2, were that it is
the obvious next step to place the burden on the producer. Seen in retrospect, the EPR could have
advantageously been implemented earlier, as the EU is already overburdened - especially with plastic
packaging waste of poor quality unﬁt for reuse or recycling. However, there is a crucial need to prevent
further damage and to stop the dramatic increase in plastic wastes, where the EPR is anticipated to
balance the market when placing the responsibility on the producer.
5.6
Key ﬁndings from the legal analysis
An overview of the key ﬁndings from the legal analysis are presented in Table 9 for the ﬁve pieces of
EU legal acts, including pros, cons and prospects.
A beneﬁt of the Regulation on food contact materials is the high restriction level of chemicals
allowed in FCM given on the ”positive list” of additives, which is a good foundation for transparency
and limitation of human exposure of unwanted chemical substances from food products. This ”positive
list” for additives may be used as an inspiration and applied for other material groups. A con is that
strict rules currently applying for FCM could limit the implementation of reuse or reﬁllable systems
for food and beverages products, but may be remedied by hygiene standards and guidelines.
The increasing awareness on the importance of assessing risks for human health and the envi-
ronment posed by plastics has lead to the proposal for including plastic polymers under registration
and evaluation under REACH. This is a promising prospect as both registration and evaluation of
Page 38 of 76
==PAGE:48==
5.6
Key ﬁndings from the legal analysis
plastic polymers will provide a better foundation for further studying and assessing the risks, and
thus increase the knowledge in an area characterized by knowledge gaps. The current procedure of
single-classiﬁcation is identiﬁed as a con as it comes with risks of allowing alternatives with same
physical chemical properties that often will pose similar risk hazards, but may be remedied by the
”one substance one assessment” initiative raised by the EC (see section 3.4) pointing toward group
classiﬁcations to increase eﬀective and eﬃcient protection. Another critique point is that mixture
eﬀects are not taken into account. However this area has been diﬃcult to asses scientiﬁcally in a
societal relevant way as there are nearly no limits for the chemical mixtures humans are exposed to in
their everyday lives. Thus the eﬀects of mixtures of chemical substances, also known as the ’Cocktail
eﬀect’, constitutes a scientiﬁc area of high concern, but also ﬁnds diﬃculties in delivering scientiﬁc
evidence as foundation for political action.
The Eco-design Directive has shown great eﬀect in increasing energy eﬃciency for the energy
related products. With the coming SPI, more products will be included aiming at making sustainable
products the norm at the EU market. However, plastics are not covered, but the harmonized standards
for eco-design and SPI may be used as inspiration for design criteria for plastics.
Despite the fact that the Single-use Plastic Directive only cover certain single-use products and
only plastic materials are addressed, it is an example of manifested political will to address the issues
related to both plastics and the single-use culture and may pave the road for more ambitious political
actions in this ﬁeld. It contributes to the aim of prevention in the waste hierarchy, by banning certain
single-use plastic products.
A pro of the EPR is that is places the responsibility on the producer, thus releasing the consumers
from the heavy burden on which they have limited power over (e.g. plastic packaging). Cons are that
it will only apply for certain products and therefore just one step of the way, and in retrospect, this or
similar measures, ought to be taken sooner than what is the case from the perspective of the negative
impacts seen with pollution and booming quantities in plastic wastes. An expansion to include more
product groups could make the principle more eﬀectively on reducing the negative impacts related to
consumer products.
Table 9: Key ﬁndings from the legal analysis including pros, cons and prospects.
EU legal acts
Pros
Cons
Prospects
Regulation on food
contact materials
High restriction level of chemicals
by the ”positive list”, labelling
requirements and tracability for
FCM resulted in high- quality plastics.
Strict rules and standards may com-
promise an implementation of reuse
options for FCM.
The ”positive list” for additives may be
and inspiration for plastics in other pro-
ducts groups.
Hygiene standards and protocols may
be applied to ensure level of hygiene.
REACH
Plastic polymers are included under
authorization and restriction.
Plastic polymers are exempted from
registration and evaluation.
Critique points raised on the single-
classiﬁcation.
Knowledge gap on mixture eﬀects.
A proposal on the inclusion of plastic
polymers is expected in 2022.
Awareness of the importance to assess
the human and environmental risks posed
by plastic additives.
Proposal for ”one substance one assessment”.
Ecodesign Directive
and the Sustainable
Products Initiative
Eco-design criteria have shown great eﬀect for
energy-related products.
Plastic products are not covered
by the existing directive, nor the
coming SPI.
Harmonized eco-design standards at EU level
can be used as inspiration for future design
criteria for plastics.
Single-use
Plastic Directive.
Contributes to the aim of prevention
in the waste hierarchy.
Not a total cessation of single-use
products disregarding material.
Manifested the political will to address some
of the issues related to plastics and may
pave the wave for more action
within this ﬁeld.
Extended Producer
Responsibility
Places the responsibility and eco-
nomic burden on the producer.
Will only apply for certain products.
Should have been implemented sooner.
Expansion to include more products groups.
Page 39 of 76
==PAGE:49==
6
Policy relevant recommendations, justiﬁcation and discussions
This section includes a presentation and discussion of the policy recommendations which constitute
the overall results from the literature study presented in the background knowledge on plastic and
EU law (section 3), the stakeholder analysis (section 4) and the legal analysis (section 5).
First,
an overview of key ﬁndings from the thesis is summarized, and followed by objectives developed as
guidance for the policy recommendations. Secondly, the policy recommendations are presented in
an overview matrix and their relevancy assessed by discussing their potential contribution to fulﬁll
the objectives. Thirdly, selected policy recommendations are highlighted as suggestions for potential
amendments for the ﬁve legal acts treated in this thesis work. Fourthly, a future legal act for eﬀective
protection of human health and the environment posed by plastics is developed. And lastly, the ﬁnal
recommendations are highlighted and discussed.
6.1
Overview of key ﬁndings and objectives for the policy recommendations
The foundation of the policy recommendations for a more eﬀective plastic legislation in the EU are
based on key ﬁndings identiﬁed in the literature study, the stakeholder analysis and legal analysis,
and are summarized and discussed in this section.
It is largely impossible to live without plastics in the EU today. The plastic production has grown
twice as fast at the GDP the past four decades, making it a very proﬁtable business. The petrochemical
industry plans to make large investments to further increase production over the coming decades,
further indicating that supply has and potentially will be determining the demand to an extend.
In the European Commissions Circular Economy Action Plan it is described that ”circularity as a
prerequisite for climate neutrality” and that ”In order to achieve climate neutrality, the synergies
between circularity and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions need to be stepped up”, which is not
in alignment with the current increase in production and investments in the petrochemical industry.
This represents a serious discrepancy between the political and industrial parties (SEI, IISD, ODI,
E3G, and UNEP, 2021; EC, 2020). UNEP and other institutions have since 2019 investigated the
investments in the fossil fuel industry and governments climate policy strategies, where they have
identiﬁed a production gap indicating there is not yet a common goal unifying these parties (SEI,
IISD, ODI, E3G, and UNEP, 2021; CIEL et al., 2019a). Therefor attention ought to be paid to the
strong market and industrial forces when future EU policy strategies are developed with the scope of
enhancing environmental and human health protection from the full life cycle of plastics, since the
drivers of the current system are still based on strong market forces and a supplier driven market.
This trend is reﬂected in the increasing consumption of plastics over the past decades with a
dramatic increase of plastic packaging, more applications made of the material, and increased con-
sumerism overall. The extensive consumption across sectors and materials in the EU is unsustainable,
where especially plastic packaging is problematic. Since plastics have been designed to be ”cheaper
to replace than to repair”, basic human skills, which have been reﬁned since the beginning of time, of
making the most out of the resources we have had on hand, have thus been unlearned by replacing
durable and long-lasting high quality materials with plastics.
Although low-quality plastics and single-use plastic products are cheap, or even free of charge, for
the consumers, the current product pricings are not reﬂecting the true cost for the full life cycle of
plastics. Furthermore, industries and private companies are currently ﬁnancially proﬁting from the
lack of producer responsibility, while society is paying the price and are exposed to the risks (e.g.
pressure on waste management and infrastructure, pollution, chemical exposure). However, with the
coming EPR scheme, the aspiration is to place the responsibility on the producer.
Page 40 of 76
==PAGE:50==
6.1
Overview of key ﬁndings and objectives for the policy recommendations
Plastic should not end up in the environment or in living beings (including humans) - but it does.
Also in countries with advanced waste management infrastructure. This is an example of the economic
and social injustice of plastic, where those beneﬁting from the material are in most cases not those
experiencing the vast majority of the following negative eﬀects, and price for cleanup are not paid
by the responsible parts (Mouat et al., 2010). This includes the whole life cycle of plastics from the
ﬁrst extraction to the ﬁnal end destination. There is little transparency on the trade of plastic wastes
when it comes to quantity and the composition of the plastic waste fraction, which was one of the
arguments to why China withdrew from importing plastic waste for recycling since a vast majority
of the fraction was indeed not ﬁt for recycling. There are currently no guidelines, documentation or
standards on how to secure proper waste handling technologies, for the protection of human health
and the environment, by end of the value chain (CIEL et al., 2019b; CIEL et al., 2019a). This is
an issue since plastics are persistent, readily dispersed, bioaccumulating, contains and carries harmful
chemical substances, and thereby constitute a potential threat towards the environment and human
health when low value plastics are placed on the market in enormous quantities (Paulsen et al., 2021;
CIEL, 2021; CIEL et al., 2019a).
The media communicates one environmental crisis after the other; the climate crisis on temper-
ature rise driven by an increase in GHG emission, the biodiversity crisis where species are lost at
drastic rate, the physical macroplastics crisis where sea turtles are suﬀocated by single-use plastics
from improper waste management, and the chemical crisis, which is currently characterized by knowl-
edge gaps. Here we ﬁnd a short list of banned chemicals - followed by speciﬁcation for special uses
and applications, a longer list of suspected hazard chemicals, and a continuously growing list of total
amount of chemicals. By communicating these crisis as separate from each other, there is a risk of
counteracting actions, when there should have been collaboration. But in fact, the world is com-
plex, and so are the ecosystems and the interrelation between diﬀerent earth systems. A single sided
focus may thus lead to ’tunnel-visioning’ or ’silo-thinking’ if other related issues are not taken into
consideration. There are no hard boundaries between where one crisis starts and another ends. The
risk of competing actions and burden shifting may increase if these crisis are studied and assessed
individually without considering the interconnection and interdependence of ecosystems and human
actions (Lawton, 2021; Dasgupta, 2021).
The complexity of the plastic related issues increases as the quantity of the material is growing.
The material comes with a paradox, and it is a simpliﬁcation to put it up as; is plastic good or bad?
Single-use plastics are deeply integrated in the modern consumerism culture, but also represents the
cornerstone of life saving applications in the health care sector and in catastrophic events. Another
classic paradox is on burden shifting. A study by the American Chemical Council (ACC) found that
alternatives to plastics have greater environmental impacts and are costlier (Lord et al., 2016), but
fails to look at the long term consequences, were it is more likely that plastics end up in nature
compared to glass or metal (CIEL et al., 2019a).
Another area is the protection of vulnerable in our society from hazardous chemicals like EDC,
where only certain groups or products are covered. Commonly recognized vulnerable groups are chil-
dren under the age of three and pregnant women. However, minimizing exposure for these groups by
restrictions on what products for their target group can contain, does not save them from exposure
as harmful substances are still found in other product groups and in the rest of society. Furthermore,
there are several vulnerable phases in life e.g. older children, puberty or menopause, women and
men in the reproductive age in general, and those suﬀering from hormone-related diseases. In order
to make inclusive protection of all vulnerable, more extensive ban on known and suspected harmful
chemicals ought to be made. Cause and eﬀect relations can be diﬃcult to identify, especially for
chemical mixtures, and thus potentially increase the risks of ineﬀective actions. The call for research
Page 41 of 76
==PAGE:51==
6.1
Overview of key ﬁndings and objectives for the policy recommendations
and scientiﬁc certainty may lead to delay in political action and legislative changes, on the expense of
the environment and human health (e.g. historical cases including tobacco, asbestos, among others).
The increasing level of complexity and rapid development of novel technologies (including plastics)
may compromise the scientiﬁc certainty called for by the law and policy makers, however, in some
cases, early warning signs based on historic cases may have been used as guidelines (Diamond et al.,
2015; Gee, 2006; Harremo¨es et al., 2001; Persson et al., 2013; Paulsen et al., 2021). Forward, it is
key for EU policy prioritization of intervention on plastics to built knowledge and collect data of the
plastic footprint and littering potential as justiﬁcation for potential political actions regarding plastics
(Amadei et al., 2022).
The last key ﬁnding highlighted here is on how the industry is aﬀected by policy goals, especially
the quantiﬁable goals. If the political focus and goals are on recycling, there will be more recycling.
The industries and producers will spend their resources to be in compliance with the requirements,
and if these are based on recycling goals, this is where the focus will be. But recycling does not solve
the fundamental problem and is not eﬀective in reaching the objectives of increased protection from
plastics (UN, 2021; MacArthur, 2013). Therefore it is crucial that policy goals at EU and MS level
follow the order of the Waste Hierarchy and that they are quantiﬁable.
Three main focus points based on the key ﬁndings were selected to work as guidance for the
further policy recommendations. These include:
1. Prevention: An absolute key point is to ’close the tap’ of outlet of plastics - to the environment,
but also to the internal market. This ﬁnds general support and is the primary focus point in the
Waste Hierarchy, and was highlighted by the majority of the stakeholders under the interviews.
2. Simplicity: For plastics to ﬁt into a CE simplicity is required, speciﬁcally for the product design,
including holistically sustainability concerns, and plastic types, including additives, allowed on
the EU market.
3. Legislation: There is a critical need for legislative and non-legislative actions at EU, MS and
regional level. The current market is characterized by being sellers market, thus harmonized
market regulations are crucial to guide the industries and private companies in contributing to
the necessary systemic changes for a CE to thrive in the EU.
6.1.1
Objectives for the policy recommendations
This thesis ﬁnds that current handling and use of plastic products in the EU does not reﬂect the Unions
objectives to ”protect, conserve and enhance the EU’s natural capital”, ”turn the EU into a resource-
eﬃcient, green, and competitive low-carbon economy” and ”safeguard EU citizens from environment-
related pressures and risks to health and well-being” (EU, 2021). The high level of complexity of the
derived consequences of the use and handling of plastic, calls for visionary and creative thinking. With
inspiration from the Backcasting methodology, the objectives made for this study are proactive and
ambitious for future plastic regulation in the EU (Kade and Lenz, 2020; Broman and Rob`ert, 2017).
These objectives also work as guidance points for the policy roadmap, to keep focus on the objectives
and trying to avoid falling into the BAU thinking with economic-, political-, technological pitfalls.
The objectives were created with inspiration from the New Plastic Economy by the Ellen MacArthur
Foundation, the Break Free From Plastic global movement and the Green Deal by the EC (MacArthur,
2013; Break Free From Plastic, 2021; Hesselink and van Duuren, 2021). The Ellen MacArthur Foun-
dation was chosen based on their progressive work on spreading knowledge and raising awareness on
Page 42 of 76
==PAGE:52==
6.2
Policy recommendations
need for societal transition towards a CE. The Break Free From Plastic is a global movement with
a vision on a world without plastic pollution, thus representing a more aggressive and visionary per-
spective, as they ﬁght to end petrochemical production, push for corporate accountability, promote
systemic solutions and build zero waste communities. The EC is represented via their work on waste
and circularity strategy as presented in the Green Deal and illustrated in the Waste Hierarchy, see
Figure 3 (EC, 2015). The objectives for the policy recommendations developed in this study are:
1. Eliminate all non-essential plastic use
2. Eliminate use of problematic chemicals in relation to human health and the environment in
plastics
3. Policy goals must follow the order of the waste hierarchy
4. The production of essential-use plastics is fully decoupled from the consumption of ﬁnite re-
sources
5. Health, safety and rights of all living beings22 outweigh economic prosperity
6. The CE for plastics is fully integrated in the European society
6.2
Policy recommendations
In Table 10, the policy recommendations are presented as a knowledge bank collecting activities
proposed by the stakeholders in the interviews (ideas collected from the literature study, and ﬁndings
from the legal analysis) and all recommendations are cross checked with the developed objectives, to
assess both if the policy recommendations match the set objectives, and if all objectives were fulﬁlled
by the identiﬁed policy recommendations. From this overview matrix, it can be seen that all objectives
and all policy recommendations have at least one match, and that some recommendations are expected
to contribute in fulﬁlling more than one objective. In the following section the policy recommendations
(denoted a-dd for reference) are elaborated relation to the six objectives and generally discussed.
6.2.1
Policy recommendations and the six objectives
The ﬁrst objective is to Eliminate all non-essential plastic use, matched with the ﬁrst policy rec-
ommendation on eliminating all single-use products (a) (see Table 10) as a political instrument to
eliminate non-essential plastic use. The critique raised against the directive - that it is ineﬀective as
it only covers certain applications and only covers plastic materials - would be met by a total ban
of single-use products for all materials. This would also statue an example of a united policy - that
single-use products no longer can be accepted in the EU. The expansion of products groups under the
Eco-design Directive with the SPI (m) has already been announced and is expected to be implemented
within the coming years. However, several of the stakeholders were worried that it will not be broad
enough as it is expected to only cover certain product groups, and thus not bring the necessary results
of more sustainable products placed on the European Market.
The EC has also announced their
recognition for action toward intentionally added microplastics (r), underlining the willingness to that
taking action on this matter. However, the discussion on what deﬁnes ’essential and non-essential use’
in relation to plastic products should be further investigated.
22This includes humans all over the world, future generations and all animals including thriving ecosystems
Page 43 of 76
==PAGE:53==
6.2
Policy recommendations
Table 10: Overview of the policy recommendations developed from the literature study, stakeholder
analysis and the legal analysis, and the objectives (1-6) presented in the methodology. [x] indicates
that the policy recommendation may support fulﬁlling the objective if integrated.
Policy recommendations
Objectives
1
2
3
4
5
6
Eliminate all
non-essential
plastic use
Eliminate use
of problematic
chemicals in
relation to human
health and the
environment
Policy goals
must follow
the order of
the Waste
Hierarchy
The production
of essential-use
plastics is comp-
letely decoupled
from ﬁnite
resources
Health, safety,
and rights for
all living beings
out-weighs
economic pros-
perity
Full integration
of circular econ-
omy in the Euro-
pean society
a
Eliminate all single-use products
x
x
b
Include more products in the
deposit system
x
x
c
Uniform waste handling system
at MS level
x
d
Make infrastructural changes on
MS level to match the new circu-
lar economy
x
e
Make closed loops for reuse and
recycling
x
x
x
f
Include registration and evaluation
of plastic polymers under REACH
x
g
Extensive ban of known and sus-
pected substances with unwanted
env. and human health risks
x
x
h
Make a positive list of additives
for plastics
x
x
x
i
Deﬁne quality criteria for plastic
x
x
j
Deﬁne good design for plastic
products
x
x
k
Develop guidelines for safe hand-
ling of plastics and waste manage-
ments systems in a circular economy
x
x
l
Make hygiene standards and
quality criteria for reuse products
x
m
Expand product groups under ECO/
SIP
x
x
x
n
Reserve certain plastics for some
applications
x
o
Make a uniform extended product
warranty for all MS
x
p
Adopt and enforce ambitious red-
uction targets for all sectors
x
q
Initiate ‘cheaper to repair than to replace’
x
x
x
r
Ban intentionally added microplastics
x
x
s
Ban composite plastic
x
t
EU committing to internally handle all
plastic waste
x
x
u
Make near-virgin quality of recycled
plastic
x
x
v
Make sustainable public procurement
obligatory for all MS
x
w
A complete phase-out of all non-recyc-
lable plastic
x
x
x
x
End ﬁnancial support for the petro-
chemical industry
x
y
Make targeted green investments and
support schemes
x
z
Make certain applications that are
intentionally disposed or easily lost
in nature in biodegradable or easily
degradable materials
x
aa
Make in vitro toxicity assets to moni-
tor EHS of recycled plastics
x
bb
Keep monitor and identify indicators
of chemical pollution from plastic
x
cc
Advance LCA and similar methods
to include the full life cycle of plastic
x
x
dd
Integrate assessments on ‘burden-
shifting’
x
Page 44 of 76
==PAGE:54==
6.2
Policy recommendations
The second objective is to Eliminate use of problematic chemicals in relation to human health
and the environment. Here, the ﬁrst policy recommendation is on the inclusion of registration and
evaluation of plastic polymers under REACH (f), thus establish a better knowledge base useful for
the scientiﬁc community among others. This could be followed by an extensive ban of all known
and suspected additives used in plastics that pose unwanted risks for the environment and human
health (g) (including PBT, EDC CMR, etc.). On top of the extensive ban of additives, a positive
list of additives for plastic products for speciﬁc applications could be developed (h). This suggestion
is inspired from the current positive list applying to FCM under the FCM Directive. Furthermore,
this could beneﬁt the recycling of plastics, since a broadening the concept of positive lists of additives
would result in a higher knowledge of what the plastic types consists of, increase the transparency,
and limit risks of unwanted additives circulating in the plastic recycling. These tree recommendations
are all related to REACH and thus constitute suggestions for amendments.
The next recommendation is on deﬁning quality criteria for plastics (i), and also deﬁning what
good design is in relation to the use of plastic materials (j). High-quality plastic would in this regard
include plastic polymer resins without known or suspected problematic additives in alignment with
the Principle of Precaution (by including ’suspected’) and Rectiﬁcation at Source (by eliminating the
use and therefore potential spreading), and good design for plastics would include design with focus
on circularity and end-of-life.
Another measure to eliminate circulation of problematic chemicals in the a European CE, is to
develop guidelines for safe handling of plastics (l). By implementing guidelines for proper waste han-
dling of plastic, including sorting of plastics suitable for staying in the loop via recycling, it allows
MS to manage their existing national systems to ﬁt the circular agenda. On top of the recommen-
dations on limiting the input of harmful chemicals to plastics and securing proper management by
developing safety guidelines applicable for the national waste management system, there is a need for
continuous monitoring, research into the area of risks associated with negative eﬀects from chemicals
from plastics, develop the current methodology, and expanse it in areas with gaps of knowledge. This
may be done by making in vitro toxicity assets to monitor the eﬀects from recycled plastics on human
health and the environment (aa), continuous and extensive monitoring of plastics in the environment
and humans to collect data that may be used to identify indicators of chemical pollution from plastics
(bb), and ﬁnally, to advance LCA and similar life cycle assessment methods to include the full life
cycle of plastics (cc).
For LCA methods in particular, arguments focused on the perspective of climate change are based
on the minimized GHG emissions from plastics compared to alternative materials, and thereby saving
the climate from further negative impacts. An example of reasoning hereof is that from a LCA perspec-
tive, transportation of plastic materials have decreased emissions related to transportation compared
to heavier alternatives like glass or metal due to the lower weight of plastic. Food waste advocates
argue that plastic packaging prolongs the life-time for many food products and is saving foods from
going bad and being discarded. However, an opponent argument would be that those statements are
missing the bigger picture by not taking the full life cycle into account. Despite the fact that heavier
packaging, with alternative materials or stronger and reusable plastic containers, does indeed have
higher GHG emissions, these studies often does not include the end-of-life of the products. Where
reusable or recyclable products would go into a closed material loop, low quality and value plastics
a more likely to end up the oceans. The ocean is the largest sink of CO2, and disturbances hereof
may have an even larger impact on the climate system (see section 6.2.1). Another perspective is that
most of today’s landﬁll research is directed towards comparatively fast reactions (months to years),
where investigations on plastic polymer should be focused on slow reactions (decades to centuries)
(Brunner and Rechberger, 2002), thus several current methods on assessing risks does not eﬀectively
cover physical nor chemical behavior of plastic.
Page 45 of 76
==PAGE:55==
6.2
Policy recommendations
The third objective is that Policy goals must follow the order of the Waste Hierarchy. The ﬁrst
recommendation is that policy goals must reﬂect the Waste Hierarchy which in practice means that
the objectives set in coming directives or amendments to existing ones (e.g. SUP Directive and the
Waste Framework Directive) must follow the prioritization as described in the Waste Hierarchy. This
could be included by a total ban on all single-use plastic products (a further widening could be a
total ban of all single-use products despite material) (a), that MS decide to include more products
in the deposit scheme (b), integrate closed loops for reuse and recycling in MS waste management
systems (e), make initiatives to support cheaper to repair than to repair (q), and a complete phase-out
of all non-recyclable plastics with a ban at EU level (w). There are several ways of achieving this
objective, and the recommendations given here are some examples. The key point is that policy goals
must follow the order of the Waste Hierarchy when MS are transposing directives into national law,
thus avoiding skewed focus on prioritizing e.g. recycling or waste-to-energy solutions, with little or no
quantiﬁable policy goals or commitments on prevention or reuse.
The fourth objective is The production of essential-use plastics is fully decoupled from the con-
sumption of ﬁnite resources. Here, a ﬁrst step to fully decouple plastic from ﬁnite resources could
be to implement a guideline on sustainable resources as part of the good-design of plastics (j), with
deﬁnitions of quality criteria and good-design in relation to plastics (i), expanding the products groups
included in the coming SIP (m), and a system of closed reuse and recycling loops of plastic (e), would
favor the CE with an aspiration to lower the need of input from non-renewable resources.
The elimination of composite plastics (s) may led to a price increase, as the non-composite alter-
native products, e.g. wood, has a higher cost. With a ban of composit plastics, a current market for
recycled plastics is removed, since plastic pellets from physical recycling are being applied in composite
products. However, this market elimination is in alignment with the ambition to limit down-cycling
and only keep high-quality plastic in the future European CE. This leads to keeping plastic products
of the same type (e.g. SPI code) in closed loops for reuse and recycling (e). Furthermore demands
on making closed loops for same application (food packaging, personal hygiene (rinse-oﬀor leave on),
cleaning agents, etc.) could be made.
Some plastics could be reserved for speciﬁc sectors, e.g. PET for food contact materials, PP
for cosmetics and PE for toys and general consumer products, as these would broadly cover the
qualiﬁcations required within each sector. Furthermore, the products should be designed with the
full life cycle in mind, including labels, glue, caps, inks etc. attached. The overall streamlining and
simpliﬁcation on product design and material, enables closed product loops, and these ideas are in
alignment with the widening of the Eco-design Directive with the SPI that will include a wider range
of products in the future. Attention ought to be paid on holistic thinking when designing quality
products, as e.g. thinner packaging or less plastic material in products to lower CO2 −eq, may result
in reduced quality plastics compromising reusal or the recyclability.
The last policy recommendation is to make near-virgin quality of recycled plastic (u), followed by
a complete phase-out all non-recyclable plastics (w). This is considered to be the most eﬀective but
also most profound change, because of the current quality of plastic, where currently even high-quality
plastics has a limited durability compared to alternative materials like glass and metal. However, a
vital premises for a functioning CE is to not place anything on the market that cannon enter the loop.
The ﬁfth objective is that Health, safety and rights of all living beings outweighs the economic
prosperity, where all living beings includes humans all over the world, future generations and all
animals including thriving ecosystems. Eﬀective protection of the environment and human health
from plastics is a matter of the EU founded in its aim, where the fundamental rights of the EU are
set in Lisbon Treaty and the EU charter of fundamental rights including human dignity, freedom,
democracy, equality, rule of law and human rights (EC, 2007; EC, 2000). Aims of the EU on this
Page 46 of 76
==PAGE:56==
6.2
Policy recommendations
matter include to promote well-being of EU citizens, to oﬀer freedom, security and justice without
internal boarders, to establish an economic union, and ﬁnally, to work towards sustainable development
of the whole of Europe, while also contributing to the sustainable development, peace and security
of the Earth. An eﬃcient plastic handling in the EU will thus not only contribute in fulﬁlling the
aim of protecting human health and the environment within the Union, but also have positive eﬀect
outside Union boarders in terms of ’closing the tap’ for both intended (outsourcing plastic waste
outside the EU) and unintended (mismanaged plastic waste). Means to fulﬁll this objective include
limiting the plastic pollution, as the reduction of plastic present in the environment will lead to
lowered physical damage and obstruction of ecosystems. There is currently a gap of knowledge related
to the eﬀect of chemicals from plastics or distributed by plastic pieces, have on both the environment
and human health. However, with the increased recognition of the chemical crisis on one hand and
the Precautionary Principle on the other, action should be taken to prevent further damage both of
physical and chemical character.
Policy recommendations on how to secure protection for all living beings from plastics include:
The elimination of single-use plastic products (a) and the ban of intentionally added microplastic (r),
would reduce some of the pressure from plastic pollution - especially toward the marine life based
on current knowledge since plastic accumulates in the ocean. Furthermore, it would minimize the
general pressure on marine and terrestrial ecosystems, where concerns have been raised regarding the
interference that microplastic may have on vital processes, e.g. photosynthesis of algae aﬀecting the
oceans capacity being a carbon sink of GHG, see section 6.2.1.
The marine environment is under great pressure being a sink of plastic pollution, and here a
recommendation is on making certain applications (products that are meant to be disposed, e.g.
harpoons, or are easily lost, e.g. ﬁshing nets, within the marine sector) of biodegradable or easier
degradable plastic materials (z). Such resources could come from renewable materials, even though
they are also ﬁnite to a certain extend. There may also be issues related to the actual degradability
despite being made from renewable resources, see section 3.1.
The health and safety aspects compromised by chemicals (see section ??ditives) is addressed by
including registration and evaluation of plastic polymers under REACH (f), followed by an extensive
ban of known and suspected additives with unwanted EHS risks (g), and the development of positive
lists of additives for diﬀerent applications of plastics (h). By adopting and enforcing ambitious reduc-
tion goals for all sectors (p), the general pressure on the ecosystems, and thus all living-beings, would
be minimized. In practice, these reductions could include targets for reduced chemical use, limited
waste generated, reduced GHG emissions, reduced water use, etc.
Finally, it is recommended that the EU shall commit to handle its plastic waste internally in the
Union (t). The expectation with this recommendation is that the commitment will work as a great
motivator for kick-starting the CE in the EU and eﬃciently integrate the needed measures to have a
functioning system capable of handling European plastics - including the necessary reduction in plastic
material quantity overall. Furthermore, the EU would take responsibility of stopping its contribution
to markets outside the EU boarders that are currently representing an enormous blind-spot of plastic
types including which chemicals they contain, in what quantities, where it ends up, the handling
on site (e.g. uncontrolled physical recycling without consideration of the chemical aspects, working
conditions, outdoor burning, dumping in rivers and/or the ocean, deposits, etc.).
The last objective is that The circular economy for plastics is fully integrated in the European
society.
This objective matches several of the given policy recommendations and since these are
already explained in relation to the other objectives, the undescribed policy recommendations will
primarily be justiﬁed and discussed here. Based on the stakeholder interviews in this respective thesis
work and the literature study, the idea of a uniform waste handling system at EU level was not found
to be realistic nor desirable. This was based on the diﬀerences in consumption patterns and consumer
Page 47 of 76
==PAGE:57==
6.2
Policy recommendations
behavior, and the variation in existing waste management systems and infrastructure in the MS. There
are currently too large variations on several crucial factors between the MS, thus there is no foundation
to recommend a ’one-ﬁts-all’ solution when it comes to a uniform waste management system in an
European context. However, there is a need to upgrade the waste management systems across the EU
to improve eﬃciency and to match new requirements for the CE. Therefore, the ﬁrst recommendation
is to make a uniform waste handling system at MS level (c) and to make infrastructural changes on MS
level to match requirements of the CE (d). Uniform systems at MS level will decrease the complexity
by eliminating regional diﬀerences which is currently the case in some MS, and further supported by
the increased controlling of the input fraction to the market, the knowledge on the output will be
increased. It is recommended to further support the development of MS waste management systems
in a CE by setting objectives and making guidelines on how to achieve this. To secure the foundation
and security of an expansion of reusable products, hygiene standards and quality criteria should be
made for products intended for reuse (e.g. reﬁllable food and beverages containers, personal hygiene
products, etc.) (l). Here, the infrastructural changes (d) could actively be integrated to support the
transition towards more reusal.
A uniformity can however be enforced on EU level by making restriction on what can be placed
in the internal market. This may be achieved by reserving some plastic types for certain applications
(n), combined with closed loops for reuse and recycling (e). An extended warranty on products made
from plastics (o) implemented on EU level along with initiatives on ’cheaper to repair than replace’
(q), would help integration of circularity on societal level.
The European waste management system is already overburdened by the amounts of plastics see
section 3.2, therefore it is expected that a commitment to internally handle plastic waste would ignite
a high incentive to drastically reduce the quantity of plastics overall, and that more eﬀorts would be
put into making long-lasting and high-quality products.
Some relevant areas regarding the transition to the a CE is to advance LCA and similar methods
to include the full life cycle of plastic (cc), and to implement assessments of burden-shifting in coming
pieces of EU legislation’s (dd).
The Singe-use Plastic Directive received criticism in the stakeholder interviews that the burden-
shifting aspect had not been considered since only single-use plastic products - and not all single-use
products where targeted. Here the example of paper straws was mentioned several times, pointing
at it having reduced functionality compared to the plastic straw, that it still contained plastic in the
coating, and that fact that the paper straws are still a single-use products and thus not solve the
initial problem - but merely shift it (burden-shifting).
Lastly, recommendations on how to ﬁnance the transition into a circular European society should
come from the governments commitment to make sustainable public procurement’s to stimulate the
new circular market (v), to end ﬁnancial support for the petrochemical industry (x), and furthermore,
to make targeted ﬁnancial green investments and support schemes (y) to further strengthen the new
CE.
6.2.2
Policy recommendations as suggested amendments for the ﬁve legal acts
In this section, the implementation of selected policy recommendations (from Table 10) as suggested
amendments presented and are further matched with the steps under the Waste Hierarchy. The policy
recommendations presented in this section are suggestions for future amendments to the respective
pieces of EU law, and not all policy recommendations from Table 10 were assessed as relevant for the
ﬁve pieces of legal acts. Therefore policy recommendations not mentioned on Figure 6 may be used
for inspiration for other relevant legal acts not treated in this thesis.
As it can be seen from Figure 6, there are only lines connected to ’Reduce’, ’Reuse’ and ’Recycle’
Page 48 of 76
==PAGE:58==
6.2
Policy recommendations
Figure 6: Selected policy recommendations from Table 10 divided into the ﬁve identiﬁed relevant pieces
of EU legislation from the stakeholder interviews, and linked to the Waste Hierarchy were relevant.
These policy recommendations are suggestions for amendments for the respective legal acts. FCM
(Regulation for food contact materials), REACH (Regulation on registration, evaluation, authorization
and restriction on chemicals), ECO (Eco-design Directive), SUP (Single-use Plastic Directive), EPR
(Extended Producer Responsibility)
from the Waste Hierarchy, and thus leave ’Recover’ and ’Dispose’ unmatched. Since the vision is to
move away from the steps found in the bottom of the hierarchy, they do not qualify for suggestions.
The future vision of the EC with the Green Deal and CE, points at a focus primarily on reduction,
followed by reuse and lastly on recycling. However, in all systems there will be some spill and 100%
circularity can never be achieved in reality. Some recovery in the form of waste-to-energy solutions
or disposal options, may be an inevitable part - also for a CE. But the vision is, that these areas are
decreased to an absolute minimum and that future legal acts and amendments to existing are working
on moving the focus away from BAU and the linear economy.
Page 49 of 76
==PAGE:59==
6.2
Policy recommendations
1. Regulation for Food Contact Materials
a). The suggested amendment to the FCM regulation is to reserve certain plastics for some
applications (n). This could apply for general consumer products and include the three common
thermoplastic types: PET, PP and PE, where PET may be saved for food packaging, as it
retains its quality better during recycling compared to PP and PE, and keeps the the high
quality standard required for food packaging.
2. REACH
a). The ﬁrst amendment suggestion for REACH is currently being processed in the EC, and
is on the inclusion of registration and evaluation of plastic polymers under REACH (f). This
amendment would increase the knowledge on plastic polymers placed on the internal market in
the EU, and enable a better overview and data foundation beneﬁcial for further research on its
eﬀect in society.
b). The next suggestion is to make an extensive ban of both known and suspected chemical
substances used as additives in plastic polymers (g). Today, exemptions are given to the rule
”no data, no market” and that has raised critique on favoring the internal market and the econ-
omy over precaution toward the environment and human health concern. Stricter rules in this
area could manifest as group classiﬁcations instead of single-classiﬁcations, which may increase
eﬀectiveness in administrative part of chemical classiﬁcations, and also increase the environmen-
tal and human health protection from unwanted eﬀects from chemicals like endocrine disruptors
and more. The precautionary principle can also be applied for the inclusion of suspected harmful
chemical substances, where the beneﬁt of the doubt will be in favor of protecting the vulnerable
instead of economic proﬁt.
c). The third suggestion is to make a positive list of additives for plastics (h), with inspiration
from the FCM Regulation. The intention with this positive list is to decrease the complexity of
which chemical substances plastics can contain, thus also increase the knowledge on the contents
beneﬁcial in the CE. Further, it will decrease exposure of harmful chemicals to vulnerable groups
as they will be less exposed if these additives are eliminated from a larger amount of product
groups and not only from those targeted the speciﬁed groups (e.g. children under the age of
three and pregnant). Since this approach will generally decrease the exposure of for example
endocrine disruptors in society, derived positive eﬀects may show in other areas like hormonal
related cancer types (e.g. breast- and prostate cancer), low male fertility, early puberty, and
genital malformations - all areas with increasing cases and with gaps of knowledge on the cause
and eﬀect relations, as humans are exposed to potentially harmful chemical substances from
various sources in the modern society, combined with very limited knowledge on mixture eﬀects.
d). The last suggestion for potential amendment to REACH is relevant under the evaluation
part, and include monitoring and identiﬁcation of chemical pollution from plastics (bb). Cur-
rently there are a limited data foundation on plastics types including the additives it contain
and in what quantities, which compromises the methodology development for plastics in the
environment and in humans. More data is therefore crucial to better scientiﬁcally describe and
investigate the eﬀects and risks posed by plastics.
3. Eco-design Directive
Several of the suggestions are relevant for the Eco-design Directive, with the coming SIP, as
design and quality criteria for plastics could be incorporated in a new eco-design guide for
plastics.
a).
The ﬁrst suggestions is to expand the product groups under the coming SIP (m).
The
Eco-design criteria for electronic products has shown great eﬀect on for example lowering the
energy use, and has been well-implemented in society by the easy comprehensible labelling by
Page 50 of 76
==PAGE:60==
6.2
Policy recommendations
both consumers, manufactures and resellers.
b). The second suggestion is to implement an uniform and extended warranty on certain products
(o). Currently the EU warranty is 2 years and the MS can chose to extend it. By increasing the
warranty period on EU level, the consumer rights are favored and it is more in alignment with
the vision of a CE where the durability of products is an integrated part.
c). The third and fourth suggestions are both on developing speciﬁc deﬁnitions for plastics,
namely: deﬁne quality criteria for plastics (i), and deﬁne good design for plastic products (j). In
both regards, the full life cycle of the material and product ought to be considered. The material
quality can thus include ﬁrstly durability for reuse, and secondly how well the material quality
are kept after recycling. The good design of plastic products ought to include consideration of
both functionality, durability, separability if the products consists of several parts, and also the
chemical aspect which could include label, ink, glue, additives etc. d). The ﬁfth suggestion is to
make close loops for reuse and recycling (e), implemented for same plastic type or for the same
product groups. By keeping the same product groups in the same loop, the risk of contamination
from other product groups for example could be minimized and therefor spillage percent could
be lowered.
e). The ﬁnal suggestion is to ban composite plastics (s). The reasoning for completely out-
phasing composite products containing plastics is that it is extremely diﬃcult to recycle those
products after end-of-life. Furthermore, the addition of recycled plastics into composite products
are a detour in the circular thinking. It is not only about re-using materials, but more about
preserving its quality and avoid downcycling - and adding plastic particles to composite materials
is an example of downcycling.
4. Single-use Plastic Directive
a). There is only one suggestion for the Single-use Plastic Directive as it covers the main vision
for a more eﬀective plastic regulation in the EU, namely to eliminate all single-use products
(a). Several of the stakeholders were disappointed on the Danish minimum implementation to
reach the objectives set out in the directive. To decrease the large margin of discretion given
to the MS on fulﬁlling the directive objectives, a total harmonization could be proposed as
an amendment, thus including all single-use products, disregarding material, in Annex B. By
implementing this amendment to the Single-use Plastic Directive, all single-use products would
be prohibited instead of only certain applications which is currently the case, thus more in
alignment with the objective of eliminating all non-essential plastic use and the ﬁrst step in the
Waste Hierarchy on prevention. Further, it would remove the burden-shifting tendency, that is
being criticized as an unintended eﬀect of the directive. Here the example of paper straw as
alternatives to plastic straws was mentioned by several of the stakeholders, as it does not solve
the root of the problem, since this application is still single-use use and thus an unsustainable
waste of resources. Additionally, massive critique has been raised on the decreased functionality
of the paper straws compared to the plastic straw. However, since this piece of EU law is a
directive, a total harmonization on all single-use products may be conﬂicting with the principle
of proportionality and the principle of sovereignty, if the EU is found to exceed what is necessary
to reach the objectives and that it could have been achieved by the MS themselves.
5. Extended Producer Responsibility
a). The ﬁnal legal act treated in this thesis, is the coming EPR. Two suggestions were found
to be relevant and include the suggestion on initiating ’cheaper to repair than to replace’ (q).
Currently, repairments of common consumer products containing plastics are compromised by
the fact that it is often cheaper to buy a new product rather than getting it repaired. Poor
product design complicating repairments, high salaries, and pricing of products that does not
Page 51 of 76
==PAGE:61==
6.2
Policy recommendations
reﬂect the true cost are some of the current obstacles for increasing the repairment share. The
increased and uniform product warranty on EU level (o) could maybe support the increase
in repairments if it is implemented in the warranty scheme that repairments are favored over
replacements.
b).
The last suggestion is to include more products in the deposit system (b), and is also
related to the suggestion on making closing loops for reuse and recycling (e). By expanding
the deposit scheme, more product groups could stay in the same loop thus supporting the
foundation for developing handling structures from there. Deposit systems are dependent on
consumers participation as it is the consumers who must deposit the containers after use. Here
deposit pricing, container value and management costs must be taken into consideration, as well
as the beneﬁts of including the consumers actively in the circularity of containers for common
consumers products.
6.2.3
Suggestions for a future EU plastic legislation
In this section, suggestions for a future EU legislation focused on the protection of human health and
the environment from plastics is presented. The aspiration for developing a new piece of EU legislation
on plastics, is to secure safety of the environment and human health from the negative eﬀects posed
by plastics, not currently covered in existing EU law.
The results from the stakeholder interviews showed a general agreement on a common vision for
plastics in an European CE. This should be built on consideration for the environment and human
health, and keep using plastics for essential applications (see Table 8 in section 4), including societal
changes including elimination of throw-away-culture and single-use, consumer rights and an overall
focus on environmental and human health protection, simpliﬁcations on which plastic types can be
placed on the internal market of the EU, and make use of technologies in the intended circular handling
of plastics in the future. However, the speciﬁc actions on how to achieve this vision varied among the
stakeholders. This indicate several means to achieve better protection of human health and the envi-
ronment from plastics, where a common frame and objectives could be made to achieve an eﬀective
plastic legislation in the EU focused on minimizing health, safety and environmental risks.
Framework directives, commonly applied legislative act on environmental matter in the EU, aims
at being ﬂexible and adjustable as the MS must transpose it into national law with the right to choose
the means as they see ﬁt as long as the objectives are achieved. Regulations are directly applicable in
the MS and thus represent a legal act to which the EU express their power over the MS. However, with
reference to the Principle of Subsidiarity and the ﬁndings in the literature study and the stakeholder
analysis, there are no indications of the need for EU for exercise their powers to the highest extend,
with a regulation, as there is basis for the MS to eﬀectively meet the objectives of human health and
environmental protection - if the necessary guidelines, harmonized standards, etc. are implemented
at EU level. Furthermore, the Principle of Proportionality states that the EU shall only cover the
necessary to meet the objectives and not misuse the competences given to it by the MS. The relin-
quishment of sovereignty from the MS to the EU is meant to ensure European cohesion, and based on
the ﬁndings in this thesis it is found appropriate, and therefore recommended, to chose the legal act
in form of a directive to eﬀectively meet the objectives of environmental and human health protection
from the full life cycle of plastics in the EU. A plastic framework directive thus allow a larger margin of
discretion for the MS on deciding which measures they ﬁnd most appropriate to archive the common
objectives for their respective infrastructure, waste management systems, culture, etc.
Page 52 of 76
==PAGE:62==
6.2
Policy recommendations
Inspiration for construction and draw up of a Plastic Framework Directive (see Figure 7) comes
from existing EU framework directives including The Water Framework Directive (EC, 2019a) and
the Waste Framework Directive (Directive, 2008). The water and waste framework directives where
chosen as they are both framework directives and thus reﬂect what this type of legal act may include.
Selected policy recommendations presented in Table 10 are included as suggestions for articles in the
Plastic Framework Directive. There are several other relevant pieces of EU legislation that could be
used for inspiration or will be relevant to refer to in the Plastic Framework Directive drawn up in
this thesis - including the ﬁve legal acts treated in this thesis, but to keep relevancy of this directive
and avoid overlapping, the legals acts already covered will not be included here. The intention of the
Plastic Framework Directive is to function as a holistic directive eﬀectively protecting the environment
and human health - from the full life cycle of plastic, thus touches upon numerous relevant legal acts
in EU law requiring a more extensive and in-depth study which is out of the scope of this thesis due
to time constraints.
Figure 7: Inspiration for developing a future Plastic Framework Directive in the EU comes from the
policy recommendations and existing framework directives (FWD) like the Waste WFD and the Water
FWD. Amendments to the ﬁve legals acts identiﬁed in this thesis work (including the Regulation on
Food Contact Materials REACH, Eco-Design Directive, Single-use Plastic Directives and the coming
Extended Producer Responsibility) are meant to complement the draw up of the Plastic Framework
Directive, as well as other relevant legal acts regarding the full life cycle of plastic not covered in this
thesis.
A graphical illustration with suggested articles covered in a future Plastic Framework Directive
is presented in Figure 8. The legal basis for a future Plastic Framework Directive must be based on
a treaty article. One option is to ﬁnd legal basis in Article 114 on the establishment and functioning
of the internal market, including Article 114(3) which speciﬁes the responsibility of the EC on secur-
ing high level of protection on health, safety environmental, consumer protection and must take new
scientiﬁc ﬁndings into account. Legal basis in Article 114 in the TFEU would thus be based on the
free movement of goods, the functioning of the internal market, but also with consideration to health,
safety and the environment.
Page 53 of 76
==PAGE:63==
6.2
Policy recommendations
Another option is to ﬁnd legal basis in Article 192 in the TFEU on environmental protection.
This article refer to reach the objectives set in 191(1) including preserving, protecting and improving
the quality of the environment and protecting human health, where the environmental principles are
listed in Article 192(2) (see description in section 3.4). In Article 191(3) it is stated that the Union
shall take account of scientiﬁc data and must assess the costs and beneﬁts of action or lack thereof.
Based on the vision of the EC on the implementation of CE, legal basis in Article 114 TFEU
may be the most appropriate as this focus on goods. Furthermore, the scientiﬁc knowledge on eﬀects
on human health and the environment is still very limited with gaps of knowledge, and in addition,
the legal deﬁnitions on plastic polymers, sizes and shapes are missing thus compromising current
research and legal action, which may limit legal basis in Article 192 based on lack of scientiﬁc proof.
However, the environmental principles described in Article 191(2) in the TFEU including the polluter
pays, precautionary, prevention, and rectiﬁcation at source principles (see section 3.4), may still be
integrated disregarding which treaty article is chosen as legal basis.
Figure 8: Graphical illustration of article suggestions for a future Plastic Framework Directive.
At ﬁrst, the purpose and scope should be outlined and could include eﬀective protection human
health and the environment from risks of physical and chemical character posed by plastics. Since
plastics are used in many applications in all sectors exclusions from the scope should be speciﬁed. e.g.
which product groups or applications are in- and included. An article on deﬁnitions should include
plastic types, high- and low quality of plastic, additives, sizes (macro-, micro- and nanoparticles),
shapes (spheres, ﬁlms, fragments, ﬁbers, etc.), pollution, polluter, ecosystem, planetary boundary,
among others, with reference to relevant EU legal acts like the deﬁnitions of the steps in the Waste
Hierarchy in the Waste FWM, deﬁnition of plastic polymers in REACH, etc.
Page 54 of 76
==PAGE:64==
6.3
Final recommendations
A methodology on risk assessment of environmental and human health eﬀects from the full life
cycle of plastics must be developed and may include Hazard identiﬁcation and characterization, Ex-
posure assessment, and Risk characterization, inspired by classic environment risk assessment (Danish
EPA, 2014; EC, 2006). Speciﬁcations on how and what and where to monitor and register negative
eﬀects of physical and chemical eﬀects from plastics should be described. Furthermore, speciﬁc ob-
jectives on protection of human health and the environment should be deﬁned (inspiration can be
found in Article 4 (EC, 2019a) and Article 13 (Directive, 2008)). This should be followed by a de-
scription of the identiﬁcation of sensitive areas (environment) and vulnerable groups (human health)
including characteristics of negative impacts from plastics for diﬀerent ecosystems (e.g. fresh water,
marine, terrestrial, etc.) or groups (e.g. children, pregnant women, teenagers, etc.). Here inspiration
may be found in directive articles from the Water FWD like characteristics of negative environmental
impacts from plastics for diﬀerent ecosystems (e.g. freshwater, marine, terrestrial, etc.) (Article 5
(EC, 2019a)). Furthermore, it should be speciﬁed how sensitive areas of plastic pollution are identi-
ﬁed and how they should be registered, and how environmental areas are monitored (Article 6 and 8
(EC, 2019a)). This should be complemented by the policy recommendations on covering the gaps of
knowledge by further research.
The recovery of costs (Article 9 (EC, 2019a)) to fulﬁll the given objectives should be outlined and
could include the policy recommendations on making sustainable public procurement obligatory for
all MS (v), that the EU ends ﬁnancial support for the petrochemical industry (x) and instead make
targeted green investments and support schemes (y) to support the European transition into a CE.
It should also be clearly outlined which issues MS are not responsible for tackling, with speciﬁcations
on which EU institution that is responsible (Article 12 (EC, 2019a)) and could include harmonized
standards, various guidelines .
The responsibility should clearly be speciﬁed between the public
institutions (MS and EU level) and the private sector (EPR), to ensure that necessary measures are
taken to ensure the protection of the environment and human health from any part of plastics life
cycle.
6.3
Final recommendations
The recommendation developed in this thesis are three-folded and include the policy recommendations
which can be implemented at MS level in national plastic relevant polices (A.), amendments based on
suggestions from the policy recommendations implemented in existing legal acts, (B.), and ﬁnally, an
early stage draft for a future Plastic Framework Directive focused on the protection of the environment
and human health with inspiration from the policy recommendations and intended to function as a
holistic piece of EU law with reference to relevant existing EU legal acts. As seen on Figure 9, six
diﬀerent variations of the policy relevant recommendations (A-C) are presented in the form of work
packages (WP) from 1 to 6. The ﬁnal recommendation is to implement WP6, thus include all three
recommendations, with the intention to develop eﬀective plastic legislation in the EU, with reference
to the Principle of Eﬀectiveness, that EU law shall eﬀectively meet its objectives - including both
environmental and human health protection.
Page 55 of 76
==PAGE:65==
6.4
Limitations
Figure 9: Overview of the three-folded policy relevant recommendations denoted A. (Policy recommen-
dations), B. (Amendments), and C. (Plastic Framework Directive). Variations of these recommenda-
tions are presented as work packages (WP) 1-6. The ﬁnal recommendation is WP6 including both A.,
B. and C. and is marked with a red box.
6.4
Limitations
A barrier of achieving an eﬀective plastic legislation in the EU includes lack of necessary political
action. This may come from ineﬃcient synergy between scientiﬁc ﬁndings and legislative acts like
oﬃcial guidelines or key deﬁnitions (foundation for targeted research), or pressure from lobbyists by
the industry.
For the stakeholder analysis, there are several limitations, disadvantages and uncertainties (Lienert,
2015), and include:
• If crucial stakeholders are not participating because they were unidentiﬁed or not able to par-
ticipate, there is a risk the analysis will show an inaccurate result and wrong conclusions and
decisions may be based on it.
• An uneven distribution between stakeholders in the groups may distort the results as some
groups were represented by a larger number. However, the results from the survey indicates a
non-homogeneous group of stakeholders, representing diﬀerent opinions and perspectives to the
subject.
• The interviewer need to have expertise and knowledge within the ﬁelds represented by the
Page 56 of 76
==PAGE:66==
6.4
Limitations
stakeholders in order to ask critical questions during the interview and to have an easier com-
munication.
The preparation prior to the interview in this thesis included research on each
stakeholder. However, both time constraints and the academic background as an environmental
engineer may have played a role in limiting the level of understanding of each stakeholder and
their respective ﬁeld due to the broadness of stakeholder representation. This is an example of
epistemic uncertainty, where the uncertainty is due to imperfect knowledge and is reducible by
e.g. by more thorough background studies (Refsgaard et al., 2007).
• Risk that stakeholders were sharing subjective opinions and not express those from the stake-
holder group as they should represent. Furthermore, bias from the interviewer may obstruct the
analysis. This was addressed by contacting all stakeholders and providing them with a draft of
the stakeholder analysis to give them the opportunity to clarify their opinions and thus decrease
the risk of misunderstandings or misinterpretation from the interviews.
• During the interviews, the stakeholders were encouraged to come with comments, give critique
and ask questions in relation to the project. The questions were designed to be broad and open
as a mean to give space for a wide range of perspectives and exactly leave room for interpretation
revealing the stakeholders perspectives. The stakeholders have diﬀerent backgrounds and focus
points in their professional work, which was seen as a strength for outputs from the stakeholder
analysis as more perspectives and viewpoints would be included. However, critique on for the
interview part, were on the broadness of the questions in general leaving space for individual
interpretation by the stakeholders. Several stakeholders speciﬁcally pointed out question 1.c.
(see Table 3), which they thought were very long to an extend were it became diﬃcult to
understand.
• Critique points raised for the survey were on the questions being too broad and open for inter-
pretation, that the statements were too general and not appropriate to reﬂect the complexity
they represented, and that it did not make sense to use the ranking system without being able
to comment and elaborate why the speciﬁc rating was given. However, the intention with the
survey was to get an overview of the trends in responses in order to clarify if this research were
representing a homogeneous or non-homogeneous group of stakeholders, and to identify which
questions speciﬁcally with agreement or disagreement. Thus, the stakeholders were given the
opportunity to express their opinions in the interview part, and since they were provided with
all questions for both the interview and the survey beforehand they were able to do so.
Page 57 of 76
==PAGE:67==
7
Conclusions
The increasing scientiﬁc concern and political recognition of both the physical and chemical issues
posed by plastics, and the extensive gaps of knowledge on the extend of the negative impacts and
aﬀects on the environment and human health, puts plastic in the spotlight. Seen in combination
with the drastic increase in the plastic production and use in the EU, this area ought to be highly
prioritized politically at EU level.
To get an overview of the complex and interdisciplinary subject plastics a literature study was
conducted. Here it was found that the EU is overburdened by the enormous amounts of plastic waste
and is currently facing infrastructural and waste managerial problems on handling growing amounts
of plastics not ﬁt or feasible for recycling with available technologies. The concern has predominantly
been on the physical plastic pollution’s eﬀect on the marine environment, but with growing scientiﬁc
and political recognition of the chemical aspects related to the additives in plastics and the chemical
substances carried by plastic particles in both a human health and environmental perspective. Nearly
40% of plastics in the EU today are packaging and this has been addressed by the Single-use Plastic
Directive. There are several examples of political action at EU and MS level in relation to combating
the critical plastic related issues issues including the Circular Economy Action Plan in the European
Green Deal and the current discussion on registration and authorization of plastic polymers under
REACH, however this study ﬁnds that current EU legislation is not eﬀectively covering the subject.
In order to develop policy relevant recommendations for future policy and regulatory development
to reach the objectives of protecting human health and the environment from physical and chemicals
risks posed by plastics, a bottom-up stakeholder analysis was carried out. This included interviews
and a survey with stakeholders either related to the plastic sector or working with derived eﬀects
from plastic pollution. Findings from the interviews included multiple perspectives, areas of concern
and ideas for policy development. The key ﬁndings from the interviews included need for changes on
societal level with decreased consumption, simplicity in what is placed on the market (plastic types
including additives), and more eﬀective EU legislation with harmonized standards and guidelines on
how to integrate plastics in a CE, which was found absolutely necessary in order to guide the MS and
the industries in the future.
The statistical analysis of the anonymous survey identiﬁed the stakeholders as an in-homogeneous
group, thus found to represent a broad range of opinions which is key for a successful and representa-
tive stakeholder analysis. The questions with most disagreement among the stakeholders was on the
questions if the beneﬁts of plastic outweighs the potential negative consequences (2.b.), if plastic can
be absolute sustainable (2.c.), and if the current plastic legislation in the EU is eﬀectively protecting
the environment and human health (2.d). This disagreement among the stakeholders, or diﬀerent
perspectives, also showed in the interviews on the areas of concern in relation to plastics and their
concrete activity proposals. The largest agreement among the stakeholders from the survey was on
question 2.e. if the handling of negative impacts from plastics is a matter of the EU, where 67% of
them gave the highest rating score 10 ”yes, to a high degree”. This was also in alignment with ﬁndings
in the literature study, in reference to the objectives of the EU, and further underlines that this is a
matter of the EU.
Identiﬁed plastic relevant EU legal acts from the stakeholder interviews made the foundation for
the legal analysis. Here it was found that the positive list of allowed additives in FCM plastics as
described in the the Regulation of Food Contact Materials, could be used as inspiration for other
plastic applications. There were several ﬁndings in relation to REACH where the proposal of ”one
Page 58 of 76
==PAGE:68==
substance one assessment” was found as key in increasing the eﬀectiveness of the general chemical
legislation in the EU. However, there are still very limited knowledge of mixture eﬀects of chemicals
which represents a signiﬁcant knowledge gap being highly relevant in the context of plastic, because of
the large number of additives currently used and little knowledge on which are being used and in what
quantities. There are high expectations from the stakeholders represented in this thesis on increased
sustainability for certain products on the internal market in the EU with the coming SPI, under the
Eco-design Directive. However it seems that plastics will not be covered, though it a recommenda-
tion of this study to use this chance to make harmonized eco-design standards for plastic products.
Where the Single-use Plastic Directive manifested the will to address the issues related to the growing
amount of plastic waste and extensive production of single-use plastic products, it failed to eﬀectively
cover the root of the problem - the single-use items, thus providing an example of burden shifting.
The recommendation is that an extensive ban of single-use products (disregarding material) should
be applied. The Extended Producer Responsibility has not yet entered into force, but receives broad
recognition and high expectations on solving plastic related issues like poor quality plastic application
unﬁt for reuse or recycling. However, it is only supposed to cover certain product groups, thus not
fulﬁlling its potential of eﬀectively bringing the EU closer to the CE in practice.
The ﬁnal recommendations are three-folded (see Figure 9). The risks and negative impacts on the
environment and human health from the full life cycle of plastics may be reduced through targeted
EU legislation that are summarized in the ﬁnal recommendations below, with the aspiration that they
will catalyze an increased eﬀectivity of EU plastic legislation:
A. Policy recommendations implemented at MS level. Here it is key that future policies follow the
order of the Waste Hierarchy and that quantiﬁable goals are made.
B. Amendments to existing EU legal acts. The suggestions from the stakeholder analysis could be
integrated in the current legislation by making amendments inspired from the policy recommen-
dations presented in Table 10 and speciﬁcally in Figure 6.
C. Development of a holistic Plastic Framework Directive. The intention is that the Plastic Frame-
work Directive shall function as a holistic directive and ensure eﬀective legal covering of subjects
related to the full life cycle of plastics.
The ﬁndings in this thesis is a contribution to create an overview of the complex and many faceted
problem that plastic constitutes. It is key to increase the knowledge on behavior, fate and risks from
plastics - both regarding physical and chemical aspects, and the environment and human health, and
to collect and present data as scientiﬁc evidence for policy makers to legally justify further political
action. The aspiration is that the inclusion of both environmental and human health concerns of the
entire life cycle of plastics in the further development of EU legal acts will increase the eﬀectiveness
- to do the right things - of the protection hereof. However, there are several knowledge gaps on the
environmental and human health eﬀects and risks from plastics which may delay political action and
thus compromise the eﬃciency - to do things right. The aim is that the ﬁndings and recommendations
presented in this thesis will support the regulatory decision making in the development of plastic EU
legislation eﬀectively protecting human health and the environment from the physical and chemical
negative eﬀects and risks posed by plastics.
Page 59 of 76
==PAGE:69==
8
Bibliography
References
A-R-C (2021).
Organization.
Amager Resource Center (A-R-C). Online:
https://a-r-c.dk/om-
arc/organisation/, accessed 14.09.2021 at 11:15 ECT.
Allan, J., Belz, S., Hoeveler, A., Hugas, M., Okuda, H., Patri, A., Rauscher, H., Silva, P., Slikker,
W., Sokull-Kluettgen, B., et al. (2021). Regulatory landscape of nanotechnology and nanoplastics
from a global perspective. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, 122:104885.
Allen, S., Allen, D., Phoenix, V. R., Le Roux, G., Jim´enez, P. D., Simonneau, A., Binet, S., and
Galop, D. (2019). Atmospheric transport and deposition of microplastics in a remote mountain
catchment. Nature Geoscience, 12(5):339–344.
Amadei, A. M., Sany´e-Mengual, E., and Sala, S. (2022). Modeling the eu plastic footprint: Exploring
data sources and littering potential. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 178:106086.
Andra, S. S., Makris, K. C., Shine, J. P., and Lu, C. (2012). Co-leaching of brominated compounds
and antimony from bottled water. Environment International, 38(1):45–53.
Arp, H. P. H., Kuhnel, D., Rummel, C., MacLeod, M., Potthoﬀ, A., Reichelt, S., Rojo-Nieto, E.,
Schmitt-Jansen, M., Sonnenberg, J., Toorman, E., et al. (2021). Weathering plastics as a planetary
boundary threat: Exposure, fate, and hazards. Environmental Science & Technology.
Auta, H. S., Emenike, C., and Fauziah, S. (2017). Distribution and importance of microplastics in the
marine environment: a review of the sources, fate, eﬀects, and potential solutions. Environment
international, 102:165–176.
Azapagic, A., Perdan, S., and Clift, R. (2004). Sustainable development in practice: case studies for
engineers and scientists. John Wiley & Sons.
Basel Convention (1989). The basel convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazadous
wastes and their disposal.
Protocol on liability and compensation for damage resulting from
transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposals. UNEP.
Bigum, M. (2018). Bioplast løser ikke verdens plastikforurening. Comment, Information. Online:
https://www.information.dk/udland/2018/07/bioplast-loeser-verdens-plastikforurening , accessed
07.10.2021 at 11:45 ECT.
Bille Nielsen, M., Peter Westergaard Clausen, L., Cronin, R., Foss Hansen, S., Oturai, N., Strand,
J., and Syberg, K. (2021). Policy initiatives targeting plastic pollution: Unfolding the science
behind.
Break Free From Plastic (2021).
Who we are.
Break Free From Plastic (BFFP). Online:
https://www.breakfreefromplastic.org/about/, accessed 09.09.2021 at 14:00 ECT.
British Plastics Federation (2021a).
How plastics are made.
British Plastics Federation. Online:
https://www.bpf.co.uk/plastipedia/how-is-plastic-made.aspx, accessed 11.10.2021 at 13:30 ECT.
Page 60 of 76
==PAGE:70==
References
British Plastics Federation (2021b).
Timeline of plastics.
British Plastics Federation. On-
line: https://www.bpf.co.uk/plastipedia/plasticshistory/Default.aspx, accessed11.10.2021at13 :
30ECT.
Broman, G. I. and Rob`ert, K.-H. (2017). A framework for strategic sustainable development. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 140:17–31.
Brooks, A. L., Wang, S., and Jambeck, J. R. (2018). The chinese import ban and its impact on global
plastic waste trade. Science advances, 4(6).
Brundtland, G. H. (1987). Report of the World Commission on environment and development:” our
common future.”. UN.
Brunner, P. H. and Rechberger, H. (2002). Anthropogenic metabolism and environmental legacies.
Encyclopedia of Global Environmental Change. Wiley, New York.
Budin, C., Petrlik, J., Strakova, J., Hamm, S., Beeler, B., Behnisch, P., Besselink, H., van der Burg,
B., and Brouwer, A. (2020). Detection of high pbdd/fs levels and dioxin-like activity in toys
using a combination of gc-hrms, rat-based and human-based dr calux® reporter gene assays.
Chemosphere, 251:126579.
Buss, A. H., Kovaleski, J. L., Pagani, R. N., da Silva, V. L., Silva, J. d. M., et al. (2019). Proposal to
reuse rubber waste from end-of-life tires using thermosetting resin. Sustainability, 11(24):6997.
Cabernard, L., Pﬁster, S., Oberschelp, C., and Hellweg, S. (2021). Growing environmental footprint
of plastics driven by coal combustion. Nature Sustainability, pages 1–10.
Catarino, A. I., Macchia, V., Sanderson, W. G., Thompson, R. C., and Henry, T. B. (2018). Low levels
of microplastics (mp) in wild mussels indicate that mp ingestion by humans is minimal compared
to exposure via household ﬁbres fallout during a meal. Environmental pollution, 237:675–684.
CEHOS
(2021).
Hvem
er
vi?
Center
for
Endocrine
Disruptors
(CEHOS).
Online:
https://www.cend.dk/hvem-er-vi-.html accessed 01.09.2021 at 11:15 ECT.
Chemsec (2020). What goes around. enabling the circular economy by removing chemical roadblocks.
Chemsec.
Chrisaﬁs, A. (2021).
That’s a wrap:
French plastic packaging ban for fruit and veg begins.
The Guardian. Online:
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/dec/31/thats-a-wrap-french-
plastic-packaging-ban-for-fruit-and-veg-begins , accessed 03.01.2022 at 11:15 ECT.
Christensen, J. B. and Katan, L. (2021). Brev til miljøministeren: Sæt m˚al for reduktion og genbrug
af emballager. Dansk Aﬀaldsforening. Online: https://danskaﬀaldsforening.dk/nyheder/brev-til-
miljoeministeren-saet-maal-reduktion-genbrug-emballager , accessed 26.11.2021 at 13:30 ECT.
CIEL (2021). Plastic global law and policy. Center for International and Environmental Law (CIEL).
Online: https://www.ciel.org/issue/plastic-global-law-policy/, accessed 06.09.2021 at 09:40 ECT.
CIEL et al. (2019a). Plastic and climate - the hidden costs of a plastic planet.
CIEL et al. (2019b). Plastic and health - the hidden costs of a plastic planet.
Clausen, L. (2021). Stakeholder analysis. Lecture. Course 12440 Environmental Ethics. Department
of Environmental Engineering. Technical University of Denmark.
Page 61 of 76
==PAGE:71==
References
Clausen, L. P. W., Hansen, O. F. H., Oturai, N. B., Syberg, K., and Hansen, S. F. (2020). Stake-
holder analysis with regard to a recent european restriction proposal on microplastics. PloS one,
15(6):e0235062.
Crawford, C. and Quinn, B. (2017). 7-the biological impacts and eﬀects of contaminated microplastics.
Microplastic Pollutants; Elsevier: Kidlington, UK, pages 159–178.
CSR (2020). Biobaseret plast vinder ikke frem som forudset. Klima, miljø og energi. CSR - Forum
for bæredygtig forretning. Online: https://csr.dk/biobaseret-plast-vinder-ikke-frem-som-forudset ,
accessed 15.10.2021 at 13:10 ECT.
Dalberg-Larsen, J. and Nielsen, J. G. (2021).
Lex specialis.
Den Store Danske. Online:
https://denstoredanske.lex.dk/lexspecialis, accessed22.12.2021at16 : 40ECT.
Danish EPA (2014). Guidance for risk assessment of chemicals in consumer articles and products. sur-
vey of chemical substances in consumer products no. 125, 2014. Danish Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). Danish Ministry of the Environment.
Danish EPA (2021). Endocrine disruptor list. The Danish Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Online: https://edlists.org/ , accessed 01.10.2021 at 14:00 ECT.
Dansk
Retursystem
(2021).
Sustainability.
Dansk
Retursystem.
Online:
https://danskretursystem.dk/en/sustainability/ , accessed 09.09.2021 at 14:50 ECT.
Dasgupta, P. (2021). The Economics of Biodiversity: the Dasgupta Review. HM Treasury.
DCE (2021).
About dce.
Danish Centre for Environment and Energy (DCE). Online:
https://dce.au.dk/en/about-dce , accessed 01.10.2021 at 13:15 ECT.
Det Nationale Plastikcenter (2021). Om det nationale plastikcenter. Det Nationale Plastikcenter.
Online: https://plastikviden.dk/om-det-nationale-plastikcenter/ , accessed 09.09.2021 at 15:10
ECT.
DI (2021a). Aﬀald som en ressource. Dansk Industri. Online: https://www.danskindustri.dk/politik-
og-analyser/di-mener/miljoenergi/aﬀald-som-en-ressource/, accessed 28.09.2021 at 11:00 ECT.
DI
(2021b).
Cirkulær
økonomi.
DI
mener.
Dansk
Industry
(DI).
Online:
https://www.danskindustri.dk/politik-og-analyser/di-mener/miljoenergi/cirkular-okonomi/,
accessed 28.09.2021 at 10:10 ECT.
Diamond, M. L., de Wit, C. A., Molander, S., Scheringer, M., Backhaus, T., Lohmann, R., Arvidsson,
R., Bergman, ˚A., Hauschild, M., Holoubek, I., et al. (2015). Exploring the planetary boundary
for chemical pollution. Environment international, 78:8–15.
Directive (1994). 94/62/EC of the european parliament and of the council of 20 december 1994 on
packaging and packaging waste. The European Union.
Directive (2008). 2008/98/EC of the european parliament and of the council of 19 november 2008 on
waste and repealing certain directives. The European Union.
Due, I. and Andersen, N. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with Oceana.
Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Page 62 of 76
==PAGE:72==
References
Due, I. and Andersson, A.-M. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with
CEHOS. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and Azoulay, D. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with CIEL.
Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I., Busk, C., and Knudsen, A. K. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the
EU with the Danish Plastics Federation. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis.
Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and B¨unemann, L. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with DI.
Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and Dichtl, R. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with Kleen Hub.
Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and Haagen, P. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with WWF.
Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and Hansen, L. E. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with Ecola-
belling Denmark. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of
Denmark.
Due, I. and Jørgensen, C. (2021a). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with the Dan-
ish Consumer Council. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University
of Denmark.
Due, I. and Jørgensen, J. S. (2021b). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with
the Danish EPA. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of
Denmark.
Due, I. and Leisner, I. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with Amager
Resource Center. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of
Denmark.
Due, I. and Mikkelsen, L. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with the
Ecological Council. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University
of Denmark.
Due, I. and Nielsen, S. S. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with Genplast.
Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and Shashoua, Y. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with National
Museum of Denmark. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University
of Denmark.
Due, I. and Sickert, L. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with Tetra Pak.
Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and Strand, J. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with Aarhus Uni-
versity. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and Svenningsen, H. M. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with
the Danish Deposit System.
Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical
University of Denmark.
Page 63 of 76
==PAGE:73==
References
Due, I. and Therkelsen, L. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with Plastic
Change. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Due, I. and ˚Abo Mortensen, J. (2021). Stakeholder interview on plastic regulation in the EU with
the Municipality of Copenhagen. Interview part of stakeholder analysis. Master Thesis. Technical
University of Denmark.
EC (1997). 97/129/ec commission decision of 28 january 1997 establishing the identiﬁcation system for
packaging materials pursuant to european parliament and council directive 94/62/ec on packaging
and packaging waste (text with eea relevance).
EC (2000). Charter of fundamental rights of the european union (2000/c 364/01). European Com-
mission (EC).
EC (2006). Regulation 1907/2006/EC of the european parliament and of the council of 18 december
2006 concerning the registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals (reach),
establishing a european chemicals agency, amending directive 1999/45/ec and repealing council.
European Commission (EC). The European Union.
EC (2007). Treaty of lisbon amending the treaty on european union and the treaty establishing the
european community. European Commission (EC).
EC (2008a). Regulation 1272/2008/EC on the classiﬁcation, labeling and packaging of substances and
mixtures. European Commission (EC). The European Union.
EC (2008b). Regulation 1935/2004/EC of the european parliament and of the council of 27 october
2004 on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food. European Commission
(EC). The European Union.
EC (2009). Directive 2009/125 of the european parliament and of the council of 21 october 2009
establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products.
European Commission (EC). The European Union.
EC
(2013).
Science
for
environment
policy.
European
Commission
DG
Environment
News
Alert
Service.
European
Commission
(EC).
2
May
2013.
Issue
326.
Online:
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/newsalert/pdf/326na6en.pdf, accessed02.01.2022at11 :
30ECT.
EC (2015).
Waste framework directive.
Environment. European Commission (EC). On-
line:
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/topics/waste-and-recycling/waste-framework-
directiveen, accessed23.09.2021at11 : 30ECT.
EC (2016a). Treaty on european union (consolidated version 2016). European Commission(EC).
EC (2016b). Treaty on the functioning of the european union (consolidated version 2016). European
Commission (EC).
EC (2018). A european strategy for plastics in a circular economy. European Commission (EC).
Page 64 of 76
==PAGE:74==
References
EC (2019a). Directive 2000/60/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 23 october 2000
establishing a framework for community action in the ﬁeld of water policy. European Commission
(EC). The European Union.
EC (2019b). Directive 2019/904 of the european parliament and of the council of 5 june 2019 on the
reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment. European Commission
(EC). The European Union.
EC (2020). Communication from the commission to the european parliament, the council, the european
economic and social committee and the committee of the regions. a new circular economy action
plan - for a cleaner and more competitive europe. European Commission (EC). 98 ﬁnal. The
European Union.
EC (2020). Proposal for a decision of the european parliament and of the council on a general union
environment action programme to 2030. European Commission (EC).
EC
(2021).
Bamboo-zling.
eu
enforcement
action
on
plastic
food
contact
materials
(fcm)
made
of
bamboo
‘powder.
Food
Safety.
European
Commission
(EC).
On-
line:
https://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/agri-food-fraud/eu-coordinated-actions/bamboo-
zlingen, accessed15.10.2021at10 : 40ECT.
ECHA (2012). Guidance for monomers and polymers. version 2.0. Guidance for the implementation
of REACH. European Chemical Agency (ECHA).
ECHA (2021a). Candidate list of substances of very high concern for authorisation. published in
accordance with Article 59(10) of the REACH Regulation. European Chemicals Agency (ECHA)
Online: https://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table, accessed 15.12.2021 at 13:30 ECT.
ECHA (2021b).
Perﬂuoroalkyl chemicals (pfas).
European Chemical Agency (ECHA). Online:
https://echa.europa.eu/hot-topics/perﬂuoroalkyl-chemicals-pfas,
accessed 09.09.2021 at 09:10
ECT.
Ecolabelling
Denmark
(2021).
About.
Ecolabelling
Denmark.
Online:
https://www.ecolabel.dk/en/about , accessed 09.09.2021 at 15:00 ECT.
EEA (2021a).
Infographic: Sources and pathways of plastics in the environment.
European En-
vironment Agency (EEA). Online: https://www.eea.europa.eu/media/infographics/sources-and-
pathways-of-plastics/view , accessed 13.10.2021 at 14:40 ECT.
EEA (2021b).
Seven common types of plastics, with symbols and applications.
European Envi-
ronment Agency. Online:
https://www.eea.europa.eu/media/infographics/seven-common-types-
of-plastics/view , accessed 28.09.2021 at 14:00 ECT.
EPR Info (2021). Extended producer responsibility (epr) - how to get through the maze. Extended Pro-
ducer Responsibility (EPR) Info. Online: hhttps://epr-info.com/packaging, accessed 14.12.2021
at 14:00 ECT.
EU (2021). Environment. European Union. Online: https://european-union.europa.eu/priorities-and-
actions/actions-topic/environmenten, accessed14.12.2021at14 : 50ECT.
Page 65 of 76
==PAGE:75==
References
EUR-Lex
(2016).
Division
of
competences
within
the
european
union.
Summaries
of
EU Legislation. Access to European Union Law. Online:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM%3Aai0020, accessed 02.01.2022 at 16:15 ECT.
Europa (2021).
Living in the eu.
European Union. Europa. Online: https://europa.eu/european-
union/about-eu/ﬁgures/livingen, accessed13.10.2021at08 : 50ECT.
European Union (2017). Special eurobarometer 468 - october 2017 “attitudes of european citizens
towards the environment”. Eurobarometer. European Union (EU).
europen (2021).
Extended producer responsibility.
The European Organization for Packaging
and the Environment. Online: https://www.europen-packaging.eu/policy-area/extended-producer-
responsibility/: :text=Extended%20Producer%20Responsibility%20(EPR)%20is,EU%20recycling%20and%20reco
accessed 14.12.2021 at 14:00 ECT.
Fankhauser-Noti, A. and Grob, K. (2006).
Migration of plasticizers from pvc gaskets of lids for
glass jars into oily foods: Amount of gasket material in food contact, proportion of plasticizer
migrating into food and compliance testing by simulation. Trends in Food Science & Technology,
17(3):105–112.
Filella, M. and Turner, A. (2018). Observational study unveils the extensive presence of hazardous
elements in beached plastics from lake geneva. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 6:1.
Fink, J. K. (2018). Polymer waste management. John Wiley & Sons.
Forbrugerr˚adet Tænk Kemi (2021). Om forbrugerr˚adet tænk kemi. Forbrugerr˚adet Tænk Kemi. On-
line: https://kemi.taenk.dk/om-taenk-kemi/om-forbrugerraadet-taenk-kemi , accessed 17.12.2021
at 13:10 ECT.
Foster, K. R., Vecchia, P., and Repacholi, M. H. (2000). Science and the precautionary principle.
Science, 288(5468):979–981.
Foster, N. (2020). EU law - directions, straightforward law. 7th Edition. Oxford University Press.
Gee, D. (2006). Late lessons from early warnings: Toward realism and precaution with endocrine-
disrupting substances. Environmental health perspectives, 114(Suppl 1):152–160.
Genplast (2021). Om os. Genplast. Online: http://genplast.dk/om-os-2/, accessed 09.09.2021 at 10:00
ECT.
Giacovelli, C. et al. (2018). Single-use plastics: A roadmap for sustainability (rev. 2).
Ginige, K., Amaratunga, D., and Haigh, R. (2018). Mapping stakeholders associated with societal
challenges: A methodological framework. Procedia engineering, 212:1195–1202.
Gregory, M. R. (2009). Environmental implications of plastic debris in marine settings—entanglement,
ingestion, smothering, hangers-on, hitch-hiking and alien invasions. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1526):2013–2025.
Groh, K. J., Backhaus, T., Carney-Almroth, B., Geueke, B., Inostroza, P. A., Lennquist, A., Leslie,
H. A., Maﬃni, M., Slunge, D., Trasande, L., et al. (2019). Overview of known plastic packaging-
associated chemicals and their hazards. Science of the total environment, 651:3253–3268.
Page 66 of 76
==PAGE:76==
References
Guerry, A. D., Polasky, S., Lubchenco, J., Chaplin-Kramer, R., Daily, G. C., Griﬃn, R., Ruckelshaus,
M., Bateman, I. J., Duraiappah, A., Elmqvist, T., et al. (2015). Natural capital and ecosystem
services informing decisions: From promise to practice. Proceedings of the National academy of
Sciences, 112(24):7348–7355.
Hahladakis, J. N., Velis, C. A., Weber, R., Iacovidou, E., and Purnell, P. (2018). An overview of
chemical additives present in plastics: Migration, release, fate and environmental impact during
their use, disposal and recycling. Journal of hazardous materials, 344:179–199.
Harremo¨es, P., Gee, D., MacGarvin, M., Stirling, A., Keys, J., Wynne, B., and Vaz, S. G. (2001).
Late lessons from early warnings: the precautionary principle 1896-2000. Citeseer.
Hesselink, T. and van Duuren, E. (2021). The green deal - a game changer for the waste management
and plastics industries. KPGM.
Hopewell, J., Dvorak, R., and Kosior, E. (2009). Plastics recycling: challenges and opportunities.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1526):2115–2126.
IEA (2018). The future of petrochemicals - towards more sustainable plastics and fertilisers. Interna-
tional Energy Agency.
Industry Agenda (2016). The new plastics economy - rethinking the future of plastics. In World
Economic Forum, January.
ISO (2013). ISO 18603:2013 - Packaging and the environment — Reuse. International Organization
for Standardization (ISO).
ISO (2021). ISO 21500:2021 Project, programme and portfolio management — Context and concepts.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO).
Jakobsen, J. V. D. (2020). Afrapportering - plast innovationspartnerskab i projekt ”cirkulær innovation
i partnerskaber. Vesthimmerlands Kommune.
Jambeck, J. R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T. R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayan, R., and
Law, K. L. (2015). Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science, 347(6223):768–771.
Jensen, T. K., Mustieles, V., Bleses, D., Frederiksen, H., Trecca, F., Schoeters, G., Andersen, H. R.,
Grandjean, P., Kyhl, H. B., Juul, A., et al. (2019). Prenatal bisphenol a exposure is associated
with language development but not with adhd-related behavior in toddlers from the odense child
cohort. Environmental research, 170:398–405.
Kade, O. and Lenz, M. (2020). The development and use of backcasting as methodology to meet the
2050 sustainability goals. Master Thesis. Department of Environmental Engineering. Technical
University of Denmark.
Kaebnick, G. E., Heitman, E., Collins, J. P., Delborne, J. A., Landis, W. G., Sawyer, K., Taneyhill,
L. A., and Winickoﬀ, D. E. (2016). Precaution and governance of emerging technologies. Science,
354(6313):710–711.
K¨ogel, T., Bjorøy, Ø., Toto, B., Bienfait, A. M., and Sanden, M. (2020).
Micro-and nanoplastic
toxicity on aquatic life: Determining factors. Science of the Total Environment, 709:136050.
Lambert, S., Sinclair, C., and Boxall, A. (2014). Occurrence, degradation, and eﬀect of polymer-based
materials in the environment. Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, Volume
227, pages 1–53.
Page 67 of 76
==PAGE:77==
References
Lawton, G. (2021). Earth’s chemical crisis. New Scientist, 251(3344):36–42.
Leal Filho, W., Saari, U., Fedoruk, M., Iital, A., Moora, H., Kl¨oga, M., and Voronova, V. (2019). An
overview of the problems posed by plastic products and the role of extended producer responsi-
bility in europe. Journal of cleaner production, 214:550–558.
Lebreton, L. and Andrady, A. (2019). Future scenarios of global plastic waste generation and disposal.
Palgrave Communications, 5(1):1–11.
Leslie, H., Leonards, P., Brandsma, S., De Boer, J., and Jonkers, N. (2016). Propelling plastics into
the circular economy—weeding out the toxics ﬁrst. Environment international, 94:230–234.
Li, C., Xu, J., Chen, D., and Xiao, Y. (2016). Detection of phthalates migration from disposable
tablewares to drinking water using hexaﬂuoroisopropanol-induced catanionic surfactant coacer-
vate extraction. Journal of pharmaceutical analysis, 6(5):292–299.
Lienert,
J.
(2015).
Stakeholder
identiﬁcation.
Sustainable
sanitation
and
water
man-
agement. Online:
http://www.sswm.info/category/planning-process-tools/exploring/exploring-
tools/stakeholderanalysis/stakeholder-identiﬁc, accessed 29.07.2021 at 10:30 ECT.
Long, M., Moriceau, B., Gallinari, M., Lambert, C., Huvet, A., Raﬀray, J., and Soudant, P. (2015).
Interactions between microplastics and phytoplankton aggregates: impact on their respective
fates. Marine Chemistry, 175:39–46.
Loonela, V. and Stoycheva, D. (2020).
Green deal: Commission adopts new chemicals strategy
towards a toxic-free environment.
Press release October 2020. European Commission. On-
line: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip201839, accessed05.09.2021at10 :
00ECT.
Loonela, V. and Stoycheva, D. (2021).
European green deal:
Commission adopts new propos-
als to stop deforestation, innovate sustainable waste management and make soils healthy
for people, nature and climate.
Press release November 2021. European Commission. On-
line: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip215916, accessed05.01.2022at11 :
40ECT.
Lord, R. et al. (2016).
Plastics and sustainability: A valuation of environmental beneﬁts, costs
and opportunities for continuous improvement.
Trucost is an aﬃliate of S&P Global Market
Intelligence (2020 S&P Trucost Limited, an aﬃliate of S&P Global Market Intelligence).
MacArthur, E. (2013). Towards the circular economy. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 2:23–44.
MarinePlastic (2021). About the project. MarinePlastic - The Danish center for research in ma-
rine plastic pollution. Online: https://marineplastic.dk/projecten.html, accessed09.09.2021at11 :
00ECT.
Miandad, R., Rehan, M., Barakat, M. A., Aburiazaiza, A. S., Khan, H., Ismail, I. M., Dhavamani, J.,
Gardy, J., Hassanpour, A., and Nizami, A.-S. (2019). Catalytic pyrolysis of plastic waste: moving
toward pyrolysis based bioreﬁneries. Frontiers in energy research, 7:27.
Page 68 of 76
==PAGE:78==
References
Mouat, J., Lozano, R. L., and Bateson, H. (2010). Economic impacts of marine litter. Kommunenes
Internasjonale Miljøorganisasjon.
Mouritsen, P. J., Jønbech, E. A., and McKinnon, D. (2020). Fra engangsemballage til genbrug - s˚adan
bliver danmark førende indenfor cirkulære forretningsmodeller.
Municipality of Copenhagen (2019). Circular copenhagen - resource and waste management plan 2024.
Oceana (2021). What we do. Oceana. Online: https://oceana.org/what-we-do/ accessed 01.09.2021
at 11:30 ECT.
OECD (2014).
The state of play on extended producer responsibility (EPR): Opportunities and
challenges. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Publishing.
OECD (2021). OECD deﬁnition of polymer. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment (OECD). Online: https://www.oecd.org/env/ehs/oecddeﬁnitionofpolymer.htm , accessed
11.10.2021 at 14:10 ECT.
Oziel, C. (2019).
Commission sets goal for polymer reach registration proposal by 2022.
Chem-
ical Watch. Online: https://chemicalwatch.com/85658/commission-sets-goal-for-polymer-reach-
registration-proposal-by-2022, accessed 22.12.2021 at 11:00 ECT.
Panyakapo, P. and Panyakapo, M. (2008). Reuse of thermosetting plastic waste for lightweight con-
crete. Waste management, 28(9):1581–1588.
Paulsen, F. L., Nielsen, M. B., Shashoua, Y., Syberg, K., and Hansen, S. F. (2021). Early warning
signs applied to plastic. Nature Reviews Materials, pages 1–3.
Persson, L., Carney Almroth, B. M., Collins, C. D., Cornell, S., de Wit, C. A., Diamond, M. L.,
Fantke, P., Hassellov, M., MacLeod, M., Ryberg, M. W., et al. (2022). Outside the safe operating
space of the planetary boundary for novel entities. Environmental Science & Technology.
Persson, L. M., Breitholtz, M., Cousins, I. T., de Wit, C. A., MacLeod, M., and McLachlan, M. S.
(2013). Confronting unknown planetary boundary threats from chemical pollution.
Pivnenko, K., Granby, K., Eriksson, E., and Astrup, T. F. (2017). Recycling of plastic waste: Screening
for brominated ﬂame retardants (bfrs). Waste Management, 69:101–109.
Plastic Change (2021a).
90% af danskerne vil returnere deres madvareemballager, hvis der var
pant p˚a.
Plastic Change. Online: https://plasticchange.dk/videnscenter/90-af-danskerne-ville-
returnere-deres-madvareemballager-hvis-der-var-pant-paa/, accessed 30.09.2021 at 10:00 ECT.
Plastic Change (2021b). Hvem er vi. Plastic Change. Online: https://plasticchange.dk/hvem-er-vi/,
accessed 09.09.2021 at 13:50 ECT.
Plastic Change (2021c). Vi kæmper for en verden uden plastikforurening. strategi 2021-2023. Plastic
Change. Online: https://plasticchange.dk/hvem-er-vi/, accessed 09.09.2021 at 13:50 ECT.
Plastics Europe (2020). Plastics - the facts. an analysis of european plastics, production, demand and
waste data. Plastics Europe. Association of Plastics Manufactures.
Plastics Europe (2021). About plastics. Plastics Europe. Association of Plastics Manufactures. Online:
https://www.plasticseurope.org/en/about-plastics/what-are-plastics, accessed 08.10.2021 at 12:30
ECT.
Page 69 of 76
==PAGE:79==
References
Plastindustrien (2021a).
Hvad er bisphenol a (bpa)?
The Danish Plastic Federation. Online:
https://plast.dk/bisphenol-a/ , accessed 01.10.2021 at 14:10 ECT.
Plastindustrien (2021b).
Om os.
Plastindustrien. Online:
https://plast.dk/om-os/, accessed
09.09.2021 at 14:50 ECT.
Plastindutrien
(2019).
Design
guide.
reuse
and
recycling
of
plastic
packaging
for
pri-
vate consumers.
Network for circular plastic packaging. Danish Plastic Federation. On-
line: https://plast.dk/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Design-Guide-Reuse-and-recycling-of-plastic-
packaging-for-private-consumers-english-version-1.pdf, accessed 14.09.2021 at 10:40 ECT.
Pouikli, K. (2020). Concretising the role of extended producer responsibility in european union waste
law and policy through the lens of the circular economy.
In ERA Forum, volume 20, pages
491–508. Springer.
Poulsen, P. B., Geschke, S., Borregaard, C., and Merlin, C. (2020). Kortlægning af udvalgte hor-
monforstyrrende stoﬀer. kortlægning af kemiske stoﬀer i forbrugerprodukter nr. 183.
Danish
Environmental Protection Agency. The Danish Ministry of Environment.
Prata, J. C., da Costa, J. P., Lopes, I., Andrady, A. L., Duarte, A. C., and Rocha-Santos, T. (2021).
A one health perspective of the impacts of microplastics on animal, human and environmental
health. Science of The Total Environment, page 146094.
Refsgaard, J. C., van der Sluijs, J. P., Højberg, A. L., and Vanrolleghem, P. A. (2007). Uncertainty
in the environmental modelling process–a framework and guidance. Environmental modelling &
software, 22(11):1543–1556.
Rietbergen-McCracken, J. and Narayan-Parker, D. (1998). Participation and social assessment: tools
and techniques, volume 1. World Bank Publications.
Ritchie,
H.
and
Roser,
M.
(2018).
Plastic
pollution.
Our
World
in
Data.
Online:
https://ourworldindata.org/plastic-pollution , accessed 12.12.2021 at 09:30 ECT.
Rochman, C. M., Browne, M. A., Halpern, B. S., Hentschel, B. T., Hoh, E., Karapanagioti, H. K.,
Rios-Mendoza, L. M., Takada, H., Teh, S., and Thompson, R. C. (2013a). Classify plastic waste
as hazardous. Nature, 494(7436):169–171.
Rochman, C. M., Hoh, E., Hentschel, B. T., and Kaye, S. (2013b). Long-term ﬁeld measurement of
sorption of organic contaminants to ﬁve types of plastic pellets: implications for plastic marine
debris. Environmental science & technology, 47(3):1646–1654.
Rockstr¨om, J., Steﬀen, W., Noone, K., Persson, ˚A., Chapin III, F. S., Lambin, E., Lenton, T. M.,
Scheﬀer, M., Folke, C., Schellnhuber, H. J., et al. (2009). Planetary boundaries: exploring the
safe operating space for humanity. Ecology and society, 14(2).
Rollin, J. and Gallegos, J. E. (2018). The surprising way plastics could actually help ﬁght climate
change.
The Conversation. Online:
https://theconversation.com/the-surprising-way-plastics-
could-actually-help-ﬁght-climate-change-106209, accessed 30.11.2021 at 11:40 ECT.
Ryberg, M. W., Hauschild, M. Z., Wang, F., Averous-Monnery, S., and Laurent, A. (2019). Global
environmental losses of plastics across their value chains. Resources, Conservation and Recycling,
151:104459.
Page 70 of 76
==PAGE:80==
References
Samsonek, J. and Puype, F. (2013). Occurrence of brominated ﬂame retardants in black thermo cups
and selected kitchen utensils purchased on the european market. Food Additives & Contaminants:
Part A, 30(11):1976–1986.
SAPEA (2021). A scientiﬁc perspective on microplastics in nature and society. Science Advice for
Policy by European Academies (SAPEA). Online: https://www.sapea.info/topics/microplastics,
accessed 09.12.2021 at 11:50 ECT.
SEI, IISD, ODI, E3G, and UNEP (2021). The production gap. governments’ planned fossil fuel pro-
duction remains dangerously out of sync with paris agreement limits. 2021 Report. Stockholm
Environment Institute (SEI), International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), Over-
seas Development Institute (ODI), Third Generation Environmentalism Ltd (E3G), United Na-
tions Environment Programme (UNEP). Online: http://productiongap.org/2021report , accessed
26.10.2021 at 16:40 ECT.
Shen, M., Ye, S., Zeng, G., Zhang, Y., Xing, L., Tang, W., Wen, X., and Liu, S. (2020).
Can
microplastics pose a threat to ocean carbon sequestration? Marine pollution bulletin, 150:110712.
Snyder, H. (2019). Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines. Journal
of business research, 104:333–339.
Steensgaard, I. M., Syberg, K., Rist, S., Hartmann, N. B., Boldrin, A., and Hansen, S. F. (2017). From
macro-to microplastics-analysis of eu regulation along the life cycle of plastic bags. Environmental
Pollution, 224:289–299.
Stockholm Convention (2001). The stockholm convention on persistent organic pollutants, opened for
signature may 23, 2001. UN Doc. UNEP/POPS/CONF/4, App. II.
Talsness, C. E., Andrade, A. J., Kuriyama, S. N., Taylor, J. A., and Vom Saal, F. S. (2009). Compo-
nents of plastic: experimental studies in animals and relevance for human health. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1526):2079–2096.
Tetra Pak (2021). About tetra pak. Tetra Pak. Online: https://www.tetrapak.com/about-tetra-pak,
accessed 09.09.2021 at 10:50 ECT.
The Ecological Council (2021).
Green transition denmarkl.
The Ecological Council. Online:
https://rgo.dk/frontpage-english/, accessed 01.09.2021 at 11:00 ECT.
Thompson, R. C., Swan, S. H., Moore, C. J., and Vom Saal, F. S. (2009). Our plastic age.
UN
(2021).
Plastic
pollution
on
course
to
double
by
2030.
Climate
and
Envi-
ronment.
Global
perspective
Human
stories.
UN
News.
United
Nations
(UN).
Online:
https://news.un.org/en/story/2021/10/1103692, accessed 14.12.2021 at 14:00 ECT.
UNEA (2021). Progress on plasticse. Update. Issue 14. UNEA5. United Nations Environment Assem-
bly (UNEA).
Vega, G. C., Gross, A., and Birkved, M. (2021). The impacts of plastic products on air pollution-a
simulation study for advanced life cycle inventories of plastics covering secondary microplastic
production. Sustainable Production and Consumption, 28:848–865.
Vethaak, A. D. and Leslie, H. A. (2016). Plastic debris is a human health issue.
Villarrubia-G´omez, P., Cornell, S. E., and Fabres, J. (2018). Marine plastic pollution as a planetary
boundary threat–the drifting piece in the sustainability puzzle. Marine policy, 96:213–220.
Page 71 of 76
==PAGE:81==
References
von der Leyen, U. (2021). State of the union 2021 - letter of intent. European Commission. Online:
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/ﬁles/stateoftheunion2021letterofintenten.pdf, accessed29.07.2021at10 :
30ECT.
Watkins, E., Romagnoli, V., Kirhensteine, I., Ruckley, F., Kreißig, J., Mitsios, A., Pantzar, M., Saveyn,
H., and Garbarino, E. (2020). Support to the circular plastics alliance in establishing a work plan
to develop guidelines and standards on design-for recycling of plastic products. Publications Oﬃce
of the European Union: Luxembourg.
Weis, J. S. and Palmquist, K. H. (2021). Reality check: Experimental studies on microplastics lack
realism. Applied Sciences, 11(18):8529.
Wood (2020). Scientiﬁc and technical support for the development of criteria to identify and group
polymers for registration/ evaluation under reach and their impact assessment. European Com-
mission, ENV.B.2 – Sustainable Chemicals.
Wright, S. L. and Kelly, F. J. (2017). Plastic and human health: a micro issue? Environmental science
& technology, 51(12):6634–6647.
WWF (2021a).
About us.
WWF Global. Online: https://www.worldwildlife.org/about/, accessed
09.09.2021 at 11:50 ECT.
WWF (2021b).
En plastikfri natur.
WWF Denmark. Online:
https://www.wwf.dk/kaemper-
for/plastikfri-natur/, accessed 09.09.2021 at 11:50 ECT.
Zero
Waste
Europe
(2021).
Why
a
zero
waste
vision.
Zero
Waste
Europe.
Online:
https://zerowasteeurope.eu/about/why-a-zero-waste-vision/, accessed 14.10.2021 at 11:15 ECT.
Zhu, Y., Skerlos, S., Xu, M., and Cooper, D. R. (2020).
System level impediments to achieving
absolute sustainability using lca. Procedia CIRP, 90:399–404.
Page 72 of 76
==PAGE:82==
Appendices
Page 73 of 76
==PAGE:83==
A
Stakeholder analysis
Table 11: The seven phases of an interview as described in the interviewguide by Kvale and Brinkmann
(2009)
The seven phases of an interview survey
Thematisation
The purpose of the interview is formulated. The why and what.
Interview design
The how. The interview constituted of two parts; Part 1 (qualitative): ﬁve open
questions and dialogue between interviewer and interviewee. scheduled for
around 20 min, held online and recorded. Part 2 (quantitative): anonymous
survey with ﬁve statements ranked from 1-10, where 1 represents ”no, not at
all” to 10 ”yes, too a high degree” and ”Do not wish to answer”.
Conducting interview
Online from 13th of September-26th of October 2021
Transcription
Listened through the recordings, included key points and highlights in the stake-
holder analysis section
Analysis
The perspectives and opinions collected from the stakeholders in the interviews were
analyzed in the light of the background knowledge gained from the literature study.
Veriﬁcation
The stakeholder analysis were sent to all participating stakeholders for veriﬁcation.
Reporting
The answers from the open questions were collected in a knowledge bank used for
creating the policy recommendations.
The answers from the surveys were statistically analysed and presented graphically.
Table 12: Quality criteria for an interview (from textbox 9.1 in Kvale and Brinkmann, 2009)
No.
Quality criteria
1
The degree of spontaneous, speciﬁc and relevant answers from the interviewee
2
The degree of short interview questions and longer answers from the interviewee
3
To what extend the interviewer follow up and clarify any relevant aspects of the answers
4
That the interview mainly is interpreted during the interview
5
That the interviewer gets the interpretations veriﬁed during the interview
6
That the interview is an independent story which do not need further explanation
Page 74 of 76
==PAGE:84==
Table 13: Qualiﬁcations and skills by the interviewer (based on textbox 9.2 in Kvale and Brinkmann
(2009)
Quality
Description
Welinformed
The interviewer should have a comprehensive knowledge on the topic of the interview to have an
informed conversation about it, should know which subject to follow up on without bragging.
Structured
The structure and aim with the interview is presented by the interviewer prior to the interview and
is ended with closing remarks on how to proceed from there and ask if the interviewee has any
questions or doubts.
Ready
The interviewer should ask clear and precise questions, speak clearly and understandable, without
using inappropiate jargon.
Kind
The interviewer allows the interviewee to speak and think in their own pace, gives times for small
pauses in the speachﬂow and is responsible for creating an environment were the interviewee feels
they can share unconventional or provoking opinions.
Sensitive
Performs active listening and picks up on nuances in the answers, by also paying attention how an
answer is given and not only to what is being said. The interviewer should also be careful to pick
up on signals from the interviewer on when to leave a subject be.
Open
The interviewer should be open and give space for the interviewee to present their perspective and
bring what is important to mention from their point of view.
Leading
The interviewer has a clear aim of the purpose with the interviews, has control over the direction
of the conversation and ready to interrupt in case of digressions.
Critical
The interviewer is critical towards the answers from the interviewee and tests the reliability of the
answers in case their is doubt of the validity.
Remembering
The interviewer pays attention to what has been said throughout the interview and gets back to key
points from earlier in the interview and may ask for further elaboration.
Interpretive
Knows when clariﬁcation is needed and being able to interpret the meaning of the answers given.
In some cases, the interviewer may tell their interpretation and then the interviewee may conﬁrm
or clarify.
Page 75 of 76
==PAGE:85==
B
Statistics applied for the stakeholder survey
The statistical formulas used are listed below, where n is the number of items in the population:
Population mean = µ =
Pn
i=1 Xi
n
(1)
Population standard deviation = σ =
rP(Xi −µ)2
n
(2)
Quantile = Q1 = 1
4(n + 1)|Q3 = 3
4(n + 1)
(3)
Table 14: Survey responses
Response nr.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
1.
10
5
2
2
10
2.
6
7
4
6
9
3.
8
8
2
5
9
4.
10
2
3
3
10
5.
-
10
10
5
10
6.
9
8
8
8
10
7.
3
9
8
8
10
8.
10
3
3
1
10
9.
8
3
4
2
7
10.
9
6
7
6
10
11.
9
7
8
5
6
12.
8
5
3
1
5
13.
10
4
4
2
10
14.
9
4
8
4
10
15.
10
7
6
4
10
16.
7
10
10
6
10
17.
7
5
10
5
10
18.
-
-
-
-
-
Page 76 of 76
