==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
DTU Management 
Department of Technology, 
Management and Economics 
The impact of the future of work on
flexible work agreements
Niklas Andersen
Supervised by Kathrin Kirchner and Nelda Andersone
14th February 2022
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
h 
Niklas Andersen
The impact of the future of work on flexible work agreements
MSc in Industrial Engineering and Management , 14th February 2022
Supervisors: Kathrin Kirchner and Nelda Andersone
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Masters Degree in Industrial Engineering and Management
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis has been submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
degree of Master of Industrial Engineering and Management at the Technical University
of Denmark and accounts for 32.5 ECTS points. The project has been carried out from
August 13th, 2021, to February 14th, 2022.
To understand the tone and position of the thesis, it is relevant to specify the period
in which the thesis was planned, designed, and written. This is relevant as the global
covid-19 pandemic continually is evolving, meaning that when the thesis was initiated
in the late summer of 2021, the situation in Denmark was that employees were starting
to return to the office, which is why this was set as the focus. However, time should
show that this was too early, as a new virus variant sent all employees back to their
home offices in December 2021. This development did not impact the thesis, but it is
relevant to keep in mind when reading the thesis.
Attached to the thesis is a zip file named data and calculation; within this file, original
data and working documents can be found. It is important to know that these docu-
ments are not critical for the understanding of the thesis. However, they are meant as
an additional opportunity to look further into the data. Throughout the thesis, several
references will be made to calculations; however, all relevant information is included
or attached as an appendix within this report to understand these..
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
The master thesis has not been possible to develop without substantial support from
people around me. Therefore I would like to express my deep gratitude to Associate
Professor Kathrin Kirchner and Ph.D. Student Nelda Anderson, my thesis supervisors,
for their patient guidance, enthusiastic encouragement, and valuable critiques of this
thesis.
I would also like to thank my colleagues in M&A Strategy at Danfoss Group for their
continuous feedback and idea generation. A special thanks go to Senior Director, Mads
Møller, who has been a great help in finding relevant information on the thesis topic.
Nobody has been more important to me in pursuing this thesis than my family. I
would like to thank my parents and sister, whose love and guidance are with me
in whatever I pursue. However, most importantly, I am grateful to my loving and
supportive girlfriend, Mie Asta, who provides unending inspiration.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates Flexible Working Agreements, FWAs impact on performance
and whether previous research and conclusion from before covid-19 still applies in
the present time and can be used as an argument when building the future work-
places. The thesis intends to advance the understanding of the future of work by
investigating how FWAs impact performance measures for knowledge workers from
industrial organizations post-covid-19. Through a descriptive-explanatory research
design with quantitative data collection in two Danish industrial companies, the thesis
finds evidence for optimal use of FWAs in relation to job satisfaction and organizational
commitment. Based on a k-means clustering, medium use of FWAs of two to three days
a week has significantly higher satisfaction and commitment than the respondent with
zero to one and four to five days per week. However, the thesis has failed to identify
evidence for a relationship between FWAs and work engagement and work-related
stress. It is described as new findings in the research field of FWAs and performance
measures, based on the opportunity to measure each respondent’s degree of FWA
usage. The thesis concludes a non-linear positive relationship between FWAs and
job satisfaction and organizational commitment. Furthermore, the results seem to
deviate from previous coherent research outputs. Based on the statistical results and
an explanatory ordinal regression, the thesis recommends organizations to consider
developing a corporate strategy within flexible work agreements, as it is identified as a
critical driver in the success of the future of work.
Key words: Flexible working agreements, organizational performance, individual
performance, covid-19 and future of work.
v
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Research problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Part A
6
2
Literature review
7
2.1
Literature search and design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Academic understanding and definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Impact on an organizational level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Impact on an individual level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Theoretical framework
20
3.1
Selection of theory focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Measuring individual indirect performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Final theoretical model and hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
Part B
28
4
Methodology
29
4.1
Research design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Quantitative method development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Questionnaire development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Case companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.1
Danfoss A/S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
Rockwool International A/S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
vi
==PAGE:7==
4.3.3
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Statistical analysis & results
39
5.1
Preparation of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
Parameter score calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.2
Data cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Analysis of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.1
Impact of FWAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.2
Tendency test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.3
Cluster segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.4
Statistical test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
Final test of hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Part C
61
6
Explanatory analysis & results
61
6.1
Democratic differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Future of work measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3
Ordinal regression of decision parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Discussion
68
7.1
Summery of key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.2
Interpretation and implications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.3
Limitations of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.4
Recommendations to future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8
Conclusion
77
9
Bibliography
79
A Appendix: Final questionnaire
83
B Appendix: FWAs in the future work place
88
C Appendix: Ordinal regression output
90
D Appendix: Learning objectives & project management
94
vii
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The introduction chapter is the foundation for the background and purpose of this
master thesis and will function as a direct link to and argument for the research
problem. The chapter is structured in three main parts, first the background in section
(1.1), which explains the original contribution and highlights why the thesis is relevant
in the present research landscape. Second, the purpose section in section (1.2), which
outlines the main driving factors behind the thesis, and what the desired outcome is.
Third, the research problem in section (1.3) will describe what overall question the
thesis seeks to answer.
1.1 Background
Morning coffee, morning traffic, thirty-seven hours, computer problems, pick-up kids
from school, hobbies, dinners, talks. Relax. Repeat. Before the covid-19 pandemic,
the everyday normality beat like a drum, a rhythm taking up more than one third
of our lives without many even noticing it (Thompson, 2016). Because who were
we to challenge the way we work? For the majority in the western world, the most
remarkable change was the organizational move from the ’60s cubicle- to the rise of
open office environments in the ’00s (Atlassian, 2021). However, this only accounts for
incremental change in how we work. The last radical change was the industrialization
in the late eighteen hundreds, where workers were invited from the countryside to
either work in the production or sit in big offices all-day for corporations in the big
cities (Frank, 2021). Surprisingly similar to 2022, even though several factors have
influenced how we work since then.
1
==PAGE:9==
In the spring of 2020, work as we knew it came to a sudden stop, and the rhythm
changed as everyone was forced home, in lockdown home offices as the covid-19
pandemic spread around the globe (Danmarks Radio, 2020 and Saglietto et al., 2020).
As time went by, more and more people started questioning, challenging how we work.
Because now, the pros and cons of working from home was a topic of discussion across
every dinner table (Pew Research Center, 2020). On the one hand, being much more
flexible and free in terms of planning, and on the other hand, missing out on the
social spirit of being part of an office. A challenging task to balance correctly, not only
for individuals but also for organizations, which can be seen in the many different
opinions and decisions on the topic, where some are for, and some are against. For
example, the German energy company MAN Energy Solutions who have published
that they intend to increase their employees’ ability to work from home, as they have
seen their productivity increased in some areas (DI Business, 2020). While the Danish
Rockwool Foundation in 2021 published a new report, which concludes a more critical
perspective on working from home, where they find employees to work on average 40
minutes less a day (Rockwool Foundation, 2021). Therefore, it is within this balancing
challenge that this thesis wishes to contribute by investigating how the future of work
should be designed as covid-19 loosens its grip.
Several factors have influenced how we work, and throughout the last decades, rapid
advancements in technology have made new ways of working possible. For example,
communication has been made much more efficient and fast, and today it is possible
to reach your colleagues in one second, through digital technologies such as Microsoft
teams. Many good things have come out of this development, economic growth
in established and emerging economies, freedom, and flexibility with employees,
but new issues also occurred. People who could communicate and solve complex
challenges faster also started doing much more simultaneously. Therefore, for some
people, this contributed to that work and life started being harder to balance out
(Väänänen et al., 2014 and Shirley Parsons, 2020). As a natural counter-reaction,
stress level measurements and employee turnover rates began to be a focus area
for organizations, as these were strong health indicators for their workforce, in fact,
from the US Employer Health Benefit Survey 2008 it was reported that approximately
70% of large US companies had established workplace well-being programs (KFF,
2008). In some organizations, new ways of working also were slowly introduced
throughout the last decades, especially in the ’00s and ’10s, to meet the new demand
from employees.
1.1
Background
2
==PAGE:10==
Back then, many different types existed which could be to have a home office or the
ability to leave a couple of hours earlier. However, in literature, all these types of
new ways of working are known as flexible work agreements which will be referred
to as FWAs in this thesis. FWAs are defined as working patterns that are different
from the existing ones (De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011, Stavrou and Kilaniotis, 2010
and Waples and Baskin, 2021). FWAs are interesting because an extensive amount of
research has been put into the topic throughout the last two decades. The research
landscape is from a high-level perspective, differentiated in relation to two main
categories. FWAs and organizational performance measures (Stavrou and Kilaniotis,
2010, Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019, Mangla, 2021, Azeem and Kotey, 2021 and Kotey and
Sharma, 2019), and FWAs and individual performance measures (Conradie and Klerk,
2019, Kelliher and Anderson, 2010 and Kelliher and Anderson, 2008). The research
landscape of FWAs, therefore, stands as the theoretical background in understanding
how different types of flexible work impact the people and organizations involved.
It is an understanding challenge highly relevant today as leaders are reconsidering
how they should design their future office in environments where home offices and
flexible work inevitably will be more present as people are slowly reintroduced to the
post-covid-19 work environment. It is a challenge emphasized by several financial
and consulting institutions which, due to the high importance for their clients and
markets, have published several papers on the topic, including (Bloomberg, 2021,
Economist, 2021, Harvard Business Review, 2021b, McKinsey, 2021 and BCG, 2021).
Organizations must balance the essential measures of having an efficient and profitable
company while ensuring that their employees experience high satisfaction concerning
individual performance measure such as job satisfaction and commitment.
Currently, the only way to balance this correctly is to build the organizational decisions
on the research developed on FWAs before the covid-19 pandemic. However, the
question is if the conclusions from before covid-19 still apply in the present time and
can be used as an valid argument when building the future workplace or if covid-19
has led to a radical change in work behavior, which means that new additional research
will be needed to make substantial arguments for how to design the future. As the
world slowly opens up again, the question of flexibility at work stands as one of the
central pillars for organizations to stay relevant for their employees and be competitive
in their market. As it is described by (Microsoft, 2021) in a recent study on the behavior
of their employees throughout the first phase of the pandemic, flexibility at work will
stand out as a critical factor when recruiting and building organizations, why it is
essential that companies find a shared ground within their organization and commit to
the future of work.
1.1
Background
3
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Purpose
To support the organizational decisions in building the future post-covid-19 work
environment, founded in coherent arguments on research in relation to FWAs. This
study is concerned with investigating whether conclusions from before covid-19 still
apply in the present time and can be used as an argument when building the future
of work. Consequently, additional research is needed to understand how to design
the future of workplaces. Therefore the purpose of this thesis is to advance the
understanding of how FWAs impact the stakeholders involved in the post-covid-19
work environment.
The goal of the thesis is to support the inevitable development of a more flexible
workplace and clarify how previous research outcomes reflect in the present time so
that organizations have a valid basis for considering FWAs in their organizations. The
thesis is built around a descriptive-explanatory research design covering the impact
of FWAs and documenting the change in a working environment from pre- to post
covid-19. Subsequently, through quantitative data collection, the thesis aims to test the
present evaluations of FWAs by developing theoretical hypotheses directly related to
the research problem. The thesis is argued to be descriptive-explanatory as it combines
descriptive research, which aims to utilize statistical methods to describe or define
the topic at hand, while using explanatory methods to explore why something occurs
when limited information is available.
This thesis functions as an important contribution to research and organizations as
there is vacuum and room for research on the future of FWAs post-covid-19. Even
though new articles are published every day, there is an immediate need to elevate the
understanding in a coherent way for usage in organizations and educational institutions
to structure the knowledge for future work.
1.2
Purpose
4
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Research problem
The following section outlines the research problem and the theoretical rationale
behind the structure of the thesis. The overall goal of this section is to define the
start of the thesis and create the point of reference throughout the analysis continuing
to the conclusion. The research problem is structured with an overarching problem
statement shown below and three guiding research parts, A, B and C. The guiding
research parts should be understood as the desired approach to enable the fulfillment
of the research problem. These will therefore be answered continuously while the
thesis unfolds throughout the report, with the goal to be able to answer the research
problem in the end.
Based on the above-outlined background and purpose, the thesis aims to answer the
following motivated problem statement:
Problem statement: The work environments face a new world post-covid-19, where
people have been getting used to new ways of working, more flexibility, and more
freedom. Organizations are therefore challenged to make the right informed
decisions when bringing their business into the future workplace while still
being an attractive employer and effective company balancing organizational and
individual performance measures. To advance the understanding of the future of
work, this thesis states the research problem of, how flexible work agreements
impact performance measures for knowledge workers of industrial organizations
post-covid-19, and what can be learned concerning the design of the future of
work?
The following guiding research parts intents to support the overarching problem
statement and will be covered throughout the thesis:
Part A, aims to explore and understand the present research landscape for FWAs. The
main questions to cover are. Who are the main research contributors, how is
research structured, and what are the main conclusions on how FWAs impact
performance measures for knowledge workers of industrial organizations pre-
covid-19? Additionally, guiding research part A aims to outline the research
landscape and build a structured theoretical framework, which most efficiently
enables the answering of guiding research part B by setting a specific literature
focus.
1.3
Research problem
5
==PAGE:13==
Part B, aims to select the most appropriate research design and build a robust method-
ology to test FWAs impact on performance measures for knowledge workers of
industrial organizations post-covid-19 within the theoretical focus of guiding
research part A. The main questions to cover are. How the impact of FWAs can be
measured within industrial organizations post-covid-19 and how the relationship
between the use FWAs and the appropriate performance measures look like?
Part C aims to apply explanatory research thinking to the selected research model to
enable the last key element of the problem statement, which is to answer what
can be learned from the results when designing the future of work environments.
To support the structure listed above, and make it clear for the reader how the
following chapters contribute to the guiding research parts. Within each chapter, an
initial statement will clarify what the specific chapter intends to do. Additionally, the
structure and contributions to the guiding research parts are marked in the table of
contents above. Therefore, it is recommended to utilize the table of contents as a guide
when reading the thesis.
1.3
Research problem
6
==PAGE:14==
2
Literature review
The literature review chapter provides an overview of existing research and studies on
the concepts of FWAs in relation to people and organizations. The overall goal of this
chapter is to clarify the theoretical foundations for the later theoretical framework, see
section (3), to create a shared understanding of the decisions and future references. By
that linking and answering guiding research part A, from the research questions. This
is done by structuring the chapter into three subsections, having a starting point in
the literature search, outlining how the utilized literature was identified and selected,
see section (2.1). Second, academic understanding and definitions of FWAs in section
(2.2). Finally, the implications when implementing FWAs in section (2.3).
2.1 Literature search and design
A literature review before any academic research project is critical, as a thorough
review supports and enables the foundation for advancing knowledge. Furthermore, it
facilitates theory development and reveals areas where research is needed. A structured
approach when identifying relevant research is therefore essential. For this thesis,
the guiding principles by (Webster and Watson, 2002) are used, as they defines a
structured and iterative approach to determine the source material for a review, which
can cover the main literature contributions on the topic and is not confined to one
research methodology, one set of journals, or one geographic region.
For this thesis, the two abstract and citation databases, DTU FindIt and Scopus, have
been used to search for literature.
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1.: Visualization of the utilized literature search and selection method.
These two databases are considered to create a sufficient reach within the present
literature landscape. The first step of the literature search was based on the search
string, which is described in figure (2.1). From this search string, studies and papers
were selected based on matched keywords and citations. However, as it is assumed
that all keywords and perspectives can not be known initially, further two steps were
applied. First, a backward approach, reviewing the citations for the articles identified
in step one to determine prior articles. Second, the forward search was used to identify
articles citing the major articles identified in the previous steps.
Overall the above described research approach resulted in a substantial volume of 35
relevant research papers, which stands as the theoretical foundation for this thesis.
2.2 Academic understanding and definitions
This section aims to elaborate and explain the academic understanding, definition
and sets the scene for further review. Alternative ways of working, including FWAs,
date back to the 1970s where it for the first time was mentioned and described in the
literature, the biggest influence being that women started entering the global labor
market (Golembiewski et al., 1974 and Kotey and Sharma, 2019). It was not until
the 1990s that research started to intensify as rapid enhancements in technology and
organizational designs made new ways of working possible (De Menezes and Kelliher,
2011).
2.2
Academic understanding and definitions
8
==PAGE:16==
It is argued by (Renard et al., 2021) in their 2021 literature review of the impact of
new ways of working on organizations and employees that research can be challenging
to compare across different conclusions and results without keeping a certain detail in
understanding the scope and theoretical framework behind. Therefore, the purpose
of this section (2.2) is to outline the overall understanding of definitions described
in the literature and set the scope and direction for this paper so that the research
contributing area is clear.
When outlining the academic understanding of FWAs it becomes clear that even though
FWAs can be defined as simple as working patterns that are different from the existing
ones (Waples and Baskin, 2021), the terminology practically involves a complex mix
of agreements (Groen et al., 2018). The most relevant and used FWAs described
in the literature are flexible working hours, part-time work, job sharing, shift and
weekend work, overtime, annual hours, flexi-time temporary, fixed-term contract,
subcontracting, teleworking, paid parental leave, flexible leave arrangements, choice
of rosters and shifts, variable year employment, annual hours contract, compressed
working weeks and working from home (Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019 and Stavrou and
Kilaniotis, 2010). A list with additional descriptions of every FWA would not add any
value at this point, as the complexity only would increase. Instead, a surrounding
structure would benefit the understanding and clarify how the FWAs differentiate. This
is done in literature by distinguishing between two overall types of agreements, the
employer-driven, and employee-driven FWAs (Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019, Waples and
Baskin, 2021 and Renard et al., 2021). Employer-driven FWAs are characterized by
benefiting the employer and, therefore, often an agreement defined by specific job
types, e.g., shift work in a factory. In general, employer-driven FWAs allow companies
to adjust the cost of employment in line with the production volume or secure a more
competitive and motivated workforce. On the other hand, employee-driven FWAs are
characterized as benefiting the employee and are therefore not job-specific. They are
often seen as an employee benefit or a result of consultation due to work-life conflict
outside the work environment. In general, employee-driven FWAs enable employees
to manage their own time and resource, and by that balance, their private life against
work individually to perform the best. In table (2.1) the list of FWA types are divided
into the two categories of either employee- or employer driven FWAs described by
(Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019, Waples and Baskin, 2021 and Renard et al., 2021). However,
within each category, FWA types still differentiate, and since (Renard et al., 2021 and
De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011) argue that literature would benefit from more focused
academic contributions, this thesis will focus on small selection of FWAs.
2.2
Academic understanding and definitions
9
==PAGE:17==
Table 2.1.: Different FWAs divided based on employee and employer characteristics
Employer driven
Employee driven
Part-time work, shift and
weekend work, overtime,
annual hours, variable year
employment, annual hours contract,
Flexible working hours, job sharing,
flexi-time temporary fixed-term
contract, subcontracting, teleworking,
paid parental leave, flexible leave
arrangements, choice of rosters and
shifts, compressed working weeks
and working from home
The focus will be based on the most common types of FWAs related to the covid-
19 pandemic. These include the employee-driven FWAs a) working from home, b)
teleworking and c) flexible working hours as is it described by (Kniffin et al., 2021,
McKinsey Global Institute, 2021). When setting the focus within the three employee
FWAs, it is relevant to keep in mind that specific employees in organizations are
excluded since they cannot do their job using that type of FWA due to their job
specifications. This includes production workers, craftsmen, and service workers.
Instead, the research focuses on knowledge workers, who are not dependent on
particular tools and materials to do their job. Knowledge workers can be defined by the
emphasis on "non-routine" problem solving that requires a combination of convergent
and divergent thinking (Reinhardt et al., 2011). Therefore in following sections the
scope of research is set within how knowledge workers are impacted by working with
the employee-driven FWAs a), b) and c).
Below, descriptions of the three selected FWAs are listed.
Working from home is the concept where an employee can choose to do their job
from home. This can either be with full flexibility where the decision is made
daily or within a more fixed system, where employees within a team agree on
shared working from home days.
Teleworking also known as telecommuting, is similar to working from home, but can
be defined as working remotely using modern technology and telecommunica-
tions to remain in touch. In this thesis, teleworking will describe remote work
excluding working from home, which means that employees have the flexibility
to work from a local cafe or when traveling, etc.
Flexible working hours are defined as employees having the option to schedule their
working day, allowing them to start and finish their workday when they want.his
means that employees can come to work earlier or later than the set time.
2.2
Academic understanding and definitions
10
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Implications when implementing FWAs
The following section explains the impact and outcome of FWAs on organizations and
people based on available research and literature. From a high-level perspective, the
assessed literature fall under two main categories. First, FWAs and organizational per-
formance measures (Stavrou and Kilaniotis, 2010, Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019, Mangla,
2021, Azeem and Kotey, 2021 and Kotey and Sharma, 2019) and second, FWAs and
individual performance measures (Conradie and Klerk, 2019, Kelliher and Anderson,
2010 and Kelliher and Anderson, 2008).
This is visualised in figure (2.2), which is an initial empty conceptual model. Within
these two categories, the following subsections will outline and fill out the model
concerning benefits and implications when implementing the employee driven FWAs
working from home, teleworking, and flexible working hours in a pre-covid-19 work
environment.
Figure 2.2.: Initial empty conceptual model, categorized in organizational and individual
performance measures.
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
11
==PAGE:19==
2.3.1 Impact on an organizational level
Research on the impact of FWAs focus on how different working arrangements impact
organizations, obviously since organizations and researchers have tried to point out the
right and valid arguments for either implementing or not implementing specific types
of work. Methods and research design differentiate between different literature, with
varying measures and hypotheses. However, from an overall perspective, each research
paper has contributed to the task of building evidence for a possible business case
for the use of FWAs in organization (Kelliher and Anderson, 2010). Understanding
how something impacts an organization is a complex question to answer. However,
literature utilizes a handful of measures based on social and human-centered studies.
From a non-extensive perspective, these measures fall into two categories, financial
and non-financial parameters (Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019). This can also be seen in
figure (2.2), where both categories are marked with a grey box. Below each category
is described and central research contributions are outlined.
Financial measures link to the direct performance of a company. They are usually
based on data that companies and organizations use directly and collect for
internal measurement of performance or external public financial data used in
market assessment, reporting, and benchmarking. In the 2019 study, (Klindži´c
and Mari´c, 2019) utilises profitability, productivity and service quality as their
parameters , while (Azeem and Kotey, 2021) focus on the degree of innovation.
Equal for them all is that each data point represents a whole organization or
company. Research often utilizes bigger databases from external data providers,
making it possible to compare many companies effectively.
Non-financial measures are not linked directly to a companies performance. How-
ever, research argues that they have an in-direct impact (Meier and Hicklin,
2008). Non-financial measures are, except within more prominent public firms,
typically not publicly reported, why they are harder to identify and quantify
for researchers. That is why most research utilizes the same parameters. Even
though many could be relevant and interesting to investigate further, it is simply
challenging to access this kind of data on an organizational level. The most
prominent parameters used in research are employee turnover and staff absen-
teeism. Employee turnover is utilized in recent studies by (Stavrou and Kilaniotis,
2010 and Kotey and Sharma, 2019), which is quantified as the percentage for
the number of employees leaving the organization annually.
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
12
==PAGE:20==
Other research, including (Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019) utilizes staff absenteeism,
which is quantified as the annual average number of days employees are absent
from their work. Alternative approaches do also exist in literature. However,
these do not add any practical value for this thesis as they aim to assess other
elements related to flexible working, for example, (Mangla, 2021) who consid-
ers how cultural intelligence and its dimensions, i.e., cognitive, metacognitive,
motivational and behavioral affect the challenges faced by FWAs.
Organizational theoretical findings
Based on the categorized methodology on financial and non-financial measures de-
scribed above, the following subsection will address the results and present theoretical
findings on the relation between FWAs and the impact on an organizational level.
In literature, there exists a weak evidence of a positive impact on financial mea-
sures from FWAs. This is a coherent conclusion from several studies (Klindži´c and
Mari´c, 2019, Renard et al., 2021 and De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011), which assessed
companies performance on a high level, by utilizing different available country or
industry-based databases. Researchers discuss that the weak evidence could be related
to a general high-level approach, which does not allow a positive marginal gain to
be visible in the data, since other more influential parameters impact the results. An
examples of this is (Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019), who utilizes the CRANET Network
to asses 171 Croatian organizations. The CRANET Network is an established global
research collaboration with a proven track record of collecting powerful, represen-
tative data, on a continuing basis; undertaking rigorous analysis, and disseminating
high-quality results (Parry et al., 2021). They find no significant positive relation be-
tween the financial parameters and the employee-driven practices. However, they find
some negative relationship between employer-driven FWAs and financial performance.
They conclude that to succeed with flexible working practices, organizations need to
implement a clear flexible working strategy simply because they find that the positive
effects of FWAs appear to depend on employee preferences and own choice.
Another research contribution is (Wood and Menezes, 2000), that have utilized the
UK 1998 Workplace Employee Relations Survey WERS98. They conclude that there is
no significant direct association between FWAs and a range of subjective workplace
performance measures, including the one described above. (De Menezes and Kelliher,
2011) agrees to these conclusions, as they, in their 2011 systematic review, conclude
that the empirical evidence has largely failed to demonstrate a well-supported and
generalizable relationship.
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
13
==PAGE:21==
However, as (Renard et al., 2021) discusses in their 2021 literature review of the impact
of new ways of working on organizations and employees, then exists research that
shows some positive significance, for example, the article from (Meyer et al., 2001),
which aims to identify which types of work-family Benefits an early term for flexible
working, maximize profits. They find working from home, positively related to profit,
however also find several inclusive results. For example, the employee-driven FWA
job-sharing to be negatively associated with profit.
The conclusion across different research contributions on non-financial measures are
coherent. They show a positive relationship between the use of the selected three
employee-driven FWAs and the non-financial parameters, employee turnover, and
staff absenteeism. In a study from 2010 (Stavrou and Kilaniotis, 2010), explore how
three bundles of FWAs are related to employee turnover. They find that the cluster
named schedule flexibility, including the FWAs, work from home, teleworking, flexible
working hours, is the FWA cluster with the most conducive to reduced turnover. Despite
its limitations, the study offers a contextual approach to looking at the relationship
between FWAs and employee turnover. It utilizes CRANET with a global database
of 3337 valid answers, making a high-level quantitative analysis, suggesting that the
identified relationship differentiates from the societal cluster. The study introduces the
need to consider the different societal systems when exploring FWAs. Other studies
such as (Kotey and Sharma, 2019) contribute to this conclusion by investigating the
direct and in-direct effects of FWAs on return on labor. (Baltes et al., 1999) considered
these ideas by introducing the concept that effective FWAs in a modern organization
could reduce employee turnover and staff absenteeism significantly.
The evidence found in the literature of the impact of FWAs on absenteeism is conclusive.
(De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011) conclude in their review that more than 60% of studies
on FWAs reports an association with lower levels of job absenteeism, confirming a
similar conclusion by (Wood and Menezes, 2000). More recent studies, such as (Peretz
et al., 2017) also confirm these conclusions in their 2017 study on FWAs, national
culture, organizational characteristics, and organizational outcomes. They utilize
CRANET across organizations from 21 countries by that identifying geographic and
social dependence concerning the use of FWA. Overall research from (Stavrou and
Kilaniotis, 2010 and Peretz et al., 2017), contributes to the evidence that suggests that
the identified relationship differentiates from the societal reference cluster and that
some FWAs types may thrive more significantly in some social settings.
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
14
==PAGE:22==
2.3.2 Impact on an individual level
As research has been centered on how FWAs impact organizations, literature has
focused on organizational parameters. However, a focused group of researchers have
explored how FWAs impact the employees within these organizations as well. This
subsection, therefore, aims a step deeper by outlining and describing what measures
are utilized in understanding the impact on an individual level; second, the theoretical
findings will be described outlining the present understanding of the impact on an
individual level. As within the organizational level, the approach to identifying the
impact on an individual level falls into two categories, see section (2.3.1). Researchers
and organizations utilize either direct performance measures such as employee-made
errors or in-direct performance measures such as scores for well-being and work-related
stress when assessing a workforce and employees.
Direct measures have a direct impact on employees performance. Even though the
direct impact on individual performance is one of the most important parameters
to understand, the majority of published research dates back to the ’80s and ’90s.
The majority of the studies focuses on individual measures such as self-assessed
performance indicators or quality of work measures, such as customer complaints
and employee errors. (De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011) outlines these parameters
in their study, which has analyzed 42 studies on the direct link between individual
performance and productivity. The different approaches in measuring the impact
on direct individual performance are visible in research studies from (Harrick
et al., 1986) and (Conradie and Klerk, 2019). In a field study from 1986, (Harrick
et al., 1986) utilizes the quantitative processing time data within tasks from 650
employees in an American company. This was possible as (Harrick et al., 1986)
had no tight research deadline and was able to use 18 months for data collection.
In comparison to these resource and time demanding methods, in a more recent
study from 2019, (Conradie and Klerk, 2019) uses self-assessed performance
indicators, in the form of a five-point Likert Scale questionnaire, within 277
employees to understand the employee’s opinions regarding self-benefit and
company benefits from FWAs. The capacity needed to handle this is much
less, as employees’ answers are structured and can be collected within a short
period; why most research on the direct impact of performance from FWA uses
self-assessed performance indicators (De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011).
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
15
==PAGE:23==
In-direct measures do not have a direct impact on employees performance, the un-
derstanding of how parameters in-directly impact the performance of employees
is therefore more tricky. This means that to draw any conclusion on the impact,
a framework should outline why these specific parameters are chosen and why
they have a certain effect. In the subsequent section (3.2), this topic will be
addressed and in further detail outline how this is applicable for use in the thesis
specific theoretical framework in section (3).Therefore, the following will focus
on what parameters are used in literature and on why and how researchers have
used them.
Research on the in-direct impact from FWAs is strong, and there exists substantial
research and papers on potential relations with different parameters. Researchers
have contributed to this more recently by attempting to draw some overall
conclusions. These conclusions can be found in meta-analysis such as (Baltes
et al., 1999) or literature reviews as (Renard et al., 2021) and (De Menezes and
Kelliher, 2011), equal for these is that they all look at a bigger portfolio of studies
and compare and collect different outcome across research fields and topics. The
most prominent assessed measures of the in-direct impact of performance are job
satisfaction, work engagement, organizational commitment, work-related stress
and perceptions of job quality, but several other parameters are also in use.
The literature contains both quantitative and qualitative data, with some studies
using one research method while others use both. An example of this is the 2010
study from (Kelliher and Anderson, 2010), which combines qualitative and quan-
titative research methods in aiming to understand how flexible working practices
affect intensification of work. Practically they do this by utilizing a questionnaire
and interviews within an organization. In general, compared to research focused
on the impact on an organizational level, research on the individual level is
more focused on one organization instead of big databases. Instead, it utilizes
questionnaires or interviews within a limited number of organizations (Kelliher
and Anderson, 2008, Conradie and Klerk, 2019). Recent literature, including the
review by (Renard et al., 2021), agrees to this development as valuable since it
enables future contribution to literature to include and focus more on the real-life
practical elements to create actual value for future decision-makers.
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
16
==PAGE:24==
Individual theoretical findings
Based on the split between direct and in-direct measures described above, the following
subsection will address the results and present theoretical findings on the relation
between FWAs and the impact on an individual level.
Although most research has been based upon the direct association with individual
performance in organizations, existing literature has not demonstrated a relationship
between the use of FWAs and direct performance measures. As (De Menezes and
Kelliher, 2011) highlight in their literature review, 69% of their 42 assessed studies
show no association. In the field study on an American organization, (Harrick et al.,
1986) concludes that the use of FWAs decreased the processing time of three tasks
significantly, but unfortunately later found the conflicting results that within three other
tasks, an increase in processing time was observed without any explanations or insights
on this. (Conradie and Klerk, 2019) also fails to show any significant relationship
between the use of FWAs and direct performance measures in their study utilizing
qualitative methods as self-assessed performance indicators. The same conclusions
are done by (Renard et al., 2021) in their recent literature review, where they also
find conflicting results and address this as a possible outcome since, as (Renard et al.,
2021) argue, the present literature is not based on coherent and structured theoretical
foundations.
Research on the outcome of in-direct measures on the other hand, is much more
coherent. Several studies agree that a positive relationship is found within the measures
of individual job satisfaction, organizational commitment, work engagement and work-
related stress (Kelliher and Anderson, 2008, Kelliher and Anderson, 2010, Conradie
and Klerk, 2019), De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011 and Renard et al., 2021). But it is
critical as (Renard et al., 2021) state, to be very accurate when reading these results.
Because in some cases, high-level conclusions have been made across research papers
to paint the picture more accurate, for instance, in the 2008 study by (Kelliher and
Anderson, 2008). They conclude that flexible working practices had a strong positive
impact on employees’ perceptions of job satisfaction, but also show that 9% reported
a negative effect and that this seemed to be linked to specific FWA and job types.
They further discuss based on qualitative interview rounds, that the perceptions of
job satisfaction, is linked to the flexible working practice and the employee’s decision
power and degree of freedom. From a 2010 study (Kelliher and Anderson, 2010)
further deep dives into this in their aim to understand how flexible working practices
affect intensification of work.
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
17
==PAGE:25==
They conclude in line with the literature the positive impact on job satisfaction, organi-
zational commitment, and work-related stress. In addition, they also found a significant
relation with increased intensification but described this as a paradox, as there seem to
be no negative parameters related to the intensification. The contradiction of satisfied
and committed workers alongside evidence of work intensification, arguments that
flexible workers were extending some additional effort on a discretionary basis in addi-
tion to imposed and enabled intensification. Overall it is stated, that literature agrees
on a positive impact on some parameters; however, more recent research introduces a
new perspective which indicates that the picture is more complex and that the degree
of freedom and intensification of work play a more significant role.
2.3.3 Summary
At the start of this literature review, an initial empty conceptual model was presented,
see figure (2.2), outlining the overall differentiation between organizational and
individual measures. Throughout the chapter on the implications when implementing
FWAs, these measures have been further described. In this subsection, the aim is
to summarize the key insights from this process, which can be seen in the updated
conceptual model below (2.3).
Figure 2.3.: Updated conceptual model, categorized in organizational and individual perfor-
mance measures, including the most prominent parameters from literature.
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
18
==PAGE:26==
To summarize the key insights on FWAs impact on an organizational level, organiza-
tional measures are divided into financial and non-financial parameters. The present
research is, in general, on a relatively high level, where organizations and companies
are compared based on extensive cross-national quantitative studies, often using public
research databases as the CRANET network. Financial measures include parameters
such as profitability, productivity, and service quality. Non-financial measures include
employee turnover and staff absenteeism. Research does not find any significant evi-
dence for FWAs positive impact on financial measures. However, within non-financial
measures, research is in general more coherent and indicate a positive relationship. In
general, the focus and scope of research contributions have undergone a development
where older literature has a very high-level approach and does not have any clear
conclusions but instead states consideration for future work. In addition, more present
literature focuses on actual considerations and aim, for example, to distinguish the
positive impacts of FWAs between different social clusters.
In terms of FWAs impact on an individual level, the research can be divided into direct
and in-direct measures. Direct measures such as employee-made errors or performance
indicators such as processing time have an impact on individual performance. However,
it is not straightforward within the in-direct measures since a theoretical framework
should argue why a particular measure is related and must be included to understand
why decisions are made. In-direct measures include parameters as job satisfaction,
organizational commitment, well-being, and work-related stress. Overall, the litera-
ture shows a weak positive link between the use of FWAs and the impact on direct
performance measures. On the other hand, literature coherently indicates a positive
impact from in-direct measures from FWA.
2.3
Implications when implementing FWAs
19
==PAGE:27==
3
Theoretical framework
Chapter (3) will address the theoretical framework of this thesis. This chapter works as
a bridge between the presented literature in chapter (2) and the method in chapter(4).
making it clear for the reader how this thesis will contribute to the literature and
answer the research problem. The chapter’s overall goal is to fulfill the last element
of the guiding research part A, as it aims to outline the research landscape and
build a structured theoretical framework by developing a clear hypothesis, setting the
methodology’s starting point to fulfill the guiding research part B.
Figure 3.1.: The final conceptual model showing the presented literature structure in relation
to impact parameters. The focus of the research is marked with bold, within
individual in-direct measures.
20
==PAGE:28==
In figure (3.1) the final conceptual model is presented, showing the structure of the
presented literature landscape. The final version differentiates from the earlier versions
since the in-direct individual measures are marked with bold, as these will be the focus
for further analysis. The following section below will elaborate on why this is the
case. Later in section (3.2) the methods for measuring the selected parameters will be
discussed. Finally in section (3.3) the final hypotheses are outlined.
In the perfect world, the thesis should be able to assess the majority of the parameters
listed in the conceptual model (3.1), as these tell the whole story of the impact of
FWAs on individuals and organizations. However, as recent literature argue that future
work on the topic of FWAs would benefit from more concentrated contributions to
create more transparency (Renard et al., 2021). To make this thesis more evident and
a valid contribution to the research landscape of FWAs, the following discussion builds
an argument based on the literature review for selecting a part of the theory which
can represent the majority, thereby focusing the thesis method to only a handful of
parameters.
3.1 Selection of theory focus
The central categories used in measuring the impact of FWAs on organizations and
individuals are outlined in the conceptual model in figure (3.1). Overall, this includes
organizational measures, either non-financial or financial, and individual measures,
either direct or in-direct. From the background of the project and guiding research part
A, the thesis aims to outline the research landscape and build a structured theoretical
framework, which most efficiently enables the answering of guiding research part B
by setting a specific literature focus. Therefore this section will outline the pros and
cons for selecting the specific scope, making it clear for the reader what reflections and
arguments have been taken into account.
The approach can be visualized on a high level with the help of the conceptual model.
In the model, four lines go through each category linking the impact on performance
with the selected FWA cluster. The goal is to identify the most direct and clear path
between these two, as this creates a more clear basis of comparison and efficient
time management. More practically, this means that research within a given category
with coherent and clear conclusions is preferred over categories with more broad and
unclear conclusions and methods.
3.1
Selection of theory focus
21
==PAGE:29==
From the organizational and individual theoretical finding subsections in the literature
review, the general insights on the different categories are outlined. From this, it can be
read that financial organizational measures are challenging and not a preferred option
for an in-depth and practical research design. The reason is that even though the
financial organizational measures are interesting, and from a company’s perspective
may be the most critical factor, measures as profitability, productivity, and service
quality have failed in research to show any coherent conclusions in relation to FWAs.
In addition, these types of data can be hard to access since not all companies publish
this kind of information.
The non-financial measures, on the other hand, show much more coherent results
across different research contributions, where in particular, employee turnover and
staff absenteeism seem to have positive relationships with the use of FWAs. This could
be a good starting point for further analysis, as it is a coherent basis for comparison.
However, as for the financial measures, this kind of data is hard to access, as only very
few companies publish this kind of data since it is considered sensitive information.
From a individual level, the direct measures are the most interesting from a companies
perspective, because this kind of information tells the direct influence of the FWAs on
their employees. However, what is described as one of the significant challenges for
utilizing direct measures when identifying the impact of FWAs on performance is that
they rely on self-assessed parameters within the employees. The downside is that data
collection can be resource-demanding, but more importantly, that data is not based on
an objective perspective. This is argued in research to be one of the reasons why the
direct individual measures have failed to show a coherent relationship with the use of
FWA.
The research landscape for individual in-direct measures is clear and create a solid
and coherent link in the conceptual model terminology. From research, there is a
common agreement across different research papers in different time periods that there
exists a positive relationship between the use of FWAs and the in-direct measures. The
most commonly used measures are job satisfaction, work engagement, organizational
commitment, and work-related stress. Additionally, these measures are described
to be more straightforward in terms of data collection, as they can be assessed and
quantified, with quantitative data collection method as Likert Scale questioners.
3.1
Selection of theory focus
22
==PAGE:30==
Therefore, in-direct individual measures are a reasonable basis for comparing and will
be used as the scope for further assessment of literature. Of course, this is a significant
assumption and should be considered in the discussion, as it is critical to reflect upon
the impact of the selection and what other measures might have caused.
Overall this is the reflection behind why the scope is selected within the in-direct
individual measures job satisfaction, work engagement, organizational commitment,
and work-related stress. The following section will reflect upon how these parameters
are defined and how they can be measured.
3.2 Measuring individual indirect performance
This section focuses on how the four identified and selected parameters are defined
and measured. This is important as this thesis aims to understand how FWAs impact
individual performance measures.
FWAs impact organizations and people in several different ways, as it has been outlined
above, and so do the methods to quantify them, from simple to more complex ap-
proaches. It is therefore essential to chose method, which make is possible to quantify
the in-direct parameters most comparably. In research papers including (Kelliher and
Anderson, 2008, Kelliher and Anderson, 2010, Conradie and Klerk, 2019), De Menezes
and Kelliher, 2011 and Renard et al., 2021), researchers utilize published peer-graded
rating scales, where questions are specially designed and linked to social and manage-
rial science, to make them able to quantify the in-direct performance measures. By that
making it possible to rate the weight of different parameters or compare with other
research.
The rest of the subsection will focus on further elaborating on the most used scales for
measurements of job satisfaction, work engagement, organizational commitment, and
work-related stress. Reflections will be shared concerning why these rating scales are
valid and what might limit and challenge their use.
3.2
Measuring individual indirect performance
23
==PAGE:31==
Job satisfaction
Job satisfaction is for this thesis defined as a positive emotional response experienced
when doing a job or when being present at work. It has been covered by several studies,
including (Schneider et al., 2003), who in a study from 2003 investigate employee
attitudes in relation to organizational financial and market performance. (Schneider
et al., 2003) defines a three-question Likert Scale to measure overall job satisfaction,
which can be found below. The endpoints are defined as a five-point Likert scale:
VS–VD = very satisfied – very dis-satisfied; VG–VP = very good – very poor.
Schneider’s Overall Job Satisfaction
• Considering everything how satisfied are you with your job? (VS–VD)
• Considering everything, how would you rate your overall satisfaction with your
company at the present time? (VS–VD)
• How would you rate this company as a company to work for compared to other
companies? (VG–VP)
The over job satisfaction scale is considered valuable as it is an efficient set of questions
which easily can be applied to research and since it has been applied with success in
(Schneider et al., 2003) own research, but also proven by previous external research as
(Kelliher and Anderson, 2010 and De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011).
Work engagement
Work engagement is in this thesis defined as a positive and motivational state combined
with a high levels of dedication and a strong focus to work (Schaufeli and Bakker,
2010). It is a known parameter within many organizations, since many companies
annually measure work engagement through employee engagement programs (Harvard
Business Review, 2020). In a study from 2004 (Schaufeli and Bakker, 2004), as a
counter-reaction to an overconcentration of negative focus research on ill-health
and unwell-being, (Schaufeli and Bakker, 2004) came up with the Utrecht Work
Engagement Scale. It is also based on a Likert Scale survey with 17 district questions
designed to fit into the theory. For this review, a condensed version of the Utrecht
Work Engagement Scale is presented, only consisting of 6 questions, since these cover
the main arguments related to work engagement. For the questions listed below, the
endpoints for the five-point Likert scale are N-E = Never - Every day.
3.2
Measuring individual indirect performance
24
==PAGE:32==
Utrecht Work Engagement Scale
• I find the work that I do full of meaning and purpose ? (N-E)
• When I am working, I forget everything else around me ? (N-E)
• When I get up in the morning, I feel like going to work? (N-E)
• I can continue working for very long periods at a time ? (N-E)
• I get carried away when I am working ? (N-E)
• At my job, I am very resilient, mentally ? (N-E)
The efficiency and validity of the Utrecht Work Engagement Scale have been testes
by several studies covered by (Schaufeli and Bakker, 2004), showing the relationship
with burnouts and workaholism, identifying possible causes and consequences of
engagement. In all studies, the validity is considered high. Furthermore, directly
related to this thesis, (Wood and Menezes, 2000) in 2005 used the Utrecht Work
Engagement Scale for a related purpose, measuring work engagement directly related
to flexible work, why the scale is considered valid for further work on this thesis.
Organizational commitment
Organizational commitment is for this thesis defined as an individual’s psychological
attachment to an organisation (Yousef, 2017) and it relates to what is meant about
being part of an organization. Some people go to work just seeing themself as an
employee there do a job, while others feel more personally involved in the organization
they work for. In the study from 1980, (Cook and Wall, 1980) investigates measures of
trust, organizational commitment, and personal need non-fulfillment. They developed
a survey directly targeting the measurement of organizational commitment in compa-
nies, which can be found below. The endpoints for the seven-point Likert scale are SD -
SA = Strongly Disagree – Strongly Agree.
3.2
Measuring individual indirect performance
25
==PAGE:33==
British Organizational Commitment Scale
• I am quite proud to be able to tell people who it is I work for ? (SD - SA)
• I sometimes feel like leaving this employment for good ? (SD - SA)
• I’m not willing to put myself out just to help the organization ? (SD - SA)
• Even if the firm were not doing too well financially, I would be reluctant to
change to another employer ? (SD - SA)
• I feel myself to be part of the organization ? (SD - SA)
• In my work I like to feel I am making some effort, not just for myself, but for the
organization as well ? (SD - SA)
• The offer of a bit more money with another employer would not seriously make
me think of changing my job ? (SD - SA)
• I would not recommend a close friend to join our staff ? (SD - SA)
• To know my own work had made a contribution to the good of the organization
would please me ? (SD - SA)
The validity of the scale have since the ’80s been confirmed by several studies in-
cluding (Kelliher and Anderson, 2010, De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011 and Kelliher
and Anderson, 2008). It is therefore considered a valid approach for the further
assessment.
Work-related Stress
Work-related Stress is defined as the feeling of being overwhelmed or unable to cope
with mental or emotional pressure. For the purpose of this thesis, the scale described
by (Rose, 2005) has been selected as a valid measure, based on two primary factors.
First, it is able to effectively quantify the degree of Work-related Stress based on four
questions. Second, that is has been used by other research in relation to flexibility
working as in (De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011) and (Renard et al., 2021). The questions
are based on a six-point Likert Scale with the endpoints N - A = Never – All of the
time.
3.2
Measuring individual indirect performance
26
==PAGE:34==
Rose Work-related stress scale
• I worry about problems after work ? (N - A)
• I find it difficult to unwind after work ? (N - A)
• I feel used up after work ? (N - A)
• I feel exhausted after work ? (N - A)
As the selected scope of literature has now been outlined and the approach of how
to quantify the selected measures described. The last section will focus on the final
theoretical model and hypotheses.
3.2
Measuring individual indirect performance
27
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Final theoretical model and hypotheses
To set the final theoretical direction and fulfill guiding research part A, this subsection
will condense the above reflections of the scope of the theoretical framework into four
tangible hypotheses, which will stand as the the starting point for the methodology to
answer, see chapter (4).
The four hypotheses a), b), c), and d) listed below will be addressed within the scope
of the theoretical framework listed above, which means that it aims to assess the
four-parameter in the post-covid-19 working environment. It is considered based on
the above arguments in section (3.1) that the four parameters are representing the
in-direct impact measures of FWAs in the optimal and most effective way. The null
hypotheses represent the general position from the literature on the impact of FWAs
on the in-direct measures why these is the most efficient reference point.
Below thee four final hypotheses, a), b), c), and d) are listed.
Hypothesis A There exist a positive relationship between peoples experience of
job satisfaction and the use of the flexible working agreements working from
home, teleworking and flexible working hours?
Hypothesis B There exist a positive relationship between peoples experience of
work engagement and the use of the flexible working agreements working from
home, teleworking and flexible working hours?
Hypothesis C There exist a positive relationship between peoples experience of
organizational commitment and the use of the flexible working agreements
working from home, teleworking and flexible working hours?
Hypothesis D There exist a positive relationship between peoples experience of
work-related stress and the use of the flexible working agreements working
from home, teleworking and flexible working hours?
3.3
Final theoretical model and hypotheses
28
==PAGE:36==
4
Methodology
The following chapter outlines the methodology. Key questions to be answered are
based on the "who, what, why, when, and how" approach and aims to describe the
thoughts and reflection behind the research design, choice of methods, and data
collection. By that fulfilling the first element of the guiding research part B. Overall,
this chapter links the theoretical framework with the analysis and show how the
research problem is intended to be answered. To do so, the first step is to understand
the research design, which is outlined below in section (4.1).
4.1 Research design
The research design is a thesis-specific framework which describes methods and
techniques. The design allows the thesis to benefit from a clear strategy, which guides
the subject matter and sets the research for success (Saunders et al., 1997).
To answer the research problem the research philosophy combines deductive and
inductive thinking, meaning that it aims at exploring and testing existing theory while
reasoning for potential new theory areas. Practically this will be done by having the
primary outcome of the research being descriptive, testing the theoretical hypothesis,
and making it possible to have explanatory reasoning’s to explain the identified behav-
ior. To make the study as clear cohered and more usable for comparisons with previous
literature as possible, a mono research method with be used. A mono research design
only utilizes either a quantitative or qualitative methodology.
29
==PAGE:37==
A qualitative method could use structured interviews sessions, as seen in the covered
research by (Kelliher and Anderson, 2010), where interviews have been conducted
within organizations to measure intensification of the employee well-being. A quan-
titative method utilizes surveys and questionnaire s, intending to be able to apply
statistical analysis, as it is seen in (Harrick et al., 1986).
From the already described theoretical framework and methods of measuring the four
selected in-direct performance measures, job satisfaction, work engagement, organi-
zational commitment, and work-related stress, it is clear that a quantitative method
would be appropriate since the Likert Scale questions types functions well within a
survey set-up. This has also been argued by (Conradie and Klerk, 2019). Therefore
the thesis’s method and data collection will be developed around a questionnaire that
can measure and quantify the relevant demographic-, work-, and decision parameter-
related questions. However, it is critical to keep in mind that the quantitative research
approach does have limitations. For example, the quality of the output is highly
correlated with the quality of the input, and several statistical research methods are
dependent on a certain data volume. If the final data collection is limited or of bad
quality, additional qualitative data is needed to explore further or explain the data
tendencies. In that case, it will be considered to add additional follow-up conversations
or structured interviews. The following section below will describe how the final
quantitative research approach was designed.
4.2 Quantitative method development
The following section will outline the development of the quantitative method used
for data collection in this thesis. Utilizing quantitative methods come with several
advantages and disadvantages; therefore, it is important to outline why a particular
approach has been selected against others. For this study, a questionnaire is used for
data collection. Even though other methods, such as semi-structured interviews, might
have created similar valid data outputs, it is critical to make the output as directly
comparable with previous research as possible. In addition, the study is part of a
master thesis program and has a specific time limitation, which means that all data
should be collected within a limited period of time. Therefore with a questionnaire
based approach, it is possible to reach a bigger group of people much faster than if
there should have been planned interviews with the same amount of people.
4.2
Quantitative method development
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.1.: Tree graph showing different types of questionnaires based on (Saunders et al.,
1997)
Questionnaires differentiate with the research aim, and different questionnaires hold
different attributes. In figure (4.1), the two main types of questionnaires are out-
lined in a tree graph by (Saunders et al., 1997). Questionnaires are divided into
self-administered and interviewer-administered types. The main difference between
these types is that in the self-administered questionnaires, respondents fill out the
questionnaires themself, whereas in interviewer-administered, the interviewer controls
and writes down what is being said. Both types come with advantages and disadvan-
tages. For example, self-administered questionnaires suffer from a low response rate,
often ranging between 30% to 50%; however, they are much more time-efficient than
interviewer-administered (Saunders et al., 1997). For this thesis, a self-administered
questionnaire will be used due to time limitations and the need for a high volume
of valid responses. Three additional types of questionnaires exist under the type
of self-administered questionnaires: the internet/intranet-based, postal-based, and
physical delivery. For this thesis, the intranet and postal-based types will be utilized, as
it is further explained in the case organization section below, see (4.3), then the distri-
bution within the two case organizations differentiate. The questionnaire is within one
organization shared on the shared company intranet and in the other organization sent
out individually to the employees. The overall design and platform of the questionnaire
did not change between the organizations.
The last element to cover in the quantitative method design is to ensure that the
questionnaire can answer the research problem. Opposed, what is known from in-
depth or semi-structured interviews, the questions in a questionnaire need to be
designed precisely to answer the question. Previous research have reflected upon this,
and several approaches exist to ensure this. One is described by (Saunders et al., 1997)
and is based on developing a data requirements table, so it is possible always to follow
back and control the questions relating to the research goal.
4.2
Quantitative method development
31
==PAGE:39==
This method was not directly used in this thesis, but the central elements were included
to ensure a clear link between the question design and the research aim. In the
following subsection, the different types and categories of questions will be further
assessed, and essential reflections will be shared.
4.2.1 Questionnaire development
Figure 4.2.: QR code linking to the
final questionnaire.
This section focuses on the content of the final
questionnaire.
What questions have been in-
cluded, and why were they written in a specific
way? In figure (4.2), a QR code links directly
to the final questionnaire, where it is possible to
click through the questionnaire and read all the
questions. The questionnaire is divided into three
categories, first, demographic-related questions
about who the respondents are. Second, work-related questions are designed to give
more insights into how the respondents differentiate concerning their job. Lastly,
in-direct decisions parameter questions are specifically designed to measure the four
in-direct parameters outlined in the hypothesis. All the final questionnaire question
can read in their raw text form, in appendix (A). Having three categories enables
the research to differentiate between the answers and potentially discover patterns
or trends. In the following subsection, these three categories are outlined, and the
relevant questions will be shown and discussed.
Demographic information
Who are the people who answer the questionnaire? This is a central question as it
defines the scope of analysis and supports the identification of trends and patterns
between different groups. Often used demographic questions are, where do the respon-
dents live? What do they do? And how much do they earn?. However, demographic
questions can be any question that aims to understand a particular respondent’s iden-
tity better. For this questionnaire, typical demographic questions are utilized. These
included the age of the respondents, to which gender identity they most identify? If
they have any kids living at home? From what country their work are based? Within
what job area do they work? If they have management responsibility? And for how
long they have worked in their current company? To see the question in the final
format, please utilize the QR code in figure (4.2) or appendix (A) under demographic
information 1.A to 1.E.
4.2
Quantitative method development
32
==PAGE:40==
Work related information
The second part of the questionnaire is linked to work-related information. More
specifically, questions that aim to explore the respondents’ experience with FWAs,
what types of FWAs they have used, how often they are exposed to them, and how
it impacts their daily work lives. The reason for including these types of questions is
that these enable the differentiation of people who have and have not experienced
FWAs. From previous research this is described as one of the critical parameters in
measuring the impact of FWAs (Kelliher and Anderson, 2010), (Harrick et al., 1986)
and (Conradie and Klerk, 2019). Previous research have approached FWAs with
a binary perspective, meaning that sample groups either experienced flexibility or
not. For this thesis a different more advanced method is utilized , as can be seen
in question 2e, see appendix (A), respondents first were asked what type of FWAs
they have experienced, and second, asked about the frequency of that specific FWA.
Thereby making it possible to measure the degree of the use of a particular FWA for
each respondent, ranging from 0 to 5 days a week. The selection of FWAs, which
respondents could choose related to the scope of the FWAs, already defined in the
literature review, see section (2.2). When compared with the literature review, it is
argued that measuring the frequency of different FWAs is a new approach, which could
potentially support new significant relationships.
Additionally, the questionnaire includes work-related explanatory questions, intending
to understand further why respondents score and answer as they do. These questions
can be found in appendix (A) as questions 2o, 2p, 2q, 2r and 2s. They cover themes
such as virtual management skills from the nearest manager, team capability to meet
social demand, personal technical capabilities, work required facilities, and corporate
strategies. The five questions are based on research contributions from major financial
and consulting institutions as they emphasize research in the future of work, which
is of high importance for their clients and markets. Some of these articles include
(Bloomberg, 2021. Economist, 2021. Harvard Business Review, 2021b. McKinsey,
2021. BCG, 2021) and even podcasts cover the topic (Miller, 2021). In appendix
(B) these key critical parameters for the future workplace are further outlined and
described. The idea is that by answering these questions with a five-point Likert Scale,
it is possible to understand if any of these parameters hold significant importance for
the potential relationship between the use of FWAs and the four decision parameters.
This would then support and potentially explain how the conclusion and output from
this thesis can be used in organizations in the future, thereby building the foundation
to guiding research part C described in the research problem, see (1.3)
4.2
Quantitative method development
33
==PAGE:41==
Decision parameters
The last element of the questionnaire relates directly to the four decision parameters,
job satisfaction, work engagement, organizational commitment, and work-related
stress This is outlined in the theoretical framework, in chapter (3). As described
in the research design section, it is critical to know what to ask to get the correct
answers when building a quantitative questionnaire. Meaning that it is important
that the question asked can measure and quantify the desired parameters in a proven
way. In the theoretical framework section (3), on the measurement of individuals
performance four scales have been outlined. All of these utilize Likert Scale type
questions, where respondents have the opportunity to rate the questions themselves,
from a scale ranging from either very poor to very good. As these scale frameworks for
measuring the selected parameters already have been used by previous research, for
example (Kelliher and Anderson, 2008, Kelliher and Anderson, 2010, Conradie and
Klerk, 2019), De Menezes and Kelliher, 2011 and Renard et al., 2021) it is considered
the most efficient and best way to produce comparable and suitable output for further
assessment.The final questions for each parameter can be found in appendix ,(A) where
the questions starting with "3" correspond to job satisfaction, "4" to work engagement,
"5" to organizational commitment, and "6" to work-related stress.
When comparing the final questions seen in appendix (A) with the sources and scale
descriptions outlined in the theoretical framework in section (3), some differences
can be found. However it should be kept in mind within why some modification
are beneficial. The first reason is that four different authors have written the four
papers at different periods and that the wording is different between them. Therefore
some changes have been made in the wording of the questions to make the overall
experience coherent and unique for this specific thesis. The second reason is based
on the length of the questionnaire and that it is important to remind the respondents
what scope they answering within. This can be seen with question 4c related to work
engagement where the original question is When I get up in the morning, I feel like
going to work?. A minor modification has been made to remind the reader within
what scope they are answering, so the final question looks like When I get up in the
morning, I feel like going to work even though I might be working from home or remote?.
Based on above outlined modifications respondents will have a precise understanding
of the questions and why they answer them. Last, it should be kept in mind that these
questions potentially are not the best to measure these parameters. For example, more
questions within each parameter would have made it possible to capture even more
detailed responses. However, the final questionnaire in appendix (A) is a compromise
to enable the highest value of responses and most effective time frame.
4.2
Quantitative method development
34
==PAGE:42==
4.2.2 Design
As the research design and question development is described above, the following
will elaborate on the design of the questionnaire, how it came to be and why this is
important.
The first reason for optimizing the design of the questionnaire is that it is critical to
achieve the highest response rate possible; by that minimizing the resources and time
used to distribute and manually share the questionnaire. The second reason is that the
questionnaire should be as straightforward as possible, where no confusion is blurring
the output, simply because people have misunderstood questions, thereby archiving the
highest possible response quality. An initial test sample group was selected to achieve
these benefits, consisting of a handful of close friends and family. The test group was
asked to participate in two design iterations. The first was focused on survey design
by comparing three different survey software platforms based on engagement, visual
design, and answering time. The three platforms which were compared were Survey
Monkey, Google Forms, and Typeform. From a functional point of view, no significant
difference exists between the three software platforms. Based on the responses from
the test group, the online software platform TypeForm was selected since the test group
felt this was most visually appealing and straightforward.
In a second design iteration with the test group, the focus was on the questionnaire’s
readability, wording, and structure. It was based on the test group’s individual experi-
ence of the different questions and structure. Overall, this gave small but critical insight
into the questionnaire structure, which helped significantly in terms of readability and
understanding. An example of this is the bold font of the inverted questions in 5c,
which indicates that respondents now have to apply the Likert Scale opposite. Again,
this is a small change, but all test group members found a significant improvement in
the questionnaire, which can be found by following the QR code link in figure (4.2).
4.2
Quantitative method development
35
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Case companies
The final section of the methods chapter outlines and describe the case companies,
which have been used for data collection. It will be outlined why these companies have
been chosen and how they fit into the project’s scope. General introductions to the
companies can be found in section (4.3.1) and (4.3.2). Lastly, the distribution section
will be outlined and describe how the questionnaire has been distributed and shared
in the two case companies.
In terms of the selection of case companies, it is essential to reflect upon how they fit
the project’s scope, as this defines the foundation for later reference in the discussion
and conclusion. Therefore to ensure the most transparent and structured selection
process, the sampling strategy described by (Patton, 1990) is used, as this enables the
logic and power to select a truly random and statistically representative sample that
permits confident generalization from the sample to a larger population.
The strategy category criterion sampling, is used, which is a selection framework
defined by the opportunity to select research specific selection criteria which samples
are required to live up to. The selection criteria for this thesis relates to the project’s
scope. First, as it has been described in literature (Renard et al., 2021), then future
research would benefit from a more limited scope and should focus more on the real-
life practical elements to create actual value for future decision-makers. Therefore the
first criteria state that data samples should come from companies. Second, the samples
have to fit into the scope of being knowledge workers in industrial organizations.
Third, the samples need to be easily accessible, as the data collection is limited within
a relatively short time frame.
To reach a broad sample population and increase the opportunity to get a high number
of respondents, emails were sent out to ten Nordic industrial firms. Based on responses
to the emails and initial casual interviews with the potential companies, an assessment
was done concerning the framework described by (Patton, 1990). From this, it was
decided to proceed with two case companies described below, Danfoss and Rockwool.
The main selection criteria drivers were that both companies fulfill the criteria of being
an industrial organization and that they are of a particular organizational size, where
it is assumed that they employ a significant amount of knowledge workers. Second,
both case organizations made two key contacts available within each organization by
that fulfilling the criteria related to easy accessibility.
4.3
Case companies
36
==PAGE:44==
4.3.1 Danfoss A/S
Danfoss A/S is a Danish industrial company based and
founded in Nordborg, Denmark, in 1933. It is a multina-
tional company with 72 factories and +40.000 employees
around the world. Driven by the potential of an electri-
fied society and powered by the opportunities of going
digital, Danfoss is engineering technology that helps the
world to get much more out of less (Danfoss, 2020). With
quality, reliability, and innovation deeply rooted in their DNA, Danfoss delivers an
extensive range of products and solutions across their three business segments Climate
Solutions, Drives, and Power Solutions - with their most commonly known product
being the Danfoss radiator thermostat. The primary contact working in Danfoss for the
data collection was located under the group functions why the dominating work types
were HR, communication, and management.
4.3.2 Rockwool International A/S
Rockwool A/S is a Danish multinational industrial man-
ufacturer of stone wool products. It was founded and
have their current headquarter in Hedehusene, Denmark.
Rockwool has more than 10.000 employees worldwide
and delivers rock wool solutions, including building insu-
lation, acoustic ceilings, exterior cladding systems, solu-
tions for plant cultivation, technical fibers for industrial
use, and insulation for the process industry marine and offshore. They are committed
to enriching the lives of everyone who come into contact with their solutions as they
empower everyone to rise to the development challenges of modern living (Rockwool,
2020). The primary contact working in Rockwool for the data collection was Group
Development, so the dominating work types were R&D.
4.3.3 Distribution
As described above in the method design, two different approaches have been utilized to
distribute the questionnaire, the intranet and postal-based types. From the descriptions
of the case companies, it could be understood that the questionnaire was sent out to all
4.3
Case companies
37
==PAGE:45==
employees of Danfoss and Rockwool, which equal more than 50.000 people. However,
as this is not the case, this subsection will elaborate more on the distribution of the
data collection to give a more precise understanding of who had the chance to answer
the questionnaire and how the sample population is defined.
The postal-based questionnaire was distributed within Danfoss, as several contact
persons were identified, who all agreed to share the questionnaire within their close
colleagues. Approximately 20 Danfoss employees within the work types of HR, com-
munications, management, and sales received the questionnaire, leading to a potential
population volume of roughly 200 employees. To ensure the highest reach within the
organization, a reminder was sent out to all key persons a week before the answering
deadline. The intranet-based questionnaire was distributed within Rockwool, as only
one central key contact was identified in the case company selection process. An
agreement was made that the questionnaire would be shared on the internal intranet
platform in the R&D organization, consisting of 150 employees. Again, a reminder was
sent out one week before the deadline to ensure the highest response rate.
Overall this meant that a sample population of roughly 350 employees was reached.
However, it is important to keep in mind that independent receivers of the questionnaire
could share the questionnaire themselves with contacts even deeper in the organization
or contacts outside the organizations, why the sample population might be even higher.
Both organizations were sent the same link, making it possible to control responses
online in real-time. This gave some advantages in terms of data management and
preparation but had one downside. It is not possible to differentiate 100% between
responses from the two case companies, as all responses are connected to one database.
Only respondents who noted their company name themselves voluntarily were possible
to identify. This is a significant factor that limits the output of this thesis. In the
discussion, this will be further discussed to reflect upon how this has impacted the
results and what could have been done differently.
4.3
Case companies
38
==PAGE:46==
5
Statistical analysis & results
The following chapter will outline and describe the analysis and results. The goal is
to clarify why the decisions have been made in terms of the analysis and outline the
results to build a foundation for a more detailed in-depth discussion in the following
chapter. This chapter contributes to the final element of guiding research part B, by
testing flexible working agreements’ impact on in-direct performance measures for
knowledge workers of industrial organizations post-covid-19. The analysis and results
chapter is structured in three sections, starting with the data preparation in section
(5.1). Second a statistical test of the four hypotheses, see section (5.2). Finally in
section (5.3) the final test of the hypotheses is outlined.
5.1 Preparation of data
The first step of the analysis is about data preparation to clarify what kind of data has
been collected and how the data points are distributed. The data has been collected
over a period of 26 days, from 02-11-2021 to 28-11-2021. In total, 159 questionnaire
responses were given, distributed evenly throughout the period. The completion rate
of the questionnaire is 75% with a total response rate of arround 50%. In figure (5.1)
the daily and accumulated responses have been visualized. One prominent peak can
be found, the 5th of November. This date corresponds to the day the questionnaire was
shared by the Danfoss Regional Head of HR in northern Europe, one of the key contacts
within Danfoss. The share of responses from outside the two selected organizations is
around 15%. Therefore, further assessment of the responses sources will be applied in
the data cleaning subsection see (5.1.2).
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.1.: A timeline, showing the daily and accumulated responses for the questionnaire,
distributed for data collection.
Before any further assessment can be done, it is relevant to test whether the ques-
tionnaire responses account for a reasonable distribution in relation to the national
statistics of employees in organizations in Denmark. This is relevant because it indicates
if the questionnaire represents the scope of the thesis in a reasonable manner.
Figure 5.2.: The age distribution from all questionnaire responses, outlined in a circle diagram.
From the Danish Statistic Database a broad range of information and data about the
Danish workforce and organizations is available. For this assessment, the database
table for Employment by gender, industry, age, and time has been utilized (Dansk-
Statistik, 2020). From this table, the actual age distribution within the Danish industrial
organizations can be found. When comparing to figure (5.2), which shows the age
distribution from all questionnaire responses, a interesting insight is seen.
5.1
Preparation of data
40
==PAGE:48==
The responses from young people under 35 years in the questionnaire are over-
represented in relation to danish statistics, where people under 35 years usually
only account for around 15-20%. In this thesis questionnaire, the respondents under
35 years account for approximately 50%. This is a significant difference, which should
be considered in further discussions, as the over-representation of young people may
influence the results. It is also relevant to highlight the distribution of gender, as
this potentially could influence the result as well. However, in figure (5.3) gender
distribution of all responses is shown, and it is concluded that the distribution of
gender does not impact the further assessment as the distribution is even.
Figure 5.3.: The gender distribution from all questionnaire responses, outlined in a circle
diagram.
To conclude the data presentation section, it can be concluded that the data is relatively
even distributed regarding the danish average work environment, only with the age
distribution being a bit skewed towards the young responses under 35 years. In general,
this is expected not to influence the further assessment significantly. However, it is
essential to consider when results are consolidated and concluded.
5.1.1 Parameter score calculation
In the method section, the overall structure of the data collection method was described.
Here, it is seen that the decision parameters are collected using peer-graded scoring
scale frameworks, which, based on a handful of Likert Scale scored questions, can
quantify the score for each parameter.
5.1
Preparation of data
41
==PAGE:49==
Understanding how this overall parameter score is calculated is essential for further
analysis and results, why this section will focus on the computation of overall parameter
scores for job satisfaction, work engagement, organizational commitment, and work-
related stress.
Initially, then does a high score relate to a positive relation, however, this makes it
hard to compare as the highest score for job satisfaction and work engagement is the
five-point answer, while for organizational commitment and work-related stress, the
highest scores are 7 and 6. Therefore have all responses been inverted, meaning that
the "best" answers, indicating a positive relation, now for all parameters are one. Still,
it is not possible to directly compare parameters between each other. However, it
makes the data output much cleaner and easier to work with. It is emphasized that
this is critical to keep in mind when reading the rest of the analysis.
The next step is to convert the Likert Scale Answers into numeric values. This is done
in excel, where each response is converted into its corresponding value, meaning
that respondents who strongly agree to a question are given the corresponding value
of 1. The total score for each parameter equals the average score of all answers.
However, it is important to keep in mind the slightly different total scoring calculation
for organizational commitment, as (Cook and Wall, 1980) has described then do
the questionnaire contain the questions 5c 5g and 5h, see (A) . These questions are
opposite as they ask the respondent about what they not would like to. Therefore
before the total average score of organizational commitment can be calculated, the
answers for 5c 5g and 5h need to be inverted back. The final scores for each parameters
is visualized in figure (5.5).
5.1.2 Data cleaning
This section focus on the final data cleaning, which refers to the process of removing
any invalid data points in the data set. As statistical seek to identify patterns based
on a hypothesis related to the nature of the data, a thorough cleaning process helps
unmask any trends. However, as data cleaning involves human judgment, in deciding
on which data points are valid and not, it is essential to keep the assessment within a
limited scope, which is transparent and clear (Saunders et al., 1997). For this study,
the data cleaning will be done with two assessments. First, identifying data points
obviously out of scope with the project and second identifying erroneous data outliers
related to external error.
5.1
Preparation of data
42
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.4.: The distribution of different job types within all questionnaire responses. Ordered
from most responses to less.
The first assessment is done by investigating the responses regarding what kind of work
they do. The reason for this is that this study has set a specific scope within knowledge
workers in industrial organizations. From figure (5.4), the distribution of different
job types within all questionnaire responses can be found. Production workers are
not defined as knowledge workers (Reinhardt et al., 2011). Therefore they have been
de-selected; the same goes for responses within the "other category" since it is not
possible to identify the original source of the response. Additionally, unemployed and
non-industrial organizations have been excluded since they are out of the scope of the
study.
Figure 5.5.: The four selected parameters score visualized in a box plot format for data
cleaning.
5.1
Preparation of data
43
==PAGE:51==
The second data cleaning assessment is based on visualization of data means and
standard errors of the selected four parameters scores. The goal is to identify any data
outliers, as these might reflect an error in the response. For each scoring parameter,
a box plot has been developed; see the figure (5.5). Based on this illustration, data
outliers have been identified for removal. Out of the initial 159 responses, 142 were
considered valid for further analysis, and 17 were removed based on the two data
cleaning processes described above.
5.2 Analysis of data
As the data set has been prepared and cleaned, the next section of the analysis focus
directly on testing the hypotheses stated in the theoretical framework, see section
(3.3). This will be done with a top-down approach, meaning that it will start on a high
level and follow the contentious discovered insights to a deeper statistical level. The
goal is to be able, based on the complete analysis, to confirm or reject the hypotheses
presented.
5.2.1 Impact of FWAs
The first step in the analysis is to test most simply if a positive relationship exist
between the selected parameters and FWAs. This is done by testing how the sample of
people who have experienced FWAs score versus people who have not. The result can
be found in table (5.1), as the table shows the volume of responses from whom have
and have not experienced FWAs, the mean and standard deviation for the scores of the
selected parameters job satisfaction, work engagement, organizational commitment,
and work-related stress.
Table 5.1.: The volume of respondents whom have and have not experienced flexible working
agreements and the mean and SD for the scores of the selected parameters.
5.2
Analysis of data
44
==PAGE:52==
What can be seen from table (5.1) when comparing the mean values is that it seems that
mean scores for job satisfaction, work engagement, and organizational commitment
all score lower when using FWAs than not using FWAs. However, it is essential to note
that, as it is described in above, then the scores are inverted. This means that lower
scores closer to one corresponds to those respondents who have a higher degree of
job satisfaction. In addition, work-related stress seems to have the opposite relation,
meaning that responses who have answered yes, score higher than responses who have
responded with no, telling that people who work with FWAs experience a higher degree
of stress than people who have does not. However, before any of these conclusions are
further considered, it is essential to note the distribution of the responses, which are
not evenly distributed, with 120 "yes" answers and only "22" no.
Table 5.2.: Output from Welch’s t-test in Excel for each parameter.
Initially, only based on the sample means it must be concluded that the overall output
from the test does not say much on its own, as the sample sizes are not evenly
distributed. However, to be sure, a Welch’s t-test with a significance level of 5% was
performed to determine if there exists a statistically significant difference between the
"yes" and "no" samples. The Welch’s t-test output in table (5.2) reveals that there exists
no statistically significant difference in parameter score means, as the P values for all
parameters are higher than the significance level.
Nevertheless, based on the above initial test, it could look like there is a relation, but
further assessment is needed to conclude if there exists a trend and if a given trend is
significant. To further understand the relationship between the different variables, the
next section will look at the overall relationship between the parameters and degree of
FWAs usage.
5.2
Analysis of data
45
==PAGE:53==
5.2.2 Tendency test
This section focus on further assessing the overall relationship between the selected
parameters and the use of FWAs. This is possible since questionnaire participants were
asked to answer how many days a week they work with their chosen working style,
see question 2g, 2h, 2i and 2j in appendix (A). These questions make it possible to
map the scores of the four parameters in relation to the degree of FWAs usage for
the respondents. However, a limiting factor in the questionnaire design has made it
challenging to distinguish between the individual FWAs types why they are approached
as one FWAs cluster representing the general post-covid-19 flexible working style. This
limiting factor is essential to keep in mind when later consolidating the conclusions, as
different FWA types in real life may have different weights in terms of impact on the
score. The conclusions from this trend test will be used as guidance and help direct
the analysis in the most meaningful and efficient way.
Four scatter plots can be found below, representing individual scores for each ques-
tionnaire response. The idea behind utilizing scatter plots is that these represent
values for two different numeric variables, visually indicating if a weak, moderate, or
strong relationship exists. Practically, this is done by investigating a linear relationship
with a tendency line, visual relationships indications as clusters, or other non-linear
relationships (Hastie et al., 2001).
Work-related stress
The previous test indicated that respondents who experience FWAs score lower than
respondents who do not in terms of work-related stress. If a general relationship
exists, it would be possible to identify a positive or negative trend visually, moderately
distributed around the tendency line. Below in figure (5.6), work-related stress scores
for each respondent have been mapped against the average use of FWAs. From the
graph, it is clear that there exists no linear tendency; additionally, there seems to be no
other relation present since the data is relatively randomly distributed on the graph.
Work engagement
Second, the relationship between work engagement and the degree of flexibility is
assessed; this is done with a similar approach as for work-related stress. The scatter
plot showing work engagement scor in relation to FWA usage can be found in figure
(5.7). What can be seen visually from the graphs is that there seems to be a minor
negative linear tendency concerning the degree of flexibility.
5.2
Analysis of data
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.6.: Scatter plot of work-related stress scores and the degree of FWAs usage.
Still, this trend is weak since the scores are distributed broadly around the tendency
line, meaning a higher degree of flexibility supports a higher score of work engagement.
It could also be argued that this negative slope is random or insignificant. Since the
data is so broadly distributed throughout the graph, a further statistical test should be
applied to answer this question further. From the graph, it is not possible to identify
other non-linear relationships.
Figure 5.7.: Scatter plot of work engagement scores and the degree of FWAs usage.
5.2
Analysis of data
47
==PAGE:55==
Organizational commitment and Job satisfaction
Last, the relationship between organizational commitment, job satisfaction, and the
degree of flexibility is assessed. The approach is similar to the one applied for work-
related stress and work engagement to visually identify any linear or non-linear
relationship.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8.: Two scatter plots of organizational commitment and job satisfaction scores and
the degree of FWAs usage.
Both parameters are visualized in figure (5.8), as they show similar trends, which is
relevant for further assessment.
5.2
Analysis of data
48
==PAGE:56==
First, both job satisfaction and organizational commitment show a weak negative
linear trend, with scores distributed broadly around the tendency line. Second, more
interesting do both parameters show evidence for cluster segmentation concerning
the use of FWAs. This cluster segmentation has been highlighted using a yellow line
in the graphs. This indicates that there exists a non-linear relationship. Based on
the tendency test, it is argued that both parameters follow a similar trend where the
cluster/group with a medium amount of flexibility score the lowest, meaning having
the highest amount of job satisfaction and organizational commitment.
It is still critical to remember that this only is an assumption based on visual identi-
fication. A mathematical test will be necessary if cluster segmentation is present in
the data and to test if there is any significant difference between these. What can be
concluded based on this test is that there does not exist any clear evidence for any
linear relationship between the four parameters and the degree of flexibility. However,
interesting non-linear relations have been identified, which will be further assessed.
5.2.3 Cluster segmentation
The following section will elaborate on the identified non-linear relationship from
the previous tendency test. This will explore the relationship by applying the manual
machine learning algorithm k-means, making it possible to build mathematical proof
for the visually identified cluster segmentation.
K-means is one of the most used clustering algorithms due to its simplicity and accuracy,
which is why it has been chosen for this study. It is an iterative algorithm and works by
assigning data points to a cluster until the sum of the squared distance between the
data points is at the minimum. The smaller the variation within the clusters, the more
similar the data points are within the same cluster (Hastie et al., 2001).
Given K number of clusters, k-means can be described with the following five
steps:
1. Randomly assign K clusters to the data-set.
2. Compute mean values for each cluster.
3. Compute the sum of the squared distance between each data points in k clusters.
5.2
Analysis of data
49
==PAGE:57==
4. Assign each data point to the new nearest cluster.
5. Validate the summed of squared distance for each data iteration, if step changes
stagnate, stop the algorithm if not go back to step 3
The rest of the section will follow this five-point structure, starting with the number
of clusters K. Even though it might be possible to choose a number of clusters based
on the scatter plots above. To build a robust and objective analysis, it is critical that
the optimal number of clusters are selected with a structured approach. For this thesis,
the method known as the "elbow" method is applied due to its well-documented effect.
The "elbow" method was first described by (Tryon, 1939) and works by assessing the
sum of the squared distance for all clusters (SSE), by that measuring the compactness
of the clustering, which should be as low as possible. The optimal number of clusters
are chosen so that adding another cluster does not improve the total SSE much better.
Therefore the name, as this point on a visualized graph, would be the "elbow" point
In figure (5.9) the "elbow" method has been applied and visualised. With yellow, the
elbow has been pointed out, which is between two and three clusters. As the method
intends to find the optimal number of clusters with the lowest SSE possible, the optimal
number of clusters is therefore selected to be three.
Figure 5.9.: The "elbow" method for optimal cluster identification visualised.
Data preparation was done before the actual k-means segmentation was performed.
Data for job satisfaction and organizational commitment was combined, and work
engagement work-related stress was excluded for now. Since these two parameters do
not hold any significant trends, as shown in the trend test.
5.2
Analysis of data
50
==PAGE:58==
Their contribution only would mask or hide any relevant results. Before outlining the
iterations steps, it is relevant to describe that in the end, four iterations were made in
assigning the three clusters, which can be seen as visualized in figure (5.10), where
the sum of the squared distance for each data iteration is shown. From this, it is clear
that the step changes stagnate from iteration four and that the algorithm has reached
its final stage.
Figure 5.10.: The summed of squared distance for each data iteration in the k-means algo-
rithm.
The k-means algorithm was performed manually in excel, the central elements and
layout will be outlined below. Step 1 was to assign all data points to a cluster randomly;
this can be seen in table (5.3,a), where the initial cluster was based on the overall
minimum, mean and maximum values. From here, the next step two was to assign
each data point to its nearest cluster. This was done by calculating the sum of the
difference of squares for each cluster and assigning the data point to the lowest value.
This procedure can be found in table (5.3,b), where the blue cells indicate that data
points 1, 2, and 3 have been assigned to clusters three and 140, 141, and 142 to cluster
one.
After the first cluster iteration, the SSE was calculated to 266, which functions as the
reference point for the following iterations. The next step was to perform another
iteration, found in table (5.4). Here, it is possible to see that the new cluster means
are calculated based on the first random assigned nearest cluster. From here, the data
points was paired with their new nearest cluster, and this process continued until the
SSE stagnated at around 180 see figure (5.10). The final iteration table can be found
in table (5.5) below.
5.2
Analysis of data
51
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
Table 5.3.: Initial first cluster assignment and iteration.
Table 5.4.: Second k-means iteration table.
The goal of this test was to find mathematical proof that cluster segmentation is present
within the dataset and that this segmentation would fit approximately the assumption
from the tendency test. Which are that a cluster segmentation could potentially exist
between people who experience low, medium, and high use of FWAs in their daily
work. Additionally, if a clear segmentation should exist, it is relevant to identify the
splits and ranges so that a later statistical significance test can be applied.
5.2
Analysis of data
52
==PAGE:60==
Table 5.5.: Firth and final k-means iteration table.
From table (5.5) marked with blue cells, the final iteration can be found, with the listed
minimum, maximum, and mean values for each parameter in each cluster. From this,
it is possible to identify that cluster 3 has the lowest degree of flexibility (0,00 to 1,50)
and the highest average scores for job satisfaction and organizational commitment.
Additionally, cluster 1 scores highest for both parameters with medium flexibility (1,33
to 3,33). Cluster 2 has the highest flexibility (3,50 to 5,00) and scores medium for both
parameters, between clusters 1 and 2. These outputs come more clear when looking
at figure (5.11), showing the three-segmented clusters. From the above k-means
segmentation, the assumed relation of having a medium cluster with the lowest scores
for job satisfaction and organizational commitment is confirmed. In the following
section, the identified and confirmed cluster segmentation will be tested statistically to
understand if a significant difference exists between the clusters for low, medium, and
high average use of FWAs.
Figure 5.11.: Scatter plot of showing the three final cluster identified from the k-mean algo-
rithm.
5.2
Analysis of data
53
==PAGE:61==
5.2.4 Statistical test
As it has been possible to identify and describe three clusters from the previous k-means
algorithm, the next step of the analysis will focus on understanding if there exists
a significant statistical difference between them. Figure (5.12) below sums up the
analysis up until now, where each parameter is plotted with each respective three
clusters. Cluster average scores are marked with grey, and standard deviations are
marked with yellow.
Figure 5.12.: All four parameters plotted with their respective clusters, showing average
scoring values and standard deviations.
What can be seen from figure (5.12) is that job satisfaction and organizational commit-
ment show similar trends as previously identified with k-means. The medium cluster
scores the lowest while the low cluster scores the highest. The previously identified
slight negative slope is visible for work engagement, while the slightly positive relation
with work-related stress can be seen. However, important for this analysis is the
standard errors marked with yellow. Since these show how broadly distributed the
data points are within each cluster.
5.2
Analysis of data
54
==PAGE:62==
The higher the standard error, the bigger the distribution. What can be seen from
figure (5.12) is that the standards deviations are big for all clusters, which makes it
difficult with the naked eye to tell if the measured differences are significant or not.
Therefore, the one-way ANOVA is used to validate these differences within the clusters
in the data set. ANOVA is a technique that can be used to compare the means of
two or more samples, and it tests the null hypothesis that samples in all groups are
drawn from a population with the same mean values. In other words, the one-way
ANOVA test for differences within groups of at least three. Additionally, as this study is
interested in understanding where the difference originates, the Tukey Post Hoc test
will be used. The Post Hoc Test is a single-step multiple comparison procedure and
statistical test. It works by comparing all possible pairs of means and then identifying
which specific groups’ means, compared with each other, are significantly different.
Both the ANOVA and Tukey Post Hoc Test are for this thesis, performed in excel. The
significance level was set to 5% as this is the common and conservative level. Setting
it to 5% means that any identified significant differences will be relevant for further
discussions and conclusions.
In the following subsection figures can be found describing the ANOVA and post hoc
test for each of the parameters.
Job Satisfaction
In table (5.6), the output from the ANOVA and Post Hoc Test on job satisfaction can be
found. To test for differences between the clusters, the P-values are compared to the
chosen significance level of 5%. If the P-value is equal or smaller than the significance
level, then the null hypothesis is rejected, and there exists a significant difference
between the three clusters. Looking at table (5.6) it can be seen that the P=value is
equal to 0,05, meaning that the hypothesis is rejected and that three clusters within
job satisfaction are not equal. When further assessing the relationship, the Tukey Post
Hoc Test works by comparing the q value to the F critical values. If the q values are
bigger than the F critical value, the null hypothesis is rejected, and the two compared
means are significantly different. Looking at table (5.6) it can be seen that Low vs.
Medium is the only comparison there is significantly different, meaning that there is a
significant difference between the low and the medium cluster.
5.2
Analysis of data
55
==PAGE:63==
Table 5.6.: ANOVA and Tukey Post Hoc Test output from job satisfaction clusters.
Work Engagement
In table (5.7) the output from the ANOVA and Post Hoc Test on work engagement
can be found. The assessment principles are the same as applied for job satisfaction.
What can be seen is that there is no proof for a significant difference between the three
clusters, and the null hypothesis is accepted. Furthermore, the Post Hoc Test shows the
same result with no significant difference between any pairs of clusters.
Table 5.7.: ANOVA and Tukey Post Hoc Test output from work engagement clusters.
5.2
Analysis of data
56
==PAGE:64==
Organizational Commitment
In table (5.8) the output from the ANOVA and Post Hoc Test on organizational com-
mitment can be found. The assessment principles are the same as applied for the two
previous parameters. However, from the ANOVA test, the output P-value is 0,01, which
is under the significance level of 5%. Therefore, the null hypothesis is rejected, and it
can be confirmed that there is a significant difference between the three clusters. From
the Post Hoc Test, it is possible to identify which of the clusters pairs are significant.
The Low vs. Medium cluster has a higher q value than the critical F value of 3,01,
which is why the null hypothesis is rejected. The two other mean comparisons do not
show any significant difference, though the Low vs. High are close. Interestingly, the
organizational commitment again follows the same trends as for job satisfaction.
Table 5.8.: ANOVA and Tukey Post Hoc Test output from organizational commitment clusters.
Work related Stress
In table (5.9) the output from the ANOVA and Post Hoc Test on work-related stress can
be found. The assessment principles are the same as those applied for the previous
parameters. What can be seen is that there is no proof for a significant difference
between the three clusters, as the output P-value of 0,88 is higher than the significance
level of 5%. Therefore the null hypothesis is accepted. Furthermore, the Post Hoc Test
shows the same result with no significant difference between any pairs of clusters.
5.2
Analysis of data
57
==PAGE:65==
Table 5.9.: ANOVA and Tukey Post Hoc Test output from work related stress clusters.
To summarize the statistical test of the identified three clusters, it is proven by ANOVA
and Post Hov Test that a statistically significant difference exists between the clusters
of job satisfaction and work organizational commitment. More precisely related to
the difference within the medium cluster, which scores significantly lower than the
low cluster. On the other hand, no significant difference was identified with work
engagement or work-related stress.
5.2
Analysis of data
58
==PAGE:66==
5.3 Final test of hypotheses
The final section of the analysis will answer the four main hypotheses stated in the
theoretical framework. The overall goal is to conclude the analysis in direct relation
to the theoretical framework and research question. This section will not discuss the
hypotheses tests and results, as this will be done in the following discussion chapter.
Below, the four hypotheses tests a), b), c), and d) are listed, based on the above-
outlined analysis, with the goal to either accept or reject the hypothesis.
Hypothesis A From the above described k-means cluster segmentation and later
ANOVA post-hoc test of the difference between cluster "low", "medium" and
"high", it is possible to identify a significant positive relationship between the
use of the selected three FWAs and score for job satisfaction. More accurately,
this relates to a significant difference between cluster "low" with 0 to 1 days
use of FWAs and cluster "medium" with 2 to 3 days use of FWAs a week, where
cluster "medium" in general is more satisfied with their job. When assessing
further, cluster "high" with high use of FWAs, of around 4 to 5 days a week,
show no significant difference with either cluster "low" or "medium". Overall,
this means there is no proportional positive relationship between FWAs and job
satisfaction, but instead, a medium usage of around 2 to 3 days a week is optimal.
Therefore, hypothesis A is accepted. From a high-level perspective, there is a
proven significant positive relationship between job satisfaction and the use of
the flexible working agreements working from home, Teleworking, and flexible
working hours, even though it is not proportional.
Hypothesis B From the above described k-means cluster segmentation and later
ANOVA post-hoc test of the difference between cluster "low", "medium" and
"high", it is not possible to identify any significant differences, either positive
or negative, in relationship to the selected three FWAs and the score for work
engagement. A tendency test has been applied by a scatter plot, which indicates a
minor positive relationship between FWAs and work arrangement; however, this
was not possible to further prove statistically. Therefore, hypothesis B is rejected.
Hypothesis C From the above described k-means cluster segmentation and later
ANOVA post-hoc test of the difference between cluster "low", "medium" and
"high", it is possible to identify a significant positive relationship between the
use of the selected three FWAs and score for organizational commitment. More
5.3
Final test of hypotheses
59
==PAGE:67==
accurately, this relates to a significant difference between cluster "low" with 0
to 1 days use of FWAs and cluster "medium" with 2 to 3 days use of FWAs a
week, where cluster "medium" in general is more satisfied with their job. When
assessing further, cluster "high" with high use of FWAs, of around 4 to 5 days
a week, show no significant difference with either cluster "low" or "medium".
Overall, this means there is no proportional positive relationship between FWAs
and organizational commitment, but instead, a medium usage of around 2 to
3 days a week is optimal. Therefore, hypothesis C is accepted. From a high-
level perspective, there is a proven significant positive relationship between
organizational commitment and the use of the flexible working agreements
working from home, Teleworking, and flexible working hours, even though it is
not proportional.
Hypothesis D From the above described k-means cluster segmentation and later
ANOVA post-hoc test of the difference between cluster "low", "medium" and
"high", it is not possible to identify any significant differences, either positive or
negative, in relationship to the selected three FWAs and the score for work-related
stress. A tendency test has been applied by a scatter plot, which indicates a minor
negative relationship between FWAs and work-related stress; however, this was
not possible to further prove statistically. Therefore, hypothesis D is rejected.
5.3
Final test of hypotheses
60
==PAGE:68==
6
Explanatory analysis & results
This chapter focuses on explanatory methods to assess the data set for additional
relationships, potentially supporting or explaining the insight and conclusions outlined
in the statistical analysis and results. This chapter will outline the explanatory part
of the thesis, therefore linking to the guiding research part C, which aims to apply
explanatory research thinking to the selected research model to answer what can be
learned from the results when designing the future of work environments. This is done
by first assessing the democratic and work-related questions related to the identified
three clusters in section (6.1) and (6.2). Additionally, in section (6.3) a new ordinal
regression model will be applied to enhance the understanding of the weight of the
variables in the assignment of clusters. Overall, the data exploration aims to build the
foundation to answer the second part of the research problem, see section (1.3), which
aims to understand how the insights and conclusions can be used when building the
future of work.
6.1 Democratic differences
A handful of democratic questions have been asked to the survey participants. It is
relevant to test if differences within democratic information can support in explaining
the behavior within the three FWA clusters and decision parameters. The first step is to
look closer at the age and gender of the respondent in relation to the three clusters. In
figure (6.1), this relationship is visualized by illustrating the average age and gender
distribution within each cluster.
What can be seen from figure (6.1), is that there seems to be no apparent difference
between the three clusters in terms of gender. Cluster "low" is entirely even with 50/50
distribution, while cluster "medium" and "high" have minor differences with either +/-
six percent point. Additionally, it can be seen from the figure that the cluster "medium"
has the lowest average age compared to the two others, which have an even average
age.
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.1.: Box plot showing the average age and gender distribution within each FWA cluster
across all decisions parameters.
Next, the impact of kids living at home is assessed. It is relevant to test as it is natural
to imagine that families with kids potentially benefit from flexibility in their work. The
relation can be seen in figure (6.2), where the share of respondents with kids living at
home is illustrated in a circle diagram. What can be seen from figure (6.2), is that there
exists a difference between the three clusters in terms of home living kids. The share
is 12 percentage points higher for the "high" cluster than the "medium" cluster. What
can be considered is that this relation might correlate to the average age of the cluster,
where the "medium" cluster is youngest why the "medium" cluster has the lowest share
of people with kids living at home as well.
Figure 6.2.: Circle diagram showing the share of respondents with kids living at home, in
relation to the three FWA clusters.
6.1
Democratic differences
62
==PAGE:70==
This relationship seems to repeat when looking at the average work experience from
the respondent current employer, which has been plotted in figure (6.3). Here it can
be seen that the "medium" cluster have the lowest average experience. In general,
based on the three assessments of democratic differences, it can be concluded that
there exists no significant evidence for differences, which could explain the behavior
of the three clusters. However, it is identified that the "medium" cluster has the lowest
average age, why it naturally seems to affect both the share of kids living at home and
work experience.
Figure 6.3.: Box-plot of the average work experience and work types in the relation to the
three FWA clusters.
6.2 Future of work measures
As questionnaire participants have been asked into their opinion on critical factors for
the future of the workplace, including virtual management skills of managers, social
capabilities, individual technical capabilities, supplied home office equipment and
corporate flexible working strategies, see section (4) and appendix (B). The following
section will explore the relationship between these factors and the identified cluster
segmentation between low, medium, and high use of flexibility.
The answers to each of the five critical "future of work" parameter questions have been
computed into a numeric value ranging from 1 - 5 equal with the endpoints "very poor"
and "very good"; this is also illustrated in the top of figure (6.4), where the five critical
parameters are written to the left.
6.2
Future of work measures
63
==PAGE:71==
Scores are marked with light grey, grey and yellow circles, corresponding to the three
clusters. When looking for relationships within figure (6.4), then it is important to
remember the meaning the cluster "low", "medium", and "high", which corresponds to
the degree of flexibility, respondents within each specific cluster experienced. The score
ranges from 1 to 5 corresponds to the level of agreement; for example, if a respondent
experiences their manager to have a high level of virtual management skills, they score
five, while if they do not, they score one.
Figure 6.4.: Graph showing the average score for each cluster, within the five crucial future of
work parameters
From figure (6.4), it can be seen that the clusters seem to show some similar trends
within each of the questions on the critical "future of work" parameters. It can be seen
that the cluster with the lowest degree of flexibility, cluster "low", scores the lowest in
all five questions. The medium cluster score is in the middle for three. However, there
seems to be a difference between the two questions related to virtual management
skills and flexible work strategy. In these two questions, the "medium" cluster score
was the highest compared to cluster high. It is hard to conclude something directly
from this directly, but it sets the direction for the next step in the analysis. What
can be said from (6.4) is that with social capabilities, technical skills, and equipment
provided by the current employer, the score is proportional with the degree of flexibility,
and this relation seems some how natural. But, interestingly, the cluster with only
medium flexibility scored the highest in terms of virtual management and flexible work
strategy.
6.2
Future of work measures
64
==PAGE:72==
6.3 Ordinal regression of decision parameters
The last explanatory subsection aims to go a step deeper in understanding the influence
of FWAs, by building on top of the findings from figure (6.4) above. This is done by
applying an ordinal regression model to the decision parameters of job satisfaction,
work engagement, organizational commitment, and work-related stress in relation to
the identified critical "future of work" parameters.
Ordinal regression is an effective method when using rating-based data, such as Likert
Scale questions from the questionnaire. Likert Scale data might include numeric values,
but these will still inherently be categorical. For example, you can not choose 3.21 on
a Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5. Ordinal regression works by predicting an ordinal
dependent variable, in our case the decision parameter, given one or more independent
variables, the critical parameters of the "future of work" (Hastie et al., 2001). Different
methods exist to apply ordinal regression, ranging from manual techniques in excel
to software-based packages in Python or R-studio. For the following analysis, the
technique described by (Bürkner and Vuorre, 2019) will be utilized, using the MASS
package in R-studios for a cumulative logistic approach. The analysis has been made
in R-studio, and the final model outputs can be found in appendix (C) for all four
parameters. Below in figure (6.5), the output for job satisfaction can be found. This
will be used as a reference for how the output and ordinal regression analysis should
be read and understood.
Figure 6.5.: Ordinal regression output on job satisfaction scores, based on R-studio.
6.3
Ordinal regression of decision parameters
65
==PAGE:73==
From figure (6.5) the Y* function can be seen. The value of the Y* function predicts
within which of the intercepts the independent variables belong to. This means that if
the Y* value is lower than -2,15 then the predicted score for job satisfaction is 1, and if
the Y* value is higher than -2,15 but lower than -0,43 then the predicted score for job
satisfaction is 2, and so on. The Y* functions itself depends on the coefficient values,
where a coefficient value of 0 corresponds to no relationship between the variables. A
negative value lower than -0,2 corresponds to a positive relation, and a positive value
greater than 0,2 corresponds to a negative relationship.
The ordinal regression’s central element for this thesis is the coefficients for the critical
"future of work" parameters since these indicate the most important factors when
organizations are designing their future workplace. However, the numerical coefficient
values are relative, meaning that the coefficients can not explain the actual influence
but only relative influence to the other. To further assess this relationship figure (6.6)
can be seen below, which is a heat map comparing the "future of work" coefficients
between the four different decisions parameters.
Figure 6.6.: A heat map showing the ordinal regression coefficients for each decision and
future of work parameter.
6.3
Ordinal regression of decision parameters
66
==PAGE:74==
What can be seen from figure (6.6) is that it seems that the most substantial relative im-
pact appears within the same decision parameters, job satisfaction, and organizational
commitment, as it was concluded within the statistical ANOVO test, see section (5.2.4).
Additionally, it is seen that the nearest manager’s virtual management skills and the
organization’s strategy on the future of work have the most significant influence on the
score of the parameters. While the social capabilities and supplied equipment show a
natural to weak influence. Surprisingly, this analysis shows that the individual technical
capabilities seem to negatively influence the score of the parameters, meaning that
questionnaire respondents who validate themselves as technically skilled are also more
stressed.
6.3
Ordinal regression of decision parameters
67
==PAGE:75==
7
Discussion
This chapter will outline the discussion of this thesis. This is done by focusing on the
results’ meaning, importance, and relevance to the present literature. The goal of the
discussion is to build a strong argument in support of the thesis’ overall conclusion in
the next chapter. To create the most transparent and clear argument, the discussion
will summarize the key findings of the report in section (7.1), followed by reflections on
the interpretation and implications of the results in section (7.2), reflecting upon why
the results matter. Last the discussion will cover the limitations and recommendations
for future work, in section (7.3) and (7.4).
7.1 Summery of key findings
The following section will summarize the key findings from the thesis. The thesis is
divided into three parts, A, B and C, as it has been outlined in the research problem
section, see (1.3). This section will take starting point in the two main analysis parts;
part B that aims to create the statistical foundations to test the outlined hypotheses,
and C, the explanatory part, that utilizes different methods to create the foundations
for explaining the identified behavior.
Key insights from part B
The analysis was performed in a top-down approach, as a funnel, to narrow down the
scope of the analysis and create the foundations for a final statistical test of the four
stated hypotheses. The first step was to test most simply if a relationship between the
selected decision parameters and FWAs existed.
68
==PAGE:76==
This was done by testing how the sample of people who have experienced FWAs scored
versus people who have not, based on mean and standard error values. From table
(5.1) the final comparison can be found, which shows a minor difference between job
satisfaction, work engagement, organizational commitment, and the use of FWAs. On
the other hand, a slightly negative relationship between work-related stress and the
use of FWAs is identified. Even though the minor differences exist, the main conclusion
from the first test was that the distribution of the responses is too uneven, with 120
"yes" answers and only "22" no’s.
The next part focused on further assessing the overall relationship between our selected
parameters and FWAs to understand if a general trend existed between the four
parameters and the use of FWAs. This was done with scatter plots, which are shown
in figure (5.6). From the graphs, no significant trend was identified concerning the
use of FWAs and work-related stress and work engagement. As no significant linear
or non-linear trends was visuable from the graphs. However, from the scatter plots
for organizational commitment and job satisfaction, non-linear trends were identified,
marked with yellow in figure (5.8). The non-linear trend indicates that a cluster
segmentation could be present in the data, with optimal use of flexibility around three
days a week, where people, in general, are more satisfied and committed. However,
as the scatter plot test is based on visual indication only, the next step of the analysis
further investigated what this non-linear trend meant and if it was possible to prove it
mathematically.
This was done using the k-means algorithm, a manual machine learning algorithm,
making it possible to build mathematical proof for the visually identified cluster
segmentation. Using the "elbow" approach, the number of clusters was selected to 3
After four iterations of the algorithm the final cluster segmentation was reached, which
can be seen in table (5.5) and figure (5.11). What can be seen from the figures is that
three clusters of the same sample sizes with a "low", "medium" and "high" use of FWAs
are found. Exactly as is was assumed based on the visual tendency test. Additionally,
the k-means segmentation indicates that the "medium" cluster with 2 to 3 days of FWA
use a week is most satisfied and committed to their job. Since both the visual tendency
test and the mathematical k-means algorithm have indicated a segmentation of three
clusters, with optimal use of FWAs at around 2 to 3 days a week, the next step of the
analysis focuses on testing if there exists a significant statistical difference between the
three clusters. For this purpose, the one-way ANOVA and Tukey Post Hoc Test were
utilized, which are statistical tools used for testing for differences between a minimum
of three samples.
7.1
Summery of key findings
69
==PAGE:77==
From table (5.6, 5.7, 5.8, and 5.9) the final statistical outputs from the two methods
can be seen. What can be read from these tables is that it is impossible to prove any
statistically significant difference for any of the clusters within work engagement and
work-related stress, which are expected as the visual test did not either indicate any
difference. However, it is proven statistically within job satisfaction and organizational
commitment that the three clusters are different. Moreover, the medium cluster
within both parameters is significantly different in relation to the low cluster. In
comparing within the other clusters constellations, it was impossible to prove any
significant difference between them. However, a clear tendency can be seen within
both job satisfaction and organizational commitment, see figure (5.12), where the low
cluster has the worst score, the medium the best, and the high cluster somewhere in
between.
Key insights from part C
The next part of the analysis focused on exploring the data for other relationships
that could support and explain the above insights and conclusions. This was done by
analyzing the democratic and work-related questions related to the identified three
clusters. The first step focused on the democratic differences by testing the distribution
for age, gender, work experience, and share of respondents with kids living at home.
From this test, the age difference of the respondents showed some relation to the
three identified clusters, where the medium cluster had the youngest average age.
Additionally, did the medium cluster also have the lowest share of kids living at home
and work experience. Initially, no other trends were discovered in relation to the three
clusters.
Next, the data explanation focused on the future of work measures, which each
respondent has answered. From figure (6.4) the average score for each cluster within
each of the future of work measures is visualized. It can be seen that with social
capabilities, technical skills, and equipment provided by the current employer, the
score is proportional to the degree of flexibility. More interestingly, the cluster with
only medium flexibility scored the highest in virtual management and flexible work
strategy. It is hard to conclude something directly from this. Still, it set the direction
for the next step in the analysis, which focused on understanding the impact of the
future of work parameters on the cluster assignment. This was done by implementing
an ordinal regression model, which can predict an ordinal dependent variable, in this
case, the decision parameter, given one or more independent variables, the critical
parameters of the "future of work".
7.1
Summery of key findings
70
==PAGE:78==
From the consolidated heat map representing the coefficients, which can be found in
figure (6.6), it can be seen that the measure for the nearest manager’s virtual man-
agement skills and the organization’s flexible work strategy have the most significant
positive influence on the score of the parameters and cluster assignment. In the end,
the analysis made it possible to test and answer the four main hypotheses, which is
found in section (5.2), where hypotheses A and C are accepted, and hypotheses B and
D are rejected.
7.2 Interpretation and implications
The following section will focus on the interpretations and implications of the results
and reflect on what they mean in relation to the research problem and literature.
Interpreting what the results actually mean is a challenging but interesting question
to answer, simply because the topic in which the thesis tap into is the point of the
discussion right now. Moreover, new research articles on the future of work are
published every day, so many, that it can be difficult to get your head around (Harvard
Business Review, 2021a). The conceptual model presented in the theoretical framework
in section (3), therefore, is a highly relevant output from this thesis, not only because
of its use in selecting an appropriate theoretical focus for the methodology but also
since it in a simple way illustrates the complexity of navigating within the field of
FWAs post-covid-19. A challenge highlighted as one of the central contributes to this
thesis’s background and motivation since organizations right now stand in front of
the decision of how they should design the future of work. What is interpreted from
the conceptual model in figure (2.3) is that decision-makers not only can focus on
one criterion when designing their future workplace. Instead, it is of high importance
that the decision makers balance both organizational performance and individual
performance measures. Therefore, the conceptual model underlines the importance of
advancing further and creating coherent research on how FWAs impact organizations
and individuals.
In the statistical analysis related to part B, it has been possible to identify and signifi-
cantly prove positive relationships between two parameters, leading to the acceptance
of hypotheses A and C and rejection of B and D as described above in the section (7.1).
To understand and interpret what this means, the discussion takes a step back and
explores the relevant key insights.
7.2
Interpretation and implications
71
==PAGE:79==
What can be seen from the results is that there is identified evidence for optimal use
of FWAs within an organization in relation to the decision parameters, organizational
commitment, and job satisfaction. Practically this means that if a decision were made
based on this analysis, the optimal decision would not be to go with no flexibility or
total flexibility, but instead two to three days of FWA usage a week. This is a highly
relevant finding that contributes uniquely to the research landscape and the general
knowledge of FWAs. This kind of relationship has not been outlined in literature
before. In previous research on these specific parameters, as it is described by (Kelliher
and Anderson, 2010), (Harrick et al., 1986) and (Conradie and Klerk, 2019), general
positive relationship has been concluded, based on binary research methods, only
looking at samples from people who have or have not experienced FWAs. Therefore, by
measuring the degree of FWAs use, as this thesis has done, see the methodology section
(4), it has been possible to explore further the relationship between the parameters
and identify new unique behavior and contributions, which has not been described in
the literature before.
Another central insight from the analysis is that two hypotheses have been rejected.
For the decision parameters, work engagement, and work-related stress, this thesis
has failed to identify any significant relationship of differences within the data. This
is relevant, as described in the literature review and above, then general research
of the selected parameters showed a cohered positive relationship regarding FWAs.
To reflect on this, two central influencers should be taken into account. First, this
difference could be a product of this thesis’s lack of method and data collection. From
the theoretical model in section (3), it is argued for precisely these two parameters
that the measuring frameworks were shortened, which may have influenced the lack
of relationship. Second, as it has also been covered in the thesis’s background, these
results could argue for a radical change in work behavior. The fact that this thesis
rejects the null hypothesis representing the majority of the current research landscape
supports the argument that covid-19 has changed the way organizations work with
and understand flexibility, why additional research to the future work would be of high
value for the future application of FWAs. This is not an assessment that can be made
hundred percent based on this thesis; however, it is still relevant.
Interpretations in guiding research part C is slightly limited; however, some central
indication is identified, which is relevant to reflect upon. Within the ordinal regression
model, it is found that the two criteria for the future of work, related to the nearest
managers’ virtual management skills and organization flexibility working strategies,
have the most significant influence on the score of all four decision parameters.
7.2
Interpretation and implications
72
==PAGE:80==
Practically this means that people who are most satisfied with their job and orga-
nizational commitment also tend to be the ones more satisfied with their leaders
and the corporate strategic direction of their company. This is an interesting finding,
which aligns with previous research from (Klindži´c and Mari´c, 2019), who argue that
to succeed with flexible working practices, organizations need to implement a clear
flexible work strategy simply because they find that the positive effects of FWAs appear
to depend on employee preferences and own choice.
From this analysis, it is therefore argued that if organizations should succeed within
the in-direct individual performance measures, it is essential that organizations ed-
ucate their managers to be able to deliver sufficient virtual management and that
the organizations take a shared corporate decision within their company, setting the
strategic direction concerning flexibility at work. Somehow these arguments also align
with previous work from (Kelliher and Anderson, 2008) and (Kelliher and Anderson,
2010), who conclude that they find the positive influence of FWAs being linked to the
employee’s decision power and degree of freedom. In the context of this thesis, this
means that for organizations to achieve the benefits of implementing the FWAs only
two to three days a week, which is found to be optimal, organizations need to create
the room for a sense of freedom by clearly defining the boundaries, in a clear strategy.
Thereby the results relate back to the research problem concerning how the identified
trends can be used when designing the future of work.
7.3 Limitations of the results
Even though any researcher would like to think that their research is perfect, even the
best research has limitations. The capability to pinpoint and acknowledge these is an
essential feature to demonstrate the credibility of the thesis. The goal of the section
is not to point out every error but instead to provide an accurate picture of what the
thesis can and cannot conclude. As many decisions have been made along the way,
this section will list all relevant points in chronological order with the thesis.
It is relevant to discuss the practical value of the scope of the thesis, as the thesis is set
to investigate the post-covid-19 work environment. It can be questioned if the period
in which the thesis has been written, in fact, is post-covid-19 and if the data collected
therefore represents the desired scope. It is an interesting reflection as the thesis aims
to create the most valuable conclusions possible.
7.3
Limitations of the results
73
==PAGE:81==
However, critics might argue that the outputs from this thesis only represent a transition
phase in the pandemic, where people still can not reflect upon the real impact of covid-
19 and flexibility properly. This is a valid critical argument, and potentially it could be
true. However, it is always easier to be hindsight, and right now in the present time,
either post-covid-19 or transition phase, it is critical to advance the understanding of
FWAs to prepare for the best possible future.
Another limiting factor to reflect upon is within the method chapter, see (4), where two
significant design flaws were made, limiting the data’s flexibility. The first design flaw
links to the choice of FWAs, set within three selected types as these represent to nature
of flexible working post-covid-19 the best. However, within the final questionnaire
design, it was impossible to differentiate between the different FWAs when measuring
the impact on the decision parameters between the different respondents. Therefore,
all FWAs were forced together in one FWAs cluster. Initially, this was not a major
limiting factor since the total impact is highly relevant. However, it would have been
interesting to be able to measure each FWA independently. This could potentially
have uncovered additional interesting trends in the data; for example, it would be
interesting to investigate if any of the FWAs have a bigger influence than the others.
Second, a similar limiting flaw was made in the distribution of the questionnaire, where
the same link was distributed to all respondents. In combination with an anonymized
research design, where it was optional for the respondents to list what company they
work for, it was impossible to control the original company source and assess the
difference between the two case companies. Again even though it is a significant
limiting factor, it did not impact the final results, as the selection of the two case
companies was made to exactly fit the scope. However, it would have added additional
value to the thesis if it was possible to differentiate.
In the data preparing section, see (5.1) it has been described how the data has an over-
representation of answers from people under 35 years, approximately 30 percent-point
above the danish industry average. This is a significant difference; however, identifying
the reason is challenging and can potentially be a product of many factors. For example,
that the research is part of a master thesis program, why other young employees might
find it more relevant to contribute and answer the questionnaire. Another factor could
be that the questionnaire has been distributed within offices in the Copenhagen area,
where the average office age might be lower than offices from other Denmark regions.
Overall, this did not seem to impact the results significantly; however, it somehow
limits the thesis credibility across different age group constellations.
7.3
Limitations of the results
74
==PAGE:82==
Last it is relevant to reflect upon the limitation of the explanatory section in (6). It
has already been covered briefly in the interpretation above; however, it still makes
sense to further elaborate on the limitation within this section. Since the last element
of the research problem asks what can be learned when building the future of work,
the guiding research part C was designed. The goal of part C was to apply explanatory
methods to investigate additional trends within the data. Unfornutally, it was impos-
sible to intensify any significant trends that could explain the behavior identified in
Part B based on the collected data. The limitation factors are the choice of method and
design of the questions; even though designed specially to enable the answering of
Part C, these did not create the required depth in the data. Alternative methods such
as structured interviews and focus groups could potentially have solved this limitation.
However, these were deselected in the method development for this thesis. It can be
argued that this limitation challenges the fulfillment of the research problem because it
is impossible to explain the identified behavior. However, it is important to remember
that some tendencies were identified within the section (6). Which at this early stage
of the research development of the post-covid-19, can make valuable contributions to
organizations and set the direction for future research.
Overall to summarize the limitations listed above on what the results can not tell
us. It is important to keep in mind that even though some flaws have been made
and limiting factors exist, the thesis’s final scope and results still are in line with the
research purpose and question. Which therefore makes the thesis a valid contribution
to the research field. The above-listed limitations are essential to be aware of as they
argue for the applicability of the thesis’s results. Additionally, they function as the
foundation for the next chapter on the recommendation for future work.
7.4 Recommendations to future work
Based on the above discussion on the thesis’s interpretations, implications, and limita-
tions. This last subsection will focus on and address the recommendations for future
work. This will be done by giving three practical recommendations for future research.
The recommendations should be seen as improvements for this thesis to meet the most
significant limitations and as ideas for an extension of the study, setting the scene for
future work.
7.4
Recommendations to future work
75
==PAGE:83==
1. Recommendation: is a natural reaction to the above results and limitations. The
thesis presents evidence for an interesting new relationship concerning the in-
direct individual performance measures and the degree of FWA use. As the results
from this thesis are based on a new approach investigating the post-covid-19 work
environment, a recommendation for further research is to increase the research
on this topic, to either re-confirm or counter-argue against this thesis’s findings.
Additionally, a recommendation would be to meet the limitation listed above
related to the measurement of individual FWA type contributions, which has not
been possible for this project since analysis on a specific FWA type-level would
significantly increase the value of the results. In general, it is argued that future
research and the scientific societies would benefit from focusing their attention
on how the knowledge related to new ways of working from pre-covid-19 can be
utilized post-covid-19.
2. Recommendation: is based on the results and outputs related to part C and the
explanatory parts of the analysis. From this, it becomes clear that the research
field of FWAs would benefit significantly from solid contributions related to an
explanatory research design. Furthermore, this thesis has shown that the key
to unlocking the application value of FWAs is based on the understanding of
why certain trends exist. It is, therefore, a recommendation for further research
to focus and advance to research model to utilize better and more structured
explanatory research designs, for example, interviews, and focus groups, since it
is assumed that these types of research and data collection would enable the data
foundation to elevate the research on the topic of FWAs and the future of work.
3. Recommendation: is related directly to interpretation concerning why the results
of this thesis do not follow the same general positive relationships, which has
been reported broadly across several papers in previous research in relation
to in-direct performance measures. It would be valuable and interesting for
future work to test the same principles within other performance measures.
For example, the organizational non-finical measures, as these also showed a
coherent research output. If similar results were identified for this study, this
would further argue for the assumption that the covid-19 pandemic has radically
changed how organizations work with FWAs.
7.4
Recommendations to future work
76
==PAGE:84==
8
Conclusion
The main problem statement is a broad and open question that throughout the thesis
has been funneled to a more concrete scope and proceeded through different ap-
proaches and methods. This has been done by developing a detailed literature review,
making it possible to create a valid argument for focusing on a specific area within
individual in-direct performance measures.
The thesis concludes in relation to the problem statement that within a selected theoret-
ical scope of in-direct individual performance measures, a group of FWAs consisting of
the working types working from home, teleworking and flexible working hours is proven
to impact job satisfaction and organizational commitment for knowledge workers in
industrial organizations significantly. The evidence is based on k-means clustering
segmentation, which argues for an optimal use of FWAs of around two to three days a
week, where employees are the most satisfied and committed to their job. Additionally,
the thesis has failed to intensify evidence for a significant impact of the same group
of FWAs on the in-direct individual performance measures of work engagement and
work-related stress.
Overall the thesis concludes that the results differentiate from the general conclusions
in previous research on the impact of FWAs on performance measures, where previous
research across several research papers conclude a generally positive relationship
between the use of FWAs and individual performance measures. This thesis concludes
that the contribution and results related to k-means clustering and the identification of
evidence for optimal use of FWAs are unique and new contribution which has not been
identified and explored before.
77
==PAGE:85==
In cooperation with the statistical results, the thesis concludes the need for organiza-
tions to emphasize and implement corporate flexible working strategies and prepare
their employees for a post-covid-19 working environment where FWAs inevitably will
be more present. This conclusion is based on a thorough review of the literature and
the structuring of key insight in a conceptual theoretical model, highlighting the com-
plexity of balancing individual- and organizational performance measures. Additionally,
an explanatory ordinal regression model has identified the criteria for a manager’s
virtual management skills and organization’s corporate flexible strategy to have the
most significant influence in achieving the identified benefits on job satisfaction and
organizational commitment when implementing FWAs.
Even though limitations are present within the thesis related to data collection and
the capabilities of explaining the identified trends at a preferred level. The thesis is
argued as a valid contribution to the research field of FWAs since it enables a deeper
understanding of the relationship between FWAs and individual performance measures
while giving structured recommendations for organizations in how they can design
their company to archive the identified benefits.
Thereby, the conclusion leads back to the overall background and purpose of the thesis
related to whether findings from before covid-19 still apply in the present time and
can be used as an argument when building the future of work. This thesis concludes
that further research on FWAs is needed to fully understand how to design the future
of workplaces. However, indications show that findings pre-covid-19 don’t apply in the
future post-covid-19 work environment.
78
==PAGE:86==
9
Bibliography
Atlassian (2021). A retrospective on the history of work.
Azeem, Muhammad Masood and Bernice Kotey (2021). „Innovation in SMEs: the role
of flexible work arrangements and market competition“. In: International Journal of
Human Resource Management, pp. 1–36.
Baltes, Boris B., Thomas E. Briggs, Joseph W. Huff, Julie A. Wright, and George A.
Neuman (Aug. 1999). „Flexible and compressed workweek schedules: A meta-
analysis of their effects on work-related criteria“. In: Journal of Applied Psychology
84.4, pp. 496–513.
BCG (2021). The Future of Work.
Bloomberg (2021). Why the Future of Work Is About Flexibility and Choice.
Bürkner, Paul-Christian and Matti Vuorre (Mar. 2019). „Ordinal Regression Models in
Psychology: A Tutorial“. In: Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science
2.1, pp. 77–101.
Conradie, Wilhelmus J. and Jeremias J. de Klerk (2019). „To flex or not to flex? Flexible
work arrangements amongst software developers in an emerging economy“. In: SA
Journal of Human Resource Management 17, pp. 1–12.
Cook, John and Toby Wall (1980). New work attitude measures of trust, organizational
commitment and personal need non-fulfilment. Tech. rep., pp. 39–52.
Danfoss (2020). Danfoss Annual Report 2020.
Danmarks Radio (2020). Corona-tiltag: Elever og studerende på alle uddannelsesinstitu-
tioner sendes hjem nu.
Dansk-Statistik (2020). Beskæftigede efter køn, branche (DSE77), alder og tid. Fordelt
efter Antal og Procent.
De Menezes, Lilian M. and Clare Kelliher (Dec. 2011). „Flexible working and perfor-
mance: A systematic review of the evidence for a business case“. In: International
Journal of Management Reviews 13.4, pp. 452–474.
DI Business (2020). Mere hjemmearbejde på vej i mange virksomheder.
Economist (2021). The rise of working from home.
Frank, Knight (2021). A History of the Office: What Has and Hasn’t Changed.
79
==PAGE:87==
Golembiewski, Robert T., Rick Hilles, and Munro S. Kagno (1974). „A Longitudinal
Study of Flexi-Time Effects: Some Consequences of an OD Structural Intervention“.
eng. In: Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 10.4, pp. 503–532.
Groen, Bianca AC, Sander P Van Triest, Michael Coers, and Neeke Wtenweerde (2018).
„Managing flexible work arrangements: Teleworking and output controls“. In: Euro-
pean Management Journal 36.6, pp. 727–735.
Hansen, Claus Thorp, Birgitte Rasmussen, and Hector Nøhr Hinz (2010). „Learning
Objectives for Master’s theses at DTU Management Engineering: Notes of inspiration
to Master’s students who have just started working on their Master’s thesis, as
prepared for the Study Board at DTU Management Engineering“. In.
Harrick, Edward J, Gene R Vanek, and Joseph F Michlitsch (1986). „Alternate work
schedules, productivity, leave usage, and employee attitudes: A field study“. In: Public
Personnel Management 15.2, pp. 159–169.
Harvard Business Review (2020). How Companies Can Improve Employee Engagement
Right Now.
Harvard Business Review (2021a). 11 Trends that Will Shape Work in 2022 and Beyond.
Harvard Business Review (2021b). The Future of Flexibility at Work.
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman (2001). The Elements of
Statistical Learning. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer New York Inc.
Kelliher, Clare and Deirdre Anderson (Mar. 2008). „For better or for worse? An analysis
of how flexible working practices influence employees’ perceptions of job quality“.
In: International Journal of Human Resource Management 19.3, pp. 419–431.
Kelliher, Clare and Deirdre Anderson (Jan. 2010). „Doing more with less? flexible
working practices and the intensification of work“. In: Human Relations 63.1, pp. 83–
106.
KFF (2008). Employer Health Benefits Survey. Tech. rep.
Klindži´c, Maja and Matija Mari´c (Feb. 2019). „Flexible work arrangements and orga-
nizational performance – The difference between employee and employer–driven
practices“. In: Drustvena Istrazivanja 28 (1), pp. 89–108.
Kniffin, Kevin M., Jayanth Narayanan, Frederik Anseel, et al. (Jan. 2021). „COVID-19
and the workplace: Implications, issues, and insights for future research and action.“
In: American Psychologist 76.1, pp. 63–77.
Kotey, Bernice Adei and Bishnu Sharma (Mar. 2019). „Pathways from flexible work
arrangements to financial performance“. In: Personnel Review 48 (3), pp. 731–747.
Mangla, Namita (Apr. 2021). „Working in a pandemic and post-pandemic period – Cul-
tural intelligence is the key“. In: International Journal of Cross Cultural Management
21 (1), pp. 53–69.
McKinsey (2021). The future of work after COVID-19.
80
==PAGE:88==
McKinsey Global Institute (Feb. 2021). The future of work after COVID-19. Tech. rep.
Meier, Kenneth J and Alisa Hicklin (2008). „Employee turnover and organizational
performance: Testing a hypothesis from classical public administration“. In: Journal
of Public Administration Research and Theory 18.4, pp. 573–590.
Meyer, Christine Siegwarth, Swati Mukerjee, and Ann Sestero (2001). „Work-Family
Benefits: Which Ones Maximize Profits?“ In: Journal of Managerial Issues 13, p. 28.
Microsoft (2021). The Next Great Disruption Is Hybrid Work-Are We Ready? Tech. rep.
Miller, Herman (2021). Looking Foreward: Episode 1, embracing a more flexible future.
Parry, Emma, Elaine Farndale, Chris Brewster, and Michael J Morley (2021). „Balancing
rigour and relevance: The case for methodological pragmatism in conducting large-
scale, multi-country and comparative management studies“. In: British Journal of
Management 32.2, pp. 273–282.
Patton, M.Q. (1990). Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods: Integrating Theory
and Practice. SAGE Publications, pp. 169–186.
Peretz, Hilla, Yitzhak Fried, and Ariel Levi (Dec. 2017). „Flexible work arrangements,
national culture, organisational characteristics, and organisational outcomes: A study
across 21 countries“. In: Human Resource Management Journal 28, pp. 182–200.
Pew Research Center (2020). 44% of Americans say they talk about the coronavirus
outbreak most or almost all of the time.
Reinhardt, Wolfgang, Benedikt Schmidt, Peter Sloep, and Hendrik Drachsler (2011).
„Knowledge Worker Roles and Actions—Results of Two Empirical Studies“. In: Knowl-
edge and Process Management 18.3, pp. 150–174.
Renard, Karine, Frederic Cornu, Yves Emery, and David Giauque (2021). „The impact
of new ways of working on organizations and employees: A systematic review of
literature“. In: Administrative Sciences 11 (2), p. 38.
Rockwool (2020). Rockwool Annual Report 2020.
Rockwool Foundation (2021). Hjemmearbejde under corona koster på arbejdstiden. Tech.
rep.
Rose, Michael (2005). „The Costs of a Career in Minutes and Morbidity“. In: Work-Life
Balance in the 21st Century. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp. 29–54.
Saglietto, Andrea, Fabrizio D’Ascenzo, Giuseppe Biondi Zoccai, and Gaetano Maria De
Ferrari (2020). „COVID-19 in Europe: the Italian lesson“. In: The Lancet 395.10230,
pp. 1110–1111.
Saunders, Mark, Philip Lewis, and Adrian Thornhill (1997). Research methods for
business students. 6th (2012). Pearson Education Limited.
Schaufeli, Wilmar and Arnold Bakker (2004). „Utrecht Work Engagement Scale“. In:
UWES Manual.
81
==PAGE:89==
Schaufeli, Wilmar B and Arnold B Bakker (2010). „Defining and measuring work
engagement: Bringing clarity to the concept“. In: Work engagement: A handbook of
essential theory and research 12, pp. 10–24.
Schneider, Benjamin, Paul J. Hanges, D. Brent Smith, and Amy Nicole Salvaggio (Oct.
2003). „Which Comes First: Employee Attitudes or Organizational Financial and
Market Performance?“ In: Journal of Applied Psychology 88.5, pp. 836–851.
Shirley Parsons (2020). Work Related Stress – What’s changed over the last 20 years?
Stavrou, Eleni and Christos Kilaniotis (June 2010). „Flexible work and turnover: an
empirical investigation across cultures“. In: British Journal of Management 21 (2),
pp. 541–554.
Thompson, Karl (2016). What Percentage of Your Life Will You Spend at Work?
Tryon, Robert C. (1939). „Cluster analysis: Correlation profile and orthometric (factor)
analysis for the isolation of unities in mind and personality.“ In.
Väänänen, Ari, Michael Murray, and Anna Kuokkanen (Sept. 2014). „The growth and
the stagnation of work stress“. In: History of the Human Sciences 27, pp. 116–138.
Waples, Ethan P. and Meagan E. Brock Baskin (May 2021). „Not Your Parents’ Or-
ganization? Human Resource Development Practices for Sustainable Flex Work
Environments“. In: Advances in Developing Human Resources 23 (2), pp. 153–170.
Webster, J and RT Watson (2002). „Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing
a literature review“. In: MIS quarterly 26.2, 13–23.
Wood, Stephen and Lilian M de Menezes (2000). „Family-friendly, Equal-opportunity,
and High-involvement Management in Britain“. In: The Oxford Handbook of Human
Resource Management.
Yousef, Darwish Abdulrahman (2017). „Organizational commitment, job satisfaction
and attitudes toward organizational change: A study in the local government“. In:
International Journal of Public Administration 40.1, pp. 77–88.
82
==PAGE:90==
A
Appendix: Final questionnaire
The following appendix outlines the questions used in the final questionnaire in the
data collection process. To see the questions within the final survey design, the QR
code, see figure (4.2), will link directly to the online TypeForm survey.
1. Democratic information
1a What is your age group?
A: 18 to 25 years, B: 26 to 35 years, C: 36 to 45 years, D: 46 to 55 years, E: 56 to
65 years or F: Above 65 years
1b To which gender identity do you the most identify?
A: Female, B: Male, C: Other, or D: I prefer not to answer
1d Do you have any kids living at home?
A: Yes or B: No
1e From what country are your work based?
Write your answer
2. Work related information
2a Within what job area do you work?
A: Administration, B: Finance, C: HR, D: IT, E: Marketing, F: Production, G: R&D,
H: Sale, I: Legal, J: Management, K: Supply chain, L: Communication or M: Other
83
==PAGE:91==
2c Which of the following descriptions are the most accurate for your current employ-
ment?
A: Manager, B: Employee, C: Student, D: Part-time or E: Unemployed
2d For how long have you worked in your current company?
A: 0 to 1 year, B: 2 to 5 years, C: 6 to 15 years, or D: Above 16 years
2e Under the assumption that you have returned to work after the covid-19 lockdown,
which of the following flexible work arrangements do you use in your current
work?
A: Working from home, B: Teleworking, C: Flexible working hours, D: Other or E:
None of them
2g How many days a week do you work with "other" ?
0 to 7 days
2h How many days a week do you work with "Working from home" ?
0 to 7 days
2i How many days a week do you work with "Teleworking" ?
0 to 7 days
2j How many days a week do you work with "Flexible working hours" ?
0 to 7 days
2k From your perspective, has the use of flexible working styles, such as working from
home, teleworking, or flexible working hours, changed compared to before the
covid-19 lockdown?
A: Yes, B: No, or C: I don’t know
2l Which of the following descriptions on how flexible working styles have changed
do you agree to?
A: I feel the use has been intensified compared to before covid-19, B: I feel the use is
the same as before covid-19, C: I feel the use is less today than before covid-19, D: I
don’t know or E: Other
2n Interesting! Why do you feel that it hasn’t changed? Is it concerning frequency,
location, decision process?
Write you answer
84
==PAGE:92==
2o In your current job, how would you rate your experience of your direct manager
readiness and competencies for managing you and your team remotely and
virtually?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point very poor - very good
2p In your current team, how would you rate your capabilities to meet each other’s
social demands when working flexible in terms of casual talks, team events, and
team cohesion?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point very poor - very good
2q How would you rate your own technical capabilities to fulfill your job when working
from home or remote?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point very poor - very good
2r In your current job, how would you rate your access to relevant equipment and
facilities to do your work from home or remote? Fx computer, headphones, desk,
or chairs?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point very poor - very good
2s In your current company, how would you rate the corporate strategy and actions
on how your organization should build the future workplace post-covid-19?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point very poor - very good
3. Job satisfaction
3a Considering everything how satisfied are you with your job?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point very dissatisfied - very satisfied
3b Considering everything, how would you rate your overall satisfaction with your
company at the present time?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point very dissatisfied - very satisfied
3c How would you rate your present company to work for compared to other compa-
nies?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point very poor - very good
4. Work engagement
4a I find the work that I do full of meaning and purpose?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point never - every day
85
==PAGE:93==
4b When I am working, I forget everything else around me?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point never - every day
4c When I get up in the morning, I feel like going to work even though I might be
working from home or remote?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point never - every day
4d I can continue working for very long periods at a time?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point never - every day
4e I get carried away when I am working?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point never - every day
4f At my job, I am very resilient, mentally?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point never - every day
5. Organizational commitment
5a I am proud to be able to tell people what company I work for?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point strongly disagree - strongly agree
5b I sometimes feel like leaving my current employment for good as they don’t meet
my demand for flexibility at work?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point strongly disagree - strongly agree
5c I am not willing to compromise myself just to help my current company?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point strongly disagree - strongly agree
5d Even if my current company was not doing well financially, I would be reluctant to
change to another employer?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point strongly disagree - strongly agree
5e I feel like I am part of the organization even though I might be located remotely?
Likert Scale from 1 to 5, with end point never - every day
5f In my work, I like to do some effort, not just for myself but also for the organization?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point strongly disagree - strongly agree
5g A job offer with a slightly higher salary with another employer would not seriously
make me think of changing my job?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point strongly disagree - strongly agree
86
==PAGE:94==
5h I would not recommend a close friend to join my organization?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point strongly disagree - strongly agree
5i To know that my own work contributes to the good of the organization would
please me?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point strongly disagree - strongly agree
6. Work-related stress
6a I worry about work-related problems after work?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point never - all of the time
6b I find it difficult to unwind after work, especially when I work from home?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point never - all of the time
6c I feel exploited at work?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point never - all of the time
6d I feel exhausted after work?
Likert Scale from 1 to 7, with end point never - all of the time
7. Survey closing information
7a What company are you working for??
Write your answer
6b The conclusion and insights on how working from home impacts you and your
organization will be consolidated and distributed to all interested survey partici-
pants. Do you want to increase your knowledge of the future of work??
A: Yes or B: No
6c Thank you. You can leave your mail below
Write your email
87
==PAGE:95==
B
Appendix: FWAs in the future
work place
Appendix B reflects upon the critical factor for FWAs in the future workplace. Below
general reflection is shared, and in the end, the five most prominent factors are
described and outlined.
Financial and consulting institutions emphasize their research on the future of work,
which is of high importance for their clients and markets. Some of these institutions
include articles from (Bloomberg, 2021. Economist, 2021. Harvard Business Review,
2021b. McKinsey, 2021. BCG, 2021) and even podcasts cover the topic (Miller, 2021).
The following descriptions below will be based on a consolidated summary of the key
insight from the above-listed sources.
Several articles argue that the covid-19 pandemic can be seen as a catalyzer for a
significant change in how organizations work with flexibility, which has been discussed
for several years. Previously flexibility was implemented for different purposes. Ex-
amples could be the employer-driven night shift and weekend work, which could
help organizations increase capacity, to the employee-driven agreements as work from
home or flextime, which helped balance out work-life issues.Equal for all was that
they were either part of the job description or an employee benefit, which meant that
the involved stakeholders, employees, and their managers, had agreed to it. Before
the pandemic, FWAs were normal and fully implemented in many organizations but
still only available for some knowledge workers in developed economies (Bloomberg,
2021). The most significant change in how organizations are expected to work with
FWAs is that employees in the future will see flexibility as a key criterion for their
employment. Therefore if organizations want to secure a strong workforce, they will
need to build a clear strategy for how they deal with flexibility and implement (Miller,
2021, and Microsoft, 2021). The rapid change in how work is done has put pressure
on the organizations and their leaders to make the right decisions. Some of the central
challenges related to FWAs are that these don’t work the same way anymore. It is
argued that FWAs are not only for the few with relevant job specifications. Instead,
88
==PAGE:96==
everyone is forced into flexibility, meaning that job types where more work depends
on human interactions and creativity, for example, communication and innovation
have to rethink the way they work. FWAs are also no longer only established based on
agreements between all stakeholders. Instead, managers and employees can be forced
into FWAs against their will, for example, if an organization takes a corporate decision
on how the company deals with flexibility. Last, it can be argued that FWAs are not
only either employee or employer-driven anymore, as it has been stated above, instead
an external force is a primary driver in these agreements.
Overall, there seems to be a common agreement between research that flexible work
is here to stay and that organizations and people would benefit if they adapt as fast
as possible. To tackle this challenge (BCG, 2021) has published a handful of in-depth
research articles in 2021 on the topic, covering the critical criteria for a successful
flexible future. These include:
1 The virtual management skills of middle managers in organizations, as all managers
have converted from daily in-office management to either full virtual management
of their employees or hybrid management. This puts significant stress on the
managers and requires specific skills for the managers to do their job.
2 The social capabilities to meet individual social demands are critical for team
development and performance. Many teams and organizations have had to
rethink how they approach this over the pandemic, where friday bars and team
events have been moved online.
3 It is important for organizations to remember that not all employees of different age
groups or cultures carry the same technical capabilities in terms of adapting to
the virtual working style. Therefore, it is critical that organizations keep their
employees up to speed and capable of doing their job virtually.
4 Relates to number three, however focus on the equipment which employees use to
do their job. Some organizations think that it is enough just to supply a computer,
however the importance for a healthy working style related to the chair, table,
lighting, and food will only increase in the years coming, and this is critical to
build into a corporate flexibility strategy, which relates to the last criteria.
5 The importance of companies making corporate decisions and building a strategy
for how their organization should work with the flexibility of their future work.
89
==PAGE:97==
C
Appendix: Ordinal regression
output
Below the output for all four decision parameters can be found. To the left of each
figure, two tables are visible. These are the direct output from the R-studio model. In
the upper table, the names of the coefficients are listed, corresponding to the "future
of work" critical parameters. In the lower table, the intercepts are listed, with their
corresponding Y* value. At the bottom of the figure marked with grey, the Y* function is
listed, which is equal to the sum of product between each coefficient and corresponding
value. On the right side of the figure, a box-diagram outlines the score distribution for
job satisfaction and visually shows how the intercept values can be used to predict the
ordinal dependent variable; in this case, either 1, 2, 3, or 4 equal to the job satisfaction
score.
90
==PAGE:98==
Job Satisfaction
In figure (6.5) below the R-studio generated ordinal regression output can be found.
What can be seen from this is that the nearest manager’s virtual management skills
and the organization’s decisions on their hybrid work strategy have the biggest positive
effect on the score of job satisfaction within the respondents. Additionally, it can be
seen that the social factor, personal technical capabilities, and supplied equipment
have a minor effect.
Work Engagement
In figure (C.2) below the R-studio generated ordinal regression output can be found.
What can be seen from this is that the nearest manager’s virtual management skills have
the biggest positive effect on the score of work engagement among the respondents.
Additionally, it can be seen that the social factor, person technical capabilities, supplied
equipment and strategy have a minor effect.
Organizational Commitment
In figure figure (C.3) below the R-studio generated ordinal regression output can be
found. What can be seen from this is that the nearest manager’s virtual management
skills and the organization’s decisions on their hybrid work strategy have the biggest
positive effect on the score on organizational commitment within the respondents.
Additionally, it can be seen that the social factor, person technical capabilities, supplied
equipment has a minor effect.
Work-related stress
In figure figure (C.4) below the R-studio generated ordinal regression output can be
found. The behavior of the coefficients is different within work-related stress, and it
can be seen that no parameters seem to be dominating. Only the personal technical
capabilities seem to have a negative effect on work-related stress. However, this is still
is minor effect.
91
==PAGE:99==
Figure C.1.: Ordinal regression output on job satisfaction scores, based on R-studio.
Figure C.2.: Ordinal regression output on work engagement scores, based on R-studio.
92
==PAGE:100==
Figure C.3.: Ordinal regression output on organizational commitment scores, based on R-
studio.
Figure C.4.: Ordinal regression output on work-related stress scores, based on R-studio.
93
==PAGE:101==
D
Appendix: Learning objectives
& project management
Learning objectives
The thesis has been written as part of DTU’s Department of Technology, Engineering,
and Management, why it important to develop a thesis specific set of learning objectives
(Hansen et al., 2010). When completing the master’s thesis the impact of the future of
work on flexible work agreements, the student should be able to:
1 Organize and carry out a research project with a clear structure including project
statement, literature review, analyses and discussions.
2 Formulate a research motivation for assessment of the post-covid-19 work environ-
ment.
3 Outline and organize the present literature landscape on FWAs concerning perfor-
mance measures in organizations and for individuals.
4 Critically review the main concepts of measuring performance and selected theoreti-
cal focus for further analysis
5 Develop a quantitative research design that enables the answering of the research
problem
6 Establish contact with relevant research companies, to establish sufficient data
collection within the desired scope.
7 Apply and assess statistical tests to evaluate the influences on the selected perfor-
mance measures of FWAs.
8 Apply and assess explanatory tests to explore and explain potential identified results.
9 Report the obtained results structurally, comprehensively, briefly, clearly, in a critically
concluding way.
94
==PAGE:102==
Reflections on project management
The following section will briefly reflect upon the project management of the thesis
program, carried out from August 13th, 2021, to February 14th, 2022. Initially, a
project plan was developed and agreed upon within the project’s main stakeholders.
This plan is visualized in figure (D.1) below in a Gantt chart format. Overall the
development of the thesis has been able to follow the plan, only with one major
iteration in December 2021. In figure (D.2) the updated iterated version of the project
plan can be found, visualizing how the project intended to achieve an efficient last two
mounts closing phase.
Figure D.1.: Initial full project plan visualized in a Gantt chart, from August 2021.
95
==PAGE:103==
Figure D.2.: Updated two months project closing plan visualized in a Gantt chart, from
December 2021.
96
