==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS
Mater of Science in Design and Innovation
DESIGN OF AN APP FOR STUDENTS
TO MANAGE THEIR MENTAL HEALTH
Author
Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez (s192393)
Supervisors
Jaap Daalhuizen
Jakob Eyvind Bardram
Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET)
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Department of Design and Innovation
Kongens Lyngby, January 2022
Copenhagen Center
for Health Technology
cachet
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
DEPARTMENT OF DESIGN AND INNOVATION
 
MASTER THESIS
Master of Science in Design and Innovation
DESIGN OF AN APP FOR STUDENTS 
TO MANAGE THEIR MENTAL HEALTH




Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
s192393
January 2022
Copenhagen Center
for Health Technology
cachet
==PAGE:4==
Page IV  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:5==
Technical University of Denmark Page V
Summary
General health and in particular mental health amongst young has become of increasing 
topic of interest. The latest report from the Danish Health Authorities (Sundhedsstyrelsen) 
about The National Health Profile (Den Nationale Sundhedsprofil) (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 
2017) found that for Danes, “health is moving in the wrong direction“. There are significant 
problems with obesity, mental health, stress, anxiety, depression, loneliness,  smoking, 
and alcohol intake amongst in particular young people. 
The recent COVID-19 pandemic has increased the demand for mental health services 
and triggered mental health conditions or exacerbated existing ones like isolation, 
bereavement, loss of income, and fear (WHO, 2020). This has motivated an increasing 
awareness in universities regarding students’ mental health.
Furthermore, treatment of patients lacks continuous data gathering, and it is summarized 
in a few consultations separated in time, which makes it difficult for clinicians to get a 
better picture of what has the patient being going through during that period.
A mobile application has been designed with the aim of helping students manage their 
mental health. Creating a setup in which all the stakeholders involved in students’ mental 
health are connected, in order to provide new forms of intervention enabled by technology 
to promote healthy living as well as help students modulate their behavior.
The design process included a User-Centered Design (UCD) methodology in order to 
design an app that is helpful and engaging for the students, while it remains a useful tool 
for health professionals to better understand and assess mental health in students. Mental 
healthcare professionals and students are the stakeholders involved in the process, mainly 
through interviews. 
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Design and Innovation at the 
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a 
Master’s Science degree in Design and Innovation. The report describes the thesis project 
completed in the fall of 2021, corresponding to 30 ECTS-points. The content of this thesis 
is meant to be understood by a broad audience.
The thesis was developed in the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET), 
where the author was employed as a student assistant. And it was co-supervised by Jaap 
Daalhuizen (DTU) and Jakob Eyvind Bardram (CACHET & DTU).
Kongens Lyngby, January 2022
Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
==PAGE:6==
Page VI  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:7==
Technical University of Denmark Page VII
Acknowledgements
The author desires to express his gratitude to the numerous people that have provided 
counseling, guidance, and help throughout this project. Firstly to his supervisors Jaap 
Daalhuizen and Jakob E. Bardram, who provided great support and counseling during the 
feedback sessions.
Dr. Miguel Álvarez de Mon and Freja Petersen, mental healthcare professionals who 
provided the author with great knowledge in literature as well as very valuable feedback 
during the interviews.
Alejandra Fernández, Ashish Challa, Alejandro Guitián, Giovanna Vilaza, and Natalia Pérez 
and more students who collaborated in this project as participants, subjects, and testers 
of the app throughout its design.
And finally, to my family, who supported me during my time in Denmark.
==PAGE:8==
Page VIII  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Contents
SUMMARY	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
V
PREFACE	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
V
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
VII
CONTENTS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
I
1. INTRODUCTION	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
1
	 	
1.1 BACKGROUND 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
1
	 	
1.2 THESIS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
1
	 	
1.3 RESEARCH GOALS AND METHODS	
	
	
	
	
2
	 	
1.4 EMPIRICAL CONSIDERATIONS	 	
	
	
	
	
2
	 	
1.5 IMPACT	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
3
	 	
1.6 INTENDED LEARNING OBJECTIVES	
	
	
	
	
3
	 	
1.7 REPORT OVERVIEW	
	
	
	
	
	
	
3
2. CLINICAL BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK		
	
5
	 	
2.1 CLINICAL BACKGROUND	
	
	
	
	
	
5
	 	
2.2 RELATED WORK	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
7
3. DESIGN PROCESS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
13
	 	
3.1 DESIGN METHODOLOGY		
	
	
	
	
	
13
	 	
3.2 STAKEHOLDERS INTERVIEWS	
	
	
	
	
	
16	
	 	
	
3.2.1 STUDENT INTERVIEWS		
	
	
	
	
16
	 	
	
3.2.2 MENTAL HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS INTERVIEWS	
17
	 	
	
3.2.3 OTHER FEEDBACK SESSIONS	 	
	
	
	
18
	 	
3.3 DESIGN TOOLS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
19
	 	
	
3.3.1 USER RELATED TOOLS	 	
	
	
	
	
19
	 	
	
3.3.2 SCENARIO RELATED TOOLS	
	
	
	
	
21
	 	
3.4 PLAN	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
24
	 	
	
3.4.1 GANTT CHART	 	
	
	
	
	
	
24
	 	
	
3.4.2 ACTIVITIES	
	
	
	
	
	
	
26
	 	
	
3.4.3 MILESTONES	
	
	
	
	
	
	
26
	 	
	
3.4.4 DELIVERABLES	 	
	
	
	
	
	
26
	 	
	
3.4.5 RISK ANALYSIS	 	
	
	
	
	
	
27
4. PROTOTYPE	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
29
	 	
4.1 REQUIREMENTS	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
29
	 	
4.2 INITIAL DESIGN	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
33
	 	
	
4.2.1 FIRST TEST	
	
	
	
	
	
	
35
	 	
4.3 ITERATION. SECOND PROTOTYPE	
	
	
	
	
37
	 	
	
4.3.1 SECOND TEST	
	
	
	
	
	
	
40
	 	
4.4 FINAL ITERATION. FINAL PROTOTYPE	 	
	
	
	
42
	 	
	
4.4.1 FINAL TEST	
	
	
	
	
	
	
46
	 	
4.5 INTERVENTIONS	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
47
	 	
4.6 DATA COLLECTION	
	
	
	
	
	
	
49
5. DISCUSSION	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
53
	 	
5.1 PERSONAL REFLECTION	 	
	
	
	
	
	
53
	 	
5.2 FUTURE WORKS	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
55
==PAGE:9==
Technical University of Denmark Page IX
6. CONCLUSION	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
57
A. BIBLIOGRAPHY	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
59
B. APPENDIX	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
63
	 	
B.1 ACRONYMS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
63
	 	
B.2 STUDENT COUNCIL FIRST INTERVIEW QUESTIONS	
	
	
63
	 	
B.3 DR. MIGUEL ALVAREZ DE MON FIRST INTERVIEW QUESTIONS	
63
	 	
B.4 SYSTEM USABILITY SCALE	
	
	
	
	
	
64
	 	
B.5 HEURISTIC TEST	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
65
	 	
B.6 PHQ-9 QUESTIONNAIRE		
	
	
	
	
	
73
	 	
B.7 ROSENBERG SELF-STEEM QUESTIONNAIRE	
	
	
	
73
	 	
B.8 EAT-26 QUESTIONNAIRE	
	
	
	
	
	
74
	 	
B.9 CAGE QUESTIONNAIRE	 	
	
	
	
	
	
75
	 	
B.10 WHO-5 QUESTIONNAIRE	
	
	
	
	
	
75
	 	
B.11 PHQ-15 QUESTIONNAIRE	
	
	
	
	
	
75
==PAGE:10==
Page X  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:11==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 1
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
General health and in particular mental health amongst young has become of increasing 
topic of interest. The latest report from the Danish Health Authorities about The National 
Health Profile (Den Nationale Sundhedsprofil) found that for Danes, “health is moving 
in the wrong direction“ (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2017). There are significant problems with 
obesity, mental health, stress, smoking, and alcohol intake amongst, in particular, young 
people. 
This has spun significant political debate regarding mental health amongst students. 
Problems such as stress, anxiety, depression, and loneliness are commonly found in 
students.
The recent COVID-19 pandemic has increased the demand for mental health services 
and triggered mental health conditions or exacerbated existing ones like isolation, 
bereavement, loss of income, and fear (WHO, 2020). This has motivated an increasing 
awareness in universities regarding students’ mental health.
According to Danmarks Evalueringsinstitut, out of the 270.000 students in Denmark, the 
number of them suffering from one or more of the above-mentioned conditions during 
2019 is estimated to be 20%, above 50.000 students. However, the number of students 
that are currently receiving help from health-related institutions stays at 5.000 (EVA, 2019). 
This number is expected to grow up to 6.000 in 2020 due to the effects of the pandemic.
This big gap provides justification to the project and sets the aim to deliver a solution to 
the remaining 45.000 students, encouraging them to take action regarding their mental 
health and supplying them with useful and hassle-free tools. While providing mental 
health institutions and professionals with a tool that will provide them with useful data to 
better understand the mental health issues faced by the students and potentially reduce 
the mentioned gap without overflowing the mental healthcare systems.
Furthermore, the traditional treatment of patients lacks continuous data gathering, and 
it is summarized in a few consultations separated in time, which makes it difficult for 
clinicians to track the patients’ wellbeing during that period.
Using digital solutions like smartphones to collect real-time data about students’ wellbeing 
is rising as a response to the continued growth in the demand for mental healthcare.
1.2 Thesis
The main objective for this thesis will be to Design an App for Students to Help them 
Manage their Mental Health. To do so, the project will be aiming to create a setup in 
which all the stakeholders involved in students’ mental health are connected, in order to 
provide new forms of intervention enabled by technology to promote healthy living as 
well as to help students modulate their behavior.
Taking the StudentLife study (see 2. Clinical background and related work) as a starting 
point, in terms of methods employed and technology used, the focus will be to reformulate 
==PAGE:12==
Page 2  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
it with a user-centered approach: design an app that is helpful and engaging for the 
students, while it remains a useful tool for health professionals to better understand and 
assess mental health in students.
In this sense, the main problem to face will be to understand the process of student 
mental health management and the role that an app can have in that process.
In order to successfully solve this problem, some related sub-problems will have to be 
solved:
• Understand what are the most common mental health problems amongst 
students along with their symptoms and treatments.
• Understand what values are useful to collect both with automatic sensing and 
manual input. 
1.3 Research Goals and Methods
The goals to be achieved during this project are the following:
• Design a user-friendly app, employing a user-centered design involving the 
different stakeholders of students’ mental health throughout the process, testing 
the prototypes and iterating from the results obtained in those tests. For this 
purpose, it will also be important to understand and follow the guidelines for the 
design of health-related apps. Another critical point is to engage students in the 
app by providing useful feedback, understanding the reasons that lead a patient to 
drop out, and avoiding them.
• Design for data collection, research about the different types of data that can be 
collected and their use case, interviewing clinicians and understanding what data 
is useful for them to be collected, both by automatic sensing from a mobile device 
and by manual input by the user.
1.4 Empirical Considerations
Prior to the start of the project, the following empirical considerations were stated:
• The final outcome from this project will be a detailed user experience design and 
user interface ready to be coded and clinically tested.
• The users for the app in this project will be students from DTU with different 
backgrounds.
• The project will be developed in collaboration with COPENHAGEN CENTER FOR 
HEALTH TECHNOLOGY (CACHET). Additionally, I plan to collaborate with mental 
healthcare professionals in Denmark and Spain.
• All the resources in terms of software and hardware needed for the project will be 
provided by CACHET.
• During this project my role will consist of being the UX/UI designer for CACHET. 
Delivering a solution for students to manage their mental health.
==PAGE:13==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 3
1.5 Impact
The outcome of this project, when completely implemented, will provide an extra tool 
for health professionals and students to better understand and improve mental health 
amongst students:
• For health professionals, it will provide continuous data from students with 
mental health issues. This will help them get a broader picture of the circumstances 
surrounding these issues. At the same time, they will get a better monitoring of 
students regarding their mental health.
• For students, it will provide them with a tool to manage their mental health with a 
continuous assessment based on the data collected.
1.6 Intended Learning Objectives 
The Intended Learning Objectives (ILO) of this Thesis are:
• identify and define complex societal needs in order to design products, services, 
and systems that successfully address those,
• evaluate, transform and integrate design methods to fit design and innovation 
projects in complex organizational contexts,
• evaluate and reframe design challenges and problems to navigate the needs and 
interests of various stakeholders of different background,s
• apply user experience and behavioral design theories and methods apply theories 
of innovation, business strategy, and entrepreneurship to design project,s
• manage multiple stakeholders and priorities in design and innovation processes,
• plan, manage and execute multi-disciplinary design team working in a range of 
areas,
• transfer technology knowledge into design projects,
• understand and apply the guidelines for a design of a health-related app,
• and carry a user-centered design process.
1.7 Report Overview
The process followed during the design of a mobile application with the aim of providing 
students with tools to manage better their mental health is documented in the report 
following this order:
• Chapter 1: Introduces the thesis project, describing the background behind the 
project, the goals to reach, and the methods to achieve them, stating the empirical 
considerations, the predicted impact, and the intended learning objectives of the 
thesis.
• Chapter 2: Describes the state of the art of digital health, in particular digital 
psychiatry and the literature relevant to the project; then analyzes the work done 
==PAGE:14==
Page 4  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
related to the topic.
• Chapter 3: Describes the design process, depicting the methodology and tools 
employed during the project. This chapter also displays the plan for the project 
dividing it into activities, milestones, deliverables, and risks.
• Chapter 4: Introduces the prototyping process by stating the requirements 
extracted from the problem statement, research and user interviews, and describing 
the iterations and tests that will result in the final prototype. Lastly, it will describe 
the use of interventions and data collection in the app,
• Chapter 5: This chapter will discuss the master thesis project, beginning with a 
personal reflection on the thesis and setting a timeline for the future works in the 
CampusLife project.
• Chapter 6: The last chapter will conclude the thesis, summarizing the thesis by 
briefly overviewing the problem statement, process, results, reflection, and next 
steps.
==PAGE:15==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 5
2. Clinical Background and Related Work
This project aims to provide students with a digital solution to help them improve their 
mental health. In order to understand the problem domain and explore the field of digital 
psychiatry, the author conducted research into the topic’s existing literature and related 
work. The research is summarized in this section.
2.1 Clinical Background
Over one billion people around the globe are suffering from mental health problems, 
being depression the most common cause of disability worldwide (Rehm J, 2019). This 
represents the main challenge to be tackled by the Mental Health Gap Action Program, 
part of the World Health Organization (MHGAP, 2020). However, the enormity of the 
task makes it unfeasible to provide solutions to this problem with traditional in-person 
mental healthcare, this manifests the need for alternative solutions with the use of new 
technologies (J. Torous et al., 2021).
The use of telehealth has been growing alongside the technology that enables the 
development of digital health. However, the recent COVID-19 pandemic has propelled 
the use of digital health technologies. The use of these technologies offers accessible, 
affordable, and scalable interventions to complement traditional healthcare (J. Torous et 
al., 2021). 
Digital psychiatry is no exception and has experimented a growth in the demand and 
use of mobile mental health technologies. Smartphone apps, social media, chatbots, 
and virtual reality are examples of growing technologies employed for digital mental 
health.  These new technologies are already delivering results and transforming mental 
health care in new ways, providing a promising evidence base, introducing digital health 
technologies as a feasible alternative to traditional healthcare for the purpose of reducing 
the abovementioned gap (J. Torous et al., 2021).
The relevance of recent technological advances to mental health research and care like 
smartphones, chatbots, virtual reality, social media, and other forms of digitally-delivered 
psychological therapies, is already remarkable, being used for mood and lifestyle tracking, 
increasing access to care, exposure therapies, population-level monitoring, and self-
management of mental health respectively. However, the project will focus mainly on 
the use of smartphones for tracking mood and lifestyle data, and self-reported data to 
provide useful tools and interventions for patients.
Smartphones being portable, wireless, and affordable has gravitated towards being the first 
device providing internet access to a big percentage of the world’s population. In 2018, 
one out of four citizens of advanced economies owned a smartphone, this percentage is 
significantly lower in emerging economies (45%) (Silver L., 2019), anyhow, it still represents 
a high proportion of the human population.
Smartphones - and wearables - offer the possibility of collecting a great variety of passive 
data from users that can be used to construct health-related features (see Figure 1). To do 
so, it is needed to interpret what individual or combination of passive data provides what 
kind of signals related to mental health. Different studies have already looked into the 
translation of the so-called Digital Phenotyping and the utility of this data for the different 
mental health conditions (J. Melcher et al., 2020) (J. Rooksby, 2019). 
==PAGE:16==
Page 6  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Data collection in smartphones can be classified into active data collection and passive 
data collection.
Active data collection refers to self-reported measures and it is mainly represented by 
smartphone-based surveys like mood or questionnaires.
Passive data collection refers to the data collected automatically by the smartphone 
sensors. The list of smartphone sensors previously used in digital phenotyping research is 
depicted in Figure 1. Other sensors used but not included in the figure are the camera and 
the keyboard/UI (J. Rooksby, 2019). 
These two kinds of data collection are commonly combined in recent research, the most 
relevant example for this project is the StudentLife study, the precursor of this project (see 
2.2 Related Work).
There are other relevant examples of studies succeeding in the use of mobile sensing and 
surveys to monitor patients: a recent study used smartphones to capture rapid fluctuations 
in individuals with bipolar disorder. This study to monitor mood symptoms in bipolar 
disorder analyzed the feasibility of using a smartphone to capture the mood fluctuations 
with self-reported questionnaires and relate them to the activity behaviors reflected by the 
smartphone sensing. The study proved the use of smartphone technology as a promising 
way to collect clinical information that can be used for treatment decision-making while 
remaining relatively hassle-free for patients (KA Ryan et al., 2020).
However, other studies have benefited from the use of smartphones, specifically the use 
of social media platforms, where people often reflect their mood, thoughts feelings, and 
activities. Two examples of studies monitored patients ’ activity in Facebook and Twitter, 
two of the biggest social media platforms. In these studies, researchers focused the 
monitoring into observing social media activity of patients and analyzed the influence of 
mental disorders, including depression, in the behavior of social media users. The results 
in both studies proved how users suffering from mental health conditions modify the 
general characteristics of their language or the way they interact in social media (A Leis et 
al., 2019) (ML Birnbaum et al.,2019).
Figure 1: Feature constructions from passive data streams. J. Torous et al., 2020
==PAGE:17==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 7
Regarding patients, they are becoming more informed and proactive about their mental 
health care and many are seeking technology-oriented and self-directed treatment 
options (Alvarez Mon MA, 2021).
However, it has been proven that the interest of patients in this kind of apps decays over 
time causing dropout. This is an increasingly recognized challenge for health research, 
as low engagement and dropout hinder interpreting and translating the findings from 
health-related apps. Research has been conducted to calculate the dropout rates in 
smartphone apps for patients with depression symptoms, with a result of almost 50% of 
patients dropping out. This study discussed the possible reasons and strategies to follow 
in order to lower the dropout rates, highlighting the better rates of apps providing human 
feedback and mood monitoring (J. Torous et al., 2019).
As mentioned before, digital psychiatry is a still-growing field, and the recent COVID-19 
pandemic has increased the use of telehealth and mobile mental health technologies. And 
educational institutions are no exception: the growth in the demand for mental health 
services has affected universities internationally. In response to this increasing demand, 
colleges are seeking digital solutions to increase access to care (J. Melcher et al., 2020).
Recent reports in the USA stating that mental wellbeing is in continued decline (K Eagan, 
2017), or in South Korea where the increasing suicide rate is considered to be the hidden 
price of education (G Chin-Lun H, 2016) are some of the examples of the awareness 
around the growing issue. It is evident that the increasing suicide rate is a cause for 
concern. But students with less severe mental health issues should also be a cause for 
concern, as they are more likely to achieve less, have a lower life quality, and drop out of 
education (P. Brown, 2016) (J. Rooksby, 2019).
2.2 Related Work
The recent technological advances in mental health research, and care, the new 
technological capabilities of smartphones, artificial intelligence, social media and 
virtual reality are already changing mental health care. Thus, the breeding ground set 
by the pandemic situation has accelerated the process of incorporating new remote 
interventions. This, added to the emerging efficacy in self-management of psychological 
well-being represents an opportunity for new kinds of mobile mental health interventions 
(J. Torous et al., 2021).
In regards to the efficacy of these new kinds of smartphone-based mental health 
interventions, it has already been proven by researchers as a promising self-management 
tool for reducing symptoms of depression (J. Firth et al., 2017 I) and anxiety (J. Firth et 
al., 2017 II). In these studies, smartphone apps for depression and anxiety were analyzed 
by monitoring the progress of a total of 5.000 patients between both studies, proving 
that psychological interventions delivered via smartphone devices can reduce depression 
and anxiety. However, it also showed some other interesting results: the effects from 
smartphone-only interventions provided slightly better results than the ones involving 
other human/computerized aspects.
The app to be developed is focused on students, research about the willingness of people 
to use a smartphone to monitor mental health in the USA (see Figure 2), shows that the age 
group of people under 30 years old are significantly more interested than other age groups 
(J. Torous et al., 2014).
==PAGE:18==
Page 8  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
It seems clear that the youth is the more willing age group to use a mental health app. 
Furthermore, in terms of actual mental health app downloads and mental health app 
use, compared to the smartphone ownership percentage, the age group of under 25 
highlights again as the group with the highest percentage in all the categories measured 
(see Figure 3) (J. Torous et al., 2018).
Figure 2: Percent ownership of smartphones and interest in using a smartphone
to monitor mental health conditions by age. J. Torous et al., 2014
Figure 3: Mobile phone ownership, app downloads, mental health app downloads,
and mental health app use reported by private clinic patients. J. Torous et al., 2018
==PAGE:19==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 9
However, the same study showed a low percentage of mental health apps in patients’ 
smartphones, being only the 18th category most present in the smartphones analyzed, 
being games, social networking, music, and navigation the top four categories (J. Torous 
et al., 2018). Anyhow, having a mental health app downloaded does not necessarilly 
translate into the app being used, as mentioned before, engagement is one of the biggest 
challenges faced in digital psychiatry, and research about the reach, use, and impact of 
these apps confirms the statement (JE Owen et al., 2015).
The project to be developed in this thesis (named CampusLife) will be a continuation of the 
StudentLife project, the name of an international collaboration that involves universities 
from the USA, the UK, and EU (R. Wang et al., 2014). This study developed a continuous 
sensing app to monitor the impact of workload on stress, sleep, activity, mood, sociability, 
mental well-being, and academic performance on a daily and weekly basis. To do so, 
they monitored 48 students using Android smartphones during a 10-week deployment 
corresponding to a complete term at Dartmouth College.
The mobile sensing data collection architecture of the StudentLife Study relied entirely 
on the automatic continuous sensing of the accelerometer, microphone, light sensor, 
GPS signal, and Bluetooth. To measure automatically, without any human interaction, the 
following behaviors (Dartmouth College, 2013):
• Sleep: bedtime, wake-up time, and sleep duration.
• Sociability: the number of conversations and duration of each conversation per 
day.
• Physical activity: walking, sitting, running, standing.
• Location: where they were located and how long they stayed there (i.e., dorm, 
class, party, gym).
• Isolation: the number of people around a student throughout the day.
• Mobility: outdoor and indoor campus buildings.
• Stress: level of stress through time.
• Self-esteem: how good they felt about themselves.
• Screen time and app usage.
Figure 4: PTSD Coach use and maintenance up to one year after initial download. JE Owen et al., 2015 
==PAGE:20==
Page 10  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
• Eating habits: when and where they ate.
• In-situ comments on campus and national events.
The results obtained in the research showed significant correlations between the data 
obtained from the smartphone sensing and mental health and academic performance of 
the students. However, the StudentLife study did not provide any feedback to students 
to help them improve their mental health since focusing on the privacy issues to resolve 
was considered to be out of the scope. Nevertheless, it provided a solid ground to further 
develop the concept of adding mobile aided interventions guided by professionals on 
students’ mental health.
At the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), the institution in charge of students’ mental 
health is the Student Council, namely Studenterrådgivningen (SRG). They already work 
with digital solutions provided by third parties like MindDistrict, where students can 
complete modules recommended by the counselors or complete other kinds of activities.
Outside the academic environment, there already exist plenty of popular alternatives in 
terms of mental health apps. However, the popularity and ratings of these mental health 
apps do not always correlate with clinical evidence or even to the results obtained by the 
users. Recent research regarding the quality, effectiveness, and attributes of top-rated 
smartphone health apps provided useful insights to understand the actual status of the 
mental health app environment (H. Wisniewski et al., 2019). In this study, after analyzing 
120 mental health apps, the percentage of apps showing specific evidence to support the 
medical claims was surprisingly low as shown in Figure 5. 
To tackle this, mental health organizations like the prestigious American Psychiatric 
Association (APA) offer app evaluation models to rate mental health apps (APA, 2021). App 
developers and mental health professionals can benefit from this model and follow the 
established guidelines to provide patients with the best app possible.
Out of the existing repertoire of mental health apps, these are some examples of the most 
popular ones that have been tried out by the author for research purposes: Headspace, 
Intellect, Fabulous, and Habio. In general terms, the experience was positive, bearing in 
mind that the use of this app was purely experimental and did not last as long in time as 
it is supposed to.
Figure 5: App star ratings, attributes and medical claims/data by target disease. H. Wisniewski et al., 2019
==PAGE:21==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 11
Intellect is based on behavioral change, offering the user new ways to work on their habits 
and behaviors. It claims to be backed by psychologists and behavioral experts, delivering a 
new form of psychological training. Based on the experience as a user, the app was highly 
customizable, providing useful tips and modules for the users to improve in the selected 
areas. 
Fabulous is an app developed by the Duke University Behavioral Economics Lab. Claims to 
be a science-based app useful to motivate users toward their wellbeing goals by building 
routines and picking up life-changing habits. Based on the experience as a user, the 
app helped create highly customizable routines to get rid of meaningless activities and 
provoke a sense of achievement.
The Habio also claims to help the user to build new habits while offering a journal to 
improve personally and modules about wellbeing. Based on the experience as a user, it 
provided the same main tool as Fabulous, however, Habio focuses more on the numbers, 
statistics, and scores meant to motivate the users and trigger the sense of achievement.
Figure 6: Intellect app. Play Store
Figure 7: Fabulous app. Play Store
==PAGE:22==
Page 12  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Above all of them, the most popular mental health app is Headspace, focusing on 
meditation and sleep. This app claims to teach users how to relax, manage stress and 
focus their energy depending on each level in three minutes sessions. The experience as 
a user is positive from the beginning, with an attractive user interface design.
However, in relation to apps incorporating aspects of mindfulness, research shows that it 
does not affect significantly study effect sizes (J. Firth et al., 2017 I). Furthermore, a second 
research focused only on the Headspace app showed that after completing 30 guided 
mindfulness sessions, no evidence was found in the users to suggest that engaging in 
guided mindfulness practice for 6 weeks improves critical thinking performance (C. 
Noone et al., 2018).
Overall, the research of existing solutions provided a more complete overview of the 
mental health app panorama and provided a better understanding of the features 
commonly employed by these apps, their strengths, and their weaknesses.
Figure 9: Headspace app. Play Store
Figure 8: Habio app. Play Store
==PAGE:23==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 13
3. Design Process
3.1 Design Methodology
The design methodology chosen for this project represents the outcome of the author’s 
professional experience and the knowledge acquired during the Design and Innovation 
Master. The process has been approached by combining the Double Diamond method, 
the User-Centered Design method, and the Agile Development method. For the iterations 
during the prototyping phase, the Build-Measure-Learn method was applied. For the 
thesis writing and development, the Fish Model was applied.
User-Centered Design
Shared by User-Centered Design and the Lean Startup method, this methodology was 
followed during the thesis.
The empathize phase represents the research on the topic, the documentation read, and 
interviews with stakeholders (students and mental healthcare professionals).
The define phase consisted in setting the focus on the problem we wanted to target, the 
one we thought we were better positioned to solve. This phase also involved identifying 
the market needs and the environment into which it would fit better, as well as making the 
personas to target the solution. Examples of tools used in this phase are Personas and the 
Stakeholder Map, whivh helped define the users to target and the space solution.
The ideate phase involved brainstorming and in-depth interviews with stakeholders to start 
shaping the solution. A user journey map is another example of a design tool employed 
during this phase to get a more detailed overview of the space available for the solution in 
terms of the process of a student suffering from a condition related to their mental health, 
to define at what stage of the process will the students arrive at the use of the app.
The prototyping phase, together with the test phase involved three prototype iterations 
and three different tests to shape a better and tailor-made solution for students and mental 
healthcare professionals. For this matter, as mentioned below, the Build-Measure-Learn 
cycle was used. An example of a design tool used during this phase is the user story map.
Double Diamond model
The double diamond methodology proved to be a useful tool to set the pace and phases 
of the project. It divided the project into two divergent phases and two convergent phases. 
The divergent phases, discover and develop, are used to broaden and explore the solution 
space while the convergent phases, define and deliver, are used to take action and make 
decisions (Design Council, 2014).
The diverging phases of the diamond represented the exploration, problem identification, 
and understanding first (discover), and the development of the initial concepts, answers 
and in-paper sketches second (develop). 
Figure 10: UCD diagram
==PAGE:24==
Page 14  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
While the converging phases were used to set the focus and the problem definition first 
(define) and to iterate the prototype until the final solution second (deliver).
Agile Development
Weekly meetings alternating Jakob and Jaap as supervisors settled a suitable environment 
to carry an agile development. As the supervising sessions consisted of presenting the 
work done in the past two weeks, receiving feedback, and setting objectives for the 
next meeting, it allowed the project to be agile, dividing it into small sprints that will be 
reviewed biweekly.
This methodology enables teams to deliver value faster, with greater quality and 
predictability, and greater aptitude to respond to change (A. Srivastava, 2017). If to compare 
to a SCRUM model, in this case, the mental healthcare professionals will represent the 
client, supervisor Jakob will be the Product Owner (PO), supervisor Jaap will represent 
the Scrum Master (SM), students will be the users, and I will represent designer in a Scrum 
Development Team (SDT).
Build - Measure - Learn Cycle
During the prototyping phase, the Build-Measure-Learn cycle was employed. A total of 
three iterations were made, described in Chapter 4: Prototype.
This method works as a feedback loop, in this case, the feedback will be provided by the 
stakeholders’ interviews, and the author will be in charge of extracting the learnings out of 
it. This cycle is considered one of the core components of the Lean Startup methodology, 
and its goal is to turn uncertainties, assumptions, and risks into knowledge that will 
eventually guide organizations and businesses towards progress. When carrying a project 
through this process, the key unknowns can actually be transformed into knowledge to 
be used in product development (A. Belyh, 2019).
Figure 12: Sprint view
Figure 11: Double Diamond diagram
==PAGE:25==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 15
After building an iteration of the prototype, this was tested with students and mental 
healthcare professionals. During this process, other relevant feedback sessions were 
included (see 3.2.3 Other Feedback Sessions). This continuous cycle of building, testing, 
and learning gravitated to a more dynamic project and a more accurate solution.
Fish Model
For the thesis flow, in terms of finding the right balance between the theoretical part of 
the thesis and the empirical part, the Fish Model (Jakob E. Bardram, 2007) was followed.
Initially designed for Ph.D.’s, this model can easily be adapted to the MSc thesis. This was 
done under de supervision and recommendations of Jakob E. Bardram, author of the 
model and cosupervisor of this thesis.
This model was useful to get an overview of the process of making a thesis, to easily map 
the tasks to be done in a timeline in order to make a plan (See 3.4.1 Gantt Chart).
However, despite the figure, the actual thesis was written along with the project, not 
only during the last 1/6 of the project. The first set of deliverables represents the Project 
Figure 14: The Fish Model by Jakob E. Bardram
Figure 13: Build - Measure/Test - Learn cycle iteration
==PAGE:26==
Page 16  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Definition Report (PDR) handed in 30 days after the start of the thesis, which included a 
more in detail description of the project, the intended learning objectives of the thesis, 
and the plan to be followed to complete the thesis.
3.2 Stakeholders Interviews
A user-centered design process requires involving the stakeholders in the process from 
the early stages in order to avoid deviation and create the most accurate solution for 
the users efficiently. To do so, the methods employed were the interviews and feedback 
sessions with representatives from the key stakeholder groups.
The interviews or feedback sessions in this project were carried along the entire process. 
They will be described in the following categories: student interviews, mental healthcare 
professionals interviews, and other feedback sessions. 
3.2.1 Student Interviews
In order to get a better understanding of the issues that students are facing, and the 
interests they might have towards an app that could potentially help them solve those 
problems, a series of interviews with different students were set during the process.
These interviews were semi-structured and informal, as it was important to create an 
environment in which students could feel comfortable talking about the difficulties they 
might face during their studies.
During the first stages of the project, when deciding on the selection process of students 
to be interviewed, a question arose: is it ethical to ask the Student Council for students 
with mental health problems to be interviewed? And if so: Does the author own the 
necessary set of skills and knowledge to be able to interview a person with severe mental 
health problems?
After discussing with the supervisors about these questions, a new agreement was 
reached to pivot and interview students with mild mental health related problems as they 
were more commonly found issues and usually easier to speak about it, without the need 
for professional expertise or the fear of making a problem worse.
During the initial search for students to potentially be interviewed, it became clear that 
there were two important differentiating factors between national/european students and 
international students: while national and european students do not have to pay tuition 
fees and have access to SU, international students do not have access to SU or the free 
tuition fee. These differentiating factors clearly reflected on their worries and mental 
health issues (see 3.3.1 Persona).
The topics covered in the interviews varied along with the project. The initial interviews 
focused on understanding the problems from the student’s point of view and brainstorming 
on possible solutions. These interviews helped set the direction and focus for the project.
Ahead in the project, the interviews focused entirely on the solution, asking the students 
to test and provide feedback on the initial prototypes in order to iterate based on all the 
stakeholders interviewed. These interviews were the first touchpoint between potential 
users and the early versions of the prototype, helping in the design of a more accurate 
solution.
==PAGE:27==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 17
The level of detail of these interviews was higher than the initial ones, thus following 
Jakob Nielsen’s theory, where elaborate usability tests are a waste of resources and the 
best results come from testing no more than 5 users and running as many small tests as 
you can afford (J. Nielsen, 2000), only five students tested the app in each iteration.
In this theory, from the fifth test user onwards, the slope of the curve flattens, becoming 
horizontal and reaching 100% of usability problems with between 12 and 15 test users. 
However, this theory supports that the number of resources needed to test 15 users 
compared to 5 does not necessarily reflect the same rate in the usability problems found.
The concrete information on the conclusions based on the feedback from the interviews 
can be found in the iterations of the prototype (see 4. Prototype).
3.2.2 Mental Healthcare Professionals Interviews
Mental healthcare professionals played an important role in the design process, providing 
useful resources in the early stages and feedback during the prototyping process.
Two healthcare professionals were involved in the project, Dr. Miguel Álvarez de Mon 
(Alvarez-Mon MA) from the Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor in Madrid, Spain; and Freja 
Petersen from the Studenterrådgivningen (Student Council) in Copenhagen, Denmark.
The interviews with them were structured (see B. Appendix), but most of the time these 
interviews lead to semistructured or informal conversations where the interviewer asked 
questions that arose during the first part of the interview.
Similar to the students’ interviews, the topic changed along the process, while the first 
interviews focused on understanding the situation and how the process works, once the 
overview was clear, the interviews focused more on the clinical aspects of the prototype.
Figure 15: Number of usability problems found in a usability test with n users. Jakob Nielsen & Tom Landauer
Figure 16: Studenterrådgivningen and Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor logos
==PAGE:28==
Page 18  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Getting to know the student’s problems from a professional point of view provided a 
more detailed picture of the situation. It became clear that from the clinical point of view 
you can distinguish two levels of conditions in students: the ‘mild’ problems that can be 
treated by the Student Council and the ‘severe’ problems that are transferred to a hospital. 
This distinction helped build the student’s user journey (see 3.3.2 Scenario Related Tools).
The clinicians pointed out the most common issues faced by students, classifying them in 
two categories above, the ‘mild’ problems like stress, anxiety, panic attacks, fear of failure 
and worry, and the more ‘severe’ like depression, self-damage, and addictions.
According to the Student Council, there is a big gap between the students that are treated 
(5.000) and the students that are struggling with one or more issues (50.000). To tackle 
this, the Council focuses part of their resources on prevention, together with institutions 
they reach the high school students before they enter the university and ask them to fill in 
a questionnaire and assess their mental wellbeing by classifying their answers into levels 
of wellbeing and trigger mindset interventions. However, they are highly dependent on 
institutions to reach their students and it is not always an easy way.
From the moment a student contacts the Student Council, they arrange a first meeting 
to develop the profile of the student’s situation in terms of studies, financial, mental, and 
practical. The meetings are scheduled every two weeks, three weeks, monthly, or even 
only once depending on the needs of the student.
There is also a questionnaire ruled in the first and last meeting to assess their progress 
(emotionally, relationship and overall) as part of the feedback informed treatment 
employed by the council, a method to monitor clinicians’ performance that, based on 
research, when used on an ongoing basis patients are 2.5 times more likely to experience 
a benefit (D. Miller S., 2018). 
About the digital solutions employed during the treatment of a patient, the Student 
Council pointed out the Mindistrict as a platform for the students’ self-help, where they 
can complete modules on certain aspects, learn about different conditions, and even log 
entries in a diary. 
3.2.3 Other Feedback Sessions
The environment at CACHET provided a variety of professionals and experts in some of 
the topics treated in the thesis. Apart from the supervisors’ meetings, some other feedback 
sessions with developers and an ethics design expert were useful for the outcome of the 
project.
The feedback session with Giovanna Vilaza, an expert in ethical design, provided very 
useful insights in transparency and ethics in the design of the app, in terms of giving the 
user the power of deciding what to see in the app, giving them all the information they 
Figure 17: Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET) logo
==PAGE:29==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 19
might want to see about their participation and data in the app, and giving the users the 
choice of erasing their account at any moment and delete or keep their anonymized data 
for the clinicians. This was implemented with a prototype of an informed consent flow 
and by updating the profile screen.
3.3 Design Tools
Part of the design tools employed during the project are classified below into two groups: 
tools focused on the user and tools focused on the scenario or environment surrounding 
the problem and solution. Together, both kinds of tools cover the whole solution space 
and provide useful information and insights to build a better solution.
3.3.1 User related tools
An interesting analysis of the difference between a user and a persona was stated during 
the UX Design and Prototyping course: A user is an abstraction of a person interested in 
your system, vs a persona that is often an imagined person representing a generalized 
class of users vs an actor that could be also others than the primary users or even other 
systems (Per Bækgaard, 2019).
The following tools employed during the design of the app focus mainly on the users, the 
students, providing insights and more detailed information about them and their relation 
with the app in order to create a better and more accurate design.
Personas
In order to have a clear view of the targeted users in a design process, a Persona is a useful 
tool. A Persona is a character-driven tool, fictionally created to personify the real users of 
the solution. 
The following two personas are examples of users targeted during the design of the app.
Anne, danish, and Mohammed, international, cover the whole spectrum of nationalities of 
students in Denmark, with their different conditions and frustrations.
Anne, like other danish and european students, in general terms, lacks a huge economic 
pressure as they have free tuition fees and access to government aid like SU. These 
conditions reflect directly on their frustrations, more orientated to the fear of failure and 
leaving up to the expectations set by them and their environment. Other factors like living 
far from home, adapting to a new environment, or people, may result in some other 
conditions.
Mohammed, an international student from India, represents the students from outside the 
EU that are not able to get the same aid from the government as EU and danish students 
and have to pay the expenses of the tuition fee. Some of the students have to get in debt 
in order to afford to study in Denmark, which is undoubtedly a pain point for them that 
can lead to mental health issues. Thus, Mohammed is dealing with big cultural contrast 
in Denmark, not only in terms of the country, food, and climate, but also trying to make 
new friends is difficult for him, every course he takes he has different classmates, which 
makes it difficult to build relationships. He is a family guy, and living far from home without 
affording to visit his home or bringing his family here has been tough. Luckily he has 
found other students going through similar situations and they can support each other 
==PAGE:30==
Page 20  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
and gather every once in a while.
Neither of both personas created is receiving any kind of treatment to improve their mental 
health, they represent the gap described before (see 1.1 Background), and they could 
benefit from a solution that represents an intermediate step between not doing anything 
for their mental health and going to a psychology session or similar. In this sense, an app 
that helps students assess their mental health would be welcomed by them.
User Story Map
User stories are short, simple descriptions of a feature told from the perspective of the 
person who desires the new capability, usually a user or customer of the system (Cohn, 
M, 2009). In this method, the goals represent something the users want, and to achieve 
them, they will need to complete some activities, divided into smaller and more detailed 
tasks.
The user story map was updated through the process as the feedback provided by the 
stakeholders continued to change the activities. The final version is depicted in the figure.
Figure 18: The two personas developed during the design process
==PAGE:31==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 21
The user story map of a student using the app can be summarized in five main activities: 
check progress, have a diary, organize the week, learn about health topics and personalize 
the experience with the app. Each of them is divided into individual tasks. At the end of 
some of the actions, the student is supposed to reflect on the activity and do something 
to improve their wellbeing. For example, when completing Organize the week, the user 
must reflect on what activities are making him score low in mood and try to change them. 
Another example would be at the end of Learn about health topics, where the user must 
reflect and apply if possible the learnings to his wellbeing.
Some of the tasks inside the activities are meant to be completed only once, regardless of 
the number of times the activity is completed, this is due to being part of the initial setup, 
where the user is asked to make a series of choices. These choices can later be changed 
in the Personalize the experience activity. 
3.3.2 Scenario Related Tools
The second kind of tools employed during the process focus on the scenario where the 
solution is to be developed: the space for the solution and the relation with the users.
In order for a solution to be useful, it needs to fit into a certain environment. To explore 
this environment and build the scenarios where the app will sustain, two of the tools used 
were the stakeholder map and the user journey map.
Stakeholder map
The stakeholder map gathers the key actors involved in the product into the same picture, 
depicting the relation and the role they play in the map. There are four main stakeholders 
in this map: students, clinicians, the university, and the app (CACHET).
Students are the central character of the map, they are the users of the app and their goal 
Figure 19: User story map
==PAGE:32==
Page 22  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
is to assess their mental health in order to improve it. They may or may not have a relation 
with the clinicians, depending on their wellbeing and needs.
The university provides a link between clinicians and students, as explained by Freja in 
the interview with the student council, they do not have a way to reach students in the 
first place other than by each university. This leaves the university responsible for raising 
awareness and prevention.
Clinicians, part of the Student Council or some other mental health institution, are the 
only responsible for big interventions and severe cases, these cases can be identified by 
the data they get from the student using the app or directly by the student. This is one 
of the cases where they do have direct contact with students as they can be considered 
patients.
The remaining stakeholder in this map is the app, directly linked with students and 
clinicians, provides small automated interventions based on sensing and questionnaires 
and triggers, if needed, alerts to clinicians.
The central triangle of the map represents the eHealth cycle often used in CACHET’s 
projects to depict the relationship between patients, the healthcare center, and the app/
CACHET.
Figure 20: The stakeholder map
Figure 21: eHealth cycle at CACHET
==PAGE:33==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 23
User Journey Map
Other tools applied before like the user story, which is a short description of what 
users want to achieve and do with your system, and use case, that details the concrete 
interactions, do not provide a bigger picture. The user journey looks at the entire flow and 
experiences through possibly multiple user stories (Per Bækgaard, 2019).
Similar to the other tools described, the user journey map was updated during the process. 
After meeting with the healthcare professionals, in order to get a better understanding of 
the process of a student looking for help, following the information given by the clinicians 
a user journey was created.
In this first user journey, the student gets to know the Student Council by the awareness 
risen by the university and gets in touch with them to assess his or her mental wellbeing 
and situation. After this first assessment is made, the Student Council decides if the patient 
needs to be treated by the Danish Healthcare system or he/she can be treated by the 
Student Council. If the Council decides to continue the treatment with the student, they 
will arrange either physical meetings, workshops or zoom meetings with the student in 
the frequency they estimate is best until the end of the treatment. However, if the student 
gets worse, he or she will be transferred to the Danish Healthcare system.
The last user journey pretends to alleviate the clogging of students treated by the Student 
Council by adding an intermediate step between the student not doing anything and the 
student reaching the Student Council.
Figure 22: User journey map without the app
Figure 23: User journey map with the app
==PAGE:34==
Page 24  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
In this new user journey, the student, motivated by their desire to improve their mental 
health or wellbeing in general, and recommended by other students, the university, or 
the Student Council, downloads the app. In the case where the student contacts first the 
Student Council, after an initial assessment, the Council decides the treatment to follow 
with the student: transferred to the Danish Healthcare system, treated by them following 
the first user journey, or treated with the app.
Once the student has downloaded the app, he or she will follow the user story map (see 
3.2.1 User Related Tools) while the app tracks the process, at any point in this journey, the 
student can decide to contact the Student Council if he or she feels like the app is not 
enough help. The app will keep track of the process and trigger small interventions to help 
the students assess their mental health. However, very poor results in questionnaires or 
alarming sensing can trigger a notification to the Student Council to act. For example, if a 
student, filling a questionnaire, answers below a certain score in the CAGE questionnaire 
for alcohol abuse, it can trigger an alarm in order for the Student Council to contact the 
student.
After a trigger activation, the Student Council has to manually review the case and assess 
the procedure to follow with the student, either refer back again to the app, continue with 
a traditional treatment or transfer to the Danish Healthcare system for further treatment.
3.4 Plan
For the first deliverable, the Project Definition Report (PDR), a plan was established. This 
plan involved a Gantt chart, the activities to be completed, the milestones to be reached, 
the deliverables to hand in at the end of the project, and a risk analysis.
3.4.1 Gantt Chart
Figure 24 shows the outline of the Master’s Thesis project.
As stated in 3.1 Design Methodology, this project involved the stakeholders from the 
start of the project. It was crucial to get a good understanding of the problem and the 
environment surrounding it, to do so, six weeks were employed analyzing the problem 
domain by studying the related literature and carrying user studies and interviews that 
continued throughout the project. At the end of this phase, a clear problem definition 
was stated.
During the same period of time, the author worked on the PDR, as during the first month it 
must be submitted as the first deliverable. Certain chapters written in the PDR settled the 
grounds for other chapters of the actual thesis. In order to document the finding of the 
analysis of the problem domain, chapters like the introduction and the related work were 
planned to be written during the initial phase.
Once the problem definition was clear, the design phase began. This phase of the plan was 
divided into an initial ideation and prototyping phase, and two iterations of the prototype, 
each of them supported by feedback and testing. The result at the end of this phase is a 
final app design.
The last step of the plan consisted in documenting and writing these last processes in the 
thesis. This last step ends with the thesis hand-in and the end of the thesis.
==PAGE:35==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 25
Figure 24: The Gantt char for this MSc. Thesis project
==PAGE:36==
Page 26  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
3.4.2 Activities
The main activities and phases of the plan are the following:
3.4.3 Milestones
The main milestones of the plan are described in the table below:
3.4.4 Deliverables
This section provides a table of the main deliverables included in the final thesis:
Table 1: Project phases and activities
Table 2: Milestones. D:Deadline, TH:Thesis
Table 3: Deliverables. R:Report, SW:Software
==PAGE:37==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 27
3.4.5 Risk Analysis
The table below includes a risk analysis of the three biggest risks that could upset the 
project:
Table 4: Risks. 1:low risk, 5:high risk of delays
==PAGE:38==
Page 28  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:39==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 29
4. Prototype
During this chapter, the prototyping process will be described. Starting from the 
requirements definition, followed by the first prototype design and the first test, the second 
prototype design, based on the feedback obtained in the first test and the posterior test, 
and the final prototype with the final test. Then, examples of the logic behind some of the 
interventions will be described. And finally, a brief description and examples of the use of 
smartphone sensing by the app.
4.1 Requirements
Starting from the problem statement: design an app to help students improve their mental 
health; together with the literature read, the previous work and the user needs to be 
extracted from the interviews with stakeholders, a set of requirements was defined.
The initial set of interviews with the mental healthcare professionals pointed out the 
difference between self-administered healthcare, the one administered by the patient 
without the help of a third party, and hetero-administered healthcare, administered by a 
clinician on behalf of a patient. The focus was set on self-administered health care, aiming 
to provide tools for the students to assess better their mental health.
There is a wide variety of mental health issues that students face. In order to decide where 
to focus the solution design, the mental healthcare professionals were asked to identify 
the most common issues that students can tackle by themselves os together with the 
Student Council. They identified the five most common problems: stress, anxiety, panic 
attacks, fear of failure, and worry.
Out of these initial interviews, the mental healthcare professionals described some of the 
tools they use with patients or they encourage patients to use in order to tackle these 
problems. Both of the clinicians agreed on how it is beneficial for the patients to have 
a diary where they can reflect on their day, and how these diaries are afterward useful 
in the appointments with patients to get an overview of their wellbeing since the last 
appointment. Patients often, when asked about how they have been feeling for a long 
period tend to be biased by their latest feelings.
Another solution employed by the Student Council in the treatment of students with 
the abovementioned problems is provided by the online platform Minddistrict, which 
offers the patient modules focused on topics they might be struggling with (i.e.: sleep, 
exam anxiety, etc). These modules combine information about these topics with useful 
exercises and practices for the students to apply in their lives.
About the mental health problems suffered by students, in order to decide where to set 
the focus in, during the initial interviews, clinicians were asked about the treatments they 
would follow with patients suffering from each of these conditions if they had to treat 
them telematically. After analyzing the different treatments it became clear that the five 
most common conditions shared the same structure in terms of treatment, only differing 
in the questionnaires to be sent and the modules to be recommended. This pushed the 
design focus into the abovementioned five most common issues.
Miguel A. de Mon, doctor, and Jakob Bardram, supervisor at CACHET, both insisted during 
this early stage that the app should be designed to reduce the dropout rates. This is an 
==PAGE:40==
Page 30  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
increasingly recognized challenge for health research, as low engagement and dropout 
hinder interpreting and translating the findings from health-related apps (J. Torous, 2019). 
To earn engagement with the students, they have to get something in return from the 
app, they have to feel involved in order to be motivated. Students were interviewed about 
this matter, and the main takeaway from their answers is that they want to see progress, 
improving in terms of wellbeing does not seem to engage enough, they wanted to be 
able to check their statistics and measure the improvements. When looking into research 
about engagement, a study pointed out that the ease of use is closely related to the intent 
of use, and in some ways actual use (M. Haan, 2019), therefore, simplicity and easiness 
should be a requirement in order to engage students.
Students’ interviews, in the early stages, focused on the overall solution. They were 
questioned about the methods they use to tackle by themselves the mental health issues 
they face during their studies. The range of answers oscillated between social interaction 
with friends or family, relaxing methods, sports, and, interestingly, organizing themselves. 
During the ideation process, it was studied how to include features in the app to help 
them deal with the issues as they are used to doing it.
During this initial stage, clinicians highlighted the risks of having big automated 
interventions in the app. Instead, it was suggested that the app, by setting triggers (see 
4.5 Triggers), could take care of small automated interventions that do not suppose a big 
risk for the patient wellbeing, and healthcare professionals will remain in charge of the big 
interventions.
It was also during the ideation stage where the decision of whether or not to design a 
platform for the mental healthcare professionals to visualize the results of the students’ 
app was taken. However, together with the supervisors, it was considered to be out of the 
scope of this thesis.
In the first interviews, clinicians pointed out the importance of following standardized 
guidelines for the evaluation of mental health apps, thus, highlighting the American 
Psychiatry Association App Evaluation Model as the most recognized by healthcare 
professionals. This evaluation model focuses on the background and accessibility of the 
app, privacy and security, clinical foundation, usability, and data integration towards a 
therapeutic goal (APA, 2021). During the entire design process, these topics were taken 
constantly into consideration.
The clinical guidelines closely followed were extracted from Dr. Miguel A. de Mon’s Telecare 
Course (Alvarez Mon MA, 2021), where the doctor describes some recommendations 
for the design of mental healthcare applications based on the APA guidelines. The 
recommendations are the following:
• Be Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) based, effective for a wide range of 
problems including depression, anxiety disorders, alcohol and drug use problems, 
and eating disorders.
• Address both anxiety and low mood.
• Design to be used by nonclinical populations. In this concrete case, design for 
students.
• Recommend activities as a way of intervention.
==PAGE:41==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 31
• Provide mental health information to the users.
• Include real-time engagement features.
• Include activities explicitly linked to specific reported mood problems.
• Encourage nontechnology-based activities in the interventions.
• Include features that provide intrinsic motivation to engage.
• Set reminders for users to engage, as another way to lower the dropout rate.
• Use simple and intuitive interface and interactions. Avoid cumbersome designs.
• Provide links in-app to crisis support services.
• Tun experimental trials to establish efficacy.
In terms of design, the guidelines to be applied will be the Eight Golden Design Rules of 
Interface Design (B. Schneiderman, 2016). This set of rules was introduced to the author 
during the User Experience Design Prototyping course. These rules encompass the 
characteristics of a good design:
1. Strive for consistency; using identical terminology, consistent color, layout, and 
fonts.
2. Seek universal usability; designing for new and experienced users, providing 
explanations for novices and shortcuts for experts.
3. Offer informative feedback to the user actions.
4. Design with closure, turning activities into sequences.
5. Design to prevent human errors.
6. Allow undo, as much as possible, to relieve user anxiety.
7. Keep the user in control of the design.
8. Reduce memory load, users should only remember from one screen to the next 
one, providing them with the needed information on display.
Summarized, from the problem statement, the stakeholder interviews, and the research 
in previous work and literature, the requirements set for the design of an app to help 
students improve their mental health are the following:
• Focus on the five most common mental health challenges faced by the students: 
stress, worry, anxiety, panic attacks, and fear of failure.
• Combine and improve the existing online solutions used by the clinician such as 
the diary and the modules.
• Design to lower the dropout rates in health-related apps by including features of 
interest for the students like statistics and progress graphics.
• Include solutions proven to be useful for the students to manage their mental 
health like a feature to encourage them to organize their days.
==PAGE:42==
Page 32  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
• Design a library of small automated interventions based on the data extracted 
from the app and their responses to questionnaires and leave the big interventions 
to mental healthcare professionals.
• Follow closely the clinical guidelines stated by Dr. Miguel A. de Mon in his Telecare 
course: On the way to the future of Care. Technical resources for teleconsultation.
• Follow the American Psychiatry Association App Evaluation Model in the decision-
making during the design process.
• During the design phases, follow the Eight Golden Design Rules of Interface 
Design by Schneiderman.
==PAGE:43==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 33
4.2 Initial Design
Figure 25: Prototype 1 wireframes
==PAGE:44==
Page 34  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
In this initial prototype, the app is divided into three tabs: home, schedule/diaries, and 
modules.
The tab students get when they open the app is the Home tab, where they will get a 
welcoming message, the assigned tasks (questionnaires and mood), and the weekly 
statistics. To complete the assigned tasks, they click on the desired task and the 
questionnaire will open on top of the screen. When the task is completed, it will disappear 
from the home screen. Examples of the design of the mood questionnaire and wellbeing 
questionnaire are also provided. They are also able to scroll down to see more statistics. 
Finally, they have a profile button on the top right corner with account and app settings.
Figure 26: Bottom tab 
Figure 27: Assigned tasks and statistics
Figure 28: Schedule and diaries
==PAGE:45==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 35
The middle button in the bottom menu leads to the Schedule and Diaries tab. In this 
tab, the user can create and edit a weekly schedule to organize his/her week. Apart from 
that, this tab contains also the Diaries feature, where the user can fill in the mood and 
a description of the day. This is displayed in a timeline view, but it can be changed to a 
monthly view to have a wider overview.
The last tab is the Modules tab. This tab will provide the users with exercises and 
information in modules format. These modules will be provided by Minddistrict, an online 
solution already employed by the Student Council. To complete them, the users will have 
to scroll and find the desired module and click on it.
4.2.1 First Test
The first test involving the prototype and the student was more generalist, meant to 
validate and set the direction of the prototyping process. The tests were carried out both 
physically and online with students, clinicians, and CACHET employees. They were asked 
to explore the working prototype in Adobe XD and then answer questions about it in the 
form of a semistructured interview, that often led to an informal discussion. Some of the 
questions asked during this test were:
• Would you describe this app as an intuitive app?
• Do you feel this app is encouraging to use?
• Do you think this app would be useful / help students with their mental health?
• Do you miss any features? Would you include something else in the app?
• Do you see something wrong? Would you change anything?
The response to the test was positive in general terms, encouraging to continue in the 
direction set. However, the testers provided useful feedback about aspects to improve the 
prototype.
Figure 29: Modules
==PAGE:46==
Page 36  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Clinicians suggested finding a way to relate between the mood and the schedule: “As 
you’re asking the student about their mood, it would be nice if there was a graph of their 
responses, or if that could somehow overlay the schedule. That might help them pinpoint 
how their mood is affected by their activities.”
Clinicians also insisted on using gamification to increase engagement: “I would also 
think about how to “reward” students for using it. Like, how to make them feel like they 
achieved something, or to give them something enjoyable – the gamification aspect is 
important with apps.”
Lastly, clinicians encouraged to include some sort of feature that would make the app 
stand out for students to use it above the others: “I would think about how to make this 
stand out from other wellbeing apps – what should make a student use this one, over all 
of the others... Would it link in with their place of study, connect them to their peers, help 
them with study tips depending on the state of their wellbeing…?”
The student feedback was equally useful, they pointed out aspects like the relation between 
the mood questionnaire and the diaries not being clear enough: “Is there a relationship 
between the mood questionnaire and the diaries? If so, it would be interesting to integrate 
the ‘Add comment’ field also in the questionnaire.”
They also suggested including patterns detection or triggers and provided some examples: 
“It would be nice if the app could detect certain patterns and comment on them. For 
example, ‘Hey, you are very happy since you are exercising regularly’, or ‘Exam period is 
approaching, why don’t you try to complete this module about exam anxiety”. Including 
these kinds of small interventions was planned in the requirements specification,  initially, 
these interventions were meant to be brainstormed and designed by clinicians, however, 
the feedback provided by these students proved to be so helpful that they were included 
during the brainstorming process.
Another student, more concerned about anxiety, suggested including heart-rate and 
breath-rate sensing to measure anxiety levels. Another student, more concerned about 
healthy lifestyles, suggested including diet and other healthy habits in the modules.
The feedback received from Giovanna Vilaza, the professional at CACHET expert in design 
ethics was also useful. She suggested, as some students pointed out as well, that users 
should decide on what to see in the app: “It would be interesting to provide a tailor-made 
experience for each user, not all of them will be interested in the same parts of the app 
or have similar objectives, they should be given choices. However, they should be able to 
change whatever they choose to focus on at any point during the use of the app.”
She insisted on the importance of informing the users about the app, this point of view 
is shared with the APA: “Users should be informed clearly about the app and be asked to 
give their consent to the terms and conditions of the app. They should be able to access 
this information at any point, and they should also be able to erase their participation and 
data whenever they want.“
She also suggested small changes to make the app more user-friendly: in the words 
used in the app change ‘To do’ for ‘Today’ and ‘Stats’ for ‘Progress’, and change the color 
selection in some features of the app.
==PAGE:47==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 37
4.3 Iteration. Second prototype
During the first iteration, the feedback received in the first test was translated into the 
prototype.
The first change was inspired by Giovanna’s feedback, when the user opens the app for the 
first time, where she/he will navigate through an informed consent and a questionnaire 
about their focus. The informed consent was designed following Giovanna’s feedback, the 
Privacy code of conduct on mobile health apps by the European Commission (EC, 2021), 
and the guide for Writing a GDPR-compliant privacy notice by the European Union (EU, 
2021). However, designing the content of an informed consent involves such a workload 
that was considered to be out of the scope of the thesis. Therefore, this prototype will just 
provide a design of the wireframes’ outlines.
Figure 30: Informed consent and initial questionnaires.
==PAGE:48==
Page 38  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Once completed and agreed to the informed consent, the users will receive a questionnaire 
about their focus in the app, selecting the topics they are interested in and the statistics 
they want to receive. These choices will determine the modules and statistics they will 
be able to see. If the user changes his/her mind, he can undo this decision on the profile 
page. The topics available to focus on were determined together with the clinicians. There 
is also a wide range of statistics collected from phone sensing available for students to 
choose what to see. 
In the initial setup, an interrogation icon was added on the top right. This icon opens a 
screen to contact the app with any questions. See figure 34.
In order to make it more hassle-free, based on the students’ feedback, the ‘Describe your 
day’ was integrated into the mood questionnaire. Therefore, users will be able to complete 
their diary in one step from the questionnaire instead of two. They will also get the same 
screen when they access from the Diaries page. See figure 33.
Clinicians suggested finding a way to relate the mood and the schedule to help them 
pinpoint how their mood is affected by their activities. This was implemented overlying 
the mood responses over the schedule.
Figure 31: Initial questionnaires. Focus and statistics.
Figure 32: Schedule and mood.
==PAGE:49==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 39
Figure 33: Initial questionnaires. Focus and statistics.
Figure 34: Contact us page.
Figure 35: Modules page and starting screens..
==PAGE:50==
Page 40  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
As a way to include gamification in order to increase engagement, the streak was added 
in the home tab and the newly designed statistics individual screens. These statistics 
individual screens include more in-depth data, the user can browse through their weekly 
and daily statistics and see the suggested modules related to the topic. See figure 36 for 
the example of the sleep statistics.
Based on the feedback given by students, more stats and modules were added to the 
home and modules screens. An intermediate screen between the modules tab and the 
modules was added, this screen describes more in-depth the module selected and 
provides a start button. See figure 35.
Lastly, the font size was increased in some of the screens based on the student’s feedback.
4.3.1 Second Test
The second test was more specific, asking more in-depth questions related to the different 
features of the prototype. During this test, students and mental healthcare professionals 
were also asked about the small interventions and triggers that they would expect from 
the app. Their suggestions are collected in 4.5 Triggers.
One of the students that tested the app suggested including a voice note feature: 
“Sometimes I don’t want to spend the time writing about my day, it takes too much time, 
it would be nice if you could record voice notes instead”. This feature was designed and 
included in the next prototype.
The profile tab seemed to be overwhelming for some students, they suggested some 
changes to have a better overview of the options available. The red buttons, representing 
Figure 36: Statistics overview and detail view.
==PAGE:51==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 41
irreversible actions (except log out) were getting too much attention from the students.
An international student commented on using the initials for the days of the week: “I often 
struggle when the days of the week are represented only the initials, it takes me some 
seconds to identify the days, but whenever I read ‘Mon, Tue, etc’ is much easier”. Some 
other students, when asked specifically about this, agreed, thus, it was implemented in the 
last prototype. For native speakers might not be an issue but since this app is meant for 
danish and international students, the change was made.
Some students pointed out the font size being too small and others suggested using 
different colors for the stats and other small changes.
The feedback received from Giovanna Vilaza, the professional at CACHET expert in design 
ethics, oscillated towards providing instructions for first-time users. The amount of new 
information for first-time users can be overwhelming and increase dropout rates. She also 
gave feedback and suggested small changes to the new informed consent. Lastly, she 
suggested differentiating more ‘Today’ from ‘Progress’ in the home tab, as it could lead 
to confusion to students thinking they belong to the same category, hence requiring the 
same actions.
Mental healthcare professionals provided positive feedback in terms of the app design: 
“It’s looking really good – you’ve chosen nice simple images and colours that I think 
promote a calming experience. I really like that you give the student a choice on which 
stats they want to receive feedback on. That way, for example, a student who is happy 
to not be very physically active does not get reminders to get moving. This makes the 
feedback meaningful for them, rather than intrusive’. They also provided suggestions and 
measures for the small interventions collected in 4.5 Interventions.
==PAGE:52==
Page 42  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
4.4 Final Iteration. Final prototype
Figure 37: Final prototype wireframes
==PAGE:53==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 43
==PAGE:54==
Page 44  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
The students, when navigating through the app for the first time, based on the feedback, 
will now get instructions or tutorial screens like the provided examples.
In the home tab, the ‘Today’ tasks were changed in color to differentiate better with the 
‘Progress’ stats.
In the same tab, the graph colors were also changed following a suggestion from a 
student, that pointed out that the color difference between the sleep graph and the rest 
was not consistent (see figure 40.
Based on the students’ feedback, a voice note feature was added to the diary, the changes 
Figure 39: New and previous color.
Figure 38: Instructions examples
==PAGE:55==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 45
are reflected both in the mood questionnaire and the diaries page. The design of the 
monthly view of the diaries responses was also implemented.
Based on the students’ feedback the days of the week were changed from ‘M, T, W, T, F, 
S & S’ to ‘Mon, Tue, Wed, Thu, Fri, Sat & Sun’. These changes are visible in the statistics of 
the home tab, the individual statistics page, and the schedule.
The profile tab distribution was rearranged, classifying some of the options under ‘Settings’ 
and ‘Account’. This gave a cleaner look to the main profile tab while hiding the red buttons 
that were dragging too much attention from the students.
Figure 42: New day abreviation and previous day abreviation.
Figure 40: New stats colors.
Figure 41: Voice note feature.
==PAGE:56==
Page 46  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Based on the student feedback, the font size was increased again in some of the screens.
4.4.1 Final Test
The final test, once all the changes from the second test were implemented, was a 
usability test. The System Usability Scale (SUS) is the most common and standardized 
questionnaire to measure usability, is a 10 question assessment that provides a reliable 
tool to measure usability: the score of this test is measured from 0 to 100, and a good 
design is considered that should score at least 70-75 points (M. Deininger, 2021 I). 
The score obtained in the test was 82.5/100. Which is considered an above-average (68) 
score. This score is more significant due to the short exposure of the users to the app: 
users with longer exposure to the product tend to give betters scores (M. Deininger, 2021 
I). The questions and answers of the SUS can be found in the Appendix.
Finally, they were asked for the Net Promoter Score (NPS) under the question: “How 
likely is it that you’ll recommend the app to other students?” from 0 (not at all likely) to 
Figure 44: Net Promoter Score and System Usability Score.
Figure 43: New profile distribution.
==PAGE:57==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 47
10 (extremely likely). This question is used to estimate loyalty and general satisfaction. 
The score obtained was NPS=40%, which compared to the 21% of average in software 
products can be considered a good score (M. Deininger, 2021 II).
A final heuristic test was also carried out by the author (see Appendix B.6). Heuristic 
evaluations and user testing often find usability problems overlooked by the other method, 
thus experts recommend running both tests (M. Deininger, 2021 II). In general terms, the 
results obtained were positive, however, there were still some areas of improvement. The 
best practice would be to correct the flaws detected and apply them in a last iteration. 
Part of the questions included in the heuristic questionnaire are regarding animations, 
response times, visual feedback, or prompts that need to be implemented when the 
app is coded, hence, it would be interesting to have these questions in mind during the 
development process and run the test again once the app is fully functional.
4.5 Interventions
The app is meant to include small automated interventions to help students improve their 
wellbeing. Big interventions will be provided by healthcare professionals. Thus, the app 
should include the needed triggers to start both intervention processes:
• Small interventions. Changing the user experience to adapt to the triggered 
intervention. Examples of these changes could be suggesting a module based on 
the recent activity level or prompt another questionnaire related to a bad score in a 
concrete section of the general wellbeing questionnaire.
• Big interventions. Triggering an alarm in the clinician’s platform informing about 
the event that lead to that alarm and providing information related to the student’s 
wellbeing.
During the brainstorming session in the second test, stakeholders were asked to provide 
examples of triggered small interventions that they think would be useful to be provided 
by the app for the students’ wellbeing. These are some of the examples brainstormed 
during the co-creation sessions:
• Related to exams: when the examination period approaches, suggest modules 
related to exam anxiety or productivity.
• Co-relate mood with exercise when possible: if exercise levels are high and mood 
results are great as well, encourage to keep both levels up with a motivational 
message.
• If the sleep scores are low, suggest sleep-related modules or give simple tips as 
notifications. Related to sleep, it would be interesting if the app could recognize 
bad sleeping habits from the smartphone sensing and make a specific suggestion 
(e.g. if the student is using his/her phone right before going to sleep, or if they are 
going to sleep very late). A collection of these suggestions can be found in Dr. 
Miguel Alvarez de Mon’s paper about the treatment of insomnia (Alvarez-Mon MA, 
2019).
• If their home-stay percentage is high, suggest the user a concrete activity to go 
outside.
• If the mood responses follow a certain pattern (e.g. being in a bad mood every 
==PAGE:58==
Page 48  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Monday), suggest the user review their schedule for that day and include an activity 
they enjoy, or perhaps make a change in the activities they have.
• When the screen time is above the recommended/average values, suggest a 
specific activity or a related module.
• Encourage and congratulate students when they reach their established goals in 
terms of, for example, sleep or steps.
Related to the questionnaire responses, Dr. Miguel A. de Mon provided examples of 
triggers and interventions based on the questionnaires responses (see B. Appendix for the 
questionnaires):
• For the questionnaire PHQ-9, regarding general wellbeing and depression: if the 
score is between 0-4 it is fine, 5-9 “wait and see” repeating the questionnaire ahead 
in time, 10-14 suggest modules or activities, 15-19 contact the Student Council, 
20-27 contact the danish healthcare system. Anyhow, if the user scores any point 
in question 9, that regards self-harm, contact a mental healthcare professional 
inmediately.
• For the Rosenberg Self-esteem scale: if the score is above 30, it means a high self-
esteem, no action is needed; if the score is between 20 and 30, suggest a module 
regarding self-esteem; if the score is below 20, contact the Student Council.
• For the EAT-26, a test regarding eating attitudes: if the score is between 0-10, it is 
normal; if the score is above 10 the procedure will be to suggest a related module 
and repeat the questionnaire ahead in time; if the score keeps above 10, contact 
the Student Council.
• For the CAGE questionnaire, a screening test for problem drinking and potential 
alcohol or drug problems: if the user scores 2, recommend a module; if the user 
scores more than two, contact a healthcare professional.
• For the WHO-5, also regarding general wellbeing, alternate with the PHQ-9: if 
the user scores below 13, trigger the PHQ-9 and act depending on the score in this 
questionnaire.
• For the PHQ-15, a questionnaire regarding stress and anxiety: if the score is 
between 0-5, it is normal; if the score is between 6-10, recommend a module 
related to the topic or a ‘learning to relax’ module; if the score is between 11-15, 
contact a mental healthcare professional.
• If the mobile sensing or questionnaires about that matter indicates low sociability, 
or self-isolation, suggest an NIH toolbox (NIH, 2015).
Freja Petersen, from the Student Council, also provided examples of potential interventions 
based on diverse factors:
• Related to course work: after delivering a questionnaire related to how the student 
is managing course work (ex: on top of it/coping/struggling/falling behind/failed 
a class or assignment), there could be a trigger to contact the studievejledning 
(the guidance counselors) on their campus for support. Or a link to their college 
information regarding re-examinations etc. Another option could be to suggest a 
few basic study skills tools – like a focus timer, a to-do list to keep track of what 
==PAGE:59==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 49
is pending/done/blocked tasks, suggestions for how to set up a study schedule or 
optimize your study environment. This could be included in a module.
• Related to sociability: if they are feeling isolated (deducted perhaps by a social 
connection questionnaire or mobile sensing), there could be a trigger to show 
options for social/college events or societies to attend or reach out to. Like college-
specific tutors, mentors, clubs & societies.
• Suggestion to contact the Student Council: ideally there would also be a button 
to contact SRG – both as a default for everyone, but also as a function that is 
suggested if their emotional wellbeing drops significantly.
• Learning to relax: if their activity level is very high, or they report stress, perhaps, 
apart from the relax modules, include a number of sound files with guided relaxation 
exercises to suggest to the student.
4.6 Data Collection 
For the app designed in this report, the data collection will have two main channels: 
automatic sensing and self-reported data. This will follow a similar structure to the figure 
below.
Figure 45: App architecture: sensing, self-reports and analysis system.
==PAGE:60==
Page 50  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
Self-reported data
The self-reported data consists of the questionnaires and the mood/diaries reports. The 
questionnaires’ architecture will depend on three factors:
1. The user preferences indicated in the app setup.
2. The responses that students give to the questionnaires, that can trigger other 
questionnaires (see 4.5 Interventions).
3. The data collected from the automatic sensing, that can also trigger different 
questionnaires.
The set of questionnaire selected is meant to cover the whole spectrum of mental health 
issues suffered by students. The selection has been designed by Dr. Miguel Alvarez de 
Mon and contains the following questionnaires (see B. Appendix for the questionnaires):
• The PHQ-9, regarding mental wellbeing in general and depression.
• The Rosenberg Self-esteem scale.
• The EAT-26, regarding eating attitudes
• The CAGE, a screening test for problem drinking and potential alcohol or drug 
problems.
• The WHO-5, regarding general wellbeing and meant to be alternated with the 
PHQ-9.
• The PHQ-15, questionnaire regarding stress and anxiety.
Automatic sensing
The automatic sensing (or passive data), will be collected from the smartphone sensors 
and translated into behavioral classifiers by the app. The sensors to be employed for the 
passive data collection are the following:
1. Accelerometer
2. Microphone
3. Light sensor
4. GPS
5. Bluetooth
6. Screen time
The data collected by these sensors will then be translated as shown in the figure into the 
following behavioral classifiers:
• activity,
• social activity,
• sleep,
==PAGE:61==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 51
• location,
• and phone use data.
From the student’s point of view, the data will be displayed (if desired by the user) in the 
statistics (home) tab, where the students can analyze and self-assess their own mental 
health.
This data will also be available for mental healthcare professionals and researchers in 
the Carp platform (provided by Cachet), where they will be able to analyze, based on 
the data, the student’s mental health issues. The data will also be supplemented with the 
questionnaires and mood answers. Furthermore, as described in 4.5 Interventions, the 
architecture provides the mental healthcare professional with triggers that can set alarms 
for them to act in certain cases.
 
==PAGE:62==
Page 52  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:63==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 53
5. Discussion
5.1 Personal Reflection
When deciding my thesis topic, a lot of factors came into consideration. However, there 
was one above the others: I wanted to design something that could potentially make an 
impact on people, and being a Student Designer at CACHET, was the perfect setup for 
that matter.
During the first meetings with my supervisor at CACHET, discussing the topic and focus 
for this thesis project, we strongly agreed that in order to carry out the best user-centered 
design process possible, I needed to have access to the users.
There were other eHealth projects proposed at that time that would have probably 
involved visiting hospitals and having contact with doctors and patients, however, due 
to the current pandemic situation, we did not want to rely our contact with the users on 
visits to the hospital, since the COVID-19 situation could rapidly change - as it ended up 
happening - leaving us without the possibility to contact the users. Instead, we decided 
to go with the CampusLife project, which I strongly believe gravitated towards a better 
solution.
Being a student myself was a deciding factor to choose to focus on this issue among 
others. It brought me closer to the topic, making it easier for me to relate to the problems 
students are facing, as I was able to take into consideration my personal experience as a 
student in Denmark along with the experience of other classmates that I have shared my 
time with during my Bachelor and Master.
However, mental health was then an unknown topic for me. Luckily, as I mentioned 
before, CACHET’s environment as a research center for health technology represented 
the perfect setup, as it provided me with tools, papers, and reasearch in related topics.
The endless amount of papers and literature regarding related topics quickly felt 
overwhelming. Entering into a new and unknown topic where a paper leads you to another 
and so on, where everything seems important for the purpose supposed a challenge in 
terms of being able to realize when to stop. Honestly, looking backwards, I realize that I 
spent a lot of time in the process digging and reading new papers. Instead, if I had to do 
it again, I would probably start the design process earlier and continue reading literature 
in the meantime, instead of waiting until I had things clear enough to start the process.
Anyhow, after reviewing the literature and interviewing the healthcare professionals it 
became clear that students facing mental health problems represented a challenge for 
educational institutions and the healthcare system. This challenge is, indeed, an important 
ongoing and growing problem that needs solutions.
Mental health in general, and mental health among students in particular, were unknown 
topics for me at the beginning. Hence, the importance of including the stakeholders of 
student mental health was highlighted since the beginning, not only to carry a proper 
user-centered design but also to learn as much as possible about the topic given the short 
period of time that represents a master thesis. Fortunately, two mental health professionals 
representing the Student Council and the Spanish Mental Healthcare system accepted to 
help in the process of defining the problem statement and designing the best possible 
==PAGE:64==
Page 54  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
solution for students. Being a student myself gave me easy access to other students, the 
other main stakeholder. And as mentioned before, working at Cachet I had access to the 
third main stakeholder in digital mental health, the developers of mHealth.
However, despite being a student myself, in the early stages of the project, I stumbled 
across an ethical obstacle: for research purposes, it was interesting for me to interview 
students that were suffering or had suffered from mental health issues in order to extract 
more for the interview and get a better understanding of the problem, however, it did 
not seem ethical to ask the student council to get these students in touch with me, as 
I was sure that if I were in the same position as them, I would prefer to speak only with 
professionals.
And furthermore, was I skilled to talk about these problems with students that had 
suffered or were suffering from these conditions without making it worst for them? 
After deliberating with the supervisors, we agreed that in order to speak with this kind of 
patients, I needed to be trained to do so, as it can be challenging sometimes, and even 
with the best of intentions, things can easily go bad. However, training for this purpose 
was considered to be out of the scope of this project. The solution remaining was to 
speak with students with mild problems instead, or students that I already knew and were 
comfortable speaking about their issues with me.
When the initial interviews took place, all the pieces seemed to fit together. Regarding the 
interviews with students, a pattern of issues and symptoms was clearly recognizable, and 
even more, they were problems and symptoms I could easily feel identified with, which I 
think helped towards developing a suitable solution. 
The interviews with the mental health professionals developed as I was advancing through 
the process. The initial interviews, as I said before, gave me the best possible overview of 
the problem and helped me understand the process, while the next interviews helped 
refine the design taking decisions based on their experience as mental health professionals. 
I think their contribution gave important value and validation to the project.
As a designer, the design phase was the stage I was most interested in. But, nevertheless, I 
decided to not start sketching until the initial interviews were over, in order to not be biased 
by my preconception of an app for students’ mental health. Since the app prototype is the 
main deliverable of the master thesis, it was not the most comfortable position. However, 
I believe that this decision helped build a design that followed the requirements set in the 
initial stages more than the preconception I had of students’ mental health.
During the iteration phases of the prototyping process, I tried to involve the stakeholders 
as much as possible, since the feedback all provided was very valuable. In total, three 
prototype versions were designed, with two feedback sessions and a usability test. The 
length of the thesis did not allow to carry more tests and feedback sessions, but I believe 
that the results would have been better if there was enough time to do a fourth prototype, 
based on a last feedback session where the students could compare two versions of the 
same feature and do an a/b testing. There were some changes in the last prototype that 
could not be validated individually since the third prototype was only tested in terms of 
general usability.
Overall, I am happy with the results obtained, and the feedback obtained from the mental 
health professionals was also very positive. I believe, and so the clinicians, that if the 
CampusLife project is to be continued, this app could really make an impact in the lives of 
==PAGE:65==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 55
students. And that was the desired outcome at the beginning of the project.
5.2 Future works
This thesis project represents the initial step of the CampusLife project, a continuation of 
the StudentLife project (R. Wang et al., 2014), the name of an international collaboration 
that also involves universities from the US, the UK, and EU that developed a continuous 
sensing app to monitor the impact of workload on stress, sleep, activity, mood, sociability, 
mental well-being and academic performance in a daily and weekly basis (see 2.2 Related 
Work).
The CampusLife project aims to provide an alternative or supplementary solution to 
traditional healthcare by offering students a mobile-based intervention app to help 
them improve their mental health. The StudentLife study, nevertheless,  provided a solid 
ground to further develop this concept of adding mobile aided interventions guided 
by professionals on students’ mental health while maintaining the digital phenotyping 
architecture established by this precursor study. Thus, the future works related to this 
thesis will be facing in that direction.
The idea at CACHET with this kind of projects, as they lack external dedicated funding, is 
to be developed by successive master thesis projects carried out by students with different 
backgrounds depending on the kind of thesis required.
As mentioned before, this master thesis is the starting point for the project. The idea behind 
this thesis was to provide the necessary clinical background to develop the CampusLife 
project and set up the design guidelines for the project.
Based on the ‘modus operandi’ at CACHET, the timeline of the project and future works 
to develop are represented in the following figure.
The next step would be to implement the prototyped mock-up into a working app. This 
step will require to set collaboration between the Student Council and CACHET in order 
to integrate the modules from Minddistrict, and the triggers designed by clinicians and 
Figure 46: Timeline.
==PAGE:66==
Page 56  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
students. During this step, the app must be integrated into the CARP platform (carp.
cachet.dk) to provide the healthcare professionals and researchers with a platform to 
study the students’ progress and data by the translated digital phenotyping. An important 
part of the process will require focusing on the privacy policy and issues that might arise 
and elaborate subsequently a complete informed consent.
Once the app is running, the next step would be to carry out a feasibility study with a small 
sample of students and healthcare professionals to analyze the benefits, side effects, and 
risks of the app. This study will provide the clinical evidence needed to be recognized as a 
mental health solution for students. The users recruited will be students at DTU. However, 
if a bigger representative sample is needed, platforms for digital psychiatry projects 
recruitment ire a common tool to provide the needed sample (DigitalPsych, 2020). This 
feasibility study should also focus in the usability of the app, asking the students to provide 
feedback on the newly programmed app in order to continue the iteration process before 
the final release.
After the feasibility study is completed, running a clinical pilot of the app fully integrated 
with the clinicians’ web platform will be the next step. The purpose of this second study 
will be to replicate the app in a real-life scenario with real patients in order to acquire 
information about the app and the integration with Carp before releasing it to the public.
When successful, the final step will be to release it publicly, and together with the Student 
Council and Cachet, inform universities about the tool in order to facilitate and unclog 
their mental health services. The technical support to fix problems and bugs will be taken 
care of by Cachet.
==PAGE:67==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 57
6. Conlusion
During the course of this project, through the data analyzed during the research and 
the interviews conducted with healthcare professionals and students, we can dictate that 
mental health among students is a real problem, and the recent COVID-19 has increased 
the demand for mental health services even more, making this a growing problem that 
needs to be faced.
This problem represents an opportunity for new forms of mental health interventions 
since traditional healthcare is not able to keep up with the demand for mental health 
services by students. Countries worldwide are becoming aware of this problem: in 
Denmark, the gap between the students with mental health issues and the students being 
treated is estimated to be over 50.000 (EVA,2015); other developed countries like the USA 
and South Korea are raising awareness due to the increasing suicide rates, and in less 
severe cases, the increasing college dropout rates.
This project is the continuation of the StudentLife study, a project that monitored students’ 
lifestyle behaviors and collected data to understand the effects of these behaviors on the 
academic outcomes. Taking this study as the base, this thesis aimed to design an app that 
following the same data collection architecture could also give feedback and provide 
mobile-based interventions to students.
One of the biggest challenges in the design of these apps - and digital health in general 
- is achieving engagement by the users and lowering the dropout rates. To achieve this, 
students were an active and important part of the user-centered design process.
A well-conducted user-centered design must count on the entire spectrum of 
stakeholders, and this project did count with the participation of students, mental 
healthcare professionals, and eHealth apps developers. Hence, the final prototype 
designed is the result of the co-creation sessions conducted with the stakeholders.
The result of this design process is an app that aims to provide students with tools to 
help them manage their mental health. The features provided are a combination of tools 
already used in patient treatment by mental healthcare professionals and features desired 
by the students. Some of the tools provided are modules related to mental health topics, 
a diary, a schedule, data visualization, and small automated interventions based on the 
mobile sensing and questionnaire responses.
However, there is still work to be done before the app gets released, between which stands 
out the feasibility study and the clinical pilot, that will provide clinicians and developers 
with the information needed to evaluate the risks and benefits within the use of the app 
by students.
This kind of technologies offer new possibilities in mobile patient treatment. Experts 
suggest that in a near future, using the data collected by mobile sensing, your smartphone 
will be able to forecast your mood, helping you stop bad moods even before they strike. 
These types of mobile-based interventions could potentially improve users’ mental health 
and its impact on academic performance or even help prevent suicide.
==PAGE:68==
Page 58  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:69==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 59
A. Bibliography
Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2017
“Den Nationale Sundhedsprofil.” In: Danskernes Sundhed (2017)
WHO, 2020
“COVID-19 disrupting mental health services in most countries, WHO survey.” In: (2020).
EVA, 2019
Følelsen af stress blandt studerende. Danmarks Evalueringsinstitut (EVA) 2019
https://www.eva.dk/sites/eva
J. Torous et al., 2021
The growing field of digital psychiatry: current evidence and the future of apps, social 
media, chatbots, and virtual reality. From: John Torous, Sandra Bucci, Imogen H. Bell, 
Lars V. Kessing, Maria Faurholt-Jepsen, Pauline Whelan, Andre F. Carvalho, Matcheri 
Keshavan, Jake Linardon, Joseph Firth.
World Psychiatry 20:3 - October 2021
Rehm J, 2019
Global burden of disease and the impact of mental and addictive disorders. from: Rehm 
J, Shield KD. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2019;21:10.
MHGAP, 2020
Mental Health Gap Action Program. World Health Organization. Depression. Geneva: 
World Health Organization, 2020.
Silver L., 2019
Smartphone ownership is growing rapidly around the world, but not always equally. 
From: Silver L., February 5, 2019.
Pew Research Center.
J. Rooksby, 2019
Student Perspectives on Digital Phenotyping. The Acceptability of Using Smartphone 
Data to Assess Mental Health. From: John Rooksby, Alistair Morrison & Dave Murray-
Rust. CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019.
J. Melcher et al., 2020
Digital phenotyping for mental health of college students: a clinical review. From: 
Jennifer Melcher, Ryan Hays & John Torous.
Evid Based Ment Health 2020; 23:161–166.
KA Ryan, 2020
A Smartphone App to Monitor Mood Symptoms in Bipolar Disorder: Development and 
Usability Study. From: Kelly Ann Ryan, Pallavi Babu, Rebecca Easter, Erika Saunders, Andy 
Jinseok Lee, Predrag Klasnja, Lilia Verchinina, Valerie Micol, Brent Doil, Melvin G McInnis, 
Amy M Kilbourne. JMIR Ment Health 2020 | vol. 7 | iss. 9.
A Leis et al., 2019
Detecting Signs of Depression in Tweets in Spanish: Behavioral and Linguistic Analysis.
Angela Leis, Francesco Ronzano, Miguel A Mayer, Laura I Furlong, Ferran Sanz.
Internet Res 2019 21.6 (2019)
==PAGE:70==
Page 60  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
ML Birnbaum et al.,2019
Detecting relapse in youth with psychotic disorders utilizing patient-generated and 
patient-contributed digital data from Facebook.
M. L. Birnbaum, S. K. Ernala, A. F. Rizvi, E. Arenare, A. R. Van Meter, M. De Choudhury & J. 
M. Kane. Nature Partner Journals NPJ 17.5 (2019)
J. Torous et al., 2019
Dropout rates in clinical trials of smartphone apps for depressive symptoms: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. From: John Torous, Jessica Lipschitz, Michelle Ng, 
Joseph Firth
Elsevier. Journal of Affective Disorders 263 (2020) 413-419.
www.elsevier.com/locate/jad
K Eagan, 2017
Kevin Eagan, Ellen Bara Stolzenberg, Hilary B Zimmerman, Melissa C Aragon, Hannah 
Whang Sayson, and Cecilia Rios-Aguilar. 2017. The American Freshman: National Norms 
Fall 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2018 from https://www.insidehighered.com/sites/
default/server_files/files/TheAmericanFreshman2016PREPUB.pdf
G Chin-Lun H, 2016
Galen Chin-Lun Hung, Pei-Ching Yang, Chia-Chi Chang, Jung-Hsien Chiang, and Ying-
Yeh Chen. 2016. Predicting negative emotions based on mobile phone usage patterns: 
an exploratory study. JMIR research protocols 5, 3 (2016).
P Brown, 2016
Poppy Brown. 2016. The Invisible Problem?: Improving Students’ Mental Health. Higher 
Education Policy Institute.
J. Firth et al., 2017 I
The efficacy of smartphone-based mental health interventions for depressive 
symptoms: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Joseph Firth, John Torous, Jennifer Nicholas, Rebekah Carney, Abhishek Pratap, Simon 
Rosenbaum & Jerome Sarris.
In: World Psychiatry 2017 3.16 (2017)
J. Firth et al., 2017 II
Can smartphone mental health interventions reduce symptoms of anxiety? A meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Joseph Firth, John Torous, Jennifer Nicholas, Rebekah Carney, Simon Rosenbaum & 
Jerome Sarris.
In: Journal of Affective Disorders 218.15–22 (2017)
J. Torous et al., 2014
Patient Smartphone Ownership and Interest in Mobile Apps to Monitor Symptoms of 
Mental Health Conditions: A Survey in Four Geographically Distinct Psychiatric Clinics.
John Torous, Steven Richard Chan, Shih Yee-Marie Tan, Jacob Behrens, Ian Mathew, 
Erich J Conrad, Ladson Hinton, Peter Yellowlees & Matcheri Keshavan.
JMIR Ment Health 2014;1(1):e5
J. Torous et al., 2018
Mental Health Mobile Phone App Usage, Concerns, and Benefits Among Psychiatric 
Outpatients: Comparative Survey Study. From: John Torous, Hannah Wisniewski & 
Matcheri Keshavan. JMIR Ment Health. 2018 Oct-Dec; 5(4): e11715
==PAGE:71==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 61
JE Owen et al., 2015
mHealth in the Wild: Using Novel Data to Examine the Reach, Use, and Impact of PTSD 
Coach. From: Jason E Owen, Beth K Jaworski, Eric Kuhn, Kerry N Makin-Byrd, Kelly M 
Ramsey, Julia E Hoffman. JMIR Ment Health. 2015 Mar 25;2(1):e7
R. Wang et al., 2014
StudentLife: Assessing Mental Health, Academic Performance and Behavioral Trends of 
College Students using Smartphones. UBICOMP ‘14.
From: Rui Wang, Fanglin Chen, Zhenyu Chen, Tianxing Li, Gabriella Harari, Stefanie 
Tignor, Xia Zhou†, Dror Ben-Zeev, and Andrew T. Campbell.
Dartmouth College, 2013
Dror Ben-Zeev, Andrew Campbell, Fanglin Chen, Zhenyu Chen, Tianxing Li, Rui Wang 
and Xia Zhou (Dartmouth College), Gabriella Harari (University of Texas at Austin), 
Stefanie Tignor (Northeastern University)
C. Noone et al., 2018
A randomised active-controlled trial to examine the effects of an online mindfulness 
intervention on executive control, critical thinking and key thinking dispositions in a 
university student sample. From: Chris Noone, Michael J Hogan.
BMC Psychol. 2018 Apr 5;6(1):13
Design Council, 2014
What is the framework for innovation? Design Council’s evolved Double Diamond 
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/what-framework-innovation-design-
councils-evolved-double-diamond
Srivastava A., 2017
SCRUM model for agile methodology. From: Apoorva Srivastava; Sukriti Bhardwaj; Shipra 
Saraswat
2017 International Conference on Computing, Communication and Automation (ICCCA)
Belyh A., 2019
How The Build-Measure-Learn Cycle Really Works. From: Anastasia Belyh
https://www.cleverism.com/how-build-measure-learn-cycle-really-works/
Jakob E. Bardram, 2007
The Art of Doing a PhD. The Fish Model. From: Jakob Bardram
https://www.bardram.net/the-art-of-doing-a-phd/
Cohn M., 2009
Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum, vol. 1. Addison-Wesley 
Professional, Boston (2009). From: Cohn, M
Nielsen J., 2000
Why You Only Need to Test with 5 Users. From: User Testing, Nielsen Norman Group
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/why-you-only-need-to-test-with-5-users/
D. Miller S., 2018
Implementation: The KEY to Improving the Effectiveness of Psychotherapy.
From: Scott D. Miller 2018
https://www.scottdmiller.com/implementation-the-key-to-improving-the-
effectiveness-of-psychotherapy/
==PAGE:72==
Page 62  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
M. Haan, 2019
Can we predict device use? An investigation into mobile device use in surveys
From: Marieke Haan,Peter Lugtig &Vera Toepoel.
International Journal of Social Research Methodology Volume 22, 2019 - Issue 5
Per Bækgaard, 2019
02809 UX Design Prototyping. Lecture week 3: Internet of Things
APA, 2021
American Psychiatric Associatin. App Advisor. The App Evaluation Model.
https://www.psychiatry.org/psychiatrists/practice/mental-health-apps/the-app-
evaluation-model
Alvarez Mon MA, 2021
Caminando hoy hacia el futuro de la Asistencia. Recursos técnicos para la teleconsulta. 
Dr. Miguel A. de Mon 
B. Scheneiderman, 2016
Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction 
(1988, 2016). From: Shneiderman, B., Plaisant, C., Cohen, M., Jacobs, S., and Elmqvist, N.
http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/DTUI6
DigitalPsych, 2020
Digital Psychiatry Studies
https://www.digitalpsych.org/projects.html#collect
EC, 2021
Privacy code of conduct on mobile health apps. Shaping Europe’s digital future. From: 
European Commission
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/privacy-mobile-health-apps
EU, 2021
Writing a GDPR-compliant privacy notice (template included). From: European Union
https://gdpr.eu/privacy-notice/
M. Deininger I, 2021
Course: 41072 Design for Interaction F21. Lecture: 01 - Introduction. Michael Deininger
M. Deininger II, 2021
Course: 41072 Design for Interaction. Lecture: 02 – User Evaluation – Part 1. Michael 
Deininger
Alvarez Mon MA, 2019
Treatment of Insomnia. From: Dr. Miguel A. de Mon & F. Ortuño
Medicineonline.es / Medicine. 2016;12(23):1359-68
NIH, 2015
Emotion Measures. NIH Toolbox® Emotion Batteries. Ages 18+
https://www.healthmeasures.net/explore-measurement-systems/nih-toolbox/intro-to-
nih-toolbox/emotion
==PAGE:73==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 63
B. Appendix
B.1 Acronyms
CACHET - Copenhagen Center for Health Tecnology
WHO - World Health Organization
ILO - Intended Learning Objectives
UCD - User Centered Design
SM - Scrum Master
PO - Product Owner
SDT - Scrum Development Team
PDR - Project Definition Report
SRG - Studenterrådgivningen - Student Council
SUS - System Usability Scale
NPS - Net Promoter Score
B.2 Student Council First Interview Questions
1. How is the process for a student suffering from a mental condition, starting the moment 
they need help and ending when they are healthy again?
2. What do students suffer the most from? How do they deal with those?
3. What parts of the process (Question 1) are automated?
4. Is there any automatically generated feedback that you collect?
5. What values/data do you track/collect during the process?
6. What value can an app bring to this process?
7. Do you send out wellbeing questionnaires? How often? Is automatically or manually 
reviewed?
8. Are they any digital solutions that the Student Council is using already or planning to 
use?
B.3 Dr. Miguel Alvarez de Mon First Interview Questions
1. What area are you focused in?
2. What is the kind of cases that you have with students?
3. How is the process for a student suffering from a mental condition, starting the moment 
they need help and ending when they are healthy again?
4. How often do you meet with the patients?
5. What do students suffer the most from? How do they deal with those?
6. What parts of the process (Question 1) are automated?
7. Is there any automatically generated feedback that you collect?
==PAGE:74==
Page 64  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
8. What values/data do you track/collect during the process?
9. What value can an app bring to this process?
10. Do you send out wellbeing questionnaires? How often? Is automatically or manually 
reviewed?
11. Are they any digital solutions that the Hospital Universitario Infanta Sofia is using 
already or planning to use?
B.4 System Usability Scale
1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently.
Strongly agree: 25%, Agree: 50%, Not agree nor disagree: 25%, Disagree: 0%, Strongly 
disagree: 0%
2. I found the system unnecessarily complex.
Strongly agree: 0%, Agree: 0%, Not agree nor disagree: 0%, Disagree: 40%, Strongly 
disagree: 60%
3. I thought the system was easy to use.
Strongly agree: 80%, Agree: 20%, Not agree nor disagree: 0%, Disagree: 0%, Strongly 
disagree: 0%
4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this 
system.
Strongly agree: 0%, Agree: 0%, Not agree nor disagree: 20%, Disagree: 0%, Strongly 
disagree: 80%
5. I found the various functions in this system were well integrated.
Strongly agree: 20%, Agree: 60%, Not agree nor disagree: 20%, Disagree: 0%, Strongly 
disagree: 0%
6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system.
Strongly agree: 0%, Agree: 0%, Not agree nor disagree: 20%, Disagree: 40%, Strongly 
disagree: 40%
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly.
Strongly agree: 40%, Agree: 40%, Not agree nor disagree: 20%, Disagree: 0%, Strongly 
disagree: 0%
8. I found the system very cumbersome to use.
Strongly agree: 0%, Agree: 0%, Not agree nor disagree: 20%, Disagree: 20%, Strongly 
disagree: 60%
9. I felt very confident using the system.
Strongly agree: 80%, Agree: 20%, Not agree nor disagree: 0%, Disagree: 0%, Strongly 
disagree: 0%
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system
Strongly agree: 60%, Agree: 20%, Not agree nor disagree: 0%, Disagree: 0%, Strongly 
disagree: 20%
==PAGE:75==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 65
B.5 Heuristic Test
==PAGE:76==
Page 66  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:77==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 67
==PAGE:78==
Page 68  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:79==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 69
==PAGE:80==
Page 70  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:81==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 71
==PAGE:82==
Page 72  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
==PAGE:83==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 73
B.6 PHQ-9 questionnaire
Over the last two weeks, how often have you been bothered by any of the following 
problems?
1. Little interest or pleasure in doing things?
2. Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless?
3. Trouble falling or staying asleep, or sleeping too much?
4. Feeling tired or having little energy?
5. Poor appetite or overeating?
6. Feeling bad about yourself - or that you are a failure or have let yourself or your family 
down?
7. Trouble concentrating on things, such as reading the newspaper or watching 
television?	
8. Moving or speaking so slowly that other people could have noticed? Or the opposite 
- being so fidgety or restless that you have been moving around a lot more than usual?
9. Thoughts that you would be better off dead, or of hurting yourself in some way?
B.7 Rosenberg self-steem questionnaire
1. On the whole, I am satisfied with myself.
2. At times I think I am no good at all.
3. I feel that I have a number of good qualities.
4. I am able to do things as well as most other people.
5. I feel I do not have much to be proud of.
6. I certainly feel useless at times.
7. I feel that I’m a person of worth, at least on an equal plane with others.
8. I wish I could have more respect for myself.
==PAGE:84==
Page 74  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
9. All in all, I am inclined to feel that I am a failure.
10. I take a positive attitude toward myself. 
B.8 EAT-26 questionnaire
1. Am terrified about being overweight.2. Avoid eating when I am hungry.
3. Find myself preoccupied with food.
4. Have gone on eating binges where I feel that.
I may not be able to stop.
5. Cut my food into small pieces.
6. Aware of the calorie content of foods that I eat. 
7. Particularly avoid food with a high carbohydrate content (i.e. bread, rice, potatoes, etc.)
8. Feel that others would prefer if I ate more. 
9. Vomit after I have eaten. 
10. Feel extremely guilty after eating. 
11. Am preoccupied with a desire to be thinner. 
12. Think about burning up calories when I exercise. 
13. Other people think that I am too thin. 
14. Am preoccupied with the thought of having fat on my body.
15. Take longer than others to eat my meals. 
16. Avoid foods with sugar in them. 
17. Eat diet foods. 
18. Feel that food controls my life. 
19. Display self-control around food.
20. Feel that others pressure me to eat.
21. Give too much time and thought to food. 
22. Feel uncomfortable after eating sweets. 
23. Engage in dieting behavior. 
24. Like my stomach to be empty. 
25. Have the impulse to vomit after meals.
26. Enjoy trying new rich foods.
==PAGE:85==
Technical University of Denmark  Page 75
B.9 CAGE questionnaire
1. Have you ever felt you needed to Cut down on your drinking?
2. Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?
3. Have you ever felt Guilty about drinking?
4. Have you ever felt you needed a drink first thing in the morning (Eye-opener) to steady 
your nerves or to get rid of a hangover?
B.10 WHO-5 questionnaire
Please respond to each item regarding how you felt in the last two weeks.
1. I have felt cheerful in good spirits.
2. I have felt calm and relaxed.
3. I have felt active and vigorous. 
4. I woke up feeling fresh and rested. 
5. My daily life has been filled with things that interest me.
B.11 PHQ-15 questionnaire
1. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by stomach pain?
2. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by back pain?
3. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by pain in your arms, legs or 
joints (knees, hips, etc.)?
4. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by menstrual cramps or other 
problems with your periods?
5. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by headaches?
6. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by dizziness?
7. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by feeling your heart pound or 
race?
8. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by shortness of breath?
9. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by pain or problems during 
sexual intercourse?
10. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by constipation, loose bowels 
or diarrhea?
11. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by nausea, gas or indigestion?
12. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by feeling tired or having low 
energy?
==PAGE:86==
Page 76  Master Thesis Gonzalo Pérez Jiménez
cachet
13. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by trouble sleeping?
14. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by chest pain?
15. Over the last week, how often have you been bothered by fainting spells?
