==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Synthesis of diferulic acid and esters as
enzymatic substrates and standards
Author
Bettina Bacso ­ s192648
Supervisors
Luca Laraia
Jesper Brask
February 27th, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This 30 ECTS report, entitled ”Synthesis of diferulic acids and esters as enzymatic sub­
strates and standards,” is the result of a Master thesis project carried out by Bettina Bacsó.
The Master thesis was conducted under the supervision of Science Manager Jesper Brask
at Novozymes A/S and Assistant Professor Luca Laraia from the chemistry department
at the Technical University of Denmark. The work is part of a collaborative project be­
tween Casper Wilkens at the Department of Bioengineering of the Technical University
of Denmark and Jesper Brask in the Department of Screening Assay Development in
Novozymes A/S. The experimental work was completed at Novozymes in the Depart­
ment of Enzyme assay development from September to February 2022, supervised by
Science Manager Jesper Brask.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
The completion of the project would not have been possible without the participation and
guidance of many people. Their contributions are deeply appreciated. First and fore­
most, I would like to thank my supervisors, Science Manager Jesper Brask for always
finding the time to answer my questions, for the endless support, invaluable guidance,
and encouragement throughout all thesis processes, and for the opportunity to collabo­
rate with Novozymes. I would also like to express my appreciation to Associate Professor
Luca Laraia for his excellent guidance and invaluable ideas. Furthermore, Finally, special
thanks to Lene Lund Pedersen and Trine Nowakowska Eriksson from the synthesis lab­
oratory group at Novozymes A/S for a pleasant working environment and friendly advice
in the laboratory.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
EF Ethyl ferulate
FA Ferulic acid (4­hydroxy­3­methoxy­cinnamic acid)
EtOAc Ethyl acetate
HRP Horse Radish Peroxydase
SM Starting Material
RT Room Temperature
TLC Thin Layer Chromatography
HC Hydroxycinnamic acid
CoA coumaric acid
CA caffeic acid
SA sincapic acid
PCW Plant Cell Wall
r.t. room temperature
HCl Hydrochlorid­acid
MeCN Acetonitrile
ON overnight
FAEs Ferulic acid esterases
DFA Diferulic acid
8, 5 −DFADC 8,5­DFA decarboxylated form
8, 5 −DFAC 8,5­DFA cyclic form
8, 5 −DFANC 8,5­DFA non­cyclic / linear form
8, 5 −DFATHF 8,5­DFA tetrahydrofuran form
AXs arabinoxylans
VA veratryl alcohol
POC phenol oxidative coupling
DIR dirigent protein
COSY COrrelated SpectroscopY
HSQC Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence
HMBC Heteronuclear Multiple Bond Correlation
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Ferulic acid (FA) and its dimer 8,5’­diferulic acid (DFA) are essential structural components
of the plant cell wall (PCW). These compounds crosslink polysaccharides and lignin, con­
tributing to biomass recalcitrance. Feruloyl esterases (FAEs) play a significant role in
hydrolyzing these ester linkages to degrade plant biomass to produce biofuels. There­
fore, it is necessary to map the activity of FAEs and investigate the relationship with their
substrates.
This thesis investigates the six different stages of the synthesis of the novel 8,5’­di­(methyl
feruloyl­α­L­arabinofuranoside), through an enzymatic dimerization approach with using
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and H2O2, starting from FA. The novel substrate is used
for assays of FAE.
Firstly, FA was esterified to produce EF in 96% yield in this project. Afterward, the enzy­
matic dimerization of EF was optimized to produce 8,5’­diferulate, which was obtained in
a 54% yield. Afterward, 8,5’­diferulate was subjected to alkaline hydrolysis to obtain 8,5’­
DFA in 86% yield. In the consequent steps, an acetyl group was installed in 29% yield, and
afterward, the intermediate 8,5’­di­(feruloyl­chloride) was obtained via chlorination with­
out further purification. This intermediate was coupled to methyl α­L­diarabinofuranoside.
Two compounds were obtained; the first one is speculated as the linear form of 4­O­acetyl
8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) as a cis/trans mixture in 98% yield, and the second as the ben­
zofuran form of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) in 74% yield. The two compounds
were deprotected by pyrrolidine to give the linear form of 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) as a
cis/trans mixture in 54% yield and the benzofuran form of 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) in
37% yield. After each synthesis step, the product was purified by reverse­phase (RP) flash
chromatography (except the intermediate acyl chloride). Methyl α­L­diarabinofuranoside
was synthesized in three steps with an overall yield of 48%.
The enzymatic assay was performed based on liquid chromatography­mass spectrome­
try (LC/MS) for screening of four different types of FAE from Aspergillus oryzae on the
novel synthesized substrates the 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (benzofuran) and 8,5’­di­
(methyl feruloyl­Ara (linear). Out of four esterases, type A FAE showed total activity on
the substrates hydrolyzing the ester linkage between 8,5’­DFA and the (C5)­O position of
a methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside. FAE­A on the benzofuran substrate showed limited ac­
tivity, cleaving only one arabinofuranoside residue, while on the substrate with the open
ring form showed total activity, hydrolyzing both ester linkages. The different activities
could be due to the stability of the benzofuran form and the flexibility of the open ring
form.
In conclusion, the enzymatic dimerization in the focus of this project was successfully
optimized and allowed the consequent synthesis of two target substrates in an acceptable
yield. Finally, the activity assay of FAE A showed a clear correlation with its specificity
towards the newly synthesized substrates.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Resume
Ferulinsyre (FA) og dens dimer 8,5’diferulsyre (DFA) er essentielle strukturelle kompo­
nenter i plantecellevæggen (PCW). Disse forbindelser tværbinder polysaccharider og
lignin, hvilket bidrager til biomasse genstridighed. Feruloylesteraser (FAE’er) spiller en
væsentlig rolle i at hydrolysere disse esterbindinger for at nedbryde plantebiomasse til
fremstilling af biobrændstoffer. Derfor er det nødvendigt at kortlægge aktiviteten af FAE’er
og undersøge forholdet til deres substrater.
Denne specialeafhandling undersøger de seks forskellige stadier af syntesen af det nye
8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­α­L­arabinofuranosid), gennem en enzymatisk dimeriseringstilgang
med brug af peberrodsperoxidase (HRP) og H2O2, startende fra FA. Det nye substrat an­
vendes til analyser af FAE.
For det første blev FA esterificeret til at producere EF i 96% udbytte i dette projekt.
Bagefter blev den enzymatiske dimerisering af EF optimeret til at producere 8,5’­diferulat,
som blev opnået i et 54% udbytte. Derefter blev 8,5’­diferulat underkastet alkalisk hy­
drolyse for at opnå 8,5’­DFA i 86% udbytte. I de efterfølgende trin blev en acetylgruppe
installeret i 29% udbytte, og bagefter blev mellemproduktet 8,5’­di­(feruloyl­chloride) op­
nået via chlorering uden yderligere oprensning. Dette mellemprodukt blev koblet til methyl
α­L­diarabinofuranosid. To forbindelser blev opnået; den første er spekuleret som den
lineære form af 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) som en cis/trans­blanding i 98%
udbytte, og den anden som benzofuranformen af 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara)
i 74% udbytte. De to forbindelser blev afbeskyttet med pyrrolidin for at give den lineære
form af 8,5’­di­(methylferuloylAra) som en cis/trans­blanding i 54% udbytte og benzofuran­
formen af 8,5’­di­(methylferuloylAra) i 37% udbytte. Efter hvert syntesetrin blev produktet
oprenset ved omvendt fase (RP) flashkromatografi (undtagen acylchlorid mellemproduk­
tet). methyl α­L­diarabinofuranosid blev syntetiseret i tre trin med et samlet udbytte på
48%.
Det enzymatiske assay blev udført baseret på væskekromatografimassespektrometri (LC/­
MS) til screening af fire forskellige typer FAE fra Aspergillus oryzae på de nye synte­
tiserede substrater 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (benzofuran) og 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­
Ara (lineær). Ud af fire esteraser viste type A FAE total aktivitet på substraterne, der
hydrolyserede esterbindingen mellem 8,5’­DFA og (C5)­O­positionen af et methyl α­L­
diarabinofuranosid. FAE­A på benzofuransubstratet viste begrænset aktivitet spaltning
af kun én arabinofuranosidrest, mens den på substratet med åbningsformen viste total
aktivitet, hydrolyserede begge esterbindinger.De forskellige aktiviteter kunne skyldes sta­
biliteten af benzofuranformen og fleksibiliteten af den åbne ringform.
Som konklusion blev den enzymatiske dimerisering i fokus for dette projekt med succes
optimeret og tillod den deraf følgende syntese af målsubstratet i et acceptabelt udbytte.
Endelig viste aktivitetsassayet af FAE A en klar sammenhæng med dets specificitet over
for det nyligt syntetiserede substrat.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Resume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Ferulic acid in nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Different isomers of FA dimers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.2
Abundancy of FA dimers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.3
Dimerization in nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.1.4
Application of FA and its dimers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Synthesis of 8,5­DFA (6) from literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Enzymes involved in enzymatic dimerization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.1
Peroxidase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.3.2
Laccase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Esterases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2
Results and discussion
14
2.1
Optimization of conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1.1
Enzymatic conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1.1.1
The influence of pH and concentration change of H2O2 . . 16
2.1.1.2
The importance of co­solvents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.1.3
The effect of laccase enzyme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.1.2
Purification with flash chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.2
Synthesis of methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside (18) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3
Synthesis of 8,5’­di­(methyl­feruoyl­Ara) (2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3.1
Fischer esterification ­ The formation of EF (12) . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3.2
Oxidative dimerization ­ Formation of 8,5’­diferulate (14) . . . . . . . 19
2.3.3
Hydrolysis ­ Formation of (6)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.3.4
Acetylation ­ Formation of (19) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.3.5
Acyl chloride ­ Formation of (20) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.3.6
Formation of (24a), (24b) and (25) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.3.7
Ac deprotection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.4
Enzyme assays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3
Conclusion and outlook
28
3.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Experimental
30
4.1
General methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2
Synthesis of EF (12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Synthesis of 8,5’­diferulate (14) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
Synthesis of 8,5’­DFA (6)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.5
Synthesis of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­DFA (19)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.6
Synthesis of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(feruloyl chloride) (20) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Synthesis of diferulic acids and esters as enzymatic substrates and standards
vi
==PAGE:8==
4.7
Synthesis of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­α–arabinofuranoside) (24 &
25) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.8
Synthesis of 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­α­L­arabinofuranoside) (26 & 27)
. . . 38
4.9
Synthesis of methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside (18) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.10 Enzymatic assays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A Appendix
49
1
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Ferulic acid in nature
Hydroxycinnamic acids (HCAs) are a class of phenolic compounds derived from cinnamic
acid. In nature, typically present as combined forms of the four essential molecules,
coumaric acid (CoA), caffeic acid (CA), ferulic acid (FA), and sinapic acid (SA) [66]. In this
project, the focus is on FA (1) shown in Figure 1.1 and ethyl ferulate (EF) (12), the ester
derivative of FA which is presented later in Figure 1.6. The basic structure of FA com­
prises nine carbon atoms, a benzene ring to which a three­carbon unsaturated chain is
coupled, therefore the backbone is referred to as phenylpropanoid C6 ­ C3 structure [27].
The numbering of the carbons used throughout this work is also shown in this structure.
Figure 1.1: The basic structure of FA (1) with the numbering of the carbon atoms
FA (1), which arises from the conversion of cinnamic acid [4], naturally found in vegetation,
fruits, cereals (rice, wheat, oats), and many beverages (tea and coffee) [27]. It presents
most abundantly in plant cell walls (PCWs), varying from 0.29mg/100g in tomatoes to
243.6mg/100g in bamboo shoots [37]. Grains, such as wheat flour and maize kernels,
are often used to extract FA (1), where it appears both in its free acid and conjugated
forms. It is often linked covalently to various carbohydrates, where cross­linking affects
the physical chemical features of PCW [29].
Following the incorporation of FA (1) into the cell wall matrix, the molecule is activated
by wall­bound peroxidases [23]. The enzymes initiate the one­electron oxidation of phe­
nol, generating a feruloyl radical with a conjugated system due to the phenylpropanoid
structure. The radical is stabilized by electron delocalization −which is demonstrated in
Figure 1.2 −, and it leads to various activation sites. As a result of a large number of
mesomeric forms, several possible ferulic acid dimers (DFAs) can be assembled by the
covalent linkage of one feruloyl radical to another [23] [25].
Synthesis of diferulic acids and esters as enzymatic substrates and standards
2
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: Generated radicals stabilized by electron delocalization
Besides the dimerization of FA (1), the FA can also form higher­order oligomers such as
trimers and tetramers, known as triferulic and tetraferulic acids, respectively. Novozymes
(NZ) has expressed its interest in synthesizing DFAs since these compounds can be used
as well­defined substrates for assaying feruloyl esterases (FAEs). FAE is a subclass of
carboxylic acid esterases that catalyze the hydrolysis of ester bonds between FA and the
arabinoxylan structure. Such enzymes are feruloyl esterases, releasing FA (1) through
enzymatic hydrolysis, which is an alternative and more specific method to chemical hy­
drolysis.
The focus of this report is on 8,5’­DFA (6). The 8,5’­DFA in dihydrobenzofuran form,
esterified with methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside (2) is illustrated in Figure 1.3. It is the target
molecule to synthesize in this project, since it can be used as a well­defined substrate
for enzymatic assays, therefore allowing the identification of better enzymes for biomass
hydrolysis.
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: 8,5­DFA esterified to methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside
1.1.1
Different isomers of FA dimers
Diferulates are built from two ferulate esters through phenol oxidative coupling (POC)
forming either a carbon­carbon or an ether bond. These stable covalent bonds allow the
characterization of the newly composed dimers, creating diverse cyclic and non­cyclic
chemical forms [45]. Various types of dimerized products of FA (1) are known; these
mainly form at the O­4­, C­5­, and C­8­ positions, leading to 5–5’, 4–O–5’, 8–5’, 8–8’, and
8–O–4’ coupling. There are currently nine known dimeric structures, from which seven
are topological isomers, and two are additional chemical forms [53]. The different isomers
are demonstrated in Figure 1.4.
Certainly, 8,5’­DFADC (8) is derived from 8,5’­DDFANC (7), loosing CO2, however neither
of these forms are present in plants naturally. The other additional chemical form is the
8,8’­DFATHF (11) which −after the radical coupling −, gained extra oxygen incorporated
from water; therefore, it can not be considered as a true dehydrodimer [40] [43].
The first discovered DFA was the 5,5’­DFA (3) in 1975, and for many years it was the only
dimer acknowledged [59]. On the contrary in 1994, it was confirmed by John Ralph et al.,
that the amounts of other DFA are more prevalent in plant cell walls after the successful
saponification and identification of the following dehydrodimers: (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9),
(10) [23]. In addition, the latest identified DFA was the tetrahydrofuran form of the 8­8’
coupled dimer (11) by M. Bunzel et al., which was detected in 2004 after alkaline hydrolysis
of the grass cell wall [34].
4
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.4: Structures of different DFAs found in nature; C­cyclic, NC­non­cyclic, DC­
decarboxylated, THF­tetrahydrofuran; 5,5’­DFA (3), 8­O­4’­DFA (4), 4­O­5’­DFA (5), 8,5’­
DFAC (6), 8,5’­DFANC (7), 8,5’­DFADC (8), ,8’8­DFANC (9), 8,8’­DFAC (10), 8,8’­DFATHF
(11)
1.1.2
Abundancy of FA dimers
As it is mentioned previously, researchers use different grains to extract FA (1). In such
a manner, the extraction and identification of DFAs are also achievable. The distribution
of DFA isomers has been widely reported in the literature, but many agree on the same
typical DFA abundance. Maize bran is one of the most frequently used types of cereal
for extraction, considering its FA dehydrodimer content which is about 2.5% (w/w). The
most abundant ones in maize cell wall ­among the nine known dimers­, are the 8­5′­
linkage (35–45% of total dehydrodimers), followed by 5­5′­linkage (19 ­ 25%), 8­8′ (17 ­
21%), 8­O­4′ (17 ­ 21%) and 4­O­5′ (0.3%) [2]. The cyclic form 8­5’ isomer, 8,5’­DFAC
(6) is the only compound formed under biomimetic conditions using H2O2/peroxidase,
therefore it is believed that both non­cyclic dimers, (7) and (8) arise from 8,5’­DFAC (6)
during saponification. Indeed, the 8,5’­DFADC (8) called poacic acid, is generated during
5
==PAGE:13==
alkaline hydrolysis, under specific conditions [2] [3] [18]. In contrast, all the 8­8’ coupled
dehydrodimers seem to be naturally present in plants [43].
1.1.3
Dimerization in nature
FA (1) exists in nature both in the form of free acid and in the form of a conjugate. However,
in PCW, it is more commonly esterified to polysaccharides, such as arabinoxylans (AXs).
The molecule is attached through the primary alcohol at the carbon­5 position (C5­OH)
of α­L­arabinofuranoside, creating an arabinoxylan matrix [51] [55] [60]. In addition, FA
(1) can also be covalently coupled to another monomer of its own, allowing the connec­
tion between two different polysaccharide backbones. Furthermore, FA (1) can mediate
a covalent linkage from the polysaccharide to lignin via an ether linkage [29] [65]. With
merging into the lignin structure, it can form a three­dimensional network, lignin­ferulate­
carbohydrate complexes [55]. Such AX structure with the cross­link of the 8,5’­DFA is
illustrated in Figure 1.5.
Figure 1.5: Cell­wall cross­linking between two arabinoxylan chains mediated by 8­5’­
DFA. The arrows indicate the hydroxyl groups where lignin monomers can be covalently
linked via ether bonds.
Different mechanisms of esterification have been proposed for cross­linking arabinoxy­
lans, both intracellularly and extracellularly.
The first structural evidence that ferulate
dehydrodimer products cross­link saccharide units was reported by the isolation of 5­
5’­diferuloyl saccharides [31] [61]. According to molecular modeling experiments, both
ferulate units of the diferulate are uniquely linked to the same arabinoxylan chain [34].
This intramolecular formation of 5­5’­dimer could imply the low occurrence of the dehy­
droferulate in nature. Later in 2004, Allerdings et al. successfully isolated the diarabinosyl
ester of 8­O­4’­dehydrodiferulic acid, confirming the possible existence of dehydrodiferu­
late cross­linkage in cell walls. However, the proposed modeling experiments might not
provide enough flexibility to entirely exclude the possible intramolecular formation of the
8­O­4’­diferulate [15]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that intracellular feruloylation
is restricted to 8,5‘­DFA and that other dimers are formed extracellularly by the action of
peroxidase [41]. Consequently, peroxidase­mediated coupling of wall ferulate and ethyl
ferulate yields mostly 8­coupled products [22].
6
==PAGE:14==
1.1.4
Application of FA and its dimers
The interest in FA (1) and its dimers have significantly increased over the last decade. FA
(1) is a widely spread natural bioactive compound, proved to be a powerful antioxidant,
anti­inflammatory, antimicrobial and anti­diabetic molecule. Due to these properties, it
is the subject of intensive research in the pharmaceutical industry, and cosmetology [37].
Not only can it be used as a pharmaceutical agent, but it is also applied in the food industry
as it shows the activity of inhibiting the growth of microorganisms; therefore, it is a natural
food preservative [14].
It has been evaluated experimentally that DFAs −illustrated in Figure 1.4 −, have an
increased antioxidant activity compared to their parent monomer. It is due to the stabi­
lization of radical species on the aromatic rings and the numerous hydroxyl groups present
in the molecules. Apart from the aromatic rings, the dehydrodimers contain conjugated
double bonds, which could justify the increased efficiency of stabilization of free radicals
[33]. For instance, it was demonstrated that among the many naturally found ferulate
dimers (further explained in the next Section 1.1.1), one stands out particularly. 8,5’­
DFADC (9), showed the best antioxidant activity [55] and exhibited the greatest antifungal
activity against S. cerevisiae. [54].
Besides the many useful applications formerly described, there has been growing interest
in renewable biological resources as an alternative to fossil fuels for energy and material
production in recent years. To produce biofuels, the most abundant substantial raw ma­
terial is lignocellulosic biomass in nature [17]. Conceivably the most crucial role of FA
(1) is in the utilization of plant cell walls as renewable resources since it cross­links the
cell wall polymers. Typically cross­linking formed by ferulates among polysaccharides
and lignin affects the physical, chemical, and biological features, contributing to biomass
recalcitrance. The dimers provide additional mechanical strength with influencing the di­
gestibility, extensibility, and plasticity of the cell wall. It also limits the accessibility of
polysaccharide degrading enzymes to their substrates, making the cell wall less suscepti­
ble to enzymatic hydrolysis [65] [13]. Moreover, it acts as a barrier and provides protection
of the PCW from insects, fungal, and viral attacks [4]. As a result, DFAs are critical struc­
tural components in the PCW, and it is of great importance to investigate the character of
cross­couplings between ferulate and monolignols for the utilization of these feedstocks
for biofuel production. Furthermore, mapping the FAEs and their substrate relationship are
substantial since it contributes to the degradation of plant biomass. These enzymes could
modify grasses and contribute to more desirable properties, such as better digestibility and
improved saccharified lignocellulosic biomass with more easily processed feedstocks [14]
[29] [65].
For the synthesis of dimeric compounds, both (1) and (12) are common to use. However,
(1) contains a free carboxyl group which could decarboxylate during the oxidative radical
coupling; while using the esterified SM can prevent this [39]. Additionally, since FA occurs
more in its esterified form in PCW during the synthesis, this can mimic better the in vivo
conditions; therefore, the dimerization with (12) is more attractive.
Most of the DFA mentioned above in Section 1.1.1 are not commercially available and
must be synthesized in the laboratory. Although several synthetic pathways have been
published in the literature, their synthesis is non­trivial [23]. These dimers are also widely
available after saponification of the extracted plant material. This method often appears
to be easier than chemical synthesis from commercially available FA (1) or analogues
such as EF (12) and MF (13). Their structures are shown in Figure 1.1 and Figure 1.6.
7
==PAGE:15==
Authentic standards are used to determine the physiological effects of DFAs and ana­
lytical methods. Unfortunately, the limited availability of DFAs as standard substances
makes their recognition and quantification non­routine. The alkaline hydrolysis of PCW
often results in mixtures of FA moieties and DFAs that can be separated and identified.
For this, liquid chromatography­mass spectrometry (LC­MS) or high­performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) equipped with an ultraviolet (UV) detector is often used [35].
HPLC has been reported to lack selectivity in this case as phenolic compounds may co­
elute; however, lately, an isolation procedure has been demonstrated from maize bran
that seems efficient enough to obtain DFAs in quantities sufficient for use as standard
substances [35].
The extraction of FA (1) and its dehydrodimers is commonly achieved by chemical hy­
drolysis ­performed through alkaline or acidic methods­ or enzymatic hydrolysis [27] [37].
Chemical hydrolysis is possible to perform with both alkaline and acidic conditions. The
former allows the isolation and identification of FA (1) and its dimers, while the latter re­
leases the diferuloylated oligosaccharides from PCW. [30] [61]. Even though the etherified
molecule to lignin is more resistant to alkaline hydrolysis at room temperature, it can also
be released either by acidic hydrolysis or alkaline hydrolysis at high temperatures [47].
1.2
Synthesis of 8,5­DFA (6) from literature
Various starting materials (SMs) can be used to prepare the DFAs with oxidative dimer­
ization. In fact, the literature describes that some synthesis started directly with FA (1)
[44], EF (12) [22] or Methyl­ferulate (MF) (13) [10], shown in Figure 1.6. The advantage
is that these compounds are all commercially available materials, and the derivatives can
also be synthesized from the trans stereoisomer. Therefore, since the SM is trans­EF,
the major dimers are obtained with (E) configuration. Typically, the side chain of DFAs
with the (Z) configuration is rare, as PCW only consists of 20% of (Z)­FA. On the other
hand, the formation of both isomers was observed after using Ag2O oxidation in acetone
by John Ralph et al. in 1992; however, the attempts to separate and identify the isomers
have failed [24]. Additionally, isomerization goes through under UV light from the trans to
the cis form. In the equilibrium mixture, the (E)­form predominates [64].
Figure 1.6: The basic structure of EF (12) and MF (13)
8
==PAGE:16==
The radical mechanism as described in Section 1.1 is the dominant one to link two mono­
mers; however, it is not the only mechanism for dimerization. FA (1) and its derivatives
can furthermore dimerize by photochemical coupling leading to truxillic and truxinic acids,
which represents cyclobutane­dimers [56]. These dimers, on the other hand, are benefi­
cial in polymeric systems [28] [67], therefore it is not discussed further in this report.
To date, multi­step small­scale synthetic routes have been reported for the synthesis of
(6). First, the dimerization of EF (12) was demonstrated by John Ralph et al., using silver
oxide (Ag2O) as the single­electron oxidant with a yield of 30%. In the same way, in
1992, FA (1) has already been coupled to methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside (19), and this
FA­ARA moiety was subjected to dimerization with (Ag2O) giving a yield of 55%. These
findings showed that the radical coupling occurs at position 8, and especially the 8,5’­
coupling products are formed by the oxidative dimerization of FA (1) and its derivatives.
This dimer was always dominant among the other isomer products [23] [24]; however, their
separation was not trivial in either of the procedures. Afterward, a more straightforward
method, the biomimetic peroxidase­H2O2 system was used in 1998 and claimed that only
the 8,5’­DFA is formed as the product quickly, with easy separation of the contaminants
due to different retention times, giving a yield of 50% [26].
Up until now, researchers have tried similar conditions and attempted optimizing the en­
zymatic dimerization of 8,5’­isomer reported before; however, different isomers, isomer
mixtures, or even higher­order oligomers have been described. For instance, Waterstraat
et al. experimented under the same conditions as performed in 1998, but using buffer con­
ditions of pH 2.5. Yields from enzymatic dimerization were not reported, only after saponi­
fication of the purified fractions, but neither exceeded 37% [38]. Additionally, Bunzel et
al. described the main formation of trimers and tetramers after using an ethanol­buffer
mixture instead of monophasic buffer systems [39]. The yields of certain reactions with
HRP/H2O2 conditions vary widely, and generally all yield lower than 50%.
Besides HRP/H2O2 system, laccase enzyme has also been considered for producing
dimers. The activity of laccase enzyme towards (1) and (12) was investigated in a study
conducted by Abdulhadi Aljawish, which showed that laccase had a higher affinity to­
ward the esterified SM (12) in methanol­buffer mixture. The scientists emphasized the
formation of cyclic 8,5’­DFA from (1) and cyclic 8,5’­diferulate from (12), but no yields
were reported [1]. A similar study conducted by Carunchio et al. in ethanol­buffer mix­
ture demonstrated the formation of 8,5’­DFA as the main product both in the cyclic and
linear form. Another investigation with laccase showed the formation of two main dimers,
namely the 8,5’­DFA (6) and the 8,8’­coupled cyclic DFA, with yields of 11 and 38%, re­
spectively. Possibly, the stability of C­C bonds and the low heat of formation of the 8,5’
linkage lead to the formation of these two dimers [42].
These findings indicate that due to the large number of mesomeric forms (illustrated in
Figure 1.2, multiple bindings are possible, and it is essential which condition each dimer
prefers.
1.3
Enzymes involved in enzymatic dimerization
Traditionally, coupling reactions such as cross­coupling (the reactant molecules are dif­
ferent) and homocoupling (the reactant molecules are the same) were performed using
metal catalysts: Na, Cu, Pd, or Ni. However, these reactions are highly susceptible to
the presence of water, and oxygen [49], therefore the replacement of these catalysts is of
great importance. As previously mentioned in section 1.1, in vivo, peroxidases catalyze
9
==PAGE:17==
the dimerization of FA (1) by catalyzing the phenoxy radical’s formation by proton transfer
and electron abstraction from the phenol. The catalysis in nature by peroxidases has in­
spired researchers to substitute the metal catalysts and use enzymes for the biomimetic
oxidative coupling to prepare dimers by chemical synthesis in laboratories. Using the
enzymes for catalysis is useful when synthesizing the dimers since the reaction mimics
more closely the natural conditions. POC is the primary reaction through which the 8,5’­
DFA (6) is produced, under the action of the enzymes peroxidases or laccases; however,
peroxidases are more common to use [4]. The two enzyme families vary primarily in the
metal cations present in their active sites, FeIII in peroxidases, while the latter has CuII
ions [4] [5].
1.3.1
Peroxidase
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) is one of the most generally used peroxidases isolated
from the horseradish plant. Out of many different isoenzymes, it is the C isoenzyme that
can be found most abundantly in the root of horseradish [72]. These enzymes are found
in the secretory pathways and are most commonly involved in lignin polymerization in
plants [25]. These enzymes also protect the cell against the accumulation of dangerous
compounds such as H2O2, through biosynthetic and degradative ways. The peroxidase
catalyzes the destruction of the H2O2, which is converted to H2O and O2 due to its oxi­
dant and reductant nature [71]. Consequently, peroxidases also dehydrogenate the hy­
droxycinnamic acids and numerous other phenolic substrates at the expense of H2O2
[25]. These enzymes are typically used in laboratories to dimerize phenolic compounds
through synthetic pathways.
The structure of HRP C has two metal centers, one iron from the heme group and two
other calcium atoms. The iron atom is located tightly in the center of the enzyme and has
two binding sites, above and below the plane of the heme group. At these positions, two
histidine residues can bind to the iron [72]. This is illustrated in Figure 1.7.
Figure 1.7: The structure of the iron heme group in HRP with a histidine attached to the
proximal residue (under the plane of the heme group) reproduced from [72]
In Figure 1.8 below, the catalytic cycle of HRP is shown. In the ground state, the second
histidine residue in the distal region, above the heme group, is vacant; therefore, to this
octahedral position, a H2O2 can bind, and this step initiates the reaction. The different
10
==PAGE:18==
intermediates of HRP are created by either addition of an electron or a reaction with H2O2.
The reductive steps are carried out by reductive substrates such as FA (1). These steps
are, for instance, the reduction of compound I to compound II and compound II back to the
resting state [21]. This mechanism can also be presented with a simplified Equation [1­4]
shown below, which also represents alternative reactions that are catalyzed by other HRP
isoenzymes [72]. In the equations, HRP(I­III) are the different intermediates of the HRP
enzyme, while AH2 represents the reductive substrate and AH is the oxidized substrate.
Figure 1.8: The catalytic cycle of HRP with FA (1) as the reducing agent reproduced from
[72]
The catalytic cycle demonstrated with equations:
HRP + H2O2 →HRP(I)
[1]
HRP(I) + AH2 →HRP(II) + AH
[2]
HRP(II) + AH2 →HRP(III) + AH
[3]
A summery of the three equations above can be written showing the conversion of H2O2
to H2O:
H2O2 + 2 AH2 →2 H2O + 2 AH
[4]
1.3.2
Laccase
The other enzyme investigated during experimental work was Laccase, due to its reported
high thermal resistance (stable at 60◦C), substrate specificity and high oxidation rates
[8]. Furthermore, considering the SM used, it has higher affinity for (12) than (1), as pre­
viously mentioned in Section 1.2. Laccase has been also reported to have high reactivity
11
==PAGE:19==
in aqueous medium, at room temperature and neutral pH [1]. These characteristics make
this enzyme an ideal candidate for experimental investigation and optimization besides
HRP enzyme.
Laccase enzymes are widely distributed in many organisms, such as fungi, plants, and
bacteria, and belong to the family of blue multi­copper oxidases [5]. At least four copper
ions characterize this type of enzyme, referred to as T1, T2, T3α, and T3β, in the active
site. The laccase isolated from Basidiomycete white­rot fungi has been given much at­
tention lately, involving lignin degradation. Their mechanism for the modification of lignin,
however, is still unclear [5]. The application of laccase in industries is prevalent since
oxygen is freely available in nature.
Laccase can catalyze the one­electron oxidation of phenolic compounds using O2 in­
stead of H2O2 as it is observed in the case of HRP. The enzymes have a wide substrate
acceptance for phenolic compounds; however, its most important property is to oxidize
p­diphenols in the presence of O2 [1]. During the catalytic cycle of the laccase oxidation,
laccases can oxidize four moles of a phenolic substrate such as (12) by the abstraction
of four electrons, while reducing one mole of O2 into two moles of H2O [50]. This process
is presented on Equation [5] below:
O2 + 4 AH2 →2 H2O + 4AH
[5]
1.4
Esterases
As mentioned previously, FAEs are a subclass of carboxylic acid esterases. The enzyme
can release the 8,5’­DFA (6) and other DFAs from PCW by hydrolyzing the ester linkage
between the substrate and the C5­O position of the arabinose residue, as it is demon­
strated on Figure 1.9 below.
Figure 1.9: The FAE cleaves the ester linkage between (2) and the C­5 position of the
arabinose moiety in the substrate
FAEs exist broadly in nature, such as plants, bacteria, and fungi. FAEs industrial applica­
tion is wide­ranging; these enzymes improve the digestion of forage plants and recover FA
from agricultural by­product waste. Their enzymatic hydrolysis is used to increase yield
in bioethanol production, and their application as biosynthetic tools allows to catalyze es­
terification and transesterification of esters of HCAs [14].
12
==PAGE:20==
The most commonly used classification for FAEs is the ABCD classification, which was
divided in a comparative study investigated by Crepin et al. [58]. According to the clas­
sification, the enzymes are divided into four sub­classes that is based on the enzyme’s
primary amino acid sequence identity, and substrate specificity. A common feature of
all known FAEs is the same conserved amino acid catalytic triad: serine (Ser)/histidine
(His)/aspartic (Asp) amino acids located in their active site [64] [58]. Furthermore, the
different characteristics of the subclasses are demonstrated in the following paragraphs.
FAE A
Class A of the FAEs is from Aspergillus niger (A. niger) [9], and it liberates FA (1) from
ester­bound feruoylated arabinose. Besides FA (1), the release of dimers (3) and (4) by
FAE­A have also been reported although, only low quantities have been stated. Type A
FAE is demonstrated to be specific for the phenolic moiety of the substrate that carries the
methoxy substitutions, specifically at the C3 position, as it exists in FA (1). Considering
the specificity against synthetic substrates, A­type FAE is effective against MF (13) and
shows a preference for hydrophobic substrates with bulky substituents on the aromatic
ring [58].
FAE B
Type B FAE, likewise found in A. niger, and it can also release FA (1) from feruoylated
arabinose, as found in grains, although to a lesser extent than type A. Unlike type A,
type B is unable to release diferulates as stated by Crepin et al. [58]. This type of FAE
prefers the phenolic portion of the substrate with one or two hydroxyl substitutions. On
the other hand, the enzyme’s activity is considerably lowered in the case of a methoxy
group present. However, regarding synthetic substrates, it is also shown to be effective
against MF (13), similarly to type A FAE [58].
FAE C and D
The two groups of FAE C and D are similar in that these enzymes display similar specificity
towards synthetic substrates. The main differences are that type C works best on some
medium polar while type D works better on some hydrophilic substrates [58].
Nowadays, the ABDC classification appears to be limited in its ability to reflect the increas­
ing diversity of the FAEs since there are more and more characterized FAEs that could
not be categorized in this system [16]. As a consequence of the previously mentioned
characteristics, these types of FAEs are worth testing for activity against 8,5­DFA (2).
13
==PAGE:21==
2
Results and discussion
The focus in the current project was to synthesize the compound 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­
α­L­arabinofuranoside) (2), illustrated in Figure 1.3. The approach taken throughout the
project was divided into four main parts. First, the aim was to optimize the enzymatic
synthesis of (14). The reactions were conducted in milligram­scale and optimized. After­
ward, the aim was to upscale the improved and simplified procedure and proceed with the
described reactions (Part A). The second step of the experimental work was the synthesis
of methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside (18) since, it is not a commercially available compound
(Part B). The third part of the project included the coupling of the two synthesized com­
pounds (6) and (18) (Part C), and subsequently the fourth part included the investigation of
the activity of different esterases (described in Section 1.4) on the substrate (Part D). The
overview for the three first parts of the project are illustrated in the Figures (Part A ­ Figure
2.1, Part B ­ Figure 2.2, Part C ­ Figure 2.3) below, and the fourth part is demonstrated in
Section 2.4.
Figure 2.1: Part A ­ The dimerization of EF (12) to obtain compound (14)
Figure 2.2: Part B ­ The three steps for the synthesis of methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside
(18)
Synthesis of diferulic acids and esters as enzymatic substrates and standards
14
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.3:
Part C ­ The 5 steps for the synthesis of 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­α­L­
arabinofuranoside) (2)
2.1
Optimization of conditions
2.1.1
Enzymatic conditions
The preparation of (6) was formerly conducted by Ralph et al. [25], and these reaction
conditions were downscaled to milligram­scale and optimized. The different dimerization
reaction conditions like the used solvent or enzyme can significantly affect the specificity
and the outcome of the reaction. The enzymatic dimerization step illustrated in Figure
2.1 was performed multiple times. The specific optimized conditions described in Exp.
4.3, are required for successful enzymatic dimerization. Conditions considered during
optimization were the influence of buffer pH, concentration change of H2O2, and the im­
portance of co­solvents. Optimization of enzymatic dimerization was performed only using
the HRP enzyme. With the same optimized reaction, laccase was tried in different sol­
vent systems. The conclusion from the optimization experiments was gathered based on
TLC and NMR analysis and visual observations. After the optimization showed the best
results, the reaction was upscaled to obtain a sufficient dimer for the subsequent coupling
process.
15
==PAGE:23==
2.1.1.1
The influence of pH and concentration change of H2O2
The first important parameter to consider was pH. The oxidation with HRP was performed
at pH 3­9. At pH 3 and 9, no conversion of the EF (12) was observed. The highest possible
conversion of (12) was at pH 5; however, at pH 4, 6, and 7, relatively minor qualitative
differences could be noticed among the formed products.
Ralph et al. describes a very diluted condition (2 g of (12) in 2 L buffer) [25]. To avoid
dealing with large volumes, the concentration was increased from 1.2 mM to 9.1 mM,
and the solubility of (12) was also tested at each pH in the concentrated buffer. Primary
product formation was observed again at pH 5. Unfortunately, due to the low solubility of
(12) in aqueous media, the dissolution at 60 °C was more time­consuming than before.
An important aspect of using HRP for dimerization is its weak stability under different
conditions, for instance, its low thermal stability and low reactivity in organic media. Due
to the sensitivity of the enzyme in organic solvents, different buffer systems are commonly
used for enzymatic dimerization. Indeed, it was stated before that the concentration of the
used buffer is a crucial element as its effects on thermal stability and H2O2 resistance of
HRP [46]. The more concentrated the potassium phosphate buffer is, the more it reduces
the thermodynamic and kinetic stability of the enzyme, which was demonstrated by the
decreased rate of the Tm (denaturation temperature) and half­life [46]. In contrast to the
high reactivity of the enzyme in buffer systems, (12) is not soluble in aqueous media;
thus, the utilization of biphasic systems might be practical (see the discussion for this in
subsection 2.1.1.2 (The importance of co­solvents)).
The conversion of (12) in each experiment was dependent on the concentration of H2O2,
and it was substantially lower compared to the diluted ones. The initial oxidation of (12) at
pH 5 reached a maximum at a H2O2 concentration of 1.1 mM. However, this was consid­
ered too high, as the conversion of the SM was still low. HRP is likely to become inacti­
vated by the high concentration of H2O2 [46], which explains the low conversion of the SM
compared to the experiments performed in diluted conditions. Along with the inactivation,
G. Ward et al. described the possibility of oligomerization due to the high concentration
of H2O2 [20]. Moreover, in order to avoid inactivation of the enzyme, the step­wise ad­
dition of H2O2 is advised [20]. To address the possible inactivation of HRP and further
polymerization of the product, the effect of the concentration change was addressed with
H2O2­urea adduct instead of H2O2. H2O2­urea has been reported to be a safe substitu­
tion for anhydrous H2O2 [70]. It is not only easy to handle the H2O2­urea complex, but
also it can be more precisely dosed than H2O2 solutions [39]. Consequently, H2O2, was
set to 1.1 equivalents to the SM, which only allowed a concentration of 0.044 mM for the
H2O2. The lower concentration provided better results than in previous experiments.
During the optimization, the reaction time was studied which indicated that the oxidation
was complete after approximately 40 minutes. Quenching of the reaction mixture could
be important, to evade the possibility of further polymerization [18].
2.1.1.2
The importance of co­solvents
The advantage of using the organic system as a co­solvent was that the SM dissolved
more rapidly. The enzymatic dimerization worked as well at room temperature (r.t.) as at
30 °C. Therefore no increase in T was necessary. The low T is also reasonable given the
low thermal stability of HRP.
16
==PAGE:24==
The first investigated co­solvent for the biphasic system was EtOAc (95%). The reac­
tion with the HRP enzyme did not result in the identification of dimer (6), TLC confirmed
no conversion, and NMR spectra indicated SM. On the other hand, it is interesting that
dimeric product ion [M­H]­ was observed at m/z 387 by LC/MS analysis. This indicates
cyclobutane dimer formation, which is a photocycloaddition product caused by UV light
absorption and has a molecular mass of 388 Da [52]. However, this was not pursued
further since the focus is the dehydrodimer formation of (14) which was not observed in
this case.
Significant product formation was observed when the dimerization of FA (1) was attempted
with laccase enzyme in 95 % EtOAc. LC/MS analysis of the compound formed after
oxidation showed a peak at m/z 385 [M­H]­ (ESI), indicating that the dimeric product was
present. Furthermore, the gathered NMR data corresponded nicely with 8,8’­dilactone.
This finding is interesting since Adelakun and co­workers claim that 8,5’­DFA (6) forms
mainly in EtOAc, whereas the 8,8­dilactone (23) is primarily formed in EtOH. However,
there was no sign of 8,5’­DFA (6) formation. The structure of the 8,8­dilactone (23) is
shown in Figure 2.4. This result is promising and appealing for future work.
Figure 2.4: The structure of 8,8­dilactone (23)
HRP­H2O2­urea with biphasic system (phosphate buffer­acetone) was the most straight­
forward and highest yielding (crude­96% −conversion based on NMR −) technique to
synthesize compound (14). After quenching the reaction, air was blown through the reac­
tion mixture in order to remove the acetone. Afterward, the crude product was recovered
by filtration. Bubbling air through the reaction mixture was claimed to facilitate the pre­
cipitation of the product [18], however no major difference was observed when using this
method instead of extraction with EtOAc. Filtration was time consuming due to the gluti­
nous texture of the product. Certainly, extraction with EtOAc is fast, however frequently
the addition of saturated NaCl was necessary to achieve better phase separation.
In summary, Table 2.1 below illustrates the biphasic systems already investigated in the
literature with the conditions in which they were carried out, and the respective yields of
the dimeric products formed.
17
==PAGE:25==
Authors
Year
Strategy
SM
Main product
biphasic system
(buffer and co­solvent)
Yield %
Ralph et al.
1998
enzymatic oxidation
(HRP­H2O2)
EF
8,5’­diferulate
buffer
50
Russel et al.
2005
enzymatic oxidation
(HRP­H2O2)
EF
8,5’­diferulate
buffer
38
Yue et al.
2016
enzymatic oxidation
(HRP­H2O2 ­ urea complex)
EF
8,5’­diferulate
water ­ acetone
crude ­ 91
Bunzel et al.
2008
enzymatic oxidation
(HRP­H2O2 ­ urea complex)
EF
8,5’­diferulate
buffer ­ EtOH
­
Aljawish et al.
2013
enzymatic oxidation (laccase)
FA & EF
8,5’­DFA
8,5’­diferulate
buffer ­ MeOH
­
Russel et al.
2005
enzymatic oxidation
(HRP­H2O2)
FA
8,8’­DFA
buffer
8
Adelakun et al.
2012
enzymatic oxidation (laccase)
FA
8,5’­diferulate
buffer ­ EtOAc
11
Carunchio et al.
2001
enzymatic oxidation (laccase)
FA
8,5’­DFA
8­O­4’­DFA
buffer ­ EtOH
­
Table 2.1: Summary of the biphasic systems studied in this project.
2.1.1.3
The effect of laccase enzyme
The effect of laccase enzyme was investigated during the optimization. As it was already
described above, 8,8­dilactone (23) formation was observed when using EtOAc as co­
solvent with the optimized conditions. This result is surprising, since there was no sign of
formation of the cyclic 8,5’­dimer. During preparative chromatography, two fractions were
obtained, one with the SM (1), and from the other fraction a large amount of (23) was
isolated. With the formation of two isomers (cyclic 8,5’­dimer and 8,8’­dilactone), similar
findings were described by Ward et al., in monophasic buffer system, without the appli­
cation of any co­solvents [20]. By their findings, the researchers also claimed that it is
insignificant which enzyme is used to oxidize the substrate, since the dimeric formation
is non­enzymatic and it might be determined by the chemistry of phenoxy radicals [20].
On the contrary, different solvents could modulate and possibly improve the regioselec­
tive outcome of reactions. Therefore it could be interesting to repeat the aforementioned
reaction and investigate further the effect of other solvents in biphasic systems with other
types of enzymes to favour a specific coupling.
By the enzymatic reaction of laccase, in most cases low conversion of (12) to the dimer­
ized 8,5’­diferulate (14) product was observed. One reason for the low oxidation rate
could be, the purity of commercially purchased laccase. Its partial purification by ultra­
filtration could potentially increase the commercial laccase activity. Partial purification of
the laccase is useful since it removes inactive peptides or protein, furthermore it allows to
prevent the interaction of the phenolic substrate of interest with the contaminated phenol
that seems to be presents in the industrial laccase [1].
2.1.2
Purification with flash chromatography
Throughout the experimental work, flash chromatography was used for purification of the
compounds. At first, fractionation was performed with a EtOAc/DCM gradient, however
in all cases, the purification gave poor results. An attempt to find better procedures for
purification was made. An alternative solution, recrystallization was attempted, as many
researchers claimed obtaining pure product through crystallization, and even separation
of the isomers [23]. However, recrystallization was not pursued further, since no crystals
were formed in any cases. Eventually, purification by reverse­phase flash chromatogra­
18
==PAGE:26==
phy with H2O/MeCN 1:1 eluent with 0.1% formic acid allowed good separation in most
cases. 0.1 % formic acid is sufficient to minimize carboxylic acid deprotonation, resulting
in optimum peak shape.
2.2
Synthesis of methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside (18)
In the second part of the project, L­arabinose was converted to methyl α­L­arabinofurano­
side. The synthesis for this compound comprises three straightforward steps, starting
from commercially available L­arabinose. The synthesis of (18) was prepared with the
procedure as reported by Hatfield et al. [44]. The deprotection of the benzoylated product
was completed as described by van Rijssel et al. [69]. Reaction monitoring was done by
TLC, which assured the maximum yield 99% of the furanoside.
The first step of the reaction is acid­catalyzed glycosylation (Fischer glycosylation) using
excess methanol on L­arabinose to form the intermediate methyl furanoside triol. The
equilibrium process gives an approximately 1:1 mixture of anomers (1:1 mixture of α and
β glycosides) which is separated in the next step. The second step of the synthesis
was focused on the formation of methyl 2,3,5­tri­O­benzoyl­α­L­arabinofuranoside pro­
duced from the previously formed methyl furanoside triol with benzoyl chloride and pyri­
dine to yield a fully benzoylated product. This product allows the separation of the two
anomeric forms since, during the crystallization, the α­anomer is separated as only this
is solid, the β­glycoside remains in oil form [57]. In the last step of the synthesis the fo­
cus is on the conversion of methyl 2,3,5­tri­O­benzoyl­α­L­arabinofuranoside to methyl
α­L­arabinofuranoside. The last reaction was carried out in two steps, first by adding 1M
NaOMe, where the benzoyl groups become deprotected through the hydrolysis of the es­
ter groups. Secondly, protonation of the alkoxide group was carried out by adding cc.
AcOH.
2.3
Synthesis of 8,5’­di­(methyl­feruoyl­Ara) (2)
2.3.1
Fischer esterification ­ The formation of EF (12)
As EF (12) is a commercially available SM, this reaction was not essential for the project;
however, due to the optimization plan, the reactions were performed repeatedly; therefore,
the purchased (12) was depleted. FA (1) was converted to (12) by a simply esterification
reaction to avoid the pause of experimental work due to the delay of the shipment of (12).
The derivatization of (1) into its corresponding (12) was performed using a straightfor­
ward, one­pot reaction as described by Armando F. Reano et al. [6]. In the reaction, HCl
was used as the catalyst in the presence of EtOH. To drive the reaction to completion, a
large excess of alcohol was necessary.
2.3.2
Oxidative dimerization ­ Formation of 8,5’­diferulate (14)
In the previous sections, the optimization of the enzymatic dimerization and hydrolysis
is discussed. The large­scale conditions for enzymatic dimerization and hydrolysis are
shown in the experimental sections 4.3 and 4.4. The reaction with SM (12) was scaled up
based on optimized procedures to ensure sufficient material for subsequent experiments.
The formed compound (14) possesses a 2,3­dihydrobenzofuran ring, which LC/MS and
19
==PAGE:27==
NMR analysis confirmed. The structure is identified by two signature signals in 1H NMR.
Each proton appears as two doublets due to splitting caused by the close vicinity of the
two protons on each carbon (A7 and A8). The protons appear at 4.45 and 6.06 ppm
(see Appendix A.5 for the corresponding signals). Furthermore, the formed dimer (14)
contains the (E) configuration of the alkene group. The trans configuration of the two
hydrogen atoms on the B7 and B8 position is confirmed by their coupling constant, which
is specific for this double bond, J = 15.9 (see Appendix A.3).
As already mentioned in the first sections, the radical pairing approach seems to be the
primary mechanism of enzymatic dimerization, and its mechanism is illustrated in Figure
2.5 below. It appears that 8,5’­coupling is preferred due to the stability of C­C bonds and
the low heat of formation of 8,5’­linkage [42]. The new C­C bond is created by radical
pairing, connecting the two monomers, and forming an intermediate. Following aromati­
zation, the intermediate forms the cyclic product upon intermolecular nucleophilic attach
of the A7 carbon, creating a new C­O bond.
Figure 2.5: Enzymatic dimerization of EF (12) illustrating the radical pairing approach
Regardless of which enzymes are applied, the product formation is independent. The
mechanism of phenol oxidation depends on the enzyme; however, all lead to the same
phenoxy radical stated by Ward et al. The researchers also specify that the subsequent
coupling of radicals to form dimers and oligomeric products is non­enzymatic and is likely
to be dominated by the chemical nature of the FA phenoxy radical [20]. The coupling
of phenoxy radicals at the para and ortho positions is considered to be the fastest since
these positions have the highest free electron density [48] [11]. In the case of EF (12), the
C3 ortho position is blocked by the methoxy group, but the C5 ortho position is accessible.
The C1 para position is blocked; still, high­density radicals arise at the C8 position due
to conjugation of the double bond on the side chain. The formation of the three highly
favored radicals can result in a mixture of 5,5’, 8,5’ and 8,8’ coupling products.
Even after many attempts for dimerization of (12) by HRP and laccases showed that the
reactions generally form a mixture of products possibly from 5,5’­ (3) and 8,8’­dimers (9)
to even higher oligomers, which shows the lack of selectivity of the enzyme. However,
no by­products were identified due to the short duration of the project and the emphasis
on synthesizing cyclic 8,5’­dimer. Unfortunately, the 8,5’coupling requires both C8 and
C5 positions; therefore, protecting groups can not be used to prompt the reaction to one
product formation. On the other hand, if radical dimerization is driven by thermodynamic
control to give the most stable product, the lack of enzyme selectivity requires additional
control or a specific physiological environment. The results of experiments with laccase
and HRP conducted during the project have confirmed that certain solvents systems could
promote reaction selectivity. Indeed, different organic solvent systems can have a signif­
icant impact, for example on the selectivity of laccase­catalyzed reactions [62].
20
==PAGE:28==
Despite the hypothesis mentioned above, the LIP enzyme could be the following inves­
tigated enzyme for selective coupling since it is less susceptible to H2O2­dependent in­
activation than the HRP enzyme. It is also established that two protectors are required
for efficient enzymatic activity (gelatin and veratryl alcohol). These protectors, however,
could also be investigated in the case of HRP and laccase since phenolics activated by
peroxidases have also exhibited enzyme inactivation with phenoxy radicals and reactive
products binding to the enzyme [19]. It would also be interesting to try the addition of
dirigent protein (DIR) for future work since it can aid stereoselective synthesis binding
precisely two radicals. By trapping two radicals in the protein cavity, it can mediate the
selective C­C bond formation [68]. If time had allowed, it could have been interesting to
investigate micellar solutions that have been reported to be effective for regioselective
oxidative coupling instead of buffer solutions [63].
2.3.3
Hydrolysis ­ Formation of (6)
The hydrolysis step illustrated in Figure 2.1 was completed multiple times. As it was
already introduced in Section 1.1.2, hydrolysis of dehydrodimers can be achieved with al­
kaline hydrolysis [27] [37]. Two other isomers of the cyclic 8,5’­dimer can form, (7) and (8).
The hydrolysis of (14) was attempted many times in order to investigate whether selective
hydrolysis conditions could be found for the two isomers, the linear and cyclic product. The
selective hydrolysis of (14) to yield poacic acid (8) has already been established under
specific conditions by Yue et al. [18]. High temperature and lower NaOH concentration
with long time­period has proven to favour ring opening and decarboxylation.
During experimental setup, base treatment with LiOH and NaOH in high concentration at
r.t. were compared, to promote hydrolysis of the diferulate to diacid over ring opening.
LC/MS showed three peaks with m/z 386 corresponding to the dimer with three different
elution times (first peak: 4.2 min elution time, second peak: 4.5 min elution time, third
peak: 4.7 min elution time). One of the byproducts identified before purifying the mixture
was the decarboxylated dimer eluted at first (m/z 341 [M­H]­). There was no sign for
the hydrolysis of only one of the ethyl esters. The major peak, identified as the cyclic
8,5’­DFA had always higher retention time in all experimental conditions compared to
the linear form. After fractionation by flash chromatography the first fraction gave yellow
crystals, while the rest of the fractions appeared as white crystals after evaporation. NMR
analysis confirmed that the first fraction contained the linear form of the dimer. The higher
retention time value of (6) in comparison with the (7), indicate the different polarity among
the compounds. Indeed, the open isomer contains one of the oxygen as a free OH group,
while in the cyclic form the oxygen is part of the ring. The open ring form of the 8,5’­DFA
is illustrated in Figure 1.4.
The correct structure of (14) is possible to confirm, and to differentiate from (7) by NMR.
The cyclic structure can be identified by two signature signals in 1H NMR. These are two
doublets, appearing around 4.45 and 6.06 ppm (see Appendix Appendix A.5 for the cor­
21
==PAGE:29==
responding signals). The splitting of the signals giving doublets are caused by the close
vicinity of the two protons on each carbon (A7 and A8). When the cyclic dimer is converted
to the linear form through a quinone methide intermediate, the aromaticity is regained by
the elimination of a proton from the 8­carbon position. Therefore in the NMR spectrum
of the linear form, the two signals disappear and the proton on carbon A7 appears as a
singlet.
The reaction duration is crucial since the highest yield was 86% of the hydrolyzed cyclic
dimer, obtained at a high NaOH concentration after one hour. The increased amount
of the linear form over the four hours suggests that ester hydrolysis may be faster than
the ring­opening under the studied conditions. Indeed, the reaction might be under ki­
netic control, indicating that the ring­opening process possesses higher activation energy;
therefore, it could be slower than the faster ester hydrolysis. Driving the reaction towards
more the hydrolysis can be further investigated by adjusting the reaction conditions, with
even shorter reaction times and higher concentrations of NaOH.
2.3.4
Acetylation ­ Formation of (19)
At this step, the common alcohol protecting group, acetyl (Ac), is installed via an acety­
lation reaction using acetic anhydride in the presence of DMAP as a base catalyst. The
combination of these reagents is commonly used for the acetylation of the alcohols [36].
Furthermore, the transformation of the phenol group is essential during the subsequent
SOCl2 reaction. In the first step, compound (6) was mixed with anhydrous pyridine to
deprotonate the phenol group. In the next step, adding the acetic anhydride and DMAP is
attaching an acetyl group to the deprotonated oxygen (esterification), forming compound
(19).
2.3.5
Acyl chloride ­ Formation of (20)
The acetylated dimer has two carboxyl groups from the previous step, which is converted
into an acid chloride using thionyl chloride (SOCl2). It is an extremely reactive intermedi­
ate, and its fast hydrolysis back to the SM is expected. Therefore, LC/MS data was not
22
==PAGE:30==
collected. However, the NMR spectrum of the crude product revealed the presence of
two possible isomers and indicated ring­opening, possible formation of (7). It was specu­
lated that the linear 8,5’­dimer was present since the A7 and A8 protons did not show the
corresponding doublets in the specific region (see Appendix A.5 for the corresponding
signals). Protons from the side chain C=C bond appeared as doublets with the correct
coupling constant (J = 15.9 Hz), confirming the side chain trans (E) double bond. COSY
similarly confirmed the correlation between the two adjacent protons. On the other hand,
the integrals could not confirm the relative numbers of hydrogens, and more intense sig­
nals appeared than those two doublets. Therefore, the hypothesis of another isomer
has not been discarded either. It is also interesting that similar doublets with the same
coupling constant appeared, but COSY could not detect any signs of correlation. The col­
lected NMR spectrum from the crude product is illustrated in Figure A.21 (Appendix A).
Since acyl chlorides are unstable reactive intermediates, this product was directly used in
the next coupling step without further purification.
Carboxylic acids with SOCl2 are typically used to produce acid chlorides in laboratories [7].
To date, no ring­opening of (6) has been observed and published under acidic conditions.
Compound (19) was treated with deuterium chloride (DCl) to confirm the assumption that
ring­opening occurs under acidic conditions. By using DCl, the reaction mixture was an­
alyzed directly by NMR. However, no conclusions were drawn during the investigation
since no ring­opening was observed; thus, data is not included in the report. Further ex­
periments are needed to find out under which conditions the ring­opening occurs. It could
be interesting to test the whole procedure again under similar conditions for future work,
and it might be worth trying increasing reaction time or temperature. In addition, using
other reagents besides SOCl2 could be investigated, such as oxalyl chloride.
2.3.6
Formation of (24a), (24b) and (25)
Figure 2.6: The product formed after coupling (20) to (18). The first fraction (S1) contains
the linear form, the second fraction (S2) contains the benzofuran form
23
==PAGE:31==
After obtaining the acyl chloride derivative of 8,5’­DFA the coupling was completed through
the C5­O of unprotected methyl α­L­diarabinofuranoside. The coupling step of (20) with
(18) was a straightforward synthesis as described by Hatfield et al. [44], and it was per­
formed in excellent yields (S1­98% S2­74%). Reaction monitoring was done by TLC and
showed a single spot with complete conversion of SM. Therefore, the reaction mixture was
purified, and, strangely, two fractions (S1 and S2) were collected. Interestingly, the TLC
analysis of the first fraction showed two different spots, and the second fraction showed
one spot, revealing the formation of different isomers. LC/MS analysis of the fractions
revealed the formation of two compounds ((24) and (25)). The analysis of S1 showed
a peak at 765.44 [M+HCOO]­ (ESI), indicating that the dimer was coupled to (18). The
other peak at m/z 763.40 [M+HCOO]­ (ESI) indicated another compound with a differ­
ence of two protons, corresponding to S2. Due to the complex structure of the dimer,
the NMR data assigned in this report was confirmed by 1H NMR, 13C NMR, H­1H COSY
(COrrelated SpectroscopY), HSQC (Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence), HMBC
(Heteronuclear Multiple Bond Correlation) data. However, in the report, only 1H and 13C
spectrums are included.
Analysis of the spectrum of S1 led to the speculation that (24) is the linear form of the prod­
uct in the presence of cis and trans isomers. Four doublets with similar coupling constant
of J = 15.9 Hz (unique to double bonds) appeared (see Appendix A.9 and Appendix
A.10). The integrals also indicated the presence of two compounds. In addition, attempts
were made to determine the structure; however, due to the extremely close 1H and 13C
NMR chemical shifts, the structure, and the hypothesis were not possible to confirm. In
fact, recently in 2021 Moni et al. investigated the photoisomerization of FA (1) [12]. The
close chemical shifts of the trans and cis isomers of FA (1) is demonstrated in Figure 2.7
below, and the data could also indicate the probability of compound (24) owing to the
open form with the presence of both isomers. If time had allowed, the attempt to separate
the isomers could have proved the presence of the cis­trans isomers of the linear form.
Figure 2.7: The picture illustrates the (E)/(Z) ratio of FA(1). Blue squares indicate the
signals of the (E) isomer, while purple triangles indicate the signal of the (Z) isomer. The
figure is reproduced from [12].
24
==PAGE:32==
The NMR data of the benzofuran form of the cyclic compound (25) assigned in this report
was mostly confirmed by 1H NMR, 13C NMR, HSQC,and HMBC data, which appeared
consistent. The correlation between the two arabinofuranoside protons, C’5­H (a,b) and
the carbonyl (A9, B9) clearly justified the esterification of the arabinose O­5. The integrals
corresponding to the total number of hydrogens present in the molecule were also confir­
matory as regards the oxidized benzofuran structure. Furthermore, the coupling constant
of the two doublets with a J = 15.9 Hz (unique to double bonds) also appeared verifying
the trans isomer of the 8,5’­di­(methyl feruoyl­Ara).
2.3.7
Ac deprotection
Figure 2.8: The first fraction (S1) contains the linear form of (26) with the speculated cis
trans isomers, the second fraction (S2) contains the benzofuran form of (27)
At the final step of the synthesis, (24) and (25) were deprotected of the acetyl group to re­
gain the phenol group. Deprotection was performed under alkaline conditions by adding
secondary amine, pyrrolidine. The deprotection yielded 54% and 37% for compounds
(26) and (27) respectively. Due to lack of time, no attempt was made to separate these
isomers. However, LC/MS data was also collected at DTU using ultra­performance liq­
uid chromatography­tandem mass spectrometer (UPLC­MS/MS). The Figure 2.9 below
demonstrates a good separation of the isomers eluting at 1.11 and 1.17 in an approxi­
mately 1:2 ratio. The LC/MS data of compound (26) below showes two major peaks at
m/z 677. [M­H]­, 723.21 [M+HCOO]­ (ESI), indicating also that the dimer was coupled to
(18), and two isomers are present.
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.9
2.4
Enzyme assays
The specificity of FAEs was assayed by a simple LC/MS method. As outlined previously in
Section 1.4, FAEs have specificity to cleave the ester linkage between the dehydrodimer
and the arabinose moiety, releasing 8,5’­DFA (6), as illustrated in Figure 1.9. Therefore,
the analysis was made via substrate conversion by the hydrolysis of each ester linkage
connected to the arabinofuranoside part. Quantification of the hydrolysis could not be
done due to the shifted retention time (Rt) values. For quantification, optimization of the
HPLC method would be necessary.
The evaluation of hydrolyzed products was performed in negative mode, allowing each
compound to detect and overview the activity of the different enzymes on each substrate
(S1 and S2). Table 2.2 below illustrates the results from the experiments that were ob­
tained upon the incubation of four different enzymes with the two substrates between a
specific interval. Out of four enzymes, only one type A esterase showed total activity to­
wards S1, cleaving both of the arabinofuranoside groups leading to S1­2Ara. On the other
hand, FAE­A could only hydrolyze one ester bond in the case of S2 (S2­Ara) throughout
the same time. The ester hydrolysis from type A FAE was expected due to the formerly
reported efficiency against MF (13), and its preference for hydrophobic substrates with
26
==PAGE:34==
bulky substituents on the aromatic ring [58]. The stability of the substrates could confirm
why it is easier to cleave the two arabinofuranoside moiety with S1 than with S2. The hy­
drolysis of both ester groups in S1 could be more convenient for FAE­A due to the open
structure and the possible cis­trans isomers (see Figure 2.8); therefore, the substrate is
more flexible, and the ester bonds could be less hindered. Additionally, S2 is more stable
due to its utterly aromatic structure [32] therefore, hydrolysis might be more challenging
for the esterase.
FAE­C1 was the other enzyme that showed visual activity against S1, cleaving only one
Ara moiety. FAE­C1 is a more general enzyme that cleaves the ester bonds less selec­
tively. Its activity corresponds well with the assay results showing cleavage but in a lower
amount compared to FAE­A.
Enzyme
type
t
(hr)
S1
(m/z)
S1­Ara
(m/z)
S1­2Ara
(m/z)
Enzyme
type
t
(hr)
S2
(m/z)
S2­Ara
(m/z)
S2­2Ara
(m/z)
677.2
531.16
385.1
675.2
529.14
383.08
FAE­A
0.5
+
++
+
FAE­A
0.5
+++
+++
­
3
+
++
++
3
++
+++
­
5
+
+
++
5
+
+++
­
24
­
+
+++
24
+
+++
+
FAE­B
0.5
+++
+
­
FAE­B
0.5
+++
+
­
3
+++
+
­
3
+++
++
­
5
+++
++
­
5
+++
++
+
24
+++
++
­
24
+++
+++
+
FAE­C1
0.5
+++
+
­
FAE­C1
0.5
+++
++
+
3
NA
NA
NA
3
+++
++
+
5
++
++
­
5
+++
++
+
24
+
+++
­
24
+++
++
+
FAE­C2
0.5
+++
+
­
FAE­C2
0.5
+++
+
+
3
+++
+
­
3
+++
++
+
5
+++
++
­
5
+++
++
+
24
+++
+++
­
24
+++
++
+
Table 2.2: The table illustrates the different activities on both synthesized substrates (S1
and S2) between 30 mins to 24 hr. S1­Ara corresponds to one hydrolysed arabinofura­
noside, while S1­2Ara shows both ester bonds hydrolysed.
The signals (­,+) are used as a scale to show the cleaved moieties, which corresponds to
the height of the peak in negative ion mode. ­ no peak, + small peak, ++ big peak, +++
very big peak
27
==PAGE:35==
3
Conclusion and outlook
In this thesis, two novel substrates were successfully synthesized in reasonable yields
using the biomimetic peroxidase­H2O2 system. The synthesized substrates were derived
from 8,5’­DFA (6) by attaching the dimer via an ester linkage to methyl α­L­diarabinofurano­
side through the C5­O position of the arabinofurano­side residue. Finally, these synthe­
sized substrates were used as standards to determine the activity of FAEs against them.
In the first part of the project, the enzymatic approach using the biomimetic peroxidase­
H2O2 system was explored to generate mainly 8,5’­coupled dimers, as described by Ralph
et al. [25]. The optimization of the enzymatic dimerization of EF (12) was carried out on a
small scale to increase the yield of the desired dimer. The optimization strategy resulted
in a maximum of 96% conversion, as observed by LC/MS analysis. The purification by
RP­chromatography was also investigated, resulting in a relatively good separation maxi­
mum of 54% yield of the 8,5’­diferulate (14). After the successful optimization, the reaction
was upscaled to obtain a sufficient dimer for the subsequent coupling process. Laccase
enzyme for the synthesis of 8,5’­DFA starting from readily available FA (1) was also inves­
tigated with the already optimized conditions. The synthesis proved unsuccessful consid­
ering the formation of 8,5’­DFA, on the other hand proved to be selective for the synthesis
of 8.8’­dilactone (23).
In the second stage of the project, the commercially not available methyl α­L­diarabinofura­
noside (18) was synthesized with a straightforward method in an acceptable overall yield
of 48%. In the subsequent steps, this arabinofuranoside moiety was linked to the 8,5’­
dimer.
The third phase of the project was exploring for the first time the 5­step synthesis approach
to obtain the novel 8,5’­di­(methyl feruoyl­Ara) substrate. The alkaline treatment of (14)
was performed with successful hydrolysis obtaining mostly the cyclic form of (6) resulting
in 86% yield. After the subsequent acetylation and chlorination, 8,5’­diferuoyl­chloride
(20) was obtained and subjected to coupling with (18), then the obtained products were
deacetylated. With this strategy, two substrates were successfully synthesized in this
project, yielding the 8,5’­di­(methyl feruoyl­Ara) in linear form possibly as a mixture of
cis/trans isomers (54%), and 8,5’­di­(methyl feruoyl­Ara) in benzofuran form (37%). After
each step RP­chromatography was performed, however the unstable intermediate (20)
wsa directly used in the coupling reaction without purification.
In the last phase of the project, FAEs activity was determined against the two success­
fully synthesized substrates, using LC/MS assay method. The enzyme activity led to the
separation of (6) from methyl α­L­diarabinofuranoside and the hydrolysed moieties were
analysed based on the detection of the mass­to­charge ratio (m/z) in ESI. Out of the four
FAEs only FAE­A showed total activity against (26) by cleaving both Ara residue, and
partial activity against (27) by hydrolysing only one Ara residue.
Synthesis of diferulic acids and esters as enzymatic substrates and standards
28
==PAGE:36==
3.1
Future work
If more time had been designated for this project, the following investigations could have
justified the observations and led to an explanation of the open questions regarding ex­
perimental work:
• Further studies of different enzymes should be pursued for selective enzymatic
dimerization. For instance, LIP enzyme could be the following investigated enzyme
for selective coupling since it is less susceptible to H2O2­dependent inactivation than
the HRP enzyme. The two protectors (gelatin and veratryl aclohol) are required for
the efficientc activity of LIP, however it could be also investigated in the case of HRP
and laccase enzyme, to examine if it possibly increases their activity
• The synthesis of the 8,8’­dilactone (23) should be attempted once more, with inves­
tigating both EtOAc and EtOH co­solvents. If it is possible to synthesize with higher
yields, afterward it can be pursued to convert to the linear form (9). This compound
could potentially be another candidate besides the 8,5’­DFA to couple to (18) and
to determine FAEs activity.
• Regarding the enzymatic assays, another substrate could be synthesized, namely
(1) coupled to methyl α­L­diarabinofuranoside yielding the 5­O­trans­feruoyl­ methyl
α­L­diarabinofuranoside. The FAE activity agains the monomer substrate could be
compared to the novel 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) substrate.
29
==PAGE:37==
4
Experimental
4.1
General methods
During the experimental work, commercially available reagents were used, delivered by
chemical suppliers, without further purification. All solvents used were of HPLC grade.
Analytical TLC was performed with Merck TLC Silica gel 60 F254 0.2 mm thick precoated
TLC plates (normal phase) and ALUGRAM® RP­18W 0.15 mm thick precoated TLC
plates (reverse­phase). The plates were visualized under UV­light (UV254). Automated
flash column chromatography was conducted on Biotage Selekt, with Biotage Sfär® silica
columns (normal phase) and Biotage® Sfär C18 Duo (reverse phase). The solvents used
for NP­chromatography were n­hexane/EtOAc eluent, and for the RP­chromatography
(water/MeCN) were prepared with 0.1% formic acid. All compounds were characterized
by NMR 1H, 13C, Correlation Spectroscopy (COSY), Heteronuclear Single Quantum co­
herence Spectroscopy (HSQC), Heteronuclear Multiple Bond Correlation (HMBC) exper­
iments in Acetone­d6 unless otherwise specified, on a 400 MHz Bruker Avance III HD
spectrometer (400 MHz for 1H NMR and 100 MHz for 13C NMR). The NMR data was pro­
cessed using TopSpin. The compounds were also characterized by LC­MS on a Bruker
Elute HPLC connected to a Bruker amaZon SL iontrap MS fitted with an ESI source in
MeCN (0.1 mg/mL).
Synthesis of diferulic acids and esters as enzymatic substrates and standards
30
==PAGE:38==
4.2
Synthesis of EF (12)
Ethyl 4­hydroxy­3­methoxycinnamate
FA (1) (18 g, 0.09 mol), was dissolved in ethanol while stirring a few drops of concentrated
HCl were added. The reaction media was refluxed for 2 days. The conversion of the SM
was checked by TLC (n­hexane:EtOAc 1:1). After cooling to r.t., ethanol was evaporated
under reduced pressure. Afterwards, the concentrated oil was solubilized in EtOAc (125
mL), washed with NaHCO3 (2 × 50 mL) and brine (25 mL) in an extraction funnel. The
organic phase was separated and dried over anhydrous Mg2SO4, filtered and evaporated
again. The final product crystallized during drying, forming opal white crystals. The NMR
data confirmed that the product is pure, it did not need further purification. The product
was isolated as a solid (19.22 g, 96%).
The NMR data of the synthesized EF (12) was compared to the reference spectrum of
the purchased EF (12) obtained from chemical supplier:
δH (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 1.29 (3H, t, J = 7.1 Hz), 3.94 (3H, s), 4.19 (2H, q, J = 7.0 Hz), 6.42
(1H, d, J = 16.2 Hz), 6.89 (1H, dd, J = 8.1 Hz), 7.16 (1H, dd, J = 8.1 Hz), 7.35 (2H, d, J =
2.0 Hz), 7.62 (d, J = 15.9 Hz)). Appendix A.1
δC (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 13.7 (C11), 55.4 (C12), 59.6 (C10), 110.4 (C2), 115.1 (C5), 115.8
(C8), 122.9 (C7), 126.6 (C1), 144.5 (C6), 147.8 (C3), 149.1 (C4), 166.5 (C9) Appendix
A.2
31
==PAGE:39==
4.3
Synthesis of 8,5’­diferulate (14)
(E)­ethyl 5­(3­ethoxy­3­oxoprop­1­en­1­yl)­2­(4­hydroxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­7­methoxy­
2,3­dihydrobenzofuran­3­carboxylate
EF (12) (8.7 g, 0.04 mol) was dissolved in acetone (180 mL) and then diluted with phos­
phate buffer (500 mL). The solution of H2O2­urea complex (4.05 g, 0.04 mol in 30 mL
in H2O) was added to the mixture, followed by the HRP dissolved in H2O2 (4 mg, 10
mL). The reaction mixture was diluted with phosphate buffer to 980 mL and stirred at
r.t. After 10 minutes the reaction became yellow and after about 30 minutes the yellow
product seemed to precipitate. TLC analysis was done throughout the experiment (n­
hexane:EtOAc 1:1). After about 40 minutes, it was considered that the starting material
was fully converted. The reaction mixture was acidified with HCl (4 M, 4 mL) to pH<0,
and the crude product was partitioned between EtOAc and saturated NaCl. The organic
layer was collected and dried with Na2SO4, the filtered through a filter funnel (4­8 µ). The
collected organic mixture was evaporated and purified.
The purification was performed by reverse­phase flash chromatography (H2O/MeCN 1:1).
Gradient elution was used, going on 20% for 2 CV, then to 60% for 30 CV and finally to
100%. The 8.3 g were purified in two rounds, as the capacity of the biggest column was
only 5 g. The main fractions were pooled together and the solvent was evaporated. The
product was isolated as a white/yellow solid (4.6 g, 54%).
The NMR data was consistent with the reported values [23].
δH (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 1.27 (t, 6H, CH3(Et) J = 7.12 Hz), 3.85 (s, 3H, A3­OCH3), 3.94 (s,
3H B3­OCH3), 4.21 (q, 2H (A10­CH2(Et)), J = 7.1 Hz), 4.28 (m, 2H (B10­CH2(Et)) J =
7.2 Hz), 4.45 (d, 1H (A8), J = 8.05 Hz), 6.05 (d, 1H (A7), J = 7.9 Hz), 6.44 (d, 1H (B8), J =
16.0 Hz), 6.86 (d, 1H (A5), J = 8.7 Hz), 6.94 (dd, 1H (A6) J = 8.2 Hz, J = 1.8 Hz), 7.11 (d,
1H (A2), J = 2.0 Hz), 7.30 (br s, 1H (B6)), 7.4 (br s, 1H (B2)), 7.64 (d, 1H (B7), J = 15.9),
7.76 (br s, 1H, A­OH) Appendix A.3
δC (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 18.82­18.97 (s, 2C CH3(Et) CH3(Et)), 60.40 (A8), 60.65 (A­OCH3),
60.82 (B­OCH3), 64.89 (B­CH2(Et)), 66.54 (A­CH2(Et)), 92.68 (A7), 115.06 (A2), 117.62
(B2), 120.15 (A5), 121.02 (B8), 123.25 (B6), 124.52 (A6), 131.74 (B5), 133.79 (B1),
136.43 (A1), 149.57 (B7), 150.16 (B3), 152.30­152.8 (A4+A3), 155.32 (B4), 171.61 (B9),
175.43 (A9) Appendix A.4
LC­MS (ESI): C24H26O8 (exact mass 442.16 Da): m/z 443.19 [M+H]+; 441.19 [M­H]­
32
==PAGE:40==
4.4
Synthesis of 8,5’­DFA (6)
(E)­5­(2­carboxyvinyl)­2­(4­hydroxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­7­methoxy­2,3­dihydrobenzofuran­
3­carboxylic acid
Diethyl 8,5’­diferulate (3 g, 7 mmol) was dissolved in 10% NaOH (380 ml, 0.02 M) and
stirred for 1 h at r.t. After 1 h, LC/MS showed full conversion, therefore the mixture was
washed with DCM to eliminate impurities. After, the aqueous layer was collected and
acidified with HCl ( 300 ml, 4 M) until pH was around 0, and then it was partitioned between
EtOAc and saturated NaCl. The organic layer was collected and dried with Na2SO4, then
filtered through a filter funnel (4­8 µ) and evaporated. Upon evaporation the crude product
crystallized and NMR was made from the crude crystals. TLC analysis was done with RP­
plates in H2O/MeCN 1:1 (both eluent with 0.1% formic acid), which indicated full reaction
completion.
Reverse­phase flash chromatography purification was done of the 2.8 g crude sample
with H2O/MeCN 1:1 eluent with 0.1% formic acid. The main fractions from the purification
were pooled together, evaporated and freeze dried. The product was isolated as a solid
(2.2 g, 86%).
The NMR data was consistent with the reported values [23].
δH (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 3.86 (s, 3H, A3­OCH3), 3.94 (s, 3H, B3­OCH3), 4.45 (d, 1H (A8),
J = 8.0 Hz), 6.06 (d, 1H (A7), J = 7.8 Hz), 6.43 (d, 1H (B8), J = 15.7 Hz), 6.85 (d, 1H (A5),
J = 8.1 Hz), 6.93 (dd, 1H (A6) J = 8.1 Hz, J = 1.9 Hz), 7.12 (d, 1H (A2), J = 2.0 Hz), 7.34
(br s, 2H (B2+B6), 7.66 (d, 1H (B7), J = 16.2 Hz) Appendix A.5
δC (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 55.92 (A8), 56.37 (A­CH3), 56.55 (B­CH3), 88.45 (A7) 110.77 (A2),
113.48 (B2), 115.87 (A5), 116.75 (B8), 118.98 (B6), 120.17 (A6), 127.68 (B5), 129.51 (B1),
132.34 (A1), 145.65 (B7) 145.86 (B3), 147.96 (A4), 148.61 (A3), 151.03 (B4), 167.99 (B9),
171.99 (A9) Appendix A.6
LC­MS (ESI): C20H18O8 (exact mass 386.35 Da): m/z 387.20 [M+H]+ ; 385.18 [M­H]­
33
==PAGE:41==
4.5
Synthesis of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­DFA (19)
(E)­2­(4­acetoxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­5­(2­carboxyvinyl)­7­methoxy­2,3­dihydro­
benzofuran­3­carboxylic acid
8,5’­DFA was weighted out in a RBF (1.72 g, 4.5 mmol) and it was dissolved in anhydrous
pyridine (1.5 mL, 133.5 mmol), and mixed with magnetic stirring. After all the diferulic acid
was dissolved, an ice bath was placed under the RBF and acetic­anhydride (3.5 mL, 347
mmol) was added to the mixture. A small amount of DMAP was also added (spatula­tip
amount). The bright yellow reaction was removed from the ice bath and left for stirring
overnight (ON). The next day the bright yellow colour became darker. 96% EtOH (1,5
mL) was added to quench the reaction, and it was placed on ice bath to crystallize. After
an hour no crystals formed, therefore the reaction mixture was evaporated with toluene
(2x10 mL), then it was diluted again in 96% EtOH and warmed up. No crystals formed
upon cooling, therefore the solvents were evaporated under reduced pressure and the
yellow oily product was dried in vacuum ON.
The sample was then purified by reverse­phase flash chromatography with H2O/ MeCN
1:1 eluent with 0.1% formic acid. Products containing fractions were pooled together,
evaporated and dried in vacuum. The product was isolated as a solid (31.4 mg, 29%).
The NMR data was consistent with the reported values [23].
δH (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 2.20 (s, 3H, A4­OCH3), 3.78 (s, 3H, A3­OCH3), 3.89 (s, 3H, B3­
OCH3), 4.45 (d, 1H (A8), J = 7.4 Hz), 6.13 (d, 1H (A7) J = 7.5 Hz), 6.41 (d, 1H (B8), J =
16.0 Hz), 7.02 (dd, 1H (A6), J = 7.9 Hz, J = 1.7 Hz), 7.05 (s, 1H (A5) J = 8.1 Hz), 7.22 (d,
1H (A2), J = 1.44 Hz), 7.30 (s, 1H (B2), 7.34 (s, 1H (B6), 7.65 (d, 1H (B7), J = 16.0 Hz)
Appendix A.7
δC (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 20.45 (A4­OCH3), 55.92 (A8), 56.51 (B­CH3), 56.93 (A­CH3),
87.66 (A7) 111.27 (A2), 113.49 (B2), 123.87 (A5), 116.66 (B8), 118.90 (A6), 119.09 (B6),
127.29 (B5), 129.66 (B1), 139.86 (A1), 140.98 (B3), 145.77 (A3), 145.91 (B7), 150.85
(A4), 152.47 (B4), 169.03 (B9), 172.02 (A9), 168.73 (A10) Appendix A.8
LC­MS (ESI): C22H20O9 (exact mass 428.11 Da): m/z 427.15 [M­H]­
34
==PAGE:42==
4.6
Synthesis of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(feruloyl chloride) (20)
(E)­4­(5­(3­chloro­3­oxoprop­1­en­1­yl)­3­(chlorocarbonyl)­7­methoxy­2,3­dihydrobenzofuran­
2­yl)­2­methoxyphenyl acetate
4­O­acetyl 8,5’­diferulate (0.46 mg, 1.1 mmol) was placed in a RBF that had a N2 flow and
dissolved in benzene (7.5 ml). SOCl2 (325 µL, 4.5 mmol) was added to the RBF through
a syringe. The reaction mixture was placed on an oil bath (95 °C) and left to reflux for
40 minutes. The reaction was checked with TLC but it was hard to see, and it did not
show full conversion. The mixture was left to reflux more, for a couple of hours. After
the mixture was placed in the freezer and stored over the weekend. For the workup, the
mixture was evaporated to a solid under reduced pressure, dissolved in toluene to wash
off the residual thyonyl chloride, and evaporated again. The crude product was dissolved
in hot toluene and cooled to r.t. This intermediate was used directly in the next coupling
step without purification. No LC/MS data was collected due to the possible hydrolysis of
the chlorine, however NMR analysis was recorded and it is illustrated in Appendix A.21.
35
==PAGE:43==
4.7
Synthesis of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl
feruloyl­α–arabinofuranoside) (24 & 25)
Compound (24a): (E)­((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)
methyl 3­(4­acetoxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­2­(5­((E)­3­(((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­
methoxy tetrahydrofuran­2­yl)methoxy)­3­oxoprop­1­en­1­yl)­2­hydroxy­3­methox­
yphenyl)acrylate
Compound (24b): (Z)­((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)
methyl 3­(4­acetoxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­2­(5­((E)­3­(((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­
methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)methoxy)­3­oxoprop­1­en­1­yl)­2­hydroxy­3­methoxy­
phenyl)acrylate
Compound (25): ((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)met­
hyl 2­(4­acetoxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­5­((E)­3­(((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­metho­
xytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)methoxy)­3­oxoprop­1­en­1­yl)­7­methoxybenzofuran­3­car­
boxylate
S1
S2
4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(feruloyl chloride) (50 mg, 1.1 mol) was dissolved in toluene (10 mL)
and placed in a dropping funnel under N2. The solution was added dropwise to a con­
tinuously stirring ice­cold mixture of methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside (53 mg, 3.2 mol) in
pyridine (10 mL). Once the addition was completed, the mixture was left stirred for 4
h. Afterward, the mixture was evaporated under reduced pressure, then twice diluted
with toluene and evaporated. The crude product was subjected to reverse­phase flash
36
==PAGE:44==
chromatography with H2O/MeCN 1:1 eluent with 0.1% formic acid. Two fractions were
collected, and LC/MS indicated the product in both fractions. (24) from fraction 1 (S1)
was isolated as a solid (75 mg, 98%). (25) from fraction 2 (S2) was isolated as a solid (57
mg, 74%).
S1
The NMR data of the structure has not been assigned, due to the extremely close chemical
shifts, and the complexity of the structure. However, the attempt was made and the 1H
and13C NMR, spectrums are included in Appendix A.9 and A.10.
LC­MS (ESI): C34H40O17 (exact mass S1 = 720.23 Da): m/z 738.37; [M+NH4]+; 765.44
[M+HCOO]­
The NMR data was consistent with the reported values [24].
S2
δH (ppm) (Acetone­d6):
3.35, 3.41 (s, 6H OCH3), 4.06 (dd, 1H (C’4), J = 3.6, 1.6 Hz) 4.11 (dd, 1H (C’4), J = 3.6,
1.4 Hz), 4.15 (sex, 1H (C’2), J = 6.2, 6.2, 3.5 Hz), 4.26 (dd, 1H (C’2), J = 6.5, 3.5 Hz), 3.97
(dd, 1H (C’3), J = 6.3, 3.7 Hz), 4.01 (dd, 1H (C’3), J = 6.6, 3.7 Hz), 4.64 (dd, 1H (C’5a),
J = 11.8, 3.5 Hz), 4.46 (dd, 1H (C’5a), J = 11.5, 6.7 Hz), 4.43 (dd, 1H (C’5b), J = 8.3, 3.5
Hz), 4.30 (dd, 1H (C’5b), J = 11.8, 6.1 Hz), 4.83 (d, 1H (C’1), J = 1.2 Hz), 4.92 (d, 1H
(C’1), J = 1.1 Hz), 2.29 (s, 3H, A4­OCH3), 3.94 (s, 3H, A3­OCH3), 4.09 (s, 3H, B3­OCH3),
6.65 (d, 1H (B8), J = 15.9 Hz), 7.24 (d, 1H (A5) J = 8.3, 1Hz), 7.4 (d, 1H (B2), J = 1.2 Hz),
7.71 (dd, 1H (A6), J = 8.3, 1.8 Hz), 7.83 (d, 1H (B7), J = 15.9 Hz), 7.98 (d, 1H (A2), J =
1.0 Hz), 7.99 (s, 1H (B6), J = 1.8 Hz) Appendix A.11
δC (ppm) (Acetone­d6) 55.10, 55.15 (s, 2C C′H3), 64.98, 65.48 (s, 2C, C’5), 79.34, 79.61
(s, 2C, C’3), 82.07, 82.44 (s, 2C, C’2), 83.26, 83.49 (s, 2C, C’4), 110.42, 110.52 (s, 2C,
C’1), 20.53 (A4­OCH3), 54.69 (?, 1C), 56.58 (A­CH3), 56.70 (B­CH3), 107.42 (B2), 107.45
(A8), 114.80 (A2), 117.45 (A5), 118.28 (B6), 122.90 (B8), 123.67 (B5), 128.38 (A6), 129.80
(A1), 132.86 (B1), 142.82, 145.02 (A3/B3), 146.32 (B7), 146.44 (A4), 151.96 (B4), 161.28
(A7), 163.85 (A9), 167.15 (B9), 168.90 (A10) Appendix A.12
LC­MS (ESI): C34H38O17 (exact mass S2 = 718.21 Da): m/z 736.37 [M+NH4]+; 763.40
[M+HCOO]­
37
==PAGE:45==
4.8
Synthesis of 8,5’­di­(methyl
feruloyl­α­L­arabinofuranoside) (26 & 27)
Compound (26a): (E)­((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)
methyl 2­(5­((E)­3­(((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)me­
thoxy)­3­oxoprop­1­en­1­yl)­2­hydroxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­3­(4­hydroxy­3­methoxy­
phenyl)acrylate
Compound (26b): (Z)­((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)
methyl 2­(5­((E)­3­(((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)me­
thoxy)­3­oxoprop­1­en­1­yl)­2­hydroxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­3­(4­hydroxy­3­methoxy­
phenyl)acrylate
Compound (27): ((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)me­
thyl 5­((E)­3­(((2S,3R,4R,5R)­3,4­dihydroxy­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­2­yl)methoxy)­
3­oxoprop­1­en­1­yl)­2­(4­hydroxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­7­methoxybenzofuran­3­carbo­
xylate
S1
S2
The removal of the phenolic hydroxyl acetate protecting group was achieved with pyrroli­
dine in 95% ethanol with both compounds: S1 and S2. S1 (34 mg, 0.05 mmol), S2 (32.1
mg, 0.04) was dissolved in 95% ethanol (0.74 ml (S1)), (0.70 ml (S2)) under N2. Pyrro­
lidine (0.01 mL, 0.09 mmol (S1),(S2)) was added, whereupon the solution turned yellow.
The solution was left for 30 min and afterwards quenched with acetic acid (1.18 mL). The
mixture was taken to a syrup and subjected to reverse­phase flash chromatography with
38
==PAGE:46==
H2O/MeCN 1:1 eluent with 0.1% formic acid. (26) from (S1) was isolated as a solid (17.3
mg, 54%). (27) from (S2) was isolated as a solid (11.2 mg, 37%).
S1
The NMR data of the structure has not been assigned, due to the extremely close chemical
shifts, and the complexity of the structure. However, the attempt was made and the 1H
and13C NMR, spectrums are included in Appendix A.13 and A.14.
LC­MS (ESI): C32H36O16 (exact mass S1 = 678.22 Da): m/z 677.42 [M­H]­, 723.21 [M+HCOO]­
The NMR data was consistent with the reported values [24].
S2
δH (ppm) (Acetone­d6):
3.34, 3.41 (s, 6H OCH3), 4.05 (dd, 1H (C’4), J = 3.6, 1.5 Hz) 4.10 (d, 1H (C’4), J = 2.0
Hz), 4.14 (dd, 1H (C’2), J = 5.8, 3.7 Hz), 4.26 (dd, 1H (C’2), J = 6.8, 3.5 Hz), 3.97 (dd, 1H
(C’3), J = 6.7, 3.9 Hz), 4.02 (dd, 1H (C’3), J = 6.6, 3.4 Hz), 4.64 (dd, 1H (C’5a), J = 11.7,
3.5 Hz), 4.46 (dd, 1H (C’5a), J = 11.8, 6.6 Hz), 4.43 (dd, 1H (C’5b), J = 12.1, 3.6 Hz), 4.29
(dd, 1H (C’5b), J = 11.9, 6.2 Hz), 4.81 (d, 1H (C’1), J = 1.2 Hz), 4.91 (d, 1H (C’1), J = 1.2
Hz), 3.95 (s, 3H, A3­OCH3), 4.11 (s, 3H, B3­OCH3), 6.66 (d, 1H (B8), J = 15.9 Hz), 7.00
(s, 1H (A5) J = 8.5 1Hz), 7.4 (d, 1H (B2), J = 1.0 Hz), 7.6 (dd, 1H (A6), J = 8.4 Hz, 1.9
Hz), 7.86 (d, 1H (B7), J = 16.0 Hz), 7.92 (d, 1H (A2), J = 1.8 Hz), 8.03 (s, 1H (B6), J = 1.1
Hz), 8.17 (s, 1H, A4­OH), Appendix A.15
δC (ppm) (Acetone­d6)
54.18, 54.23 (s, 2C C′H3), 64.01, 64.45 (s, 2C, C’5), 78.33, 78.66 (s, 2C, C’3), 81.16,
81.47 (s, 2C, C’2), 82.33, 82.56 (s, 2C, C’4), 109.54, 109.60 (s, 2C, C’1), 55,60 (A­CH3),
55.80 (B­CH3), 106.3 (B2), 107.55 (A8), 113.08 (A2), 114.83 (A5), 116.49 (B6), 117.27
(B8), 120.49 (B5), 123.30 (A6), 129.35 (A1), 131.82 (B1), 143.84, 145.50 (A3/B3), 145.55
(B7), 147.03 (A4), 149.28 (B4), 161.80 (A7), 163.25 (A9), 166.24 (B9), Appendix A.16
LC­MS (ESI): C32H38O16 (exact mass S2 = 676.20 Da): m/z 675.37 [M­H]­
39
==PAGE:47==
4.9
Synthesis of methyl α­L­arabinofuranoside (18)
STEP 1
(2S,3R,4R)­2­(hydroxymethyl)­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­3,4­diol (16)
L­(+)­arabinose (10 g, 0.06 mol) was dissolved in methanol (160 mL) then concentrated
sulfuric acid (1.6 mL) was added with a syringe. The cloudy reaction mixture was stirred
ON at r.t. The conversion of the SM was checked by TLC (5:1 CHCl3:MeOH, stained with
1 M H2SO4). The clear reaction mixture did not show any residual SM, therefore it was
neutralized by adding pyridine (30 mL) and evaporate under reduced pressure at 40 °C.
The measured crude product was 20 g. The product was used in the next step of the
synthesis without purification, therefore in this step no NMR analysis was necessary.
40
==PAGE:48==
STEP 2
(2S,3S,4R)­2­((benzoyloxy)methyl)­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­3,4­diyl dibenzoate (17)
1­O­methyl­D­ribofuranose (20 g crude, reagents were calculated with 10 g SM) was dis­
solved in pyridine (100 mL) in a RB flask and placed on ice bath. Benzoyl chloride (35
mL) was added while stirring. After the ice bath melted, the reaction left there stirring
ON. The reaction mixture was analysed by TLC (CHCl3:MeOH 19:1, stained with 1 M
H2SO4). After the reaction indicated full conversion, the RB was placed on ice bath, then
H2O (200 mL) was added. The reaction was left there stirring for an hour to hydrolyse
the benzoylchloride. After an hour, the mixture was extracted with CHCl3 (200 mL) in a
separation funnel. The organic phase was washed with H2SO4 (3x200 mL, 1 M). The
organic phase was collected and dried with Mg2SO4, then filtered through a filter funnel
(4­8 µ). The organic phase was evaporated under reduced pressure at 40 °C, and the
crude product was dissolved in EtOH and heated with heat gun to dissolve and left at r.t.
to crystallize ON. After the crystals were filtered through a filter funnel (4­8 µ), washed
with cold EtOH and dried in vacuum oven ON (Batch­1). The filtrate was collected and
evaporated under reduced pressure at 40 °C, then heated and dissolved again in EtOH.
It was left to crystallize at r.t. ON (Batch­2), but the next day Batch­2 was discarded as
there were no crystals. The product (Batch­1) was isolated as a solid (13.87 g, 48%). The
crystals are the α version of the product. All of the product was used for the next step of
the reaction.
The NMR data was consistent with the reported values [44].
δH (ppm) (CDCl3) 3.32 (s, 3H OCH3), 5.51 (d, 1H (C4), J = 1.2 Hz), 4.57 (dd, 1H (C2), J
= 8.5, 4.9 Hz), 5.58 (d, 1H (C3), J = 5.1 Hz), 4.85 (dd, 1H (C5a), J = 11.9, 3.6 Hz, 4.69
(dd, 2H (C5b), J = 11.9, 4.9 Hz), 5.18 (s, 1H (C1)), 7.5­8.5 (15H, aromatic protons)
Appendix A.17
δC (ppm) (CDCl3) 55.02 (s, CH3), 63.75 (s, C5), 77.97 (s, C3), 80.88 (s, C2), 82.21 (s,
C4), 106.91 (s, C1), 120.00­140.00 (aromatic C (C6H6)) 165.50­166.23 (s, 3C (C=O))
Appendix A.18
41
==PAGE:49==
STEP 3
(2S,3R,4R,5R)­2­(hydroxymethyl)­5­methoxytetrahydrofuran­3,4­diol (18)
Tri­O­benzoyl­α­D­arabinofuranoside (13.87 g, 0.03 mol) was dissolved in NaOMe in
MeOH (103.94 mL, 1 M) and left to stir for 3 hours at r.t. The reaction mixture was checked
by TLC analysis after 3 hours, the reaction completed, no SM left. To neutralize the crude
product of α­D­arabinofuranoside, AcOH (5.2 mL, 100%) was added to the reaction mix­
ture.
The crude product was purified by flash chromatography with manual vacuum pump. The
product was dry loaded on the column and gradient elution was used based on the Table
4.1 below. TLC analysis was made from the collected fractions (20% MeOH in DCM as
eluent, stained with 1 M H2SO4). After evaporation under reduced pressure the product
was isolated as a solid (4.77 g, 99%).
Elutent
V (L)
Collected fractions
10% MeOH in DCM
1
1
15% MeOH in DCM
1
2
20% MeOH in DCM
3
12
Table 4.1: Gradient elution used for purification
The NMR data was consistent with the reported values [44].
δH (ppm) (CDCl3) 3.32 (s, 3H OCH3), 3.94 (dd, 1H (C4), J = 5.8, 3.4 Hz), 3.96 (dd, 1H
(C2), J = 3.3, 1.6 Hz), 3.85 (dd, 1H (C3), J = 5.9, 3.3 Hz), 3.72 (dd, 1H (C5a), J = 12.3,
3.4 Hz), 3.61 (dd, 2H (C5b), J = 12.1, 5.8 Hz), 4.83 (d, 1H (C1), J = 1.5 Hz)
Appendix A.19
δC (ppm) (CDCl3) 54.92 (s, CH3), 61.23 (s, C5), 76.38 (s, C3), 80.73 (s, C2), 83.89 (s,
C4), 108.33 (s, C1) Appendix A.20
42
==PAGE:50==
4.10
Enzymatic assays
The enzymatic assay with four different esterases was carried out on both products ob­
tained (S1 and S2). S1 and S2 were dissolved to a concentration of 10 mg/mL in acetone,
then distributed to 5­5 Eppendorf tubes, each containing 0.2 mg of the substrates. The
four types of enzymes (1 mg from each) were diluted to 1 mg/mL with acetate buffer (20
mM, pH=5)
Each Eppendorf tube with substrates (0.2 mg) was dissolved in acetate buffer in a ther­
moshaker at r.t. for 30 mins. After 30 mins, LC/MS analysis was run to confirm that the
substrate is visual on the chromatogram. Afterward, 0.5 mL was added to each substrate
from the four different enzymes, and a blank incubation was also done with buffer. The
samples were incubated at 30 °C, and samples (0.2 mL) were taken out after every 30
mins, 3, 5, and 24 hr. After each sampling, LC/MS analysis was obtained.
43
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Abdulhadi Aljawish et al. “Laccase­catalysed oxidation of ferulic acid and ethyl fer­
ulate in aqueous medium: A green procedure for the synthesis of new compounds”.
In: Food Chemistry (2014). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.07.119.
[2]
Andreia Bento­Silva et al. “Hydroxycinnamic Acids and Their Derivatives in Broa,
a Traditional Ethnic Maize Bread”. In: Annual Review of Plant Biol. (2020). doi: 10.
3390/foods9101471.
[3]
Andreia Bento­Silva et al. “Relevance, structure and analysis of ferulic acid in maize
cell walls”. In: Food Chemistry (2018). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.
11.012.
[4]
Anette Henriksen et al. “The Structures of the Horseradish Peroxidase C­Ferulic
Acid Complex and the Ternary Complex with Cyanide Suggest How Peroxidases
Oxidize Small Phenolic Substrates*”. In: The journal of biological chemistry (1999).
doi: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.49.35005.
[5]
Anna K. Sitarz et al. “Structure, functionality and tuning up of laccases for ligno­
cellulose and other industrial applications”. In: Crit Rev Biotechnol (2016). doi: 10.
3109/07388551.2014.949617.
[6]
Armando F. Reano et al. “Structure−Activity Relationships and Structural Design
Optimization of a Series of p￿Hydroxycinnamic Acids­Based Bis­ and Trisphenols
as Novel Sustainable Antiradical/Antioxidant Additives”. In: ACS Sustainable Chem.
Eng. (2015). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.5b01281.
[7]
B. Helferich et al. “n­butyryl chloride”. In: Org. Synth. (1929). doi: 10.15227/orgsyn.
009.0032.
[8]
Claudia Crestini et al. “Oxidative strategies in lignin chemistry: A new environmental
friendly approach for the functionalisation of lignin and lignocellulosic fibers”. In:
Catalysis Today (2010). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cattod.2010.03.057.
[9]
Craig Faulds et al. “What can feruloyl esterases do for us?” In: Phytochemistry Re­
views (2009). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11101-009-9156-2.
[10]
D. L. A. Rakotondramanana et al. “Synthesis of ferulic ester dimers, functional­
isation and biological evaluation as potential antiatherogenic and antiplasmodial
agents”. In: Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry (2007). doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2007.06.
047.
[11]
David R. Armstrong et al. “Oxidative coupling of phenols. Part 7. Spin­density cal­
culations on the phenoxyl radical”. In: J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2 (1983). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1039/P29830000569.
[12]
Dr. Lisa Moni et al. “A Thorough Study on the Photoisomerization of Ferulic Acid
Derivatives”. In: Org. Chem. (2021). doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/ejoc.202100064.
[13]
Dyoni M. Oliveira et al. “Ferulic acid: a key component in grass lignocellulose re­
calcitrance to hydrolysis”. In: Plant Biotechnology Journal (2014). doi: 10.1111/pbi.
12292.
[14]
Dyoni M. Oliveira et al. “Feruloyl esterases: Biocatalysts to overcome biomass re­
calcitrance and for the production of bioactive compounds”. In: Bioresource Tech­
nology (2019). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2019.01.064.
[15]
E. Allerdings et al. “Isolation and structural identification of diarabinosyl 8­O­4­dehy­
drodiferulate from maize bran insoluble fibre”. In: Phytochemistry (2004). doi: 10.
1016/j.phytochem.2004.10.026.
Synthesis of diferulic acids and esters as enzymatic substrates and standards
44
==PAGE:52==
[16]
Emilie N. Underlin et al. “Feruloyl Esterases for Biorefineries: Subfamily Classified
Specificity for Natural Substrates”. In: Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. (2020), pp. 1–17.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.00332.
[17]
Fachuang Lu et al. “Rapid Syntheses of Dehydrodiferulates via Biomimetic Radical
Coupling Reactions of Ethyl Ferulate”. In: J. Agric. Food Chem. (2012). doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/jf302140k.
[18]
Fengxia Yue et al. “Scaled­up production of poacic acid, a plant­derived antifungal
agent”. In: Industrial Crops and Products (2017). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indcrop.2017.03.045.
[19]
Gary Ward et al. “Inactivation of lignin peroxidase during oxidation of the highly
reactive substrate ferulic acid”. In: Enzyme and Microbial Technology (2001). doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0141-0229(01)00336-2.
[20]
Gary Ward et al. “Initial Steps of Ferulic Acid Polymerization by Lignin Peroxidase”.
In: JBC (2001). doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009785200.
[21]
Gunnar I. Berglund et al. “The catalytic pathway of horseradish peroxidase at high
resolution”. In: Nature (2002). doi: 10.1038/417463a.
[22]
John H. Grabber et al. “Cross­Linking of Maize Walls by Ferulate Dimerization and
Incorporation into Lignin”. In: J. Agric. Food Chem. (2000), pp. 6106–6113. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1021/jf0006978.
[23]
John Ralph et al. “Identification and Synthesis of New Ferulic Acid Dehydrodimers
Present in Grass Cell Walls”. In: J. CHEM. SOC. (1994). doi: https://doi.org/10.
1039/P19940003485.
[24]
John Ralph et al. “Lignin­Feruloyl Ester Cross­links in Grasses. Part 2. Model Com­
pound Syntheses”. In: J. Chem. Soc. (1992). doi: 10.1039/p19920002971.
[25]
John Ralph et al. “Lignins: Natural polymers from oxidative coupling of 4­hydroxyphenyl­
propanoids”. In: Phytochemistry Reviews (2004). doi: https://doi.org/10.1023/B:
PHYT.0000047809.65444.a4.
[26]
John Ralph et al. “Simple Preparation of 8­5­Coupled Diferulate”. In: J. Agric. Food
Chem. (1998). doi: 10.1021/jf980123r.
[27]
José Teixeira et al. “Hydroxycinnamic Acid Antioxidants: An Electrochemical Overview”.
In: BioMed Research International (2013). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/
251754.
[28]
Kaur Gagan et al. “Photo­reversible dimerisation reactions and their applications in
polymeric systems”. In: Polymer Chemistry (2014), pp. 2171–2186. doi: 10.1039/
c3py01234d.
[29]
Linjie Yang et al. “Ferulate­sinapyl alcohol cross­coupling reaction improves the
understanding of grass cell wall lignification”. In: Industrial Crops & Products (2021).
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2021.113587.
[30]
Luc Saulnier et al. “Isolation and partial characterization of feruloylated oligosac­
charides from maize bran”. In: Carbohydrate Research (1995), pp. 241–253. doi:
10.1016/0008-6215(95)00053-v.
[31]
Luc Saulnier et al. “Isolation and structural determination of two 5,5%­diferuloyl
oligosaccharides indicate that maize heteroxylans are covalently cross­linked by ox­
idatively coupled ferulates”. In: Carbohydrate Research (1999). doi: 10.1016/s0008-
6215(99)00152-4.
[32]
Lucia Chiummiento et al. “Last Decade of Unconventional Methodologies for the
Synthesis of Substituted Benzofurans”. In: Molecules (2020). doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3390/molecules25102327.
45
==PAGE:53==
[33]
Luis Hernández­García et al. “Theoretical study of ferulic acid dimer derivatives:
bond dissociation enthalpy, spin density, and HOMO­LUMO analysis”. In: Structural
Chemistry (2018), pp. 1265–1272. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11224-018-1107-3.
[34]
M. Bunzel et al. “Phenolic Compounds as Cross­Links of Plant Derived Polysac­
charides”. In: Czech J. Food Sci. (2004). doi: 10.17221/10613-CJFS.
[35]
M. Bunzel et al. “Semipreparative isolation of dehydrodiferulic and dehydrotriferulic
acids as standard substances from maize bran”. In: J. Sep. Sci. (2004). doi: 10.
1002/jssc.200301703.
[36]
Majid M. Heravi et al. “Acetylation of alcohols, phenols and salicylic acid by het­
eropoly acids in acetic anhydride: a green and eco­friendly protocol for synthesis of
acetyl salicylic acid (Aspirin)”. In: Arkivoc (2007).
[37]
Maria Dragăn et al. “Ferulic Acid – A versatile molecule”. In: ABMJ (2018). doi:
10.2478/abmj-2018-0013.
[38]
Martin Waterstraat et al. “A stable isotope dilution approach to analyze ferulic acid
oligomers in plant cell walls using liquid chromatography­tandem mass spectrome­
try”. In: Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry (2019). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00216-019-01924-w.
[39]
Mirko Bunzel et al. “Peroxidase­Catalyzed Oligomerization of Ferulic Acid Esters”.
In: J. Agric. Food Chem. (2008). doi: 10.1021/jf801825z.
[40]
Mirko Bunzel et al. “Sinapate Dehydrodimers and Sinapate−Ferulate Heterodimers
in Cereal Dietary Fiber”. In: J. Agric. Food Chem. (2003). doi: 10.1021/jf020910v.
[41]
Nicolai Obel et al. “Intracellular feruloylation of arabinoxylan in wheat: evidence for
feruloyl­glucose as precursor”. In: Planta (2003). doi: 10.1007/s00425-002-0863-9.
[42]
Oluyemisi E. Adelakun et al. “Laccase­catalyzed dimerization of ferulic acid ampli­
fies antioxidant activity”. In: Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic (2012). doi:
10.1016/j.molcatb.2011.08.010.
[43]
Paul F. Schatz et al. “Synthesis and identification of 2,5­bis­(4­hydroxy­3­methoxyphenyl)­
tetrahydrofuran­3,4­dicarboxylic acid, an unanticipated ferulate 8–8­coupling prod­
uct acylating cereal plant cell walls”. In: Org. Biomol. Chem. (2006). doi: 10.1039/
b605918j.
[44]
R. D. Hatfield et al. “Synthesis of Methyl 5­0­tram­Feruloyl­a­L­arabinofuranoside
and Its Use as a Substrate to Assess Feruloyl Esterase Activity”. In: Analytical Bio­
chemistry (1991). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-2697(91)90146-k.
[45]
Ramin Vismeh et al. “Profiling of diferulates (plant cell wall cross­linkers) using
ultrahigh­performance liquid chromatographytandem mass spectrometry”. In: An­
alyst (2013). doi: 10.1039/c3an36709f.
[46]
Sedigheh Asad et al. “Phosphate buffer effects on thermal stability and H2O2­
resistance of horseradish peroxidase”. In: International Journal of Biological Macro­
molecules (2011). doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2011.01.021.
[47]
Thi Bach Tuyet Lam et al. “Determination of etherified hydroxycinnamic acids in cell
walls of grasses”. In: Phytochemistry (1994). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0031-
9422(00)89815-5.
[48]
Toshio Fuchigami et al. “Fundamentals and Applications of Organic Electrochem­
istry”. In: (2014). doi: 10.1002/9781118670750.
[49]
Tukayi Kudanga et al. “Potential applications of laccase­mediated coupling and
grafting reactions: A review”. In: Enzyme and Microbial Technology (2011). doi:
10.1016/j.enzmictec.2010.11.007.
[50]
Valentina Perna et al. “Just accepted manuscript: Laccase catalyzed oxidation of
lignin induces production of H2O2”. In: ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. (2019).
46
==PAGE:54==
[51]
Wendy R Russell et al. “Structure­specific functionality of plant cell wall hydroxycin­
namates”. In: J Sci Food Agric (1999). doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/\%28SICI\
%291097- 0010\%2819990301\%2979\%3A3\%3C408\%3A\%3AAID- JSFA265\
%3E3.0.CO\%3B2-Q.
[52]
Wojciech Ostrowski et al. “Differentiation of phenylpropanoid acids cyclobutane­
and dehydrodimers isomers in barley leaf cell walls with LC/MS/MS system”. In:
International Journal of Mass Spectrometry (2016). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijms.2016.07.003.
[53]
Wout Boerjan et al. “Lignin Biosynthesis”. In: Annual Review of Plant Biol. (2003).
doi: 10.1146/annurev.arplant.54.031902.134938.
[54]
Ying He et al. “New Products Generated from the Transformations of Ferulic Acid
Dilactone”. In: Biomolecules (2020). doi: 10.3390/biom10020175.
[55]
Yuan Jia et al. “The structure­antioxidant activity relationship of dehydrodiferulates”.
In: Food Chemistry (2018). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.07.038.
[56]
M. Bunzel. “Chemistry and occurrence of hydroxycinnamate oligomers”. In: Phy­
tochem Rev. (2010). doi: 10.1007/s11101-009-9139-3.
[57]
Christopher S. Callam and Todd L Lowary. “Synthesis of Methyl 2,3,5­Tri­O­benzoyl­
α­D­arabinofuranoside in the Organic Laboratory”. In: Journal of Chemical Educa­
tion (2001). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ed078p73.
[58]
V.F. et al. Crepin. “Functional classification of the microbial feruloyl esterases”. In:
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2004). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-003-1476-3.
[59]
Roy D. Hartley and Edwin C. Jones. “Diferulic acid as a component of cell walls of
lolium multiflorum”. In: Phytochemistry (1975). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0031-
9422(76)85121-7.
[60]
R. D. Hatfield and Jane M. Marita. “Enzymatic processes involved in the incorpo­
ration of hydroxycinnamates into grass cell walls”. In: Phytochem Rev (2010). doi:
10.1007/s11101-010-9165-1.
[61]
Tadashi Ishii. “Isolation and characterization of a diferuloyl arabinoxylan hexasac­
charide from bamboo shoot cell­walls”. In: Carbohydrate Research (1991), pp. 15–
22. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0008-6215(91)89039-i.
[62]
A. et al. Klibanov. “Improving enzymes by using them in organic solvents”. In: Nature
(2001). doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/35051719.
[63]
E. et al. Larsen. “Regioselective dimerization of ferulic acid in a micellar solution”.
In: Danish Institute of Agricultural Sciences (2001).
[64]
Sindhu Mathew and T. Emilia Abraham. “Ferulic Acid: An Antioxidant Found Natu­
rally in Plant Cell Walls and Feruloyl Esterases Involved in its Release and Their Ap­
plications”. In: Critical Reviews in Biotechnology (2004). doi: 10.1080/07388550490491467.
[65]
Marcia M. de O. Buanafina. “Feruloylation in Grasses: Current and Future Perspec­
tives”. In: Molecular Plant (2009). doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/mp/ssp067.
[66]
Victor R Preedy and Helena Abramovič. Fundamental Principles of Optical Lithog­
raphy. Chapter 93 ­ Antioxidant Properties of Hydroxycinnamic Acid Derivatives:
A Focus on Biochemistry, Physicochemical Parameters, Reactive Species, and
Biomolecular Interactions. London, England : Academic Press, 2015.
[67]
Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy and Jayaraman Sivaguru. “Supramolecular Photochem­
istry as a Potential Synthetic Tool: Photocycloaddition”. In: Chem. Rev. (2016),
pp. 9914–9993. doi: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00040.
[68]
Lu Ren. “Effectors of selectivity in laccase catalyzed reactions”. In: Catalysis. (2019).
[69]
van Rijssel et al. “Chiral Pyrroline­Based Ugi­Three­Component Reactions Are un­
der Kinetic Control”. In: Org. Lett. (2013). doi: 10.1021/ol4012053.
47
==PAGE:55==
[70]
Sandra Taliansky. “Urea–Hydrogen Peroxide Complex”. In: Synlett (2005). doi: 10.
1055/s-2005-871968.
[71]
Poulos TL and Kraut J. “The Stereochemistry of Peroxidase Catalysis”. In: J Biol
Chem (1980). doi: PMID:6251047..
[72]
Nigel C. Veitch. “Horseradish peroxidase: a modern view of a classic enzyme”. In:
Phytochemistry (2004). doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2003.10.022.
48
==PAGE:56==
A
Appendix
Ethyl ferulate (12)
Figure A.1: 1H NMR of EF 12
Figure A.2: 13C NMR of EF 12
Synthesis of diferulic acids and esters as enzymatic substrates and standards
49
==PAGE:57==
8,5’­diferulate (14)
Figure A.3: 1H NMR of 8,5’­diferulate (14)
Figure A.4: 13C NMR of 8,5’­diferulate (14)
50
==PAGE:58==
8,5’­DFA (6)
Figure A.5: 1H NMR of 8,5­DFA (6)
Figure A.6: 13C NMR of 8,5­DFA (6)
51
==PAGE:59==
4­O­acetyl 8,5’­DFA (19)
Figure A.7: 1H NMR of 4­O­acetyl­8,5­DFA (19)
Figure A.8: 13C NMR of methyl 8,5­DFA (19)
52
==PAGE:60==
4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (open form) (24a & 24b)
Figure A.9: 1H NMR of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (linear form), the assump­
tion of compounds: (24a) and (24b)
Figure A.10:
13C NMR of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (linear form), the as­
sumption of compounds: (24a) and (24b)
53
==PAGE:61==
4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (benzofuran form) (25)
Figure A.11: 1H NMR of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (benzofuran form) (25)
Figure A.12: 13C NMR of 4­O­acetyl 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (benzofuran form) (25)
54
==PAGE:62==
8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (open form) (26a & 26b)
Figure A.13: 1H NMR of 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (linear form), the assumption of com­
pounds: (26a) and (26b)
Figure A.14:
13C NMR of 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (linear form), the assumption of
compounds: (26a) and (26b)
55
==PAGE:63==
8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (benzofuran form) (27)
Figure A.15: 1H NMR of 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (benzofuran form) (27)
Figure A.16: 13C NMR of 8,5’­di­(methyl feruloyl­Ara) (benzofuran form) (27)
56
==PAGE:64==
1­O­methyl­L­arabinofurano­tribenzoate (17)
Figure A.17: 1H NMR of 1­O­methyl­L­arabinofurano­tribenzoate (17) in CDCl3
Figure A.18: 1H NMR of....in 1­O­methyl­L­arabinofurano­tribenzoate (17) in CDCl3
57
==PAGE:65==
1­O­metyl­α­L­arabinofuranoside (18)
Figure A.19: 1H NMR of 1­O­metyl­α­L­arabinofuranoside (18) in CDCl3
Figure A.20: 1H NMR of 1­O­metyl­α­L­arabinofuranoside (18) in CDCl3
58
==PAGE:66==
8,5’­di­(metyl feruoyl chloride) (21)
Figure A.21: 1H NMR of 8,5’­di­(metyl feruoyl chloride) (20). Reaction that gives mixture
of open, cyclic and benzofuran form (S1 and S2)
59
==PAGE:67==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
