==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Master’s thesis by Soﬁe Kristensen (s164294):
Emissions of carbon monoxide from plant leaves exposed to
various spectral light distributions
Supervised by:
Teis Nørgaard Mikkelsen (Technical University of Denmark)
Dan Bruhn (Aalborg University)
February 13, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Summary
Carbon monoxide (CO) has been found to be emitted from vegetation when exposed to vis-
ible and ultraviolet (UV) light. This project aimed to broaden the knowledge on the effect
from individual colours of light (spectral distributions) within the visible spectrum on the
CO production from vegetation. Leaves of Hedera helix (common ivy) were exposed to six
different visible spectral light distributions from LED lamps: violet, blue, green, yellow, red
and white light. The emitted CO from the leaves were measured in a closed-loop setup, and
the light-induced rate calculated as the difference between the CO production under expo-
sure to light and the production from leaves in darkness. Per 1 W/m2 light intensity it was
found that all tested spectral distributions within the visible spectrum yielded similar CO
emission rates in the range 4.6-5.9 nanomoles CO per square meter leaf area per hour (nmol
CO/m2/h). Blue and green light yielded the lowest mean rates, while red and white light
yielded the highest mean rates in the visible spectrum. When the same tests were performed
with UV light, UVA showed 2.5-4 times higher rates and UVB showed 40-60 times higher
rates compared to visible light. A tendency that the light-induced CO rate increased linearly
with higher light intensity was seen for blue, red and white light, whereas no clear tendency
could be deduced for green light. Screenings of four species of leaves gave an indication of a
species dependence.
To compare the rates from the visible and UV spectra, a calculation was used to estimate the
corresponding CO production to be expected from the natural solar spectrum in the 300-700
nm wavelength range. From the calculation it was estimated that 55% of the CO produc-
tion from natural solar radiation should be attributed to UV light and 45% to visible light.
This highlights that both UV and visible light should be considered equally important in fu-
ture global estimates of photo-induced CO emission from vegetation, and that the previous
global estimate of 50-200 Tg per year should possibly be doubled. Further, a more certain
estimate on the global photo-induced CO production should include both living, degrading
and dead plant matter. To gain further knowledge, it is suggested that seasonal variations and
the effect of senescence within the same leaf species are investigated for individual spectral
distributions as well as the full spectra of UV and visible light.
==PAGE:3==
Sammenfatning
Emissioner af carbonmonoxid (CO) kan måles når vegetation udsættes for synligt og ultravi-
olet (UV) lys. Formålet med dette projekt var at øge viden om effekten af individuelle farver
(spektralfordelinger) af synligt lys på produktionen af CO fra vegetation. Blade fra Hedera
helix (efeu) blev udsat for seks forskellige spektralfordelinger af synligt lys fra LED-lamper:
violet, blå, grøn, gul, rød og hvid. Emissioner af CO fra baldene blev målt i en lukket (closed-
loop) forsøgsopstilling, og den lys-inducerede rate blev udregnet som forskellen mellem CO-
produktionen i lys og CO-produktionen med blade i mørke. Per 1 W/m2 lysintensitet blev der
målt sammenlignelige emissioner af CO for alle spektralfordelinger af synligt lys i intervallet
4,6-5,9 nanomol CO per kvadratmeter bladareal per time (nmol CO/m2/t). Blåt og grønt lys
gav gennemsnitligt de laveste rater og rødt og hvidt lys gav gennemsnitligt de højeste rater.
Når de samme test blev udført med UV lys, gav UVA 2,5-4 gange højere rater og UVB gav
40-60 gange højere rater end det synlige lys. Det blev estimeret at udviklingen i CO-raten
med højere lysintensitet kunne beskrives lineært med blåt, rødt og hvidt lys, mens der ikke
blev fundet en klar tendens for grønt lys. En screening af ﬁre arter af blade gav en indikation
om at CO-raten er afhængig af arten.
For at sammenligne raterne målt i det synlige spektrum og UV-spektret, blev det ved hjælp
af en udregning estimeret hvor meget af CO-produktionen der kan tilskrives henholdsvis
UV og synligt lys i solens 300-700 nm spektrum. Udregningen estimerede at 55% af CO-
produktionen kan tilskrives det naturlige UV-spektrum i sollys og 45% kan tilskrives det syn-
lige lys. Dette understreger at både UV og synligt lys skal regnes for at være lige vigtige at
medtage i fremtidige globale estimater af CO-emissioner fra vegetation, samt at det tidligere
globale estimat på 50-200 Tg per år muligvis skal fordobles. Yderligere skal mere sikre esti-
mater af den globale lys-inducerede CO produktion baseres på emissioner fra både levende,
falmende (ENG: senescent) og dødt plantemateriale. For at forøge viden inden for området,
foreslås det at man inden for enkelte plantearter undersøger CO-rater på forskellige tider af
året samt effekten af nedbrydningen af blade, både for individuelle spektralfordelinger og for
det fulde spektrum af både UV og synligt lys.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Method
3
2.1
Test setup and instruments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Development of setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Leaf collection and treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Test procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Test Series 1 (TS1): Varying spectral distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5.1
Calculation: the contribution to CO production from the UV and vis-
ible light spectra of natural solar radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Test Series 2 (TS2): Dose-response - effect of the same spectral distribution
at varying intensities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
Screening of different species of leaves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Results
14
3.1
General tendencies for all measured gases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Tests with visible light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Tests with UV light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Comparison of blanks and dark tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Calculating the light-induced CO emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Results from Test Series 1 (TS1): Varying spectral distributions . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Results: the contribution to CO production from the UV and visible
light spectra of natural solar radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Results from Test Series 2 (TS2): Dose-response - effect of the same spectral
distribution at varying intensities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
Results from screening of different species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Discussion
27
5
Conclusion
31
6
References
33
A Appendix: Heliospectra DYNA settings
35
==PAGE:5==
B
Appendix: The internal volume used to calculate the CO rates
37
C Appendix: Test series 2: dose-response values obtained
38
D Appendix: Indications of an effect governed by photosynthesis
39
D.1
CO and photosynthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
D.2
CH4 and photosynthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:6==
Preface
This is the master’s thesis of Soﬁe Kristensen, student number s164294, made as the ﬁnal
assignment of the master programme in Environmental Engineering at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark (DTU). The work of the thesis has been performed at the Department
of Environmental Engineering at DTU in the period August 2021 to February 2022. The
project has been supervised by Teis Nørgaard Mikkelsen (Technical University of Denmark,
Department of Environmental Engineering) and Dan Bruhn (Aalborg University, Department
of Chemistry and Bioscience).
1
Introduction
Carbon monoxide (CO) is an atmospheric trace gas, whose major sink is the reaction with
the hydroxyl radical, a molecule which is also governing the degradation of the greenhouse
gas methane (CH4). The atmospheric concentration of CO can therefore indirectly affect
the greenhouse gas accounts, though CO is not itself considered a greenhouse gas. It has
been observed that the atmospheric CO concentration has been decreasing over the last two
decades, but had the CO concentration not been decreasing, the atmospheric CH4 concentra-
tions would most likely have been higher (Gaubert et al., 2017). Anthropogenic emissions
of CO are estimated to annually account for 608 Tg CO and is primarily due to incomplete
combustion of fossil fuels and biomass. In the atmosphere, CO is formed by oxidation of
CH4 and volatile organic carbon (VOC) (Mikkelsen et al., 2016). A natural source of CO is
photo-induced emissions from vegetation, which has been estimated to account for 50-200
Tg annually (Tarr et al., 1995).
Wilks (1959) was among the ﬁrst to examine the emission of CO from green vegetation, a
process found to be induced under illumination and in the presence of oxygen. Later studies
have supported the ﬁnding that CO is emitted from leaves under illumination (Seiler and
Giehl, 1977; Fischer and Lüttge, 1978; Seiler et al., 1978; Schade et al., 1999; Yonemura
et al., 1999), and in the presence of oxygen (Fischer and Lüttge, 1978; Tarr et al., 1995;
Yonemura et al., 1999; Derendorp et al., 2011). Light from the ultraviolet (UV) spectrum
alone also induces CO emissions (Bruhn et al., 2013; Derendorp et al., 2011). Derendorp et al.
(2011) found that the CO production was similar using ambient and synthetic air, respectively,
indicating that the CO production is not dependent on background concentrations of other
atmospheric trace gases than oxygen. The CO production has not only been found to be
dependent on oxygen, but it has also been found that higher oxygen mixing ratios increase
the CO production (Wilks, 1959; Fischer and Lüttge, 1978; Yonemura et al., 1999). Looking
at carbon dioxide (CO2), Fischer and Lüttge (1978) found that higher CO2 concentrations
decreased the CO production, while Yonemura et al. (1999) found no correlation with CO2.
Other abiotic factors have also been found to induce CO emissions, including a positive
exponential relationship between CO emissions and temperature (Fischer and Lüttge, 1978;
1
==PAGE:7==
Derendorp et al., 2011; Bruhn et al., 2013; Van Asperen et al., 2015), and increasing CO
production with higher salt stress (Zilli et al., 2014).
Looking at the relationship with light intensity, some authors have found that the CO emission
increases linearly with higher irradiance (Fischer and Lüttge, 1978; Seiler et al., 1978; Bauer
et al., 1979; Yonemura et al., 1999), while Schade et al. (1999) found that the relationship was
exponential. Bruhn et al. (2013) and Derendorp et al. (2011) have also found a positive linear
relation when leaves were solely exposed to UV intensity. Bruhn et al. (2013) examined the
effect of different spectral distributions of UV light, and found higher CO production when
exposing leaves to UVB compared to UVA, supporting Tarr et al. (1995) who found that when
more UV at shorter wavelengths was eliminated, the CO production decreased. Further, Tarr
et al. (1995) found this tendency to be species dependent. Exposure to sunlight has also been
found to cause varying CO emission rates between species (Bruhn et al., 2013; Wilks, 1959).
The source of the CO emissions is not yet uncovered, and several precursors and mechanisms
has been suggested. Tarr et al. (1995) found higher emissions from the bottom of the leaf,
suggesting that the production is happening inside the leaves. On the other hand, Yonemura
et al. (1999) found that there was no correlation with CO2 or humidity and interpreted this
as an indication that the mechanism is not directly controlled by carbon metabolism or stom-
atal conductance. Fischer and Lüttge (1978) and Bauer et al. (1980) found no correlation
with photosynthesis, and Lüttge and Fischer (1980) suggested that the production might be
coupled to photorespiration. Plant constituents as cellulose has been suggested as a primary
precursor (Schade et al., 1999), and Wilks (1959) found higher emission from chlorophyll
fractions in pigment-separated leaf ﬂour, while Bauer et al. (1980) observed CO production
from a chlorophyll-free strain of a phototrophic microorganism.
Schade et al. (1999) is until now the only author to expose vegetation to a number of spectral
distributions within the visible light spectrum, ﬁnding that higher wavelengths induced lower
CO production in degrading beech leaves and savannah grass. Degrading leaves have been
found to emit 9-10 times more CO compared to fresh leaves (Tarr et al., 1995; Yonemura
et al., 1999), and therefore it is relevant to make the same measurements as Schade et al.
(1999) with fresh leaves. Further, more studies that separately compare the effects of the UV
spectrum and visible spectra can broaden the knowledge on the magnitude of emitted CO that
should be attributed to speciﬁc parts of the solar spectrum.
This project aims to broaden the knowledge on the effect of emitted CO from different colours
of light from the visible spectrum. Measurements have been made on fresh leaves of common
ivy (Hedera helix). Firstly, it will be examined whether a light-induced rate of CO can be
detected from leaves exposed to different spectral distributions within the visible spectrum,
which will be compared to measurements using UVA and UVB light. From these results it
will also be examined whether some parts of the visible light spectrum induces higher CO
emissions than other parts of the spectrum. Secondly, the relationship between light intensity
and spectral distribution of visible light will be studied. Lastly, emissions from different
species of leaves will be compared. The ﬁndings will be used to estimate the effect of natural
sunlight on the light-induced CO emission from leaves, and it will be discussed whether the
2
==PAGE:8==
ﬁndings for separate visible spectral light distributions can be compared to ﬁndings of earlier
studies concerning the full visible spectrum and ultraviolet spectral distributions.
2
Method
2.1
Test setup and instruments
To be able to measure the emission of CO from the leaves, which earlier have proven to be
very low concentrations, a closed-loop setup was chosen. A Picarro G2401 Gas Concentra-
tion Analyzer was used to measure gases in the tests. The analyzer uses cavity ring-down
spectroscopy to measure CO, CO2, CH4 and H2O simultaneously and continuously. The
closed system allows for the gases to build up inside the system, and if there is an increase it
will be seen as increasing concentrations on the analyzer. Leaves were placed inside a Walz
3010-GWK1 Gas-Exchange Chamber during tests. The Walz chamber can be temperature-
controlled and a fan can provide circulation to the internal chamber. A Picarro A0702 Low-
Leak Diaphragm Pump was used to circulate air between the Walz chamber and Picarro
analyzer. Pump, analyzer and chamber were connected with stainless steel tubes, see setup
in Figure 1.
Figure 1: On the left, the Picarro analyzer is placed with a screen on top to display the live mea-
surements. To the right, the Walz chamber is placed on a lift. The chamber is placed underneath
the Heliospectra DYNA LED lamps that hang from a rack, whose sides are covered in metallic foil
and dark cloths during tests. In the middle, to the right of the analyzer, a Picarro pump is placed,
that circulates air from the Walz chamber into the Picarro analyzer. Pump, chamber and analyzer is
connected with stainless steel tubes in a closed loop.
Heliospectra DYNA LED lamps provided visible and UVA light for the tests. The lamps can
radiate light around speciﬁc wavelengths, lowest setting being 380 nm and highest being 735
nm, and there is further a 5700K setting for white LED light. At each wavelength setting,
3
==PAGE:9==
an intensity setting between 0-1000 can be chosen. The different wavelength settings can be
used alone or in combination.
Inside the Walz chamber, additional items were added to be able to place and keep the leaf
surface ﬂat during the tests, and to place the leaf as close to the chamber top as possible: a
stainless steel grate supported by cylinders cut from Teﬂon tubes were used to make a ﬂat
and stable surface underneath the leaf. Layers of thin Teﬂon sheet was placed on top of
the stainless steel grate to prevent any light passing the leaf surface to hit the bottom of the
chamber directly. Leaves have been put on top of the steel grate and Teﬂon sheets during
tests.
2.2
Development of setup
A set of screening tests were performed to examine the setup performance and limitations.
Use of template:
It was found that when exposed to light, the empty Walz chamber itself released an amount
of CO which was higher than what was seen in darkness. This rate was lower than rates from
similar screenings performed with light-exposed leaves in the chamber, indicating that the
production from the leaves could be detected. Though, to prevent unnecessary CO production
from the chamber, templates that ﬁtted the leaves were cut in cardboard and placed on top of
the chamber lid during tests.
Distance from LED-lamps to chamber top:
Screenings at different distances (5 cm, 10 cm, 15 cm, and 20 cm) from LED-lamps were
performed. In these tests, the CO-rate released from the leaf was higher at 10 cm than 5
cm distance, whereafter the rate decreased with increasing distance. This is likely due to the
location of diodes in the LED-lamps, that are not uniformly distributed over the lamp surface
and differs with the chosen spectral distribution. Further it was noted that mist was seen on
the chamber lid when the chamber was placed at 5 cm distance, likely due to extra heating
from the light that affects leaf transpiration. To lower heating and inﬂuence of the diode
location on the lamp, but to still keep a high light intensity, it was chosen to use a distance of
10 cm between lamps and chamber.
Extra gasket:
In a number of the ﬁrst screenings, a decline in CH4 and CO2 was seen, and was suspected
to be caused by a leak. The gaskets between chamber bottom and lid where replaced. As
an extra measure, extra gasket material was glued to pieces of wood and clasped around the
chamber gaskets with clamps during tests.
Compressed synthetic air:
The concentrations of especially CH4 was anywhere in between 2 and 8 ppm, which is higher
compared to atmospheric concentrations that are estimated around 1.9 ppm (NOAA). A bot-
tle of synthetic air (content: oxygen N45 20.9 vol-%, CO2 <0.1 vol-ppm, CO <0.1 vol-ppm,
total hydrocarbons <0.05 vol-ppm, sulphur dioxide <10 vol-ppb, water <0.5 vol-ppm, NOx
4
==PAGE:10==
<10 vol-ppb, N2 rest) was used for screenings supposed to mimic a near-natural atmosphere
(approx. 400 ppm CO2 and 1.8 ppm CH4) and a low-concentration atmosphere (set to approx.
100 ppm CO2 and 0.5 ppm CH4). A higher increase in CH4 with lower starting concentra-
tions was seen as a sign of continued leak in the setup. To avoid too much inﬂuence from
leaks, the chamber lid was left open between tests and the measured internal concentration
from the analyzer was allowed to stabilize and reach the background concentrations from the
laboratory. By doing this it was expected that internal setup concentrations and laboratory
concentration would be in equilibrium at the start of each test and the effect from diffusion
into or out of the setup would be minimal.
Duration of tests:
Tests of 8 minutes, 10 minutes, 15 minutes and 30 minutes have been performed. 8 minutes
was enough to see a steady, linear development of CO. Though, 30 minute tests were needed
to see clear patterns in CO2 and H2O. Photosynthesis in the leaves, interpreted by decreasing
CO2 concentrations, did not start instantly after exposing the leaves to light in the chamber.
H2O reached a steady concentration, in many tests over a longer timescale than 15 minutes.
Therefore it was chosen to run the later tests for 30 minutes.
2.3
Leaf collection and treatment
Tests were performed from November 2021 to January 2022. To be able to use freshly picked
leaves that had grown naturally outdoors, an evergreen leaf species was needed. Leaves of
Hedera helix (common ivy) were used for the main part of the tests, collected in a location
nearby the laboratory. All leaves for one test day were collected at the same time in the
morning, brought to the laboratory, where dirt was gently cleaned from the leaf surface with
a wet paper towel, and kept on the lab table with a wet paper towel around end of petiole to
prevent drying and closing of stomata.
Each leaf was cut from the petiole shortly before the test. FW of the whole leaf (excl. petiole)
was measured before and after test. After each test, the leaf was cut to ﬁt the size of the
template hole, and the FW of the "ﬁtted leaf" was also measured. Leaf area was measured on
whole leaf and ﬁtted leaf. By measuring the ﬁtted leaf, statistics could be made on leaf area
and weight corresponding to only the leaf surface that was exposed to light, excluding the
leaf area that was covered by the template during the test. All leaves were dried in a drying
cabinet for a minimum of 48 hours at 70 °C before measuring the DW of the ﬁtted leaf as
well as the cut-off leaf surface.
2.4
Test procedure
Two types of tests were performed for each leaf: light tests and dark tests. Dark tests were
performed without light; lamps were turned off and a folded, dark cloth was placed on top of
the chamber to make sure no light reached the leaf surface during this test. Light tests were
performed with leaves exposed to light, at desired light intensity and spectral distribution.
5
==PAGE:11==
The chamber was placed only under one of the lamps as this yielded higher intensity than
placing the chamber between both lamps. But both lamps were always turned on in the
light test, as this yielded higher intensity than only using the lamp the chamber was placed
beneath.A light test as well as a dark test were performed for all leaves, both tests performed
subsequent to each other without opening the chamber in between tests.
Test Series 1 (TS1) and Test Series 2 (TS2), that have constituted the main part of the project
and will be described in the two following sections, have both been performed with the same
procedure:
• Walz chamber was set to 25 °C and fanspeed 2 (of 5).
• One of four templates of different sizes was chosen to cover the leaf of each test. The
template, made of cardboard was plastered to the chamber lid, so no light directly lit
the chamber bottom, but was directed to the leaf surface.
• The leaf was cut from the petiole shortly before being put into the chamber.
• Chamber lid was lifted and the gas concentrations measured by the analyzer was al-
lowed to stabilize to the concentrations inside the laboratory.
• The leaf was put into the chamber and ﬁtted to a location right under the template.
• The chamber lid was put on the chamber and tightened. Extra gaskets were ﬁtted
around the Walz chamber with clamps.
• The chamber was placed with 10 cm distance to the LED lamps. The chamber was
always placed underneath one lamp, though both lamps were turned on when making
tests with light.
• The top and sides of the rack holding the lamps were covered with metallic foil and
dark cloths to shield from light other than from the lamps.
• The ﬁrst test (light/dark) was started, run for 30 minutes.
• The second test (light/dark) was started, run for 30 minutes.
• Leaf was removed from the chamber and preparation for new measurement started,
In TS1, it was varied whether the dark test or the light test was run ﬁrst. Throughout the
report, the tests where the dark test was run ﬁrst will be referenced as DL tests ("DL" being
short for "Dark-Light"), and the tests where the light test has been run ﬁrst will be referenced
as LD tests ("LD" being short for "Light-Dark").
6
==PAGE:12==
2.5
Test Series 1 (TS1): Varying spectral distributions
The ﬁrst test series aimed to investigate 1) whether a light-induced CO emission could be
detected when leaves were exposed to different spectral distributions within the visible light
spectrum, and 2) whether the magnitude of the light-induced CO emission was dependent on
the spectral distribution. Tests with leaves exposed UVA and UVB were also performed to
be compared to the effect of the visible spectrum as well as to make comparisons to earlier
publications.
Six different spectral distributions were chosen within the visible spectrum, giving violet,
blue, green, yellow, red and white LED light. Further, one level of UVA and one level of
UVB were also tested. Six replicates were made for each spectral distribution. For tests with
spectral distributions within the visible spectrum, maximum one test of each colour were
performed on the same day. UVA tests as well as UVB tests were each performed over two
days.
The light that will here be introduced as yellow was a combination of green and red diodes,
but the light underneath the lamp was perceived as yellow. The spectres for all of the spectral
distributions can be seen in Figure 2, where it is seen that the yellow curve has one peak in
the green wavelength range and also a peak in the red range. The light that is perceived as
white comes from diodes with white light, which from Figure 2 is seen to be constituted by
a peak in the blue wavelength range and wider peak topping in the yellow wavelength range.
For the remaining spectral distributions, the wavelengths are distributed around one peak. It
should be noted that the diodes providing different colours of light in the Heliospectra DYNA
lamps have different locations, depending on colours, meaning that the distribution of light
has not been equal for all spectral distributions.
Figure 2: Spectres measured with a LI-180 spectrometer in the 380-700 nm range of the different
spectral distributions used in TS1, referenced by the colour of light. The intensity of the different
spectral distributions correspond to those from Table 1. UVB is not included in the ﬁgure, as this
spectral distribution is primarily in the shorter wavelength range (see spectrum in Figure 1B from
Bruhn et al. (2009)), which cannot be measured with the LI-180 spectrometer.
7
==PAGE:13==
The UVA setting that was used was also provided from the Heliospectra DYNA lamps. UVB
was provided by two Philips UV-B Medical Hg (PL-S 9W/01/2P) light bulbs.
The intensities of the different spectral distributions are presented in Table 1. Visible light was
measured with a LI-COR LI-180 spectrometer and presented in two units: photon intensity in
the photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) spectrum (µmol/m2/s, 400-700 nm) and energy
intensity (W/m2) in the 380-780 nm range. UV intensities were measured with a Gigahertz-
Optik P9710 Optometer, using a UV3701 detector head for UVA (315-400 nm) and a UV3702
detector head for UVB (280-315 nm).
The intention of the tests in TS1 was to expose leaves to the same energy intensity for all
visible spectral light distributions. The energy intensities that were used to scale the inten-
sities were measured with a pyranometer that did not to have a ﬂat spectral response, which
was not recognized until the tests had already been performed. This is further elaborated in
Box 1. Conclusion was that the leaves have unintentionally been exposed to varying light
intensities from each spectral distribution.
Box 1: Test Series 1 should have been performed with the same light intensities in
each spectral distribution, but has unintentionally been performed with varying
light intensities.
The intention of TS1 was to test varying spectral distributions at the same light energy
intensity, so the calculated light-induced CO rates would be directly comparable. The
intensity of each spectral distribution was measured and adjusted to an intensity of ap-
proximately 70 W/m2 with an LI-200R Pyranometer. The Heliospectra DYNA lamp
settings providing this intensity on the Pyranometer was used during all tests in TS1.
Later it was recognized that corresponding measurements of photon intensity (unit:
µmol/m2/s) from a LI-190R Quantum sensor at the same lamp settings showed de-
creasing photon intensity with higher wavelength spectrum (e.g., blue light showed
higher intensity than red light). Logically, this pattern should have been opposite, as
shorter wavelengths have higher energy. As all spectral distributions should have same
intensity in energy units, higher photon intensity should have been seen at higher wave-
length spectres.
An LI-180 Spectrometer that could measure intensity in energy and photon units si-
multaneously was used to make the same intensity measurements. This instrument
showed that the intensity was higher in both energy and photon units at shorter wave-
length spectres compared to longer wavelength spectres.
The producer of the sensors, LI-COR, was contacted to ﬁnd out which measurements
should be used. The answer was that the LI-200R Pyranometer was not appropriate
as it does not have a ﬂat spectral response and have not reduced the intensity as much
as needed in the shorter wavelengths. Conclusion was therefore that the leaves have
been exposed to not only to varying spectral distributions, but also varying intensities
with each spectral distribution. The intensities of visible light that are presented in the
report are all measured with the LI-180 spectrometer.
8
==PAGE:14==
Apart from the decreasing intensity for visible light with higher wavelength, it should also be
noted that UVA intensity has been measured for several of the visible spectral distributions.
Both PAR and light visible to the human eye is normally considered as the spectral range 400-
700 nm. The UVA detector detects the wavelength range 315-400 nm and the UVB detector
detects in the wavelength range 280-315 nm, and these ranges will be used to differentiate
between the UVA and UVB spectra in this project.
Table 1: Overview of the different spectral distributions used in TS1: peak wavelength of spectres (see
also Figure 2), and measured intensities of visible and UV radiation. Photon intensity is measured in
the 400-700 nm range as PPFD, and energy intensity of visible light is measured in the 380-780
nm range, both with the LI-180 spectrometer. UV intensities were measured with a Gigahertz-Optik
P9710 Optometer, UVA in the range 315-400 nm with a UV3701 detector head and UVB in the
wavelength range 280-315 nm with a UV-3702 detector head. Peak wavelengths are not provided for
yellow and white light, as these spectres both have two peaks. The settings used on the Heliospectra
DYNA lamps can be seen in Table 7 in Appendix A
Spectral
distribu-
tion (colour)
UVB
UVA
Violet
Blue
Green
Yellow
Red
White
Peak wavelength
-
383
410
447
520
-
657
-
PAR photon inten-
sity [µmol/m2/s]
-
-
811.4
(±6.0)
678.6
(±8.7)
540.6
(±10.2)
469.4
(±17.9)
423.4
(±4.1)
495.3
(±6.8)
Energy
intensity
[W/m2]
-
-
241.0
(±3.4)
176.9
(±6.2)
123.8
(±2.9)
95.9
(±4.1)
78.6
(±0.8)
111.6
(±1.9)
UVA
intensity
[W/m2]
6.5
(±0.4)
22.2
(±0.5)
12.8
(±0.02)
0.46
0
0
0
0.12
UVB
intensity
[W/m2]
20.0
(±0.8)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Diode colour(s)
-
-
Violet
Blue
Green
Green,
red
Red
White
The different intensity detectors have different cut-offs, though the border is not sharp. The
UVA detector measures primarily in the 315-400 nm range, but as can be seen in the spectral
responsivity graph from https://www.gigahertz-optik.com/en-us/product/uv-3701/,
it can also detect wavelengths a bit above 400 nm, which is expected to cause the UVA in-
tensities that are measured for blue and white light. As can be seen in Figure 2, the violet
spectrum also contains wavelengths below 400 nm. Though, as the energy intensity measured
with the LI-180 spectrometer includes wavelengths from 380-780 nm, the UVA range of vio-
let light is assumed to be covered by using this energy intensity. UV intensities are based only
on the UV detector heads. Here it should be noted that the UVB lamps contains both UVB
and UVA light intensities. The spectrum of the UVB lamps can be seen in Bruhn et al. (2009)
(Figure 1B), showing a large peak around 312 nm, and two smaller peaks at around 305 nm
and 365 nm, and it has been chosen that the measured UVA and UVB intensities presented
in Table 1 should be summed to equal the total energy intensity from the UVB lamps. As
9
==PAGE:15==
the photon intensity only measures the photon ﬂux, and as photons with shorter wavelengths
contain more energy than photons at longer wavelengths, the energy intensity has been used
to compare the CO emission rates from all of the spectral distributions.
2.5.1
Calculation: the contribution to CO production from the UV and visible light
spectra of natural solar radiation
As will be seen in Section 3.4, there is a detectable light-induced CO rate in the UV as well
as the visible spectrum. Leaves will be naturally exposed to sunlight, so the rates that are
calculated for each spectral distribution should be put in relation to the magnitude of that
spectral distribution in sunlight. If both UV and visible light induces CO emissions from
vegetation, it will be interesting to distinguish between how much radiation is received in the
UV and visible spectra, respectively, and how much CO will be produced from these spectra.
To estimate how much CO would be produced in the UV part of the solar spectrum com-
pared to the visible part of the solar spectrum, a simpliﬁed calculation was set up. The mod-
elled ASTM G-173-03 Direct+circumsolar spectrum from https://www.nrel.gov/grid/
solar-resource/spectra-am1.5.html was used as a proxy for the solar radiation at the
surface of the Earth. The model represents the spectral terrestrial irradiance on an inclined
surface for one set of speciﬁed atmospheric conditions, representative for average conditions
for 48 states in the United States over a period of one year. Solar power (unit: W/m2) as
function of wavelength is given for the range 250-4000 nm in the model.
The spectral distributions that were used in this project range only from the UVB to the
visible spectrum. Therefore, the part of the solar spectrum that will be used in this calculation
is limited to the 300-700 nm range. A CO rate for each spectral distribution will be presented
in Section 3.4. In this calculation, the CO rate will be linked to a speciﬁc wavelength, and
between these wavelengths the CO rate will be interpolated to make an estimate of how big a
CO rate can be expected from each wavelength of the 300-700 nm solar spectrum.
For all of the spectral distributions that have one peak in Figure 2 (all spectres except UVB,
yellow and white), the speciﬁc wavelength will be chosen at the peak of the corresponding
spectrum. White will be excluded from this calculation as the distribution of this colour
ranges all over the visible spectrum. For yellow, that has a peak in the green and in the red
wavelength range, respectively, the speciﬁc wavelength will be set in between these two peaks
at 580 nm. As described, the spectrum of the UVB lamps can be found in Bruhn et al. (2009),
and has a large peak around 312 nm, and two smaller peaks at around 305 nm and 365 nm,
respectively. To give the largest peak higher inﬂuence, the speciﬁc wavelength for UVB is
for the calculation set at 310 nm. All the speciﬁc wavelengths for each spectral distributions
are presented in Table 2.
10
==PAGE:16==
Table 2: The speciﬁc wavelength that was chosen to represent the CO rate of each spectral distribution
in the calculation. For all spectral distributions except UVB and yellow, the peak wavelength was
set as the peak wavelength from the spectrum that was shown in Figure 2. For the yellow light, the
speciﬁc wavelength has been set in the middle between the peak in the green and red parts of the
yellow spectrum. The UVB spectrum from Bruhn et al. (2009) was used to set the speciﬁc wavelength
at 310 nm for UVB.
Spectral
distribu-
tion (colour)
UVB
UVA
Violet
Blue
Green
Yellow
Red
Speciﬁc
wavelength [nm]
310
383
410
447
520
580
657
The CO rates that are presented in Section 3.4 are given per 1 W/m2 irradiation intensity and
are scaled per leaf area (unit: nmol/m2/h). For each spectral distribution, the calculated CO
rate is assigned at the chosen speciﬁc wavelength from Table 2. There are gaps in between
the speciﬁc wavelengths, as only these few spectral distributions have been tested. In lack
of knowledge of the development in between the chosen speciﬁc wavelengths, linear inter-
polation has been used between each speciﬁc wavelengths to extrapolate the CO rate to each
wavelength in the 310-657 nm solar spectrum. In the range 300-310 nm, the CO rate is set
equal to the rate at 310 nm (CO rate from UVB). In the range 657-700 nm, the CO rate is set
equal to the rate at 657 nm (the CO rate from red light). The solar spectrum in the 300-700
nm range, and the interpolated CO rates in the 300-700 nm range are presented in Figure 3A
and 3B, respectively.
A: The modelled solar spectrum in the 300-700 nm
range, used as a proxy for the irradiance received at
the Earth surface.
B: Linear interpolation has been applied between the
calculated CO rates, which are assigned at the speciﬁc
wavelength from Table 2.
Figure 3
Using fallen leaf matter, Tarr et al. (1995) found that when more UV was eliminated in
the 305-425 nm spectral range, the CO rate decreased. This supports that the wavelengths
11
==PAGE:17==
between 310 nm and 380 will probably be in between the two rates obtained, and it can be
justiﬁed that linear interpolation was used to extrapolate the CO rate in the UV spectrum,
even with the large decrease between 310 nm and 380 nm.
The estimated CO rate per irradiation intensity is multiplied with the irradiation intensity of
the solar spectrum at each wavelength. This yields an estimate of the CO rate governed by the
solar spectrum for each wavelength in the 300-700 nm range. By integrating the area under
Figure 3A, the solar irradiation intensity of the 300-700 nm range can be estimated.
2.6
Test Series 2 (TS2): Dose-response - effect of the same spectral dis-
tribution at varying intensities
The second test series aimed to investigate whether there is a relation between intensity and
CO rate, i.e. a dose-response relation. A positive linear relation between the light-induced
CO rate and light intensity has previously been found in the UV and the full visible spectrum
(Fischer and Lüttge, 1978; Seiler et al., 1978; Yonemura et al., 1999; Derendorp et al., 2011;
Bruhn et al., 2013), whereas this part of the project focused on exploring whether the same
pattern was seen for individual spectral distributions within the visible spectrum.
Four spectral distributions (colours of light) were chosen; blue, green, red and white light.
Five different intensities of light were chosen for the dose-response tests for each colour.
Apart from these ﬁve intensities, a sixth intensity had already been measured in TS1. It
was chosen to vary the intensity by adjusting intensity on the Heliospectra DYNA lamps
rather than adjusting distance between lamps, i.e. the distance between lamps and chamber
top remained 10 cm. The used lamp settings can be seen in Appendix A (Table 8) and the
measured intensities are presented in Table 3. Blue light was in the range 54-154 W/m2,
green 57-148 W/m2, red 53-168 W/m2 and white light in the range 172-468 W/m2.
One replicate of each intensity of each colour was made. In lack of time, it was chosen to test
more intensities with one replicate rather than fewer intensities with more replicates.
Table 3: The ﬁve levels of light energy intensity (W/m2, ±std) used in TS2. The intensities are
measured with a LI-180 spectrometer, and are listed from the lowest to the highest top-down. Values
are based on four independent measurements.
Blue
Green
Red
White
Intensities [W/m2]
Intensities [W/m2]
Intensities [W/m2]
Intensities [W/m2]
54.1 (±1.5)
56.8 (±0.4)
52.7 (±0.7)
171.7 (±2.9)
79.3 (±1.5)
82.1 (±1.1)
106.7 (±2.2)
253.3 (±3.5)
103.9 (±1.5)
104.5 (±0.9)
127.0 (±3.3)
327.5 (±5.7)
129.2 (±1.8)
136.0 (±2.5)
149.3 (±2.8)
400.4 (±4.0)
153.5 (±1.8)
148.2 (±3.5)
168.4 (±2.7)
467.9 (±6.1)
The dose-response tests were performed exclusively in the visible spectrum, as dose-response
12
==PAGE:18==
tests of UVA and UVB light has previously been performed (Derendorp et al., 2011; Bruhn
et al., 2013). Violet was also left out due to the signiﬁcant amount of UVA in this spectral
distribution. As the yellow light was a combination of different diodes and spectral distribu-
tions, it would not be possible to scale the intensity of this colour directly, so yellow was also
left out.
The test procedure follows the one described in Section 2.4, though the dark test was always
performed before the light test in TS2 (i.e. all are DL tests); as only one replicate was made
of each light intensity, it was chosen to make equal conditions for all tests. See Section 3.2
for comments on the effect of performing the dark test before or after the light test. The tests
for the same colour has been performed on the same day, and the tests have been performed
in random order and not e.g. from lowest to highest intensity.
2.7
Screening of different species of leaves
Had there been more time to perform tests, a series with different species would have been
made after the setup was fully developed. Though, screenings were made of four different
species in the start-up phase of the project, which will here be presented. As these tests were
made in the start-up phase, the following differed from TS1 and TS2:
• The fan speed in the Walz chamber was set to 1 (of 5), i.e. a level lower than later tests.
The lowest fan speeds were not found to have notable effect on the CO rate during
screenings, and this is not considered to have had a big impact.
• Tests were run only for 8 minutes. 8 minutes was enough to gain a linear development
of CO, though not to stabilize H2O, as outlined in Section 2.2.
• These tests were run before the old gaskets were changed on the Walz chamber, and
further before extra gaskets were added. The setup might therefore have been prone to
larger leaks.
The four leaf species tested were beech (Fagus sylvatica), hazel (Corylus avellana), common
ivy (Hedera helix), and oak (Quercus robur). The same template was used for all of these
tests, to have the same leaf area (approx. 48.5 cm2) exposed to light. This cardboard template
was cut to ﬁt a hazel leaf, which were used for a number of other screenings. To ﬁll out the
template, several of the other types of leaves were ﬁtted in the Walz chamber under the
template hole (6-8 beech leaves, 4 oak leaves, and 5-7 ivy leaves), where only one hazel leaf
was needed, see Figure 4.
All the tests were run with white light at maximum intensity possible: approx. 468 W/m2
(see also max intensity for white light in Table 3). Two replicates for each leaf species was
made. The tests were run on the 4/11-2021, i.e. shortly before leaf senescence of beech, oak
and hazel caused the green colours to fade and leaves to fall from the trees.
13
==PAGE:19==
Beech
Hazel
Ivy
Oak
Figure 4: The leaves used in the screenings with four different leaf species. The images show how
the different leaves were ﬁtted under the template, that was originally made for hazel leaves. Several
beech, oak and ivy leaves are placed overlapping each other, while only one hazel leaf was needed.
3
Results
3.1
General tendencies for all measured gases
The primary part of the project had focus on CO and the results that will be presented in
the following sections will primarily be CO results, but the general tendencies seen for all of
the gases measured with the Picarro analyzer (CO, CO2, CH4 and H2O) will here be shortly
commented. Most focus will be put on the effects from visible light, as the primary aim of
the project has been to explore the visible spectral light distributions, and UV has primarily
been included for comparison.
3.1.1
Tests with visible light
For CO2, it was clear that the leaf was still alive during tests. Leaf respiration caused the
CO2 concentration to increase in darkness and photosynthesis caused the CO2 concentration
to decrease when the leaf was exposed to light. It was apparent that when light tests were run
ﬁrst (LD tests), the CO2 concentration started decreasing within the ﬁrst couple of minutes.
Though, when the dark test was run ﬁrst (DL tests), there was a lag-time before the CO2 con-
centration decreased in the light test, see Figure 5. In some DL tests, it was observed that the
CO2 concentration kept increasing a few minutes into the light tests before the concentration
started to decrease - a sign of the shift from respiration to photosynthesis.
In TS1, CO2 was decreasing by 300-700 ppm in the light tests and increasing by 50-250
ppm in the dark tests. Exceptions from the general pattern were seen in TS1 for three of the
replicates that were exposed to red light. In these three tests, that constitute one LD test and
two DL tests, the CO2 concentration only decreased by 22-39 ppm during the 30 minute light
14
==PAGE:20==
test. Apart from this, all the tests using red light showed the fastest response in CO2 with a
clear decrease within two minutes.
Figure 5: Two examples of the general tendencies seen for CO2 in a DL test (ﬁgure A) and an LD
test (ﬁgure B). Dark tests (dotted) and light tests (solid) data are plotted over the 1800 seconds (30
minutes) test duration. CO2 in both dark tests are increasing near-linearly. A: there is a lag-time
before CO2 starts decreasing in DL light tests, here exempliﬁed in a test with yellow light. B: the CO2
concentration starts decreasing instantly in LD light tests, here exempliﬁed by a test with green light.
The water vapor (H2O) concentration increased in all tests, and showed a stabilization pat-
tern in most tests. Start concentrations of H2O were typically in the range 0.5-1.0%, and
stabilization was typically reached at 2.0-2.5% H2O. In few tests, the H2O never reached the
stabilization point, but kept slowly increasing towards the 2.0-2.5% H2O.
Figure 6: Two examples of the general tendencies that were seen for H2O in DL tests (ﬁgure A) and
LD tests (ﬁgure B). Both examples are from leaves exposed to blue light in TS1. A: H2O steadily
increasing during dark test, whereafter stabilizing in light test. B: Light test causes a steep increase in
H2O, whereafter the concentration stays stable during the dark test.
In TS1, when the light test was run ﬁrst (LD tests), the H2O concentration generally increased
15
==PAGE:21==
with a steep slope and stabilized within 20-25 minutes, whereafter the H2O concentration
was stable in the following dark test (see example in Figure 6B). When the dark test was
run ﬁrst (DL tests), in general a more gradual increase in H2O concentration was seen in
darkness, whereafter the concentration increased to stabilization in the light test. With the
indication that CO2 concentration is decreasing due to photosynthesis when exposed to light,
it is expected that stomata will be open and that transpiration is the cause of the increases in
H2O concentration that is seen under light tests.
An example of the CO development is presented in Figure 7A, where it is apparent that the
CO concentration increases linearly. A linear development of CO was seen in all dark tests
and all light tests. The background concentrations of CO in the laboratory has mostly been
in the range 0.15-0.20 ppm. Evident for both CO and CH4 is that noise is seen around the
measurements (see Figure 7), that is ascribed as measurement noise from the analyzer.
Figure 7: Measurement noise was seen around CO (ﬁgure A) and CH4 (ﬁgure B) data. Both ﬁgures
show data from the same DL test with violet light in TS1. A: the CO concentration shows a linear
development over the 30 minutes duration for both dark test and light test. B: In this ﬁgure, the CH4
concentration is relatively stable during the dark test and decreasing during the following light test.
Both of these CH4 curves have variations within 30 ppb (note that the y-axis is zoomed in for detailed
view).
The CH4 concentrations that were analyzed have been H2O-corrected by an algorithm in the
Picarro analyzer. CH4 results had different outcomes and no clear tendency has been seen
when leaves were exposed to visible light. In Section 2.2 it was described that measures to
prevent leaks were developed for the setup. Before these measures were implemented, it was
clear that CH4 concentrations were decreasing in most tests. These decreases were smaller
after tightening the chamber, but did not make the CH4 decreases cease. For light tests as well
as dark tests it applied that in some tests CH4 was decreasing, in some tests it was increasing,
and in some it was stable. In some tests, the CH4 concentration was increasing in dark tests
and then decreasing in the light tests (see e.g. Figure 7B), indicating no effect of visible light,
but there are also examples of the opposite. The change in CH4 concentration over the 30
minute tests varied within a few and 50 ppb, i.e. a factor of 10 lower than the variations seen
16
==PAGE:22==
for CO. As earlier mentioned, the background concentration in the laboratory varied a lot,
being anywhere in between 2 and 8 ppm, but most tests have been run with a background
concentration within 2.3-3.0 ppm.
3.1.2
Tests with UV light
Under UV light, CO concentrations keeps increasing linearly, though with a higher slope
compared to tests under visible light.
CO2 concentrations show the same tendency in dark tests with an increase within 100 ppm.
In light, the variations are also within 100 ppm in most tests, which is much lower compared
to tests with visible light. Some tests show an increase in CO2 concentration, some show a
decrease, and in some tests the concentration is stable within 10 ppm.
Earlier studies have proved that UV is not only effective at inducing CO production from
leaves, but also CH4 (McLeod et al., 2008; Bruhn et al., 2009; Qaderi and Reid, 2009; Fraser
et al., 2015). There is an indication that this also applies from the UV tests of this project. In
ﬁve out of six tests of both UVA and UVB, respectively, an increase in CH4 is seen. For the
last of the six tests of UVA and UVB there is a decrease in CH4.
H2O does not show a clear stabilization pattern as was seen under visible light. In most tests,
the H2O concentration keeps steadily increasing. The end concentration of H2O is also lower
compared to the tests under visible light, for the UV tests mostly ending below 2%.
3.2
Comparison of blanks and dark tests
The background CO production from the setup was examined in dark tests run without leaves
(blanks). Originally it was expected that the background production would be insigniﬁcant
and could be subtracted from the tests with leaves. Though, when looking at the data out-
come, the magnitude of the blanks and dark rates with leaves could not easily be distin-
guished, which is shown in Figure 8. Figure 8A compares the CO rates obtained in blank
tests and dark tests with leaves, both including all tests from TS1 and TS2. Dark tests are
divided into three groups; one group with only the dark rates that have been run before the
light test ("Dark DL"), which is half of the dark rates from TS1 and all the dark rates from
TS2; the second group only with the dark rates that have been run after the light test ("Dark
LD"), which is half of the tests from TS1; the third group including all dark tests ("All Dark")
from TS1 and TS2.
Comparing the mean values, the mean CO rate for blanks is higher compared to the mean
of all dark tests. The Dark DL rates have a mean value very close to blanks though with a
little higher variation (higher standard deviation). It is apparent that the mean for the Dark
LD tests is lower compared to the other groups. The individual rates were not found to be
normal distributed, and a non-parametric Mann-Whitney U (MWU) test was run to test if the
differences between the distribution of the groups were signiﬁcant. The MWU test showed
17
==PAGE:23==
that there was no signiﬁcant difference between the distributions of blanks and Dark DL tests,
and neither were there between blanks and All Dark tests. Though, a signiﬁcant difference
was found between blanks and LD dark tests, and also when comparing the DL dark tests and
LD dark tests.
The ﬁndings from Figure 8A indicate that there is an interaction between the leaf and light
during the light test, and this has an effect on the CO production in darkness if the dark tests
has been run afterwards. That there is no signiﬁcant difference between the blanks and the
rest of the dark tests makes it impossible to estimate if the leaf produces CO in darkness, but it
must be concluded that the setup itself has a production of CO, though the source is unknown.
How much should be ascribed to production from the setup, the leaf, and uncertainties from
the analyzer cannot be concluded, but the dark rates with leaves will be considered to include
all of these.
Figure 8: A: the mean CO rates (±std) of all blanks (12 samples), dark tests run before light tests
("Dark DL", 44 samples), dark tests run after light tests ("Dark LD", 24 samples), and all dark tests
("All Dark", 68 samples). B: The mean CO rate (±std) for different numbers of leaves; 0 leaves
("Blank", same as Figure A), 1 leaf (same as "All Dark" in Figure A), 5 leaves and 9 leaves. Only one
replicate was made with 5 and 9 leaves, so these do not have a standard deviation.
In an attempt to examine if the production from the leaf can be detected with a higher leaf
area in the chamber, two screenings with several common ivy leaves were run. One dark
test was run with 5 leaves in the chamber, and a second dark test was run with 9 leaves.
A comparison of blanks with 0 leaves, dark rates with 1 leaf (all dark rates from TS1 and
TS2) and the screenings with 5 and 9 leaves are compared in Figure 8B. The outcome of the
screening was that the number of leaves increased the CO rate in darkness. Noting that only
one test was made with 5 and 9 leaves, the variation that is seen for blanks and dark tests with
one leaf has not been estimated, and it can only be concluded that there is a tendency that
more leaves would make it possible to distinguish between the background CO production
and the CO production from the leaf in darkness.
18
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Calculating the light-induced CO emission
The Picarro analyzer continuously provides CO concentrations in ppm. In all tests, CO has
shown a near-linear development in light tests as well as dark tests and blanks - including the
shorter screenings of 8 minutes as well as the longest 30 minute tests. Linear regression has
therefore been ﬁtted to extrapolate the CO data and to calculate a CO emission rate in ppm
per hour. As was shown in Figure 7 there is measurement noise around the CO data, but as
this is not affecting the trend of the data over time, linear regression has been applied to raw
data.
For each test, a rate of CO production from dark tests (dark rate) and a CO production rate
in light tests (light rate) is calculated from the linear ﬁt. As was presented in the previous
section, there are insigniﬁcant differences between the blanks and the total number of dark
rates. The dark rate is considered to include both the background production from the setup
and the leaf production in darkness. And even though there was an effect on the dark rate
depending on whether the dark rate was run before or after the light test, there are seen great
variations between the dark rates in each individual test. I.e. in some tests the dark rate was
higher than the light rate of another test. Thus, for simplicity, it was decided to estimate the
light-induced CO emission by subtracting the dark rate from the light rate in each individual
test:
CO ratelight-induced = CO ratelight −CO ratedark
Units of CO rates have been converted from ppm to either nmol or µmol to be comparable to
earlier publications. For this conversion, an internal setup volume of 1.26 L has been used,
see Table 9 in Appendix B.
The extrapolated rates have been scaled to four different parameters: light-exposed leaf area,
FW, DW and speciﬁc leaf area (SLA). It is assumed that the CO production is governed only
by the area of the leaf that is exposed to light, i.e. the area corresponding to the hole of the
template. There is awareness on the fact that there might be a production from the part of
the leaf that is covered by the template, either from production in darkness or governed by
diffuse light, but it has not been accounted for.
In TS1, due to the unintentional varying light intensities (see Box 1), the rates from the
different spectral distributions have further been scaled based on intensity to yield the CO
rate induced per 1 W/m2.
3.4
Results from Test Series 1 (TS1): Varying spectral distributions
The ﬁrst test series aimed to investigate the inﬂuence of different spectral distributions within
the visible spectrum on the light-induced CO emission. The results of TS1 are presented in
Figure 9 and Table 4, where it is seen that there is a production from each colour tested in the
visible spectrum. It is thereby concluded that spectral distributions within the visible light
19
==PAGE:25==
spectrum induces a CO production that is higher than what is produced in darkness and by
the background. Per 1 W/m2 intensity the mean rates per leaf area are in the range 4.6-5.9
nmol CO/m2/h. The lowest mean rate is seen under blue light (4.6 nmol/m2/h), followed by
green light (5.2 nmol/m2/h). The highest mean rate is seen under white light (5.9 nmol/m2/h),
very closely followed by red light (5.8 nmol/m2/h). The much higher standard deviation that
is seen for red light is caused by one of the replicates showing a much higher rate than the
other ﬁve replicates.
The second part of TS1 aimed to answer whether the emitted CO rate is dependent on spectral
distribution. In the visible spectrum, the rates under different spectral distributions are very
similar when the variation from the standard deviations are taken into account, and it is not
clear that one spectral distribution within the visible spectrum should govern much larger
CO emissions. But when the UV spectrum is also included, there is a clear difference, see
Figure 9A. UVA shows 2.8-3.5 times higher mean rate of 16.3 nmol/m2/h, whereas UVB has
a mean rate of 265.8 nmol/m2/h per 1 W/m2 intensity, which is 45-58 times higher than the
rates from the visible spectrum.
That UVB shows much higher CO rates than the visible spectrum is in agreement with earlier
publications (Tarr et al., 1995; Bruhn et al., 2013). If not downscaling to rate per 1 W/m2,
UVB has a CO rate of 7043 (±441) nmol/m2/h at 26.5 W/m2 UVB. This is higher than Bruhn
et al. (2013) obtained with B. oleracea using the same light source; approx. 5000 nmol/m2/h
at approx. 20 W/m2 UVB, but this might result from variations between species. Species
dependence will be discussed in Section 3.6.
Figure 9: The mean CO rates (± std) per 1 W/m2 (A) for each spectral distribution tested in TS1, and
(B) only for colours in the visible spectrum. The rates have been scaled per m2 leaf area, and are given
in the unit nmol CO/m2/h.
20
==PAGE:26==
The rates that are presented in Figure 9 are scaled per light-exposed leaf area. In Table 4, the
rates that are scaled per FW, DW and SLA are also presented. The other scalings were made
to uncover whether the weight of the leaf showed a different relationship with CO emission
than the leaf area. Overall, scaling per weight or SLA does not change the ratio between the
rates much compared to scaling per leaf area. In the visible spectrum, blue and green continue
to have the lowest mean rates independent of the scaling, and for FW and DW white light
shows the highest mean rates, though red light induces the highest mean rate when scaled to
SLA. UVB is around 40-60 times higher than visible light no matter which scaling is made,
and UVA is around 2.5-4 times higher than visible light for all of them.
Table 4: Mean CO (±std) rates scaled per 1 W/m2 irradiation for each spectral distribution used,
calculated per leaf area, per FW, per DW and per SLA, respectively.
Spectral distribu-
tion (colour)
UVB
UVA
Violet
Blue
Green
Yellow
Red
White
CO rate per leaf
area [nmol/m2/h]
265.8
(±16.6)
16.3
(±6.2)
5.5
(±0.7)
4.6
(±0.6)
5.2
(±0.9)
5.6
(±1.0)
5.8
(±2.7)
5.9
(±1.5)
CO rate per FW
[µmol/g FW/h]
992.3
(±238.0)
62.2
(±28.8)
20.0
(±3.7)
16.2
(±2.7)
19.9
(±5.7)
19.9
(±4.5)
20.3
(±9.9)
22.7
(±5.2)
CO rate per DW
[µmol/g DW/h]
2621.4
(±506.4)
182.2
(±86.9)
52.6
(±13.2)
45.4
(±9.2)
55.2
(±17.2)
56.3
(±14.2)
55.6
(±27.7)
67.5
(±11.7)
CO
rate
per
SLA
[µmol·kg
DW/m2/h]
129.0
(±45.7)
6.8
(±1.8)
2.7
(±0.3)
2.2
(±0.4)
2.2
(±0.3)
2.7
(±0.6)
3.0
(±1.3)
2.7
(±1.0)
Figure 10 compares the effectiveness of the light-induced CO rates per 1 W/m2 scaled per
leaf area obtained in TS1 to the effectiveness obtained by Schade et al. (1999). Schade et al.
(1999) tested degrading beech leaves and savannah grass under varying spectral distributions
within the visible and UV spectra, and found for both leaf types, that the effectiveness kept
decreasing with higher wavelength. The exponential ﬁts that are plotted in Figure 10 have
been estimated using the online tool http://www.graphreader.com/ and origins from Fig-
ure 8(b) from Schade et al. (1999). The rates obtained from TS1 are plotted in Figure 10 at
a speciﬁc wavelength, equal to those chosen and presented in Table 2. White light has been
excluded as this spectral distribution ranges over wavelengths from all of the visible spec-
trum. In relative effectiveness, UVA shows an effectiveness of 0.061 compared to UVB, and
the colours in the visible spectrum have an effectiveness of 0.017-0.022 compared to UVB in
TS1.
Whereas Schade et al. (1999) found a decreasing exponential tendency with higher wave-
length for degrading beech leaves and degrading savannah grass, this project found that for
live green ivy leaves, the light-induced CO rate was relatively stable within the visible spec-
trum. Comparing the results, there were similar effectiveness at 380 nm, 410 nm and 450 nm
for beech leaves and ivy, and up to 410 nm ivy is comparable to the degrading savannah grass.
Hereafter Schade et al. (1999) obtained much lower effectiveness with higher wavelengths.
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 10: The relative effectiveness of the different spectral distributions relative to UVB. The light-
induced CO rates per 1 W/m2 from TS1 (points) are plotted at the speciﬁc wavelength that was chosen
in Table 2 for every spectral distribution except white light. The exponential ﬁts from the results
obtained by Schade et al. (1999) for degrading beech leaves (solid line) and savannah grass (dotted
line) have been added for comparison, values estimated from Figure 8(b) from Schade et al. (1999)
using the online tool http://www.graphreader.com/. Y-axis is logarithmic.
Tarr et al. (1995) found for fallen leaf matter that in the 305-425 nm spectral range, that
when more UV was eliminated, the CO rate decreased, which corresponds to the results of
TS1 as well as the results of Schade et al. (1999). Further, Tarr et al. (1995) found that this
wavelength dependence was dependent on species, which well could explain the difference
between the two species tested by Schade et al. (1999), but might not solely explain the
different tendency that is seen for ivy leaves. This will be further discussed in Section 4.
3.4.1
Results: the contribution to CO production from the UV and visible light spectra
of natural solar radiation
The estimated CO production that can be expected from each wavelength within the 300-
700 nm range is illustrated in Figure 11. By each wavelength, the modelled solar intensity
that was illustrated in Figure 3A has been multiplied by the interpolated CO rate that was
illustrated in Figure 3B to yield the CO production per solar irradiation. By integrating the
area under the graph, it has been estimated how much CO would be produced within the
UV spectrum (300-399 nm) and in the visible spectrum (400-700 nm). Table 5 compares the
estimated solar radiation (integrated area under the graph in Figure 3A) from the two spectra
together with the calculated CO production within the the two spectra.
22
==PAGE:28==
Figure 11: Estimated CO rate induced per wavelength by the solar spectrum. At each wavelength, this
corresponds to the solar irradiance of ﬁgure 3A multiplied by the CO rate in Figure 3B.
From the estimated values, UV constitutes 7.5% of the incoming solar radiation, whereas the
visible light constitutes 92.5%. On the other hand, the UV spectrum is estimated to constitute
around 55% of the CO production and the visible spectrum only 45% of the CO production
from solar radiation.
Table 5: Overview of the calculation examining the contribution of UV and visible light on the total
CO production from solar radiation. In the three wavelength ranges 300-700 nm (full), 300-399 nm
(UV) and 400-700 nm (visible), the solar radiation is estimated together with the CO production. The
contribution of each spectrum compared to the full investigated spectrum (300-700 nm) is given in
percent to compare the contribution from the UV and visible spectra separately.
Wavelength range
Solar radiation
[W/m2]
% of total
CO production
[nmol/m2/h]
% of total
300-700 nm
405
100%
4528
100%
300-399 nm
31
7.5%
2496
55.1%
400-700 nm
375
92.5%
2032
44.9%
As was seen in Figure 9 and Table 4, the CO rate from UVB was much higher than the rates
in the visible spectrum, and even though UV light constitutes only a small amount of the
incoming radiation, it was expected that UV had a signiﬁcant contribution to the overall CO
production. But even as the contribution from visible light is lower compared to UV light,
they both constitute around half of the CO emission that can be expected to be produced by
natural solar radiation, and none of these sources should be overlooked. Schade et al. (1999)
estimated that visible light could cause approximately 40% of the total CO emissions, and
23
==PAGE:29==
Bruhn et al. (2013) estimated that UV from natural solar radiation would constitute about half
of the CO production, which both corresponds well to the ﬁndings of this calculation.
3.5
Results from Test Series 2 (TS2): Dose-response - effect of the same
spectral distribution at varying intensities
TS2 aimed to investigate the relationship between radiation intensity and CO production for
spectral distributions within the visible light spectrum. The rates from TS2 have been plotted
as function of light intensity as dose-response curves for each tested colour (blue, green, red
and white) in Figure 12. The intensity and mean rate gained for these colours in TS1 has
also been added. Further, a point in (0,0) has been added to depict that the expected light-
induced rate in darkness (intensity = 0 W/m2) is expected to yield zero CO emission. This is
an assumption and a point that has been constructed based on the basis that the light-induced
rates are calculated as ratelight-ratedark, and without light, the rate would be equivalent to
ratedark-ratedark = 0 nmol CO/m2/h.
The data was found to be described best by a positive linear relationship. A linear ﬁt was
applied through all the points that are shown in each plot in Figure 12. The standard deviation
of the CO rate from TS1 is shown in the plots to depict the variation that was seen, but only
the mean value has been used to make the linear ﬁt. Above each plot, the function for each
linear ﬁt, the R2 and the p-value are given. The values of the CO rates that are plotted at
each intensity and spectral distribution in the dose-response plots are presented in Table 10
in Appendix C.
Looking at the plots, it seems most apparent that there is an increase in CO rate with higher
intensity under white light. As it was possible to expose leaves to much higher intensities of
white light, this might be a cause of why the pattern is more clear in Figure 12D. Though the
tests under blue light shows an N-shape, this is the ﬁt that gains the highest R-squared value,
at the same magnitude as the ﬁt for white light at 0.87-0.88. For red light, the measured
values show a "U"-shape, having a rate that is higher at the lowest measured intensity, then a
decrease and then an increase in light-induced CO rate, which yields a lower R2 of 0.77.
Common for blue, red and white light, was that the highest intensities induced higher rates
compared to the lower intensities. For green light, the intensity 104.5 W/m2 yielded the
highest CO rate of 948 nmol/m2/h, while the remaining rates showed low variation within
a range of 463-642 nmol/m2/h. This is represented by the low R2 of 0.55. Taking out the
point through (0,0) there would not be a clear tendency that higher intensities of green light
induced higher CO rates.
As indicated by the illustrated standard deviation on the rates from TS1, there is variation
when making more replicates of the same test. It is reckoned that more replicates would
have given the opportunity to examine the variation at the different intensities, but also that
a calculated mean rate could have outruled some of the rates that seem like outliers. Due to
limited time, these extra tests were not performed.
24
==PAGE:30==
Figure 12: Dose-response curves, CO rate [nmol/m2/h] plotted as function of intensity. Separate plots
have been made for each colour: blue (Figure A), green (Figure B), red (Figure C) and white (Figure
D). Each dataset has been added a linear ﬁt (black line), and the slope, R-squared and p-value for
the ﬁt are given at the top of each plot. For the point that is based on results from TS1, the standard
deviation found in TS1 has been added, though the regression line is only ﬁtted through the mean.
25
==PAGE:31==
Regardless of expected variation that has not been uncovered in TS2, the results give an indi-
cation that within spectral distributions of blue, red and white light, the CO rate will increase
linearly with higher light intensity. The linear increase is in accordance with earlier stud-
ies that have also found linear relationship for leaves exposed to a broader visible spectrum
(Fischer and Lüttge, 1978; Seiler et al., 1978; Bauer et al., 1979; Yonemura et al., 1999).
3.6
Results from screening of different species
The CO rates induced in the screening with different leaf species are presented in Figure
13 and values in Table 6. Oak shows the highest CO rate with a mean of 3030 nmol/m2/h,
followed by beech with a mean CO rate of 2560 nmol/m2/h. Hazel and ivy show lower CO
rates of 1467 and 1589, respectively.
With these results it is evident that there is an indication of a species dependence. There are
only two replicates of each species, but the standard deviations for oak, hazel and ivy are
relatively small, and support that there is a detectable variation between the species.
Figure 13: Mean (±std) CO rates from the four leaf species that was tested in the screening: beech,
hazel, ivy and oak. Values are based on two replicates of each species.
In the screenings, the maximum intensity of white light was used. This is the same maximum
intensity that yielded a CO rate of 1188 nmol/m2/h for ivy in the dose-response test with
white light in TS2. The mean rate from the screening is somewhat higher at 1589 nmol/m2/h.
In TS1, the difference between the highest and lowest light-induced CO rate between the six
white light replicates was 494 nmol/m2/h before being scaled per 1 W/m2. That suggests
that the difference between the screening and dose-response of same intensity might just be
natural variation.
Other publications have also measured variations between species. Bruhn et al. (2013) tested
six different species under sunlight at 789±47 µmol/m2/s, and found rates in the range 1000-
2400 nmol/m2/h. Yonemura et al. (1999) tested live rice and maize leaves at 490 W/m2
under metal halide lamps and got rates of around 1550 nmol/m2/h and 1300 nmol/m2/h,
26
==PAGE:32==
respectively. Both authors attain rates of a magnitude that are comparable to the rates of the
screening in this project.
Table 6: The mean CO rates (±std) induced in the screening of four different leaf species exposed
to white 5700K LED light at 468±6 W/m2 (2048±26 µmol/m2/s). Mean and standard deviation for
each species is based on two tests.
Species
CO rate [nmol/m2/h]
Beech
2560 (±340)
Hazel
1467 (±22)
Ivy
1589 (±84)
Oak
3030 (±104)
4
Discussion
This project has focused on CO emissions from green leaves under illumination from dif-
ferent light intensities and spectral distributions within the visible spectrum. The focus has
not been to identify the mechanism behind the emitted CO. This section will try to discuss
which indications can be interpreted from the results and compare them to ﬁndings of earlier
publications.
In TS1, the different spectral distributions of visible light yielded similar CO rates per W/m2.
This is in opposition to the ﬁndings of Schade et al. (1999), who found a decreasing trend with
higher wavelength for degrading beech leaves and savannah grass. In TS2, ivy leaves were
tested under blue, green, red and white light under different irradiation intensities. There were
several examples that blue, green and red light induced similar CO rates at several similar
intensities. This supports that similar rates would be found for all visible colours in TS1. The
differences between these results and the results from Schade et al. (1999) might be an effect
of using either degrading or fresh leaves. Wilks (1959) studied the CO production of extracted
pigments from milled oven-dried leaf ﬂour exposed to sunlight and found the chlorophyll
fractions to yield the highest CO production. Senescent leaves degrade chlorophyll, so if
chlorophyll takes part in the production, this might explain the lower efﬁciencies of visible
light that was found by Schade et al. (1999) in degrading leaves and grass. More studies
will be needed to explore the effect from the same species in fresh and degrading state when
exposed to different spectral distributions within the visible spectrum.
Even if chlorophyll takes part in the mechanism in live leaves, it does not explain the CO
production from degrading and dead plant leaves, where the CO rates are found to be several
times higher. As pointed out by Tarr et al. (1995), the mechanism in live and dead leaves
may be different. While Fischer and Lüttge (1978) and Bauer et al. (1980) found that the
emissions are not correlated with photosynthesis in green leaves, Tarr et al. (1995) found
higher emissions from the bottom of the leaf, indicating that the process happens inside the
leaf.
27
==PAGE:33==
In the DL test, there was seen a lag-time in the light test before photosynthesis started. This
gave the opportunity to compare the CO rate before and after start of photosynthesis, respec-
tively. For all DL tests of TS1, the start of photosynthesis was estimated in the light tests
as the time where CO2 visually started to decrease. The rate of CO before and after this
estimated time has been calculated, and the ratio between them calculated (see results and
elaboration in Appendix D). For 13 out of 15 tests, the CO rate was higher (in the range
+2.4 to +36.4%) after photosynthesis started, and for two tests the calculated rate was lower
afterwards, being -3.0% and -14.5%, respectively. The resulting mean and standard devia-
tion would yield 11.2±11.9% change after photosynthesis starts. The change in the rate does
not seem to be affected by the total CO2 decrease during the whole light test. The magni-
tude of the change in rate was highly affected by the chosen start time of CO2 decrease, so
uncertainties should be attributed to the magnitude of the change of rate.
Photosynthesis does not only affect the concentration of CO2, but it will also increase the
concentration of oxygen, which cannot be measured with the Picarro analyzer. Many authors
agree that the CO production is dependent on the presence of oxygen, and it has also been
found that the CO production increases with higher oxygen concentration. Yonemura et al.
(1999) further found that live leaves had a fast response to changes in ambient oxygen within
a couple of minutes. As the oxygen concentration has not been measured, the change in
oxygen cannot be estimated, but it will be expected to increase in the closed-loop system as
photosynthesis proceeds. Compared to the atmospheric concentration of approximately 20%
oxygen, it is expected that the oxygen produced by photosynthesis during 30 minutes test
will be relatively small, compared to the changes that are seen for CO2. But if even a small
increase in oxygen can affect the CO rate, this might partly be an explanation of the higher
CO production after start of photosynthesis.
The rate might be higher after start of photosynthesis, but all of the CO production cannot be
ascribed to this effect. The light-induced rates have been calculated by subtracting the dark
rate from the light rate of each test. If performing the same procedure, and calculating the
light-induced CO rate only on the data points before the estimated start of photosynthesis,
the rate is positive in all DL tests from TS1 except one green light test - though a single neg-
ative rate is not considered important due to variations related to the course of the individual
dark and light tests. This indicates that even if some of the production is related to photo-
synthesis, there might also be another source which is governed on the surface of the leaf.
This assumption is further supported by the notion that CO2 was relatively more stable in the
UV tests, suggesting lower stomatal conductance, whereas these light distributions governed
much higher CO rates.
Variations in the light-induced CO rate were seen for tests performed under the same condi-
tions, meaning there will be natural variation within the same species. Had more replicates
been made at each tested intensity in TS2 and variation been explored, especially the green
light tests might have shown a more clear pattern. The measured values in Figure 12B under
green light are all within a narrow range, and had the constructed point through (0,0) not been
added, the linear ﬁt would lie closer to horizontal. With more replicates at each intensity for
each colour, variations could be incorporated and outliers be given less importance, hopefully
28
==PAGE:34==
with the outcome yielding curves with higher R2 values. There is an indication that the CO
production increases linearly with higher irradiance within single spectral distributions in the
visible spectrum, but more studies will be needed to conclude this effect. Though, a linear
relationship is in line with previous studies using the full visible spectrum and/or parts of the
UV spectrum (Bauer et al., 1979; Seiler et al., 1978; Yonemura et al., 1999; Derendorp et al.,
2011; Bruhn et al., 2013).
Apart from the natural variation seen for one species, the screening with four different species
also indicated that there is a species dependence on the emitted CO rate, which has previously
been indicated by e.g. Tarr et al. (1995) and Bruhn et al. (2013). Had another species been
tested in TS1 and TS2, the rates might have had a different magnitude. It should also be
noted that even though common ivy is an evergreen species, the leaves have been tested in
November-January where they might be more inactive compared to summer time. Bauer
et al. (1979) found that the CO rate induced per irradiation intensity varied throughout the
year, being higher in July-August, lower in January-February and even lower in November.
Had TS2 been performed in summer, the slopes that are calculated for each dose-response
curve in Figure 12 might therefore have been higher. The other leaf species that were used
in the screening may have been prone to beginning senescence, why these rates might have
been lower if the screening had been performed in summer.
Important when interpreting the results of this project is also to consider that tests have only
been performed on at short timescale of maximum 30 minutes in light and darkness, respec-
tively. Tarr et al. (1995) produced a time series of around 125 minutes in light, showing
that CO production from intact lima beans under simulated sunlight increased sharply within
the ﬁrst 20 minutes, then rising with a lower rate over the next 100 minutes. This outcome
is based on few measurement points made with analyzed gas samples extracted from test
chambers and cannot directly be compared to the continuous measurements that the Picarro
analyzer provides, but it raises the question whether a stabilization of CO would be seen if
running the same tests over a couple of hours or longer. There is clearly a time-lag before
leaves start photosynthesis in light tests after being exposed to darkness, and if photosynthe-
sis or stomatal conductance has any effect on the CO production, longer time intervals might
better comprise the effect.
Methane
Originally it was expected that CH4 would also be part of the analysis. As earlier described,
there are indications that there has been a leak somewhere in the setup, which most likely has
had the biggest impact on the small molecule CH4 among the gases that were measured. CH4
concentrations have during preliminary screenings as well as the ﬁnal tests been increasing
and decreasing without a clear pattern. The experiments have been performed in a laboratory
on a location right next to a wastewater treatment facility, where pipes have earlier been open
between the laboratory and the wastewater facility, to take in water samples for analysis.
These pipes have not yet been properly closed, why the laboratory has frequently been prone
to very high background CH4 concentrations, anywhere in the range 2-8 ppm, but most often
29
==PAGE:35==
in the range 2.3-3.0 ppm CH4. As described in Section 2.2, when compressed air was used to
decrease the starting concentrations, the CH4 increase was higher the lower the concentration
started. If there has been a leak and the background CH4 concentration outside the setup has
changed during the course of the test time, CH4 might have diffused either in or out of the
setup to get closer to at state of equilibrium, and this might be a reason why the different
patterns of CH4 have been seen. It was tried to minimize this issue by letting the analyzer
take in air from the laboratory in between tests to gain equilibrium with the background at
the beginning of each test, but as a clear tendency for CH4 was still not found, CH4 analysis
was left out of the primary part of the project.
As for CO, there is an indication that the CH4 concentration is also affected after photosyn-
thesis starts. Unfortunately, this tendency was only found for 5 out of the total 68 tests in TS1
and TS2. For the ﬁve tests where the tendency was seen, it was clear that CH4 increased with
decreasing CO2 concentration (see examples in Appendix D), whereas it is hard to visually
detect that the CO rate increases after photosynthesis starts. Due to the uncertainty of the
CH4 emissions that has been governed by the possible effect of leaks in the setup system, and
that the tendency was only seen in a limited number of tests, this will only be interpreted as
an indication of a relationship between CH4 and photosynthesis, and a closed system without
leaks would be needed to explore this tendency further.
A lookout on the natural global CO production
Though it is recognized that CO is emitted in small rates, CO emissions from plants constitute
a natural source of CO that should be accounted for in the global CO budgets. The direct
emissions photo-induced by plants have been estimated to constitute 50-200 Tg yr−1 (Tarr
et al., 1995). This estimate is based on experiments with living plants exposed to visible light,
and does not include the UV part of sunlight. Mikkelsen et al. (2016) made a global estimate
of photo-induced CO emissions from the UV part of solar radiation, an estimate yielding 22
Tg CO yr−1, which is a magnitude of 11-44% compared to the previously estimated 50-200
Tg yr−1. Based on a ﬁeld study, Bruhn et al. (2013) estimated that the UV part constitute
half of the solar-induced CO emissions, which corresponds well to what was calculated in
this report (55% from UV and 45% from visible light). These ﬁndings indicate that the
previous estimate should perhaps be doubled to account for all of the solar spectrum. As
discussed by Tarr et al. (1995), there is also a signiﬁcant amount of dead plant matter exposed
to sunlight, which might both be affecting temperate forests and grasslands in fall season, but
also standing dead plant matter in tropical savannahs. The authors estimate that dead plant
matter from tropical savannahs might contribute with 30-60 Tg yr−1, and Schade and Crutzen
(1999) estimated a similar interval of 60±30 Tg from standing dead plant matter, grass and
leaf litter. Summing up the previous estimate from living leaf matter of 50-200 Tg yr−1 from
exposure to the visible part of the solar spectrum, adding the same amount to make up the
UV part of solar radiation, and adding the estimate for dead standing plant matter in tropical
savannahs from Tarr et al. (1995) (which does not include dead plant matter in temperate
areas), the photo-induced CO emission from vegetation would add up to 130-460 Tg yr−1.
30
==PAGE:36==
Bruhn et al. (2013) commented that the previous global upscaling is based on relatively few
species, and also suggest that species with great variability in relation to surface characteris-
tics should be tested. This will be necessary to gain knowledge on whether the low variations
that e.g. Bruhn et al. (2013) found between species (though also between a limited number
of species) are representative for the global biosphere. Further, for future upscalings of CO,
it will be important to make measurements of the same species at different times of the year
to gain knowledge on seasonal variations within species and the effect of senescence on the
CO production.
5
Conclusion
The project aimed to broaden the knowledge on the light-induced CO emission from leaves
exposed to various spectral distributions within the visible light spectrum. It can be concluded
from the performed tests that CO was emitted when leaves of Hedera helix were exposed to
visible spectral light distributions of violet, blue, green, yellow, red and white light from LED
lamps. Per 1 W/m2 light intensity, the light-induced mean rates were similar in the range 4.6-
5.9 nmol/m2 leaf area/h. When the same tests were performed with UV light, UVA yielded
rates 2.8-3.5 times higher and UVB yielded rates 45-58 times higher than visible light. Based
on the results of this project, the relationship between light intensity and light-induced CO
rate was best described by a positive linear ﬁt for blue, red and white light, whereas no clear
tendency was seen for green light. The latter results are based on the outcome of only one
test for each light intensity, and it is suggested that more replicates at each intensity should
be performed to gain a representation of the natural variation that was seen in other tests.
A screening of different species exposed to white LED light indicate a species dependence,
which has also been found in earlier publications. Though, the magnitude of the rates might
be affected by the season and the beginning senescence in three of the four species that were
screened.
To estimate the effect of natural solar radiation, the CO production expected from each wave-
length of the 300-700 nm solar spectrum was estimated by interpolating the measured mean
rates for each spectral distribution and relating these to the solar power. Based on this, it was
estimated that 55% of the CO production from natural sunlight will be governed by UV light,
while the remaining 45% of the CO production will be governed by visible light. This em-
phasizes that the light-induced CO emissions from UV and visible light should be considered
equally important when included in future global estimates of photo-induced CO. Previous
global estimates are based on rates governed by the visible light spectrum, and further based
on relatively few species of fresh leaves. To gain more certain estimates it will be important
to test a broader range of species, uncover the photo-induced rates from fresh, degrading and
dead plant matter of the same species, and study seasonal variations. It is suggested that pre-
vious global estimates should be enhanced to include both photo-induced emissions from the
UV spectrum and the visible spectrum as well as include emissions from live, degrading and
dead plant matter.
31
==PAGE:37==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to express my gratitude to my two supervisors, Teis Nørgaard Mikkelsen
and Dan Bruhn, for their involvement and interest in the project. I have gained many valuable
advice, professional back-and-forth discussions and feedback during the project that I greatly
appreciate.
I would also like to thank my technical supervisor Flemming Møller and technicians Erik
Rønn Lange and Mads Lodsgaard Justesen from DTU Environmnet for their help with build-
ing the setup and transport and delivery of instruments, tools and other equipment.
32
==PAGE:38==
6
References
K. Bauer, W. Seiler, and H. Giehl. CO-Produktion höherer Pﬂanzen an natürlichen Stan-
dorten. Zeitschrift für Pﬂanzenphysiologie, 94(3):219–230, 1979. ISSN 0044328X. doi:
10.1016/s0044-328x(79)80161-0.
K. Bauer, R. Conrad, and W. Seiler.
Photooxidative production of carbon monoxide by
phototrophic microorganisms. BBA - Bioenergetics, 589(1):46–55, 1980. ISSN 00052728.
doi: 10.1016/0005-2728(80)90131-0.
D. Bruhn, T. N. Mikkelsen, J. Øbro, W. G. Willats, and P. Ambus.
Effects of tem-
perature, ultraviolet radiation and pectin methyl esterase on aerobic methane release
from plant material. Plant Biology, 11(SUPPL.1):43–48, 2009. ISSN 14358603. doi:
10.1111/j.1438-8677.2009.00202.x.
D. Bruhn, K. R. Albert, T. N. Mikkelsen, and P. Ambus. UV-induced carbon monoxide emis-
sion from living vegetation. Biogeosciences, 10(12):7877–7882, 2013. ISSN 17264170.
doi: 10.5194/bg-10-7877-2013.
L. Derendorp, J. B. Quist, R. Holzinger, and T. Röckmann. Emissions of H2 and CO from
leaf litter of Sequoiadendron giganteum, and their dependence on UV radiation and tem-
perature.
Atmospheric Environment, 45(39):7520–7524, 2011.
ISSN 13522310.
doi:
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2011.09.044.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.
2011.09.044.
K. Fischer and U. Lüttge. Light-dependent net production of carbon monoxide by plants [15].
Nature, 275(5682):740–741, 1978. ISSN 00280836. doi: 10.1038/275740a0.
W. T. Fraser, E. Blei, S. C. Fry, M. F. Newman, D. S. Reay, K. A. Smith, and A. R. McLeod.
Emission of methane, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and short-chain hydrocarbons
from vegetation foliage under ultraviolet irradiation.
Plant, Cell and Environment, 38
(5):980–989, 2015. ISSN 13653040. doi: 10.1111/pce.12489.
B. Gaubert, H. M. Worden, A. F. Arellano, L. K. Emmons, S. Tilmes, J. Barré, S. Martinez
Alonso, F. Vitt, J. L. Anderson, F. Alkemade, S. Houweling, and D. P. Edwards. Chemical
Feedback From Decreasing Carbon Monoxide Emissions. Geophysical Research Letters,
44(19):9985–9995, 2017. ISSN 19448007. doi: 10.1002/2017GL074987.
U. Lüttge and K. Fischer. CO-evolution by C3 and C4 Plants. Planta, 149:59–63, 1980.
A. R. McLeod, S. C. Fry, G. J. Loake, D. J. Messenger, D. S. Reay, K. A. Smith, and B. W.
Yun. Ultraviolet radiation drives methane emissions from terrestrial plant pectins. New
Phytologist, 180(1):124–132, 2008. ISSN 0028646X. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.
02571.x.
33
==PAGE:39==
T. N. Mikkelsen, D. Bruhn, and P. Ambus. Solar UV Irradiation-Induced Production of
Greenhouse Gases from Plant Surfaces: From Leaf to Earth, pages 407–437. Progress in
Botany. Springer, 2016. doi: 10.1007/124_2016_10.
NOAA. Trends in Atmospheric Methane. Ed Dlugokencky, NOAA/GML. URL: https:
//gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends_ch4/. Site visited 12/2-2022.
M. M. Qaderi and D. M. Reid.
Methane emissions from six crop species exposed to
three components of global climate change: Temperature, ultraviolet-B radiation and
water stress.
Physiologia Plantarum, 137(2):139–147, 2009.
ISSN 00319317.
doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3054.2009.01268.x.
G. W. Schade and P. J. Crutzen. CO emissions from degrading plant matter (II). Estimate
of a global source strength. Tellus, Series B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology, 51(5):
909–918, 1999. ISSN 02806509. doi: 10.3402/tellusb.v51i5.16503.
G. W. Schade, R. M. Hofmann, and P. J. Crutzen. CO emissions from degrading plant matter
(I). Measurements. Tellus, Series B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology, 51(5):889–908,
1999. ISSN 02806509. doi: 10.3402/tellusb.v51i5.16501.
W. Seiler and H. Giehl.
INFLUENCE OF PLANTS ON THE ATMOSPHERIC CAR-
BON MONOXIDE. Geophysical Research Letters, 4(8):329–332, 1977. doi: 10.1029/
GL004i008p00329.
W. Seiler, H. Giehl, and G. Bunse. Inﬂuence of plants on the atmospheric carbon monox-
ide. Geophysical Research Letters, 4(8):329–332, 1978. ISSN 19448007. doi: 10.1029/
GL004i008p00329.
M. A. Tarr, W. L. Miller, and R. G. Zepp. Direct carbon monoxide photoproduction from
plant matter. Journal of Geophysical Research, 100(D6):403–413, 1995. ISSN 01480227.
doi: 10.1029/94jd03324.
H. Van Asperen, T. Warneke, S. Sabbatini, G. Nicolini, D. Papale, and J. Notholt. The role
of photo- And thermal degradation for CO2 and CO ﬂuxes in an arid ecosystem. Biogeo-
sciences, 12(13):4161–4174, 2015. ISSN 17264189. doi: 10.5194/bg-12-4161-2015.
S. S. Wilks. Carbon Monoxide in Green Plants. Science, 129(3354):964–966, 1959.
S. Yonemura, M. Morokuma, S. Kawashima, and H. Tsuruta. Carbon monoxide photopro-
duction from rice and maize leaves. Atmospheric Environment, 33(18):2915–2920, 1999.
ISSN 13522310. doi: 10.1016/S1352-2310(99)00099-0.
C. G. Zilli, D. M. Santa-Cruz, and K. B. Balestrasse. Heme oxygenase-independent en-
dogenous production of carbon monoxide by soybean plants subjected to salt stress.
Environmental and Experimental Botany, 102:11–16, 2014.
ISSN 00988472.
doi:
10.1016/j.envexpbot.2014.01.012. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.
2014.01.012.
34
==PAGE:40==
A
Appendix: Heliospectra DYNA settings
The Heliospectra DYNA LED lamps can be intensity-adjusted for a number of spectres by
choosing a setting from 0-1000, either around a speciﬁc wavelength (8 possible settings in
the range 380-735 nm) or using the 5700K setting for white LED light. The light settings that
were used for TS1 and TS2 are presented in the following tables.
Test Series 1 (TS1): Spectral distribution
The wavelength and intensity settings used in TS1 are presented in Table 7 (the corresponding
light intensities were presented in Table 1). Here it should be noted that two wavelength
settings are used for violet light. Both of these settings yielded violet light separately, but
was used in combination to increase light intensity. The yellow light setting is a combination
of three different wavelength settings; the green 530 nm; the 620 nm which yielded orange-
red light; and a 660 nm setting which also yielded red light. UVA was set at intensity 500
(of 1000) as this yielded an intensity around 20 W/m2 and was supposed to be compared to
a measurement from Bruhn et al. (2013) at the same intensity, though it was later recognized
that the UVA light used by Bruhn et al. (2013) has a different spectral distribution, and the
light-induced rates from these two separate UVA tests could not be directly compared.
Table 7: Overview of the light and intensity settings on the Heliospectra DYNA lamps that have been
used to gain the colours and intensities in TS1. Empty cells means the intensity setting is 0.
Intensity setting (0-1000)
380 nm
500
400 nm
1000
420 nm
1000
450 nm
920
530 nm
735
60
620 nm
950
660 nm
32
295
Light setting
5700K
76
Light
UVA
Violet
Blue
Green
Yellow
Red
White
Test Series 2 (TS2): Dose-response
The lamp settings that were used in TS2 are presented in Table 8 (corresponding measured
light intensities were presented in Table 3). Apart from these intensities, a sixth intensity of
each colour was gained from TS1. Therefore, the minimum and maximum intensity settings
in the following table are not the same. The aim was to increase the intensity of each colour
by choosing an approximate interval for the intensity setting, e.g. the blue intensity settings
are made with intervals of 150, and white light with intensity setting intervals of 200.
35
==PAGE:41==
Table 8: Light intensity settings chosen on the heliospectra DYNA lamp for TS2.
Blue
Green
Red
White
Light setting: 450 nm
Light setting: 530 nm
Light setting: 660 nm
Light setting: 5700K
Intensity settings
Intensity settings
Intensity settings
Intensity settings
100
100
100
200
250
300
500
400
400
500
650
600
550
850
800
800
700
1000
950
1000
36
==PAGE:42==
B
Appendix: The internal volume used to calculate the CO
rates
The volume that was used convert the unit of the CO rate from ppm to nmol (or µmol) was
based on a sum of the estimated volumes from each compartment of the setup.
The volumes of the Walz chamber cooling unit and cuvette were found in the manual. The
total gas path of the Picarro analyzer, pump and tubes were estimated to around 100 mL in
the analyer datasheet. After a mail correspondence with Picarro support, it was understood
that this estimate should be interpreted with a ±5% uncertainty interval. It was chosen to use
100 mL as the proxy in the total estimated volume of the setup.
Table 9: Internal volume of the instruments in the
setup, as given by manuals and datasheets from
producers.
Part of setup
Volume
Walz cooling unit
840 mL
Walz cuvette
320 mL
Picarro analyzer, pump, tubes
100 mL a
Total volume of setup/gas path
1260 mL
a Uncertainty interval of ±5% (mail correspondence
with Picarro)
37
==PAGE:43==
C
Appendix: Test series 2: dose-response values obtained
Table 10 presents the values for intensity and light-induced CO rate for each intensity mea-
sured in TS2 together with the mean rate and intensity used from TS1 (marked bold). The
dose-response plots in Figure 12 are based on these values.
Table 10: The CO rates scaled by leaf area (nmol/m2/h) at each intensity used in TS2, and the mean
intensity and CO rate gained from TS1 (marked bold). CO rates are rounded.
Blue
Green
Red
White
Intensity
[W/m2]
CO rate
[nmol/m2/h]
Intensity
[W/m2]
CO rate
[nmol/m2/h]
Intensity
[W/m2]
CO rate
[nmol/m2/h]
Intensity
[W/m2]
CO rate
[nmol/m2/h]
54.1
335
56.8
550
52.7
607
111.6
654
79.3
472
82.1
463
78.6
452
171.7
760
103.9
369
104.5
948
106.7
428
253.3
960
129.2
457
123.8
642
127.0
619
327.5
1088
153.5
618
136.0
579
149.3
899
400.4
1405
176.9
820
148.2
630
168.4
851
467.9
1186
38
==PAGE:44==
D
Appendix: Indications of an effect governed by photo-
synthesis
D.1
CO and photosynthesis
This appendix concerns the indication of an increased CO rate seen after the start of photo-
synthesis, as discussed in Section 4. As the aim was merely to detect if there was a tendency,
and as only TS1 provides more replicates under the same conditions, it was chosen only to
look at the TS1 DL tests. To address this matter, only the DL tests were included as this is
where there was a delay of photosynthesis, and only here the effect on the CO rate before
photosynthesis can be interpreted.
The start of photosynthesis is estimated at the time where the curve for CO2 starts decreasing.
This has been estimated by eye. It appeared that under red light, the leaf started photosynthe-
sis within 100 seconds in all three DL tests. This was considered too short time to estimate an
effect before photosynthesis. Therefore only the test where photosynthesis started after 200
or more seconds were included. As seen in Table 11 the start of photosynthesis is estimated
between 200-750 seconds for all colours except red.
From here, the CO light rate before and after the estimated start time of photosynthesis has
been calculated. As described, there was noise around the CO measurements. This was not
expected to affect the overall trend when ﬁtting over 30 minutes. But as this analysis looked
at smaller intervals, the effect of the noise could have a bigger impact on the slope of the ﬁt.
To address this issue, a low pass ﬁlter was added to the data. The low pass ﬁlter attenuates
the high-frequency noise to make a line that describes the development of CO without noise.
On the ﬁltered data, a linear ﬁt was added on the data before the start of photosynthesis, and
a ﬁt was added to the data after start of photosynthesis.
The ratio rateafter/ratebefore was calculated to estimate the percentage change in the CO rate
after start of photosynthesis. For each test, this change of rate is presented in Table 11.
Further the total CO2 decrease over the 30 minute light test has been added to be able compare
whether the percentage change has been dependent on how much CO2 has been assimilated.
39
==PAGE:45==
Table 11: The table includes statistics on the CO light rate from all DL tests of TS1. For each colour
of light, three replicate DL light tests are presented. The estimated start time, set as the time where
CO2 visually starts to decrease, is given in seconds. The %-change in rate is calculated as the per-
centage change between the light rate that can be estimated before and after the estimated start time
of photosynthesis. Further, the total CO2 decrease over all of the 30 minute test is given in ppm. As
red light caused the CO2 concentration to decrease within 100 seconds in all three tests, it was chosen
that no statistics could be estimated before the start time of photosynthesis.
Violet
Blue
Time before CO2 decrease start [s]
550
350
450
750
600
400
%-change in rate after CO2 decrease starts
8.9
13.8
12.4
31.1
5.6
11.0
Total CO2 decrease over 30 minutes [ppm]
703
522
414
335
346
728
Green
Yellow
Time before CO2 decrease start
550
500
400
450
200
200
%-change in rate after CO2 decrease starts
20.1
-3.0
9.8
2.4
-14.5
14.0
Total CO2 decrease over 30 minutes [ppm]
261
347
377
275
769
302
Red
White
Time before CO2 decrease start
0
75
100
300
250
350
%-change in rate after CO2 decrease starts
-
-
-
10.2
36.4
9.1
Total CO2 decrease over 30 minutes [ppm]
492
39
38
377
238
284
D.2
CH4 and photosynthesis
The following ﬁve ﬁgures all represent examples of tests where a possible relation between
photosynthesis and methane are seen; the methane concentration starts increasing as the CO2
starts decreasing and the methane increase grows more rapidly as the CO2 assimilation gets
faster.
The ﬁrst three ﬁgures shows the most clear tendency.
As it has been mentioned several times during the project, the CH4 concentration has probably
been affected by leaks in the setup. The tendency of a relation to photosynthesis has only been
seen in the following ﬁve tests, which is only few of the total number of tests (68 tests in total
from TS1 and TS2), so these ﬁgures should be used as an indication that there might be
an effect, but it can only be speculated whether photosynthesis actually plays a role in the
photo-induced emission of CH4. More certain measurements will be needed to investigate
this further.
40
==PAGE:46==
Figure 14: DL light test from TS2 using blue light (performed with 153.5 W/m2 light intensity).
Figure 15: DL light test from TS1 using yellow light.
Figure 16: DL light test from TS2 using white light (performed with 253.3 W/m2 light intensity).
41
==PAGE:47==
Figure 17: DL light test from TS1 using blue light.
Figure 18: LD light test from TS1 using green light.
42
