==PAGE:1==
 
1 
IT tools for accelerated genome 
engineering by library construction in 
yeast 
Case: Stepwise debottlenecking of the strictosidine pathway 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master thesis in Biotechnology; February 2022.  
 
Author: Lucas Levassor s193131 
 
Supervisors: Nikolaus Sonnenschein, Søren D. Petersen, and Michael Krogh Jensen  
 
DTU Bioengineering 1. September 2021 - 1. February 2022 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
2 
Preface 
The work presented here was carried out in the period from 1. September to 1. February at the 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Kongens Lyngby. The work was mainly done at DTU 
Bioengineering but also at the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability (CFB). The 
main supervisors guiding this work were Nikolaus Sonnenschein, Søren Dalsgård Petersen and 
Michael Krogh Jensen. The work was conducted as part of the final Master's project at DTU with 
a workload of 30 ECTS points.  
 
 
 
 
 
Lucas Levassor  
 
February 2022 
 
Copenhagen  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
3 
Abstract 
The world's population is growing and with it the demand for consumer goods such as fuel, 
pharmaceuticals, foods, etc. Microbial cell factories grown on sustainable feedstocks could meet 
this demand sustainably, but the process of commercializing a cell factory can take years and is 
resource-intensive. Optimizing cell factories often iterate over the design, build, test, learn (DBTL) 
cycle. By gearing the process with IT tools, we can automate several steps in the cycle and 
increase development speed.  
 
The focus of this project has been to develop IT tools to aid in the design phase of the DBTL cycle. 
This work has shown that genetic parts selection can be automated through algorithms that were 
developed. Additionally, an IT tool for making combinatorial libraries was developed along with 
scripts that can automatically generate robot-executable instructions. Jupyter notebooks were 
made to systematize the workflows with increased readability, and for next-level documentation 
purposes.  
 
The IT tools developed in this work have the potential to help future metabolic engineering 
endeavors such as becoming fully automated and could lead the way for Biofoundries to emerge 
all over the world. All in all, this brings us one step closer to accelerating genome engineering and 
moving towards a fully sustainable production.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
4 
Resumé (Dansk) 
Verdens befolkning vokser og med det efterspørgslen efter forbrugsvarer såsom brændstof, 
lægemidler, fødevarer osv. Mikrobielle cellefabrikker dyrket på bæredygtige råvarer kunne 
imødekomme denne efterspørgsel bæredygtigt, men processen med at kommercialisere en 
cellefabrik kan tage år og er ressource-intensiv. Optimering af cellefabrikker drives ofte design, 
build, test, learn (DBTL) cyklussen. Ved at geare processen med it-værktøjer kan vi automatisere 
flere trin i DBTL-cyklussen og øge udviklingshastigheden. 
 
Fokus for dette projekt har været at udvikle it-værktøjer til at hjælpe i designfasen af DBTL-
cyklussen. Dette arbejde har vist, at udvælgelse af genetiske dele kan automatiseres gennem de 
algoritmer, der blev udviklet. Derudover blev der udviklet et it-værktøj til at lave kombinatoriske 
biblioteker ved hjælp af scripts, der automatisk kan generere eksekverbare robot instruktioner. 
Jupyter-notesbøger blev lavet for at systematisere og forøge læsbarheden af arbejdsgangen, 
samt for “next-level” dokumentationsformål. 
 
De IT-værktøjer, der er udviklet i dette arbejde, har potentialet til at hjælpe fremtidige metaboliske 
ingeniør-bestræbelser, såsom at blive fuldt automatiserede, og kan føre til, at “Biofoundries” 
opstår over hele verden. Alt i alt bringer dette os et skridt tættere på at accelerere genomteknologi, 
og bevæge os mod en fuldt ud bæredygtig produktion. 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
5 
Acknowledgments 
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Nikolaus Sonnenschein for opening the world of 
computational biology to me and giving me the opportunity to do this terrific project. I also wish 
to thank Michael Krogh Jensen for giving me the opportunity to expand this project to CFB and 
enriching my learning output. I would like to offer my warmest thanks to Søren Dalsgård Petersen 
for the invaluable guidance, the long scientific discussions, and to boost my morale along the 
way. Many thanks for the encouragement and patience throughout the duration of this project. 
 
I would like to express my gratitude to the computer-aided biotechnology group for being 
welcoming, open-minded, and for the helpful advice. Thanks to all of DTU Bioengineering for 
engaging in scientific discussions, and for inspiring me to do better science. 
 
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for all the help and encouragement they have 
provided during this project.  
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
6 
 
Preface 
2 
Abstract 
3 
Resumé (Dansk) 
4 
Acknowledgments 
5 
Introduction 
8 
Background 
10 
2.1 Current IT tools to assist with combinatorial library construction 
10 
2.1.1 Closed-source software: 
11 
Teselagen 
11 
Benchling 
11 
2.1.2 Open-source software 
12 
Pydna 
12 
Cas-designer 
12 
Constrain 
12 
2.2 A case for creating combinatorial libraries: Strictosidine pathway 
13 
2.2.1 The current bottlenecks of the Strictosidine pathway 
14 
2.3 Literate programming 
15 
2.4 Research aims and specific questions addressed 
17 
Methods 
18 
3.1 Algorithms 
19 
3.1.1 Homolog selection 
19 
3.1.2 Promoter selection 
19 
3.1.3 Combinatorial library generation 
19 
3.1.4 Robot instructions 
20 
3.2 Testing of algorithms 
20 
Results 
22 
4.1. Parts selection 
22 
Homolog selection 
22 
Promoter selection 
27 
4.2 DesignAssembly - Combinatorial library construction: 
31 
4.3 RobotAssembly - Virtual plates and robot instructions 
37 
4.5 Comparison of time used between the algorithms and manual work 
42 
Discussion 
43 
5.1 Automating and standardizing parts selection for the SLS bottleneck 
44 
5.2 Strategies for making combinatorial libraries 
46 
==PAGE:7==
 
7 
5.3 Approaches to automating robot instructions 
48 
Conclusions 
50 
Perspectives 
51 
References 
56 
Appendices 
63 
Appendix 1. Jupyter notebook 1 - Homolog selection 
63 
Appendix 2. Jupyter notebook 2 - Promoter selection 
87 
Appendix 3. Jupyter notebook 3 - Combinatorial library generation 
107 
Appendix 4. DesignAssembly.py 
130 
Appendix 5. RobotAssembly.py 
141 
Appendix 6. Synbiopython hack to accommodate Flowbot One instructions 
150 
Appendix 7. Multiple sequence alignments 
152 
Appendix 8. Dependencies 
164 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
8 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The world population is growing at an accelerating pace and the demand for consumer goods 
such as pharmaceuticals, food additives, feedstocks, and fuel follows this trend. To meet this 
increasing demand and at the same time adhere to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 
derived from the UN, we need to devise new ways of manufacturing. One way to achieve this, is 
to transition into a cell-factory-based manufacturing platform since it does not rely on oil as a 
precursor but rather renewable resources. 
 
Developing cell factories with forward-engineering principles often requires a substantial effort 
since the rules governing biology are unknown or not well understood (Endy, 2005; R. Fox, 2019). 
To optimize cell factories, the most common strategy used is the Design-Test-Build-Learn cycle 
(DBTL) where a metabolic design is implemented and optimized through several rounds (see 
Figure 1c) (Nielsen & Keasling, 2016). This cycle is often performed by sequential optimization 
where one part or a set of parts is optimized each round (Naseri & Koffas, 2020). Sequential 
optimization comes with limitations in the time and resources spent. This is exemplified for 
making artemisinin in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae) which took 150 people working 
years, while it took 575 people working years for Dupont to make their 1,3 propanediol pathway 
in Escherichia coli (E. coli) (Hodgman & Jewett, 2012).  
 
Given that we want to optimize the development time, resources, and performance of cell 
factories we need to approach this problem differently. Combinatorial optimization strategies can 
solve this by facilitating the generation of most genotypes in the shortest time by making 
stochastic DNA variants (R. Fox et al., 2003; R. J. Fox et al., 2007). Recent studies show that this 
approach works in metabolic engineering with significant yield and production increases 
(Ajikumar et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2020). The way combinatorial libraries optimize the 
metabolism of the chosen organism is by combining optimal pathway expression levels and 
reducing the metabolic burden and imbalance (Jeschek et al., 2017). An added advantage of 
combinatorial libraries is that they can optimize different levels of regulation e.g translation, 
transcriptional, and coding sequences, and optimize on relationships that would otherwise be lost 
in a sequential optimization process (Fernández-Cabezón et al., 2019). 
 
The combinatorial optimization strategy follows the DTBL cycle and starts with the initial design 
of the library. Here diversity is generated through combining different genetic parts (design) and 
integrating them into the genome (build). The library is then tested (test) and the generated data 
is used to inform the next round of design (learn) (see Figure 1c)). Given the complexity and size 
of combinatorial libraries, which can easily come up to several thousands of strains, we need 
tools to aid the design of this process.  
==PAGE:9==
 
9 
 
Figure 1. (a) Schematic representation of population growth leading to increased demand. (b) Pitfalls in the 
development of microbial cell factories include massive investment in resources and time. (c) Schematic 
representation of gearing the development of cell factories with IT by automating several steps in the DBTL-cycle 
(here with a focus on the design).  
 
IT tools are the perfect means for aiding this task by automating the design of these libraries and 
speeding up the DBTL cycle. By automating every step of the DBTL-cycle it would be possible to 
accelerate genome engineering to the levels of other engineering disciplines e.g. electrical and 
mechanical engineering, which can iterate through one cycle in less than a day (Endy, 2005). 
Automating the DBTL cycle has been proposed before (Carbonell et al., 2018), but often involves 
manual curating on different platforms and websites and would therefore increase time and 
lessen automation. What is needed is a platform that is coherent and supports the DBTL-cycle as 
a whole. The Python programming language is being adopted more into the scientific community 
at an increasing pace, because of the plethora of possibilities and easy syntax. Python could serve 
to connect the different steps in the DBTL-cycle with one unified open-source language.  
 
In this work, I present Python-based IT tools that aid the design phase of the DBTL-cycle by 
constructing combinatorial libraries to accelerate genome engineering. More specifically, the 
thesis aims to investigate current tools for combinatorial library constructions, identify 
deficiencies in these, and improve them to aid in the construction of combinatorial libraries.  
 
==PAGE:10==
 
10 
2. Background 
2.1 Current IT tools to assist with combinatorial library 
construction  
Within the last decade, the speed at which synthetic biology tools are made is growing and there 
are now tools that cover many different parts of the DBTL cycle. To name a few, RetroPath can 
re-construct metabolic pathways (Delépine et al., 2018), and Cameo can aid the strain design 
process (Cardoso et al., 2018). However, when it comes to combinatorial library designs, IT tools 
are scarce.  
 
The design of combinatorial libraries needs computer-aided tools to build them efficiently and 
thus take the burden of talented researchers and lab technicians for several reasons. One reason 
is simply the fact that it is time-consuming and tedious to design all the primers and plan the 
execution of a full combinatorial library. Another reason is that the sheer size and complexity of 
combinatorial libraries can lead to design errors when made by hand. This is evidenced by 
Johansson and co-workers that followed several cloning setups from research papers. They 
found mistakes in primers that probably had been changed by the lab but did not make it into the 
final paper (Pereira et al., 2015). Even when a larger project is successful, the process is often not 
described in detail, which makes replicating the results difficult. The right IT tool could limit 
mistakes, enable backtracking, troubleshooting, and most importantly increase the speed of the 
DBTL cycle, and through this help researchers tremendously.  
 
Computer software can be distributed with available source code which is often referred to as 
“open-source software”. In contrast, when source code is not freely available it is referred to as 
“closed source software”. Both types have pros and cons, and they are examined in the following. 
An argument for open-source code is that it permits the user to optimize and change the code 
however the user sees fit unless stated otherwise. Sometimes it is encouraged by the software 
community (Raghunathan et al., 2005). It can be argued that IT tools should be modular since 
protocols in the lab are dynamic and change frequently. Open-source software is modular and 
can be changed enhanced for the individual protocols. Cons for open-source software include a 
limited user-friendly interface, which limits its use for non-programmers. Furthermore, 
maintaining open-source software is often done by the software community and can therefore be 
neglected, which leads to software that doesn't work or is not updated.  
 
Maintenance is more straightforward for closed-source software since developers maintain, 
update, and troubleshoot potential problems. Other pros for closed-source software include more 
user-friendly interfaces that increase the user base. A con for closed-source software is that the 
software is proprietary and that limits its modularity. If the closed-source developers do not work 
in close contact with the user and update the software, the software could become antiquated 
==PAGE:11==
 
11 
(Yeoh et al., 2021). The final con for closed-source software is that the software can be costly 
and academic and small companies might not be able to afford it.  
 
Another aspect of open and closed-source software is that time has to be invested in learning the 
new software. It is invested and will therefore only be of benefit to you in the long run. Reading 
and programming in commonly used languages such as Python are smart investments on a 
scientific journey since they can be used multiple times, unlike a piece of software that will only 
be used once for a specialized task.  
 
In the interest of keeping this thesis short, the following paragraphs will examine five IT tools that 
are used in the DBTL cycle.  
2.1.1 Closed-source software:  
Teselagen 
Teselagen is a closed-source commercial software with a wide range of functionalities built 
around the DBTL cycle and can generate combinatorial libraries with the j5 algorithm (Design & 
Build Platform - Teselagen, n.d.; Hillson et al., 2012). The j5 algorithm can generate DNA 
assemblies through methods such as Gibson and Golden gate and is free but not open-source 
(Eckert & Trinh, 2016; Yang et al., 2016). Teselagen uses an intuitive graphical user interface (GUI) 
for designing the combinatorial library and no programming skills are therefore needed. The 
interface can, however, be rigid and the user must follow exact steps to make it work. 
Furthermore, since the software is closed-source it’s not possible to change design parameters 
e.g. how primers overlap or change protocols unless the developers accommodate this 
functionality. Additionally, the cost of a license could discourage companies or institutions with 
more limited funds to acquire the software.  
Benchling 
Benchling is a cloud-based software tool that incorporates many molecular biology processes 
from viewing DNA entries, designing DNA parts, inventory, to recording experiments into a 
notebook format (Cloud-Based Informatics Platform for Life Sciences R&D | Benchling, n.d.). It also 
features a semi-automated primer design based on Primer3, which is only able to make one 
primer at a time. It is closed-source software and is widely used in academia and industry 
because of its relative ease of use and intuitive design. It does not include a module for the design 
of combinatorial libraries and some functionalities are restricted to premium users, such as their 
API (Application Programming Interface).   
==PAGE:12==
 
12 
2.1.2 Open-source software 
Pydna 
Pydna is developed by Bjørn Johanson and co-workers and is an open-source developed Python 
library (Pereira et al., 2015). It facilitates in-silico simulation of cloning and DNA construction 
experiments and aids in manipulating DNA constructs. Most noteworthy Pydna functionalities 
include automated primer design for homologous cloning or Gibson assembly as well as having 
a datatype to describe double-stranded DNA (Pereira et al., 2015). It is open-source, modular, 
maintained, and well-documented. It does not include a combinatorial design part and some of 
the modules need older versions of the Python package “Biopython” to function, which can be 
difficult to maneuver for non-programmers.  
Cas-designer 
Cas-designer is an open-source IT tool developed by researchers from the Joint BioEnergy 
Institute (d’Espaux, 2016/2016). It has a module to automatically make primers for simple 
constructs assembled by Gibson cloning or homologous recombination. These constructs can 
be inserted into a characterized genomic locus (from a provided list) or non-characterized 
genomic loci. For the non-characterized loci, gRNA needs to be designed by the user. When 
choosing the functionality of providing your own gRNA, it can fetch homology regions up and 
downstream of the target gRNA (d’Espaux, 2016/2016). It can generate primers for simple 
genetic constructs, but it cannot make combinatorial libraries. Finally, the user interface is limited 
since it relies on command-line inputs.  
Constrain 
Constrain is an IT tool being developed by Søren Dalsgård Petersen at the Technical University of 
Denmark (DTU) and aims at encapsulating the whole DBTL cycle into one IT tool. It can simulate 
experimental workflow for yeast strain construction, thereby performing the experiments in silico, 
limiting human errors, and reducing time consumption. It also automates steps such as analysis 
of data generated from the test stage which is subsequently prepared for the learning phase 
which uses Machine Learning (ML). The ML models are able to predict top strain designs for the 
next round of library construction (Pedersen, 2022; Petersen, 2021b, 2021c, 2021d). Nevertheless, 
Constrain lacks the functionality of making combinatorial libraries which previously has been 
done manually.  
 
The different IT tools discussed here, and their objectives are summarized in table 1. Several of 
the tools provide additional functions that are not listed here. A common theme is that almost all 
the tools lack the functionality of combinatorial library generation except for Teselagen. However, 
since Teselagen is closed-source it comes with problems of modularity. This means that there is 
a dire need to build an open-source platform that can create combinatorial libraries to support 
the current tools.  
 
==PAGE:13==
 
13 
Table 1. A table of the IT tools discussed in this work. It shows the functionalities of the IT tools, which 
parts of the DBTL cycle they have functionalities for with the addition of being open-source or not, and 
which level of python is required for use.  
 
To investigate and strengthen the usefulness of a tool able to generate combinatorial libraries a 
test case is needed. A test case that for various reasons has been difficult to optimize with 
classical forward engineering approaches. For this reason, I have chosen the anti-cancer 
precursor Strictosidine because of its low yields in cell factories, high value. Additionally, 
Strictosidine could benefit from being approached from a combinatorial optimization perspective, 
which will be covered below. 
2.2 A case for creating combinatorial libraries: Strictosidine 
pathway 
Strictosidine is a secondary metabolite produced in rare plant species from tropical areas e.g.  
Madagascar and belongs to the family Monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs). Strictosidine is a 
precursor for chemotherapeutic compounds such as Camptothecin, Vinblastine, and Vincristine, 
which are used in the treatment of various cancer diseases (Cui et al., 2015; Sharma et al., 2018). 
Strictosidine is difficult to produce by chemical synthesis (Ishikawa et al., 2008), and is therefore 
extracted from plants (Brown et al., 2015). This process is expensive and results in low yields. 
Furthermore, since the harvest can fail due to weather or agricultural pests it is an unstable form 
of production (Brown et al., 2015). A cell factory platform can overcome these hurdles since a 
fermentation process is a closed system, invariable of the surrounding climate, and extraction is 
cheaper. Another aspect is that a cell-factory platform could be used to form new semi-synthetic 
drugs with improved functionalities thus further improving the use of the precursor (O’Connor, 
2012). In summation, the difficult and expensive extraction with unstable plant harvest and 
possibilities of making new semi-synthetic drugs make the Strictosidine pathway ideal for a 
microbial platform. However, the yields from plant-derived compounds in cell factories can be 
low. Strictosidine is no exception with the highest reported yield being ∼0.5 mg/L (Brown et al., 
2015). Consequently, it needs to be improved to reach commercialization. I, therefore, propose 
that de-bottlenecking the Strictosidine pathway with combinatorial libraries would be an ideal 
case to test the IT tools made in this work.  
==PAGE:14==
 
14 
2.2.1 The current bottlenecks of the Strictosidine pathway 
Strictosidine is made from Secologanin and L-tryptamine. L-tryptamine is made in a single step 
from Tryptophan, while Secologanin is generated from the 10-step pathway where the initial 
compound is geraniol (see Figure. 2). The Strictosidine pathway consists of four cytochrome 
P450 (CYP) and their concomitant cytochrome P450 reductases (CPR) (Brown et al., 2015) (see 
Figure 3). Feeding experiments have been conducted where S. cerevisiae strains with the entire 
pathway integrated were fed with intermediary compounds from the pathway to identify potential 
bottlenecks. These studies identified the four CYPs (G8H, IO, 7-DLH, SLS) as being major 
bottlenecks (see Figure 2) (Brown et al., 2015).  
 
Common for CYPs is that they are complex, large enzymes and form complex interactions with 
CPRs, and there is no generalized method for de-bottlenecking. However, what has previously 
been done is to change the expression, protein engineering, and co-expression of CYPs and CPRs 
(Jiang et al., 2021). There is no high-throughput screening strategy to aid de-bottlenecking which 
means we are limited by analytics. By finding homologs of CYPs and CPRs, changing promoters, 
and co-expressing them in a combinatorial library, more parameters can be optimized at the same 
time. The previous de-bottlenecking of the G8H step in the pathway has been conducted by 
integrating two promoters in opposite directions in front of CYP and CPR homologs.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the Strictosidine pathway. The 10 step pathway starts from 
geraniol and in the final step produces Strictosidine from Secologanin and Tryptamine. The arrow 
indicates the SLS step of the pathway which is a bottleneck when expressing the pathway in S. cerevisiae. 
Adapted from (Petersen, 2021a). 
  
Until now, the major bottleneck identified was G8H. However, data generated from experiments 
conducted at DTU show that a combinatorial optimization approach has reached a plateau of 
product formation and G8H is no longer the major bottleneck (Pedersen, 2022). The next major 
bottleneck in the pathway has been identified as being secologanin synthase, referred to as SLS 
from now on (see arrow, Figure 2). It will therefore be used as a test case for making IT tools able 
of generating combinatorial libraries (see Figure 2). 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
15 
In summation, a test case has been identified and a series of IT tools have been analyzed. 
Additionally, as the analysis in table 1 depicts, there is a need to add functionalities to the already 
existing IT tools to accommodate combinatorial library construction. This includes automating 
and standardizing the selection of genetic parts and generating executable instructions for robots 
along with the combinatorial library construction. In the following paragraph, I will introduce the 
platform on which these workflows were developed. 
2.3 Literate programming  
To make the IT tools necessary for combinatorial library construction, a literate programming 
approach that combines text explanation with computer code (Spotnitz, 1998) was adopted. This 
makes computer programs more comprehensible by increasing readability. The Jupyter 
notebook platform provides this (Project Jupyter, n.d.) and has the benefit of helping digitization 
efforts by combing documents that would otherwise be separate e.g. Microsoft Excel and Word. 
 
By making notebooks with executable code, the user can follow a workflow in a level of detail that 
would otherwise not be possible with a traditional protocol. For example, If I were to reread and 
perform a protocol in the lab like I did last year, I would most likely not be able to successfully 
execute it without help from a technician. However, the combination of text and computer code, 
with its level of detail, would enable me to re-learn all the minute details and steps in the protocol. 
This is also why this approach has been adopted in many other fields of science e.g., physics. I 
would like to term this concept “next-level documentation” because it offers a new level of 
documentation in biology.  
 
The next step of this project was focused on automating and systematizing workflows, with 
Jupyter notebooks, for the design of the combinatorial libraries. The SLS bottleneck was chosen 
as the test case for applying these workflows. An example of the workflows necessary to build 
combinatorial libraries is presented below (see Figure 3.). Namely, selecting genetic parts is 
necessary as well as designing the combinatorial library and lastly generating robot instructions.   
==PAGE:16==
 
16 
 
Figure 3. A closer look at the design and build phase in the DBTL cycle. It starts with the design phase 
where genetic parts are selected i.e., homologs and promoters, then a combinatorial library is generated 
along with robot executable instructions. The second phase is the build phase that covers building the 
strains by first ordering primers and preparing templates, then PCRs are made and purified. S. cerevisiae 
is then transformed in a one-pot assembly reaction and plated. Colonies are sampled and sent for 
sequencing for genotyping. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
17 
2.4 Research aims and specific questions addressed 
The main aim of this thesis is to accelerate genome engineering by developing IT tools. 
Specifically, the objective is to develop algorithms and Python code to facilitate combinatorial 
library construction. More concretely, the intention was to systematize, standardize and automate 
the workflows leading up to combinatorial library construction, including selecting genetic parts 
and generating robot instructions. The literate programming platform, Jupyter notebooks, was 
chosen to ensure comprehensibility and readability of the workflows and to facilitate research in 
this field in the future.  
 
This thesis intends to answer the following research questions:   
 
a. Can we determine and standardize genetic parts selection via algorithms? 
b. Can we use existing IT tools to make combinatorial libraries? 
c. Can we translate this into automation with robot instructions? 
 
The questions addressed in this thesis were tested by writing python code and developing Jupyter 
notebooks. All designs were simulated for the Strictosidine bottleneck SLS and physical tests of 
the simulated designs were not performed in this thesis.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
18 
 
3. Methods  
Dependencies 
The main methods used in this work, are rooted in writing, and generating Python code to address 
the research questions. To this extent, several python packages were used and an overview of 
these can be found in table 2 along with how they were used in this thesis. These packages were 
all used in conjunction with Jupyter notebook version 6.2.0 anaconda navigator in a virtual 
environment. All the remaining dependencies can be visited in appendix 8.  
 
Table 2. Overview of the Python packages used in this work, their usages, and how they were used 
in this thesis.  
 
 
Object-oriented programming 
It became apparent in the first weeks of starting the project that adopting an object-oriented 
programming (OOP) approach would be beneficial. OOP is a programming paradigm that is used 
in many programming languages. As the name indicates, the focus of OOP is ‘objects’ and how 
they relate and behave with other objects (Pokkunuri, 1989). The idea behind using data classes, 
objects, and inheritance in OOP not only makes more complicated programs easier to read, but 
also offers increased ease of usage. Utilizing this paradigm allows for each object to be an 
autonomous entity with its own methods and data (Pokkunuri, 1989). Data can therefore be 
extracted at any point can from the object. By using OOP, the interface is easier to use and 
understand, which will make the tool approachable to more users.     
 
Flowbot One instructions 
Despite the lack of physical use of Flowbot One, the generation of CSV instructions was made 
possible. The Flowbot One CSV syntax was adapted from the manufacturer's instruction manual.  
==PAGE:19==
 
19 
3.1 Algorithms 
This section describes the general algorithms and shows a high level of abstraction and can 
therefore be adapted to any programming language. 
3.1.1 Homolog selection 
The first algorithm was designed to find homologs from a protein sequence. The general steps 
are presented below. 
 
1. Read in the protein sequence of interest 
2. Cross-reference with a given database to find homologs 
3. Retrieve relevant homologs  
4. Select relevant homologs based on parameters such as amino acid identity, E-value, 
active site homology, taxon, etc.  
5. Retrieve the homolog sequences of interest and save them. 
6. Make the protein sequences into DNA and Codon-optimize 
7. Save sequences and export them to an external database  
3.1.2 Promoter selection 
The second algorithm that was developed, was aimed at selecting relevant promoters from 
expression dynamics. The general steps can be viewed below.  
 
1. Load in RNA-seq data 
2. Pre-process the data, i.e., sort, remove irrelevant data points (zero counts), and set a lower 
limit for what is considered low expression, etc.  
3. Consider what expression dynamics are interesting and search through the pre-processed 
data 
4. Save the best candidates from each group of expression dynamics chosen from the 
previous step 
5. Retrieve their sequences (upstream sequences from the transcriptional start site (TSS)) 
from a sequence database 
6. Align the sequences to avoid homology and select promoters 
7. The chosen promoters should be saved and exported to an external database  
3.1.3 Combinatorial library generation 
The third algorithm described in this work was aimed at generating combinatorial libraries. The 
individual steps of the algorithm are shown below:  
 
1. Retrieve sequences of interest, along with names 
2. Make amplicons from sequences consisting of primers and their annealing temperatures 
3. Generate combinatorial lists of all possible combinations 
==PAGE:20==
 
20 
4. If a pad is wanted, add the pad at a chosen location in each list 
5. Assemble contigs by making overlapping primers between each amplicon 
6. Save all primers 
7. Primers containing the same sequences are updated to have the same names (happens 
quite frequently with homologs) 
8. Unique primers are saved 
9. Unique amplicons are saved 
3.1.4 Robot instructions 
Two algorithms to generate robot executable instructions were made here and work in the 
following ways. 
 
The first method is linked to the combinatorial library object and is executed as follows.  
 
1. Three Virtual source plates with a configuration made from unique amplicons are made 
i.e., PCR reaction number one uses forward primer x, reverse primer y and template z.  
2. A picklist is made by adding well contents from the first well (A1) of each source plate 
into the first well of the destination plate and continuing this process successively.  
3. 2x PCR mix and H2O is added to each used well in the destination plate.  
4. Plate configuration can be printed into an excel file and Flowbot One instructions into a 
CSV file.  
 
The second method to generate robot executable instructions is based on already made plates 
with primers and templates and PCR reaction components.  
 
1. Virtual plates are set up for: Primers, and templates from already made plates.  
2. PCR reactions are read in and used as a template for the destination plate configuration.  
3. Iterating through the PCR reaction components while iterating through the virtual plates 
each component is added to the picklist.  
4. The final picklist is generated and is exported as a CSV file.  
 
3.2 Testing of algorithms 
It is beneficial to test algorithms to ensure they produce the desired outcome. In this work, I 
sought to test the algorithms against doing the same work by hand for comparison purposes. 
The general idea was rooted in how much time could be saved from applying algorithms to take 
over manual work. 
 
The algorithm tests were all executed in the same fashion, followed the same algorithmic steps, 
and performed the exact same action by hand. As an example, to test how long it would take to 
use NCBIs basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) by hand, a stopwatch was started, the NCBI 
==PAGE:21==
 
21 
website was accessed, and the specified protein query was uploaded. The results from the BLAST 
were then filtered in the same way as the algorithm and the results were saved in a folder next to 
the folder with the algorithmic results and the stopwatch was stopped. The test would probably 
be easier and faster to conduct in a second run-through. However, this would give a false sense 
of the actual time spent doing it in a research setting, and it was therefore only performed by hand 
once. 
 
The testing of how the algorithms performed was measured with the IPython command “%%time” 
that outputs (1) CPU time and (2) Wall time (Built-in Magic Commands — IPython 8.0.0 
Documentation, n.d.). The CPU time gives a measure of how long the CPU was working and the 
Wall time shows how much time has passed for the operation to finish. The Wall time was used 
for comparison in this work.  
  
 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
22 
4. Results 
As the reader probably has noticed by now, most of the work conducted in this thesis has been 
focused on developing algorithms and writing code. To increase the documentation and 
readability of the code, Jupyter notebooks were used. However, in the hopes of not overburdening 
the reader, snippets from the notebooks are presented in the following paragraphs and the full 
notebooks can be found in appendix 1-3.  
 
The main results are presented below, starting with how parts were selected. First homologs were 
selected which can be found in the first Jupyter notebook “01-LL-findHomologs” (appendix 1). 
Secondly, promoters were selected which can be found in the second notebook “02-LL-
PromoterSelection” (appendix 2). Then the combinatorial libraries were made from the selected 
parts with executable Flowbot instructions which can be found in the third notebook “03-
CombinatorialLibraries” (appendix 3). Lastly, the interested reader can find the two data classes 
Designassembly and RobotAssembly in the respective python files with the same names 
Designassembly.py (appendix 4) and RobotAssembly.py (appendix 5). The structure is thus 
presented as follows:  
 
1. Parts selection - Jupyter notebook “01-LL-findHomologs” (appendix 1) and 02-LL-
PromoterSelection” (appendix 2).  
2. Combinatorial library generation -Jupyter notebook “03-CombinatorialLibraries” (appendix 
3) and python file Designassembly.py (appendix 4). 
3. Robot instructions - Jupyter notebook “03-CombinatorialLibraries” (appendix 3) and 
RobotAssembly.py (appendix 5) 
4.1 Parts selection 
The main goal of selecting parts for combinatorial library generation is to get an abundance of 
diversity. Therefore, we need to select diverse biological parts. It is often impossible to know 
which biological parts will perform best in each design since many factors need to be accounted 
for. For purposes of testing the Strictosidine case and adhering to the previous design of de-
bottlenecking G8H (Pedersen, 2022), several gene homologs need to be selected for both the SLS 
cytochrome P450s (CYPs) and the cytochrome P450 reductases (CPRs). Furthermore, promoters 
are needed to drive the expression and as a design consideration, they need to be different 
enough in sequence identity to reduce the risk of a loop-out event occurring. In the following two 
paragraphs, I will investigate how to algorithmically automate and standardize the selection of 
homologs and promoters.  
Homolog selection  
To generate a successful combinatorial library, functional diversity is needed since it increases 
the likelihood of yielding a beneficial phenotype. It also reduces the size of the library significantly 
compared to approaches that create diversity through random mutagenesis or DNA shuffling. 
==PAGE:23==
 
23 
However, the goal is to find gene homologs that would show different mechanistics or otherwise 
be different enough, in combination with other parts, to increase flux towards the desired product.  
 
A commonly used tool for finding protein homologs from a protein query is the Basic Alignment 
Search Tool (BLAST) algorithm (Chen et al., 2007; Nichio et al., 2017). The BLAST algorithm 
searches through a database and aligns the protein query with the database sequences. The 
result is a series of alignments with parameters such as E-value, identity, and query coverage.  
 
To increase the diversity of the combinatorial library, I was interested in a percent identity of 70-
95% amino acid identity. This range of amino acid identity was based on three factors. 1) The 
probability of having functional enzymes is increased at higher amino acid identities. 2) The 
probability of the enzymes having different mechanistics is increased at lower amino acid 
identities. 3) The capacity of the library permits only up to ten parts. By balancing these three 
factors this amino acid identity range was decided.   
 
To get a sufficient library we need to get homologs for both the SLS CYPs and the CPRs. Below a 
detailed description of SLS CYPs is presented and the results for the CPRs selection are 
presented in more general terms. For a detailed walkthrough visit appendix 1 or Figure 4.  
 
The first step of the algorithm involves reading in a FASTA file containing the protein sequence 
of the native SLS CYP (in the code croSLS1) from the Madagascan periwinkle, Catharanthus 
roseus (Brown et al., 2015). Reading in the FASTA file was easily done by using the SeqIO module 
from Biopython that creates a SeqRecord object that holds sequence information, ID, and name 
(see code snippet 1).  
 
 
Code snippet 1.  Reading a FASTA file into a Biopython SeqRecord object, which contains sequence, ID, 
and name. 
 
Next, the Biopython function “NCBIWWW” was used because it can blast the sequence in a 
chosen database (see code snippet 2). Here the “blastp” is chosen since we are searching for 
protein homologs. The “nr” denotes which database to search against. 
 
 
Code snippet 2. Using the Biopython function NCBIWWW to blast the protein query “croSLS1” through the 
blastp database. 
==PAGE:24==
 
24 
 
The result was saved as an XML file and can later be accessed without needing to blast again. 
The next step is to search through the alignment and find the alignments that follow the above-
mentioned criteria i.e., amino acid identity: 70-95%. The alignments that show these 
characteristics can be printed out along with alignment metrics e.g., name, length, E-value, first 
75 amino acids query, subject, their amino acid matches, and shared amino acids (Identity). A 
printout is shown for two alignments below:  
 
 
Code snippet 3. Custom printout of two alignments with alignment metrics such as name, title, length, e-
value, query, match, subject, and identity (a metric for how many amino acids are shared between the 
query and the subject). The query used here is the croSLS1 query and the matches between 0.75-0.95 
were saved.  
 
From the alignment, accession numbers were saved onto a list. At this point, the user/scientist 
could decide to work with a subset of the found homologs (by slicing the list), change the criteria 
(get only a desired length for example), or sample from the list at a constant rate. For SLS CYP a 
total of 10 homologs were found to adhere to the criteria which were used for the next step in the 
algorithm. The next step of the algorithm involves fetching the alignment sequences. These were 
fetched through the Biopython function “Entrez” which can fetch sequences from the accession 
numbers. The sequences were retrieved and saved as a FASTA file with an added “*” star 
denominating the stop codon which will be used when the proteins are reverse-translated (from 
protein to DNA). 
 
Next, these FASTA files were reverse-translated into DNA by importing a translation table for S. 
cerevisiae from the Python package Synbiopython. This function uses a simple probabilistic way 
of choosing codons and does not contain parameters such as choosing GC content. Therefore, it 
is only used for making temporary non-codon optimized DNA sequences. The temporary DNA 
sequences were codon-optimized with the tool “DNA chisel” created by the Edinburgh genome 
==PAGE:25==
 
25 
foundry (Zulkower & Rosser, 2020). DNA chisel can codon optimize genes to a specified 
organism, avoid homologies or specific sequences and tune GC content among others. The 
sequences were codon-optimized specifically to S. cerevisiae while constraining GC content to 
40-70%. Interestingly, other platforms also make use of this tool including Benchling (Benchling 
Product Release Notes, June 2020, n.d.). The final step yielded a series of Biopython objects called 
Seqrecords that hold sequence information, accession number, name, and description. The 
names were arbitrarily chosen with the abbreviation of the enzyme class and a number for making 
it easier to keep track of (Example: ‘SLS0’).  
These objects can be used directly as parts of the combinatorial library. However, for keeping 
track of the process, the FASTA files can be exported to a platform of choice using an API. 
 
A detailed schematic representation of the algorithm can be found below in Figure 4, which 
describes each step and how they relate.  
 
==PAGE:26==
 
26 
Fig 4. Diagram showing the Homolog search algorithm.  The first steps of the algorithm include reading 
in the protein query and blasting it. The alignments are saved onto an XML file and search results are 
filtered and ACC numbers are saved. Protein sequences are fetched through the “Entrez” function and 
codon-optimized in two steps. The DNA sequences are then made into Biopython objects and can be 
saved as FASTA files or exported to an external database.  
Finally, the same framework was used for selecting the CPRs except for restraining the length of 
the homologs to be +-10 amino acids in length to ensure easier cloning downstream. Additionally, 
since +50 homologs were found for the CPRs, homologs were sampled from the pool at a chosen 
rate to get homologs with an increasing amino acid identity. With this framework, a total of 8 
CPRs were found, codon-optimized, and written into FASTA files.  
 
To visualize the diversity of the homologs, two phylogenetic trees were made from the protein 
sequences of the SLS CYPs and the CPRs. This was done using the EMBL-EBI Clustal Omega 
alignment tool and is shown in figure 5. In Figure 5a, the ten SLS CYPs are shown where the top 
clade, comprising of 6 proteins share a common ancestor while the bottom 4 proteins are 
branched into two clades with a common ancestor. Similarly, in Figure 5b, it is observed that a 
common ancestor is found in 3 clades for the CPRs. From the top a single clade, then a larger 
clade comprising of 5 proteins, and finally a clade comprising of 2 proteins. The amino acid 
identity is shown for each homolog next to its accession number (ACC number). The amino acid 
identity shows the fraction of how many amino acids they share with their native equivalent.  
 
Figure. 5. Phylogenetic tree of chosen SLS CYP homologs and CPR homologs. a) SLS CYPs are 
comprised of three main groups with ranges of amino acid identities 0.712-0.944 compared to croSLS1. 
b) CPRs also comprised of 3 main groups with ranges of amino acid identities of 0.765-0.838 compared 
==PAGE:27==
 
27 
to Q05001. ACC number = accession number. Amino acid identity is the fraction of shared amino acids 
with the native enzyme. 
Promoter selection  
Promoters are a major component of protein expression and a key driver of biological systems 
(Kotopka & Smolke, 2020). To make a library with diversity, unique expression levels, and kinetics, 
I wanted to look for different promoter dynamics. These included promoters with high/low 
constitutive expression and promoters that either increase/decrease in expression over time. 
Additionally, I wanted to automate the whole selection process. Traditional design construction 
relies on a limited number of promoters for S. cerevisiae (Kotopka & Smolke, 2020). However, 
selection can be achieved from RNA-seq data, where mRNAs are sequenced, mapped to specific 
genes, and added to a count matrix. In S. cerevisiae, promoters are defined as the 1kb upstream 
of the transcriptional start site (TSS), which is a laboratory standard (Zhang et al., 2020). As I will 
show, this clear definition makes the promoter sequences easy to retrieve. 
 
The RNA-seq data used here was generated by Arun et al. (Rajkumar et al., 2019). The data is 
composed of three columns representing time points i.e., samples were taken at 6 hours, 12, 
hours, and 24 hours. The 6303 rows represent the genes of S. cerevisiae, and each has RNA 
counts for each of the time points. These counts can be added together and plotted to get an 
overview of the data (see appendix 2). The data shows a few genes with a gene count of more 
than 20000 in total. While the majority lies below 2000 counts with a substantial portion close to 
zero counts (see appendix 2). The proposed algorithm to analyze this data was described in 
section 3.1.2. 
 
The data analysis required to find the promoters can be performed in various ways in python. 
However, to ensure a nice overview of the data, along with powerful build-in functions, this part 
was performed with the Python library pandas. 
 
Firstly, the data is read into the Jupyter notebook with the Pandas function “read_csv” and made 
into a pandas DataFrame. The next few steps involve filtering out data points that are not of 
interest. The first filtering step was made by removing all promoters with zero counts since we 
are not interested in promoters that are induced under special circumstances. This step reduced 
the rows from 6303 to 5868. The second filtering step is made by removing data points that have 
a count total of less than 2000. This step reduces the promoters to 303. By a simple sorting of 
the DataFrames, 5 promoters were picked exhibiting high constitutive expression and 5 
promoters exhibiting low expression. The ten chosen constitutive promoters can be viewed in 
Figure 6 below:  
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
28 
Figure 6. Showing the top 5 promoters chosen from two categories. Left, High constitutive expressing 
promoters. Right, Low constitutive expressing promoters. The columns indicate sampling times that 
were performed after 6 hours, 12 hours, and 24 hours. The rows indicate the gene in question with 
datapoints representing mRNA counts. 
 
The next part of the algorithm involves choosing promoters that have different dynamics, i.e., 
increasing or decreasing expression over time. For this, the previously filtered DataFrame was 
used with the Pandas function “pct_change” that, as the function name indicates, calculates the 
percent change from chosen columns and to the adjacent. The rows were subsequently sorted. 
From this, we get a DataFrame with promoters that increase or decrease over time. The 
DataFrames are presented below in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Dataframe showing ten promoters by the percentage change in their count matrix. Rows 
indicate gene names, and columns sampling time from 6, 12, and 24 hour. A difference in +/-1 is 
equivalent to +/-100% change. Left, Promoters that show the highest percentage increase from the 12 
hour to the 24 hour sampling point.  Right, Promoters with the highest decrease from the 12 hour to the 
24 hour sampling point.  
 
The data shows a higher increase in expression over time relative to decrease over time. This is 
due to the fact that the largest reduction in gene expression reduction that is possible is -1, which 
corresponds to an expression of 0. The highest percent increase is found with MLS1 with ~650x 
from 12 hours to 24 hours. Interestingly, a pattern can be observed in which a large decrease 
followed by the largest increase is seen at the highest increases. Additionally, all the promoters 
that decrease over time have the opposite pattern with an increase followed by a decrease in 
gene expression. The 5 rows from the top and bottom were selected for the next step of the 
algorithm which is fetching the promoter sequences.  
 
==PAGE:29==
 
29 
Fetching the promoters’ sequences was done by utilizing the Intermine database, which harbors 
sequence data from a plethora of organisms including yeast. The yeast part of the database, 
which was used here, is called Yeastmine (YeastMine: Home, n.d.). By utilizing the Yeastmine API, 
sequences 1kb upstream of the TSS were retrieved directly into Jupyter notebooks with two 
functions (see Appendix 2). The sequences were saved as Seqrecord objects with name, id, 
description and made into a single FASTA file to perform multiple alignments. The multiple 
alignments are a necessary step that was made to limit loop-out events due to homologous 
recombination. The multiple alignments of the 20 promoters were performed with the graphical 
alignment tool Mview (MView < Multiple Sequence Alignment < EMBL-EBI, n.d.) and show no 
significant homology (see appendix 7). When these alignments were analyzed for consensus with 
a threshold of 70%, only 0.6% had consensus, which indicates that the promoters are sufficiently 
different enough to possibly avoid loop-out events (See appendix 2).  
 
The dynamics of the 20 promoters found were plotted against each other to get a nuanced view 
of their characteristics and dynamics (See appendix 2). 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Expression dynamics of the chosen promoters. Left, Dynamics first set of promoters 
(YDR524W-A, FAA1, MSL1, URA1) is shown. The high expression promoter YDR524W-A is depicted in 
green and the low expressing promoter FAA1 is depicted in red. The increasing promoter MSL1 is shown 
in blue and decreasing promoter URA1 is shown in orange. Right, the dynamics of the second set of 
promoters are shown (RPL41A, LPD1, PCK1, EXG1). The high expressing promoter RPL41A is depicted 
==PAGE:30==
 
30 
in green and the low expressing promoter LPD1 in red. The increasing promoter, PCK1, is shown in blue 
while the decreasing promoter, EXG1, is depicted in orange. 
  
From these 20 promoters, one from each group was chosen and the results can be viewed in 
figure 8. From the chosen promoters it is found that the high expressing promoters show similar 
dynamics where YDR524W-A and RPL41A increase initially followed by a decrease. However, 
these remain at a relatively high expression level in the time course. The low expressing 
promoters LPD1 and FAA1 stay stable below 1000 counts. The increasing promoters MLS1 and 
PCK1 show similar mRNA count characteristics and end on ~5000 counts. Finally, the decreasing 
promoters, URA1 and EXG1 also show similar mRNA count characteristics although URA1 
increases more at the 12-hour mark but both decrease to similar levels of ~200 counts. Lastly, 
the promoters were saved as FASTA files for the downstream analysis. A detailed diagram of the 
algorithm for selecting promoters can be found below in Figure 9.  
 
==PAGE:31==
 
31 
 
Figure 9. Diagram showing the algorithm for promoter selection. Four main steps are performed with 1) 
Data integration and filtering 2) Promoter dynamics selection 3) Promoter sequences retrieved and 
aligned 4) Data export. 
4.2 DesignAssembly - Combinatorial library construction:  
After selecting promoters and homologs, the combinatorial library construction can begin. This 
is done using the Python class developed in this work called DesignAssembly. The algorithm 
behind DesignAssembly uses several already built packages such as Pydna, Biopython, 
==PAGE:32==
 
32 
Synbiopython, and Itertools. DesignAssembly is initialized by several helper functions that 
mediate the class instances. These instances can then be retrieved at any time after the object 
has been initialized. Now let's examine the individual parts of the DesignAssembly algorithm with 
the Strictosidine case.  
 
The homologs and promoters previously found were made into a list of Dseqrecords, a data type 
provided through Pydna. Additionally, a list of the names belonging to the sequences should be 
provided (see appendix 3). Now, the desired construct configuration must be initialized in the 
correct order, meaning that for the SLS assembly, a list should be made in the following way: Up-
site, terminator (tADH1), SLS CYPs, SLS CYP promoters, pad, CPR-promoter, CPRs, terminator 
(CYC1), and Down-site (see Figure 10). The reverse configuration of the promoters driving the 
expression of SLS CYPs is made by simply reversing the parts sequences in Python. 
Figure 10. Schematic representation of the SLS construct. The figure illustrates each part of the construct 
where arrows indicate promoter sequences. General names of the genetic parts are shown in the boxes, 
while the accession numbers for the specific parts are shown below. The Up-site: XI-UP and the Down 
site: XI-DW. 
 
Additional functionality, provided by DesignAssembly, is the ability to incorporate a so-called 
“pad”. If the user wants a specific sequence i.e., a pad between two constructs it can be integrated 
into the primers. An example could be to add a 5’ hexamer Translational initiation site (TIS) to 
tune expression in S. cerevisiae, which has been shown to increase expression 10-fold (Petersen 
et al., 2018). Or integrating a CRISPR target sequence that could be used to delete or alter the 
integrated construct. In the construct configuration seen in Figure 10, the pad also serves as a 
constant part that makes genotyping easier. In essence, this pad could be any sequence that the 
user wants to be incorporated into the construct. To ensure that the constructs are efficiently 
integrated into S. cerevisiae while limiting primer length, a limit of adding a pad of 40 bp is made, 
which can be changed in the source code. An example is shown below.  
 
==PAGE:33==
 
33 
 
Code snippet 4. Initializing a pad as a Dseqrecord object by adding a string inside the object (An arbitrary 
sequence is shown here). 
 
The first thing the algorithm does is to make “amplicons” from the Dseqrecord sequences. An 
amplicon is defined as a piece of DNA that can be amplified by a forward and reverse primer. The 
primers are made with an annealing temperature decided by the user and linked to each amplicon 
object. This is a crucial step in performance as calculating primer melting temperatures can vary 
tremendously depending on the primer melting temperature function. For example, simple 
functions from Biopython have a high speed while functions that use APIs are slow and can 
seriously impair performance. Calculating the main primers for all the parts at this point would 
limit the calculations to only the number of parts of the library and not the whole combinatorial 
library.  
 
The DesignAssembly function is modular so the user can use a primer melting temperature 
function of choice. A primer melting temperature function based on the NEB Biocalculator is 
provided (see appendix 4) which is one of the most used primer-melting-temperature calculators 
for molecular biologists. The function has been optimized for performance so it can calculate 
approximately one primer every second. This stands in contrast to Biopython functions that can 
calculate up against a thousand primers in the same timeframe. However, the NEB Biocalculator 
is trusted by biologists and is therefore preferred. The primer's melting temperature is saved 
along with the amplicons as a class instance which is used in the next part of the algorithm.  
 
Next, the combinatorial library is made from the amplicons, the names belonging to the 
amplicons, and the primers melting temperatures. This is done with the Itertools function 
“product”, which makes all possible pairs of a list of elements. It does that by cycling with the 
right pair for every iteration (Itertools — Documentation, n.d.). An example of how the function 
works is shown below where ‘repeat’ denotes the pairs:  
 
product('ABCD', repeat=2) → AA AB AC AD BA BB BC BD CA CB CC CD DA DB DC DD 
 
This process is done with our desired construct of sequences, names, and primer melting 
temperatures. And since these combinations are done in exactly the same systematic way we 
will get the data from these three lists in the same combinations. Showing a printout of this step 
of the algorithm would take up multiple pages because of the combinatorial “explosion” but a 
snippet of this is shown below.  
 
==PAGE:34==
 
34 
 
Code snippet 5. Printout of 3 lists from the combinatorial library showing amplicons and the different 
contigs. Notice that the 6th position changes for each contig and that the first half of the contigs all 
contain the PCK1 promoter and then it changes to EXG1. 
The next step of the algorithm re-makes the combinatorial sequence tuples into a list to facilitate 
the insertion of a pad on the desired position of every construct in the library. This is done with 
the built-in python function “insert”. The objects now consist of a series of amplicon objects and 
a single Dseqrecord on each position which is shown below where the Dseqrecord object is 
inserted into index 4.  
 
 
Code snippet 6. Printout of 5 lists from the combinatorial library, with the pad incorporated at index 4 
(middle position). The pad is shown as a Dseqrecord with 37 bases.  
 
Now that every combination of amplicons has a pad embedded, the constructs can be 
assembled. This is done with the Pydna function “assembly” that takes a list of amplicon objects 
and/or Dseqrecord objects as the input. This function works by making overlapping primers to 
each amplicon while the Dseqrecord is getting incorporated through the primers. The overlapping 
primers are set by default to 35 bp since this ensures efficient homologous recombination. 
However, the user can change this to accommodate any other designs. The result here is a list of 
amplicons that are longer since the overlapping primers elongate them and the Deseqrecord 
object, the pad, is incorporated into the amplicons.  
 
 
Code snippet 7. Printout of Amplicons after overlapping primers have been incorporated. Notice that the 
pads have been incorporated into the amplicons and the Dseqrecord object is gone.  
==PAGE:35==
 
35 
 
Next, we can go through these assemblies and add information to the primer objects belonging 
to the amplicons. All the primers are given a systematic name e.g forward primers start from 
F001 and increment forward while the reverse primers increment from the last forward primer. 
Additionally, the annealing temperature is added to the objects as well as a description of what 
part they anneal to and what part they overlap towards. Finally, all the primers can be extracted. 
Since primers might have the same sequences because different homologs have high sequence 
similarity, the primers sharing sequences would need to be updated by name and saved to the 
final primer list. 
 
The final operation is to make a list of PCRs needed for assembling the combinatorial library. 
Amplicons can be used for this since they hold information about the template and the primers. 
However, unique amplicons need to be found since many of the amplicons in the list of constructs 
are the same. This is easily done with a for loop and the result is a list of the PCRs with the 
template, primers, and annealing temperature. The same operation is done with the primers. With 
the class method “PCR_list_to_dataframe()”, a pandas DataFrame can be made with the PCRs 
which is shown below.  
 
 
Code snippet 8. Class method PCR_list_to_dataframe that makes a DataFrame of the PCRs needed to 
construct the combinatorial libraries along with the annealing temperatures of the primers. The annealing 
temperatures were calculated with the default tm_calculator. 
 
DesignAssembly has several class methods to improve the functionality of the class. The class 
methods are listed here: 
==PAGE:36==
 
36 
 
○ def ShowVariantsLibDF() 
○ def contigs(): 
○ def print_primer_list():  
○ def primer_list_to_dataframe():  
○ def print_PCR_list(): 
○ def PCR_list_to_dataframe(): 
 
The ShowVariantsLibDF() makes a pandas DataFrame of all the variants in the library. The 
contigs() method shows the continuous overlapping sequences with systematic names in the 
form of contigs. The print_primer_list() and print_PCR_list() method prints primers tp stdout. The 
primer_list_to_dataframe() and PCR_list_to_dataframe() makes pandas DataFrames from 
DesignAssembly as described above.  
 
A detailed chart of the relationships between the different functions, objects, and parts of the 
algorithm is shown in Figure 11 below. 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Detailed flowchart of specific parts of the DesignAssembly class algorithm. This diagram is 
divided into two parts 1) the general steps of the algorithm 2) the Class methods available to the 
DesignAssembly class. The arrows pointing vertically between each box indicate the functions that 
==PAGE:37==
 
37 
mediate the step.  
 
 
Interestingly, the PCR DataFrame can be sorted into only a subset of templates that can be made 
into a new DataFrame (see appendix 3). This is useful when the user does not want to perform 
all the PCR reactions at once. Lastly, the DataFrame(s) generated by the user can be used by the 
RobotAssembly class, which is the last part of the results presented in the next paragraph.  
4.3 RobotAssembly - Virtual plates and robot instructions 
 
Automating laboratory work is essential if we want to speed up the construction of cell factories 
and decrease development costs. Liquid handling robots have shown to be promising in 
accelerating genome engineering due to their speed, limited mistakes, and high throughput. Every 
liquid handling robot needs two components to perform the desired action: 
 
1. A set of instructions 
2. Physical plates inserted at the right positions into the liquid handler 
 
This section focuses on automatically generating instructions. One could imagine that the 
physical part of the process could in the future be automated with robots, but more on that later.  
 
Currently, liquid-handling robots, e.g., Flowbots and Opentrons, come with predefined program 
templates for ease of use - and are operated through a GUI. However, when making hundreds of 
reactions and handling multiple plates, mistakes are plentiful in a GUI by manually clicking on 
wells with a mouse. Additionally, the time spent fiddling with the GUI for the liquid-handling robots 
is time wasted. There is also an economic incentive to be able to customize workflows for certain 
liquid-handling robots since the fees for customizable workflows can amount to more than 1000+ 
USD (Opentrons Custom Protocols, n.d.) and can be unfeasible for small enterprises, academia, 
or Biofoundries. 
 
I, therefore, see the need to build an automated way of programming these liquid-handling robots. 
Specifically, a system that is linked to the previous design phase that without manual 
management can generate instructions for the desired constructs. To this extent, the 
RobotAssembly class was made to accommodate this need. 
 
The RobotAssembly class is built on top of the python package SynBiopython (Yeoh et al., 2021) 
which has been adapted from the Edinburg genome foundry PLATEO tool (Plateo Documentation 
— Plateo 0.1.0 Documentation, n.d.). This package has an interesting automation module that can 
generate a picklist for the Labcyte Echo, and it can also generate instructions in a human-readable 
format. However, since the tool is limited to one liquid-handling robot I sought to increase it to 
other liquid-handling robots such as the Flowbot One. To accommodate this, the source code has 
==PAGE:38==
 
38 
been modified to generate Flowbot instructions. These changes can be found in appendix 6. With 
a simple class method, a CSV file can be exported with the precise instructions for the Flowbot, 
which can perform the needed actions. 
 
RobotAssembly can take two types of inputs and the algorithm differs depending on the input. 
The first algorithm is built on a naive approach where some pipetting is necessary to 
accommodate a fixed robot instruction program. The second approach is built from already 
configured plates and in this approach manual pipetting is not required since the algorithm finds 
the needed primers from the plate configuration. The only necessary components are a 
DataFrame of the PCRs (with primers and template for each PCR) and a list of the primer plates 
and template plates in successive order.  
 
The first method starts by making virtual plates from the DesignAssembly object. More 
specifically, it reads what components are needed for the PCR and adds them to the virtual wells. 
The virtual wells are made from the SynBiopython well class which stores information about the 
content of each well. These configurations are made into three source plates consisting of a plate 
for Templates, Forward primers, and Reverse primers. The fourth source plate is configured to 
hold 2X Mastermix and H2O which is added in the end of each PCR reaction. The plate 
configurations can be made into an Excel file, physically printed, and be taken into the lab where 
the primer and template plates can be made (see figure 12). 
 
Next, the picklist is made through an iterative process of taking the needed components from the 
virtual well of A1 from the source plates into A1 in the destination plate (see figure 12). The default 
setting is a 20 µl PCR reaction with the described content in table 3.  
 
Table 3. Showing the components needed to perform a 20 µl PCR reaction. The percent of the total volume 
is shown in the right column if the user wants to change the volume. The concentration of each component 
can vary and is therefore only used as a guideline. 
 
 
 
A schematic representation of how the naive robot instructions are made can be viewed in Figure 
12. The limitation of this approach is that it is only possible to make 96 PCRs and that the plates 
must be prepared by manual pipetting. This could be alleviated by using larger plates i.e., 384 well 
plates or increasing the number of source and destination plates by changing the code. 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
39 
 
Figure 12. Schematic representation of how the picklist is generated and executed from the virtual plates. 
Prior to the picklist generation, the RobotAssembly object has been initialized and generated the plate 
layouts. 1) The process starts with the RobotClass adding components from A1 in each plate (Template, 
Forward primers, and Reverse primers) 2) Mastermix and H2O are added subsequently. The process 
starts over from well A2 and continues until all the components have been added to the destination plate.  
 
Class methods that can be utilized from RobotAssembly are shown below.  
1. def PlatesToExcelFile():  
2. def print_well_df_to_string(): 
3. def FlowbotInstructionsToCSV(): 
 
The first two class methods above are used to make the plate configurations needed for the liquid 
handler to perform the correct actions. The PlatesToExcelFile method prints out an excel file with 
4 sheets namely, 'Forward_primer_wells', ’Reverse_primer_wells', 'Template_wells' and 
‘'PCR_MIX_H20'. These can be printed out and taken into the lab where the plates are prepared 
from the Eppendorf tubes containing the primers in the prescribed configuration. The 
print_well_df_to_string does the same as the previous method but only prints the configurations 
to Standard Output (stdout). A snippet from the print_well_df_to_string() is shown below.  
 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
40 
 
Code snippet 9. Printout from the class method print_well_df_to_string() which shows how each plate 
should be configured for assembly in the liquid handler. Here only a part of the forward primer plate is 
shown (A1-B7).  
  
The final method is FlowbotInstructionsToCSV which generates a picklist and exports a CSV file 
with the instructions to Flowbot One. And as Flowbot One instructions dictate, three columns are 
made with a source, target (defined here as the destination plate), and volume column. The first 
number from the source and target columns indicate which plate action is performed on, followed 
by which well. The final column volume intuitively indicates the volume that needs to be pipetted. 
An example of such a file can be viewed below. 
 
 
Code snippet 10. A snippet of the generated CSV file that can be loaded onto the Flowbot One. A volume 
of 1 µl from Source plate 1, in well A1 (Forward primers plate) is transferred to target plate 5, in A1 (PCR 
plate), this continues with plate 2 (Reverse primers) and 3 (Templates) and finally, Mastermix and H2O 
are added from plate 4. The process continues to A2 stops when all the PCRs have been made into the 
picklist or the PCR plate is full. 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
41 
The second way of using RobotAssembly is to have pre-defined plates and a pandas DataFrame 
of PCR components which is then translated into a picklist. Essentially, primers needed for the 
assembly can be ordered in 96 well plates from a vendor and the RobotAssembly class can 
automatically generate the necessary picklist for making the PCRs. The picklist can be used to 
generate Flowbot One instructions or printed as a string in a human-readable format.  
 
The first step is to make lists of the components in plates which can then be made into virtual 
plates. Combined with a DataFrame that holds information about the PCRs and the virtual plates 
a picklist is generated. The picklist can as the previous method be printed into a human-readable 
format or exported as a Flowbot one instruction CSV file. A schematic representation of how it 
works is shown below in Figure 13. There are a lot of reasons to prefer this method since it doesn’t 
need any manual pipetting and is fully automated which limits mistakes and frees up time. The 
only thing that is needed for the algorithm to work is that the primers needed to perform a reaction 
are present in the plates.  
 
 
 
Figure 13. Workflow from plates with a fixed configuration and the necessary steps to generate a picklist. 
1) The names of the primers from the plates with a fixed configuration can be retrieved and made into 
lists 2) these lists can be used to make virtual plates. 3) The RobotAssembly class can iterate through a 
==PAGE:42==
 
42 
DataFrame with PCR components while it searches through the virtual plates. If it finds the primer and/or 
template it is added to the picklist. 4) The picklist can be exported as a CSV file and used on a robot 
(Here the Flowbot One).  
4.5 Comparison of time used between the algorithms and manual work 
The algorithms discussed here were all made to accelerate genome engineering and it was 
therefore interesting to test how much time is saved by adopting these IT tools. The testing of 
the algorithms is described in the methods section 3.2. All the comparisons were made for the 
SLS construct (see Results 4.1 and 4.2). The calculation of primer design was made by multiplying 
the amount of time for making one primer i.e., 2 min with the amount of SLS primers (204). 
Codon-optimization was done with Benchling since it also uses “DNA chisel” to make for better 
comparison. Choosing promoters from a dataset of 6303 rows was not performed by hand but 
an estimate was given. Designing a combinatorial library was also not performed by hand since 
this would be too time-consuming and would be beyond the scope of this thesis. The same goes 
for generating robot instructions by hand. An overview of the results from the time comparison is 
found in table 4.   
 
Table 4. Overview of the time saved by incorporating the IT tools for generating combinatorial libraries 
that were discussed in this work.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
43 
5. Discussion  
In this study, I have focused on developing IT tools to accelerate genome engineering by 
specifically designing combinatorial libraries. An automated workflow of selecting parts for the 
combinatorial libraries has been shown. Additionally, automated robot instructions were 
generated that could potentially close the loop between the design and build phase of the DBTL 
cycle.  
 
A major argument for adapting these automated workflows is how much time is saved. If 
researchers can save time in all steps in the DBTL cycle, genome engineering is not only 
accelerated but time is also freed up for doing more science e.g., designing new strains. The time 
that is saved accumulates for every step, but this is normally only realized when making larger 
projects. The time savings are also big for smaller projects if all steps are automated.  
 
Making one primer, with overlaps, correct melting temperature (from NEB Biocalculator), saving 
the sequence to a sheet or database along with melting temperature, possibly takes 2 min for an 
experienced researcher (see Results 4.5). Making 204 primers for the SLS combinatorial library 
would therefore take 404 min (roughly 7 hours). With DesignAssembly, it takes ~ 3 min to make 
all primers with the NEB Biocalculator while It only takes the algorithm ~ 20 seconds when using 
the default TM-calculator (see result 4.5). Additionally, PCR’s necessary to complete the library is 
generated, which would also be time-consuming by hand but is not considered here. These 
estimates do not take into consideration the possibility of making faulty primers or other 
mistakes.  
 
Retrieving homologs from NCBI can also be time-consuming and as mentioned these time 
savings accumulate. As described in the Methods section 3.2, a NCBI BLAST was performed by 
hand which took ~17 min (see result 4.5). Continuing on, these sequences were converted into 
DNA sequences and codon-optimized. This took 10 min by hand (see Result 4.5). Furthermore, 
promoters must be found by hand going through the large datasets, this could take hours of 
research but let's assume this could be done in 60 min (see Result 4.5). The total time saved at 
this point is ~ 500 min, ~8 hours. A brief overview of different estimates can be found in table 4.  
 
For the final part of this section, consider how much time would be saved by automating the 
assembly with robots. With all the materials ready i.e., primers, templates, etc. a researcher could 
at best build a combinatorial library of 1000-2000 combinations by hand in 8 weeks at a high 
pace. With liquid handling robots and help from the algorithms developed here, this could most 
likely be done in one week. This amounts to a difference of 7 weeks and when more people adopt 
this workflow the time saved would be immense. Departments adopting IT tools such as the one 
described here could outcompete almost any lab in speed and efficiency. It is interesting to 
consider that by speeding up the DBTL-cycle a second cycle is reached faster which in turn means 
time would be saved once again.  
 
==PAGE:44==
 
44 
In the following paragraphs, I will discuss three main topics divided into sub-topics. These topics 
reflect some of the considerations that were made during this work and are divided as follows:  
 
I. 
5.1 Automating and standardizing parts selection 
II. 
5.2 Strategies for making combinatorial libraries  
III. 
5.3 Approaches to automating robot instructions 
 
5.1 Automating and standardizing parts selection for the SLS bottleneck 
Parameters for homolog selection  
Some specific algorithmic choices were made and will be discussed here. Firstly, the strategy of 
changing cytochrome p450s and cytochrome p450 reductases has been shown to work well on 
numerous occasions for optimizing these enzymes (Milne et al., 2020). Secondly, homologs were 
selected on the criteria of having a 70-95% identity. Selecting homologs on these criteria was 
made from the notion of getting enough functional diversity to improve the flux through the 
bottleneck. However, I deem that the range used here could work well for our purposes but is not 
the only way of selecting homologs with functional diversity. The identity quotient could for 
example be enlarged if not enough homologs were found.  
 
A multitude of parameters could be investigated such as the difference in membrane anchors, 
active sites, and other enzyme mechanics. Here a framework for accelerating the process is 
simply presented and future users of this framework can tweak the parameters as they see fit. 
Other parameters that would have an influence on the cloning and integration of the constructs 
into S. cerevisiae is whether the chosen SLS CYP and CPR homologs show sequence similarity. 
This could influence the likelihood of loop-out events and influence performance. This could be 
alleviated by either codon-optimizing the enzymes with different constraints or simply performing 
the transformation in two steps. 
 
Finally, many hits from the CPRs BLAST made it necessary to filter out homologs. This was done 
by adding the soft criteria of homologs having similar lengths to increase the probability of having 
all functional domains. The remaining 44 CPRs were then sorted by amino acid identity and 
sampled over the range of amino acid identities. As described in results 4.1, three factors were 
considered for selecting homologs, (1) functional diversity, (2) different mechanistics, and 3) 
fulfilling the capacity requirements. Therefore, I believe this sampling is useful when working with 
many BLAST hits. However, depending on the project these choices might differ and should be 
treated individually.  
 
 
Can better promoters be chosen? 
To drive the expression of the SLS CYPs and CPRs, promoters were selected. The promoters were 
chosen from their expression dynamics deducted from RNA-seq counts. A common strategy is 
to choose constitutive promoters or glycolytic promoters when expressing heterologous genes 
==PAGE:45==
 
45 
in S. cerevisiae (Peng et al., 2015). Here, I opted for choosing both high and low constitutive 
promoters to lessen the metabolic burden and optimize pathway flux. Interestingly, from our 
search criteria, along with the 20 candidates, we found some of the most used constitutive 
promoters for the expression of heterologous genes in S. cerevisiae, namely ‘PCK1’ and ‘TD3’ 
(Sun et al., 2012; Weinhandl et al., 2014).  
 
Furthermore, I was interested in promoters that would increase or decrease over time to gain 
expression 
of 
the 
desired 
genes 
at 
different 
times 
for 
the 
duration 
of 
the 
bioprocess/fermentation. These promoters could limit the metabolic burden constitutive 
promoters impose on the cells in the different growth phases. Additionally, promoters with 
increasing activity in the stationary phase are of preference, if the expressed product or an 
intermediary product shows toxic properties (Yu et al., 2015). 
 
The expression dynamics, discussed here, are only a subset of dynamics that could be explored 
and implemented. An example of these dynamics can be viewed in the Jupyter notebook “02-
PromoterSelection” where the 303 filtered RNA-seq data points showed widely different 
expression characteristics (see appendix 2). Interestingly, most of the promoters that increase 
from the first time point of 6 hours decrease at the 12-hour mark and then increase substantially 
at the 24-hour mark. The opposite asserts for the promoters that decrease over time, by 
increasing at the 12-hour mark and decreasing at the 24-hour mark. These differences show 
some of the remarkable dynamics of promoters and there are many more not covered here but 
could serve to further advance cell factory engineering efforts. Such promoters include inducible, 
responding to different substrates, or highly activated in different phases of growth.  
 
The process of selecting constitutive promoters was based on filtering and slicing data points 
from the top and bottom of sorted DataFrames. This process could have been done in other ways 
such as looking at promoters that show little to no change from every time point. 
 
Additionally, in the process of determining the increasing and decreasing promoters, percent 
change from each time point was used and it was highlighted that the promoters that decrease 
over time can only do so to - 1 (or to 0 RNA counts) of the previous value. This selection process 
could also be made by calculating the difference in RNA counts between each data point. 
However, this selection process also has its flaws since promoters with high RNA counts at the 
6-hour mark increase at the 12-hour mark and decrease at the 24-mark. The decrease in percent 
relative to the previous time point is not large but the difference in RNA count is large for most 
promoters that show a decrease in expression. This would result in choosing high-expressing 
promoters for the decreasing promoters category such as “RPL41B” which has the highest mRNA 
counts but also the steepest decrease from the 6-hour mark (14291.1) to the 24-hour mark 
(10638.8) of 3652.3 counts difference (see appendix 2). Here, the framework is merely laid out 
and can be changed or improved as one sees fit. The truth is no one knows which promoters 
would work for our purposes, but the focus of this process is to find diversity among the 
==PAGE:46==
 
46 
promoters to increase the chance of getting beneficial expression dynamics and in the end an 
improved phenotype.  
 
In terms of aligning the promoter sequences, I found that none of them showed significant (>70% 
threshold) similar motifs that could cause loop-out events (see appendix 2). Intuitively, this makes 
biological sense, because if many promoters would have the same motifs, loop-out events would 
be more likely to occur in the native S. cerevisiae strain and could result in the loss of essential 
genes. However, this is not examined here but could be an interesting topic to explore. 
Additionally, it is important to keep in mind that when integrating native promoters into a locus, 
there is a chance that the native promoters are found nearby, which could result in the loss of the 
integrated constructs or essential genes. The author notes that a script could be made to cross-
validate that the selected promoters are not natively located in the nearby locus. This could be of 
great value and solve this potential problem.  
 
On a slightly different note, it is noted that the promoter selection workflow can be used to 
automate and standardize the selection of terminators by fetching the 500 bp downstream of a 
gene. This is interesting since Kathleen et al. have investigated 30 terminators and found 6.5-11-
fold differences in mRNA transcript levels depending on the terminator sequences (Curran et al., 
2013). A slight alteration of the code provided here could be used to investigate terminators' 
impact on gene expression through combinatorial library generation.  
5.2 Strategies for making combinatorial libraries 
How large combinatorial libraries should be generated?   
The main part of this work dealt with generating combinatorial libraries through the 
DesignAssembly class. Enabled by the parts selection the DesignAssembly class was initiated to 
generate a combinatorial library. The total number of combinations from this library were found 
to be 1280 (1x1x10x4x4x8x1x1x1 = 1280). The total number of forward and reverse primers 
generated were 204 and distributed on 138 PCR reactions with 28 templates. A central question 
when making combinatorial libraries is: How large should the generated library be? And this 
question is answered by the available testing capacity.  
 
Testing is one of the biggest bottlenecks in the DBTL cycle when it relies on analytic chemistry 
methods such as LC-MS. The library size that was chosen here was made on the assumption that 
the testing capacity for this project is around 200 colonies with the means available. Instead of 
testing all the constructs, an ML methodology, described by Zang et al., can be used to predict 
the phenotypes in the rest of the untested library (Zhang et al., 2020). Predictions are never as 
good as testing but with this methodology, speed is increased going through the DBTL cycle and 
fewer resources are spent. To determine how large a combinatorial library should be, another 
method can be used namely, Monte Carlo simulations. With Monte Carlo simulations, the ideal 
number of tests needed for a given library can be simulated by estimating the number of unique 
genotypes found from sampling library colonies (Zhang et al., 2020). This will in turn give an 
==PAGE:47==
 
47 
indication of how large a test capacity is needed for a library and can be used for an informed 
choice.  
 
Alternatively, testing can be done in a high-throughput manner with biosensors that can be 
combined with the expression of a fluorescent molecule. The cells can then be sorted by 
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and tested, thus testing genotypes that are high 
producers (Zhang et al., 2020). This approach is not available for Strictosidine at the time of 
writing but efforts to make a biosensor specific to this molecule would be of significant value.  
 
Benchmarking to competitors 
A critical aspect to discuss when making an IT tool is performance and this is typically done by 
benchmarking the tool to other tools. A comparison between the DesignAssembly module and 
Teselagens combinatorial library module is made in the following. Firstly, Teselagens module, at 
the time of writing, is only able to provide primer designs for libraries <900 constructs. To this 
extent, a direct comparison can simply not be made due to this limitation. Teselagen suggests 
breaking the library down into smaller pieces, which was not done here to benchmark it.  
 
However, a previously generated library for the G8H bottleneck was compared with the 
DesignAssembly module. While the Teselagen module made fewer primers (117) they were also 
longer (Average 65bp). DesignAssembly made more primers (208) but also shorter (average 
40bp) due to the difference in primer generation and design. The total bases were ~ 7600bp for 
the Teselagen library compared to ~ 8000 bp for the DesignAssembly library. Although 
DesignAssembly has an apparent larger base usage, the actual cost of primers can be lower since 
primers that are shorter than 60 bp are cheaper to purchase from the primer vendors. An added 
advantage of getting more primers is that the primers will most likely not run out during the 
assembly process unlike re-using the same forward primer with 20+ reverse primers. Additionally, 
it can be argued that shorter primers have the added benefit of lower risk of tertiary structure 
formation or primer-dimers. However, this was not tested here. The reason for this difference in 
primer length and amount is that the Teselagen module only makes 3’ overlaps while the 
DesignAssembly module makes overlaps on each side of the amplicons.  
 
Only open-source package 
Notably, while the generation of combinatorial libraries is not new, it is new with an open-source 
Python IT tool. As was described earlier no open-source Python tool has been developed to 
accommodate combinatorial library construction. The primary strength of DesignAssembly is the 
fact that it is modular and can be coupled to other IT tools through the Jupyter notebook. One of 
these modularities is also provided in the Jupyter notebook as the NEB Tm calculator that can be 
used to calculate primer melting temperatures. As evidence from many years in the lab, 
researchers and lab technicians prefer some tools over others and will go to extreme measures 
of re-calculating optimal primer annealing temperatures even though it is tedious and 
cumbersome. By being able to use the preferred tool this step of re-calculating both increases 
the usefulness of the open-source tools and to an extent makes them more attractive. 
==PAGE:48==
 
48 
Additionally, this also lessens the time spent making a combinatorial library and frees up time for 
addressing the real questions in biology instead of making repetitive tedious work. Furthermore, 
this modularity has the key feature of enabling researchers to create their workflows and change 
the software to their specific needs.  
5.3 Approaches to automating robot instructions 
Libraries with liquid handlers 
Another critical aspect to discuss from this study is how the results from the combinatorial library 
can be translated into executable instructions for liquid handlers. As libraries increase in size the 
feasibility of making such libraries by the traditional pipetting decreases. In this study, two ways 
of creating executable robot instructions were presented. The first method was called the naive 
method since it uses the same picking pattern regardless of the plate configurations. This means 
a new set of plates custom-designed is needed to perform the task. Despite this additional step 
it is easy to perform this action by anyone. Simply by generating plate configuration into an excel 
file that can be printed out and brought into the lab. Whereas this method is mostly useful for 
making a limited number of PCR reactions it has the functionality to be used directly with a 
DesignAssembly object.  
 
The second method described, focused on making robot instructions by completely skipping 
manual pipetting steps. This method improves on the previous method by making a picklist from 
a pre-configured plate layout. This method is very useful for making a subset of the total PCR 
reactions such as all the reactions with some of the templates but could in principle also be used 
to generate instructions for assembling whole libraries. The code is set up to work with 96-well 
plates but can easily be changed to accommodate 384 plates which would enable the 
construction of the whole SLS library in one single afternoon. Larger libraries can also be made 
by adjusting to code and using the 1536-Well plate class but here specialized equipment may be 
needed for the assembly.  
 
As mentioned in the results, generating instructions specifically for the Flowbot One was the 
focus. Nonetheless, the code can be changed to a desired liquid handler since the basic 
instructions for liquid handlers follow the regiments of source well to the destination well and 
transfer volume. Having the Flowbot One as the focus was decided based on their high prevalence 
in Danish scientific communities. However, the future of liquid handling robots might not be the 
generation of CSV files, since some liquid handling robots such as the Opentron OT-2 feature an 
API. This means that it is possible to access and control the robot through a Python script from 
anywhere. This is not the case yet for all liquid handling robots but could be where the future is 
headed. 
 
Optimizing pipette tip usage 
The last point to discuss is the necessary topic of saving pipette tips. Manufacturing of pipette 
tips can be halted or delayed due to unforeseen circumstances, as everyone experienced with the 
pandemic of 2020 and the obstruction of the Suez Canal in 2021. An environmental and economic 
==PAGE:49==
 
49 
aspect of it is also present and we should do what we can to limit waste and save money for more 
research. The RobotAssembly class has not been optimized for pipette tip consumption, but an 
easy fix could be to add all the necessary PCR mix before or after the template and primers are 
added to the wells. Thus, significantly reducing the number of used pipette tips. Recently 
algorithms have been developed to address this problem by optimizing the use of pipette tips. 
This was done in a linear programming approach where the algorithm would use a single tip for 
all wells with the same content since they would not be cross-contaminated (Sechkar et al., 2021). 
Future work could be directed at optimizing the RobotAssembly class to be optimized for pipette 
usage.  
 
==PAGE:50==
 
50 
6. Conclusions  
This work has contributed to making open-source IT tools to speed up the design phase of the 
DBTL-cycle. More specifically, algorithms and Python code were developed to answer the 
research questions in paragraph “2.4 Research questions”.  
 
The first research question was focused on creating algorithms that can determine and 
standardize genetic parts selection. In the first Jupyter notebook “01-LL-findHomologs” 
(appendix 1) the process of standardizing the selection of homologs was presented. Through the 
specific steps of the algorithm homologs of SLS CYP and CPR were selected. It was shown that 
the algorithm featured flexibility to the filtering process which resulted in interesting candidates 
for the combinatorial library. This flexibility also made it possible to tweak the filtering to get an 
appropriate library size. In the second Jupyter notebook “02-LL-PromoterSelection” (appendix 2), 
it was shown that via the developed algorithm, promoters could be selected from pre-determined 
dynamics. Here, the algorithm could automatically select promoters that had expression 
dynamics such as high/low constitutive expression, as well as increasing/decreasing expression 
over time from absolute mRNA abundances. It was also shown that the algorithm had embedded 
measures for screening the selected parts of homologous regions. 
 
The second research question in this work sought to illuminate the possibility of making 
combinatorial libraries. To this extent, It was shown that by utilizing previously made IT tools and 
combining them in new ways combinatorial libraries could be made. More precisely the data class 
DesignAssembly was developed to encapsulate the whole process of generating combinatorial 
libraries into one object (see appendix 4). Creating combinatorial libraries is exemplified in the 
third Jupyter Notebook “03-LL-CombinatorialLibraries” (appendix 3). The third notebook also 
shows how easy this object can be initiated to generate the necessary primers and PCR reaction 
schemes required for the assembly of the selected combinatorial library. 
 
The last research question that was examined in this work addressed how the generated 
combinatorial library could be translated into executable robot instructions. To address this, the 
RobotAssembly class (appendix 5) was made to automate the generation of liquid handler 
instructions for the Flowbot one. Two methods were developed to generate these instructions: 1) 
the naive approach that could configure plates in a defined way to generate a picklist from a 
DesignAssembly object. 2) the non-naive approach searching over a predefined plate to generate 
a picklist. This was accomplished by changing the source code of the Synbiopython package to 
accommodate Flowbot One instructions (appendix 6).  
 
Ultimately, the thesis depicts how genome engineering can be accelerated using IT tools. On a 
final note, the author hopes that the IT tools developed here will be used to answer further 
biological questions such as experimentally constructing the SLS designs. Finally, the work done 
here motivated new questions and ideas that have the potential to make IT tools even more 
valuable.  
 
==PAGE:51==
 
51 
7. Perspectives 
The set of Jupyter notebooks that accompany this work show how workflows can be made 
through literate programming by mixing executable Python code and text. These workflows are 
by no means the only ones that can be envisioned. I believe that workflows can be made for every 
step of the DBTL-cycle by identifying core workflows.  
 
Imagine that a Jupyter notebook with a workflow for any specific action in the lab, e.g., USER 
cloning, gene knockout, gene integration with combinatorial library design, was readily available 
through a GitHub repository. The notebooks could even be linked through each step and/or mixed 
and matched. The user would download the notebook and input the values needed for that 
specific lab action. The notebook would then generate all the necessary information and 
components to make that transformation and guide the user through all of the steps. This would 
make the user extremely self-sufficient in the lab and could, without much guidance, go into the 
lab and finish the workflow at a high pace. By adopting this idea of having generalized workflows 
on a literate programming platform, errors, as well as knowledge loss, will be reduced. I speak 
from experience that lab protocols usually need an introduction or know-how to reach usable 
results. However, with a workflow in which the user can execute each step before going into the 
lab, this problem would be alleviated. Additionally, all the repetitive tasks that researchers go 
through in a day such as designing primers, ordering primers, calculating master mixes, tracking 
samples to name a few, can be automated, and done in one place. With the Jupyter notebooks, it 
is even possible to control other programs to benefit from their functions such as CLC, Benchling, 
Teselagen. I believe that a unified system such as the literate programming platform of Jupyter 
notebooks has a huge potential to save time and increase the speed at which we engineer biology 
even before we adopt robotics. 
 
The design of combinatorial libraries can be carried out at an accelerated pace with the IT tools 
provided here. Naturally, new questions arise from this initial breakthrough such as “what are the 
next steps?”. An obvious next step is to experimentally build the designs for SLS. This would 
involve ordering primers, templates, preparing reagents and then making the PCRs with or without 
the generated robot instructions, and finally performing the one-pot assembly. After which going 
through the test and learn phase and initiating the next round of designs. It can be advantageous 
to not only pick the best designs from the ML model but also pick the designs that show the 
highest uncertainty in the predictions in the model. This could be used to update the model and 
hopefully generate better predictions in the following rounds. Additionally, new edits could be 
fused into the top strains of the library such as terminators, 5’-UTR hexamers to further fine-tune 
expression and increase Strictosidine yield.  
 
Thermocycler allocation, order of primers, USER cloning 
Further steps could include improving the functionalities of the scripts developed here. A script 
can be improved till the end of time without proper prioritization and it’s therefore important to 
organize according to the level of priority. As I see it, there are some low-hanging fruits that could 
==PAGE:52==
 
52 
be dealt with first. For example, having the functionality of grouping PCR reactions depending on 
the primer pairs' optimal melting temperatures, and the lengths of amplified fragments (since 
they would require different elongation times). The groups could then be made in separate plates 
and run on separate thermocyclers. All of this could be performed automatically by the script 
which would lessen the burden in the lab and speed up the process. 
Another low-hanging fruit in terms of improvement would be to automatically order primers 
through the Jupyter notebook and allocate them to a spot in the freezer thus freeing up time and 
improving traceability. Furthermore, an improvement that would be interesting to pursue is to 
make the DessignAssembly USER compatible. It could be done by changing the way primers are 
generated by adding USER tails. This would effectively free up a significant amount of time for 
many people, considering the fact that most institutions within the relevant Danish research 
landscapes rely on hand-made USER primers. 
 
Homology and genome integration 
Another question regarding cloning efforts and design is rooted in the length required for 
homology arms to facilitate efficient repair of double-stranded breaks from CRISPR/Cas9. The 
most used approach is to use around 500 bp for integrating larger constructs. This could be a 
relic from genetic engineering approaches solely based on homologous recombination. What if 
we could incorporate shorter homology arms of 40 bp that could be integrated into a primer? 
Different efficiencies have been reported with ranges reported of 70-85% for 3-part construct with 
50 bp overlap (Stovicek et al., 2017). Additionally, Ronda et al have reported close to 100% 
efficiencies of three gene expression cassettes with 60 bp overlap (Ronda et al., 2015). By 
Integrating homology arms of 40 bp into the primers of the ends of the constructs, fewer parts 
are needed. Implementing this into the DesignAssembly class is relatively simple and could be 
done much like the pad that is integrated in between the promoters. Nonetheless, before this 
shows as an effective method, it needs to be investigated if assembling >5 parts with shorter 
homology arms is efficient.  
 
New methods of cloning and how the algorithms are relevant in the future (versatility of the 
algorithms) 
The cost of synthesized gene nucleotides become cheaper with the progress of new DNA 
synthesis technologies (Hughes & Ellington, 2017). While the cost of synthesized DNA decreases, 
the need for parts derived through PCRs decreases. Therefore, it's possible that it will be cheaper 
in time spent and effort to synthesize whole combinatorial libraries. This doesn't mean that the 
work here becomes antiquated or outdated. The combinatorial libraries still need to be designed 
and with a few modifications, this could be accommodated in the desired configuration. For 
example, libraries could be made in many plasmids containing DNA parts with appropriate ends 
for homologous recombination. In between these parts, restriction sites could be integrated and 
through a simple restriction enzyme reaction, the parts would be liberated, purified, and used for 
one-pot assembly (see Figure 14).  
==PAGE:53==
 
53 
Figure 14. Cheaper DNA synthesis could mediate genetic parts being ordered in plasmids. The algorithms 
designed in this work could be modified to accommodate that process. The process would start by designing and 
ordering plasmids which would be followed by: 1) Restriction digestion, to free up the parts 2) the now available 
parts would be purified and the combinatorial library would be ready for the next step.  3) A transformation in the 
form of a one-pot assembly into S. cerevisiae could be performed with the combinatorial library. 
 
Fully automated labs 
Finally, with advances in lab automation and IT tool development, we could speed up the DBTL 
cycle with fully automated workflows. For example, the different steps in a workflow could be 
connected and controlled by a robotic arm or multiple. The robotic arm would be able to perform 
simple actions such as taking samples from one piece of specialized equipment to the next 
through a connection by a rail. The robotic arm would then be able to take samples from the 
storage put them into a liquid handler that would mix PCR reactions. Then take the samples to a 
thermocycler, control correct product formation with a Labchip, clean the products, mix all correct 
products. Finally, a one-pot transformation could be performed with S. cerevisiae, and strains 
placed into a Biolector where growth could be continuously monitored. When the cultured cells 
have reached a desired optical density, they could be moved by the robotic arm to a preparation 
station. Here the samples would be divided into the phenotypic analysis i.e., LC-MS and genotypic 
analysis i.e., sequencing. The data generated would then be used for making ML-guided 
predictions of top producers and the design phase could start again. A schematic example of a 
possible configuration as described is shown in Figure 15. 
 
A version of a robotic arm, although anchored to a platform, has been developed and shown to 
be able to perform laboratory tasks (Burger et al., 2020). Nonetheless, having a robotic arm in 
every lab could be some years away. At the time of writing most modern labs are in possession 
of liquid handling robots which can be used for more semi-automatic workflows. This is 
exemplified with a liquid handling robot connected by rail to incubators, enabling high-throughput 
transformation workflows for S. cerevisiae (Liu et al., 2017). In the aforementioned study, Lie et 
al showed that they could produce up to 1200 yeast strains per day and emphasized that these 
==PAGE:54==
 
54 
workflows could be adapted to other liquid handling robots. This shows the flexibility and 
modularity of the method. However, to fully adopt these workflows, each module must be 
thoroughly tested and have a certain level of modularity so new workflows can be incorporated. 
One of the next modules that need to be fully automated is Laboratory Information Management 
System (LIMS). LIMS includes functions such as the ability to track samples in freezers, fridges, 
etc. and this is important for two reasons. Firstly, most workflows will start with accessing 
samples. Secondly, lack of traceability would result in loss of information which is of utmost 
importance when sample sizes increase.  
 
Finally, by standardizing all the workflows and openly sharing results and robot instruction in 
scientific papers, the reproducibility crisis could be solved since a certain procedure could be 
reproduced down to the last detail. Therefore, I see fully automated labs as one of the next steps 
for engineering biology.  
 
Figure 15. Schematic representation of a fully automated workflow where a robotic arm handles samples 
to each specialized station. It would start by handling samples from a freezer, depending on the workflow, 
and would then proceed to a liquid handler, thermocycler, incubation chamber, and so on. The three dots 
indicate that the workflow could be extended to other stations, increasing the possibilities. 
 
Biofoundries  
The idea of making fully automated workflows to produce high-performing cell factories is not 
new and has been adopted by Biofoundries (“About the GBA,” 2019). These Biofoundries are 
established by research institutions all over the world and even DTU Biosustain has established 
one (Biofoundry - DTU Biosustain, n.d.). Commercial companies, such as Gingko Bioworks, are 
also opting for this solution (Carbonell et al., 2016).  
 
To understand how we can make Biofoundries we have to learn from manufacturing disciplines 
where core workflows are pooled together to speed up development and lower costs. By defining 
these workflows and grouping them we could pool the same activities together. Some of these 
core workflows we see in the lab are PCRs, USER-cloning, CRISPR-mediated Knock gene knock-
==PAGE:55==
 
55 
out to name a few and could all be made through Jupyter notebooks. This could for instance 
mean that if 20 people on any given day are doing 500 different PCRs these could effectively be 
pooled and made by a single person or robot. The orchestration of making 20 people cooperate 
to do this is a nightmare but with a meta-analysis of the used Jupyter notebooks, this could be 
achieved automatically. The result of pooling activities together effectively speeds up the 
engineering efforts and could be seen as the start of a Biofoundry. The steps for this process can 
be envisioned as follows:  
 
1. Create Jupyter notebooks with core workflows 
2. Meta-analyze the notebooks 
3. Pool the same activities together 
4. Start of a Biofoundry 
 
However, there are challenges associated with the transition into automated workflows. One 
major obstacle is that researchers are hesitant to adopt new ideas and change their existing 
working habits - especially from a Python perspective. I believe we need a paradigm change, and 
this can be achieved through the education of researchers and cultivating the use of these Python-
based workflows. Using one programming language could accelerate this process and help 
researchers learn from each other and since Python is one of the easiest and most powerful 
languages it could be a possible direction. If this is widely adopted, which I hope, we could be one 
step closer to accelerating genome engineering, harnessing the power of biology, and moving 
toward fully sustainable production.  
 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
56 
References 
 
About the GBA. (2019, November 18). Global Biofoundries Alliance. 
https://biofoundries.org/about-the-gba 
Ajikumar, P. K., Xiao, W.-H., Tyo, K. E. J., Wang, Y., Simeon, F., Leonard, E., Mucha, O., Phon, T. H., 
Pfeifer, B., & Stephanopoulos, G. (2010). Isoprenoid Pathway Optimization for Taxol 
Precursor Overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science, 330(6000), 70–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1191652 
Benchling product release notes, June 2020. (n.d.). Retrieved December 9, 2021, from 
http://help.benchling.com/en/articles/4208812-june-2020-product-release-notes 
Biofoundry—DTU Biosustain. (n.d.). Https://Www.Biosustain.Dtu.Dk. Retrieved December 15, 
2021, from https://www.biosustain.dtu.dk/biofoundry 
Brown, S., Clastre, M., Courdavault, V., & O’Connor, S. E. (2015). De novo production of the plant-
derived alkaloid strictosidine in yeast. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
112(11), 3205–3210. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1423555112 
Built-in magic commands—IPython 8.0.0 documentation. (n.d.). Retrieved January 18, 2022, from 
https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/interactive/magics.html?highlight=%25time#
magic-time 
Burger, B., Maffettone, P. M., Gusev, V. V., Aitchison, C. M., Bai, Y., Wang, X., Li, X., Alston, B. M., 
Li, B., Clowes, R., Rankin, N., Harris, B., Sprick, R. S., & Cooper, A. I. (2020). A mobile 
robotic chemist. Nature, 583(7815), 237–241. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-
2442-2 
Carbonell, P., Currin, A., J. Jervis, A., W. Rattray, N. J., Swainston, N., Yan, C., Takano, E., & 
Breitling, R. (2016). Bioinformatics for the synthetic biology of natural products: 
Integrating across the Design–Build–Test cycle. Natural Product Reports, 33(8), 925–
==PAGE:57==
 
57 
932. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6NP00018E 
Carbonell, P., Jervis, A. J., Robinson, C. J., Yan, C., Dunstan, M., Swainston, N., Vinaixa, M., 
Hollywood, K. A., Currin, A., Rattray, N. J. W., Taylor, S., Spiess, R., Sung, R., Williams, A. 
R., Fellows, D., Stanford, N. J., Mulherin, P., Le Feuvre, R., Barran, P., … Scrutton, N. S. 
(2018). An automated Design-Build-Test-Learn pipeline for enhanced microbial 
production of fine chemicals. Communications Biology, 1(1), 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-018-0076-9 
Cardoso, J. G. R., Jensen, K., Lieven, C., Lærke Hansen, A. S., Galkina, S., Beber, M., Özdemir, E., 
Herrgård, M. J., Redestig, H., & Sonnenschein, N. (2018). Cameo: A Python Library for 
Computer Aided Metabolic Engineering and Optimization of Cell Factories. ACS 
Synthetic Biology, 7(4), 1163–1166. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00423 
Chen, F., Mackey, A. J., Vermunt, J. K., & Roos, D. S. (2007). Assessing Performance of 
Orthology Detection Strategies Applied to Eukaryotic Genomes. PLOS ONE, 2(4), e383. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0000383 
Cloud-Based Informatics Platform for Life Sciences R&D | Benchling. (n.d.). Retrieved November 
5, 2021, from https://www.benchling.com/ 
Cui, L., Ni, X., Ji, Q., Teng, X., Yang, Y., Wu, C., Zekria, D., Zhang, D., & Kai, G. (2015). Co-
overexpression of geraniol-10-hydroxylase and strictosidine synthase improves anti-
cancer drug camptothecin accumulation in Ophiorrhiza pumila. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 
8227. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08227 
Curran, K. A., Karim, A. S., Gupta, A., & Alper, H. S. (2013). Use of High Capacity Terminators in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae to Increase mRNA half-life and Improve Gene Expression 
Control for Metabolic Engineering Applications. Metabolic Engineering, 19, 88–97. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2013.07.001 
d’Espaux, L. (2016). Leodespaux/CASdesigner [Jupyter Notebook]. 
==PAGE:58==
 
58 
https://github.com/Leodespaux/CASdesigner (Original work published 2016) 
Delépine, B., Duigou, T., Carbonell, P., & Faulon, J.-L. (2018). RetroPath2.0: A retrosynthesis 
workflow for metabolic engineers. Metabolic Engineering, 45, 158–170. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2017.12.002 
Design & Build Platform—Teselagen. (n.d.). Retrieved November 11, 2021, from 
https://teselagen.com/design-build-platform/ 
Eckert, C. E., & Trinh, C. T. (2016). Biotechnology for Biofuel Production and Optimization. 
Elsevier. 
Endy, D. (2005). Foundations for engineering biology. Nature, 438(7067), 449–453. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04342 
Fernández-Cabezón, L., Cros, A., & Nikel, P. I. (2019). Evolutionary Approaches for Engineering 
Industrially Relevant Phenotypes in Bacterial Cell Factories. Biotechnology Journal, 14(9), 
1800439. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201800439 
Fox, R. (2019). Accelerating Forward Engineering at Genome Scale. Genetic Engineering & 
Biotechnology News, 39(8), 57–58. https://doi.org/10.1089/gen.39.08.17 
Fox, R. J., Davis, S. C., Mundorff, E. C., Newman, L. M., Gavrilovic, V., Ma, S. K., Chung, L. M., 
Ching, C., Tam, S., Muley, S., Grate, J., Gruber, J., Whitman, J. C., Sheldon, R. A., & 
Huisman, G. W. (2007). Improving catalytic function by ProSAR-driven enzyme evolution. 
Nature Biotechnology, 25(3), 338–344. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt1286 
Fox, R., Roy, A., Govindarajan, S., Minshull, J., Gustafsson, C., Jones, J. T., & Emig, R. (2003). 
Optimizing the search algorithm for protein engineering by directed evolution. Protein 
Engineering, Design and Selection, 16(8), 589–597. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/protein/gzg077 
Hillson, N. J., Rosengarten, R. D., & Keasling, J. D. (2012). J5 DNA Assembly Design Automation 
Software. ACS Synthetic Biology, 1(1), 14–21. https://doi.org/10.1021/sb2000116 
==PAGE:59==
 
59 
Hodgman, C. E., & Jewett, M. C. (2012). Cell-free synthetic biology: Thinking outside the cell. 
Metabolic Engineering, 14(3), 261–269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2011.09.002 
Hughes, R. A., & Ellington, A. D. (2017). Synthetic DNA Synthesis and Assembly: Putting the 
Synthetic in Synthetic Biology. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 9(1), a023812. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a023812 
Ishikawa, H., Colby, D. A., & Boger, D. L. (2008). Direct Coupling of Catharanthine and Vindoline 
to Provide Vinblastine: Total Synthesis of (+)- and ent-(−)-Vinblastine. Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, 130(2), 420–421. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja078192m 
itertools—Documentation. (n.d.). Retrieved December 9, 2021, from 
https://docs.python.org/3/library/itertools.html 
Jiang, L., Huang, L., Cai, J., Xu, Z., & Lian, J. (2021). Functional expression of eukaryotic 
cytochrome P450s in yeast. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 118(3), 1050–1065. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.27630 
Kotopka, B. J., & Smolke, C. D. (2020). Model-driven generation of artificial yeast promoters. 
Nature Communications, 11(1), 2113. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15977-4 
Liu, G., Lanham, C., Buchan, J. R., & Kaplan, M. E. (2017). High-throughput transformation of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae using liquid handling robots. PLOS ONE, 12(3), e0174128. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0174128 
MView < Multiple Sequence Alignment < EMBL-EBI. (n.d.). Retrieved January 15, 2022, from 
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/mview/ 
Naseri, G., & Koffas, M. A. G. (2020). Application of combinatorial optimization strategies in 
synthetic biology. Nature Communications, 11(1), 2446. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
020-16175-y 
Nichio, B. T. L., Marchaukoski, J. N., & Raittz, R. T. (2017). New Tools in Orthology Analysis: A 
Brief Review of Promising Perspectives. Frontiers in Genetics, 8, 165. 
==PAGE:60==
 
60 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2017.00165 
Nielsen, J., & Keasling, J. D. (2016). Engineering Cellular Metabolism. Cell, 164(6), 1185–1197. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.004 
O’Connor, S. E. (2012). Chapter Nine - Strategies for Engineering Plant Natural Products: The 
Iridoid-Derived Monoterpene Indole Alkaloids of Catharanthus roseus. In D. A. Hopwood 
(Ed.), Methods in Enzymology (Vol. 515, pp. 189–206). Academic Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-394290-6.00009-4 
Opentrons Custom Protocols. (n.d.). Opentrons Labworks Inc. Retrieved December 16, 2021, 
from https://shop.opentrons.com/opentrons-custom-protocol-1-expedite-workflow/ 
Pedersen, C. M. (2022). Accelerated forward engineering of metabolic pathways supported by IT 
including machine learning [Master Thesis]. Technical University of Denmark. 
Peng, B., Williams, T. C., Henry, M., Nielsen, L. K., & Vickers, C. E. (2015). Controlling 
heterologous gene expression inyeast cell factories on different carbon substrates and 
across the diauxic shift: Acomparison of yeast promoter activities. Microbial Cell 
Factories, 14(1), 91. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-015-0278-5 
Pereira, F., Azevedo, F., Carvalho, Â., Ribeiro, G. F., Budde, M. W., & Johansson, B. (2015). Pydna: 
A simulation and documentation tool for DNA assembly strategies using python. BMC 
Bioinformatics, 16(1), 142. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-015-0544-x 
Petersen, S. D. (2021a, September). Strictosidine presentation. 
Petersen, S. D. (2021b). 05-SDP-AllLibraries.ipynb—Combinatorial ibrary preparation notebook. 
Petersen, S. D. (2021c). 06-SDP LibCharacterisation.Rmd—R library characterization script. 
Petersen, S. D. (2021d). 06-SDP-DataAnalysis.Rmd—R data analysis scripts. 
Plateo Documentation—Plateo 0.1.0 documentation. (n.d.). Retrieved November 26, 2021, from 
https://edinburgh-genome-foundry.github.io/Plateo/ 
Project Jupyter. (n.d.). Retrieved February 1, 2022, from https://jupyter.org 
==PAGE:61==
 
61 
Raghunathan, S., Prasad, A., Mishra, B. K., & Chang, H. (2005). Open source versus closed 
source: Software quality in monopoly and competitive markets. IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans, 35(6), 903–918. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMCA.2005.853493 
Rajkumar, A. S., Özdemir, E., Lis, A. V., Schneider, K., Qin, J., Jensen, M. K., & Keasling, J. D. 
(2019). Engineered Reversal of Function in Glycolytic Yeast Promoters. ACS Synthetic 
Biology, 8(6), 1462–1468. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00027 
Ronda, C., Maury, J., Jakočiu̅nas, T., Baallal Jacobsen, S. A., Germann, S. M., Harrison, S. J., 
Borodina, I., Keasling, J. D., Jensen, M. K., & Nielsen, A. T. (2015). CrEdit: CRISPR 
mediated multi-loci gene integration in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microbial Cell 
Factories, 14(1), 97. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-015-0288-3 
Sechkar, K., Tuza, Z. A., & Stan, G.-B. (2021). A linear programming-based strategy to save pipette 
tips in automated DNA assembly [Preprint]. Synthetic Biology. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.13.464196 
Sharma, A., Verma, P., Mathur, A., & Mathur, A. K. (2018). Overexpression of tryptophan 
decarboxylase and strictosidine synthase enhanced terpenoid indole alkaloid pathway 
activity and antineoplastic vinblastine biosynthesis in Catharanthus roseus. 
Protoplasma, 255(5), 1281–1294. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-018-1233-1 
Spotnitz, R. (1998). Literate programming. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 22(12), 1745–
1747. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0098-1354(98)00029-5 
Stovicek, V., Holkenbrink, C., & Borodina, I. (2017). CRISPR/Cas system for yeast genome 
engineering: Advances and applications. FEMS Yeast Research, 17(5). 
https://doi.org/10.1093/femsyr/fox030 
Sun, J., Shao, Z., Zhao, H., Nair, N., Wen, F., Xu, J.-H., & Zhao, H. (2012). Cloning and 
characterization of a panel of constitutive promoters for applications in pathway 
==PAGE:62==
 
62 
engineering in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 109(8), 
2082–2092. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.24481 
Weinhandl, K., Winkler, M., Glieder, A., & Camattari, A. (2014). Carbon source dependent 
promoters in yeasts. Microbial Cell Factories, 13(1), 5. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-
2859-13-5 
Yang, K., Stracquadanio, G., Luo, J., Boeke, J. D., & Bader, J. S. (2016). BioPartsBuilder: A 
synthetic biology tool for combinatorial assembly of biological parts. Bioinformatics, 
32(6), 937–939. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv664 
YeastMine: Home. (n.d.). Retrieved December 6, 2021, from 
https://yeastmine.yeastgenome.org/yeastmine/begin.do 
Yeoh, J., Swainston, N., Vegh, P., Zulkower, V., Carbonell, P., Holowko, M., Peddinti, G., & Poh, C. 
L. (2021). SynBiopython: An open-source software library for Synthetic Biology. Synthetic 
Biology, 6. https://doi.org/10.1093/synbio/ysab001 
Yu, X., Xu, J., Liu, X., Chu, X., Wang, P., Tian, J., Wu, N., & Fan, Y. (2015). Identification of a highly 
efficient stationary phase promoter in Bacillus subtilis. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 18405. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep18405 
Zhang, J., Petersen, S. D., Radivojevic, T., Ramirez, A., Pérez-Manríquez, A., Abeliuk, E., Sánchez, 
B. J., Costello, Z., Chen, Y., Fero, M. J., Martin, H. G., Nielsen, J., Keasling, J. D., & Jensen, 
M. K. (2020). Combining mechanistic and machine learning models for predictive 
engineering and optimization of tryptophan metabolism. Nature Communications, 11(1), 
4880. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17910-1 
Zulkower, V., & Rosser, S. (2020). DNA Chisel, a versatile sequence optimizer. Bioinformatics, 
36(16), 4508–4509. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa558 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
63 
Appendices 
Appendix 1. Jupyter notebook 1 - Homolog selection 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
64 
==PAGE:65==
 
65 
==PAGE:66==
 
66 
==PAGE:67==
 
67 
==PAGE:68==
 
68 
==PAGE:69==
 
69 
==PAGE:70==
 
70 
==PAGE:71==
 
71 
==PAGE:72==
 
72 
==PAGE:73==
 
73 
==PAGE:74==
 
74 
==PAGE:75==
 
75 
==PAGE:76==
 
76 
==PAGE:77==
 
77 
==PAGE:78==
 
78 
==PAGE:79==
 
79 
==PAGE:80==
 
80 
==PAGE:81==
 
81 
==PAGE:82==
 
82 
==PAGE:83==
 
83 
==PAGE:84==
 
84 
==PAGE:85==
 
85 
==PAGE:86==
 
86 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
87 
Appendix 2. Jupyter notebook 2 - Promoter selection
 
==PAGE:88==
 
88 
==PAGE:89==
 
89 
==PAGE:90==
 
90 
==PAGE:91==
 
91 
==PAGE:92==
 
92 
==PAGE:93==
 
93 
==PAGE:94==
 
94 
==PAGE:95==
 
95 
==PAGE:96==
 
96 
==PAGE:97==
 
97 
==PAGE:98==
 
98 
==PAGE:99==
 
99 
==PAGE:100==
 
100 
==PAGE:101==
 
101 
==PAGE:102==
 
102 
==PAGE:103==
 
103 
==PAGE:104==
 
104 
==PAGE:105==
 
105 
==PAGE:106==
 
106 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
107 
 
Appendix 3. Jupyter notebook 3 - Combinatorial library generation 
 
==PAGE:108==
 
108 
==PAGE:109==
 
109 
==PAGE:110==
 
110 
==PAGE:111==
 
111 
==PAGE:112==
 
112 
==PAGE:113==
 
113 
==PAGE:114==
 
114 
==PAGE:115==
 
115 
==PAGE:116==
 
116 
==PAGE:117==
 
117 
==PAGE:118==
 
118 
==PAGE:119==
 
119 
==PAGE:120==
 
120 
==PAGE:121==
 
121 
==PAGE:122==
 
122 
==PAGE:123==
 
123 
==PAGE:124==
 
124 
==PAGE:125==
 
125 
==PAGE:126==
 
126 
==PAGE:127==
 
127 
==PAGE:128==
 
128 
==PAGE:129==
 
129 
 
 
 
==PAGE:130==
 
130 
 
Appendix 4. DesignAssembly.py 
# For primer TM function 
import requests 
import json 
 
# For Design assembly function 
import IPython.core.display 
import subprocess 
import os 
import pathlib 
import itertools 
import string 
import numpy as np 
import pandas as pd 
import pydna 
import Bio 
import Bio.SeqRecord 
import Bio.Seq 
import Bio.SeqFeature 
import utils 
import pydna.editor 
import pydna.primer 
import pydna.dseqrecord 
import pydna.amplify 
import pydna.assembly 
import pydna.gel 
from pydna.design import primer_design 
from pydna.dseqrecord import Dseqrecord 
from pydna.design import assembly_fragments 
from pydna.assembly import Assembly 
import itertools 
from pydna.tm import tm_default as _tm_default 
 
# For anealing temp 
from Bio.SeqUtils import MeltingTemp as mt 
from Bio.Seq import Seq 
# For automating part 
import synbiopython.lab_automation as lab 
 
==PAGE:131==
 
131 
 
 
def primer_TM_NEB(primer1: str): 
 
    #TMCalculator: find melting temperature and annealing temperature 
    url = 'https://tmapi.neb.com/tm/batch' 
 
    #Define if it is a primer pair or single primer 
    seqpairs = [[primer1]] 
 
    input = { 
        "seqpairs": seqpairs, 
        'conc': 0.5, 
        'prodcode': "onetaqhs-2" 
    } 
    headers = {'content-type' : 'application/json'} 
    res = requests.post(url, data=json.dumps(input), headers=headers) 
    r = json.loads(res.content) 
 
    #Print TM and maybe Ta + possible error messages 
    if r['success']: 
        for row in r['data']: 
            return row['tm1'] 
    else: 
        print('request failed') 
        print(r['error'][0]) 
 
 
 
def CombinatorialListMaker(listOflist_that_is_being_made_into_all_combinations):  
    ''' Makes all possible combinations from a list of list'''  
    combinations = list(itertools.product(*listOflist_that_is_being_made_into_all_combinations)) 
     
    return combinations 
 
def systematic_names_function(List_of_list_parts:list): 
    ''' Returns a list of list with systematic names i.e [1,1,1], [1,2,1]... etc''' 
     
    #The number of parts of each fragment 
    no_parts = [int(len(l)) for l in List_of_list_parts] 
 
==PAGE:132==
 
132 
    ### For naming the strains systematically ### basicly making a list from the number of parts 
with indexes  
    list_of_systematic = [] 
    midlertidiglist = [] 
    for parts in no_parts:  
        for j in range(0,parts):  
            midlertidiglist.append(j+1) 
        list_of_systematic.append(midlertidiglist) 
        midlertidiglist = [] 
 
    # Then we use itertools to make the right combinations 
    combinatorial_list_of_indexes = list(itertools.product(*list_of_systematic)) 
     
    return combinatorial_list_of_indexes 
 
def EmptyListMaker(list_of_sequences:list): 
    ''' returns empty list in the length of seqs''' 
    EmptyList = [[] for i in range(len(list_of_sequences))] 
     
    return EmptyList 
 
def SimpleAmpliconMaker(list_of_seqs:list, list_of_names:list):  
    ''' Calculates amplicons, updates their names''' 
    # Start by making an empty list 
    list_of_amplicons = [[] for i in range(len(list_of_seqs))] 
    list_of_amplicon_primers = [[] for i in range(len(list_of_seqs))] 
    list_of_amplicon_primer_temps = [[] for i in range(len(list_of_seqs))] 
 
    ### HERE WE CALCULATE Amplicons, primers, and their temperatures 
     
    # Then we calculate the primers with the NEB calculator 
    for i in range(0,len(list_of_seqs)): 
        for j in range(0, len(list_of_seqs[i])):  
            # Append Amplicons 
            amplicons = primer_design(list_of_seqs[i][j],tm_func=_tm_default,  target_tm = 56.0, limit 
= 13)   ############## Can add NEB Calculator here: primer_TM _tm_default i.e tm_func = 
_tm_default, 
             
            # Updating names 
            amplicons.name = list_of_names[i][j] 
            list_of_amplicons[i].append(amplicons) 
             
==PAGE:133==
 
133 
            # Save the primers 
            primers = (amplicons.forward_primer.seq, amplicons.forward_primer.seq) 
            list_of_amplicon_primers[i].append(primers) 
             
            # Save melting temps 
            melting_temps = 
(_tm_default(amplicons.forward_primer.seq),_tm_default(amplicons.reverse_primer.seq)) 
            list_of_amplicon_primer_temps[i].append(melting_temps) 
 
    return list_of_amplicons, list_of_amplicon_primers, list_of_amplicon_primer_temps 
 
 
def GetPrimers(List_of_assemblies:list, combinatorial_list_of_names:list, 
combinatorial_list_of_primer_tm:list):  
    '''Returns a list of primers from combinatorial library with ''' 
    primers_temporary = [] 
    primers = [] 
 
    counter = 0 
    for i in range(0,len(List_of_assemblies)): 
        for j in range(0, len(List_of_assemblies[i])): 
            counter += 1 
                # Names 
            List_of_assemblies[i][j].name =  combinatorial_list_of_names[i][j] 
                # Primers 
                  #description ------ DESCRIBES what other part it overlaps------------- 
            if j == 0:   # START OF THE ASSEMBLY 
                List_of_assemblies[i][j].forward_primer.description='Anneals to 
'+str(List_of_assemblies[i][j].name)  
                List_of_assemblies[i][j].reverse_primer.description='Anneals to '+ 
str(List_of_assemblies[i][j].name)+', overlaps to '+ str(List_of_assemblies[i][j+1].name)                                              
            if j > 0 and j < len(List_of_assemblies[i])-1: #      # THE rest: 
                List_of_assemblies[i][j].forward_primer.description='Anneals to 
'+str(List_of_assemblies[i][j].name+', overlaps to '+ str(List_of_assemblies[i][j-1].name))    
                List_of_assemblies[i][j].reverse_primer.description='Anneals to 
'+str(List_of_assemblies[i][j].name+', overlaps to '+ str(List_of_assemblies[i][j+1].name))  
            if j == len(List_of_assemblies[i])-1: # THE END OF THE ASSEMBLY 
                List_of_assemblies[i][j].forward_primer.description='Anneals to 
'+str(List_of_assemblies[i][j].name)+', overlaps to '+ str(List_of_assemblies[i][j-1].name)  
                List_of_assemblies[i][j].reverse_primer.description='Anneals to '+ 
str(List_of_assemblies[i][j].name)                                                                                                                              
 
==PAGE:134==
 
134 
            #template it aneals to  
            List_of_assemblies[i][j].forward_primer.name = str(List_of_assemblies[i][j].name) 
            List_of_assemblies[i][j].reverse_primer.name = str(List_of_assemblies[i][j].name)  
 
            # Primer tm 
            List_of_assemblies[i][j].forward_primer.features 
=round(float(combinatorial_list_of_primer_tm[i][j][0]), 2)  
            List_of_assemblies[i][j].reverse_primer.features 
=round(float(combinatorial_list_of_primer_tm[i][j][1]),2) 
 
            fwd_rev_primers = [List_of_assemblies[i][j].forward_primer, 
List_of_assemblies[i][j].reverse_primer] 
            primers_temporary.append(fwd_rev_primers) 
 
 
        primers.append(primers_temporary) 
        primers_temporary = [] 
 
 
    return primers 
 
 
def AssemblyMaker(combinatorial_list_of_amplicons:list): 
    ''' Assembles Amplicons with pad and makes new overlapping primers''' 
 
    List_of_assemblies = [] 
    for i in range(0, len(combinatorial_list_of_amplicons)):  
        List_of_assemblies.append(assembly_fragments(combinatorial_list_of_amplicons[i], 
overlap=35, maxlink=40)) 
     
    return List_of_assemblies 
 
 
def UniquePrimers(primers:list, list_of_assemblies):     
 
    unikke_F_primers = [] 
    unikke_R_primers = [] 
    length_of_unique_primers = 0 
    counter = 0 
    primer_list = [] 
 
    for i in range(0, len(primers)): 
==PAGE:135==
 
135 
        for j in range(0, len(primers[i])): 
            counter += len(primers[i][j]) 
            if  primers[i][j][0] not in unikke_F_primers:  
                unikke_F_primers.append(primers[i][j][0]) 
            if  primers[i][j][1] not in unikke_R_primers:  
                unikke_R_primers.append(primers[i][j][1]) 
     
    counter = 0 
    unique_forward_primers = [] 
    unique_reverse_primers = [] 
     
     
    ### CHANGING THE NAMES OF THE PRIMERS 
    for i in range(len(unikke_F_primers)): 
        counter += 1 
        unikke_F_primers[i].id = 'F{number:03}'.format(number = counter) 
        length_of_unique_primers += len(unikke_F_primers[i].seq) 
        U_f_primers = [unikke_F_primers[i].id,unikke_F_primers[i].name,unikke_F_primers[i].seq, 
unikke_F_primers[i].features,len(unikke_F_primers[i].seq),len(unikke_F_primers[i].seq)*1.8  ] 
        unique_forward_primers.append(U_f_primers) 
 
    for i in range(len(unikke_R_primers)):  
        counter += 1 
        unikke_R_primers[i].id = 'R{number:03}'.format(number = counter) 
        length_of_unique_primers += len(unikke_R_primers[i].seq) 
        U_r_primers = [unikke_R_primers[i].id,unikke_R_primers[i].name,unikke_R_primers[i].seq, 
unikke_R_primers[i].features,len(unikke_R_primers[i].seq),len(unikke_R_primers[i].seq)*1.8] 
        unique_reverse_primers.append(U_r_primers) 
         
    primer_list = unique_forward_primers +  unique_reverse_primers # cOULD CONCATONATE 
THEM INTO: unique_forward_primers + unique_reverse_primers 
     
                ### Updating primer names and removing duplicates? 
    for i in range(0, len(list_of_assemblies)): 
        for j in range(0, len(list_of_assemblies[i])): 
            for l in range(0, len(unikke_F_primers)): 
                if list_of_assemblies[i][j].forward_primer.seq == unikke_F_primers[l].seq:  
                    list_of_assemblies[i][j].forward_primer = unikke_F_primers[l] 
            for m in range(0, len(unique_reverse_primers)): 
                if list_of_assemblies[i][j].reverse_primer.seq == unikke_R_primers[m].seq:  
                    list_of_assemblies[i][j].reverse_primer = unikke_R_primers[m] 
                     
==PAGE:136==
 
136 
                     
    return primer_list 
 
def UniqueAmplicons(list_of_assemblies:list):     
    ### Unique amplicons 
    unique_amplicons = [] 
    for i in range(0, len(list_of_assemblies)): 
        for j in range(0, len(list_of_assemblies[i])): 
            if list_of_assemblies[i][j] not in unique_amplicons:  
                unique_amplicons.append(list_of_assemblies[i][j]) 
                 
    return unique_amplicons 
 
def MakingAssemblyObjects(list_of_assemblies:list):     
    ''' 
    Assembling amplicons into assembling class that shows fragments, limit,  
    nodes and which algorithm that was used for assembling. THe printout is not so  
    ''' 
    list_of_assembly_objects = [] 
    for i in range(0, len(list_of_assemblies)):  
          list_of_assembly_objects.append(Assembly((list_of_assemblies[i]),limit=35)) 
 
    return list_of_assembly_objects 
 
 
 
def MakingAssembledContigs(list_of_assembly_objects:list): 
    ''' 
    Takes in a list of assembly object 
    This assembles the contigs into a continous contig 
    ''' 
    contigs_assembled = [] 
    for j in range(0, len(list_of_assembly_objects)):  
        contigs_assembled.append(list_of_assembly_objects[j].assemble_linear()) 
 
    return list_of_assembly_objects 
 
 
class DesignAssembly: 
    """Class representing a combinatorial design library of chosen constructs. 
     
    Input: 
==PAGE:137==
 
137 
    :param list_of_seqs: A list of list of a construct of choice. 
    :param list_of_names: A list of list of the names wanted for the construct of choice. 
    :param pad: Volume to be transferred, expressed in liters. 
    :param position_of_pad: A dict containing any useful information about the transfer. 
        This information can be used later e.g. as parameters for the printing out primers,PCRs 
needed 
        for the construction of the library 
     
    Design_output: 
    The rest of the parameters are generated from the initial such as:  
    :param list_of_amplicons 
    :param systematic_names 
    :param combinatorial_list_of_amplicons 
    :param combinatorial_list_of_names 
    :param combinatorial_list_of_primer_tm 
    :param list_of_assemblies 
    :param primers 
    :param unique_primers 
    :param unique_amplicons 
 
    """ 
 
    def __init__(self, list_of_seqs:list,list_of_names:list, pad:str, position_of_pad:int): 
         
        ###  1.INITIALIZING ## 
        self.list_of_seqs = list_of_seqs 
        self.list_of_names = list_of_names 
        self.pad = pad 
        self.position_of_pad = position_of_pad 
         
        ### 2. Amplicons, primers, and their temperatures 
        self.list_of_amplicons, self.list_of_amplicon_primers, self.list_of_amplicon_primer_temps = 
SimpleAmpliconMaker(self.list_of_seqs, self.list_of_names) 
         
        # Systematic names 
        self.systematic_names = systematic_names_function(self.list_of_seqs) 
         
        ### 3. COMBINATORIAL LISTS 
        self.combinatorial_list_of_amplicons = CombinatorialListMaker(self.list_of_amplicons) 
        self.combinatorial_list_of_names = CombinatorialListMaker(self.list_of_names) 
        self.combinatorial_list_of_primer_tm = 
CombinatorialListMaker(self.list_of_amplicon_primer_temps) 
==PAGE:138==
 
138 
 
        # Making the combinations into a list so we can insert PADS later (They are tuples at this 
stage, and insert doesnt work for tuples) 
        for i in range(0, len(self.combinatorial_list_of_amplicons)):  
            self.combinatorial_list_of_amplicons[i] = list(self.combinatorial_list_of_amplicons[i]) 
             
        #### 4. Adding PAD ###  
#         protospacer = Dseqrecord(self.pad) 
        for i in range(0, len(self.combinatorial_list_of_amplicons)):  
            self.combinatorial_list_of_amplicons[i].insert(self.position_of_pad, self.pad) 
         
        ### 5. Assembling and making overlapping primers 
        self.list_of_assemblies = AssemblyMaker(self.combinatorial_list_of_amplicons) 
         
        ### 6. GETTING all primers, annotating, adding features  
        self.primers = GetPrimers(self.list_of_assemblies, self.combinatorial_list_of_names, 
self.combinatorial_list_of_primer_tm) 
         
        ### 7. Getting Unique primers and re-annotating list_assemblies to get right names 
        self.unique_primers = UniquePrimers(self.primers,self.list_of_assemblies)    # OLD 
FUNCTION 
#         self.unique_primers = UniquePrimers1(self.primers,self.list_of_assemblies )    # New 
function 
         
        ### 8. Unique amplicons 
        self.unique_amplicons = UniqueAmplicons(self.list_of_assemblies) 
         
 
    ########################################################## 
    ###################  CLASS METHODS  ###################### 
 
    def ShowContigs(self): 
        ''' Returns a string of the contigs generated by the assembly''' 
        print('Template, Primer, tm') 
        for i in range(0, len(self.list_of_assemblies)): 
            print('\nContig' + str(self.systematic_names[i])) 
            for j in range(0, len(self.list_of_assemblies[i])): 
                print('Template: ',self.list_of_assemblies[i][j].name[0:15])#, '\t', 
self.primers[i][j][0].name,'\t',self.primers[i][j][0].features) 
        return  
 
    def print_primer_list(self):  
==PAGE:139==
 
139 
        """Return the list of transfers in human-readable format.""" 
        for primers in self.unique_primers:  
            print(primers) 
     
    def primer_list_to_dataframe(self):  
        """Return a pandas dataframe with list of primers.""" 
        df = pd.DataFrame(self.unique_primers) 
        df.columns =['ID', 'Anneals to', 'Sequence', 'Annealing temperature', 'Length', 'Price(DKK)'] 
 
        return df 
 
    def print_PCR_list(self):  
        ''' Prints PCR_list''' 
        print('PCR#, Template,forward_primer, reverse primer, F_tm, R_tm') 
        for i in range(0,len(self.unique_amplicons)): 
            print('PCR{number}'.format(number = i+1),',',self.unique_amplicons[i].name,',', 
self.unique_amplicons[i].forward_primer.id,',', self.unique_amplicons[i].reverse_primer.id,',', 
self.unique_amplicons[i].forward_primer.features,',', 
self.unique_amplicons[i].reverse_primer.features) 
     
    def PCR_list_to_dataframe(self): 
        ''' Prints PCR_list into a pandas dataframe''' 
        dataframe_list = []         
        for i in range(0,len(self.unique_amplicons)): 
            lst = ['PCR{number}'.format(number = i+1),self.unique_amplicons[i].name, 
self.unique_amplicons[i].forward_primer.id, self.unique_amplicons[i].reverse_primer.id, 
self.unique_amplicons[i].forward_primer.features,self.unique_amplicons[i].reverse_primer.featur
es] 
            dataframe_list.append(lst) 
             
        df = pd.DataFrame(dataframe_list) 
        df.columns =['PCR#', 'Template', 'forward_primer', 'reverse_primer', 'F_tm','R_tm'] 
         
        return df 
     
    def GraphicalRepresentationOfAssemblies(self): 
        ''' 
        Takes in the assembly object and returns graphical rep  
        of the fragments assembled 
        ''' 
        graphical_representation = [self.assembly_object[x].assemble_linear()[0].figure() for x in 
range(0,len(self.assembly_object))] 
==PAGE:140==
 
140 
 
        return  graphical_representation 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:141==
 
141 
Appendix 5. RobotAssembly.py 
# For primer TM function 
import requests 
import json 
 
# For Design assembly function 
import IPython.core.display 
import subprocess 
import os 
import pathlib 
import itertools 
import string 
import numpy as np 
import pandas as pd 
import pydna 
import Bio 
import Bio.SeqRecord 
import Bio.Seq 
import Bio.SeqFeature 
import utils 
import pydna.editor 
import pydna.primer 
import pydna.dseqrecord 
import pydna.amplify 
import pydna.assembly 
import pydna.gel 
from pydna.design import primer_design 
from pydna.dseqrecord import Dseqrecord 
from pydna.design import assembly_fragments 
from pydna.assembly import Assembly 
import itertools 
from pydna.tm import tm_default as _tm_default 
 
# For anealing temp 
from Bio.SeqUtils import MeltingTemp as mt 
from Bio.Seq import Seq 
# For automating part 
import synbiopython.lab_automation as lab 
 
 
def well_keys_96(row = True): 
==PAGE:142==
 
142 
    ''' 
    If true it generates keys for a 96 well plate by row. 
    else it does it by coloumn 
    ''' 
    key_list = 'ABCDEFGH' 
 
    if row == True:  
        wells_keys = [] 
        for i in range(0,len(key_list)): 
            for j in range(1,13): 
                wells_keys.append(key_list[i]+str(j)) 
         
    else:  
        wells_keys = [] 
        for i in range(1,13):  
            for j in range(0,len(key_list)): 
                wells_keys.append(str(key_list[j])+str(i)) 
 
    return wells_keys 
 
well_keys = well_keys_96() 
 
 
def AddPrimersToPlates(unikke_amplicons, start = 0, end = 96): 
     
    # Getting keys for wells 
    well_keys = well_keys_96() 
     
    # Initializing plate with platetype and name 
    source_plate1 = lab.Plate96(name="1") # Forward primers 
    source_plate2 = lab.Plate96(name="2") # Reverse primers 
    source_plate3 = lab.Plate96(name="3") # Templates  
    source_plate4 = lab.Plate2x4(name="4") # PCR mix and H20 
     
    # Calculate the needed volume and adding a little extra to be sure there is enough mixture 
    volume_needed = len(unikke_amplicons)+1 
     
    # Going through the amplicons to and creating virtual plates 
    ############## By changing the slicing the user can make different plates i.e 97-192 or 
193-284 etc. #" 
    for i in range(0, len(unikke_amplicons[start:end])): 
        #Forward primer plate 
==PAGE:143==
 
143 
        
source_plate1[well_keys[i]].add_content({unikke_amplicons[i].forward_primer.id:1},volume=5) 
        # Reverse primer plate 
        
source_plate2[well_keys[i]].add_content({unikke_amplicons[i].reverse_primer.id:1},volume=5 ) 
        # Template plate 
        source_plate3[well_keys[i]].add_content({unikke_amplicons[i].name:1},volume=5) 
         
        # PCRMIX and H2O plate  
        source_plate4["A1"].add_content({'PCR_2x_mix':10},volume = volume_needed*10) 
        source_plate4["A2"].add_content({'H2O_MQ':10},volume = volume_needed*7) 
         
    return source_plate1, source_plate2, source_plate3, source_plate4 
 
 
def PickListen(unikke_amplicons, source_plate1, source_plate2, source_plate3, source_plate4, 
start = 0, end = 96): 
 
    # Initalizing destination plate and picklistObject:  
    destination_plate = lab.Plate96(name="5") 
    picklist = lab.PickList() 
     
    # Going through the amplicons to and creating virtual plates 
    ############## By changing the slicing the user can make different plates i.e 97-192 or 
193-284 etc. #" 
    for i in range(0, len(unikke_amplicons[start:end])): 
        # F_primers 
        transfer_forward_primers = lab.Transfer(source_plate1.wells[well_keys[i]], 
destination_plate.wells[well_keys[i]], 1 ) 
        picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_forward_primers) 
 
        # R_primers 
        transfer_reverse_primers = lab.Transfer(source_plate2.wells[well_keys[i]], 
destination_plate.wells[well_keys[i]], 1) 
        picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_reverse_primers) 
 
        # Templates 
        transfer_templates = lab.Transfer(source_plate3.wells[well_keys[i]], 
destination_plate.wells[well_keys[i]], 1 ) 
        picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_templates) 
 
    # Find out which wells have primers+templates in them 
==PAGE:144==
 
144 
    used_wells = [] 
    for well in destination_plate.iter_wells(): 
        if well.volume > 0: 
            used_wells.append(well.name) 
 
    # Then we add the PCR AND H20 in the end         
    for i in range(0, len(used_wells)):  
    #     PCR_mix 
        transfer_PCR_mix = 
lab.Transfer(source_plate4.wells['A1'],destination_plate.wells[used_wells[i]], 10 ) 
        picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_PCR_mix) 
 
    for j in range(0, len(used_wells)):  
        # H2O 
        H20 = lab.Transfer(source_plate4.wells['A2'],destination_plate.wells[used_wells[j]], 7 ) 
        picklist.add_transfer(transfer = H20) 
 
    return picklist 
 
def MakeVirtualPlatesFromDF(f_primers:list, r_primers:list, templates:list, 
Dataframe_with_PCR_contents):  
     
    #initializing  
    source_plate1 = lab.Plate96(name="1") # Forward primers 
    source_plate2 = lab.Plate96(name="2") # Reverse primers 
    source_plate3 = lab.Plate96(name="3") # Templates  
    source_plate4 = lab.Plate2x4(name="4") # PCR mix and H20 
    well_keys = well_keys_96() 
    volume_needed = len(Dataframe_with_PCR_contents)+1 
     
    # Adding each primer/template to the virtual plates 
    for i in range(0,len(f_primers)): 
        source_plate1[well_keys[i]].add_content({f_primers[i]:1},volume= 5.0) 
    for j in range(0,len(r_primers)): 
        source_plate2[well_keys[j]].add_content({r_primers[j]:1},volume= 5.0) 
    for k in range(0,len(templates)): 
        source_plate3[well_keys[k]].add_content({templates[k]:1},volume= 5.0 ) 
 
    # Adding MM and H2O to the final plate 
    source_plate4["A1"].add_content({'PCR_2x_mix':10},volume = volume_needed*10) 
    source_plate4["A2"].add_content({'H2O_MQ':10},volume = volume_needed*7) 
     
==PAGE:145==
 
145 
    return source_plate1, source_plate2, source_plate3, source_plate4 
 
 
def PicklistFromPlates(F_primer_plate, R_primer_plate, Templates_plate, MM_H20_plate, 
PCR_dataframe): 
    FORWARD_PRIMERS = F_primer_plate.to_pandas_dataframe() 
    REVERSE_PRIMERS = R_primer_plate.to_pandas_dataframe() 
    TEMPLATES = Templates_plate.to_pandas_dataframe() 
    MM_H2O = MM_H20_plate.to_pandas_dataframe() 
     
    destination_plate = lab.Plate96(name="5") 
    picklist = lab.PickList() 
    counter = 0 
 
    # FIRST WE CHECK WICH COMPONENTS WE NEED FOR THE PCRs 
    for index,row in PCR_dataframe.iterrows(): 
        templates = row['Template'] 
        f_primers = row['forward_primer'] 
        r_primers = row['reverse_primer'] 
 
        # FORWARD PRIMERS 
        # we see if we can find the primer we need in the primer plate and if we find it we will add it 
to the picklist 
        for index1, row1 in FORWARD_PRIMERS.iterrows(): 
            for k, v in  row1['content']['quantities'].items():  
                if k == f_primers:  
                    transfer_forward_primers = lab.Transfer(F_primer_plate.wells[index1], 
destination_plate.wells[well_keys[counter]], 1 ) 
                    picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_forward_primers) 
 
        # REVERSE PRIMERS 
        # we see if we can find the primer we need in the primer plate  
        for index2, row2 in REVERSE_PRIMERS.iterrows(): 
            for k, v in row2['content']['quantities'].items():  
                if k == r_primers:  
                    transfer_reverse_primers = lab.Transfer(R_primer_plate.wells[index2], 
destination_plate.wells[well_keys[counter]], 1 ) 
                    picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_reverse_primers) 
 
        # TEMPLATE 
        # we see if we can find the primer we need in the plate  
        for index3, row3 in TEMPLATES.iterrows(): 
==PAGE:146==
 
146 
            for k, v in row3['content']['quantities'].items():  
                if k == templates:  
                    transfer_template = lab.Transfer(Templates_plate.wells[index3], 
destination_plate.wells[well_keys[counter]], 1 ) 
                    picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_template) 
 
        # Master mix 
        transfer_MM = lab.Transfer(MM_H20_plate.wells['A1'], 
destination_plate.wells[well_keys[counter]], 10 ) 
        picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_MM) 
        #H20 
        transfer_H20 = lab.Transfer(MM_H20_plate.wells['A2'], 
destination_plate.wells[well_keys[counter]], 7 ) 
        picklist.add_transfer(transfer = transfer_H20) 
         
        # TO MAKE SURE WE ADD TO THE CORRECT WELL                       
        counter += 1 
     
     
    return picklist 
 
class RobotAssembly: 
    """Class to generate instructions for robot on demand. It can be initialized in two ways:  
    1. Use a design assembly object  
    2. Pandas dataframe with PCRs and Pandas dataframe with Forward and Reverse primers, 
and Template  
     
    Input: 
    :param DesignAssembly_object 
    :param Pandas_dataframe_PCR 
    :param  
     
    Robot_output:  
    :param  self.source_plateF_primers, self.source_plateR_primers, self.source_plateTemplates, 
self.source_platePCRmix = sourceplate objets 
    :param  self.picklist  
    """ 
 
    def __init__(self, DesignAssembly_object = None, Pandas_dataframe_PCR = None, 
F_primers:list=None, R_primers:list = None, Templates:list = None): 
         
        ###  1.INITIALIZING ## 
==PAGE:147==
 
147 
         
        ######################## Naive assembly ############################ 
        if DesignAssembly_object is not None and Pandas_dataframe_PCR is None and F_primers 
is None and R_primers is None and Templates is None:  
            # Making virtual plates 
            self.source_plateF_primers, self.source_plateR_primers, self.source_plateTemplates, 
self.source_platePCRmix = AddPrimersToPlates(DesignAssembly_object.unique_amplicons) 
     
            # Generating Picklist from virtual plates 
            self.picklist = PickListen(DesignAssembly_object.unique_amplicons, 
self.source_plateF_primers, self.source_plateR_primers, self.source_plateTemplates, 
self.source_platePCRmix) 
         
        ######################## Assembly from plates 
############################ 
        if Pandas_dataframe_PCR is not None and F_primers is not None and R_primers is not 
None and Templates is not None: 
            # Initializing instances 
            self.pandas_PCR = Pandas_dataframe_PCR 
            self.forward_primers = F_primers 
            self.reverse_primers = R_primers 
            self.templates = Templates 
             
            #Virtual plates 
            self.source_plateF_primers, self.source_plateR_primers, self.source_plateTemplates, 
self.source_platePCRmix = MakeVirtualPlatesFromDF( self.forward_primers, 
self.reverse_primers, self.templates, self.pandas_PCR) 
             
            # Generating Picklist from virtual plates 
            self.picklist = PicklistFromPlates(self.source_plateF_primers, self.source_plateR_primers, 
self.source_plateTemplates, self.source_platePCRmix, self.pandas_PCR) 
             
             
             
        ######################## ERROR input messages ######################## 
Some std error messages 
        if DesignAssembly_object is not None and F_primers is not None:  
            print('There seems to be a mistake with the input. Try agian. Remember you can only use 
amplicons or Dataframes for robot instructions') 
        if DesignAssembly_object is not None and R_primers is not None: 
            print('There seems to be a mistake with the input. Try agian. Remember you can only use 
amplicons or Dataframes for robot instructions') 
==PAGE:148==
 
148 
        if DesignAssembly_object is not None and Templates is not None:  
            print('There seems to be a mistake with the input. Try agian. Remember you can only use 
amplicons or Dataframes for robot instructions') 
        if DesignAssembly_object is not None and Pandas_dataframe_PCR is not None:  
            print('There seems to be a mistake with the input. Try agian. Remember you can only use 
amplicons or Dataframes for robot instructions') 
     
     
    ########################################################## 
    ###################  CLASS METHODS1  ###################### 
 
    def PlatesToExcelFile(self):  
        '''Returns an excel file of the plate setup that needs to be made before the flowbot can 
operate''' 
        df1 = self.source_plateF_primers.to_pandas_dataframe() 
        df2 = self.source_plateR_primers.to_pandas_dataframe() 
        df3 = self.source_plateTemplates.to_pandas_dataframe() 
        df4 = self.source_platePCRmix.to_pandas_dataframe() 
 
        with pd.ExcelWriter('Plate_instructions.xlsx') as writer:   
            return df1.to_excel(writer, sheet_name='Forward_primer_wells'), df2.to_excel(writer, 
sheet_name='Reverse_primer_wells'), df3.to_excel(writer, 
sheet_name='Template_wells'),df4.to_excel(writer, sheet_name='PCR_MIX_H20') 
 
     
    def print_well_df_to_string(self): 
        ''' Prints Pandas dataframe in string format''' 
 
        df1 = self.source_plateF_primers.to_pandas_dataframe() 
        df2 = self.source_plateR_primers.to_pandas_dataframe() 
        df3 = self.source_plateTemplates.to_pandas_dataframe() 
        df4 = self.source_platePCRmix.to_pandas_dataframe() 
 
        return print(' ###Forward primers: ', df1.to_csv(sep=' ', index=False, header=True),'\n', 
'###Reverse primers: ', df2.to_csv(sep=' ', index=False, header=True),'\n','###Templates: 
',df3.to_csv(sep=' ', index=False, header=True),  df4.to_csv(sep=' ', index=False, header=True)) 
         
    def FlowbotInstructionsToCSV(self): 
        '''Function that prints flowbot instructions to csv format''' 
         
        with open('Flowbot_instructions.csv','w') as outfile: 
 
==PAGE:149==
 
149 
            return print('source, target, volume','\n',*self.picklist.to_flowbot_instructions(), 
sep='',end='\n', file = outfile) 
         
         
 
 
==PAGE:150==
 
150 
Appendix 6. Synbiopython hack to accommodate Flowbot One 
instructions 
Instructions:  
To make the program work copy and paste these functions into the respective files of the 
Synbiopython package. They just need to be next to the other functions.   
 
In Transfer.py 
 
    def to_flowbot_instructions(self): 
        """Return Flowbot instructions: i.e 
                source, destination, volume 
                # 4:A3, 4:A6, 20 
                # 3:A1, 7, 50.7 
                # 2:A, 2:B-F, 100 
        .""" 
 
        return ( 
            "{self.source_well.plate.name}:" 
            "{self.source_well.name}," 
            " {self.destination_well.plate.name}:" 
            "{self.destination_well.name}, {self.volume} " 
            ).format(self=self) 
 
In PickList.py 
 
    def to_flowbot_instructions(self): 
        """Return the list of transfers in Flowbot format.""" 
        return "\n".join(transfer.to_flowbot_instructions() for transfer in self.transfers_list) 
 
    def to_robot_string(self): 
        """Returns Flowbot one instructions: 
                source, destination, volume 
                # 4:A3, 4:A6, 20 
                # 3:A1, 7, 50.7 
                # 2:A, 2:B-F, 100 
        """ 
 
        return ( 
            "{self.source_well.plate.name}:" 
            "{self.source_well.name}," 
            "{self.destination_well.plate.name}:" 
==PAGE:151==
 
151 
            "{self.destination_well.name}, {self.volume:.02E}L " 
            ).format(self=self) 
==PAGE:152==
 
152 
Appendix 7. Multiple sequence alignments 
Promoters: 
 
==PAGE:153==
 
153 
==PAGE:154==
 
154 
==PAGE:155==
 
155 
 
==PAGE:156==
 
156 
 
Homologs:  
 
==PAGE:157==
 
157 
==PAGE:158==
 
158 
==PAGE:159==
 
159 
==PAGE:160==
 
160 
==PAGE:161==
 
161 
==PAGE:162==
 
162 
==PAGE:163==
 
163 
 
==PAGE:164==
 
164 
 
Appendix 8. Dependencies 
# Name                    Version                   Build  Channel 
_libgcc_mutex             0.1                        main   
_openmp_mutex             4.5                       1_gnu   
antimony                  2.12.0.2                 pypi_0    pypi 
anyio                     3.3.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
argon2-cffi               20.1.0           py38h27cfd23_1   
async_generator           1.10               pyhd3eb1b0_0   
atomicwrites              1.4.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
attrs                     21.2.0             pyhd3eb1b0_0   
babel                     2.9.1              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
backcall                  0.2.0              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
backports-functools-lru-cache 1.6.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
beautifulsoup4            4.10.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
benchlingapi              2.1.12                   pypi_0    pypi 
bioplate                  0.1.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
biopython                 1.78             py38h7b6447c_0   
blas                      1.0                         mkl   
bleach                    4.0.0              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
blessings                 1.7                      pypi_0    pypi 
brotlipy                  0.7.0           py38h27cfd23_1003   
bs4                       0.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
ca-certificates           2021.7.5             h06a4308_1   
cachetools                4.2.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
cairocffi                 1.2.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
cairosvg                  2.5.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
cameo                     0.13.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
certifi                   2021.5.30        py38h06a4308_0   
cffi                      1.14.6           py38h400218f_0   
chardet                   4.0.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
charset-normalizer        2.0.4              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
click                     8.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
cobra                     0.21.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
colorama                  0.4.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
colorcet                  2.0.6                    pypi_0    pypi 
commonmark                0.9.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
coverage                  6.1.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
cryptography              3.4.7            py38hd23ed53_0   
cssselect2                0.4.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
==PAGE:165==
 
165 
debugpy                   1.4.1            py38h295c915_0   
decorator                 5.0.9              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
defusedxml                0.7.1              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
depinfo                   1.7.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
deprecation               2.1.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
diskcache                 5.2.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
dna-features-viewer       3.1.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
dnachisel                 3.2.8                    pypi_0    pypi 
dnaplotlib                1.0                      pypi_0    pypi 
docopt                    0.6.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
entrypoints               0.3                      py38_0   
escher                    1.7.3                    pypi_0    pypi 
et-xmlfile                1.1.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
execnet                   1.9.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
fastaparser               1.1                      pypi_0    pypi 
flametree                 0.1.11                   pypi_0    pypi 
future                    0.18.2                   pypi_0    pypi 
fuzzywuzzy                0.18.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
gitdb                     4.0.9                    pypi_0    pypi 
gitpython                 3.1.24                   pypi_0    pypi 
gnomic                    1.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
google-api-core           2.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
google-api-python-client  2.22.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
google-auth               2.1.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
google-auth-httplib2      0.1.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
googleapis-common-protos  1.53.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
grako                     3.18.1                   pypi_0    pypi 
greenlet                  1.1.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
h11                       0.12.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
html2text                 2020.1.16                pypi_0    pypi 
html5lib                  1.1                      pypi_0    pypi 
httpcore                  0.13.7                   pypi_0    pypi 
httplib2                  0.19.1                   pypi_0    pypi 
httpx                     0.19.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
idna                      3.2                pyhd3eb1b0_0   
importlib-metadata        4.8.1            py38h06a4308_0   
importlib-resources       5.2.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
importlib_metadata        4.8.1                hd3eb1b0_0   
inflection                0.3.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
inform                    1.26.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
inspyred                  1.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
intel-openmp              2021.3.0          h06a4308_3350   
==PAGE:166==
 
166 
intermine                 1.11.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
iprogress                 0.4                      pypi_0    pypi 
ipykernel                 6.2.0            py38h06a4308_1   
ipython                   7.27.0           py38hb070fc8_0   
ipython_genutils          0.2.0              pyhd3eb1b0_1   
jedi                      0.18.0           py38h06a4308_1   
jinja2                    3.0.1              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
json5                     0.9.6              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
jsonschema                3.2.0              pyhd3eb1b0_2   
jupyter-packaging         0.10.6                   pypi_0    pypi 
jupyter-server            1.11.2                   pypi_0    pypi 
jupyter-server-mathjax    0.2.3                    pypi_0    pypi 
jupyter_client            7.0.1              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
jupyter_core              4.7.1            py38h06a4308_0   
jupyterlab                3.1.7              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
jupyterlab_pygments       0.1.2                      py_0   
jupyterlab_server         2.8.1              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
lazy-object-proxy         1.6.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
ld_impl_linux-64          2.35.1               h7274673_9   
libffi                    3.3                  he6710b0_2   
libgcc-ng                 9.3.0               h5101ec6_17   
libgomp                   9.3.0               h5101ec6_17   
libroadrunner             2.0.5                    pypi_0    pypi 
libsodium                 1.0.18               h7b6447c_0   
libstdcxx-ng              9.3.0               hd4cf53a_17   
lml                       0.1.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
markdown                  3.3.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
markupsafe                2.0.1            py38h27cfd23_0   
marshmallow               3.13.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
matplotlib-inline         0.1.2              pyhd3eb1b0_2   
mistune                   0.8.4           py38h7b6447c_1000   
mkl                       2021.3.0           h06a4308_520   
mkl-service               2.4.0            py38h7f8727e_0   
mkl_fft                   1.3.0            py38h42c9631_2   
mkl_random                1.2.2            py38h51133e4_0   
more-itertools            8.10.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
mpmath                    1.2.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
nbclassic                 0.2.8                    pypi_0    pypi 
nbclient                  0.5.3              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
nbconvert                 5.6.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
nbdime                    3.1.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
nbformat                  5.1.3              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
==PAGE:167==
 
167 
nbgitpuller               1.0.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
ncurses                   6.2                  he6710b0_1   
nest-asyncio              1.5.1              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
notebook                  6.4.3            py38h06a4308_0   
numexpr                   2.7.3                    pypi_0    pypi 
numpy                     1.19.3                   pypi_0    pypi 
numpy-base                1.20.3           py38h74d4b33_0   
oauth2client              4.1.3                    pypi_0    pypi 
openpyxl                  3.0.9                    pypi_0    pypi 
openssl                   1.1.1l               h7f8727e_0   
optlang                   1.4.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
ordered-set               4.0.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
packaging                 21.0               pyhd3eb1b0_0   
palettable                3.3.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
pandas                    1.3.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
pandocfilters             1.4.3            py38h06a4308_1   
param                     1.11.1                   pypi_0    pypi 
parso                     0.8.2              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
pathlib                   1.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
pdf-reports               0.3.3                    pypi_0    pypi 
pexpect                   4.8.0              pyhd3eb1b0_3   
phrasedml                 1.1.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
pickleshare               0.7.5           pyhd3eb1b0_1003   
pillow                    8.3.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
pip                       21.0.1           py38h06a4308_0   
plateo                    0.2.6                    pypi_0    pypi 
plotly                    5.3.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
pluggy                    0.13.1                   pypi_0    pypi 
proglog                   0.1.9                    pypi_0    pypi 
prometheus_client         0.11.0             pyhd3eb1b0_0   
prompt-toolkit            3.0.17             pyhca03da5_0   
protobuf                  3.18.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
ptyprocess                0.7.0              pyhd3eb1b0_2   
pyasn1                    0.4.8                    pypi_0    pypi 
pyasn1-modules            0.2.8                    pypi_0    pypi 
pycparser                 2.20                       py_2   
pyct                      0.4.8                    pypi_0    pypi 
pydantic                  1.8.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
pydenticon                0.3.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
pydrive2                  1.10.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
pyexcel                   0.6.7                    pypi_0    pypi 
pyexcel-io                0.6.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
==PAGE:168==
 
168 
pyexcel-xls               0.6.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
pyexcel-xlsx              0.6.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
pygments                  2.10.0             pyhd3eb1b0_0   
pyopenssl                 20.0.1             pyhd3eb1b0_1   
pyparsing                 2.4.7              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
pyphen                    0.11.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
pypugjs                   5.9.9                    pypi_0    pypi 
pyrsistent                0.17.3           py38h7b6447c_0   
pysocks                   1.7.1            py38h06a4308_0   
pytest                    5.4.3                    pypi_0    pypi 
pytest-cov                2.12.1                   pypi_0    pypi 
pytest-forked             1.3.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
pytest-notebook           0.6.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
pytest-xdist              1.34.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
python                    3.8.11          h12debd9_0_cpython   
python-box                5.4.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
python-codon-tables       0.1.10                   pypi_0    pypi 
python-dateutil           2.8.2              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
python-libcombine         0.2.13                   pypi_0    pypi 
python-libnuml            1.1.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
python-libsbml            5.19.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
python-libsedml           2.0.26                   pypi_0    pypi 
pytz                      2021.1             pyhd3eb1b0_0   
pyyaml                    5.4.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
pyzmq                     22.2.1           py38h295c915_1   
readline                  8.1                  h27cfd23_0   
regex                     2021.8.28                pypi_0    pypi 
reportlab                 3.6.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
requests                  2.26.0             pyhd3eb1b0_0   
requests-mock             1.9.3                    pypi_0    pypi 
requests-unixsocket       0.2.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
rfc3986                   1.5.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
rich                      6.2.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
rrplugins                 2.0.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
rsa                       4.7.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
ruamel-yaml               0.17.16                  pypi_0    pypi 
ruamel-yaml-clib          0.2.6                    pypi_0    pypi 
sbml2matlab               1.2.3.1                  pypi_0    pypi 
selenium                  3.141.0         py38h27cfd23_1000   
send2trash                1.5.0              pyhd3eb1b0_1   
sequenticon               0.1.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
setuptools                45.3.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
==PAGE:169==
 
169 
single-version            1.5.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
six                       1.16.0             pyhd3eb1b0_0   
smmap                     5.0.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
snapgene-reader           0.1.19                   pypi_0    pypi 
sniffio                   1.2.0            py38h06a4308_1   
soupsieve                 2.2.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
sqlalchemy                1.4.25                   pypi_0    pypi 
sqlite                    3.36.0               hc218d9a_0   
swiglpk                   5.0.3                    pypi_0    pypi 
sympy                     1.8                      pypi_0    pypi 
synbiopython              0.2.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
tabulate                  0.8.9                    pypi_0    pypi 
tellurium                 2.2.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
tenacity                  8.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
terminado                 0.9.4            py38h06a4308_0   
tesbml                    5.18.1.2                 pypi_0    pypi 
teselagen                 0.3.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
testpath                  0.5.0              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
texttable                 1.6.4                    pypi_0    pypi 
tinycss2                  1.1.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
tk                        8.6.10               hbc83047_0   
tomlkit                   0.7.2                    pypi_0    pypi 
tornado                   6.1              py38h27cfd23_0   
tqdm                      4.62.3                   pypi_0    pypi 
traitlets                 5.0.5              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
typing                    3.7.4.3                  pypi_0    pypi 
typing-extensions         3.10.0.2                 pypi_0    pypi 
uritemplate               3.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
urllib3                   1.26.6             pyhd3eb1b0_1   
urlopen                   1.0.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
wcwidth                   0.2.5              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
weasyprint                52                       pypi_0    pypi 
webencodings              0.5.1                    py38_1   
websocket-client          1.2.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
wellmap                   3.0.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
wheel                     0.37.0             pyhd3eb1b0_1   
xlrd                      1.2.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
xlsxwriter                3.0.1                    pypi_0    pypi 
xlwt                      1.3.0                    pypi_0    pypi 
xmltodict                 0.12.0                   pypi_0    pypi 
xz                        5.2.5                h7b6447c_0   
zeromq                    4.3.4                h2531618_0   
==PAGE:170==
 
170 
zipp                      3.5.0              pyhd3eb1b0_0   
zlib                      1.2.11               h7b6447c_3   
 
 
 
