==PAGE:1==
Development of Operational Real-Time Control Strategies 
for Reduction of Combined Sewer Overflows 
Master’s Thesis 
 
 
Morten Halkjær Olsen 
February 2022 
==PAGE:2==
 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development of Operational Real-Time Control Strategies 
for Reduction of Combined Sewer Overflows 
 
 
 
Master Thesis  
 
 
 
Morten Halkjær Olsen 
 
February 2022 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors:  
Roland Löwe, Associate Professor, DTU Environment 
 
 
 
Teemu Kokkonen, Aalto University, Aalto University School of Engineering 
Nadia Schou Vorndran Lund, Industrial Postdoc, EnviDan A/S  
 
Copyright: 
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the 
customary bibliographic citation including name of the author, report title, 
etc.  
 
Published by: 
DTU, Department of Environmental Engineering 
Bygningstorvet, Bygning 115 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
==PAGE:3==
 
ii 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Real-time control (RTC) is an efficient way to reduce CSO and considerably cheaper than increasing 
wastewater storage volume by construction of basins. Despite this, wastewater operators are reluctant to 
implement such systems and enhanced methods for application of RTC are needed. Rule-based real-time 
control is considered the simplest control method and while being widely applied there are plenty of 
experience from previous cases to benefit from. This study aims at identifying rule-based RTC applications 
that are generic and well documented. Identified rule-based control strategies have undergone a translation 
process preparing them for easier implementation on new systems. Control strategies were implemented and 
tested on a combined sewer system in Bistrup, Denmark (9.000 PE), and followingly evaluated with respect 
to CSO reducing abilities on four years of historic rainfall data. The study found that many documented 
applications exist, however, at detail levels insufficient for further implementation. A handful of control 
strategies were successfully translated and tested. However, they led to insignificant CSO reductions of 2-3% 
and behaved very similar in terms of performance and function. Improvements to the control-related 
structure of the system and subsequently testing with one control strategy yielded much higher CSO 
reductions. Therefore, it was also concluded that successful applications of rule-based RTC are more 
dependent on the system that the control strategies applied. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
ABSTRACT ...................................................................................................................................................... ii 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .............................................................................................................................. ii 
1 
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................................... 1 
2 
THEORY ................................................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1 
Objectives 
4 
2.2 
Control strategy levels 
5 
2.3 
Control loop and settings 
6 
2.4 
Controlable structures 
Fejl! Bogmærke er ikke defineret. 
2.5 
Control strategy types 
Fejl! Bogmærke er ikke defineret. 
3 
REVIEW OF APPLIED RULE-BASED CONTROL STRATEGIES ...................................................... 8 
4 
CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM ............................................................... 10 
4.1 
Description of case study 
10 
4.2 
Combined sewer hydrodynamic model 
12 
4.3 
System conceptualization 
14 
4.4 
Radar rainfall data 
18 
5 
METHODOLOGY .................................................................................................................................. 19 
5.1 
Definition of control objectives 
19 
5.2 
Translation of existing control strategies 
20 
5.3 
Test and validation on representative rain events 
21 
5.4 
Evaluation of control strategy performance 
22 
6 
RESULTS ................................................................................................................................................ 24 
6.1 
Control strategy translations 
24 
6.2 
Rain events for testing 
27 
6.3 
Test and validation on representative rain events 
27 
6.4 
Control strategy performance evaluations 
37 
7 
DISCUSSION .......................................................................................................................................... 42 
7.1 
Differences between assessed rule-based strategies 
42 
7.2 
Prospects of RTC applications 
42 
==PAGE:5==
 
iv 
 
 
7.3 
Limitations of study 
43 
7.4 
Further studies 
43 
8 
CONCLUSION ....................................................................................................................................... 45 
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................................ 46 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
v 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX A – Increased control performance 
 
APPENDIX B – Schütze et al. (2005) control strategy translation  
 
==PAGE:7==
1 INTRODUCTION 
1 
 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Overflow from CSS are the primary point-source contributor of organic matter pollution to Danish waters, 
while also contributing significantly to total nitrogen and total phosphorous pollutions (Styrelsen for Vand- 
og Naturformidling, 2017). Around 6% of the entire area of Denmark are sewered areas, with combined 
sewer systems covering about 40% corresponding to around 100 000 ha (Miljøstyrelsen, 2021). Ongoing 
urbanization of European cities during the 20th century have put more pressure on existing urban drainage 
infrastructure and is expected to continue (Mikovits et al., 2014). Furthermore, the operation of CCSs is, and 
will continuously be, affected by climate change and will generally lead to increased CSO events and 
durations on a global scale (Fortier & Mailhot, 2015). While the separate sewer system is now the preferred 
solution, the existence of CCS is expected many years ahead. This is due to the often costly and time-
consuming process related to CCS separations in central urban areas, combined with long life spans of such 
systems in general. Eventually, there is an increased need of CCSs being safely operated, now and in the 
future, to deal with risks posed by CSOs to receiving waters. 
 
Challenges related to CSOs are generally addressed by three methods: 1) prevent storm water from entering 
the system, 2) increase system capacity by volumetric expansion and 3) establish smart operation of drainage 
system for increased utilization of system capacity (García et al., 2015; Lund et al., 2018). The preferred 
method may vary and is cost-efficiency dependent. However, the latter option, when achieved through RTC, 
has proven itself as a reliable measure to deal with CSOs (García et al., 2015). 
 
In the literature, descriptions extensively exist of scientifically approached applications of RTC strategies. 
Studies are based on modeling exercises of both hypothetical and real-life case systems ((Dirckx et al., 2014; 
van Daal et al., 2017). Descriptions of control strategies implemented and put into actual operation, can be 
found int the literature as well. E.g., Herrenberg, GE and Ense-Bremen, GE (Weyand, 2002), Quebec, CA 
(Schütze et al., 2004) and Copenhagen, DK (Grum et al., 2011). However, they often lack details on control 
algorithms, practical barriers and drawbacks (Dirckx et al., 2014). It has been pointed out, that universities 
are rarely involved in real RTC projects, while numerous scientific papers and articles on the subject are 
published (Schilling, 1989). Additionally, it has been highlighted that emphasis should be given to use a 
clear terminology to enable better cooperation between scientists and experts of different areas relevant to 
RTC (Schütze et al., 2004). Indications are that a gap exists between scientific and practical RTC 
assessments. Despite the common understanding of RTC as a mean of improving sewer system operations, a 
common understanding of RTC being “too complex” also exists among wastewater operators (Dirckx et al., 
2014). It has been stressed, that successful implementation of RTC requires staff acceptance on all levels, 
and that operators should feel ownership and be able to “grow with the RTC system” (Schilling, 1989; 
Schütze et al., 2004). Rule-based control could prove to be useful in this matter, as it is regarded as the 
simplest and easiest to understand control method. In addition to this, quality and performance of the method 
relies heavily on expert knowledge about system behaviors and characteristics (García et al., 2015).  
 
Rule-based control is based on continuous evaluations of present hydraulic conditions under at set of 
predefined IF-THEN-rules. E.g. set point tracking of actuators like pumps and movable gates, based on 
collected real-time information about flows and water levels across the system (García et al., 2015). Rule-
based control has been applied for decades and many descriptions exists of successful implementations of 
rule-based control. The control method has been applied to achieve different objectives, but most commonly 
for reductions of CSO (Campisano et al., 2000; Dirckx et al., 2011; Klepiszewski & Schmitt, 2002; Kroll et 
==PAGE:8==
1 INTRODUCTION 
2 
 
al., 2017, 2018; Mollerup et al., 2018; Pabst et al., 2011). Another common objective is the control of 
WWTP influents (Kroll et al., 2016; Schilling et al., 1996; van Daal et al., 2017), while assessment of 
flooding, as a consequence of implemented control strategies, has been a subsidiary objective (Kroll et al., 
2018; Schilling et al., 1996).  
 
 
It has been advocated that a generic and automated RTC design process may play a key role in making 
reluctant wastewater operators harness the potential of RTC (Kroll et al. 2018). Formalizing real-time control 
as a discipline is considered a general objective of this study, and findings here will hopefully contribute to 
more combined sewer systems being operated under real-time control. The study has been shaped by the 
research questions below. 
 
1. Which rule-based RTC strategies, found in the literature, have been used for reducing overflows? 
2. Can rule-based control strategies for reducing CSO be generalized? How are they similar and 
different to each other? 
3. What aspects should be considered when implementing a generic rule-based control strategy on a 
new case system? 
4. Which rule-based control strategies performs best in reduction of CSO, without reducing the service 
level of a combined sewer system? 
 
The study has processed as illustrated in Figure 1. Initially, a review on the real-time control terminology and 
methods were carried out, followed by a review of existing rule-based control strategies applied for reducing 
CSO. The case system of Bistrup was analyzed with respect to appliance of rule-based control. This included 
assessment of land use and conceptualization of the system identifying characteristics and possible control 
points. Followingly, required modifications were made to the available hydrodynamic and system 
performance of a no-control scenario was evaluated, with respect to defined control objectives. Generalizable 
control strategies were selected for test and evaluation, presented by a generic translation, and implemented 
to the hydrodynamic model. Validation of proper implementation of each control strategy were based on 
simulations of selected rain events, by analysis and visual inspection of time series of relevant parameters. 
Control strategy performances were evaluated based on long-term simulations, and with respect to defined 
control objectives, while also discussed in terms of advantages and disadvantages. Finally, findings and 
thoughts on generalization of rule-based control strategies are discussed, along with limitations and further 
prospects of the study. 
==PAGE:9==
1 INTRODUCTION 
3 
 
 
Figure 1 – Diagram showing the work flow of the study.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
2 THEORY 
4 
 
2 
THEORY 
 
In this chapter, the main findings from the literature review of real-time control and the sub method of rule-
based control are presented. This includes descriptions of terms relevant to the discipline of real-time control, 
along with brief descriptions of the most common control methods. Finally, the results of a review on applied 
rule-based control are presented. 
 
2.1 
Objectives 
 
Fundamental to application of real-time control of any form, is the initial definition of control objectives. 
Objectives may vary between various RTC applications and are dependent on the challenges related to 
operation of a specific system. Control objectives are often directly linked to already defined system 
performance indicators, where operation costs are considered the main driving force (Schütze et al., 2004). In 
addition to economic incentives, control objectives often also seek to reduce negative environmental impacts, 
with regulatory legislation and public concern as driving forces (Schilling, 1989). Ideally, control objectives 
should be measurable, allowing for evaluation of a given control strategy upon its implementation. A list of 
common control objectives, along with their evaluation criteria, can be seen in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 – Typical control objectives their evaluatoin parameters 
Control objective 
Evaluation criteria 
Reduce environmental impact of CSO 
(volume based) 
Overflow frequency [number of events], 
total volume [m3]. 
Reduce environmental impact of CSO 
(water quality based) 
Mass of emitted pollutants [kg], ecological 
status of receiving waters. 
Reduce flooding of urban areas 
Flood frequency (number of events), flood 
volume [m3], flood depth [m]. 
WWTP influent equalization 
Influent flow variations [m3/s]. 
Optimize operation (pumps etc.) 
Operational saving [DKK/year], breakdown 
frequency [number of breakdowns] 
Reduce construction costs (by reducing 
need for volumetric expansion) 
Construction savings [DKK/year] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
2 THEORY 
5 
 
2.2 
Control strategy levels 
 
Control strategy levels is used and an indicator of complexity. Control strategies at higher levels are likely to 
be more complex and likely to be based on more comprehensive system state evaluations. The levels as 
presented below are related to the spatial extent at which information is collected for set point tracking of 
actuators.  
 
▪ 
Local control 
Measurements are made in the near vicinity of the actuator, or from within the control block. Data is 
often transmitted by wires between sensors and regulators (Butler et al., 2018). Only local system 
states are considered, leading to control of less sophisticated character, where optimum control is 
rarely achieved (Schilling, 1989). 
 
▪ 
Regional control 
Considered as the intermediate level between local and global control. It is defined as the controlled 
outlet of one part of a system, not being interrelated with the control of processes other than the 
controlled outflow from an immediate upstream part of the system, or the controlled outflow from an 
immediate downstream part of the system (Schilling, 1989). However, in this study, it is defined as 
control based on data exchanged only with upstream and/or control blocks. 
 
▪ 
Global control 
Complex control of actuators. Data collected throughout the system are used for central and 
coordinated control of actuators and considers a more general state of the system (Butler et al., 2018; 
Schilling, 1989). It is less distinct in its definition and applies whenever definitions of local and 
regional control do not fit. 
 
▪ 
Integrated control 
Highest level of complexity is integrated control. System states outside of the collection system is 
considered. I.e., precipitation and runoff being upstream systems and WWTP and receiving waters 
being downstream systems (Butler et al., 2018). Complexity increases with integrated control, due to 
outside systems being of different nature, and possibly operated by different institutions. 
 
In applications of real-time control, it may as well be relevant to address hierarchical and temporal levels, at 
which decisions and control actions are taken. Such definition is proposed by Mollerup et al. (2017). Here, 
hierarchical levels range from the controller of local control loops to managements of utility companies. 
Related temporal decision frequencies range from seconds to months. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
2 THEORY 
6 
 
2.3 
Control loop and settings 
 
Regardless the level of control complexity, four different hardware components are required and constitutes 
the fundamentals of RTC application in any form. The components and their interactions, known as the 
control loop (Butler et al., 2018; Schilling, 1989), are described below:  
 
1. Sensor measures process variables (water level, water flow, water quality components) used as input 
in a controlling algorithm. 
2. Data transmission system transfers information between control loop components. I.e., from 
sensor/regulator to controller, and from controller to regulator. 
3. Controller receives measured and controlled process variables, and based on their possible distinct 
values, calculates, and transmits set-points to the regulator. 
4. Regulator (pump, gate, weir, valve) takes required action according to received-set point. 
 
Furthermore, the control loop in its basic form, which is best suitable for local control, can be distinguished 
as either a feedback or a feed forward control loop and indicates mutual placements of sensor and regulator 
along the process flow path. Feedback control is achieved when sensors measure process variables 
downstream of the regulator. The difference between measured and desired values dictates regulator action, 
and only maintains its setting when there is no deviation. Feed forward control is achieved when sensors 
measure process variables upstream of the regulator. With the measured value as input, a model is used to 
predict the required regulator action (Butler et al., 2018). Measured process variable is not necessarily the 
same as controlled process variable. Feedback and feed forward control loops are shown in Figure 2 and 
Figure 3 respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 – Feedback control loop 
 
Figure 3 – Feed forward control loop 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
2 THEORY 
7 
 
2.4 
Static structures 
 
When discussing RTC, there is a group of structure commonly found in combined sewer system, that are 
highly relevant. This especially applies when reduction of CSO is chosen as primary control objective. When 
assessing combined sewer systems and CSO related challenges, the following structures should be identified 
as they are much important to the systems ability of avoiding overload situations.  
 
Overflow structures: 
To avoid combined sewers from complete filling and terrestrial flooding, the system will find relief through 
strategically placed overflows structures. Locations of CSO structures will affect where and to which 
receiving waters overflow will occur. 
 
Storage basins: 
Combined sewers discharging untreated wastewater to receiving waters may only be prevented if sufficient 
storage volumes are available and well distributed across the system. When hydraulic load increases and 
flow exceeds pipe capacities, the system, i.e., pipes and manholes start filling up. At some point, as water 
levels are closing in on ground levels, built in storage basin starts to fill through internal overflow structures. 
Basins that do not fill completely will empty stored wastewater back into the sewers. If basins are getting 
completely full CSO, structures start discharging untreated wastewater.  
The basins contribute with either online storage volume or off line storage volume (placed in parallel). Their 
interlink with the remaining sewer system may be either of the two senn on Figure 4 and Figure 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 – Online storage basin 
Figure 5 – Offline storge basin 
 
 
 
 
3 
Control strategy methods 
 
Within the field of real-time control, applied methods may be placed into one of two categories. The methods 
are either optimization-based or rule-based and depends on the controlling algorithm. Optimization-based 
algorithms aims at maximizing or minimizing criteria expressed as scalar functions. The criteria may express 
system states, system operation or criteria related to water quality. Rule-based algorithms are simpler in 
nature and are defined by a pre-defined set of IF-THEN-rules, under which the system state is constantly 
evaluated. Actuator setting are chosen according to the output of the evaluation (García et al., 2015).
==PAGE:14==
4 REVIEW OF APPLIED RULE-BASED CONTROL STRATEGIES 
8 
 
4 
REVIEW OF APPLIED RULE-BASED CONTROL 
STRATEGIES 
 
This chapter presents the findings of a review on real-time control strategies from the literature. The focus of 
the review was on well documented cases with elaborate details and design procedures. Additionally, the 
scope was narrowed down by the study objectives as defined in the introduction of this paper. According to 
those, the control strategies searched for, should be 
 
1. Rule-based 
2. Designed for reducing combined sewage overflow  
3. Generic and replicable on similar case systems 
 
Additionally, the case systems, on which the control strategies have been applied, should preferably resemble 
combined sewer systems typically found in Denmark. The complete list of applied real-time control 
strategies can be found in Table 2. It summarizes details on conducted studies and assessed control 
strategies. Overall findings of the review are summarized below: 
 
▪ Applications were only found on combined sewers in European cities, largely varying in terms of 
drained area and population served. Most studies evaluate performances based on historical rain data 
and with durations ranging from 1 week to 13 years. In some cases, the evaluation is based on few or 
just a single rain event. Nevertheless, only improvements were seen, with reduced CSO volumes as high 
as 65%. Controlled actuator types were both 2-point controllers (pumps, gates) and proportional (PID) 
controllers (movable weirs and gate, pumps, and throttle valves). Most studies do not outline control 
algorithms sufficiently, and assumptions must be made if replicated 
▪ All control strategies are volume-based and relies on system state information, indicating how storage 
volumes are utilized. For most instances, this information is gained from look-up tables in exchange of 
measured water levels and expresses the relative filling of a basin. This parameter is also known as the 
basin filling degree (FD). The filling degree is hold against a desired FD set-point and appropriate 
effluent settings are selected accordingly. Consequently, the basin either retains or discharges 
wastewater until the FD set-point is reached. 
▪ Commonly, the mean FD of basin is used as set-point (Campisano et al., 2000; Dirckx et al., 2011; Kroll 
et al., 2018; Weyand, 2002), and recognized as the “equal filling degree” method. In some cases, the 
smallest of all FDs (Kroll et al., 2017) or the FD of the most downstream basin (Kroll, 2019) are 
applied. Common to all, is that they apply global control. 
▪ Semi-local or regional control is achieved when based on FDs of several upstream branches (Alex et al., 
2008; Pabst et al., 2011; Schütze et al., 2005), despite being global control as per definition. 
▪ On the other hand, local control is applied, when FD of the basin immediately down- or upstream is 
used as input (Campisano et al., 2000; Kroll et al., 2018). 
▪ The simplest control algorithms rely on 2-point controllers allowing enabling actuators one of two 
possible setting (ON/OFF or open/closed). Proportional (PID) controllers enable actuator settings within 
a range, and often requires more complex control algorithms.  
==PAGE:15==
4 REVIEW OF APPLIED RULE-BASED CONTROL STRATEGIES 
9 
 
Table 2 
==PAGE:16==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
10 
 
 
5 
CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
 
This chapter outlines all relevant background information on the case study area and combined sewer system 
of Bistrup. A description is given of the study case system and the of case study area in terms of land use. 
Thereafter, the provided hydrodynamic model representing the case system, is described in short. 
Followingly, a general conceptualization of the system has been carried out, for the purpose of control 
strategy implementations. Lastly, available radar rainfall data is presented. 
 
5.1 
Description of case study 
 
The area assessed in the study is xx ha, covers Bistrup and southern parts of Birkerød, and is located within 
Rudersdal Municipality, north of Copenhagen. The extension is defined by all subcatchments discharging to 
Bistrup WWTP according to the wastewater plans of Rudersdal Municipality.  
More than 72% of the area is used for housing, while the remaining area primarily consists of industrial areas 
and areas with public purposes. Spatial distribution of land use categories can be seen in Figure 6. Future 
development of the area is expected. In Bistrup unbuild areas will be turned into housing, and in Birkerød, 
which is already close to being fully developed, former industrial areas will be turned into housing, while 
also experiencing a general congestion (Rudersdal Kommune, 2021). All of this will lead to increases in 
collected wastewater and stormwater runoff, and therefor also on the hydraulic loads on sewer networks and 
Bistrup WWTP. Risks of releases of untreated wastewater, from CSOs during storm events, to the 
surrounding aquatic environment around is expected too. 
Bistrup WWTP is a MBNDK-type treatment facility and designed for treating wastewater equal to 9.900 PE, 
and as it receives wastewater equal to 11.849 PE, it is already overloaded. Treated wastewater is diverted 
from inland surface waters and discharged through pipes directly to Øresund (Rudersdal Kommune, 2017a). 
84% of the case area is covered by combined sewers, and 15% is covered by separated sewers. The 
remaining 1% of the area is covered by sanitary and storm sewers. Spatial distribution of sewer system types 
can be seen in Figure 7. No changes to the system are planned in the near future ((Rudersdal Kommune, 
2017a, 2017b)). The combined sewer system consists of 45 km of pipes and has five controllable storage 
basins, with overflow structures and a total storage volume of 1900 m3. Additionally, uncontrollable storage 
volume of 3800 m3 is available in two basins. Storage basins are both online and offline basins and those 
controlled are emptied by pumps and a movable gate. At the WWTP an equalization of 5000 m3 in storage 
volume and is located immediately before the WWTP inlet. Lastly, the system holds a number of pumping 
stations and no-storage overflow structures. 
 
==PAGE:17==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
11 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 
 
Figure 7 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
12 
 
5.2 
Combined sewer hydrodynamic model 
 
A hydrodynamic model of the combined sewer system is provided by utility company Novafos. It covers the 
entire project area and consists of 1.246 nodes and 1.233 pipes with a total length of 45 km. Weirs, pumps, 
gates and storage structures are represented in the model as well. The model has a global real-time control 
algorithm built-in which maintains operation of pump effluents and positioning of a movable gate (orifice), 
all that are related to emptying of five storage basins. Other pumping stations in the system are operated 
locally with real-time control, with start/stop operation depending on pump sump water levels. The system as 
represented in the hydrodynamic modelling environment can be seen in Figure 8. 
 
 
Figure 8 
 
==PAGE:19==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
13 
 
To make the hydrodynamic model more suitable for evaluating real-time control strategies, with respect to 
defined control objectives, a number of changes have been made to the model. The model with the below 
mentioned changes included is what is later on referred to as the no-control scenario. 
 
1. The built-in global control algorithm is discarded and not taking effect in any simulations. As a 
replacement, Movable gate is fixed at a fully-open setting, and storage basin emptying pumps are 
locally controlled instead. 
 
2. Storage basin emptying pumps with stop levels higher than the basin bottom level, are lowered to 
that of the basin bottom level, enabling complete emptying of basins. 
 
3. All manholes with cover type “normal” have been changed to “spilling”. When nodes are flooded, 
wastewater will spill irreversibly out of system instead of being temporarily stored above ground 
level. This enables volumetric quantification of flooding, which can be accumulated and used for 
comparison between control and no-control simulation results. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
14 
 
5.3 
System conceptualization 
 
Before any control strategies is implemented, a systematic analysis of case system and catchment area is 
carried out. The purpose is to define physical boundaries and a conceptual framework which will ease the 
implementation process. This includes identification of control points, and delineation of catchment followed 
by a subdivision into control blocks based on identified control points. The analysis has been carried out 
manually based on the automated methodology as suggested by Kroll (2019). It is presented here as a 3-step 
process. The output can be seen in Figure 9. 
 
A. System catchment delineation 
The node at the influent to Bistrup WWTP marks the downstream system boundary. Upstream 
boundaries are defined by dead ends in branches, and CSOs of storage basins and CSOs placed in 
line with sewers. No bifurcations separating the system from other combined sewer systems were 
identified.  
 
B. Identification of control points 
The method of selection control points only at existing actuators have been applied. Control points 
are furthermore limited to those in connection with significant storage volumes, and control of in 
line pump lifting stations are therefore excluded. The actuators included are four pumps pumping 
wastewater from offline basins back into the system, and one movable gate able to retain flows from 
an upstream main pipe and a parallel offline storage basin. 
 
C. Subdivision of system into control blocks 
Division is based on identified control locations. Downstream boundaries are defined as the node 
holding the overflow structure discharging into offline basins, or as the node in which the movable 
gate is placed. Upstream boundaries are defined by the dead ends in branches or downstream 
boundary of other control blocks. Six control blocks were identified, including the most downstream 
A01RA with effluent equal to the fixed WWTP influent of 108 l/s. 
 
==PAGE:21==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
15 
 
 
Figure 9 
 
Additionally, the system is further conceptualized with a flowchart of the control blocks. It shows mutual 
placement of control blocks, and interconnections of storage basins, controlling actuators and overflow 
structures (not including in-line overflow structures A-F as seen in Figure 9). In addition, it lists control 
block characteristics. These numbers are relevant for assessing control potential, design of control algorithms 
and for function- and performance evaluations of applied control strategies. The system flowchart and 
control block characteristics can be seen in Figure 10, and are subjects to further system analysis as seen 
below. 
 
System structure: 
▪ 
The system is divided into a tree-like structure with five control blocks along three branches, 
discharging into a downstream central control block. Control blocks B22 and B15 are the biggest 
contributors draining an area of 42 ha. Secondly, is control block B17 draining 25 ha, and lastly 
control blocks B21 and B19 draining 10 ha. They all connect in control block A01RA, with a 
separate drainage area of 26 ha, and discharges towards the WWTP. Retention basins equipped with 
overflow structures are located downstream within each control block, with equalization basin 
A01RA at the WWTP. 
==PAGE:22==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
16 
 
 
Storage basins: 
▪ 
Retention basins B15, B17, B19, B21 and B22 has storage volumes ranging from 147 to 605 m3. 
Equalization basin A01RA at the WWTP has a storage volume of 5000 m3. Additional storage of 
100 m3 is available in basin PB (online pipe basin) within control block B22, and of 3700 m3 in basin 
B16 (offline surface basin) within control block B17. 
▪ 
Big variations in specific storage capacities (storage volume relative to drained area) can be seen. 
Basins B17 and B22 have low specific storages of 24 and 10 m3/ha, when compared with those of 
B15, B19 and B21. This could indicate that basin B17 and B22 are of insufficient capacity and at 
risk of large CSO discharge volumes. 
▪ 
B15, B19, B21 and B22 are emptied by pumps, while B17 discharges uncontrolled with the option of 
flow control through a gate immediately downstream. The gate adjusts uncontrolled discharges from 
control block 17 as well. With respect to emptying times, basins B19 and B22 are most capable of 
fast emptying at 1.4 and 1.6 hours respectively. Basins B15 and B17 have significantly longer 
emptying times of 4.3 and 4.8 hours respectively. This could indicate large CSO discharge volumes 
at B15 and B17, as basins with long emptying times are considered less flexible in terms of readiness 
for incoming downpours. 
 
Overflow structures: 
▪ 
The system has seven additional in-line overflow structures. Four located within control block 
A01RA (A, B, C and basin PB), and three located within control block B22 (D, E and F).  
 
==PAGE:23==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
17 
 
 
Figure 10 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
5 CASE STUDY – BISTRUP COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM 
18 
 
5.4 
Radar rainfall data 
Rainfall data covering the study area have been provided and will be used for evaluation of RTC strategies 
implemented in the study. The dataset is provided by The Danish Meteorological Institute and have been 
collected with doppler radars. It provides precipitation intensities in [μm/s] at a 1-minute temporal resolution 
and covers a 4-year period from 2017-2020. Data is provided for grid cells at a spatial resolution of 500x500 
meters. 
 
 
Figure 11 
 
==PAGE:25==
6 METHODOLOGY 
19 
 
6 
METHODOLOGY 
 
This chapter describes the methodology applied in the study. Firstly, the process of translating existing 
applications of rule-based control strategies found in the literature is outlined. This includes the initial 
selection of strategies that were found suitable and relevant with respect to objectives of the study. Secondly, 
the process of implementing control strategies into the existing hydrodynamic model is described. This 
includes the selection of rain events for control strategy testing, analysis of control function and mechanisms 
and validation of implementation properness. Lastly, the evaluation of control strategy performances is 
outlined, comprising of long-term simulation specifications and selection of parameters to be extracted from 
test results, and hold against the no-control scenario. 
 
This chapter describes the methodology applied in the study. Firstly, the process of translating existing 
applications of rule-based control strategies is outlined. Secondly, the process of implementing control 
strategies into the existing hydrodynamic model is described. Lastly, the evaluation of control strategy 
performances is outlined.  
 
 
6.1 
Definition of control objectives 
 
In the literature, it is often emphasized that a clear definition of control objectives, should be the very first 
step to take in the process of applying real-time control. The purpose of this chapter is to stress the already 
outlined objectives of the study. By this the necessary steppingstone for assessing real-time control and 
completing the study is laid. 
 
Therefore, control objectives of the real-time control study on Bistrup combined sewer system are as 
follows: 
 
▪ 
Primary objective: 
Reduction of CSO in terms of volume and frequency 
 
▪ 
Subsidiary control objective: 
Prevent flooding from getting worse in the attempt to achieve the primary control obejctive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
6 METHODOLOGY 
20 
 
6.2 
Translation of existing control strategies 
 
The following explains activities related to generic translations of existing control strategies. Initially, it is 
described how control strategies to be assessed in this study were selected, including the criteria that were 
evaluated in the process. Followingly, a description of the translation process is presented. Here, it is 
outlined what have been used as translation inputs, and on what form the translated control strategy is 
presented. 
 
6.2.1 Selection of control strategies 
 
From the list of reviewed studies and control strategy applications, a limited number have been selected for 
translation, testing and evaluation. The selection was a non-systematic process considering a range of 
features. Preference was given to studies and control strategy applications complying with features as stated 
below:  
 
▪ 
Reduction of CSO discharges as primary control objective 
▪ 
High performance with respect to control objectives. 
▪ 
Generic and applicable to other case systems 
▪ 
Descriptions of control strategy and algorithm are in great detail and at high replicability 
▪ 
Case study is similar in nature to combined sewer systems commonly found in Denmark 
 
6.2.2 Translation process 
 
The translation process includes interpretation and analysis of the overall nature and function of the control 
strategy. Additionally, it shall clearly specify what have been used from the assessed studies as input in the 
translation. Finally, the translation output is presented, and shall consist of an algorithm, along with 
specifications of measured state variables to be used as input. The process in divided into the following 
sections:  
 
A. Control strategy characteristics and application suitability: 
Description of overall character and nature of the control strategy. E.g. guiding principles of the 
control strategy, control level, system suitability. Also, the features considered in the selection 
process shall be addressed. 
 
B. Control strategy translation base: 
A compilation of elements extracted from the study of the particular control strategy. Elements may 
consist of tables, diagrams, paragraphs etc., and forms the basis of the control strategy translation. 
 
C. Control strategy translation: 
A description of how to implement the control strategy, e.g. how and where to measure system state 
variables, and how to apply them for generating set points of controlled system state variables. A 
complete list of the variables is presented, along with the control algorithm presented as a rule 
scheme for action selection of actuators, based on the logical conditions of system state variables. 
System specific precautionary measures that may be implemented in the control setup are excluded 
from the control algorithm to ensure a higher level of generalizability. 
==PAGE:27==
6 METHODOLOGY 
21 
 
6.3 
Test and validation on representative rain events 
 
The following explains activities related to implementation, testing and validation of selected control 
strategies. This includes the selection of a series of test rain events representative to a range of different 
hydrological conditions and hydrodynamic response types. Followingly, properness of control 
implementation is validated from hydrodynamic test results, based on representative rain events, and visual 
inspection of the consequential system behaviors. Subsequently the mechanisms and overall function, of the 
control strategies are analyzed at higher detail for a single rain event. 
 
6.3.1 Selection of test rain events 
 
To ensure proper implementation of control strategies in the hydrodynamic model, a range of rain events 
have been selected for testing the implemented control strategies. Event of varying hydrological load type 
were identified on the basis daily hydrological key parameters derived from the radar rainfall data. This 
included total rain depth [mm], rain activity [minutes] and smallest/biggest control block rain depth [ratio]. 
Identified rain events were applied in hydrodynamic no-control simulations and related hydrodynamic 
response were assessed and categorized. Events of both moderate and extreme character have been identified 
and are associated with hydrological load types and hydrodynamic response types, as listed in Table 3 and 
Table 4, in different combinations. 
 
Table 3 
ID 
Hydrological load type 
Event search criteria 
(daily basis) 
Assessment purpose 
A1 
 
 
Single rain event of short 
duration and with 
significant peak intensity 
High accumulated rain 
depths [mm] and little 
rain activity [minutes] 
Test of system under conditions 
that are likely to occur during 
summer 
A2 
 
 
Consecutive rain event 
of long duration 
Moderate to high 
accumulated rain depth 
[mm] and high rain 
activity [minutes] 
Test of system under conditions 
that are likely to occur during 
winter 
A3 
 
 
Rain event with high 
spatial variability of rain 
intensity 
Big variations of 
biggest/smallest rain 
depth as ratio 
Test of system under conditions 
with subcatchment load 
variations greater than the 
system design load 
 
Table 4 
ID 
Hydrodynamic 
response type 
Event search criteria 
Assessment purpose 
==PAGE:28==
6 METHODOLOGY 
22 
 
B1 
 
 
Rain event causing 
moderate basin filling 
degrees and small or no 
CSO activity throughout 
the system 
Visual inspection of 
filling degree plot 
Test of control strategy function 
under conditions with 
significant filling degree 
variations and good potential of 
basin rentention/emptying. 
B2 
 
 
Rain event causing high 
basin filling degrees and 
high CSO activity 
throughout the system 
Visual inspection of 
filling degree plot 
Test of control strategy 
malfunctions under very 
extreme conditions 
 
 
 
6.3.2 Test and validation of control strategy implementation 
 
Selected control strategies have been implemented in the hydrodynamic model according to control 
translation as presented in the rule scheme tables. Followingly, simulations are made with the identified rain 
events as input. Successfulness of control strategy implementations are evaluated in the following ways: 
 
A. Visual inspections of test results for all representative rain events 
Visual inspections are carried out on time series of basin filling degrees, basin effluents and basin 
overflow activities for controlled storage structures. Inspections shall reveal if the control strategy 
works as intended, and that it does not malfunction under any hydrological conditions as represented 
by the representative rain events. All selected rain events area assessed. 
 
B. Detailed analysis of control strategy mechanism on a single rain event 
Close up analysis of basin filling degree and basin effluent behaviors. Time series are evaluated on a 
minute-to-minute basis. Patterns and significant behaviors are pointed out and commented. The 
function and mechanism analysis contributes to the basis of an overall comparison of all assessed 
control strategies. 
 
6.4 
Evaluation of control strategy performance 
 
The following explains the methodology of evaluating control strategy performances. Initially, specifications 
of long-term simulation are presented. Followingly,   
 
 
6.4.1 LTS specifications 
 
Control strategy performances are best evaluated on a long-term time-scale, including evaluations on 
reductions of CSO (Find reference!). Preferably, evaluation periods should be of one year at least and 
represent all 12 months to account for seasonal variations in the hydrological load pattern. Also, it will 
provide a satisfactory statistical foundation for evaluating system performances affected by the stochastic 
nature of rainfall. 
==PAGE:29==
6 METHODOLOGY 
23 
 
In this study, four years of radar rainfall data from 2017-2020 is included in long-term simulations. Criteria 
for event selection is defined for the purpose of reducing the rainfall continuum and, thus bringing down 
simulation time. No attention has been paid to identification and statistical evaluation of CSO events. The 
criteria can be seen in Table 5. 
 
 
Table 5 - Nævn at FD er filing deree (og øvrige forkortelser 
LTS simulation criteria 
Location 
Threshold 
Duration 
Job start (general) 
Influent of entire system 
Qinfluent > 6 × QDWF,peak 
10 minutes 
Job stop (general) 
Influent of entire system 
Qinfluent < 6 × QDWF,peak 
60 minutes 
Run time stop criteria 
(additional) 
Storage basins B15, B17, B19, 
B21, B22 and A01RA 
FD < 0.1 
120 minutes 
 
 
6.4.2 Performance evaluation criteria 
 
Performance evaluations are carried out with respect to defined control objectives. The evaluation is based 
on the long-term simulation results, in comparison with the same numbers of a no-control scenario. CSO 
discharge volumes and flood volumes (irreversible spills from the system) are measured in [m3], while CSO 
discharge frequencies are measure in [days]. Performance evaluation parameters can be seen in Table 6. For 
control block A01RA, CSO discharge volumes are summarized and reported separately for CSO in basin PB 
and for CSOs A, B and C. This similarly applies to control block B22 and CSO discharge volumes for CSOs 
D, E and F. 
 
Table 6 
Objective 
Primary/ 
secondary 
Evaluation 
parameter 
Achievement criteria 
Reduction of 
discharged CSO 
volumes 
Primary 
Accumulated 
discharged volume 
[m3] 
Any reduction 
Reduction of CSO 
discharge 
frequencies 
Primary 
Reduction of days 
with CSO activites 
[days] 
Any reduction 
No increase of 
flooding 
Secondary 
Accumulated spilled 
volume from 
manholes [m3] 
Increase of volume up to 10% is 
allowed (due to inaccuracy of model, 
data and other uncertainties) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
7 RESULTS 
24 
 
7 
RESULTS 
 
Results from the study are presented in this chapter. This includes the translations of control strategies. 
Followingly, selected representative rain events for testing, control strategy test results along with the 
validation of implementations are represented. Lastly, the results of control strategy performances are 
outlined. 
 
7.1 
Control strategy translations 
 
In the following, results from the process of control strategy translations are presented. Firstly, descriptions 
of the selected studies and control strategies are presented in short, trying to address the criteria defined in 
the selection process. Secondly, the results from the translations are presented, including lists of measured 
variables, controlled variables, and system constants relevant for control strategy applications. Control 
strategy rule schemes are included as well and are the primary output of the translation. 
 
7.1.1 Kroll et al. (2018) 
 
The study takes the initial steps towards a complete generic methodology for implementing rule-based real-
time control on existing combined sewers. The study synthesizes previous work on volume-based control of 
combined sewers, including those of Schütze et al. (2005) and Dirckx et al. (2011). Additional proposals for 
strategies optimizing storage volumes are presented as well. All control strategies have CSO reductions as 
the primary objective The study includes a generic methodology with three options for identifying control 
locations. As all is presented in a structured manner, it allows for exploring optimal usage storage volume, 
through several combinations of control strategies and control location layouts. In the study, control 
strategies were applied on 5 different Belgian combined sewer systems with drainage areas ranging from 25 
to 251 ha. The results from the study were generally positive with reductions in CSO volumes of up to 50%.  
The author states that the control strategies are applicable to similar sewer systems. In the case of this study, 
the combined sewer system of Bistrup is found to fir with this description. 
 
Three control strategies from the study have been selected for translation. All three strategies attempt to 
control basin filling degrees in different ways, causing them to close in on each other. Thus, the overall aim 
of alle three is to assure equal utility of storage volumes in the system. The strategies are based on 2-point 
setting of basin effluents, e.g. pumps turned ON or OFF, or gates and weirs being either fully open or 
completely shut. The basin most downstream (immediately before the WWTP) is excluded from being 
controlled and has fixed effluent equal to the WWTP treatment capacity. Algorithms of the strategies are 
similar in structure but do use different inputs for set point tracking of basin filling degrees. Short 
descriptions of the strategies and how they distinguish from each other can be found in Table 7. If a 
fundamental version of the often discussed and applied “equal filling degree” strategy is to be defined, the 
subversion Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo, as translated and presented here, would be a very good proposal for 
that. 
 
Table 7 
Strategy subversion 
Description 
Basin filling degree set point 
==PAGE:31==
7 RESULTS 
25 
 
Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo 
Global equal filling 
degree 
Arithmetic mean of all basin filling 
degrees in the system 
Kroll et al. (2018) DS glo 
Global downstream 
filling degree 
Filling degree of furthest downstream 
basin in the system 
Kroll et al. (2018) DS loc 
Local downstream 
filling degree 
Filling degree of immediate 
downstream basin 
 
 
Description of variables used in the control algorithms can be seen in Table 8, and the rule schemes of the 
three control algorithms for strategy subversion A, B and C can be found in Table 9, Table 10 and Table 11 
respectively. 
 
Table 8 
Control strategy variables – Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo, DS glo and DS loc 
𝐹𝐷𝑖  
Filling degree of each individual basin in system 
M 
𝐹𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛  
Arithmetic mean of all basin filling degrees in system 
M 
𝐹𝐷𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑆  
Filling degree of furthest downstream basin in system 
M 
𝐹𝐷𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑆  
Filling degree of basin immediately downstream 
M 
𝑄𝑖  
Effluent flow of each individual basin 
C 
𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥  
Highest flow setting of actuator / actuator fully open 
P 
𝑄0  
Zero-flow setting of actuator / actuator fully closed 
P 
 
 
 
 
Table 9 
Control strategy rule scheme – Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo 
IF 
𝐹𝐷𝑖< 𝐹𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛  
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥  
ELSE 
𝐹𝐷𝑖> 𝐹𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛  
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄0  
 
 
 
 
 
Table 10 
Control strategy rule scheme – Kroll et al. (2018) DS glo 
IF 
𝐹𝐷𝑖< 𝐹𝐷𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑆  
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥  
ELSE 
𝐹𝐷𝑖> 𝐹𝐷𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑆  
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄0  
 
 
 
 
 
Table 11 
Control strategy rule scheme – Kroll et al. (2018) DS loc 
==PAGE:32==
7 RESULTS 
26 
 
IF 
𝐹𝐷𝑖< 𝐹𝐷𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑆  
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥  
ELSE 
𝐹𝐷𝑖> 𝐹𝐷𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑆  
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.1.2 Dirckx et al. (2011) 
 
The study tries to uncover the most cost-efficient alternative for mitigating impacts from CSOs. Conducted 
on one case system in Belgium serving about 25.000 people and draining a catchment with a total area of 
2.200 ha. The study applies a control algorithm based on equal filling degree and refers to the study of 
Campisano et al. (2000), in which further reference is made to Weyand (1990) and Schmitt (1996). The 
control strategy is applied to storage basins in different combinations in search of highest possible reduction 
of CSO volumes. Additionally, the strategy addresses practical aspects related to operation of actuators. 
Firstly, the control algorithm is not activated until at least one basin has a filling degree higher than 20%. 
Secondly, the control algorithm should avoid actuators from flip-flopping around a certain set point (despite 
planned only for the practical set up). Simulations of six scenarios are evaluated based on historic rain data 
of 1 year and leads to reduction of CSO volumes of 19-65%.  
 
The control strategy resembles Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo but is different on a few areas. It allows 
implementation on only selected basins. It includes a procedure of activating only when the filling degree of 
any storage basin exceeds 20%. Lastly, it prevents actuators from flip-flopping around a certain set point. In 
this study, this has been understood as no change of actuator settings while filling degrees are within a 
certain range centered around the mean filling degree. E.g. the setting of an actuator remains unchanged as 
long as the related basin filling degree is within a range of ±1% of the mean filling degree. Control variables 
and parameters of the control strategy translation are found in Table 12, while the control algorithm is found 
in Table 13. 
 
Table 12 
Control strategy variables – Dirckx et al. (2011) 
 
 
 
𝐹𝐷𝑖  
Filling degree of each individual basin 
M 
𝐹𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛  
Arithmetic mean of all basin filling degrees 
M 
𝑄𝑖  
Effluent flow of each individual basin 
C 
𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥  
Highest flow setting of actuator / actuator fully open 
K 
𝑄0  
Zero-flow setting of actuator / actuator closed 
K 
Δ𝐹𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥  
Filling degree interval centered around 𝐹𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 at which 𝑄𝑖 remains 
unchanged when 𝐹𝐷𝑖 falls within 
K 
 
 
 
 
Table 13 
Strategy control rule scheme – Dirckx et al. (2011) 
IF 
ANY 𝐹𝐷𝑖< 0.2 
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄𝑛𝑜𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙  
==PAGE:33==
7 RESULTS 
27 
 
ELSE 
𝐹𝐷𝑖< 𝐹𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛−Δ𝐹𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥/2 
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥  
ELSE 
𝐹𝐷𝑖> 𝐹𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛+ Δ𝐹𝐷𝑓𝑖𝑥/2 
THEN 
𝑄𝑖= 𝑄0  
 
 
 
 
 
7.2 
Rain events for testing 
 
The selected representative rain events are found in Table 14. The complete list encompasses events related 
to identified hydrological load types and hydrodynamic system responses. Assessing control strategies based 
on these rain events assures testing under all relevant conditions at which control algorithms are expected to 
take effect. 
 
Table 14 – Referer lod/response types til afsnit 
Event 
Start date 
Duration 
Depth 
Rain 
activity 
Low/high 
depth 
ratio 
Rain 
intensity 
 
Hydrological load/ 
hydrodynamic 
response type 
 
 
 
[d hh:mm] 
[mm] 
[-] 
[-] 
[µm/s] 
 A1 A2 A3 B1 B2  
1 
19-05-2018 
0 01:53 
16.6 
100% 
0.25 
2.4 
 🗸 
 
🗸 
 
🗸  
2 
04-08-2018 
0 00:43 
9.2 
100% 
0.23 
3.5 
 🗸 
 
🗸 
🗸 
 
 
3 
09-08-2018 
0 02:35 
10.8 
96% 
0.93 
1.2 
 🗸 
 
 
 
🗸  
4 
26-01-2019 
2 00:34 
11.3 
56% 
0.87 
0.1 
 
 
🗸 
 
🗸 
 
 
5 
03-03-2019 
15 10:46 
117.2 
31% 
0.92 
0.3 
 
 
🗸 
 
🗸 
🗸  
6 
17-09-2019 
1 05:12 
49.1 
47% 
0.33 
1.0 
 
 
🗸 
🗸 
🗸 
 
 
7 
21-10-2019 
0 03:49 
44.6 
98% 
0.86 
3.3 
 🗸 
 
 
 
🗸  
 
 
7.3 
Test and validation on representative rain events 
 
The successfulness of implemented control strategies are evaluated in the following. This includes validation 
by visual inspection of test results based on representative rain event. Also, the implementations are 
validated based on detailed analyses of control strategy function and algorithm mechanisms. In both cases 
validation is based on filling degrees and effluents behaviors, according to control objects and overall 
principles.  
 
A. Visual inspections of test results for all representative rain events 
Visual inspections of test results were carried out for assessed strategies on all seven representative 
rain events. No behaviors suggesting incorrect implementation were seen. Inspected test results can 
be seen in Appendix XXX for a single rain event as an example. 
 
B. Detailed analysis of control strategy mechanism on a single rain event 
==PAGE:34==
7 RESULTS 
28 
 
Detailed analysis of control strategy function and mechanisms can be found for each assessed 
control strategy in the subchapters below, including a subchapter in which they are compared. 
Included are time series of basin filling degrees and effluents based on a single rain event. 
 
The specific rain event occurred on 9 august 2010, lasted 2½ hours and had insignificant spatial variation of 
rain intensities. It is categorized as hydrological load type A1 being a single rain event of short duration and 
with significant peak intensity. The event induced a hydrodynamic response of type B2 categorized by high 
basin filling degrees and high CSO activity throughout the system. Times series of rain intensities within 
each control block are seen in Figure 12, while basin filling degrees are seen in Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 12 
 
 
Figure 13 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
7 RESULTS 
29 
 
7.3.1 Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo 
 
Times series of filling degrees under no-control and under implementation of the Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo 
control strategy, can be seen in Figure 14. Basin effluent rates are shown as well for the controlled scenario. 
Findings of the detailed function analysis are categorized and can be seen below. 
 
Overall function: 
▪ 
It appears that the strategy is successful in closing filling degrees of individual basins in on the mean 
filling degree, thus reaching a state where storage capacities of all basins are equally utilized. 
▪ 
As the mean filling degree reaches below 10%, and the control strategy stops being active. The strategy 
ending procedure makes the basin effluents switching to regular operation at max capacities, followed by 
fast emptying of basins and all filling degrees dropping to zero. 
 
Mean filling degree trends: 
▪ 
The mean filling degree reveals that the entire system is kept at a higher degree of filling throughout the 
simulation period when compared to the no-control scenario. It is kept in mind, that the mean filling 
degree is the arithmetic mean of fillings of basins varying from 147 to 5005 m3 in hydrostatic storage 
capacity. The total volume stored in the system is, therefore, not directly proportional to the mean filling 
degree. 
▪ 
A close look at the times at which the system is completely empty (filling degree of basin A01RA 
reaches 0), under control and no-control, indicates that the system is entirely emptied a bit later in the 
controlled situation. This is due to a reduction of CSO discharges (possibly also reduction of flooding) as 
a consequence of the control strategy, eventually requiring more water to be fed to the WWTP. 
▪ 
As more filling degrees reaches the mean, the curve representing the mean filling degree flattens out. 
Eventually, the rate at which the mean filling degree changes is reduced. When the last basin filling 
degree (B17) reaches the mean, the mean filling degree changes at a fix rate. All basin filling degrees are 
at this point fixed to the same change rate. This common filling degree change rate is determined by the 
basin with lowest emptying capacity with respect to own max storage volume. According to the test 
results in this case, the “bottleneck” is the emptying capacity of basin A01RA, at a fixed filling degree 
change rate of 0.085/hour. This is related to the constant WWTP influent of 118 l/s, and the emptying of 
all six basins consequently depends on the WWTP treatment capacity. 
 
Basin filling degree and effluent trends: 
▪ 
Basin effluents are at max capacities until the mean filling degree have been reached. 
▪ 
After reaching the mean filling degree, basin effluents are required to switch between max capacity and 
no flow to maintain their related basin filling degrees centered around the mean filling degree. As basin 
effluents can only be that of max capacity, with a filling degree change rate different from the mean 
filling degree change rate, a systematic ON/OFF pattern begins causing basin filling to fluctuate around 
the mean. 
▪ 
As more filing degrees reaches the mean, the filling degree change rate of basins that have already 
reached the mean filling degree, appears to decrease. This becomes evident as the systematic ON/OFF 
effluent pattern changes, with increasing periods with no effluent. This is for instance the case, when 
basin effluent rates of B15, B19, B21 and B22 lowers, when the filling degree of B17 lastly reaches the 
mean filling degree. 
 
==PAGE:36==
7 RESULTS 
30 
 
 
Figure 14 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
7 RESULTS 
31 
 
7.3.2 Kroll et al. (2018) DS glo 
 
Times series of filling degrees under no-control and under implementation of the Kroll et al. (2018) DS glo 
control strategy, can be seen in Figure 15Figure 14. Basin effluent rates are shown as well for the controlled 
scenario. Findings of the detailed function analysis are categorized and can be seen below. 
 
Overall function: 
▪ 
Similar to overall function of Kroll et al (2018) EQ glo 
 
Mean filling degree trends 
▪ 
Similar to mean filling degree trends of Kroll et al (2018) EQ glo 
▪ 
CHANGES: When the last basin filling degree (B17 and B19 almost simultaneously) closes in on 
A01RA, so does the mean filling degree. All basin filling degrees are at this point fixed to the same 
change rate.  
 
Basin filling degree and effluent trends: 
▪ 
Basin effluents are at max capacities until the filling degree of A01RA have been reached 
▪ 
For basins with filling degrees reaching the filling degree of A01RA after inflow to the basin has ended, 
and before A01RA filling degree peaks, no effluent will occur. Wastewater will be retained until the 
filling degree of A01RA has lowered sufficiently once again. This is the case for B19, B21 and B22. 
▪ 
Basins with filling degrees reaching the filling degree of A01RA after its peak, are required to switch 
their effluent between max capacity and no flow to maintain their filling degree centered around that of 
A01RA. As basin effluents can only be that of max capacity, with a filling degree change rate different 
from the one seen in basin A01RA, a systematic ON/OFF effluent pattern begins causing related filling 
degrees to fluctuate around the filling degree of A01RA. 
▪ 
Basin filling degree change rates, i.e., the systematic ON/OFF effluent pattern, remain more or less 
constant until the control strategy deactivates. Disturbances to the ON/OFF effluent pattern may happen 
due to inconsistent inflow in the basin itself or basin A01RA.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
7 RESULTS 
32 
 
 
Figure 15 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
7 RESULTS 
33 
 
7.3.3 Kroll et al. (2018) DS loc 
 
Times series of filling degrees under no-control and under implementation of the Kroll et al. (2018) DS loc 
control strategy, can be seen in Figure 16. Basin effluent rates are shown as well for the controlled scenario. 
Findings of the detailed function analysis are categorized and can be seen below. 
 
Overall function: 
▪ 
Similar to overall function of Kroll et al (2018) EQ glo 
 
Mean filling degree trends: 
▪ 
Similar to mean filling degree trends of Kroll et al (2018) EQ glo 
 
Basin filling degree and effluent trends: 
▪ 
Basin effluents are at max capacities until the filling degree has reached the downstream basin filling 
degree. 
▪ 
For basins with filling degrees reaching the downstream filling degree after inflow has ended, and before 
the downstream filling degree peaks, no effluent will occur. Wastewater will be retained until the filling 
degree of downstream has lowered sufficiently once again. This is the case for B22. 
▪ 
After reaching the downstream basin filling degree, basin effluents are required to switch between max 
capacity and no flow to maintain their related basin filling degrees centered around that of the 
downstream basin. As basin effluents can only be that of max capacity, with a filling degree change rate 
different from the downstream basin filling degree change rate (while emptying at max capacity as well), 
a systematic ON/OFF pattern begins causing basin filling degrees to fluctuate around or below the filling 
degree of the downstream basin. 
▪ 
Basin filling degrees may be kept at very high levels due to overloaded downstream basins. For instance, 
this is the case with basin B15. It seems to maintain a filling degree equal to 1, despite ended inflow. 
This is due to downstream basin B22 having a filling degree of 1 while also being overloaded. 
▪ 
Filling degrees of basins in the system may periodically start to scatter instead of closing in on each other 
as intended, due to downstream basins possibly having a bigger emptying capacity with respect to own 
storage volume. 
 
==PAGE:40==
7 RESULTS 
34 
 
 
Figure 16 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
7 RESULTS 
35 
 
7.3.4 Dirckx et al. (2011) 
 
Times series of filling degrees under no-control and under implementation of the Dirckx et al. (2011) control 
strategy, can be seen in Figure 17. Basin effluent rates are shown as well for the controlled scenario. 
Findings of the detailed function analysis are categorized and can be seen below. 
 
Overall function 
▪ 
Similar to overall function of Kroll et al (2018) EQ glo 
 
Mean filling degree trends 
▪ 
Similar to overall function of Kroll et al (2018) EQ glo 
 
Basin filling degree and effluent trends 
1. The overall pattern of basin filling degrees resembles that of Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo. However 
due to pump OFF-periods being longer, more rapid changes in respective filling degrees are seen. 
2. When basin filling degrees have reached that of basin A01RA, they also surpass it. Eventually, they 
all, except for A01RA, end up being turned OFF while within the range where no regulations are 
made. Basin A01RA empties as the only one for some time, until that eventually (and slowly) lowers 
the mean filling sufficiently enough for some of the remaining basin filling degrees to exceed the 
mean filling degree range at which no regulations are made. 
3. The added mechanism to the algorithm ensuring pumps operated with fewer regulation is very 
evident when looking at the pump capacity curves. Pump ON//OFF periods have become 
significantly longer, and pumps will actually reach their max capacity. 
4. Pumps are at max capacities until the filling degree set points is reached. From then all pumps are 
able to empty their respective basins within 5-8 ON/OFF cycles. 
==PAGE:42==
7 RESULTS 
36 
 
 
Figure 17 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
7 RESULTS 
37 
 
7.4 
Control strategy performance evaluations 
 
This chapters evaluates the performances of control strategies with respect to identified control objectives. 
Included are CSO discharge volumes, CSO discharge frequencies and flood volumes for all assessed control 
strategies, being hold against the no-control scenario. 
 
7.4.1 Reduction of CSO discharge volumes 
 
The simulation test results related to the primary control objective, i.e., reduction of CSO volumes, can be 
seen in Figure 18. All assessed control strategies are represented as well as the no-control scenario. The 
figure shows total CSO discharge volumes, for each of the six control blocks for the period from 2017 to 
2020. For control block B22 and A01RA, volumes discharge from in line CSO structures are reported as a 
single quantity for each control block. 
 
All control strategies reduce CSO volumes to some extent, however, reductions for all strategies are not very 
significant. They are in the range from 2.3% to 3.1%. By far, the biggest CSO reductions are seen in control 
block A01RA and ranges from 38 to 41%. With the overall control strategy principles in mind, i.e., 
equalization of utilized storage volumes, wastewater is assumed to be retained in upstream basins more often 
and for longer time. Upstream basins are thus prevented from discharging wastewater towards the central, 
and occasionally already overloaded basin A01RA. Slight reductions are also seen in control block B21 by 4 
to 12%, and in control block B22 by 2 to 3% for in line overflow structures. Increased CSO volumes are seen 
in control blocks B15, B17 and B22. This seems to be the costs of achieving rather large CSO reductions at 
control block A01RA. 
 
The result at hand confirms earlier suspicions of high CSO volumes in control block B17 and B22. As 
identified in the analysis of control block characteristics, specific storages appear small in control block B17 
and B22. With specific storages of 10 and 24 m3/ha respectively, they are found remarkably small and 
undersized in comparison with other control blocks. 
==PAGE:44==
7 RESULTS 
38 
 
 
 
Figure 18 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
7 RESULTS 
39 
 
7.4.2 Reduction of CSO discharge frequencies 
 
The simulation test results related to the primary control objective, i.e., reduction of CSO frequencies, can be 
seen in Figure 18. All assessed control strategies are represented as well as the no-control scenario. The 
numbers in the figure express the counted days with CSO activity of any kind, relative to the total 1461 days 
of the assessed period. Results are reported for the entire system, and for each of the six control blocks. 
 
It appears from the results, that the control strategies applied have close to no impact on reported days with 
CSO activity for the entire system. The same applies to the in line CSO structures of control block B22. In 
addition, they are highly corelated for all scenarios with and without control. It is therefore expected that one 
or more of the in-line CSOs of control block B22 are the weakest point in the system, i.e., those most likely 
to start overflowing. 
 
Changes are significant for basin B19 and B21 that are in series. While B19 in most cases has fewer days 
with CSO, the number increases for B21. This indicates that the control strategies successfully are able to 
retain wastewater that would otherwise discharge to B21 and then overflow. 
 
They all perform well for basin A01RA, as all applied control strategies decreases the total number of events 
by approx. 40 %. 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
7 RESULTS 
40 
 
 
Figure 19 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
7 RESULTS 
41 
 
7.4.3 Prevention of increased flooding 
 
The simulation test results related to the subsidiary control object, i.e., no aggravation of flooding, can be 
seen in Figure 20. Overall, all control strategies performed well in this matter, as flood reductions was not a 
requirement. Flood volume reductions for the assessed control strategies are overall ranging from 0.5 to 
1.4%. However, due their insignificance, the control strategies conclude to be successful in preventing 
aggravations of flooding, rather than successful in reducing flooding. 
 
Despite the overall conclusion above, it is well worth looking at how flood patterns are changing across the 
system. Control strategies pursuing the primary objective, seems to be at the cost of significant increased 
flood volumes in control block B19. For all control strategies, it is in the range from 9 to 16%, and three out 
of four exceeds the defined threshold of 10%. 
 
 
Figure 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
8 DISCUSSION 
42 
 
8 
DISCUSSION 
 
8.1 
Differences between assessed rule-based strategies 
The control strategies that were successfully translated and implemented were found to be much alike in 
terms of performance and function. When comparing the control algorithms this might seem intuitive, but as 
very different guiding FD set-points are applied, different performances and functionings could also be 
expected. Despite this, they did equally well in equalizing filling degrees, thus achieving a uniform 
utilization of the basin storage capacities. 
Most significant differences between the applies strategies were on number of days with CSO activities. 
Kroll et al. (2018) DS loc would perform better than Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo for control block B21, 
however it would also perform equally for control block B19. As the two basins are in series, it might 
indicate that one strategy was just better at equalizing stored volumes, thus causing wastewater to discharge 
somewhere else 
The differences in performances with respect to days with CSO are otherwise not considered significant or of 
big impact to the receiving waters. Keeping in mind that the volumetric CSO reductions are insignificant, the 
increases and decreases seen in number of days with CSO activities, may very well be for days with very low 
CSO volumes.  
Control strategy functioning of Dirck et al. (2011) did divert from those of Kroll et al. (2018), however this 
is obviously explained by the algorithm extension that maintains operation with less frequent actuator 
regulations. For this reason, also, Dirckx et al (2011) would be preferred over the other strategies. As 
performances between the strategies are almost insignificant, preference would then be given to safer pumps 
operations. 
 
8.2 
Prospects of RTC applications 
The study proved than more complex control strategies, being that of (Schütze et al., 2005), were less likely 
to undergo a successful translation process. It is therefore considered more likely that simple applications. 
This is backed by the general findings from the literature review, where documented real-life applications, in 
most cases, are high in simplicity, e.g. the Equal Filling Degree method as well as other FD set-point 
tracking methods based on local and global information (Campisano et al., 2000; Dirckx et al., 2011; Kroll et 
al., 2017; van Daal et al., 2017; Weyand, 2002). As it is hard to imagine a simpler method for equalized use 
of storage capacities, it indicates a general preference by operators on simple rule-based control algorithms. 
This is in line with a long-known circumstance of wastewater operators considering real-time control “too 
compex” (Beeneken et al., 2013; Dirckx et al., 2014). Complex real-time control systems, such as MPC, has 
been applied for decades (Nielsen et al., 1993; Pleau et al., 2005) and it is believed that chances of RTC 
uptake depends greatly on the willingness of just a few. Based on the literature, is seems that development of 
control strategies of increased complexity and performance is the main agenda. Additionally, this seems to 
be understood as an important factor in making RTC applications grow in numbers (Alex et al., 2008; Pabst 
et al., 2011; Schütze et al., 2005). It has been pointed out that as more RTC systems are implemented world-
wide, the experience gained should improve confidence and accelerate uptake in appropriate circumstance 
(Butler et al., 2018). Based on all this, it is found important that scientific experts are to aid operators in 
adapting RTC at levels found comfortable. Additionally, this is believed to be the primary way conveying 
expertise slow and steadily to the operational part of the industry. 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
8 DISCUSSION 
43 
 
8.3 
Limitations of study 
It was tested to what extent CSO volumes could be reduced if changes were made to the system, making it 
more suitable for RTC applications. Those changes eventually meant, that basin PB and B16 were included 
in the control set up. Basin PB adds a very little controllable volume of 100 m3 and B16 adds a very large 
controllable volume of 2700 m3. See Figure 9 for respective locations within the system.  
Control strategy Kroll et al (2018) EQ glo were applied to this altered case system and were able reduce CSO 
significantly better. The specified scenario led to reductions of CSO volumes by 11% against reductions of 
2.6% for the scenario applying the same control strategy, but on original case system. It is believed that the 
control strategies assessed had limited performance opportunities due to a system having little potential for 
RTC applications. Studies trying to identify control strategies that performs better, should preferably be 
tested on case systems with very big potentials. This is in line with the literature where it is stated that 
selection of a proper control strategy is of less importance with respect to flooding and much more dependent 
on proper distribution of control locations (Kroll et al., 2018). 
The study is furthermore considered limited as control strategies were only tested one case system. If a 
control strategy is found to be general, it must be applicable on similar case systems. As no other similar case 
systems were used for testing the same strategies, it can be questioned whether the study was on generic 
strategies or not. 
 
8.4 
Further studies 
A procedure for uncovering best possible RTC application of as system is suggested. It includes three 
possible paths (A, B and C) to explore best possible solutions. The three paths, despite representing different 
aspects to consider, are found equally important in the process of designing case specific rule-base control 
strategies. The suggested method requires un-automated assessments of three paths. This is in contradiction 
with current trends within the field, where tools for assessment of control potentials and tools for preliminary 
RTC designs are under constant development. The three paths of the suggested methods are seen below, 
including an example of path C being explored. 
 
A. The physical layout of the system. Distribution of storage volumes, controllable locations, 
distances (travel time) between storage facilities. 
 
B. The control algorithm and the way it is designed to achieve the system state set points that 
represents the fulfilling of initially defined control objectives. 
 
C. System state and related control algorithm parameters 
 
It is often mentioned that RTC is the attempt to change the immediate state of a system, into a 
more desirable one, depending on the immediate system state. What should be used to describe 
the current state of a system at a given time? What should be the input parameters in the control 
algorithm? 
It is found in the literature, that basin filling degree is the one and only system state parameter 
found useful and capable of describing exactly at what state a given a system is in. Moreover, 
the equalization of basin filling degrees throughout a system almost nearly seems to be the only 
desirable setting of that specific system state description. 
 
==PAGE:50==
8 DISCUSSION 
44 
 
The idea of an equal utilization of storage capacity in a system is understandable. However, it is 
believed that unequal distribution of basin filling degrees in a system is generally not a problem 
in itself. It becomes a problem if basins are unequally filled, while the storage of one basin is 
fully utilized at 100%. Not until then, is the unequal distribution of sewage an issue, as sewage 
then starts discharging out of the system, while there is still vacant storage capacity elsewhere in 
the system. 
It is believed that the only requirement of equal utilization of basins storage capacities, no matter 
the starting point and distribution of filling degrees, should happen gradually as the total filling 
of the system increases towards 100 %. 
 
With this in mind, control strategies that aims at equalizing basin filling degrees only seems to 
be the best option, if it can somehow be assured, that the same temporal change of basin filling 
degrees will occur across the system. This is, however, found to be unlikely due to the following 
to reasons: 1) as basin storage volumes are rarely of equal dimension with respect to the area of 
their related subcatchments. 2) As basin emptying capacities are rarely equal with respect to the 
specific basin volume. 
 
What might be achievable, on the other hand, are the two following systems states: 
 
(1) A state where all basins are equally vulnerable to being filled by runoff from their related 
catchment This involves the change of basin fillings towards equalization of specific vacant 
storage capacity. 
(2) A state where all basin effluents are equally capable of complete emptying the basin, with 
respect to time. This involves the change of basin fillings towards equalization of basin 
emptying times. 
 
So, when should the pursuit for one system state favored over the other? It seems that 
 
(1) “Equalization of specific storage capacity [reduced ha / m3 storage volume]” is desired 
when, it is likely or certain that a basin receives run off at flow rate lower than the maximum 
flow rate of the device that empties the basin. 
(2) “Equalization of basin emptying times [hours]” is desired, when it is likely or certain that a 
basin receives run off at a flow rate lower than the maximum flow rate of the device that 
empties the basin. 
==PAGE:51==
9 CONCLUSION 
45 
 
9 
CONCLUSION 
 
The study assessed previous applications of generic rule-based control strategies for CSO reductions found 
in the literature. Findings of the study is summarized below: 
 
General: 
▪ Several applications of generic rule-based control strategies for CSO reduction are documented in the 
literature. WWTP influent regulation is sometimes seen as an additional control objective, while flood 
control is commonly assessed as subsidiary control objective.  
▪ Descriptions of control strategies are generally incomplete. Control algorithms are often insufficiently 
outlined, and replication becomes difficult. This is considered a shortcoming hindering the field of rule-
based real-time control from development and further expansion. 
Control strategy similarities and differences: 
▪ All control strategies aim at equalizing utilized basin storage volumes by regulation of basin effluents. 
Furthermore, they are all based on the concept of filling degree (FD), i.e., the relative filling of a basin. 
Effluent set points are selected by evaluating basin FDs against a predefined FD set-point. 
▪ The mean FD is commonly used as FD set-point and recognized as the “equal filling degree” method. 
However, local downstream basin FD and global downstream basin FD (at WWTP inlet) are also 
applied, as well as the smallest FD of any basin. 
▪ Control strategy applications are found to rely mostly on 2-point control (ON/OFF and open/closed), 
but applications of proportional control (adjustable flows or gate positions) are identified as well. 
▪ Control strategies applying proportional control are generally more sophisticated and challenging to 
implement. This is due to more complex rule-bases, basin FDs not having a common set-point and as 
basin effluents rely on mass-balance based flow negotiations between up- and downstream basins. 
▪ Studies on CSO reducing control strategies generally evaluates performance similarly based on 
reductions of CSO volumes and frequencies. 
Control strategy performances and function 
▪ Control strategies may occasionally push the system into locally undesired states, due to the specific 
control algorithm and its mechanisms. 
▪ Control strategy Kroll et al. (2018) DS loc performed best in this study, however, also restricted by a 
case system with limited control potential. Small CSO volume reductions were seen for all strategies, 
ranging from 2.3 to 3.1%. No significant improvement of were seen in terms of CSO frequency. 
▪ All control strategies perform similarly overall and at similar patterns across the system. CSO control 
potential is found to be system specific, which is in line with findings in the literature. 
▪ In the literature, proportionally controlled strategies with adjustable flows are sometimes favored. 
However, there is no shared agreement of a best-performance control strategy for CSO reduction. 
▪ Control strategies aggravations flooding in local parts of the system, but otherwise performed well as 
increased were seen in overall flood volume. However, it is unclear whether this is due to good control 
strategy performances or a system generally less prone to flooding. 
 
==PAGE:52==
REFERENCES 
46 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Alex, J., Schuetze, M., Ogurek, M., & Jumar, U. (2008). Systematic design of distributed controllers for 
sewer networks. IFAC Proceedings Volumes (IFAC-PapersOnline), 17(1 PART 1). 
https://doi.org/10.3182/20080706-5-KR-1001.0574 
Beeneken, T., Erbe, V., Messmer, A., Reder, C., Rohlfing, R., Scheer, M., Schuetze, M., Schumacher, B., 
Weilandt, M., & Weyand, M. (2013). Real time control (RTC) of urban drainage systems - A 
discussion of the additional efforts compared to conventionally operated systems. Urban Water 
Journal, 10(5), 293–299. https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2013.790980 
Butler, D., Digman, C. J., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, J. W. (2018). Urban Drainage (4th ed.). CRC Press. 
Campisano, A., Schilling, W., & Modica, C. (2000). Regulators’ setup with application to the Roma-
Cecchignola combined sewer system. Urban Water, 2(3), 235–242. www.elsevier.com/locate/urbwat 
Dirckx, G., Schütze, M., Kroll, S., Thoeye, C., de Gueldre, G., & van de Steene, B. (2011). Cost-efficiency 
of RTC for CSO impact mitigation. Urban Water Journal, 8(6), 367–377. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2011.630092 
Dirckx, G., van Assel, J., & Weemaes, M. (2014). Real Time Control From Desk Study to Full 
Implementation. 13th International Conference on Urban Drainage, 7–12. 
Fortier, C., & Mailhot, A. (2015). Climate Change Impact on Combined Sewer Overflows. Journal of Water 
Resources Planning and Management, 141(5). 
García, L. A., Barreiro-Gomez, J., Escobar, E., Téllez, D. A., Quijano, N., & Ocampo-Martinez, C. (2015). 
Modeling and real-time control of urban drainage systems: A review. Advances in Water Resources, 85, 
120–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2015.08.007 
Grum, M., Thornberg, D., Christensen, M. L., Shididi, S. A., & Thirsing, C. (2011). Full-Scale Real Time 
Control Demonstration Project in Copenhagen’s Largest Urban Drainage Catchments. 
Klepiszewski, K., & Schmitt, T. G. (2002). Comparison of conventional rule based flow control with control 
processes based on fuzzy logic in a combined sewer system. Water Science and Technology, 46(6–7), 
77–84. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2002.0665 
Kroll, S. (2019). Design of Real-Time Control Strategies for Combined Sewer Networks. 
Kroll, S., Dirckx, G., Donckels, B. M. R., van Dorpe, M., Weemaes, M., & Willems, P. (2016). Modelling 
real-time control of WWTP influent flow under data scarcity. Water Science and Technology, 73(7), 
1637–1643. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2015.641 
Kroll, S., Weemaes, M., van Impe, J., & Willems, P. (2017). A generic concept for storage control in sewer 
systems. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/319877240 
Kroll, S., Weemaes, M., van Impe, J., & Willems, P. (2018). A methodology for the design of RTC strategies 
for combined sewer networks. Water (Switzerland), 10(11). https://doi.org/10.3390/w10111675 
Lund, N. S. V., Falk, A. K. V., Borup, M., Madsen, H., & Steen Mikkelsen, P. (2018). Model predictive 
control of urban drainage systems: A review and perspective towards smart real-time water 
management. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 48(3), 279–339. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2018.1455484 
==PAGE:53==
REFERENCES 
47 
 
Mikovits, C., Rauch, W., & Kleidorfer, M. (2014). Dynamics in urban development, population growth and 
their influences on urban water infrastructure. Procedia Engineering, 70, 1147–1156. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2014.02.127 
Miljøstyrelsen. (2021, November 15). Spildevand i kloakken. Miljøministeriet, Miljøstyrelsen. 
https://mst.dk/natur-vand/vand-i-hverdagen/spildevand/spildevand-i-kloakken/ 
Mollerup, A. L., Mikkelsen, P. S., Thornberg, D., & Sin, G. (2017). Controlling sewer systems–a critical 
review based on systems in three EU cities. Urban Water Journal, 14(4), 435–442. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2016.1148183 
Mollerup, A. L., Thornberg, D. ;, Mikkelsen, P. S., Johansen, N. B., & Sin, G. (2018). 16 Years of 
Experience with Rule Based Control of Copenhagen’s Sewer System. Abstract from 11th IWA 
Conference on Instrumentation Control and Automation. 
Nielsen, J. B., Lindberg, S., & Harr, P. (1993). MODEL BASED ON-LINE CONTROL OF SEWER 
SYSTEMS. Wal. Sci. Tech, 28, 87–98. https://iwaponline.com/wst/article-pdf/28/11-
12/87/24704/87.pdf 
Pabst, M., Alex, Niclas, C., & Schütze, M. (2011). ADESBA-A new general global control system applied to 
the Hildesheim sewage system. 
Pleau, M., Colas, H., Lavallée, P., Pelletier, G., & Bonin, R. (2005). Global optimal real-time control of the 
Quebec urban drainage system. Environmental Modelling and Software, 20(4 SPEC. ISS.), 401–413. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2004.02.009 
Rudersdal Kommune. (2017a). Spildevandsplan 2017. 
Rudersdal Kommune. (2017b). Spildevandsplan 2017, kloakoplande - plan. 
Rudersdal Kommune. (2021). Kommuneplan 2021. 
Schilling, W. (1989). REAL-TIME CONTROL OF URBAN DRAINAGE SYSTEMS. The state-of-the-art. 
IAWPRC Task Group on Real-Time Control of Urban Drainage Systems. 
Schilling, W., Rauch, W., & Harremoës, P. (1996). Real time control of wastewater systems Controle en 
temps reel des réseaux d’assainissement. 
Schmitt, T. G. (1996). Operational flow control of combined sewer systems in long term pollution load 
simulation. 7th Intern. Conf. on Urban Storm Drainage, SUG-Verlagsgesellschaft, Hannover, 
Germany, 827–832. 
Schütze, M., Alex, J., & Ogurek, M. (2005). A general algorithm for the development of control algorithms 
for RTC of sewer systems (M. Schütze, J. Alex, & M. Ogurek, Eds.). 
Schütze, M., Campisano, A., Colas, H., Schilling, W., & Vanrolleghem, P. A. (2004). Real time control of 
urban wastewater systems - Where do we stand today? Journal of Hydrology, 299(3–4), 335–348. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2004.08.010 
Styrelsen for Vand- og Naturformidling. (2017). Punktkilder 2015. 
van Daal, P., Gruber, G., Langeveld, J., Muschalla, D., & Clemens, F. (2017). Performance evaluation of real 
time control in urban wastewater systems in practice: Review and perspective. Environmental 
Modelling and Software, 95, 90–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.06.015 
==PAGE:54==
REFERENCES 
48 
 
Weyand, M. (1990). Experience and results of real time control within a combined sewer system. 5th 
International Conference on Urban Storm Drainage, OSAKA, 1237–1242. 
Weyand, M. (2002). Real-time control in combined sewer systems in Germany – some case studies. 
www.elsevier.com/locate/urbwat 
  
==PAGE:55==
Development of Operational Real-Time Control Strategies 
for Reduction of Combined Sewer Overflows 
 
APPENDIX A – Increased control performance 
 
The tables below shows the increased performances of control strategy Kroll et al. (2018) EQ glo when 
applied to Bistrup combined sewer system, where also basin PB and B16 are being controlled. Volumetric 
reductions of CSO are significantly higher  (11%) than in the scenario, where basin PB and B16 are not 
included in the control strategy (2.6%). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
Development of Operational Real-Time Control Strategies 
for Reduction of Combined Sewer Overflows 
 
APPENDIX B - SCHÜTZE ET AL. (2005) control strategy translation 
 
Demand effluent from basin A into catchment B (𝑻𝑨,𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒏𝒅). Estimated considering volume 
balance in basin A: 
 
0 = 𝑧𝐴+ 𝑇𝑢𝑠−𝑇𝐴,𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑+ Δ𝑆𝐴  
 
𝑇𝐴,𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑= 𝑧𝐴+ 𝑇𝑢𝑠+ Δ𝑆𝐴  
 
𝑧𝐴 is replaced by 𝑄𝐴,𝑖𝑛−𝑇𝑢𝑠 
 
𝑇𝐴,𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑= (𝑄𝐴,𝑖𝑛−𝑇𝑢𝑠) + 𝑇𝑢𝑠+ Δ𝑆𝐴  
 
𝑇𝐴,𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑= 𝑄𝐴,𝑖𝑛+
(𝐹𝐷𝐴−𝐹𝐷𝐵)∙𝑉𝐴
Δ𝑡𝑅𝑇𝐶
  
 
Permitted effluent from basin A into catchment B (𝑻𝑨,𝒑𝒆𝒓𝒎𝒊𝒕𝒕𝒆𝒅). Estimated considering 
volume balance in basin B: 
 
0 = 𝑇𝐴,𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑑+ 𝑧𝐵−𝑇𝐵+ Δ𝑆𝐵  
 
𝑇𝐴,𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑑= −𝑧𝐵+ 𝑇𝐵−Δ𝑆𝐵  
 
𝑧𝐵 is replaced by 𝑄𝐵,𝑖𝑛−𝑇𝐴 
 
𝑇𝐴,𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑑= −(𝑄𝐵,𝑖𝑛−𝑇𝐴) + 𝑇𝐵−Δ𝑆𝐵  
 
𝑇𝐴,𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑑= −𝑄𝐵,𝑖𝑛+ 𝑇𝐴+ 𝑇𝐵−
(𝐹𝐷𝐵−𝐹𝐷𝐶)∙𝑉𝐵
Δ𝑡𝑅𝑇𝐶
  
 
 
 
 
 
Reference: 
Schütze, M., Alex, J., & Ogurek, M. (2005). A general algorithm for the development of control algorithms 
for RTC of sewer systems (M. Schütze, J. Alex, & M. Ogurek, Eds.). 
