==PAGE:1==
Platforms
as
drivers
in
transforming
construction towards circularity
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
Master Thesis
15 February, 2022
By
Janak Raja
Supervisor
Christian Thuesen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Civil
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Civil Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Circular
Economy and Product Platform Strategy.
Janak Raja ­ s192757
Signature
Date
ii
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Construction sector has a significant contribution to the world economy.
About 10 Trillion US Dollars is spent on construction­related goods and
services every year. This amount of money has the potential for boosting the
world GDP by 2 percent.
The extraction and dumping of resources are taking place at an unsustainable
rate, and with global construction output projected to be 80 percent by the
year 2030. The construction industry is left with little choice but to transform
into Circular Economy.
The present linear economy model of the construction industry follows a “take­
make­waste” approach in which the raw materials are extracted and made use
of, for construction. The building is then demolished after a certain period and
the waste generated due to demolition is often discarded or down cycled. The
implementation of Circular economy would lead to the minimization of virgin
materials used for construction and reduce the waste generated.
Product
Platform
Strategy
have
proven
to
be
effective
solutions
for
generating long­term strategic gains in industries such as automotive and
information technology, but their use in construction is restricted. This report
aims to clarify how Platform strategy can be drivers in transforming the
construction industry towards Circularity.
iii
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This Thesis was written as part of the Master of Science in Civil Engineering
degree requirement.
It was written with the aid of DTU’s Civil Engineering
Department,
under
the
guidance
of
Christian
Thuesen
(Associate
Professor,Department of Technology, Management and Economics).
This
thesis was prepared for 30 ECTS over the course of 5 months ( September
2021 to February 2022).
I’d like to thank Christian Thuesen, my primary supervisor, for his guidance
during the Thesis. I’d also want to thank my friends and family for their support
and contributions to the study.
iv
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Project Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory and Literature Study
5
2.1
What is Circular Economy? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Product Platforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
13
4
Results and Analysis
15
4.1
Circular Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Product Platforms in Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Connecting the dots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Strategies
for
the
application
of
Circular
economy
in
Prefabricated Buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Discussion
63
6
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
71
v
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
Research area and Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Butterfly diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Built Environment Levels according to Pomponi and Moncaster,
(2017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Benefits of Product Platform Harland and Uddin, (2014) . . . . .
10
2.4
Derived from J. Barney, (1991)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1
Selection Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1
Co­Occurrence of Keywords for Circular Economy with threshold
of 30 occurrences in a article
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Co­authorship of Circular economy articles with threshold of 3
articles per author and 10 citations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Co­authorship of countries in Circular economy articles with
threshold of 5 articles per country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Distribution of articles over the years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Distribution of articles over journals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.6
Six Pillars of Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.7
A Figure depicting Circular Economy in Construction Value chain
22
4.8
A Figure depicting Waste hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.9
A Figure depicting Barriers of Circular Economy
. . . . . . . . .
27
4.10 A Figure depicting Enablers of Circular Economy . . . . . . . . .
30
4.11 Co­Occurrence of Keywords for Product Platform in Construction
with threshold of 5 occurrences in a article
. . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.12 Co­authorship of articles for Product Platform in Construction
with threshold of 10 citations per article
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.13 Co­authorship
of
countries
in
Product
Platform
articles
in
Construction with threshold of at least 5 documents per country
36
4.14 Product Platform in construction article distribution over the years 37
4.15 Product Platform in construction article distribution over different
Journals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.16 A Figure on Fragmentation in the construction Industry derived
from Jones et al., (2021) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.17 A Figure showing the different types of manufacturing strategies
and their respective CODP (customer order decoupling point).
derived from Bonev et al., (2015) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.18 Co­Occurrence of Keywords for Circular economy and Product
Platforms with a threshold of 25 occurrences in an article . . . .
50
4.19 Model of Sustainable Industrialized Building System (SIBS)
taken from Zabihi et al., (2013)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
vi
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Project Motivation
The construction industry is a trillion­dollar industry.
It is no secret that an
Industry as big as this is producing a lot of waste. As a matter of fact, the
construction industry is responsible for over 30 percent of all the extraction of
natural resources that takes place in the world. This also means that there is
a lot of waste that is also associated with the construction industry [Benachio
et al., (2020)]. To be precise, the industry generates a quarter of all the solid
waste that is being generated throughout the world [Yeheyis et al., (2013)].
There are several reasons why the industry is responsible for the production
of such huge amounts of waste.
The main reason that stands out among
others is because the construction sector adopts a Linear Economic model of
“Take­Make­Dispose”.
What “Take­Make­Dispose” means is that the raw
materials that are needed to produce the resources are extracted and the
products needed are produced and used for a limited period and then the
product is disposed of at the end of its life.
In construction, the materials
used in the buildings are disposed at the end of its life, as they are
assembled for a single use and it is perceived that the materials do not
retain the ability to be reused [EMF, (2015)].
The system of take make dispose works on belief that value is created by
producing and selling products. The main issue with this approach is that the
underlying assumption for this system to work assumes that there is an
infinite supply of the resources like raw materials, energy and labor that is
needed to produce a particular item. But this assumption is not true, and the
world has begun to recognize this problem [TMW, (2021)].
The reason why the linear model of economy is so unsustainable is because
the last stage of this system is the generation of waste.
This system is
responsible for production of all kinds of wastes that are now turned into a
major threat for the ecosystem. The landfills are growing by about 2 billion
tonnes of garbage every year [TMW, (2021)].
This economic model is also responsible to produce large amounts of green
house gases such as Carbon, Methane and Nitrous oxides. The construction
Industry has a fair share in the production of waste.
The Industry is
responsible for about 32 percent of all the waste that is being generated
worldwide [Yeheyis et al., (2013)]. Like mentioned earlier, one quarter of the
solid waste is also generated by the construction industry. Half of the total
1
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:10==
green house gas emissions are due to the activities of extraction and
processing of raw materials.
The process makes use of land and water
which has also led to the loss of habitat and Biodiversity [TMW, (2021)].
The generation of waste by construction and demolition processes happens
throughout the life cycle of a building.
But 50 percent of the waste is
generated at the end of life [Kibert, (2016)].
The problem is predominant
because the construction industry follows the linear economic model that is
based of “take, make, dispose”.
The solution to this problem would be to
gradually shift the practices in the construction industry from the linear
economic model to the more sustainable Circular Economic Model.
The main transformation that is being pushed with the idea of CE is that it
separates the idea of resource depletion and economic growth, allowing an
everlasting economic development and profitability without adding pressure
on the environment.
1.2
Thesis Structure
The structure of the thesis is as follows.
It starts with the introduction as
Chapter 1 where the motivation for the study is discussed along with the
objectives. Chapter 2 then follows with the introduction to the topics that is
discussed. The third chapter then deals with the methodology that was used
to find the relevant information that was needed to write the thesis and also
the technique that was used to obtain the relevant data from the vast
databases. In Chapter 4 , there is a detailed discussion of all the information
that were found by conducting the systematic literature review on both the
topics of Circular economy and Product platform strategy.
Chapter 5 deals
with the discussions about the methodology used, results and limitations of
the study. Chapter 6 concludes the thesis report by summarising the overall
findings.
1.3
Thesis Objective
The Main objective of the thesis is to conduct an extensive literature analysis
of Circular Construction as well as Product platforms. Another objective of the
thesis is to find out how the use of product platform strategy in construction
can enable the transition of the construction industry from a linear economy
that it currently follows into a circular economy.
The objectives of this thesis leads us to the following research questions:
• What are the recent developments in literature on Circular Economy?
• What are the recent developments in literature on Product Platform
Strategy?
2
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:11==
• How can product platform strategy be linked with circular economy?
These research question will help us in answering the main question
that is to be addressed.
How can product platforms act as drivers in transforming construction
towards circularity?
Figure 1.1: Research area and Objective
3
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:12==
4
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory and Literature Study
This chapter presents the theories that are related to Circular economy and
circular buildings.
It also provides the theory for Product platforms.
The
fundamentals of circular economy and product platform is covered in this
chapter to help the reader understand the topic in discussion.
2.1
What is Circular Economy?
The Circular Economy is an alternative framework that is used to design,
make and use resources within our planetary boundaries.
The difference
between linear economy and Circular economy is that the circular economy
is restorative and regenerative by design. The adaptation of circular economy
will keep the materials in a closed loop and helps them retain maximum
value.
This is done by making of the principles of recovering and reusing
materials as much as possible[TMW, (2021)].
Construction, building energy consumption, and transportation all contribute
significantly to global climate emissions.
Construction is responsible for 15
percent of the global emission, while transportation is responsible for 21
percent and operations of buildings contribute 21 percent to the global
emissions according to Bajželj et al., (2013).
The complexity of urban
sustainability, which stems from sector­specific realities such as material
intensive urbanization, high building energy use, and slow building stock
turnover, emphasizes the importance of adopting new sustainable practices
to break the vicious circle and avoid path dependency.
It is worth noting that even though circular economy provides a lot of
emphasis to reusing and recycling, it is not only about that.
The Circular
economy
is
dynamic
and
complex
system
that
requires
a
profound
transformation in almost every sector [TMW, (2021)].
Circular economy is categorised according to the materials into two cycles by
the Ellen McArthur Foundation.
The two cycles are Biological cycle and
technical cycle. The biological cycle represents all the materials that can be
degraded by natural processes.
these are organic materials that are easily
degraded.
On the other hand, the technical cycle represents the inorganic
materials that are not biodegradable. The cycles that have been introduces
are explained with the help of the figure 2.1:
5
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Butterfly diagram
The whole point of Circular economy is to not look at waste as something
that needs to be disposed of, but to look at it as a resource that could be
used in some other process.
It promotes a cycle that is “take, make, use,
consume, regenerate, restore and reuse”.
The ultimate goal of a circular
system is not to reduce the amount of waste produced but to use less
products
and
make
fewer
products.
The
most
common
mistake
in
understanding the concept is that it is perceived as a system that is used to
handle waste efficiently and not much thought is put into how the waste can
be reintroduced into the life cycle [TMW, (2021)].
The Circular economic models promote the reuse of building materials at the
end of their life and the components parts are to be deconstructed so that
they could be used as material banks for future construction activities. This
helps in keeping the materials and components in a closed loop. The role of
the construction and built environment is crucial considering its high impact
on the environment due to the amount of resources it uses.
This in turn
offers a notable opportunity for the reduction in the production of waste and
energy use [Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017)].
Many of the difficulties of urban sustainability are projected to be solved by the
6
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:15==
CE. CE has been proposed as one of the remedies to mega trends including
urbanization, climate change, and a lack of suitable infrastructure, which are
producing issues like water scarcity, flooding, water pollution, negative health
consequences, and high rehabilitation costs [Koop and van Leeuwen, (2017)].
Liu et al., (2018) and Lee et al., (2016) are of the opinion that the circular
economy is the way forward for cities to become more sustainable and
resilient metabolism [Joensuu et al., (2020)].
Another problem with urban
development is that the cities dependency on the neighbouring rural areas
for the supply of materials required to sustain the populations needs.
The
rural areas in turn do not get any form of benefit out of this activities but
rather suffer from the ill effects of pollution and Industrialization. The concept
of Circular economy as a strategy to mitigate the problems that exist due to
Urban development has to be pushed.
2.1.1
What are Circular Buildings?
The term circular building is used to define a ”building that is designed,
planned,
built,
operated,
maintained
and
deconstructed
in
a
manner
consistent
with
CE
principles”
[Pomponi
and
Moncaster,
(2017)].
The
literature that is available on Construction Economy in the built environment
is still in its starting stages but the concept is gaining momentum in the field
of construction.
Buildings have a high level of complexities since they are normally one­off
projects. The components and materials that go into a building has its own
life cycle and all interact dynamically in space and time [ Pomponi and
Moncaster,
(2017)][Brand,
(1995)].
It is also noteworthy that the long
lifespans of a structure and the change in its use makes it more complex to
determine the future scenarios.
This leads to the conclusion that even
though the buildings are built using components that were manufactured as
products,
but
when
these
components
come
together,
their
complexity
increases and it is hard to fit them into the logic of manufacturing.
According to Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017), one of the the aspect that is
important to consider while framing building research from a CE perspective
is that the solutions that have been found out for products with a short life
span are not applicable to buildings, because the life span of a building is far
greater than that of the short lived products. It is significant to note from the
data that is available that 80 percent of the buildings that exist today were
built before 1990, and half of those have been built before 1960.
These
statistics give us an idea about the average lifespan of the building which
can range between 60­100 years [Ma et al., (2015)]. This evidences the fact
that it is not enough to just focus on the new construction if true circularity
has to be introduced to the construction industry.
7
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:16==
Another important aspect is to know that even though standard products are
used
in
buildings,
when
these
products
are
assembled
together,
and
transformed into a one­of­a­kind, complicated, long­lasting, and ever­changing
entity[Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017)].
Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017) have a very interesting point of view where
they see buildings as the meso­level, with urban agglomerates being the
macro level and the components used in the buildings being the micro­ level.
The
different
levels
of
built
environment
according
to
Pomponi
and
Moncaster, (2017) has been shown in the figure 2.2. The authors point out
the need for research in the building level.
Since most of the papers only
talk about either macro level or micro level. But there is a lack of literature
available on the topic of circularity in connection to buildings. Pomponi and
Moncaster, (2017) are of the opinion that an analysis that considers buildings
as an entity is currently missing in literature.
The Environmental impact
assessment research which is mostly done in terms of embodied energy and
carbon are conducted by considering the materials or cities, but it is to be
noted that buildings are the common level of analysis rather than materials
or cities for this kind of research in literature.
Figure 2.2: Built Environment Levels according to Pomponi and Moncaster,
(2017)
8
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Product Platforms
Product platform is a strategy that is commonly used in the manufacturing
Industry since its usage reduces the time required to develop a product, it
also contributes to the reduction of the costs that is associated with the
development of the product and helps increase the variety of products. This
makes
sure
that
the
companies
that
use
product
platforms
have
a
competitive advantage over other competitors[Muffatto and Panizzolo, (1996)]
[Muffatto and Roveda, (2000)].
The definition of product platforms differ from one paper to another. some of
the definitions are carved out in a broad sense and the others in a narrow
way.
However, the definitions that have been referred to the most are the
definitions of product platforms by Meyer and Lehnerd, (1997) and the other
definition is by Robertson and Ulrich. Meyer and Lehnard define the system
as a ”set of sub systems and interfaces that form a common structure from
which a stream of derivative products can be efficiently developed and
produced”[Harland et al., (2020)]. This definition is considered to be a narrow
way of defining Product Platforms.
In a broad sense the definition of Product Platforms as defined by Robertson
and Ulrich, (1998) is that ”they describe product platforms as a collection of
assets (e.g., components, processes, knowledge, people and relationships)
that are shared by a set of products”[Harland et al., (2020)].
Harland and Uddin, (2014) defines it as a ”collection of modules or parts that
are common to a number of products, and this commonality is developed
intentionally to attain certain effects” [Harland et al., (2020)] which helps in
the creation of customer value.
On the one hand, the product platform approach is a paradigm that allows
for economies of scale not via product uniformity,
but through module
standardization.
On the other side, this module­level uniformity allows for
more product variation in some market conditions [Harland et al., (2020)].
It
is
important
to
have
a
organisation­wide
strategic
consideration
and
coordination
in
order
for
a
product
platform
to
lead
to
a
sustainable
competitive advantage on an organisation level. If this is lacking then there is
no guarantee that the investments made in product platform will lead to any
competitive advantage [Halman et al., (2003)].
Since a company’s strategic position is often linked to how it handles its
resources, its position can be strengthened if it develops accurate abilities to
configure and deploy the resources that are available into different markets
9
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:18==
efficiently. However, because the value of a resource varies over time, this
resource management job necessitates not just synchronization with other
functional units (breadth) and management levels (depth), but also temporal
alignment [Sirmon et al., (2011)].
Skold and Karlsson argued that the projects that are based on platforms
should
be
given
special
attention
because
of
its
modular,
radical,
architectural
and
incremental
nature
that
depends
on
the
resource
requirements, principles of the organisation and the style of management
[Sköld and Karlsson, (2013)]. Meyer and Lehnerd, (1997) proposed a model
for
product
platform
development
where
Consumer
insights,
product
technology, the manufacturing process, and organizational competencies are
all common building pieces in the development of product platforms.
The capabilities of a product platform is influenced positively by different
factors
such
as
formalisation
in
the
development
process,
knowledge
exchange across platform­based products, the existence of a platform­based
product development champion, and the continuity of platform­based product
development teams. This has been pointed out by Chai et al., (2012). The
two factors that are important for the economic success of a product platform
are the speed of environmental change and demand­side characteristics
[Magnusson and Pasche, (2014)].
Figure 2.3: Benefits of Product Platform Harland and Uddin, (2014)
2.2.1
Product Platforms as a Resource
Many researchers are of the view that Product platforms play a crucial role in
the strategic point of view of an organisation as the introduction of product
platforms are aimed at reduction of cost, increase in the variants of products
and market time reductions [Meyer and Lehnerd, (1997)] [Robertson and
Ulrich,
(1998)][Sawhney,
(1998)] .Halman et al.,
(2003) argued that by
making
the
resources
available
to
the
platform,
a
number
of
market
advantages could be realised.
10
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:19==
Since the product platforms are related to the way resources are managed in
an organisation, it is important to define what a resource means. J. Barney,
(1991) defined resources as ”all assets, capabilities, organizational process,
firm attributes, information, knowledge, etc.
that help to improve a firm’s
strategic competency ”[Harland et al., (2020)].
Hence it is important for
organisations to acquire resources that prove to be a source of competitive
advantage over their counterparts [Peteraf, (1993)Wernerfelt, (1989)].
A resource can be evaluated on the basis of the VRIO criteria. This criteria
was proposed by J. Barney, (1991). VRIO is attributes that help evaluate the
competitive advantage of a particular resource. The attributes are Valuable,
Rare, inimitable and Organisationally exploitable.These attributes are explained
in the figure 2.4.
Since Product platforms can be considered as resources that only some
organisations possess.
It could be checked against the VRIO criteria to
determine its resource potential. There is no doubt that Product platforms are
valuable or create value since they are responsible for the efficient use of
the resources that are being used in the platform. By making efficient use of
the resources,
the resource consumption is kept in check [Gawer and
Cusumano, (2014), Halman et al., (2003),Hofer and Halman, (2005),Jiao and
Helander, (2006),Robertson and Ulrich, (1998) ,Shooter et al., (2007)].
The second aspect is to check the rarity.
Product Platforms are quite rare
mostly because they have been designed by an organisation in a particular
way and it is not possible for each and every organisation to own a platform.
A lot of thought is put into the platform development to make it fit in with the
product line that an organisation offers.
RD expenses, varied development
resources,
testing
resources,
design
resources,
technological
resources,
manufacturing
resources,
and
production
resources
are
all
common
requirements for product platform development.
As a result,
allocating
resources
to
platform
development
is
not
straightforward
for
every
organization [J. Barney, (1991)].
The next element is for Product platforms to be Inimitable. since the platform
that are developed by the organisations are mainly developed to gain
competitive advantage over their counterparts, a lot of effort is put into
making the platform as inimitable as possible.
Since a product platform is
developed in such a way that it would be able to create a variety of products
from the same platform, its nature in general is very complex, even though it
reduces the complexity in the production of derivatives, a platform by itself is
highly complex hence ensuring that it is inimitable [J. Barney, (1991)].
The last criteria is for an resource to be organisationally exploitable.
It is
essential that the product platform should have access to organisational
resources and capacity to have any success in its operation.
Chai et al.,
11
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:20==
(2012)
observed
that
standardized
development
process,
knowledge
exchange across platform­based products,
platform team consistency in
product development, and the existence of a platform champion all had a
good influence on product platform competency.According to Thomas (2014),
a company’s strategic flexibility has a favorable impact on the relationship
between platform design support and market performance.
Meyer and
Lehnerd, (1997) used Black
Decker’s motor platform for power tools to
highlight the relevance of organizational capabilities,
and they regarded
organizational capabilities to be one of the product platform’s building blocks.
Figure 2.4: Derived from J. Barney, (1991)
This proves that a Product Platform satisfies the VRIO Criteria that was
suggested by J. B. Barney, (1995) which has to be met for a resource to
create sustainable competitive advantage.
However, Harland et al., (2020)
argue that there is a limitation, according to the authors the value of a
certain resource depends on the context.
For example, a platform that is
valuable for a small enterprise would not have the same value for a large
organisation.
Harland et al., (2020) concluded in their paper that :
• Introduction of a platform in an organisation leads to a competitive
advantage over competitors in the market
• A
company’s
product
platform
resources
must
be
managed
in
a
methodical manner.
• It is crucial to develop platform based capabilities in an organisation to
realise the success of platform based products
• Platform thinking must be synchronized throughout the business to
ensure platform­based product success.
12
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
The review method that has been chosen for this thesis report is the
systematic literature review. The reason for selecting this method is because
of its ability to provide a summary of the previous studies that have been
done in a particular field and also to point out the missing links, what is
known as the research gaps[Webster and Watson, (2002)].
The important
stages of a conducting a literature review that was pointed out by Briner and
Denyer and was broken down into 8 steps,[Benachio et al., (2020)] namely:
• Definition of the problem to be studied (initial review)
• Objective definition
• Definition of Criteria from considering studies
• Selection of database
• eligibility criteria
• data collection method
• quality assessment metod
• result synthesis
This approach was utilized to conduct this review because it focuses on
incorporating
the
research
question
and
ensures
that
it
is
methodical,
transparent, and repeatable.
In the initial review, the problem to be studied was defined. The problem in
question is ” If product platforms can act as an enabler of Circular economy
in construction industry”. The Objective of this research was to look into the
recent trends in the field of circular economy and product platforms in the
built environment and determine how they were being used presently. In the
next step the criteria for inclusion of the articles was defined, the articles that
used the concept of circular economy and product platforms with respect to
built environment were chosen. A bibliometric map was created and from the
result that was obtained during the preliminary review to point out the
subjects that were the most relevant in the papers. The plan to obtain the
articles was to perform the preliminary search and from the results obtained,
a bibliometric network map was created. The main reason for the creation of
the map was to find out relevant keywords that would help in finding similar
papers later on. The selection process is graphically explained in the figure
3.1
13
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Selection Process
The visualisation of the bibliometric map was made possible by making use
of the VOS viewer software.
One of the main reasons for selecting VOS
viewer is because it does not limit to the use of only one database. Hence
data can be extracted from any database that is chosen by the authors. For
the
purpose
of
this
study,
Scopus,
Web
of
Science
and
Dimensions
databases were selected and the database that returned the highest number
of article searches was used to create the bibliometric map. The Keywords
used (“Circular Economy” OR ”Cradle to Cradle”) And (“Construction” OR
”construction Industry” OR ”built environment” ) for circular economy and
((”product
platform*”OR”mass
customization”OR”modular”)AND(”construction”OR”Industrial
Housing”OR”built
environment”)) for product platforms.
The Scopus search query for circular
economy returned 1489 results and the query for product platforms on
Scopus had 1266 results.
Web of science returned with 874 results for
circular economy and 1157 results for product platforms. The databases with
the highest number of cases were used to create the bibliometric maps
respectively.
Furthermore, filters were used to exclude papers that did not
have open access and the papers that weren’t published in English.
The use of filters greatly reduced the number of articles and then the author
went through the title of the remaining articles to determine if it is going to be
useful for the study and some more article were excluded. The abstracts of
the remaining articles were read to determine if it is useful for the research.
14
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:23==
4
Results and Analysis
This chapter presents the results and analysis of the data that was acquired
by the systematic literature review in the topics of Circular construction and
Product platforms. The connection between the two topics will also be made
in this section and will be further discussed. The first section will deal with
the circular economy in detail and the second section will be about the
product platforms.
The third section deals with the topics that connect the
circular economy with the product platforms.
4.1
Circular Construction
Bibliometric Analysis
For Circular economy the keyword that was used was ”(“Circular Economy”
OR ”Cradle to Cradle”) And (“Construction” OR ”construction Industry” OR
”built environment” ) ” and this returned 1489 search results on Scopus. But
since only open access papers and English papers were to be considered,
the number of papers after applying the filter was reduced to 643. The titles
of the papers were then read to distinguish papers that were relevant for the
study and the number was further reduced to 105.
Figure 4.1: Co­Occurrence of Keywords for Circular Economy with threshold
of 30 occurrences in a article
15
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:24==
A bibliometric map (4.1) is created based on the data obtained from Scopus.
One of the main maps that were created was the Co­occurrence of keywords.
The Bibliometric Visualisation is done on the sample containing all the
articles that were obtained with the string ”(“Circular Economy” OR ”Cradle to
Cradle”)
And
(“Construction”
OR
”construction
Industry”
OR
”built
environment” )”. The Bibliometric map is made up of 4 main sets. The set is
Blue represents all the keywords that is related to Sustainability aspect of
construction.
The red subset groups all the keywords that are related to
waste management in the construction industry,
The keywords that the
Yellow subset represents are related to the materials that are used in
construction activities. Lastly, the Green subset consists of keywords that are
related to Life Cycle Assessment.
Co­authorship with regards to the authors
The figure 4.2 shows the co­authorship of circular economy articles.
A
threshold of 3 articles per author and a minimum of 10 citations per author
were used to create the map of co­authorship.
The search from all the
articles under the string of circular economy returned with 199 articles that
matched the criteria, but only 68 articles were interconnected and the map of
this was produced. From the map, it is evident that most of the researchers
were from Asia.
Figure 4.2:
Co­authorship of Circular economy articles with threshold of 3
articles per author and 10 citations
16
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:25==
Co­authorship with regards to the country
A Co­authorship map (4.3) with regards to countries is produced to find out
which countries are leading in the research related to Circular economy. For
this reason,
the whole sample of the results obtained by the circular
economy search string was used to produce a co­authorship of countries
map. This also helps in recognising the joint effort of countries in a particular
research.
The articles were from 101 countries, but the threshold chosen was at least
5 documents per country.
A total of 53 countries had over 5 articles on
Circular economy. From the map it is clear that the most number of articles
are published in China in the Asian continent.
In Europe, the focus on
Circular economy is increasing which is reflected on the map.
Italy and
United Kingdom have the most co­authorship in Europe.
But it is also
interesting to see that most of the European countries are appearing on the
map suggesting the interest in this field in the continent.
Also, the authors
have a well developed network that is spread throughout the world, this
indicates that the research might be gaining momentum throughout the world.
Figure 4.3:
Co­authorship of countries in Circular economy articles with
threshold of 5 articles per country
Distribution of articles over the years
Another analysis that was done was related to the number of articles published
over the years. It is seen from figure 4.4 that there has been an exponential
17
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:26==
increase in the number of articles that has been published. This shows that
there is a rising interested in this field of research.
Figure 4.4: Distribution of articles over the years
Distribution of articles over Journals
An analysis to find out the publications with the most number of articles was
conducted. It is found that the publication ”Journal of cleaner production” has
the highest number of articles with the count standing at 60 articles, followed
by ”IOP conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science” with 58 articles.
Figure 4.5: Distribution of articles over journals
18
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:27==
Analysis of Academic articles
4.1.1
Six Pillar Framework by Pompani and Moncaster
The work of Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017) introduces the ”six pillars”
framework which points out the important dimensions for building research
which are essential for successfully meeting the goals of the present day
sustainability research.
The six pillars that are recognised by Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017) are
Governmental,
Economic,
Environmental,
Behavioural,
Societal
and
Technological.
Some of the main findings in each of these dimensions are
mentioned below:
Figure 4.6: Six Pillars of Sustainability
• Governmental Dimension:
There
is
a
lot
of
pressure
on
the
Governmental agency for support in the form of policies.
One of the
important discussions throw light on how the steel reuse could be killed
if there is no change in the policies and taxes on steel. since the price
of steel is already too low, it is not economically feasible to recycle
steel[Corbey et al., (2016)]. Another issue that has been discussed by
Faraud,
(2016)
is
the
need
for
the
planning
authorities
to
have
knowledge of their local context.
• Economic Dimension:
There is an urgent need to find different
paradigms for making profits and also the need to change the existing
ownership models [Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017)].
19
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:28==
• Environmental Dimension: This dimension throws light on the fact that
the environmental impact of reusing building materials such as steel
and wood has significantly lower impact on the environment than using
new products [Corbey et al., (2016)]. Another issue that needs looking
into is the fact that most of the research looks into whole life energy
and carbon as impact categories. It has to be taken into account that
by doing this, some of the other important environmental indicators
could be overlooked and this could lead to shifting of burden from one
impact category to another [Pomponi et al., (2016)].
• Behavioural Dimension : This dimension is considered as one of the
main dimensions that can be crucial in implementation of CE. Touching
on the steel reuse example from before, it was noticed that people
were reluctant to buy steel from scrap man for their new building
[Corbey et al., (2016)].
But in the case of wood reuse the behaviour
was different as people ranked aesthetic and attractiveness as the most
important parameters for choosing reclaimed wood[Adams,
(2016)].
These findings convey that people are the key aspect in embracing
circularity.
• Societal Dimension :
There is a need for education particularly in
learning how to design and build by making use of reused and
reclaimed materials[Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017)]. There is a need
for partnerships and collaborations in building projects and also a
greater level of engagement with all the stakeholders involved in the
projects.
• Technological Dimensions: This Dimension has to be prioritised as it
is an important aspect that can help enable circularity.
It is important
because it can help connect the supply chain and also might be
extensively used to store large amounts of data that is required for the
smooth functioning of Circular Economy.
Some of the technological
innovations such as Design for Manufacture and Assembly (DfMA) or
Design for Deconstruction or Disassembly (DfD) also have a huge
impact on enabling CE [Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017)].
4.1.2
Importance of Circular Economy adoption in the
Construction Industry
There is no doubt that adopting CE in construction will speed up the
transition of the industry towards sustainability.
The introduction of this
concept in the industry is still in its early stages but the literature pertaining
to this field is increasing. Concerns have been shown on how inefficient the
construction industry has been in managing resources especially after the
concept of circular economy has been introduced [Hossain et al., (2020)].
20
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:29==
The process of closing the material loops can only be achieved through
effective collaboration and communication of all the stakeholders in an open
and transparent manner which would in turn help achieve Circular Economy
[Schraven et al., (2019)].
Even though the rolling out of Circular Economy
strategies have been pushed globally by some policies, there are still many
issues that needs to be resolved like how to quantify the flow of resources,
the environmental impact associated with the flow of resources [Hossain
et al., (2020)] [Petit­Boix and Leipold, (2018)].
The construction industry has demanded close attention since it involves the
sharing of the by­products and residues between different sectors of the
industries so that the resources can be reused in a different cycle [Chertow,
(2000)]. It is also considered to be an industry that has the most potential to
move in the direction of Circular Economy by making use of Eco­friendly
products and technologies [Smol et al., (2015)]. It is possible to bring down
the cost of construction as well as reduce the impact it has on the
environment which is now prevalent due to the excessive use of resources in
construction [Akanbi et al., (2019)].
According to different studies the conclusions drawn out on the adoption of
Circular Economic principles in the construction industry are as follows
[Hossain et al., (2020)]:
• To increase the use of sustainable materials in construction which are
obtained collaboration with various parties
• To reduce the production of waste which will in turn lead to reduction in
land filling activities
• To use the materials efficiently and recycle and reuse the construction
materials
under the prevalent system, there is only a small amount of materials that is
being recycled at the end of life of a building.
The fact that a lot of raw
materials is used up in the production of the necessary materials and only a
small part of it being recycled is a matter of concern.
Most of the
components that are recycled are being down cycled which is not an efficient
way of recycling.
This system only provides a very negligible amount of
revenue and does not incentivise recycling [Hossain et al., (2020)].
A reason to push forward the agenda of Circular Economy is due to the fact
that the availability of resources for extraction in the future is declining, the
adoption of Circular Economy would be an ideal measure to make the built
environment future proof [Lemaitre et al., (2019)].
By selecting sustainable
materials, maximizing material recovery, and lowering waste creation, Circular
Economy attempts to increase material efficiency [Akanbi et al., (2018)].
21
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.7: A Figure depicting Circular Economy in Construction Value chain
The recent Circular Economy agenda has mostly focused on the material
supply chain and the recovery of construction materials for direct reuse
[S.­Y. Pan et al.,
(2015)],
as these are seen as critical steps toward
successful
Circular
Economy
implementation.The
lack
of
materials
or
component
take­back
mechanism
(e.g.,
business
model)
and
end­of­life
material
collecting
methods
were
among
the
practical
hurdles
of
implementing Circular Economy in construction [Singh and Ordoñez, (2016)].
4.1.3
Top­Down and Bottom­Up Approaches
Pomponi and Moncaster, (2017) have used the concept of Top­down and
bottom­up approaches in their work. The definition of these approaches are
given by Prendeville et al., (2018) as mentioned below:
• A Top down change is an institution driven change such as strategy
and policy decisions that includes public­private partnership projects
concerned with developing and facilitating market initiatives.
• A bottom up change describes social movements and social innovation
such as initiatives and entrepreneurial activities initiated and run by civil
society, non­governmental organisations, communities and businesses.
It is crucial to find the right mix of both, top­down approach and bottom up
approach
so
as
to
manage
the
transition
towards
sustainable
urban
development. Mathews and Tan suggests that both the approaches provide
advantages in their own way.
The latecomers benefit from the top­down
approach while new innovations are formed through spontaneous and self
22
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:31==
organising processes.
Yu et al., (2015) feels that the Top­down command­and­control systems are
unlikely to be avoided in industrial production, because the major motivators
for engagement in symbiotic activities are economic incentives, including tax
breaks,
financial
subsidies,
and
demands
from
tighter
environmental
regulations.
Top­down policies are at risk of serious issues such as
competing agendas of two government organizations, which confuse various
actors, ignoring geographical variation, missing or conflicting policies, missing
guidelines that could lead to whitewashing at the operational level, and
misunderstanding of Circular Economy’s goals [ Zhang et al., (2010)].
The
solution to this problem could be the adoption of bottom­up approach by
simplifying regulations.
4.1.4
Waste Hierarchy
Since energy and resource consumption is dependent on both construction
and operation activities of a building, it is not possible to improve the climate
efficiency in cities by replacement of old structures with new ones [Joensuu
et al., (2020)]. Circular economy revolves around the concept of retaining the
highest value of a material for as long as possible which would result in the
reduction of virgin material usage and output of wastes.This means there
should be an increase in the practice of reduction rather than just reusing
and recycling. Reduction of the use of resources is of utmost importance in
circular economy. However, when it is not possible to reduce, then reusing
and recycling techniques should be implemented.
Figure 4.8: A Figure depicting Waste hierarchy
The waste hierarchy (4.8) ranks reduction principles above others.
Hutner
23
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:32==
et al., (2017) defines reduction as ”any measure taken before the material
crosses the waste threshold.” Hutner et al., (2017) also claims that despite
the attention given to preventative measures, its adoption is scarce.Hutner
et al., (2017) has categorised the different types of prevention phases. The
first type is the pre­use phase, this phase consists of activities such as
designing out waste, which is a term used to define the design of products
by making use of recycled materials, designed with minimum material or
toxic substance, designed to be manufactured with minimum loss and apply
design
for
disassembly(DfD)
for
enabling
of
life
cycle
expansion
of
components or products [Joensuu et al., (2020)].
The second phase is the use phase, where the reduction can be achieved
by careful and intense utilisation of the available resources by practising
sharing economy which helps increase the number of users or by practising
repair and maintenance which increases the life cycle of the product.
The last phase is the post use phase, here prevention can be achieved if the
users do not throw away or discard the product after usage but return it back
into the loop which boosts the reuse potential after the product is checked for
any repair and maintenance if necessary [Hutner et al., (2017)].
The
notion
of
product­service
systems
might
provide
a
framework
for
promoting consumption and waste reduction while maintaining or improving
service levels.
PSS’s basic concept is to focus on customer requirements
rather than physical items, and to produce a blend of real products and
intangible services that may work together to meet the final consumer
demands.[Tukker, (2015)] In the performance economy, a similar concept to
the PSS is used, where the client pays for utilities rather than ownership
[Stahel, (2017)].
In PSS, there are three basic kinds of tactics [Tukker,
(2015)].
• product­oriented
maintenance,
product
support,
and
take­back
agreements)
• Use­oriented (leasing,sharing,renting, and pooling);
• Results­oriented
(outsourcing,
payment
per
service
unit,
functional
results).
Hutner et al., (2017) suggests the usage of sharing economy in the use phase
as a preventative measure since it enables a single product to have multiple
users. Hutner et al., (2018) have shown that life cycle impact assessments
may be used to indicate that preventative initiatives like the sharing economy
have a huge potential for reducing waste and climate emissions.
The next best technique in the waste hierarchy after reduce is reuse, followed
by recycling. The volume of waste can be significantly reduced by making use
of the reuse principle. The principles of reuse is close to that of reduce since
it motivates the users to reuse the product instead of getting rid of it at the
24
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:33==
end of its use or in the post­use phase [Joensuu et al., (2020)].
It is also deemed essential to apply the practices such as Design for
Disassembly and design­for­repair in order to overcome the barriers that are
in place due to the current take­make­dispose culture.
The challenge of
building a source­separating collecting system with supply chains for diverse
materials or reusable goods and components is the same for reuse as it is
for recycling [Joensuu et al., (2020)].
Value and the scale of waste generation are found out to be the main factors
that affect the recycling pattern as found by Mo et al., (2009). Researchers are
of the opinion that in order to influence the citizens behaviour, it is necessary
to increase the share of source separated fractions to improve the efficiency
of the recycling facilities.
Even though the principles of recycling and reuse are being developed, a
considerable amount of products at the end of its life gets discarded and is
disposed of when the last option for circular economy is the recovery of
energy and precious resources.
Since the construction industry consumes resources in both its construction
and use phases, it plays an important role in global climate emissions. This
cannot be averted only by replacing the existing old building stock with new
construction.
According to Krausmann et al., (2017) the existing buildings
should be utilized efficiently, the service life of the buildings should be
improved significantly and lastly, it is necessary to develop new technologies
and design efficiently.
Esa et al., (2017) Consider CE concepts like waste
hierarchy and 3R in their waste management strategy for the construction
industry, and keep in mind that waste prevention strategies are used during
the design and planning stages, whereas recycling and reuse are used
during the procurement, construction, and demolition stages.
4.1.5
Design for Change and Circularity
The European union is moving away from the linear systems to the circular
systems and treating waste as a resource. A circular strategy not only helps
to avoid depleting and squandering vital resources, but it also helps to lessen
reliance on other nations for resource supply and employment creation.
Although it is beyond the scope of this study to determine if components and
materials are really utilized, reused, and recycled in the planned manner,
these are critical markers for the success of envisioned material loops.
In
essence, those beliefs are based on a ’mitigation tradition,’ i.e., reducing the
negative effects of human activities while ignoring the possibility of same
activities
having
good
environmental
and
societal
consequences
[Geldermans, (2016)].
Geldermans, (2016) suggested that the materials needed to exhibit certain
25
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:34==
intrinsic and relational properties in order to facilitate circularity. The intrinsic
properties of that are essential are:
• of high functional performance
• Originating from a sustainable source and capable of ’reincarnating’ in a
sustainable manner after each iteration
• The materials is to be derived from a non toxic source
• In line with the biological cycle and cascade, as well as one or more
technological cycles
A material or product should connect to the design and usage of buildings in
addition to its inherent features. These relational features are concerned with
anticipating future user circumstances that are unknown. the important intrinsic
properties that have been noted by Geldermans, (2016) are:
• Dimensions
• Connections
• Definition of the life span (Performance time)
4.1.6
Barriers and Enablers of Circular Economy
Hart et al., (2019) is of the opinion that the enablers and barriers to the
implementation of circular economy can be like mirror images. since some of
the enablers are designed to specifically target a certain group of barriers,
and the others are general enablers of circular economic concept which in
turn acts as a solution to multiple barriers.
Hence Hart et al.
proposes a
system to categorise the enablers and barriers by considering the categories
such as regulatory, financial, cultural and sectoral.
Cultural Barriers
The cultural barriers are related to the contexts that include the social,
behavioural and managerial aspects.
These could include issues such as
people preferring the conventional methods over the prefabrication methods
mostly because of the lack of knowledge about the latest techniques. Also, it
is a matter of status and ownership of certain products and silo mentality. A
lack of collaboration is also evident in the supply chain.
One of the main
barrier for the adaptation of circular economy could be the lack of interest
about the idea of circularity [Hart et al., (2019)].
Regulatory Barriers
The regulatory barriers are the ones that are concerned with the policies and
regulations surrounding the Circular Economy. These are generally related to
the higher authorities in the country and also deals with the legislation and
regulations set by the government. It includes financial incentives too. One
of the topics that is cited most of the time when this barrier is discussed is
26
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:35==
the lack of regulatory framework on an international or a national level
regarding the circular economy.
It has been pointed out that the policies
around the implementation of circular economy has have targets which are
more than just diversion of landfills. Another issue brought up is the lack of
financial incentives for practicing Circular Economy.
There are numerous
ways in which the practice of circular economy can be incentivised, but the
most evident would be introduction of public procurement’s and incentives on
tax [Hart et al., (2019)].
Financial Barriers
This category includes barriers that are focused on financial difficulties and
are concerned with the market rather than the fiscal environment.
Raw
materials, property ownership, and investment are all aspects of the building
sector that are covered. The players in the construction sector are accused
for prioritising rapid returns on their investments and also choosing capital
expenditure over operational expenditure. The projects that prioritises social
and environmental objectives are not favoured and the projects that give
quick returns with short term relationships with stakeholders are chosen over
the
otherwise
collaborative
partnerships
that
is
required
for
the
implementation of Circular Economy.
Figure 4.9: A Figure depicting Barriers of Circular Economy
Another fiscal barrier is related to the high cost that is incurred in supporting
27
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:36==
the infrastructure in the Circular economy projects. Also, the prices at which
the virgin materials are available is low.
Hence, the stakeholders mostly
prioritise to use new materials over reusing the old materials, this acts as a
barrier for circular economy implementation. According to Hart et al., (2019)
the business cases that are based on Circular economy is not strong enough
to convince key players.
Sectoral Barriers
Sectoral
barriers
are
those
that
are
particularly
relevant
to
the
built
environment,
such as the design,
construction,
ownership,
maintenance,
modification,
deconstruction,
reuse,
and
disposal
of
structures
and
infrastructure. Since the buildings and the components associated with them
have a long product life it is unclear about how the buildings and the
components are being used in the future, also the question of its future
ownership remains unanswered many times [Hart et al., (2019)].
Another sectoral barrier is the lack of bandwidth is aggravated by the
absence of a unified vision for the sector.
This is closely related to the
cultural barrier where there is a necessity to ask the question: Is the concept
and instruments compelling enough to pique attention and complement
existing
approaches
to
resource
productivity
and
environmental
issues?
There is also a lack of standardisation when it comes to reuse and recycling
of materials.
Hart et al., (2019) is of the opinion that the construction sector is orthodox,
non­collaborative, and hostile. In terms of Circular Economy, the industry is
its own worst adversary. It is suspicious of innovation by nature, and adopts
an adversarial, risk­averse attitude to contractual liability clauses that can
further stifle innovation.
Cultural Enablers
There is no doubt that Leadership or taking initiative is an enabler of Circular
economy.
The
incorporation
of
Circular
Economy
principles
into
the
procurement process through inclusion in technical standards and supply
chain briefings requires buy­in from the top, according to Hart et al., (2019).
The problem lies in recognising who should take the leadership among the
different stakeholders involved.
Another driver would be incorporating sustainability in the project by going for
certifications like DGNB or LEED which will naturally instill certain Circular
economic aspects into the project. It is also important to have meetings and
workshops with clients
in order
to educate them about the processes
involved before starting a project which helps in reviving the demand for
circular economy.Long term partnerships can also act as an enabler [Hart
28
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:37==
et al., (2019)].
Regulatory Enablers
Policy support for skills and innovation,
as well as measurements for
Circular Economy and embodied carbon, is advocated.
Public procurement
can
also
benefit
from
policy
support.
Obstructive
regulations
can
be
cancelled out by bringing in Regulatory Reforms. Incentives could act as a
great enabler of Circular Economy.Hart et al., (2019) gives an example of
incentivising refurbishment projects by reduction on the amount of VAT to be
paid.
It is also advised to have producer responsibility as a possibility but
this not favoured by the manufacturers .
The introduction of a new valuation technique that comprises of social,
governmental and environmental dimensions is suggested since it sheds light
on the value of the material assets. Another suggested enabler is scale. The
aggregation of initiatives via collaboration has the potential to transform
obstacles into possibilities.
Sectoral Enabler
There is a need for the construction sector to provide the policymakers with
convincing evidence like a case study of multiple commercial projects. There
is also a need for a ”clear vision for CE in the built environment” [Hart et al.,
(2019)] to translate the circular economic principles into practice.
Research
and development of new technologies pertaining to Circular economy is also
seen
as
a
driver
because
innovations
can
open
new
doors
for
the
implementation of Circular Economy.
Standards have to be developed to
assure the quality of materials which are to be reused.
The creation of a reverse logistics infrastructure, such as materials markets,
storage facilities, and up cycling facilities, can help with practical concerns
such as recycling materials that have been released as a result of renovation
or destruction [Hart et al., (2019)].
These are some of the Enablers and Barriers to CE that has been discussed
in Hart et al. Hart et al., (2019) paper.
29
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.10: A Figure depicting Enablers of Circular Economy
4.1.7
Strategies for Implementation of Circular Economy in
Construction
Stephan
and
Athanassiadis,
(2018)
proposed
several
strategies
for
transitioning to circular construction, including the use of sustainable and
durable materials, the adoption of the design for disassembly concept, the
use of modular and prefabricated elements, and the development of recovery
schemes (take­back system in the manufacturing industry).
In order to
optimize
the
Circular
Economic
advantages,
the
report
recommended
evaluating the complete environmental implications for each of the strategies.
Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018) offered seven options for the construction of
circular prefabricated buildings.
The first option is to reduce waste using a
lean manufacturing process.
The second technique,
reusing materials,
focuses on the use of by­products in the manufacture of new materials or
components. The third technique encourages the reuse of replacement parts
and components, while the fourth encourages the design of flexibility (for
another cycle with different applications). Design for disassembly using BIM
(to facilitate end­of­life deconstruction) is the fifth technique, while design with
consideration for respectability of reused materials is the sixth strategy.
30
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:39==
Finally, the final technique focuses on the use of a tracking system to collect
data, monitor locations, and track the life cycle of materials or components
so that they may be reused after disassembly or deconstruction.
Hossain et al., (2020) identified some of the fields in challenges and some
potential
solutions
for
the
implementation
of
Circular
Economy
in
the
construction industry.
The main fields that were identified the the authors
were Design, Material selection, Supply chain, Business Model, Relevant
policy, Uncertainty and Risk,Collaboration among actors, knowledge among
stakeholders, Integration of Urban Metabolism and methodology for Circular
Economic evaluation.
The conclusions drawn by Hossain et al.,
(2020).
is that the use of
sustainable and durable materials; design for disassembly; use of modular
and prefabricated elements; development of recovery schemes; establishment
of relevant requirements for waste and demolition plans and standards to
ensure
quality
of
recycled
materials;
sharing
of
information,
technical
performance, recycling rate, and trace­ability of building materials; provision
of guidelines and training for demolition companies, among other things, are
all critical.
Kollikkathara et al., (2009) suggests that the cities should have a plan on
how the development of the built environment has to be managed so as to
create value as well as reduce the need for resources simultaneously. The
Circular economy provides a wide array of development strategies such as
the 3R, Cradle to Cradle, Integrated waste management etc. The authors are
also of the opinion that giving a wide range of options to the decision­makers
would rather confuse them.Ribić et al., (2017) suggests an easy solution to
this problem of indecision, which is popular as the waste hierarchy.
The
main objective of the waste hierarchy is similar to that of 3R, the waste
hierarchy also prioritises reduction of waste generation. It also advocates the
minimization
of
waste
processing
which
might
provide
cost
saving
opportunities in the extraction of raw materials as well as waste disposal
[Joensuu et al., (2020)].
Joensuu et al., (2020) is of the impression that since most of the impact on
the environment is caused by the current state of built environment, the
adoption of circular economy would help in solving all of the problems related
to sustainability. The authors also considered the built environment to be a
complex and multidisciplinary issue because of its features and limitation that
are specific to the sector.
The researchers are of the opinion that it is necessary to include both
buildings and infrastructure that are constructed as well as the ones that are
maintained, operated and used for various purposes, which has different
31
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:40==
impacts on the environment over their life and also at the end of life
[Joensuu et al., (2020)].
Zhou et al., (2012) noticed that the introduction of energy efficient buildings
improve the quality of the urban environment but the improvement in the
quality is offset by the use of materials that go into the new buildings.
Hence, the savings are offset.
4.1.8
Key Takeaways from Circular Economy Literature
The adaptation of circular economy in the construction industry can help
realize many benefits. But the shifting of the industry from linear to circular
economy must be pioneered by the government. This is simply because the
government is the only organization that can initiate the gradual shift of the
industry. At the moment, there is very little to no incentives for the firms that
want to use the principles of circular economy in their firm’s practices.
Hence, the governments can have to help by introducing regulations and
incentives.
There is also a need of educating the stakeholders of the industry about the
circular
economic
practices
and
the
benefits
that
could
be
reaped
by
following the principles of circular economy.
There is also a need of
educating the designers with the principles of circular economy since circular
economy is a life cycle process and not just restricted to waste management.
Long term partnerships between stakeholders are the key for the successful
implementation of Circular Economy.
The current scenario in the construction industry is that most of the waste is
being handled in the demolition stage and there is a lack of importance given
to the minimization of waste in the earlier phases of the building. Also, the
waste that is being retrieved during the demolition activities is being landfilled
and only a small portion of it is being recycled.
Recycling is not the best
option according to the Circular Economic principles because most of the
time, the waste that is recycled is downgraded.
This goes against the
principle of retention of the high value of the material. Recycling should only
be considered when the value of the material has dropped, and it cannot be
used for the same purpose again. The regular maintenance and service of
the building should also be given importance since it is necessary to keep
the components at their highest value.
The circular economic transition in the field of construction seems possible if
a top­down approach is followed. Since the transition is in a deadlock and
there is a need for the intervention of the government in the form of tax
breaks, subsidies, financial incentives and stricter environmental regulations.
But, since it is necessary to have a mix of both the approaches, individual
32
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:41==
organizations can also lead or help the transition by creating new sustainable
alternatives and also by coming up with business models that support
circular economy.
The
principle
of
reduction
has
to
be
adapted
in
order
to
design
the
components in such a way that only the materials that are absolutely
necessary are used in the component.
This helps in driving down the
amount of resources that end up in waste.
Design for disassembly should
also be given priority since it helps in retrieving the components easily once
the building reaches its end of life. The retrieved components can be used
elsewhere, which will in turn reduce the use of raw materials.
A business
model around sharing economy in construction is also necessary to reduce
the number of products that are produced and wasted after being used in a
single facility.
Sharing economy will allow the components to be used by
multiple users and since the users are only paying for the service and not for
the component itself,
the service provider would have the incentive to
maintain the component at its highest value for as long as possible.
Reusing
components
is
being
practiced
in
construction
but
mostly
the
reusability of the component is looked down upon due to the clients looking
at the components as second hand components and assuming that it is not
as good as new. There is a need of educating the stakeholders as well as
case studies that prove reusing is profitable and economical in the long run
without compromising on quality.
Reuse of the materials can only be possible if the design allows it. The issue
with reusing is that the components are too expensive or too hard to be
retrieved. This might be because of the connections used and also due to
the interfaces between the components not being the same.
Hence to
promote reuse, it is necessary to have a universal interface system that is
set by the standards and regulations.
Having the same interface which is
designed for disassembly will help the reuse of components greatly.
The
price and time required can be brought down significantly which can boost
reuse of components.
33
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:42==
4.2
Product Platforms in Construction
Bibliometric Analysis
A Bibliometric analysis was also conducted on the topic of product platforms
in relation to construction industry.
For this purpose, the search string
”((”product
platform*”OR”mass
customization”OR”modular”)AND(”construction”OR”built
environment))
was
used.
The search string returned with 1266 results.
After filtering out the
result for open access papers and subject relevant papers, the number came
down to 357.
Then, the title of the papers were then read to check if the
paper would prove to be useful for the research and finally 87 articles were
selected for review.
Co­Occurrence of Keywords
A map of co­occurrence of keywords (4.11) in the articles of Product Platforms
in construction industry is produced to better understand the relation between
the different keywords. The Figure below shows a total of 5 clusters. The red
cluster comprises of keywords that best define the Construction industry. The
Green Cluster has all the keywords that are related to the modular construction
and product platforms. The Blue cluster is related to the mass customization
aspect of construction.The yellow cluster consists of keywords that define the
pre­construction processes and lastly, the purple cluster deals with keywords
that are specific to management.
Figure 4.11: Co­Occurrence of Keywords for Product Platform in Construction
with threshold of 5 occurrences in a article
34
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:43==
Co­authorship with regards to authors
A Co­authorship of articles map (4.12) is created next to understand how the
researchers interact with each other on this topic.
The threshold that was
chosen for the map is 10 citations per author. The threshold lead to filtering
out only 297 articles and the largest set consisted of 16 connected authors.The
map obtained is displayed below:
Figure 4.12: Co­authorship of articles for Product Platform in Construction with
threshold of 10 citations per article
The largest set of connected authors that are displayed in the map looks like
they are from the European Continent. The overall map of 297 articles reveal
that the research in the different continents are rarely connected, but there is
a large set of literature available on this topic.
35
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:44==
Co­authorship with regards to countries
Out of the total of 49 countries that had articles on product platform only 19
countries met the criteria for 5 or more documents. only 17 countries out of 19
were connected in the network. The map (4.13) shows that China and Hong
Kong are the only 2 major countries in Asia that has literature on product
platforms in construction.
Figure 4.13:
Co­authorship of countries in Product Platform articles in
Construction with threshold of at least 5 documents per country
It is interesting to see that in the European continent, United Kingdom has
the
highest
articles
closely
followed
by
Denmark
and
Sweden.
The
Co­authorship of articles seem to be connected all over the countries
displayed in the map.
This could suggest that there is a good amount of
knowledge sharing on this topic throughout the world.
Distribution of articles over the years
The next analysis was to find out the number of articles that have been
published over the year on the topics of Product Platform strategy in
construction. It is seen from figure 4.14 that the research on Product platform
in construction reached its peak in 2014, there was a short decrease in the
literature related to the topic in the next 4­5 years, but the topic is still being
researched up to date.
The reason for the dip might be the due to the
industry not being ready to adopt the principles of product platforms.
36
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.14: Product Platform in construction article distribution over the years
Distribution of articles over different Journals
The last Analysis is to find the Journals with the most number of publications
associated with them.A figure 4.15 that has the journals with most publications
was created.
Figure 4.15: Product Platform in construction article distribution over different
Journals
Mass Customisation and Personalisation in Architecture and Construction
Journal,
IFIP
Advances
in
Information
and
Communication
Technology
Journal and Automation in Construction Journal all have 12 articles each
published making these the Journals with the most number of Publications.
The Publications are all evenly spread out among different Journals and no
single Journal has vast amount of literature related to the topic of Product
Platform in Construction.
37
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:46==
Analysis of Academic Articles
4.2.1
Building Industrialization definition
The idea of Industrialization of construction is being reconsidered for its quick
and greater production, economy and attainment of quality and resistance
and also for its ability to be optimised according to different necessities. It is
a false notion that industrial architecture means pre­fabrication methods, of
course prefabrication is one of the methods that is followed in industrial
architecture but it also includes other methods that are simple and traditional
[Zabihi et al., (2013)].
By
focusing
on
mass
production,
industrial
production
is
focused
on
centralization
and
ordering
of
activities,
as
well
as
mechanization
of
operations.
Industrialization is predicated on a strong capacity for lowering
prices, improving quality, and expanding access to complicated products for
a broad range of individuals. This rationale is now represented by a variety
of items, including construction materials [Zabihi et al., (2013)].
According to R.­B. Richard, (2005) definition of Industrialization, It is the
overall
planning
of
operations
based
on
the
number
of
finished
and
customized goods.
Building Industrialization differs from the conventional
Industrialization because the complete product in building Industrialization is
not the standard building.
This is the case because the buildings are
customised according to the clients needs.
Hence the complete product in
this case would be the building system. A building system can be defined as
” a collection of different parts with relevant rules while the details solved
before the real building plan”.
A great deal of importance was given to the mass production and low cost
aspects of industrialised building systems in the past which resulted in the
elimination of the individuality aspect such as attention to social issues. This
is seen as a drawback of industrialised building systems. This issue is being
addressed in the sector today and a great deal of attention is paid to find
answer to the drawback.
According to R. B. Richard, (2006) ”Individualization of a building means any
creation of identity and its dependency while all family members possess a
personal space in compliance with their own expectations and conditions.”
[Zabihi et al., (2013)].
Since, in the previous decades there was a lack of
attention paid to individualisation, it prevented the main stream adoption of
industrialised housing.
The AEC sector is now finding ways to incorporate
the social aspects in Industrialised house building.
R. B. Richard, (2006) presents the four guidelines that the other sectors
adopted to create individualisation through mass production. They are:
38
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:47==
• Flexibility of product
• Flexibility of tools and equipment
• multipurpose framework
• combinability
4.2.2
Product Platform development in the construction
industry
The construction industry is facing a problem of aging workforce which has
an negative effect on the productivity of the industry.
This problem is
prompting the industry to adopt the manufacturing processes and techniques.
The
problem
with
the
implementation
of
these
techniques
is
that
the
construction
industry
is
project
based,
hence
the
deliverable
in
the
construction industry is most likely an one off­project that requires specialist
organisations to come together and work on a solution that is unique to a
particular project [Jones et al., (2021)].
Howard
et
al.,
(1989)
is
of
the
opinion
that
the
fragmentation
and
specialization in the construction industry which spreads across different
dimensions are responsible for the creation of inefficiencies at the time of
delivery of the projects.
There has been a lot of confusion around the matter of whether an industry
like construction that is operating in a competitive and fragmented market
can transform its role and the value delivery approach by developing a
product platform [Jones et al., (2021)].
As shown in the figure 4.16, Jones et al., (2021) reported that there are
three kinds of fragmentation in the construction industry namely, Vertically,
horizontally and longitudinally. The vertical fragmentation occurs due to fact
that different firms deliver different phases of the project.
The horizontal
fragmentation is present due to the fact that different firms are responsible
for the delivery of complimentary products and services at the same phase of
an ongoing project.
Lastly, longitudinal fragmentation occurs because the
teams
that
work
on
a
certain
project
is
divided
after
the
successful
completion
of
their
responsibility
in
the
project
which
means
that
the
knowledge gained in the project is also lost with this.
39
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.16: A Figure on Fragmentation in the construction Industry derived
from Jones et al., (2021)
Nam and Tatum, (1992) have made a proposal that consists of 4 different
solutions that could help in solving the problems of inefficiencies that are
caused by vertical fragmentation that occur between phases.
The first
solution
is
the
integration
of
different firms
by
acquisition
which
helps
establish managerial control over the workflow which makes it easier for
coordination and delivery throughout the life of the project.
The second solution that has been proposed speaks about leveraging long
term
partnerships
and
coordination
of
the
activities
without
a
contract.
Thirdly,
The
reliance
on
contracts
as
vertical
coordinating
mechanisms
between
stages
in
the
past,
which
was
nearly
exclusively
based
on
inadequate designs, can result in costly litigation. The last solution that has
been proposed is the integration of information, across the project team,
information integration and the adoption of common data and standards.
The
fragmentation
of
decision­making
can
be
addressed
by
using
manufacturing and standardization approaches in construction projects, which
can result in a number of advantages.However, there is still a demand for
variety,
as
well
as
institutionalized
pressure
to
do
so,
providing
a
counterbalance to standardization objectives.
Product platforms provide the advantages of mass production while allowing
some product heterogeneity through the reuse of common components,
processes,
knowledge,
and
capabilities
across
multiple
products,
40
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:49==
supplemented by a limited range of peripherals, all coordinated through a
coordinating mechanism [Robertson and Ulrich,
(1998)].
Rapid market
responsiveness, decreased development time, enhanced capacity to upgrade
goods, reduced testing, and the encouragement of greater learning across
products are all advantages of such platform approaches [Wortmann and
Alblas, (2009)].
The application of the product platform can be bit of a task because of the
heterogeneous nature of the projects which forces the construction firms to
have a level of novelty and not make the processes too standardised. Jensen
et al., (2015) addressed the need for construction product platforms to find a
balance between the use of standardised process and the solutions that are
required in order to deliver the design aspirations for a particular project.
Platform thinking is commonly used in traditional product­oriented companies
as a method for exploiting economies of scale through standardization across
products.
The project­based construction business, on the other hand, is
mostly unaware of it. Gibb, (2001) suggests that the industry participants that
stress on standardization in the construction industry have always had a
problem
in
deciding
between
the
level
of
uniformity
and
variation.
Standardization ensures that components are precise and interchangeable.
Hence the interface between the components is considered to be the most
important part in standardisation rather than the components themselves
[Thuesen and Hvam, (2011)].
Thuesen and Hvam, (2011) presented the following points from their analysis
of the German Housing Platform:
• Platforms in construction does not imply that it should be ”Off­site
Manufacturing” for it to be the most optimal manufacturing method. It is
possible to achieve high level of efficiency by onsite production.
• It is not necessary to develop complex new methods to reap benefits, it
can be achieved by focusing on the existing techniques and tools.
• IT systems are not necessary for the development of a platform. The IT
systems can act as an enabler of the platform but it is not a platform
by itself. The platform can be built upon the combination of skills and
culture
• The whole organisation should have the required level of commitment
and loyalty in order to successfully introduce and implement a platform.
• It is essential to have a view of the market which sheds light on the
creation of value for the customers while developing a platform and also
defines who the profitable customers are.
• It is essential to have an in­house architect who understands how to best
make use of the modules available
• The top management of the firm should have clear knowledge of the
41
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:50==
platform.
• There has to be a clear separation between the development of the
platform and development of products from the platform.
Zabihi et al., (2013) suggests that with the help of Offsite Manufacturing
techniques, there can be an improvement in the capacity and quality. It also
helps in offering complex building components for relatively lower costs.
Sacks et al., (2004) discusses the time related advantages related to the
production and erection of building parts [Bonev et al., (2015)].
Thuesen and Hvam, (2011), for example, look into how system delivery might
increase
on­site
construction
productivity
in
Germany.
Their
research
demonstrates how standardised methods, preferred building solutions, and
the reuse of experience and working groups have resulted in considerable
cost savings on a variety of housing projects without reducing customer
value [Bonev et al., (2015)].
The construction industry is known for adopting and comparing approaches
from other sectors. An important lesson from the car making industry is that
it is able to provide a wide variety of customisation without affecting the lead
time, the quality of the product or the production cost [Bonev et al., (2015)].
Mass customisation strives to supply custom­tailored goods more effectively
by combining configuration systems, adaptable product structures, flexible
processes, and adaptive organizations around a specified set of platforms
[Su et al., (2005)].
The exploration of platforms has lead the manufacturing companies to be
classified according to the customer order decoupling point (CODP), that is ”
the degree the manufacturing set up is customer independent and based on
forecast or order­related and connected to a specific sale” [Bonev et al.,
(2015)]. The most commonly mentioned strategies like Make­to­order(MTO),
Engineer­to­order (ETO), Make­to­stock (MTS), Assemble­to­order(ATO) have
been categorised by Wikner and Rudberg, (2005).
An additional strategy
called Concept­to­order(CTO) is added in the construction sector where the
client is involved in the process early on, i.e. right from the conceptual phase
of the building project. The scenario in MTS strategy is quite different than
CTO, here the customer enters the process at a much later stage of value
creation, in this strategy the final product is created based on the market
forecasts in accordance with the demands of the customer. ATO and MTO
strategies fall between CTO and MTS, only a certain degree of customisation
is offered by these strategies which is normally based on the standardisation
levels of the given product [Bonev et al., (2015)].
42
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.17: A Figure showing the different types of manufacturing strategies
and their respective CODP (customer order decoupling point). derived from
Bonev et al., (2015)
In order to achieve mass customisation, the company’s that follow MTS
strategy must move towards an ATO type production.
However, if ETO is
being practised then it is necessary for the firm to accept higher level of
standardisation, while moving down the decoupling point further down the
value chain [Haug et al., (2009)] [Bonev et al., (2015)]. Hence it becomes an
important point to note that while developing a platform it is necessary to
provide
sufficient
variety
in
the
product
but
it
must
be
balanced
with
standardisation so that the economies of scale and scope can be achieved.
Bonev et al., (2015) suggests to develop a well functioning relationship
among the team members and different teams is important in case of an
ETO situation.
Traditionally, sales, engineering, and production operations
have been ad hoc and reliant on unique talents and workmanship.
For all
incoming orders, extended coordination methods are employed to balance
product standards with technical and manufacturing capabilities [Konijnendijk,
(1994)]. Hence it is important to employ stable team at each stage of value
creation for the firm to expect benefits from the economies of scale.
The main concern of the ETO firms are about how the engineering process
coincides with the manufacturing process [Konijnendijk, (1994)].
To realise
the true potential of the platform strategy, they will have to postpone the
Decoupling point further down the line in the value chain , in other terms the
process has to be standardised to the maximum extent possible.
Gann, (1996) pointed out that the firms having modules spent 50 percent
less than others in the process of onsite assembly. Having modules also cut
down the assembly lead time by 55 percent as compared to conventional
prefabricated panel houses or up to 67 percent when compared to carpenter
built houses.
43
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:52==
Bonev et al., (2015) concluded in their paper that the successful mass
customizers in the industry use platforms to acquire the economies of scale
while maintaining a degree of flexibility in the structure of the product and
processes.
It is pointed out that the usage of platforms doesn’t mean that
the flexibility and customer value has to be sacrificed for efficiency instead it
helps create the optimum cost value creation for the specific target market
addressed through the platform.
4.2.3
Platform use in systems building
Construction businesses are being forced to systematize work in their own
supply chain in order to meet current expectations for shorter lead times,
customized projects, and high­quality deliveries. The design phase of building
is now a vital element of the process, with high demands on fast and precise
delivery made in the quickest time feasible. In general, construction design
suffers from inefficiency in delivery, with time, money, and quality falling short
of expectations [Jansson et al., (2014)].
Construction is said to be one of the largest user of the engineer­to­order
sector [Gosling and Naim, (2009)].
The customer decoupling point in the
ETO sector is in the engineering phase which allows the customer to affect
the
output
which
lets
them
customise
the
solution
according
to
their
demands.
Engineer­to­order supply has a non­physical stage that includes
activities like tendering, engineering, and process planning, as well as a
physical
stage
that
includes
component
production,
assembly,
and
installation.
The complex nature of the product structure in ETO leads to
unstable supply chain between projects.
To stabilise the supply chain and make it predictable, Jansson et al., (2014)
suggests the implementation of systems building as a part of house building.
In simple terms, this means the pre­definition of the engineering phase.
Design management strategies may be used with a reliable supply chain.
The situation in systems building is addressed by the supplier by the
formation of product platforms.
The
product
development
methods
were
originally
developed
for
large
productions using a make­to­order strategy. When using the ETO method in
home
construction,
one
must
manage
and
implement
platforms
in
a
succession of projects in conjunction with unique customer orders on a
regular basis. As a result, the client interface is extremely important [Jansson
et al., (2014)].
Experience from design and manufacturing is gradually saved in the platform
for future use by reusing solutions in successive house projects [Robertson
and Ulrich, (1998)]. Engineering is a critical activity in restricting the platform
and avoiding project­based creation of additional variations since the product
44
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:53==
platform is used throughout the design phase [Jansson et al., (2014)].
As opposed to the large series of products, component interfaces are key for
project configurations.
[Thuesen and Hvam, (2011)].
Components are the
actual building pieces utilized in product design, as well as the equipment
associated with manufacturing fixtures [Jansson et al., (2014)].
Jiao et al.,
(2007)
expanded
on
the
product
platform
idea
by
including
planning,
decision­making,
optimization,
and
configuration
approaches
to
aid
in
engineering tasks.
Customization, configuration, production, supply, and assembly are all actions
enabled by the platform in the process of defining the product. The front­end
approach emphasizes innovation, improved performance, and lower customer
costs [Jansson et al.,
(2014)].
Flow­based activity planning,
combined
experience/loyalty to standards, needs handling, and value configuration were
utilized as support approaches to reduce costs and boost customer value
from platform standards in Thuesen and Hvam, (2011) assessment of a
platform for house­building in Germany.
In
systems
construction,
design
entails
translating
unique
customer
requirements into dwellings that can be effectively constructed.The platform,
according to Styhre and Gluch,
(2010),
is a boundary object tool that
provides
engineers
with
know­how,
expertise,
and
other
resources
for
efficient supply chain operations.
According to Persson et al., (2009) efficient design management might cut
costs and boost productivity by systematizing the job. Engineering work is an
element of the design process, and it involves configuring platforms to suit
project requirements.
When merging the companies’ boundary objects, Styhre and Gluch, (2010)
discovered that knowledge may operate as a bridge between precision and
flexibility. Discrete improvements in technology and working practice can be
part of the alignment between knowledge, competence, culture, and control
process management to enhance home design [Jansson et al., (2014)].
Virtual design approaches can be effective in the context of building projects
to manage components and technological solutions, as well as to profit from
the repetitiveness of the product offer.
Jansson et al., (2014) is of the opinion that since engineering work is
involved in housing, it ensures that the client is involved in the design
process. It is important for the supplier to adhere to the platform in order to
complete production. As a result, client needs are drivers for the platform’s
unique components, and owing to the decoupling point, all platforms under
45
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:54==
construction require a unique part.
According to Jansson et al., (2014) the
full parameterisation of the platform is hindered by the fact that the client
demands keep changing in the ETO context. Hence the suppliers make use
of support methods which helps them handle the individuality in partly
defined platforms.
Jansson et al., (2014) concludes that when leveraging platforms in an ETO
setting,
design
support
approaches
for
everyday
engineering
work
are
required to bridge gaps between project needs and platform specifications.
Even in system development, separating platform development from platform
usage is challenging in an ETO scenario. Although product development may
be done outside of projects,
it is not always practicable since not all
customer demands are anticipated.
Instead, they originate when project
requirements meet platform specifications during the engineering process.
4.2.4
Product Platform alignment in industrialised house
building
Changes
in
the
business
climate
in
the
1960s
prompted
numerous
enterprises in various nations to industrialize and begin mass­producing
homes.
Product distinctiveness has become more important,
and IHB
enterprises have had to adjust [Thuesen et al., (2013)].
The usage of
product platform assets provides IHB organizations with the freedom to mix
components, systems, and aspects with variable degrees of pre­definition into
a suitable service that satisfies the demands of a certain market [Popovic
et al., (2021)].
Today’s houses require more design flexibility, with more pieces defined
through configure­to­order and modify­to­order product platforms.
The late
1980s saw the emergence of mass customisation (MC) as a response to
market realities.
Customer needs and requirements began to diversify,
making it more difficult for manufacturers to supply tailored products while
still employing efficient and mass­production­like procedures [Popovic et al.,
(2021)].
Industrial House Building (IHB) businesses have been industrialized as a
result of a transition away from pure project­oriented businesses and toward
product­oriented businesses, where product and process definitions have
assumed the form of platforms that are employed during project execution.
IHB firms integrate vertically in the supply chain to gain control of additional
stages of product life cycle, but it should not be associated with off­site
manufacturing [Popovic et al., (2021)].
Off­site manufacturing can be employed in the conventional setting of the
AEC sector, for example, in the integrated project delivery process, where
46
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:55==
architectural,
engineering,
and construction disciplines collaborate closely.
However, these are almost always independent organizations.
Because of
the vertical integration, the benefits of product platforms may be most reaped
in IHB [Johnsson, (2013)].
Companies in the IHB have a two­dimensional structure, with product and
project dimensions.
Product platform development is placed in the product
dimension, whereas product platform use is placed in the project dimension,
according to Bonev et al., (2015) The flexibility of product platforms must be
improved by merging object­based parametric modeling with building systems
to enable configure­to­order and modify­to­order specification procedures and
a lower degree of pre­definition [Johnsson, (2013)].
The IHB business model structure was coined by Brege et al., (2014) and
consists of three primary building blocks:
product, market position, and
operational platform.
Offering denotes a company’s value proposition, in
which the market’s consumer demands and requirements are met through
products
and
services.
Intermediates
between
market
position
and
operational platform are available.
The segments to which a product is
addressed, a company’s function in the supply chain, and the relationships
through which that offering is communicated, negotiated, and created are all
used
to
explain
market
position.The
degree
of
prefabrication
that
characterizes an operating platform must be decided strategically.
A home
can be prefabricated in components (at the lowest level), panelized parts (at
the medium level), and/or volumetric elements (at the greatest level).
The
operational platform also includes the company’s resources, competencies,
external
resources
from
suppliers
and
partners,
and
the
method
for
organizing and using these pieces [Popovic et al., (2021)].
Popovic et al., (2021), based on their study on Product platform alignment in
IHB came to a conclusion that in IHB organizations, achieving alignment
between
product
platform,
offering,
market
position,
and
the
external
business environment is frequently hampered by a lack of knowledge of how
these factors interact.
The product platform alignment approach may help
senior management of an IHB company undertake a holistic examination of
business models and discover development prospects.
Furthermore, the
model may be utilized by enterprises to convey and develop awareness of
business models and product platforms across the organization, resulting in a
cultural shift that offers a challenge to product platform alignment from the
perspective of the internal business environment.
customisation can be defined as the abilities and strategies that are used
during the design and manufacturing process of a tailored product for a
specific customer. The entry point of the customer determines the which of
the four business model is to be opted.
The four business models being,
Configure­to­order, select variant, Engineer­to­order and Manufacture­to­order.
47
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:56==
Product platforms acts as enablers of the first two which aids in efficient
customisation.
Product
platforms
are
known
for
maintaining
business
efficiency while serving a wide range of products [André et al., (2019)].
André et al.,
(2019) points out that the product platforms have been
successful in increasing the average life cycle of the product as well as
results in higher profits and sales as compared to the products that are not
derived from a platform. Also, the use of product platforms helps in reaching
different
customer
segments
efficiently
as
they
make
use
of
common
components and interfaces.
4.2.5
Key Takeaways from Product Platform Literature
Product platforms are a game changer as they allow heterogeneity in the
product
while
still
maintaining
the
mass
production
efficiency.
The
individualization
aspect
is
taken
care
of
by
making
use
of
reuse
of
components, processes and knowledge across multiple products.
Since
common resources are shared across multiple products, product platform
strategy reduces the time to market along with the testing time. One of the
obstacles that need to be overcome is finding the right mix of heterogeneity
and standardization. Heterogeneity is required for the clients to feel a sense
of
individualism
in
the
product
while
standardization
ensures
that
the
components can be interchanged.
Hence the interface that connects the
components is seen as the important part.
The industrialization of Construction seems profitable because of its higher
output capacity, quality assurance, and for its ability to adapt according to
the different necessities.
Normally, Prefabrication is dubbed as the only
industrialization architecture, which is not true. Industrialization in construction
can be attained by making use of simple and traditional methods too.
The advantages of industrialization in general are that it helps in driving
down the cost while improving the quality of the product. Industrialization in
the construction industry is different because in the construction industry the
standard building is not the product. This is the case because the buildings
are designed according to the client’s demands. The complete product I the
case of building industry is the building system with all the relevant rules.
The drawback of the industrialized system is that, in order to lower the cost,
the individuality aspect was compromised.
Lack of Individualization is seen
as the main factor that prevented the adaption of industrialization in the
previous decade.
A great deal of attention is paid to the individualization
aspect of industrialized construction these days.
Hence it is important to
have flexibility in the products and the tools used.
48
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:57==
One of the main reasons for the inefficiency of the construction industry is its
fragmented ¨nature.
The 3 kinds of fragmentation that is present in the
construction sector is vertical, horizontal and longitudinal.
Hence it is very
important
to
address
this
fragmentation
issue
by
making
use
of
Organizational Modularization.
It is essential to move down the Customer Order decoupling point further
down the value chain so that it is possible to standardize the process as
much as possible. This is important to achieve economies of scale. Having
standardized modules helps companies to spend less on onsite assembly
which helps saving lead time.
Product platforms were originally used in large production companies that
made use of Make­To­Stock strategy.
But when it is being applied to an
industry like construction which follows ETO strategy,
it is important to
manage and implement Platforms in several projects so that the learning can
be used to better optimize the platform. The engineering part of construction
is critical activity to standardize the products.
Design management is also a crucial task since it is a bridge between the
clients demands and achieving them with efficient methods. It helps in cutting
cost and systematizing jobs.
Knowledge gained by using the platform in
different projects can be a used as abridge between precision and flexibility.
The client requirements are the unique part of the product to be delivered.
This is important since individualization is seen as an essential element for
the success of industrialization of the construction industry.
It is also to be
noted
that
the
client
demands
keep
on
changing
preventing
the
full
parameterization of the platform.
49
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:58==
4.3
Connecting the dots
Bibliometric Analysis
Co­occurrence of Keywords
A map of co­occurrence of keywords (4.18) is created to visualise the
connection between Circular economy and Product Platforms. The threshold
limit was set to 25 occurrences of keywords per article. The map consists of
5 subsets, The red subset consists of keywords that are related to Product
platform strategy that in the construction industry.
The yellow subset deals
with the keywords that are connected to life cycle assessment.
The blue
subset represents the construction materials.
The green subset has the
keywords that are relevant to waste management and finally the purple
subset consists of keywords that is directly related to Circular Economy.
Figure 4.18: Co­Occurrence of Keywords for Circular economy and Product
Platforms with a threshold of 25 occurrences in an article
Analysis of Academic Articles
4.3.1
Sustainable Industrial Building System Model (SIBS)
In
recent
years,
people’s
perceptions
and
interpretations
of
building
sustainability have shifted.
The initial focus was on resource limitations,
namely energy,
and methods for reducing its influence on the natural
environment.
In the previous decade,
the focus was on building and
construction
technical
challenges
such
as
materials,
building
parts
and
components,
construction
procedures,
and
energy.
Most
non­technical
50
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:59==
concerns are now taken into account, and economic and social growth have
been elevated as indicators of sustainable development [R. B. Richard,
(2006)].
Optimizing
the
use
of
construction
materials,
reducing
raw
material
consumption
and
recovering
them
in
industrialized
manufacturing,
and
maintaining buildings at low costs are all elements that impact the building
industry’s ability to achieve sustainable development [Zabihi et al., (2013)].
Zabihi et al., (2013) is of the opinion that Industrialized building systems may
achieve the aims of sustainable construction by relying on quality increase
ideas,
environmental
harmony,
increased flexibility,
effective design and
planning, and optimization.
IBS has several qualities that are conducive to
long­term sustainability, therefore industrialization is a force that works in
tandem with sustainability [R. B. Richard, (2006)] [Zabihi et al., (2013)].
SIBS is a broad concept that encompasses several elements and techniques
to Industrialization.
This strategy, for example, might be understood as
addressing
social
issues
associated
with
constructing
industry
(individualization,
social
identity,
and
so
on).
Furthermore,
economic,
technical, and technological difficulties are all treated in some way in this
method, making it a complete and holistic strategy that addresses many
obstacles originating from building industrialization [Zabihi et al., (2013)].
According
to
research,
the
fundamental
features/criteria,
complementary
features,
and feasibility features/criteria of sustainable and industrialized
buildings may be evaluated in three categories:
basic features/criteria,
complementary features,
and feasibility features/criteria.
Basic (natural)
characteristics are those that occur in industrialized systems to varying
degrees, and these attributes, such as waste reduction, decreased time,
optimized consumption, and so on, are mostly attributable to industrial ideas.
Second features, or complementary criteria, are characteristics that do not
naturally occur in industrialized systems but need be included in these
building systems in order to attain sustainability levels.
Major advantages
linked
with
sustainability
are
highlighted
in
the
topic
of
supplementary
characteristics.
Feasibility
criteria
are
those
that
ensure
the
use
of
industrialized systems in construction.If these traits aren’t offered or don’t
reach a certain threshold, employing industrial procedures will be difficult,
and their usage will be unjustified [Zabihi et al., (2013)].
51
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.19: Model of Sustainable Industrialized Building System (SIBS) taken
from Zabihi et al., (2013)
Zabihi et al., (2013) is of the opinion that Industrialized building systems are
more
responsible
to
sustainability
principles
and
aims
than
traditional
construction
approaches.
The
sustainable
advantages
of
the
industrial
building systems according to Olia, (1999) are :
• reduction in the quantity of waste produced
• increase in the average lifespan of the building
• improvement in overall quality
• simple and rigid construction and renovation process
• reduction in the usage of natural resources
• reduction in the environmental pollution
• Better control over quality
• reduction in the energy consumed
Other advantages of Industrialised building systems have been noted by
Kamar
et
al.,
(2010)
as
the
environment
is
controlled,
lesser
waste
production,
application
of
construction
materials,
the
conditions
for
52
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:61==
transportation
and
finally
the
economical
sustainability
associated
with
Industrial building systems. Due to faster construction speed associated with
IBS, it also has a positive effect on the neighbours of the construction site,
the need for storage of materials in site in minimum as well. It also has a
positive impact on the health and work conditions of the site workers due to
lesser work on the site.
Industrialization,
in
general,
is
a
force
that
works
in
tandem
with
sustainability. The following are the points relating economy, industrial output,
and consistency:
• The formation of a general organisation for a product which is being
continuously produced by making use of the same principles and
knowledge.
• Simplification of the processes involved and reduction in the total energy
usage related to each project.
• Better time management as the work is done in factories instead of on
site. This will avoid unnecessary setbacks in schedule due to weather
conditions.
• The raw materials are purchased in bulk in factory production which
might help reduce the loss of raw materials from about 40 to 100
percent when compared with in­situ construction.
• Better control over the quality of the product when it is prepared in the
factory which helps mitigate some of the defects which would otherwise
need maintenance.
• Due to precision achieved in factory production, the operation on site is
made easier with less waste generation due to less work on site.
• The use of dry connections that are used in the subsystems, it is easier
for making non destructive changes during the renovation. It also helps
in reducing the waste generated in case the dimensions or the shape
of the building has to changed in the future due to its non destructive
disassembly nature.
As
a
result,
the
following
points
concerning
sustainable
design
and
construction based on an industrial concept are debatable.
A transaction
between technology and the environment,
or,
to put it another way,
a
relationship between technology and the environment, is one of the most
significant aspects of sustainable building. This relationship exists indefinitely
as a result of the benefits of technology in conjunction with appropriate
environmental circumstances.
This condition is suitable with several current
industrialized construction systems [Zabihi et al., (2013)].
Zabihi et al.,
(2013) concludes that many current industrialized building
systems might be classified as sustainable construction, with the goal of
53
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:62==
improving quality and harmonizing with the environment, as well as moving
toward greater flexibility via proper design and optimization.
Environmental,
social, economic, and technological elements of sustainability in industrialized
building systems are divided into four areas, each of which examines some
of the main features of industrialization in these systems.
4.3.2
Resource Efficiency in Industrialized housing
construction
IHC (Industrialized Housing Building) is a broad word that encompasses
prefabrication,
Modularization,
off­site
fabrication,
and
contemporary
construction processes (MMC). IHC is a strategy for using new technologies
for resource­efficient house building [Kedir and Hall, (2021)].
There is an sense of urgency in the global construction of housing since the
global population is estimated to be 9.7 billion by 2050.
Hence there is a
need
for
provision
of
housing
and
urban
planning
strategies.
The
construction industry is responsible for the consumption of about 3 billion
tonnes of raw material each year.
This is necessary to keep up with the
global housing demand.
Even after the consumption of such enormous
amount of resources, the construction industry is still not able to meet the
demand for housing supply. Also, the resources that are used in construction
are depleting and there is a need for construction to be resource efficient
[Kedir and Hall, (2021)].
Industrialised housing seems like an promising alternative to the conventional
methods
of
construction
that
is
being
dubbed
as
resource
consuming.
Industrialised Housing construction (IHC) is not just prefabrication of the
elements.
In a broad sense, IHC refers to holistic strategy that includes
well­defined technical systems, use of Information Communication Technology
(ICT), planning and control of processes, and a stronger relationship with
stakeholders [Lessing and Brege, (2015)].
All
actions
that
occur
away
from
the
final
site
where
structures
are
permanently constructed are referred to as pre­manufacturing. Manufacturing
concepts are used to carry out these activities in a regulated setting.
Structures can be built as a volumetric element (3D) or as a panelized
system
(2D).
In
addition,
on­site
innovations
such
as
integrating
lean
processes and/or leveraging building information modeling can be included in
IHC . These are the IHC subsystems that can be used to build a platform for
resource efficiency [Kedir and Hall, (2021)].
Kedir and Hall, (2021) presented the scientific knowledge that is available in
the topics of building life cycle and also the themes and sub themes that were
often referred to. The five main areas mentioned are Design, Manufacturing
54
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:63==
and logistics, Assembly, Occupancy and End of life.
Design
The design process in IHC involves a strict planning strategy which aids in
the management of process and technical performances.The IHC undergoes
a product based approach instead of a project based approach that is typical
in the construction industry. It helps the stakeholders to get an idea of the
product right from he start. One of the things in the design phase that has to
be paid importance to is the dematerialisation.
It means that the materials
that go into a product must be reduced as much as possible. The process of
dematerialisation can be achieved throughout the life cycle of the building
[Kedir and Hall, (2021)].
De­materialisation
can
be
achieved
mainly
by
making
use
of
product
optimisation and system optimisation. Product optimisation can be achieved
by being aware of the advanced manufacturing methods that are available
for design optimisation. On the other hand, system optimisation requires an
integrated design approach which makes the structure resource efficient as a
whole and not just in a component by component basis[Kedir and Hall,
(2021)].
In IHC, system optimization is achieved through the use of
standardized products and systems, as well as design ideas such product
modularity. Individual components can be conceived and developed while the
product as a whole is still being integrated.
Material designers should pay attention to making use of materials with low
carbon content and also should try to exclude the materials that are energy
intensive and come from non renewable sources. Abey and Anand, (2019)
found out in their research that about 90 percent of the embodied energy in
construction came from the materials that were being used.
Hence, if the
embodied energy can be decreased in the materials, it will greatly effect the
total embodied energy in the construction sector leading to more sustainable
construction.
Concrete, steel and aluminum were found out to be the top
contributors.
Manufacturing and Logistics
Typically the activities of construction are moved from the site of construction
to a factory offsite in IHC. This gives a great deal of control over the
elements the are manufactured.
Since the manufacturing is done in a
controlled environment, there is a potential for resource efficiency. However,
care has to be taken in terms of emission that arises from the transportation
of finished elements to the site.
The themes that are discussed when it
comes to the manufacturing and logistics in IHC are Production systems,
waste and quality management and transportation systems.
One of the most claimed benefits of IHC is that it has a very high potential
55
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:64==
to reduce construction waste as well as to limit the use of primary materials
that go into the components [Kedir and Hall, (2021)]. To achieve reduction in
IHC it is important to work in a controlled environment which promotes
precision in manufacturing leading to the decrease in material wastage. The
usage of advanced manufacturing techniques ensures higher product quality
which in turn eliminates the need for onsite plastering and painting activities.
Also due to the higher quality obtained the need for maintenance and
replacement during the occupancy stage is reduced. The difference between
the conventional construction methods and IHC according to the findings of
Begum et al., (2010) is that IHC produces only 1.5 tonnes of waste per 100
square meter as compared to 54.6 tonnes of waste per square meter that
gets produced in case of onsite construction. It is also noteworthy that most
of the waste that gets produced in the industrial production is fed back into
the system.
In an invention project, it was discovered that prefabrication
procedures produced accuracy of up to 1 mm. Furthermore, the accuracy of
production allows designers to avoid over designing and contractors to avoid
putting excess orders.
Material orders for delivery to the building site
sometimes include a 5­15 percent contingency to account for waste during
the manufacturing process. IHC also benefits from manufacturing synergy, as
increased
production
capacity
enables
more
sustainable
and
integrated
product designs [Kedir and Hall, (2021)].
Production systems in IHC can be helpful in reducing the waste generated
because of the improvements attained in material process, flow planning and
smooth information flow among stakeholders.
Process innovation can be
achieved by the implementation of lean production. Lean manufacturing aims
to eliminate waste from the manufacturing process.
By adopting ”backward
scheduling,” which depends on real­time demand rather than previous data
and projections, a pull production system may minimize overproduction and
surplus inventory.
Inventory tracking and monitoring is another subtheme.
Through the integration of tracking technologies like as RFID and BIM,
materials and goods may be monitored, traced, and visualized.
These
advantages are frequently advertised as time­saving. They can, however, be
expanded to better material management [Kedir and Hall, (2021)].
The job of transferring the products that have been produced in the factory
to the final site is looked after by the transportation systems.
The chosen
production sites should be near to the final assembly location to save
transportation distance.
Du et al.,
(2019),
however,
maintain that the
performance
of
IHC
during
the
transportation
phase
is
equivalent
to
traditional
construction
since
finished
components
are
delivered
to
the
building site in smaller, more efficient batches.
Smith, (2018) in his studies found that Panelized timber building systems use
6.7 percent more timber material than traditional timber construction systems,
whereas volumetric/modular systems use 69.4 percent more timber material.
56
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:65==
The extra wood need for transportation stiffness accounts for the large
increase in the case of volumetric/modular systems.
Overall, traditional
building consumes fewer resources during the transportation phase. The use
of a lean supply chain that guarantees just in time delivery also means that
the emissions are increased [Kedir and Hall, (2021)].
On­site
and
near­site
manufacturing
is
another
sub
theme.
Transportation­related effects can be reduced by using on­site or near­site
manufacturing solutions. The distance between where elements are created
and where they are assembled is quite important.
Assembly
Assembly systems are an important aspect of the IHC system because even
if most of the activities are conducted in the factories, there are still some
activities that has to be completed on­site. Higher degrees of standardization
in IHC products and processes provide the ability to improve site and
equipment efficiency.
Furthermore, the usage of digital tools such as BIM
improves resource efficiency in assembly by detecting clashes.
Occupancy
The use of resources during the occupation period of housing is referred to
as operational performance. In this phase, resource efficiency might take the
shape of building materials or energy.
IHC’s operational performance is
influenced by a variety of site and design factors, including the quality of the
buildings, their orientation and placement, ventilation, and energy sources.
These considerations should be included into the IHC design to ensure that
site­specific resource­efficient structures are constructed.
End of life
End of life is the phase after the occupancy stage of the building.
The
themes that are discussed in the end of life phase with respect to resource
efficiency is the reusability and recyclablity.
One of the topics that is
discussed in the flexibility of the product. That means that the product should
be efficiently designed using principles such as design for disassembly
principles.
IHC makes use of these principles and could be designed with
disassembly in mind.
This helps in the better maintenance of the building
[Brehar and Kopenetz, (2011)].
Another sub theme that falls under the end of life phase is the product as a
service business model.
This business model allows the manufacturers to
own the materials and lease them out to consumers. Hence this shifts the
focus from selling the product to maintaining the product and also develops a
long term relationship with the cusotmers.
The reusability and recyclability
potential of the IHC components can only be exploited when there is a
57
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:66==
stakeholder who is responsible for the end of life phase of the building.
Some of the other themes discussed by Kedir and Hall, (2021) that are not
associated with the life cycle phases but effect the IHC as a whole are the
factors such as Industrial and Regulatory.
one of the key factors is the
customers willingness to pay for a feature. So it is important to onboard the
customers from the starting.Yau et al., (2014) found that the customers were
willing to pay more for the features like LED lights but were reluctent to pay
for prefabricated elements.
This maybe because the customers cannot see
the resource efficiency in the process but it is easier to see it in the end
products that they use. so it becomes imperative to showcase the resource
efficiency aspect of the prefabricated elements to help the customers see the
benefit in opting for this greener method.
Kedir and Hall, (2021) also discusses the the regulatory factors that could aid
the implementation of IHC. The regulatory factors mostly has to do with the
codes used in design, policies that surround the construction industry and
Incentives for the use of a certain type of technology.
The shift from the
compliance code to the performance based codes is a welcome move
according to Kedir and Hall, (2021) since they only specify the necessary
performance for the materials that has to be used and do not dictate the use
of a specific material or product. The use of innovative materials is affected
negatively by the lack of codes relating to them. There is also a necessity
for the IHC to be incentivised in the national level for its fast roll out. Policies
by the government is also required to aid IHC in its mainstream adoption.
Kedir and Hall, (2021) is of the opinion that during the use phase of a material
or a product, its resource efficiency aspect is judged by looking into how well it
can retain its value when it is in use and also after it has served it purpose. It
is found that there is a direct impact of the decisions made in the early design
phase on the resource efficiency aspect in the later stages of the product. It
has been pointed out how the selection of materials may later effect the energy
performance of a particular building.
4.4
Strategies for the application of Circular
economy in Prefabricated Buildings
The Circular Economy ideas of material and component reduction, reuse,
and recyclability have previously been effectively applied to a variety of
items, ranging from electronic goods to apparel, but to a lesser extent to
structures and building components [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)].
The process of using recycled materials are not considered to be a part of
Circular
Economy
as
this
falls
under
the
category
of
Down­cycling.
58
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:67==
Down­cycling is the usage of a material in a process where its value is
degraded as compared to its original use.
Traditional buildings have a
number
of
challenges,
including
their
monolithic
character,
architectural
elements that contribute to a lack of standard standards, and a poorly
developed closed­loop supply chain[Hart et al., (2019)].
Buildings that are
prefabricated might be a solution to these problems [Minunno, O’Grady,
et al., (2018)].
Prefabrication in construction is defined as a ” manufacturing process that
takes place in a specialized facility where various materials are joined
together to form a component of the final installation procedure” [Minunno,
O’Grady, et al., (2018)][W. Pan et al., (2012)]. According the the classification
of Gibbs Gibb, (1999) Prefabrication is categorised into four levels depending
on the level of prefabrication used in the product, the different categories are:
• component manufacturing and subassembly carried out in a factory and
not considered for on­site production
• non­volumetric pre­assembly that refers to pre­assembled units not
enclosing usable space
• volumetric pre­assembly refers top re­assembled units enclosing usable
space, which are usually manufactured in factories, but do not form part
of the buildings structure
• whole­building prefabrication refers to pre­assembled volumetric units
forming the actual structure and fabric of the building.
Prefabricated buildings are the buildings in which the components like walls,
roofs etc. are manufactured in a factory offsite and then transported to the
site for assembly. Hence, the difference between prefabricated and traditional
building is that in a traditional building, the components of the building are
manufactured on site [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)].
Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018) has presented 8 different strategies to
incorporate circular economy in Prefabricated buildings.
The strategies are
discussed in brief below:
Strategy 1: Construction waste reduction and the application of lean
production chain
Most of the industries work on the principle of linear economy. This inevitably
leads to the large quantity of waste once the products reach the end of life.
It is a known fact that most of the waste in the linear economy is produced
during the End of life phase. However, it is not possible to look over the fact
that a great number of waste is also produced in the manufacturing stage.
When spoil, scrap, or faulty materials are formed due to over­production,
delays, inventory difficulties, or damage during transportation, a considerable
amount of scrap and raw materials is lost in the basic phases of the
production chain. This puts pressure on the manufacturers to find a way to
59
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:68==
optimise the use of resources. The integration of lean production and parallel
production is seen as a way out of this problem during the manufacturing of
the products. This is achieved by making use of project management tools
such as Just in Time delivery,
design for assembly and supply chain
management.
The usage of BIM in projects also helps in minimising the
waste produced.
However, the use of BIM in traditional buildings is not as
effective due to its complexity [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)].
Strategy 2: Integration of the waste into new production
Integration of waste back into production is supported by many CE experts
since it can greatly help in closing the loop.
It is also deemed as a more
efficient way when compared to recycling.
The wastes or byproducts from
different sectors can be reintroduced in the value chain as raw materials or
components [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)]. According to Formoso et al.,
(2002) the waste that is produced due to the construction activities are
mostly inert materials that can act as a perfect byproduct or raw material in
the production of recycled concrete.
The main reason as discussed by
Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018) is that by adding the byproduct into the
recycled concrete, the by­products are generally delayed from being land
filled. The problem with this is that the amount of byproducts that is available
is not enough to fulfill the demands of the global cement demand.
Strategy 3: Reuse of replacement parts or entire components
The reuse of parts that were disassembled before is preferred in most of the
industries. However, it has to be noted that the usage of such a method is
not always possible owing to the technical and economical nature of the
component in question. According to Mok et al., (1997) disassembly is the
”degree of easy assembly”.
Disassemblability is generally described as the
ease with which a component can be disassembled with the use of any tools
or by exerting force but just by making use of some simple mechanism and
standardisation of parts [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)]. It is important for
the
cost
of
the
disassembled
components
to
be
lower
than
the
new
component in order for disassembly to be feasible. It also depends on the
value of the goods that are retrieved through disassembly and the cost that
goes into the process of disassembly. Gorgolewski, (2008) argues that even
when
deconstruction
is
theoretically
viable,
it
takes
longer
since
the
dismounted components must be kept, inspected, and certified, and the
supply chain for reused materials and components is not yet developed.
Strategy 4: Design for adaptability during operation
One of the methods to reduce the consumption of materials is to extend the
life cycle of the component.
One of the main barrier in practicing the
principles of re usability or life extension is that the value of the component
to be reused or whose life is to be extended should always be available for
a cheaper price than that of a new component.
If it is not lower by a
60
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:69==
considerable amount, then new components are preferred over the salvaged
components.
A lot of attempt is made in building construction to close the
material loops.
However, there is a requirement for accurate planning to
achieve life extension by flexibility of spaces and adaptable elements.
The
degree of mobility of structures and the adaptability of its components is
connected to their flexibility. Design for modularity and standardisation of the
components are the two strategies that can easily address the problem of
adaptability [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)].
Strategy 5: Design towards Dissembling goods into components to be
reused
Design for disassembly as defined by Wheaton means ” preemptive, aiming
to
include
serviceability
and
adaptability
in
its
methodology.”
[Minunno,
O’Grady, et al., (2018)]. There are several components in a building that will
eventually outlast the life cycle of the building itself.
Instead of regarding
these materials as a waste, they need to be disassembled and reused in as
a component or a raw material in another building.
It is advised to design
materials with mechanical connection as these type of connections can be
easily disassembled when compared to the the materials that are connected
using chemical connections.
Mechanical connection also ensures that the
components are not damaged during the process of disassembly.
BIM can be used to design the buildings while keeping the disassembly
aspect in mind. BIM makes it easier for a particular element to be tracked,
also the relevant information about the element can be stored in the BIM
model.
It can also help the user understand the relation of the element to
the overall structure. By having these information handy, it will be easier for
the future users to decide how to handle the material at the End of life and
how to disassemble the component once it has served its purpose.
A
material passport makes it easier to track the materials and reuse them at
the end of life [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)].
Strategy 6: Design for recycling of the materials used in construction
The building components and materials that cannot be reused should be
designed in a way that it must be recyclable. The reason why recyclability is
graded below reduce and reuse is because of the fact that while a material
gets recycled, it gets downgraded, meaning it loses its quality hence effecting
the quality of the second life product. The most common materials that are
recycled in the field of construction is steel and concrete.
Both these
materials are very different in terms of their recyclability. On one hand, Steel
can be recycled numerous times and it would still retain all its properties. On
the other hand, concrete can be recycled but care should be taken since
concrete can lose its quality if it is not designed for recycling [Minunno,
O’Grady, et al., (2018)].
61
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:70==
The problem with concrete is that once it is recycled, for it to be comparable
to virgin concrete, it is essential to add cement to it. This is considered as a
downgrade since it transforms from concrete to an aggregate that needs
cement to be mixed with it to regain certain properties.
The reason why
concrete is to be recycled is because it could help in the scarcity of
materials and also by introducing the recycled concrete back in the value
chain, the introduction of concrete as waste that needs to be land filled is
delayed. However, steel is given a higher weightage than concrete when it
comes to recycling while the emissions due to the transport of materials is
taken into account [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)].
Strategy 7: Systems for tracking of materials in their supply chain
Tracking of materials across its supply chain can prove to be a key feature in
material saving and also reduction of material usage up to a certain extent.
Radio­Frequency Identification(RFID) or bar codes could be used to track the
materials in the supply chain. The information about the different components
used in the building can be stored using BIM models, this would give a boost
to developing cities as material banks [Minunno, O’Grady, et al., (2018)].
This might enable for the tracking of geometric and mechanical features, as
well as the component’s location, age, and predicted life cycle. This would
benefit the reusability criteria as the information regarding a certain material
is stored and can be accessed to check if a material that has reached its
End of life is available to be disassembled and used in a future project. The
tracking of materials would result in the decrease in materials that end up in
landfills
and
also
prevents
some
materials
from
being
recycled
and
downgraded. Also, using a disassembled material reduces the need for new
components.
Prefabricated construction offers the benefit of enabling for a closed­loop
supply chain since building takes place in one location, allowing for safe
material storage and inventory. The existing limits with reuse supply chains
are the location of current material stock and the period of availability.To
finish
projects,
traditional
construction
practitioners
use
a
dispersed,
subcontractor work force.
Because of the contractual structure and the
variable locations of projects, component traceability is problematic; hence,
including the RFID technology into a prefabricated building would maximize
its potential for creating a closed­loop supply chain [Minunno, O’Grady, et al.,
(2018)].
62
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:71==
5
Discussion
In recent years there has been a great level of interest on the topics of
circular economy in construction, another issue topic that has captured the
interests
of
the
industry
and
the
policymakers
is
the
concept
of
Modularization.
The problem is that these two topics are being treated as
two separate entities and the inter dependency of the topic has not yet been
discussed on a large scale. The discussion about how these two topics can
relate to each other is the need of the hour since this could mean that
Modularization could be the next big thing to disrupt the current scenario of
the construction industry and acts as a driver in transforming the construction
industry towards circularity.
Modularization is seen as a way to control the overall quality of the
components by making use of controlled working environments, since the
work is done in the controlled environment, the time taken to complete a
building is also greatly reduced and the maintenance cost is also thought to
be reduced due to the fact that there will be lesser probability of failure of
the components. Furthermore, Modularization is deemed to reduce the cost
of construction since there are fewer parts to be handled on site.
One of the main drawbacks of traditional construction is that the life of the
building or an infrastructure project is mainly determined by the components
that are used in the construction.
This components are not designed for
disassembly, hence it is very hard to replace the components. Even though
some of the components can be disassembled, it is very expensive to
replace the component.
The solution to the problem stated above is to
design buildings modularly so that the components can be separated from
the building when they reach the end of their life or if the building reaches
the end of its use and then can be used in a different building or recycled,
whatever seems fit in a particular scenario, hence extending the life of the
building as well as contributing to circular economy by retaining the highest
value of components for as long as possible by reintroducing it in the life
cycle of a product.
To implement a circular economy in construction industry it is imperative to
follow the main principles that promotes circular economy, they are:
• Reuse of products
• Restructuring of systems to promote the usage of components that are
considered as waste as a feed stock in another system and hence
retaining the component at its highest value
63
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:72==
• Component recovery in order to use it in another construction as a
component itself or raw material for a new component.
The main aim of Circular economy in construction is not to just focus on the
functionality aspect of the infrastructure but is to manage the end of life
optimally.
It is important to reintroduce the components back in new
infrastructure.
Modularization is contributing to the circular economy of the construction sector
in the following ways[Mignacca et al., (2020)]:
• Possibility of dismantling, moving, and repairing modules in order to
reuse them, lowering raw material demand and energy use.
• Possibility to repair parts without disturbing the basic structure of the
building.
• The amount of waste is reduced greatly as the manufacturing takes place
in factories (controlled environment) instead of in­situ.
• The materials need not be transported over a long distance hence
reducing the impact on the environment by the reduction in emissions.
Modularization in buildings helps reduce the amount of construction and
demolition waste. Design for disassembly is also a great tool to reduce the
waste generated by aiding in the easy change of components that needs
repair or replacing. Technologies like 3D printing and additive manufacturing
helps in minimising the time taken to complete a project.
In order to achieve a closed loop in construction, it is important to apply the
principles of disassembly so that the components can be disassembled with
ease and used in other projects where it is needed. This will ensure that the
products do not end up in the waste heap even though they might be useful
somewhere else.
It is important to have simplified connections in buildings
which are standardised so that the process of assembly and disassembly is
simplified [Mignacca et al., (2020)].
The use of prefabrication technology is noted to be more energy efficient
than the conventional methods of construction.
The energy embodied in
prefabricated steel construction is higher than the other types of construction
methods, but if the steel structure and the other components are used in a
new construction then according to Aye et al., (2012), there can be a savings
od upto 81 percent of the embodied energy [Mignacca et al., (2020)].
The
modular
design
might
help
items
perform
better
in
terms
of
disassemblability,
maintainability,
upgrade­ability,
reusability,
and recycling
[Hata et al.,
(2001)].
The suggestions by Mignacca et al.,
(2020) for
achieving the optimal performance in circular economy terms has to be
64
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:73==
considered.
The performance of a component can only be enhanced only if the options
for the life cycle of the component is evaluated during its early design
stages. It is suggested that the components that needs to be joined should
be made of the same material and not of composite materials, it is also
suggested that the physical life of the components that go together have to
be determined and it should have the same physical life in order to avoid or
reduce the waste generated.
According to Hata et al., (2001) Use of common modules in the product
family and having likely reusable components in the same module makes
reuse easier.
It is also recommended that the module can have electronic
monitoring to determine the end life of the module, this will help in tracing
the components that are at the end of their life, or also in reusing the
elements that can be fitted into another building.
If the module can be designed in such a way that it can undergo the
process of recycling or reusing directly without having to be disassembled
then the load on the environment and the cost of logistics can be reduced.
This can be achieved by considering the life cycle options of all the
components that go into the module and designing the module to have
components with the same life expectancy [Mignacca et al., (2020)].
A concept of Modular Circular Economy has been discussed in the article of
Mignacca et al., (2020). Modular CE is defined as ” the factory fabrication,
transportation and installation on­site of modules aiming to facilitate the
reuse/ repair/replacement/recycling of modules/components/materials” so this
concept is the mix of circular economy and a product platform. The main aim
of this concept is to promote the sustainable development and make the
process of construction in line with the sustainable development goals of the
United Nations.
This strategy of combining the Circular economy with
modularity is important because it means that the strategy could be used to
extend the life of the structures or generally speaking will help to retain the
resources at their highest value until they are not fit for use. For example,
when a building is set to be retired, the modules that still can be used that
are the part of the building to be retired can be reused in a building that only
requires a change in the module to continue functioning.
This will help in
extending the life of the infrastructure and also to reduce the waste.
However, the concept of exchanging the modules within the construction is
still in its development stage and it can only be realised if enough stress is
given to design strategies such as design for assembly/ disassembly and
design for deconstruction.
The success of the Product platform enabling
circular economy actually depends on how well the design for deconstruction
65
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:74==
strategy is implemented and also on the standardisation of the interface. It is
important for all the manufacturers to have a common mode of working and
designing in order to make the components reusable across multiple variety
of buildings and infrastructure.
It is also worth noting that the cost of
deconstruction and the cost of the new materials as compared to the
salvaged materials also has an important role to play in the implementation
of the Modular Circular Economy strategy in construction.
The standardisation of design is the main obstacles that needs to be
implemented in order for the Modular Circular economy to work as imagined.
It is near to impossible to reuse the components if the modules are not
standardised.
Reuse can reduce the waste produced efficiently in times
when a building is retired prematurely or if the parts have not reached the
end of life when the building they are used in has been retired.
It is not
possible to standardise the whole building industry in a short period of time.
hence it is important to start with standardisation of modules since it will
gradually lead to the standardisation of the whole industry once the benefits
of
standardisation
is
realised.
One
of
the
best
ways
to
implement
standardisation is through the policies.
Hence policymakers have to take
action on this issue and make policies that promote standardisation by
incentivising
reuse
of
components
and
modules,
which
will
promote
sustainability as a domino effect.
It is the need of the hour for Policy makers and industry to work together to
devise a plan to promote the circular economy in infrastructure projects by
taking advantage of Modularization [Mignacca et al., (2020)]. There is need
for a law to make sure that the retired buildings and infrastructure projects
undergo a phase of deconstruction and all the components or most of the
components that can be reused somewhere else is salvaged before pulling
down the building. policy makers are no doubt the ones that need to drive
this trend since the industry seems negligent about this topic.
There is no doubt that in the initial phases of the transition from a linear
economy based construction industry to a circular construction industry, it is
not going to be profitable or economical to salvage the materials and reuse
them. So it becomes important for the government to incentivise this practice
along with setting up regulatory frameworks to on board the industries to
circular economic practices.
Product platforms can be the answer to the question of what will help the
construction industry transition from Linear economy to Circular economy.
Product platform strategy has a lot of advantages that can be utilised by the
construction industry to transition into circular economy.
The main idea of
Circularity is to close the material loop. This can be realised if the resources
that are being used in construction is used efficiently.
The efficient use of
66
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:75==
resources will greatly reduce the burden on the extraction of resources since
about 30 percent of natural resource extraction is done to provide the
construction industry with the resources it demands.
Industrialization in construction can greatly help in the efficient use of
materials since industrialised construction has proven record of efficient
usage of materials. Also since the production of the elements take place in
factories, the quality of the products that are obtained in this process is
higher than that of the same product that is obtained from traditional methods
of construction. This will help in increasing the life of the products and also
might lead to lesser maintenance and repair issues due to its higher quality.
The loss of raw materials can also be controlled when the parts needed for
construction are produced. The schedule can also be maintained better since
the chances of setbacks in operation due to bad weather is eliminated when
the parts are produced in the factory.
The waste generation in the site of
construction is also greatly reduced as there isn’t a lot of work that needs to
be done on site. The raw materials can also be tracked in the supply chain
by making use of RFID technology which can help prevent the loss of
materials.
The usage of BIM can also act as an enabler of Modularization since the
data regarding the materials that are used in the projects can be stored and
referred to at a later stage to check if there are any parts or components
that could be reused. Another advantage is that since the components are
produced in factories, they are assembled on site by making use of dry
connections which is easy to disassemble.
This ease of disassembling the
components can promote the reuse of materials since it would drive down
the cost of recovering the materials while decreasing the time taken to
recover them too.The principles of reusing and reduction in the usage of
materials can also be seen in the product platform strategy in construction.
The waste generated is often used as a raw materials in another process.
Product platform strategy implements most of the principles that have been
prescribed in Circular economy. It has to be noted that even though offsite
construction has been used as an example to describe the benefits of
Product Platform strategy, it does not mean that ”Off­site” construction has to
be followed for the construction to be circular. The implementation of Product
platform strategy may vary according to the segment that is being served. It
is possible to reap the benefits of circular economy even by focusing on
existing techniques and tools.
The fragmentation in the construction industry can be solved by integration of
different firms which will help in the coordination and delivery throughout the
project. It is also important to have long term partnerships. The information
67
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:76==
flow across the project team can also be a valuable resource.
The
fragmentation in decision making can be countered by standardising the
approaches in construction.
Since the platform is to be managed by the people ultimately, it is important
for the whole organisation to have commitment and loyalty in order to
successfully implement a platform. The top management is expected to have
clear knowledge about the platform.
Vertical integration of the independent organisations that work on a project
will ensure the success of the project.
This is because of the fact that
independent organisations are normal responsible for different tasks that are
supposed to be completed wither in the same phases or different phases of
the project.
Longitudinal Integration is something that needs looking into so that the
knowledge gained in a particular project is not lost by the disbandment of the
project team but is recorded and used as a resource in the upcoming
projects. This will help in increasing the efficiencies by recording the lesson
learnt. It can also be used to upgrade the platform.
68
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:77==
6
Conclusion
The need of the hour is for the construction industry to transition from a
linear economy to a circular economy. This transition would help save a lot
of resources since construction industry is responsible for the consumption of
almost one third of all the natural resources extracted.
This transition however has to be guided with the help of policies set up by
governmental organisations.
The traditional methods of construction are
resource consuming and produces a lot of waste throughout its life cycle.
The problem in traditional construction is the extraction of components that
can be used somewhere else. The extraction of these components are not
economically feasible. In some cases where it is economically feasible, the
salvaging of components take a lot of time. Hence, the life of the modules is
coupled with the life of the structure rendering them useless at the end of
the structures life.
The modules can be reused or recycled if their life can be decoupled from
the life of the structure and this can be done with the adaptation of product
platforms that make use of modularisation. Adapting this strategy would help
save a huge amount of materials that still have the capacity to be reused
and hence this strategy would promote circular economy and sustainable
growth.
In this paper, the state­of­art of Circular Economy and Product Platforms in
construction is looked into. The link between circular economy and product
platforms is also made. It is surprising to find that even though these topics
have been researched for quite sometime, there was only a handful of
papers that connected the concepts of circular economy and product platform
strategies in the construction industry.
The adaption of Product platform strategy in the construction industry will
boost the performance of the industry in the fields such as reusability,
recyclability and disassembly.
The designing of components with the same
life cycle as well as the same recycability potential that go into the same
structure will help increase the chances of achieving Circular economy in
construction. By implementing product platform strategy the waste generated
in the construction and demolition process can also be reduced.
There is a possibility of doing future research on the policies that would drive
the implementation of Circular economy in the construction sector. There is
also a need to look into business models that could profitably implement
69
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:78==
Circular Economy in the construction sector.
The question of the level of
standardisation that could be achieved in the construction sector without
compromising on the individuality aspect of the product is also worth looking
into since construction industry is predominantly a project based industry.
The discussion about modularity in the construction industry is done by
considering the process based nature of the industry. Most of the literature
available looks into product modularisation and process modularisation in the
construction
industry.
There
is
a
need
for
research
in
the
area
of
Organisational Modularity in the construction industry and how it will effect
the performance of the construction sector.
70
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
Benachio, G. L. F., Freitas, M. d. C. D., & Tavares, S. F. ((2020)). Circular
economy in the construction industry: A systematic literature review.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 260, 121046.
Yeheyis, M., Hewage, K., Alam, M. S., Eskicioglu, C., & Sadiq, R. ((2013)). An
overview of construction and demolition waste management in canada:
A lifecycle analysis approach to sustainability. Clean Technologies and
Environmental Policy, 15(1), 81–91.
EMF.
((2015)).
Towards
a
circular
economy:
Business
rationale
for
an
accelerated transition. https : / / ellenmacarthurfoundation . org / towards - a -
circular-economy-business-rationale-for-an-accelerated-transition
TMW. ((2021)). How bad design is driving the ’take­make­waste’ economy.
https://www.whatdesigncando.com/stories/how-bad-design-is-driving-the-
take-make-waste-economy/
Kibert, C. J. ((2016)). Sustainable construction: Green building design and
delivery. John Wiley & Sons.
Bajželj, B., Allwood, J. M., & Cullen, J. M. ((2013)). Designing climate
change
mitigation
plans
that
add
up.
Environmental
science
&
technology, 47(14), 8062–8069.
Pomponi,
F.,
&
Moncaster,
A.
((2017)).
Circular
economy
for
the
built
environment: A research framework. Journal of Cleaner Production,
143, 710–718. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.055
Koop, S. H., & van Leeuwen, C. J. ((2017)). The challenges of water, waste
and
climate
change
in
cities.
Environment,
development
and
sustainability, 19(2), 385–418.
Liu, W., Zhan, J., Li, Z., Jia, S., Zhang, F., & Li, Y. ((2018)). Eco­efficiency
evaluation of regional circular economy: A case study in zengcheng,
guangzhou. Sustainability, 10(2), 453.
Lee, S. E., Quinn, A. D., & Rogers, C. D. ((2016)). Advancing city sustainability
via its systems of flows: The urban metabolism of birmingham and its
hinterland. Sustainability, 8(3), 220.
Joensuu, T., Edelman, H., & Saari, A. ((2020)). Circular economy practices in
the built environment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 276. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124215
Brand, S. ((1995)). How buildings learn: What happens after they’re built.
Penguin.
Ma, J.­J., Liu, L.­Q., Su, B., & Xie, B.­C. ((2015)). Exploring the critical
factors and appropriate polices for reducing energy consumption of
china’s urban civil building sector. Journal of Cleaner Production, 103,
446–454.
Muffatto, M., & Panizzolo, R. ((1996)). Innovation and product development
strategies in the italian motorcycle industry. Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 13(4), 348–361.
71
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:80==
Muffatto, M., & Roveda, M. ((2000)). Developing product platforms:: Analysis
of the development process. Technovation, 20(11), 617–630.
Meyer, M. H., & Lehnerd, A. P. ((1997)). The power of product platforms. Simon;
Schuster.
Harland, P. E., Uddin, Z., & Laudien, S. ((2020)). Product platforms as a
lever of competitive advantage on a company­wide level: A resource
management perspective. Review of Managerial Science, 14, 137–158.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-018-0289-9
Robertson, D., & Ulrich, K. ((1998)). Planning for product platforms. Sloan
management review, 39(4), 19.
Harland, P. E., & Uddin, Z. ((2014)). Effects of product platform development:
Fostering
lean
product
development
and
production.
International
Journal of Product Development 18, 19(5­6), 259–285.
Halman, J. I., Hofer, A. P., & Van Vuuren, W. ((2003)). Platform­driven
development of product families: Linking theory with practice. Journal
of product innovation management, 20(2), 149–162.
Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., Ireland, R. D., & Gilbert, B. A. ((2011)). Resource
orchestration to create competitive advantage: Breadth, depth, and life
cycle effects. Journal of management, 37(5), 1390–1412.
Sköld, M., & Karlsson, C. ((2013)). Stratifying the development of product
platforms: Requirements for resources, organization, and management
styles. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 30, 62–76.
Chai, K.­H., Wang, Q., Song, M., Halman, J. I., & Brombacher, A. C.
((2012)).
Understanding
competencies
in
platform­based
product
development: Antecedents and outcomes. Journal of product innovation
management, 29(3), 452–472.
Magnusson, M., & Pasche, M. ((2014)). A contingency­based approach to the
use of product platforms and modules in new product development.
Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31(3), 434–450.
Sawhney, M. S. ((1998)). Leveraged high­variety strategies: From portfolio
thinking to platform thinking. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 26(1), 54–61.
Barney, J. ((1991)). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage.
Journal of management, 17(1), 99–120.
Peteraf, M. A. ((1993)). The cornerstones of competitive advantage: A
resource­based view. Strategic management journal, 14(3), 179–191.
Wernerfelt, B. ((1989)). From critical resources to corporate strategy. Journal
of general management, 14(3), 4–12.
Gawer, A., & Cusumano, M. A. ((2014)). Industry platforms and ecosystem
innovation. Journal of product innovation management, 31(3), 417–433.
Hofer, A. P., & Halman, J. I. ((2005)). The potential of layout platforms for
modular complex products and systems. journal of engineering design,
16(2), 237–255.
Jiao, J. R., & Helander, M. G. ((2006)). Development of an electronic
configure­to­order
platform
for
customized
product
development.
Computers in Industry, 57(3), 231–244.
72
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:81==
Shooter, S. B., Evans, C. M., & Simpson, T. W. ((2007)). Building a better
ice scraper—a case in product platforms for the entrepreneur. Journal
of Intelligent Manufacturing, 18(1), 159–170.
Barney, J. B. ((1995)). Looking inside for competitive advantage. Academy of
Management Perspectives, 9(4), 49–61.
Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. ((2002)). Analyzing the past to prepare for the
future: Writing a literature review. MIS quarterly, xiii–xxiii.
Corbey, S., Cullen, J., Sansom, M., & Fishwick, R. ((2016)). Overcoming the
barriers to steel re­use in construction.# buildcircular learning hub@
ecobuild 2016.
Faraud, C. ((2016)). Circular economy strategy at a city level.# buildcircular
learning hub@ ecobuild 2016.
Pomponi, F., Piroozfar, P. A., & Farr, E. R. ((2016)). An investigation into ghg
and non­ghg impacts of double skin façades in office refurbishments.
Journal of Industrial Ecology, 20(2), 234–248.
Adams,
K.
((2016)).
Important
factors
to
consider
for
applying
circular
economy in buildings including a focus on reclamation.# buildcircular
learning hub@ ecobuild 2016, 8–10 march 2016.
Hossain, M. U., Ng, S. T., Antwi­Afari, P., & Amor, B. ((2020)). Circular
economy and the construction industry: Existing trends, challenges and
prospective framework for sustainable construction. Renewable and
Sustainable
Energy
Reviews,
130.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.109948
Schraven, D., Bukvić, U., Di Maio, F., & Hertogh, M. ((2019)). Circular
transition: Changes and responsibilities in the dutch stony material
supply chain. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 150, 104359.
Petit­Boix, A., & Leipold, S. ((2018)). Circular economy in cities: Reviewing
how environmental research aligns with local practices. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 195, 1270–1281.
Chertow, M. R. ((2000)). Industrial symbiosis: Literature and taxonomy. Annual
review of energy and the environment, 25(1), 313–337.
Smol, M., Kulczycka, J., Henclik, A., Gorazda, K., & Wzorek, Z. ((2015)). The
possible use of sewage sludge ash (ssa) in the construction industry as
a way towards a circular economy. Journal of Cleaner Production, 95,
45–54.
Akanbi, L. A., Oyedele, L. O., Omoteso, K., Bilal, M., Akinade, O. O.,
Ajayi,
A.
O.,
Delgado,
J.
M.
D.,
&
Owolabi,
H.
A.
((2019)).
Disassembly
and
deconstruction
analytics
system
(d­das)
for
construction in a circular economy. Journal of cleaner production, 223,
386–396.
Lemaitre, C., Braune, A., Durán, C. R., & Geiselmann, D. ((2019)). Fostering
the integration of circular economy aspects into the construction and
real estate industry. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science, 290(1), 012021.
Akanbi, L. A., Oyedele, L. O., Akinade, O. O., Ajayi, A. O., Delgado, M. D.,
Bilal, M., & Bello, S. A. ((2018)). Salvaging building materials in a
73
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:82==
circular
economy:
A
bim­based
whole­life
performance
estimator.
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 129, 175–186.
Pan, S.­Y., Du, M. A., Huang, I.­T., Liu, I.­H., Chang, E., & Chiang, P.­C.
((2015)). Strategies on implementation of waste­to­energy (wte) supply
chain for circular economy system: A review. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 108, 409–421.
Singh, J., & Ordoñez, I. ((2016)). Resource recovery from post­consumer
waste: Important lessons for the upcoming circular economy. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 134, 342–353.
Prendeville, S., Cherim, E., & Bocken, N. ((2018)). Circular cities: Mapping six
cities in transition. Environmental innovation and societal transitions, 26,
171–194.
Yu, F., Han, F., & Cui, Z. ((2015)). Evolution of industrial symbiosis in an eco­
industrial park in china. Journal of Cleaner Production, 87, 339–347.
Zhang, L., Yuan, Z., Bi, J., Zhang, B., & Liu, B. ((2010)). Eco­industrial parks:
National pilot practices in china. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(5),
504–509.
Hutner, P., Thorenz, A., & Tuma, A. ((2017)). Waste prevention in communities:
A comprehensive survey analyzing status quo, potentials, barriers and
measures. Journal of cleaner production, 141, 837–851.
Tukker, A. ((2015)). Product services for a resource­efficient and circular
economy–a review. Journal of cleaner production, 97, 76–91.
Stahel, W. R. ((2017)). Analysis of the structure and values of the european
commission’s circular economy package. 170(1), 41–44.
Hutner,
P.,
Helbig,
C.,
Stindt,
D.,
Thorenz,
A.,
&
Tuma,
A.
((2018)).
Transdisciplinary
development
of
a
life
cycle–based
approach
to
measure
and
communicate
waste
prevention
effects
in
local
authorities. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 22(5), 1050–1065.
Mo, H., Wen, Z., & Chen, J. ((2009)). China’s recyclable resources recycling
system and policy: A case study in suzhou. Resources, Conservation
and Recycling, 53(7), 409–419.
Krausmann, F., Wiedenhofer, D., Lauk, C., Haas, W., Tanikawa, H., Fishman,
T., Miatto, A., Schandl, H., & Haberl, H. ((2017)). Global socioeconomic
material stocks rise 23­fold over the 20th century and require half of
annual resource use. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
114(8), 1880–1885.
Esa, M. R., Halog, A., & Rigamonti, L. ((2017)). Developing strategies for
managing construction and demolition wastes in malaysia based on
the concept of circular economy. Journal of Material Cycles and Waste
Management, 19(3), 1144–1154.
Geldermans,
R.
J.
((2016)).
Design
for
change
and
circularity
­
accommodating circular material
product flows in construction. Energy
Procedia, 96, 301–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2016.09.153
Hart, J., Adams, K., Giesekam, J., Tingley, D. D., & Pomponi, F. ((2019)).
Barriers and drivers in a circular economy: The case of the built
environment.
Procedia
CIRP,
80,
619–624.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.12.015
74
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:83==
Stephan,
A.,
&
Athanassiadis,
A.
((2018)).
Towards
a
more
circular
construction sector: Estimating and spatialising current and future
non­structural material replacement flows to maintain urban building
stocks. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 129, 248–262.
Minunno, R., O’Grady, T., Morrison, G. M., Gruner, R. L., & Colling, M.
((2018)). Strategies for applying the circular economy to prefabricated
buildings. Buildings, 8(9), 125.
Kollikkathara, N., Feng, H., & Stern, E. ((2009)). A purview of waste
management evolution: Special emphasis on usa. Waste management,
29(2), 974–985.
Ribić, B., Voća, N., & Ilakovac, B. ((2017)). Concept of sustainable waste
management in the city of zagreb: Towards the implementation of
circular economy approach. Journal of the Air & Waste Management
Association, 67(2), 241–259.
Zhou, W., Zhu, B., Chen, D., Griffy­Brown, C., Ma, Y., & Fei, W. ((2012)).
Energy consumption patterns in the process of china’s urbanization.
Population and Environment, 33(2), 202–220.
Zabihi, H., Habib, F., & Mirsaeedie, L. ((2013)). Definitions, concepts and new
directions in industrialized building systems (ibs). KSCE Journal of Civil
Engineering, 17, 1199–1205. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12205-013-0020-y
Richard, R.­B. ((2005)). Industrialised building systems: Reproduction before
automation and robotics. Automation in construction, 14(4), 442–451.
Richard, R. B. ((2006)). Industrialized, flexible and demountable building
systems quality, economy and sustainability.
Jones, K., Mosca, L., Whyte, J., Davies, A., & Glass, J. ((2021)). Addressing
specialization
and
fragmentation:
Product
platform
development
in
construction
consultancy
firms.
Construction
Management
and
Economics. https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2021.1983187
Howard, H. C., Levitt, R. E., Paulson, B., Pohl, J. G., & Tatum, C. ((1989)).
Computer integration: Reducing fragmentation in aec industry. Journal
of computing in civil engineering, 3(1), 18–32.
Nam, C., & Tatum, C. ((1992)). Noncontractual methods of integration on
construction
projects.
Journal
of
Construction
Engineering
and
Management, 118(2), 385–398.
Wortmann, H., & Alblas, A. ((2009)). Product platform life cycles: A multiple
case study. International Journal of Technology Management, 48(2), 188–
201.
Jensen, P., Lidelöw, H., & Olofsson, T. ((2015)). Product configuration in
construction. International Journal of Mass Customisation, 5(1), 73–92.
Gibb, A. G. ((2001)). Standardization and pre­assembly­distinguishing myth
from reality using case study research. Construction Management &
Economics, 19(3), 307–315.
Thuesen, C., & Hvam, L. ((2011)). Efficient on­site construction: Learning
points from a german platform for housing. Construction Innovation, 11,
338–355. https://doi.org/10.1108/14714171111149043
Sacks, R., Eastman, C. M., & Lee, G. ((2004)). Process model perspectives
on management and engineering procedures in the precast/prestressed
75
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:84==
concrete industry. Journal of construction engineering and management,
130(2), 206–215.
Bonev,
M.,
Wörösch,
M.,
&
Hvam,
L.
((2015)).
Utilizing
platforms
in
industrialized construction: A case study of a precast manufacturer.
Construction
Innovation,
15,
84–106.
https://doi.org/10.1108/CI-04-2014-0023
Su, J. C., Chang, Y.­L., & Ferguson, M. ((2005)). Evaluation of postponement
structures to accommodate mass customization. Journal of Operations
Management, 23(3­4), 305–318.
Wikner, J., & Rudberg, M. ((2005)). Integrating production and engineering
perspectives on the customer order decoupling point. International
Journal of Operations & Production Management.
Haug, A., Ladeby, K., & Edwards, K. ((2009)). From engineer­to­order to mass
customization. Management Research News.
Konijnendijk, P. A. ((1994)). Coordinating marketing and manufacturing in eto
companies. International journal of production economics, 37(1), 19–26.
Gann, D. M. ((1996)). Construction as a manufacturing process? similarities
and differences between industrialized housing and car production in
japan. Construction Management and Economics, 14, 437–450. https :
//doi.org/10.1080/014461996373304
Jansson, G., Johnsson, H., & Engström, D. ((2014)). Platform use in systems
building. Construction Management and Economics, 32, 70–82. https://
doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2013.793376
Gosling,
J.,
&
Naim,
M.
M.
((2009)).
Engineer­to­order
supply
chain
management: A literature review and research agenda. International
journal of production economics, 122(2), 741–754.
Jiao, J. R., Simpson, T. W., & Siddique, Z. ((2007)). Product family design and
platform­based product development: A state­of­the­art review. Journal
of intelligent Manufacturing, 18(1), 5–29.
Styhre, A., & Gluch, P. ((2010)). Managing knowledge in platforms: Boundary
objects and stocks and flows of knowledge. Construction management
and economics, 28(6), 589–599.
Persson, S., Malmgren, L., & Johnsson, H. ((2009)). Information management
in industrial housing design and manufacture. Journal of Information
Technology in Construction (ITcon), 14, 110–122.
Thuesen, C., Jensen, J. S., & Gottlieb, S. C. ((2013)). Enabling mass
customization
in
construction–making
the
long
tail
work.
Mass
customisation
and
personalisation
in
architecture
and
construction
(pp. 208–218). Routledge.
Popovic, D., Schauerte, T., & Elgh, F. ((2021)). Product platform alignment in
industrialised house building. Wood Material Science and Engineering.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17480272.2021.1903993
Johnsson,
H.
((2013)).
Production
strategies
for
pre­engineering
in
house­building: Exploring product development platforms. Construction
Management and Economics, 31(9), 941–958.
76
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:85==
Brege, S., Stehn, L., & Nord, T. ((2014)). Business models in industrialized
building
of
multi­storey
houses.
Construction
Management
and
Economics, 32(1­2), 208–226.
André, S., Lennartsson, M., & Elgh, F. ((2019)). Exploring the design platform
in
industrialized
housing
for
efficient
design
and
production
of
customized
houses.
Advances in Transdisciplinary Engineering,
10,
125–134. https://doi.org/10.3233/ATDE190115
Olia, J. ((1999)). Necessity and industrialization and ultra industrialization
concepts in design and industrial production of construction. Proc. of
Educational Conference on Mass Production and Industrial Production of
Construction in Iran, Building and Housing Research Center, Tehran,
Iran, 7–25.
Kamar, K., Ismail, E., Ismail, E., Abd Hamid, Z., Egbu, C., Arif, M., Mohd,
Z., Mohd, M., Ghani, K., & Rahim, A. ((2010)). Sustainable and green
construction. Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB), Malaysia.
Kedir, F., & Hall, D. M. ((2021)). Resource efficiency in industrialized housing
construction – a systematic review of current performance and future
opportunities. Journal of Cleaner Production, 286. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2020.125443
Lessing, J., & Brege, S. ((2015)). Business models for product­oriented
house­building companies–experience from two swedish case studies.
Construction innovation.
Abey,
S.
T.,
&
Anand,
K.
((2019)).
Embodied
energy
comparison
of
prefabricated and conventional building construction. Journal of The
Institution of Engineers (India): Series A, 100(4), 777–790.
Begum, R. A., Satari, S. K., & Pereira, J. J. ((2010)). Waste generation and
recycling:
Comparison
of
conventional
and
industrialized
building
systems. American Journal of Environmental Sciences, 6(4), 383.
Du, Q., Bao, T., Li, Y., Huang, Y., & Shao, L. ((2019)). Impact of prefabrication
technology on the cradle­to­site co 2 emissions of residential buildings.
Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy, 21(7), 1499–1514.
Smith, S. ((2018)). The world needs to build more than two billion new homes
over the next 80 years. The Conversation.
Brehar, O. F., & Kopenetz, L. G. ((2011)). Prefabricated structural system for
passive houses. JOURNAL OF APPLIED ENGINEERING SCIENCES,
1(4), 15–22.
Yau, Y., Chiu, S. M., & Lau, W. K. ((2014)). Economising subsidies for green
housing features: A stated preference approach. Urbani izziv, 25(2),
107–118.
Minunno, R., O’Grady, T., Morrison, G. M., Gruner, R. L., & Colling, M.
((2018)). Strategies for applying the circular economy to prefabricated
buildings. Buildings, 8. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings8090125
Pan, W., Gibb, A. G., & Dainty, A. R. ((2012)). Strategies for integrating the
use of off­site production technologies in house building. Journal of
Construction Engineering and Management, 138(11), 1331–1340.
Gibb, A. G. ((1999)). Off­site fabrication: Prefabrication, pre­assembly and
modularisation. John Wiley & Sons.
77
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:86==
Formoso, C. T., Soibelman, L., De Cesare, C., & Isatto, E. L. ((2002)).
Material
waste
in
building
industry:
Main
causes
and
prevention.
Journal of construction engineering and management, 128(4), 316–325.
Mok, H., Kim, H., & Moon, K. ((1997)). Disassemblability of mechanical parts
in automobile for recycling. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 33(3­4),
621–624.
Gorgolewski, M. ((2008)). Designing with reused building components: Some
challenges. Building Research & Information, 36(2), 175–188.
Mignacca, B., Locatelli, G., & Velenturf, A. ((2020)). Modularisation as enabler
of circular economy in energy infrastructure. Energy Policy, 139. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111371
Aye, L., Ngo, T., Crawford, R. H., Gammampila, R., & Mendis, P. ((2012)). Life
cycle greenhouse gas emissions and energy analysis of prefabricated
reusable building modules. Energy and buildings, 47, 159–168.
Hata, T., Kato, S., & Kimura, F. ((2001)). Design of product modularity for life
cycle management, 93–96.
78
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:87==
79
Platforms as drivers in transforming construction towards circularity
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
