==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY
MASTER THESIS
Light-controlled dynamic enzymatic cyclodextrin
synthesis
Author
Student ID
Emilie Ljungberg
s164082
Juliane Sørensen
s164073
Supervisor
Associate Professor Sophie R. Beeren
January 30, 2022
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface and acknowledgement
This thesis presents the research carried out by the authors at DTU, Department of Chemistry, between
September 2021 and January 2022, under the supervision of Associate Professor Sophie Beeren. This
thesis accounts for 2x5 ECTS points special course and 2x30 ECTS points Master thesis. The spe-
cial course was performed as an initialising literature study. Therefore, parts of the Introduction and
background section have previously been submitted and reviewed. Except where otherwise indicated,
either directly or by reference, it is the authors’ own work.
An introduction to the background of the project is found in the Introduction and background section
including the concepts of supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry, cyclodextrins,
photoswitches, and the thermodynamics of binding interactions. The synthetic and analytical work
performed throughout the project is presented in the Results and discussion section. The experimen-
tal procedures are described in the Experimentals section. References to used literature are given as
superscript numbers, and a list of all references can be found at the end of the thesis. All relevant
supplementary NMR and UV-vis data can be found in Appendices.
The experimental work for the synthesis of compounds 2, 6, 8, 11-13, and 25 was performed by Em-
ilie Ljungberg. The experimental work for the synthesis of compounds 1-3, 10, 15, and 17-20 was
performed by Juliane Sørensen. The analytical experiments and the written report were made with
equal contributions from both authors.
We would like to thank our supervisor, Associate Professor Sophie Beeren, for excellent guidance
throughout the project, always taking the time to help us in all aspects including discussion of synthe-
ses and results. You have been a great inspiration to us. Finally, we would like to thank you for the
opportunity to be part of this project and your group.
We would also like to thank the entire group for making it a joyful time. Thanks for always being
kind, welcoming, and helpful in answering all of our questions during the project both regarding syn-
thetic challenges, theoretical challenges, and demonstrating how to use apparatus. A special thank
you to Dennis Larsen and Andreas Kjær Erichsen for spending much time helping us. Thank you to
all of you Lastly, we would like to thank the Department of Chemistry for providing the necessary
facilities along with the academic and technical staff.
30/1 2022:
Emilie Ljungberg
s164082
30/1 2022:
Juliane Sørensen
s164073
I
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis an approach to light-controlled cyclodextrin synthesis using enzyme-mediated dynamic
combinatorial chemistry is presented. It is shown that the distribution of dynamic interconverting
cyclodextrins (CDs) in a dynamic combinatorial library (DCL) can be shifted by addition of a com-
plexing azobenzene template. The photoswitching properties of the templates are utilised to change
the library distribution upon light irradiation at speciﬁc wavelengths, emphasising the doubly dynamic
properties of the system.
Three differently substituted azobenzene templates, Azo (1), mAzo (2), and ipAzo (3) were suc-
cessfully synthesised (Figure 1). The photoswitching properties of the templates were characterised
using NMR and UV-vis spectroscopy to determine the photostationary states upon irradiating with
light at speciﬁc wavelengths.
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
N
N
linker
R
R
R
R
R = 1, Azo : H
       2, mAzo : OMe
       3, ipAzo : OiPr
Figure 1: Illustration of the three successfully synthesised templates Azo (1), mAzo (2), and ipAzo (3).
The binding interactions between each isomer of the templates and the natural CDs (α-, β-, and γ-CD)
were studied via 1H NMR titration experiments. The three synthesised templates were investigated
in an enzyme-mediated DCL of CDs under different light conditions. In accordance with the found
binding afﬁnities, analysis of the DCLs by HPLC-ELSD showed that the trans-Azo template led to
a modest ampliﬁcation of α-CD, the cis-Azo template ampliﬁed β-CD, whereas both the cis- and
trans-mAzo templates led to a very small ampliﬁcation of β-CD. The cis-ipAzo template showed a
great ampliﬁcation of γ-CD resulting in an increase of synthesised γ-CD from 13% to more than 60%
of the total concentration of CDs. Libraries with multiple changes in light conditions were tested with
template Azo and ipAzo, respectively, which proved that light could be applied as a remote, external
stimulus to change the distribution of CDs in the DCLs as a result of cis−trans isomerisation. Finally,
it was shown that DCLs with multiple azobenzene templates can be utilised in the light-controlled
synthesis of cyclodextrins.
II
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Resumé
I denne rapport bliver der præsenteret en metode til at udføre lys-kontrolleret cyklodextrin (CD) syn-
tese via enzym-medieret dynamisk kombinatorisk kemi. Det bliver vist, at udbyttet af de dynamiske
blandinger af cyklodextriner i et dynamisk kombinatorisk bibliotek, kan ændres ved at tilsætte et
komplekserende azobenzen templat. Templaternes fotokemiske egenskaber udnyttes til at ændre ud-
byttet af de dynamiske biblioteker ved at belyse bibliotekerne med speciﬁkke bølgelængder. Dette
understreger systemets dobbelt-dynamiske egenskaber.
Tre forskelligt substituerede azobenzen templater, Azo (1), mAzo (2) og ipAzo (3), blev succes-
fuldt syntetiseret. De fotokemiske egenskaber af templaterne blev karakteriseret ved brug af NMR
spektroskopi og UV-vis spektroskopi til at bestemme de fotostationære tilstande ved belysing med
speciﬁkke bølgelængder.
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
N
N
linker
R
R
R
R
R = 1, Azo : H
       2, mAzo : OMe
       3, ipAzo : OiPr
Figure 2: Illustration af de tre succesfuldt syntetiserede templater Azo (1), mAzo (2) og ipAzo (3).
Bindingsinteraktioner, mellem hver isomer af templaterne og de naturlige cyklodextriner (α-, β- og
γ-CD), blev undersøgt via 1H NMR titreringseksperimenter. De tre syntetiserede templater blev an-
vendt i et enzym-medieret dynamisk kombinatorisk bibliotek af cyklodextriner ved belysning med
speciﬁkke bølgelængder. Ved at analyse udbyttet af de dynamisk kombinatoriske biblioteker med
HPLC-ELSD analyse, blev det vist, at trans-Azo templaten medførte en beskeden ampliﬁcering af
α-CD, cis-Azo ampliﬁcerede β-CD, hvorimod både cis- og trans-mAzo medførte en meget lille am-
pliﬁcering af β-CD, hvilket var i overensstemmelse med de bestemte bindingsafﬁniteter. Cis-ipAzo
templaten medførte en stor ampliﬁcering af γ-CD, som resulterede i en øgning af syntetiseret γ-
cyclodextrin fra 13% til over 60% af den samlede koncentration af CD. Ved at ændre lysbetingelserne
undervejs i de dynamiske kombinatoriske biblioteker med templat, blev det vist, at lys kan bruges
som en fjernstyret, ekstern stimuli til at ændre udbyttet af cyklodextriner i biblioteker som et resultat
af cis−trans-isomerisering. Til sidst blev det vist, at dynamiske kombinatoriske biblioteker tilsat ﬂere
azobenzen templater kan udnyttes i lys-kontrolleret syntese af cyclodextriner.
III
==PAGE:8==
List of abbreviations
ACh
Acetylcholine
br
Broad
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
CD
Cyclodextrin
CGTase
Cyclodextrin glucanotransferase
COSY
Correlation spectroscopy
d
Doublet
DCC
Dynamic combinatorial chemistry
DCL
Dynamic combinatorial library
DCVC
Dry column vacuum chromatography
DHA
Dihydroazulene
DMAP
N,N-Dimethylpyridin-4-amine
DMF
Dimethylformamide
DMSO
Dimethyl sulfoxide
EDC
1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide
ELSD
Evaporative light scattering detector
eq.
Equivalent(s)
ESI
Electro-spray ionisation
EtOAc
Ethyl acetate
Fmoc
Fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl protecting group
Gal
Galactose
HMBC
Heteronuclear multiple-bond correlation
HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography
HRMS
High resolution mass spectrometry
HSQC
Heteronuclear single quantum correlation
ITC
Isothermal titration calorimetry
IV
==PAGE:9==
J
Coupling constant
LCMS
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
LED
Light emitting diode
MeOH
Methanol
M.P.
Melting point
NANA
N-acetylneuraminic acid
NMR
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
NOESY
Nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy
OPNG
ortho-Nitrophenyl-β-galactoside
oxyma
Ethyl cyanohydroxyiminoacetate
PAA
poly(acrylic acid)
PTFE
Polytetraﬂuoroethylene
q
Quartet
Rf
Retention factor
rpm
Rounds per minute
SDS
Sodium dodecyl sulfate
STD
Saturation transfer difference
t
Triplet
TCEP
Tricarboxyethylphosphine
TFA
Triﬂuoroacetic acid
THF
Tetrahydrofuran
TLC
Thin layer chromatography
UV
Ultraviolet
VHF
Vinylheptafulvene
vis
Visible
WGA
Wheat germ agglutinin
V
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface and acknowledgement
I
Abstract
II
Resumé
III
List of Abbreviations
IV
1
Introduction and background
1
1.1
Introduction to supramolecular chemistry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Dynamic combinatorial chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Ampliﬁcation principles in DCLs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Test for thermodynamic control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.3
Thermodynamic behaviour of DCLs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.4
Reversible chemistries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.5
Recent applications of DCC - Systems chemistry and out-of-equilibrium sys-
tems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3
DCC with enzyme-catalysed reversible chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.1
Early work on enzyme-mediated DCC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.2
The current ﬁeld of enzyme-mediated DCC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.4
Cyclodextrins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.5
Photoswitches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
1.5.1
Azobenzenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
1.5.2
Binding interactions between cyclodextrins and azobenzenes . . . . . . . . .
26
1.5.3
Photoswitches in DCC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
1.6
Thermodynamics of binding interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
1.6.1
Experimental determination of Ka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
1.6.2
Experimental determination of ∆H◦and ∆S◦
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
2
Project scope
41
2.1
Short description of previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
2.2
Aim of this project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3
Results and discussion
43
3.1
Syntheses of templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.1.1
Synthetic pathway towards template Azo (1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
VI
==PAGE:11==
3.1.2
Synthetic pathway towards template mAzo (2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.1.3
Synthetic pathway towards template ipAzo (3)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.1.4
Synthesis of solubilising group 25 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.2
Characterisation of templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.2.1
UV-vis absorption spectra
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
3.2.2
Determination of photostationary states by NMR spectroscopy . . . . . . . .
78
3.2.3
Aggregation studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
3.3
Binding studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
3.3.1
UV-vis titration experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
3.3.2
1H NMR titration experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
3.4
Templated enzyme-mediated interconversion of cyclodextrins . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
3.4.1
Light-controlled synthesis of cyclodextrins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
3.4.2
Libraries with varying light conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
3.4.3
Two templates in one library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
4
Conclusion and future perspectives
110
5
Experimentals
112
5.1
Genereal methods and materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
5.2
Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
5.3
Synthesis of compounds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
5.3.1
Synthetic procedures towards template Azo (1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
5.3.2
Synthetic procedure towards template mAzo (2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118
5.3.3
Synthetic procedures towards template ipAzo (3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
5.3.4
Synthesis of compound 25 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
5.4
Analytical experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
5.4.1
UV-vis spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
5.4.2
NMR studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
130
5.4.3
Procedure for setting up and monitoring CGTase-mediated DCLs of cyclodex-
trins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
6
References
133
7
Appendices
139
7.1
NMR spectra
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
139
7.2
UV-Vis absorption spectra
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
160
7.3
Fitting value ∆δmax from NMR titration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
162
7.4
Obtained distribution percentages of CDs from HPLC-ELSD analysis of DCLs
. . .
163
VII
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction and background
1.1
Introduction to supramolecular chemistry
Supramolecular chemistry is a ﬁeld of chemistry that focuses on intermolecular forces beyond sin-
gle molecules. It is the study of how molecules recognise one another, how they interact, fold, and
aggregate and how they can self-assemble into larger supramolecular entities of greater complexity.
The entities exist due to reversible intermolecular forces, and therefore, they can associate and re-
form in response to a change in chemical or environmental stimuli. The folding or aggregation gives
rise to new entities that may have entirely different properties and functions. Supramolecular phe-
nomena occur highly efﬁciently in Nature as seen in, for example, the complex DNA replication, the
ribosomal translation of RNA into a protein, transmembrane ion transport, and in enzyme catalysis.1
Inspired by Nature, supramolecular chemists apply simple molecules and assemble them using inter-
molecular forces to build new and complex chemical architectures, adaptive materials, and host-guest
systems as applied in, for example, drug delivery systems. The intermolecular forces responsible
for the supramolecular phenomena include non-covalent forces such as hydrogen bonding, van der
Waals forces, the hydrophobic effect, metal-ligand coordination, and electrostatic effects.1 The goal
of supramolecular chemistry is deﬁned as gaining control over the intermolecular bonds.2
From the very ﬁrst ideas of supramolecular chemistry in the late 1800’s the non-covalent bonds were
gradually understood more in detail and supramolecular chemistry evolved. In 1987 the Nobel Prize in
chemistry was awarded to Donald J. Cram, Jean-Marie Lehn, and Charles J. Pedersen "for their devel-
opment and use of molecules with structure-speciﬁc interactions of high selectivity"3, which acknowl-
edged the importance of supramolecular chemistry. During the last three decades, supramolecular
chemistry has continuously been developing into new ﬁelds and areas. In 2016 Jean-Pierre Sauvage,
Sir J. Fraser Stoddart, and Bernard L. Feringa received the Nobel Prize in chemistry "for the design
and synthesis of molecular machines".4 Templated syntheses were designed to form mechanically in-
terlocked molecular structures that can move relative to one another. The Nobel Laureates developed
out-of-equilibrium energy-ﬁlled systems with controllable movements of the interlocked molecular
assemblies, which laid the foundation for a molecular motor.4 For example, Feringa et al. designed a
propeller-type molecular motor where the rotational movements are driven by light. The energy from
the light induces cis-trans isomerisations which causes the propeller to rotate unidirectionally around
the axle (Figure 3).5
1
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3: Light-driven molecular motor anchored to a gold surface.5 Adapted from ref. (5)
1.2
Dynamic combinatorial chemistry
Dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC) is a branch of supramolecular chemistry that applies re-
versible combinatorial chemistry under thermodynamic control.6 The approach is based on building
blocks that react with one another through self-assembly using reversible chemical reactions to form
a dynamic combinatorial library (DCL). A DCL is constantly interconverting, where library members
are forming and falling apart, and the equilibrium distribution of library members is determined by the
thermodynamic minimum of the system. This means that the library members are distributed accord-
ing to their relative stabilities as depicted around the left reaction arrow in Figure 4.7 Due to the nature
of a dynamic equilibrium, external stimuli can inﬂuence and shift the equilibrium distribution, and
thus affect self-assembly as well as ampliﬁcation of species. External stimuli can be of various types
including solvent polarity, ionic strength, temperature, pH, changes in concentrations of molecules,
and addition of an external template molecule.8 By addition of a template molecule to a DCL, ideally
the library member with the highest afﬁnity towards the template will bind non-covalently, leading to
a stabilisation of this host-guest complex. This enables the discovery of the best binder to a speciﬁc
template molecule. If the template can bind to several of the library members, ideally, the library
member with the strongest and most favourable interaction will be ampliﬁed the most.9 This principle
is depicted in Figure 4. Non-ideal cases do occur and will be discussed in section 1.2.3.
Figure 4: Formation of a DCL from several building blocks. An illustration of the energy diagrams are shown
together with the distribution of the library members. Ideally, addition of a template molecule will alter the
DCL distribution to amplify the library member that forms the strongest interaction with the template.9 Adapted
from ref. (9).
2
==PAGE:15==
1.2.1
Ampliﬁcation principles in DCLs
There are different ways a speciﬁc member of a dynamic combinatorial library can be ampliﬁed
due to non-covalent interactions. Molecular recognition can exert control over the library distribution
through self-templating, also known as internal templating, or through addition of an external template
acting as guest or host as depicted in Figure 5.7,10
Figure 5: Different ways molecular recognition enables control over DCL distribution: Ampliﬁcation of a
library member by self-templating through a) intramolecular interactions or b) intermolecular interactions;
Ampliﬁcation through external templating by addition of c) guest molecule or d) host molecule.7 Adapted from
ref. (7).
1.2.1.1
Intramolecular self-templating
Intramolecular self-templating occurs when a library member is able to form intramolecular inter-
actions to form a foldamer. The library member that forms the most favourable intramolecular in-
teractions, and hence the most stable foldamer, will be ampliﬁed at the expense of non-stabilised
library members, as depicted in Figure 5a.7 In a recent example Sijbren Otto et al. showed that a
disulﬁde DCL of large 1,3-dimercaptobenzene macrocycles can self-assemble into foldamers.11 The
building blocks were composed of 1,3-benzenedithiol featuring a peptide attached to the 5-position.
Through disulﬁde exchange reactions the building blocks formed a DCL of different macrocycles
which were inﬂuenced by the substituents of the building blocks (Figure 6a). It was reasoned that am-
phiphilic dipeptides attached to the 5-position are favourable for formation of foldamers (Figure 6b),
3
==PAGE:16==
and therefore different substituents, R, of amphiphilic dipeptides were explored. The most selective
formations of foldamers were discovered for the substituents R=CO-Phe(4-guanidinium)-Lys-OH and
R=CO-Phe(4-NH2)-Lys-OH, depicted in Figure 6c. The use of these substituents yielded a 16-mer
and a 23-mer, respectively, with almost full conversion of library members into foldamers.11 From
libraries of different starting points, Otto et al. conﬁrmed that the 16-mer and 23-mer, respectively,
were the thermodynamic product in their libraries. Otto et al. concluded, that the preference for the
1,3-dimercaptobenzene macrocycles to self-template into foldamers is a result of two opposite pa-
rameters. The ﬁrst is the strong potential for each monomer to form stabilising intramolecular forces
such as hydrogen bonds, chalcogen bonds, and salt bridges in combination with a hydrophobic ef-
fect. The second parameter is geometrical constraints, where the main chain in the macrocycle, the
1,3-dimercaptobenzene backbone, must have some degree of rigidity. This avoids formation of small
structures which are entropically favoured. In addition, the amphiphilic nature of the dipeptide moi-
eties allow formation of large macrocycles with a hydrophobic core and a hydrophilic shell, which is
beneﬁcial to promote formation of foldamers in the aqueous environment.11
Figure 6: a) A DCL of 1,3-dimercaptobenzene macrocycles of different sizes interconverting through disulﬁde
exchange reactions. b) Substituent R as amphiphilic dipeptide promotes the formation of foldamer. c) R peptides
leading to 16-mer and 23-mer foldamers.11 Adapted from ref. (11).
1.2.1.2
Intermolecular self-templating
Ampliﬁcation of a library member can also occur through self-templating via intermolecular interac-
tions. The change in library distribution takes place when non-covalent intermolecular interactions
between identical or different library members result in assembling or aggregation into stabilised
structures (Figure 5b).7 The formation of assemblies or aggregates occurs at the expense of a loss
of entropy, which has to be balanced by strong molecular interactions in order to obtain stabilised
structures.9
4
==PAGE:17==
One of the ﬁrst examples of this type of DCL was published in 2008 by Xu and Giuseppone, who
designed a library of imines synthesised by the condensation of aldehydes and adenosine amines. It
was found that one imine was ampliﬁed from the mixture because it could self-assemble through in-
termolecular hydrogen bonds and produce stable homodimers.12 In 2011 Sijbren Otto and co-workers
reported the formation of stacked macrocycles inﬂuenced by the mode of mechanical agitation.13 The
macrocycles were formed from a library of 1,3-benzenedithiol building blocks similar to the library
for the formation of foldamers. However, in this case small peptide sequences of alternating hy-
drophilic and hydrophobic amino acids were explored as substituents for the 5-position as depicted
in Figure 7a. Building block 2, not featuring a peptide sequence, formed a library of cyclic trimers
and tetramers (Figure 7b). Interestingly, the product formation in a DCL with building block 1, with
a peptide sequence substituents of alternating hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acid residues, was
sensitive to mechanical agitation. Upon stirring, the DCL formed primarily cyclic heptamers (Fig-
ure 7c), with no agitation a mixture of cyclic trimers and tetramers was formed (Figure 7d), and upon
shaking, the DCL formed a cyclic hexamer as the most dominating species (Figure 7e).13 Otto and
co-workers discovered that the macrocyclic hexamers and heptamers stacked on top of one another
to form ﬁbers. Alternating hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acid sequences are known to facil-
itate β-sheet structure and the formation of β-sheets was analytically proven. Otto and co-workers
proposed that the cyclic hexamers and heptamers self-assemble into ﬁbers that are held together by
non-covalent peptide-peptide interactions (Figure 7f).
 
 
 
b) 2, stirring 
f 
a 
c) 1, stirring 
d) 1, no agitation 
e) 1, shaking 
Figure 7: a) DCL of macrocycles formed from dithiol building blocks. HPLC chromatograms of DCLs from: b)
building block 2 after stirring for 15 days; c) 1 after stirring for 15 days; d) 1 after 16 days with no agitation;
e) 1 after shaking for 20 days. f) Proposed formation of ﬁber from macrocyclic hexamer of 1.13 Adapted from
ref. (13).
5
==PAGE:18==
Otto and co-workers proposed, that the mechanosensitivity of the system was explained by the differ-
ent rates of fragmentation and elongations upon the different agitation processes. It was suggested that
the ﬁbers acts as kinetic traps which results in the selectivity of forming speciﬁc larger macrocycles.13
1.2.1.3
External templating with guest molecule
External templating is a widely used approach to identify the best binder to a speciﬁc target molecule.
As previously described the template will ideally bind to the library member with the most favourable
non-covalent binding interaction, resulting in a stabilised complex that is ampliﬁed at the expense of
library members with lower afﬁnities for the template.9 The fact that the best binder is identiﬁed by
its ampliﬁcation makes it an appealing approach for many purposes. The use of external templates
is one of the most used applications of DCC and has been described in e.g. material sciences, drug
discovery processes, and development and optimisation of catalysts and receptors.6
The use of a guest molecule as external template (Figure 5c) has, among others, been applied in the
search for receptor molecules and drug delivery systems. An example of identifying a receptor for the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) has been reported by Sanders et al.14 A DCL utilising hydrazone
exchange reactions was formed from dipeptide-hydrazone building blocks resulting in mainly cyclic
dimers, trimers, and tetramers. By addition of ACh as template, a thermodynamically stable product
was formed and ampliﬁed in the library. The product, isolated with 67% yield, was highly unexpected
a [2]-catenane of two identical interlocked cyclic trimers as depicted in Figure 8. It was found that the
[2]-catenane receptor was ampliﬁed due to a strong, exothermic binding with a 100 nM afﬁnity for
ACh.14 The example shows that external templating can be a strong tool to recognise and synthesise
receptors, or other complex structures that would otherwise be difﬁcult to predict.
Figure 8: a) DCL from peptide-hydrazone building blocks with structure 7 being a [2]-catenane. HPLC traces
of the DCL in presence of ACh after b) 2 min, c) 44 days, and d) without ACh after 44 days.14 Adapted from
ref. (14).
6
==PAGE:19==
1.2.1.4
External templating with host molecule
A host molecule as an external template can be applied in order to determine the best binding guest
molecule from a DCL, as depicted in Figure 5d. Caraballo et al. utilised this approach in the discovery
of the best inhibitor for the enzyme β-galactosidase.15 A library of hemithioacetals was studied and
showed a fast and reversible interconversion between building blocks of thiol derivatives and aldehy-
des or ketones in aqueous solution. The equilibrium of the library was shifted towards the building
blocks, resulting in only transient constituents of hemithioacetals. By addition of the template en-
zyme β-galactosidase to the library, two hemithioacetals were selected by the enzyme. The concept
is shown in Figure 9. 1H STD NMR and inhibition studies conﬁrmed the inhibitory behaviour of the
two hemithioacetals with up to a 12-fold decrease in enzyme activity.15
Figure 9: Concept of identifying an enzyme inhibitor from a dynamic hemithioacetal system.15 ONPG = ortho-
Nitrophenyl-β-galactoside, Gal = galactose. Adapted from ref. (15).
1.2.2
Test for thermodynamic control
In DCC the ampliﬁcation of one or more library members relies on the DCL being under thermody-
namic control. This requires that the mixture of library members is equilibrating with a distribution
corresponding to the relative stabilities.7 A common method to test whether the DCL is under ther-
modynamic control, is to determine the library distribution when the DCL has been generated from
different starting points but with identical building block compositions. If the DCL is under thermody-
namic control, the same library distribution will be obtained from different starting points. Figure 10
presents an example of three different starting points for a DCL. One starting point is mixing the
individual building blocks and another one is combining two separate, preformed libraries. The third
starting point is mixing of macrocycles composed of the building blocks.10 Figure 10 illustrates that
the different starting points of identical building block compositions result in the same distribution of
library members which is true for a system under thermodynamic control. An example of a thermo-
dynamic test is described in section 1.3.1.
7
==PAGE:20==
Figure 10: Examples of different starting points of identical building block components leading to the same
distribution of library members under thermodynamic control. 1) Individual building blocks. 2) Combination
of two separate DCLs. 3) Mixing of macrocycles.10
1.2.3
Thermodynamic behaviour of DCLs
It is important to consider that it is the Gibbs-free energy of the whole system, and not the individual
species, that determine the altering of the equilibrium in DCC. This means that cases can be found
where the library member with the highest afﬁnity for the template molecule will not be ampliﬁed.10
This is explored in the work of Kay Severin who has investigated the behaviour of DCLs through
computer simulations and experimental data.16,17 Kay Severin explored three types of DCLs: Type
A, B, and C, as depicted in Figure 11a. The investigations led to the conclusion that DCLs of type
A have a tendency to favour the library members consisting of fewer building blocks, compared to
larger assemblies.17 Furthermore, the DCLs of type B and C were shown to favour hetero-assemblies
compared to homo-assemblies.16 This was conﬁrmed by experimental data testing trinuclear metal-
lamacrocycles consisting of three different building blocks with different steric effects as shown in
Figure 11b. It was shown that the metallamacrocycle aaa was the most stable species. However, when
mixing trinuclear complexes e.g. aaa with bbb the hetero assemblies abb and aab were preferred
over the thermodynamically more stable species aaa.16 Furthermore, Severin tested the different types
of DCLs against addition of a template to test the ability to use templated synthesis in a selection pro-
cess on the basis of afﬁnity.17 The most important points include, that for both type A and B it was
shown that the selection is not always afﬁnity-based. Moreover, for a DCL of type B it is favourable
to have a small concentration of template and a DCL equilibrium altered towards the monomers rather
than the assemblies in order to entail an afﬁnity-based selection. The general observation that hetero
assemblies are preferred for type B was conﬁrmed for templated synthesis as well.17
8
==PAGE:21==
Figure 11: a) Different types of DCL formation. Type A: one building block with variable stoichiometry; Type B:
different building blocks with ﬁxed stoichiometry; Type C: different building blocks with variable stoichiometry.
b) Organometallic pyridonate complexes assembled to trinuclear metallamacrocycle.16 Adapted from ref. (16).
Otto et al. further investigated the thermodynamic behaviour of larger DCLs on the basis of Severin’s
work. The focus of Otto’s group was to investigate when ampliﬁcation of the best binding template
occurs, and to estimate how much of a problem other inﬂuences on the DCL distribution are. Otto’s
group also used computer simulations followed by experimental substantiation.18,19 The simulations
were set up over a large range of building block and template concentrations resulting in 289 different
simulated experimental conditions.
Otto et al. found that it is optimal to have a low template concentration compared to the concentration
of building blocks. Speciﬁcally, they observed that a template concentration of 1/10 of the building
block concentration, resulted in ampliﬁcation of the strongest binder in 90% of the cases, in accor-
dance with Severin’s ﬁndings. This is due to building blocks or library members competing for the
template and thereby increasing the probability of the best binder being ampliﬁed. The cases which
showed that ampliﬁcation is not always afﬁnity-based were justiﬁed by the fact that a large number
of good-binding library members can be formed in preference over a smaller number of even better
binders, since it can result in an overall lower energy of the system.18 In general, the investigation of
the thermodynamical behaviour of larger DCLs led to the conclusion that with the right experimental
conditions it is possible to set up experiments where ampliﬁcation of the best binder is observed.18,19
1.2.4
Reversible chemistries
The reversible chemical reactions which are important for the formation of DCLs will be discussed
in this section. These reactions allow an interconverting system where bonds are constantly formed
or broken within or between the library members. These reversible bonds can be either covalent,
9
==PAGE:22==
non-covalent, or metal-ligand coordinate bonds. The DCC approach entails some requirements for a
suitable reversible reaction. A suitable reaction must be fast, or at least happen within a reasonable
time frame, and it must be possible to switch it on and off to enable isolation of the desired prod-
uct. Moreover, mild reaction conditions are preferable in order to avoid interference with the non-
covalent interactions responsible for the supramolecular assembly.7 Compared to covalent bonds, the
non-covalent interactions (mainly hydrogen-bonding) and metal-ligand-coordinations form faster but
weaker bonds. This results in less stable library members that are hard to isolate and analyse. Hence,
reversible covalent reactions are the most widely used in the exchange reactions forming a DCL.10
In the search for suitable exchange reactions a range of reactions have been explored during the last
decades. Reactions include transesteriﬁcations, C-C bond forming reactions such as the Diels-Alder
reaction, and various C=N exchange reactions, among other reactions.10 Multiple reviews of exchange
reactions for DCC exist, for example in the work by Corbett et al.7, Zhang et al.20, and more recently
by Canal-Martín and Pérez-Fernández21.
In the following, four different reversible reactions widely used will be described. The speciﬁc reac-
tions are listed in Table 1 and include acylhydrazone formation, disulﬁde exchange, imine formation,
and boronate ester formation.
Table 1: Examples of widely used reversible reactions to form a DCL
Reversible reaction
Structure
Acylhydrazone formation
Disulﬁde exchange
Imine formation
Boronate ester formation
A DCL of acylhydrazones is formed by reversible condensation reactions between building blocks
of acylhydrazides and aldehydes as shown in the ﬁrst entry in Table 1. The exchange reaction takes
place in water at a pH range from 4 to 8, which means that it can occur under physiological condi-
tions. The equilibrating acylhydrazone library can also be formed in various organic solvents.10 The
reaction requires mild acidic conditions and under slightly basic conditions the exchange reaction
needs a catalyst to function. This implies that the acylhydrazone exchange reaction can be switched
off by increasing the pH or removing the catalyst.9
10
==PAGE:23==
Entry two in Table 1 is a disulﬁde exchange reaction, which is efﬁcient even under mildly basic condi-
tions and is a popular reversible reaction for formation of DCLs. The disulﬁde exchange is stable and
robust towards many functional groups. The DCL can be formed from thiol building blocks under
mildly basic conditions and by irreversible oxidation by air which forms the disulﬁde bonds.7 The
exchange reaction proceeds via a nucleophilic substitution where thiolate attacks. Thiolate is a good
soft nucleophile.22 Since the disulﬁde exchange reaction is catalysed by thiolate anions, pH values
between 7 to 9, to give mild basic conditions, are required to deprotonate a sufﬁcient amount of thiol.
This pH dependence can be utilised to switch the reaction off by lowering the pH.
The irreversible oxidation of thiol by air is slow, but it must be noticed that the reversible disulﬁde
exchange reaction only can occur as long as thiolate ions are present in the library mixture. This
implies that the reversible disulﬁde exchange reaction stops when all thiol or thiolate building blocks
have been oxidised. Therefore, oxidation can also be utilised to switch off the exchange reaction.
The mild reaction condition of the disulﬁde exchange reaction enables its compatibility with biolog-
ical systems. However, the disulﬁde exchange interfere with cysteine residues which can be utilised
intentionally or take place unintentionally.23
A DCL utilising imine exchange reactions can be formed from building blocks of speciﬁc aldehy-
des or ketones condensing with primary amines as shown in the third entry of Table 1. Imines are
unstable and thus removal of water from the reaction mixture is in general necessary to avoid hydrol-
ysis to the parent carbonyl building block.22 Imines from aldehydes bearing an aromatic substituent
are the most stable and have been widely applied in the formation of DCLs. The imine formation is
catalysed by acid and the DCLs are often formed under mild reactions conditions. Aqueous buffers
with pH values between 5 and 8.5 and organic solvents with a weak acid catalyst have been used.7
Due to the unstable nature of imines, a reduction of the product to the corresponding amine is often
necessary to isolate the product. A common reducing agent for this purpose is NaBH3CN, which can
also be utilised to switch off the reaction. A disadvantage of the reduction is, that the conversion into
an amine might change the supramolecular properties of the product and hence its afﬁnity to a target.9
Entry four in Table 1 shows the formation of boronate esters which are formed from boronic acid
and 1,2- or 1,3-diol building blocks. Due to the labile nature of the B-O bond, the boronic acid can be
involved in various reversible reactions such as boroxine exchange and boronate transesteriﬁcations.10
Through transesteriﬁcation reactions the DCL can form complex structures of e.g. boronate macrocy-
cles, helicates, and capsules, which can be utilised in the detection of saccharides and identiﬁcation of
enzyme inhibitors.24 The boronate transesteriﬁcation exchange reaction is reversible at physiological
pH in both aqueous solutions and organic solvents. An additional advantage is that the reversibility is
pH dependent, where the required pH depends on the pKa of the building blocks in the manner that
pH > pKa.21,25
11
==PAGE:24==
1.2.5
Recent applications of DCC - Systems chemistry and out-of-
equilibrium systems
The approach of using a template to select the thermodynamically most stable product from an equi-
librating mixture was described in the mid-1990’s by the research groups of Sanders and Lehn.9 The
early concepts of DCC and how the ﬁeld has evolved up to the mid-2000s have previously been re-
viewed by, among others, Corbett et al.7 The covered applications of DCC include discovery of syn-
thetic receptors, molecular capsules, ligands for biomolecules, synthetic catalysts, sensors, and the
study of aggregation and folding.7 More recently, Frei et al. published a review focusing on the use of
macromolecular hosts in order to identify potent ligands for pharmacologically interesting targets.6
Speciﬁcally, Pérez-Fernández and Canal-Martín have reviewed the use of proteins as molecular hosts
showing the great potential of DCC as a hit-identiﬁcation tool in the drug discovery process.21
During the last decade, DCC has expanded from only considering systems under thermodynamic
control to explore more complex, out-of-equilibrium systems.23,26 These systems can be divided into
dissipative and non-dissipative non-equilibrium states, as depicted in Figure 12.27 The non-dissipative
non-equilibrium state characterises a system often referred to as kinetically trapped or in a metastable
state. It occurs when the system is captured in a local minimum of the energy landscape which can
take place when strong non-covalent interactions are formed in a self-assembly structure. If the en-
ergy barrier from the local minimum to the global minimum is low, the system can be characterised
as being in a metastable state, where an overall more stable structure will be formed slowly. If the
energy barrier is high the system is said to be kinetically trapped in the local minimum, where it will
remain for a period (probably) much longer than the timescale of the experiment.27
Figure 12: Energy landscape of the different thermodynamic states in a supramolecular self-assembled
structure27. Adapted from ref. (27).
12
==PAGE:25==
The use of DCC allows complex mixtures, and thus DCLs have proven a strong tool for exploring
unexpected molecules. This has resulted in the discovery of e.g. self-replicators and interlocked
structures such as catenanes.26 The complexity of DCLs have been limited by analytical challenges
posed by large libraries. As more powerful techniques for analysis of complex mixtures are evolv-
ing, it allows the study of more complex systems. With the increased complexity of the systems in
DCC, the ﬁeld is moving towards the area of systems chemistry.26 Systems chemistry aims to develop
highly complex chemical systems in order to study emergent properties of the molecular system in-
stead of the molecule itself.28 Such systems have been studied extensively by the group of Sijbren
Otto, who has been leading in the ﬁeld of systems chemistry. In section 1.2.1 the mentioned example
of self-templating through intramolecular bonds does in fact utilise a systems chemistry approach,
where Otto et al. showed the formation of highly complex foldamers. The complexity of the system
increases as the identical molecular building blocks assemble into a foldamer of up to 12 distinct
environments.11
In a novel study, Otto et al. have utilised chemical fuelling to achieve a complex, out-of-equilibrium
self-replicating system. The study is an expansion of the presented library of disulﬁde macrocycles
(section 1.2.1.2) that upon stacking self-assembles into self-replicating ﬁbers. The novel DCL is
formed in the presence of guanidinium chloride which results in self-replicating ﬁbers of trimers and
hexamers as seen in Figure 13a. The trimer ﬁbers are favoured without fuelling due to a higher repli-
cation rate.29 The system was chemically fuelled in a replication-destruction cycle. The replication
reaction, oxidation of thiol building blocks, was mediated by NaBO3 since the oxygen supply from
air is relatively low. The destruction reaction was introduced by addition of tricarboxyethylphosphine
(TCEP) which reduces disulﬁde bonds to thiols. It was found that the reduction rate of the trimer
replicator was higher than for the hexamer ﬁber. This was suggested to be a result of the trimer
stack forming a maximum of three β-sheets, whereas the hexamer stack can be held together by six
β-sheets. Trimer ﬁbers are less stabilised by non-covalent bonds, and thus they are shorter and have
more ﬁber ends resulting in both higher replication and reduction rates compared to the hexamer
ﬁber.29
The chemically fuelled replication-destruction cycle was established by a simultaneously addition of
NaBO3 and TCEP to the library. The fuelled system resulted in an increase of the hexamer replicator
to constitute 60−70% of the building blocks at steady state. When the supply of fuel was stopped the
composition of the replicators returned to favour the trimer ﬁber as depicted in Figure 13b. The chem-
ically fuelled cycle is an example of a dissipative out-of-equilibrium system.29 The system favours
the larger ring size and thereby forms a molecular more complex replicator, which from a systems
chemistry approach enables an emergence of function. Otto et al. concluded that this principle is
an improvement towards understanding de-novo synthesis of life and how the complexity of living
13
==PAGE:26==
systems have emerged.29
Figure 13: a) Sketch of the simultaneous replication by addition of oxidant NaBO3 and reduction upon addition
of TCEP. Two replicating macrocycles can assemble, the thickness of the arrows indicate the size of the ﬂuxes.
b) Product distribution over time upon simultaneously addition of NaBO3 and TCEP. The "Flow stopped" arrow
indicates the time the addition of NaBO3 was stopped.29 Adapted from ref. (29).
Another example of utilising a highly complex, out-of-equilibrium system has been articulated by
Dennis Larsen and Sophie Beeren. They explored an enzyme-mediated DCL where cyclodextrins act
under pseudo-thermodynamic control in a kinetically trapped system.30 The system will be discussed
in the next section, where enzyme-mediated DCC will be described.
1.3
DCC with enzyme-catalysed reversible chemistry
Dynamic combinatorial chemistry can be performed in combination with the use of enzymes. The
enzymes enables the connections between building blocks to form reversibly. Therefore, the enzyme-
catalysed reactions form an interconverting dynamic combinatorial library under thermodynamical
control as described for the DCC methodology in section 1.2.8 In general, enzyme-catalysed reactions
are reversible under physiological conditions meaning that they are ideal for generating dynamic
combinatorial libraries.31 Enzymatic reactions are often performed under mild conditions to ensure
enzyme stability. Inactivation or removal of enzyme will stop enzymatic activity resulting in a static
library that can be analysed directly or from where products can be isolated.31 Enzyme-catalysed
DCC, like non-enzymatic DCC, can be used to explore manipulation by external stimuli in order to
synthesise and amplify self-assembled components which ideally will be the most stable molecular
structure.
1.3.1
Early work on enzyme-mediated DCC
The method of enzyme-mediated DCC is a relatively unexplored ﬁeld. Only a few research groups
have studied and utilised relatively simple DCLs from enzyme-catalysed reversible reactions. These
14
==PAGE:27==
enzymatic reactions can be seen in an overview in Table 2. The early work on enzyme-mediated DCC
has mainly been focusing on peptide formation with non-speciﬁc protease enzymes, as seen in entry
one and three of Table 2, whereas entry two is an example of a reversible aldol reaction of sialic acid
analogues. The common feature between these examples is the desire to utilise the enzyme-mediated
DCLs to form stable complexes or stable aggregates through either external or internal templating.
These different cases and ampliﬁcation strategies, depicted in Table 2, will be explained more in depth
in the following section.
Table 2: Overview of selected research studies on early work on enzyme-mediated DCC
Research group
year
Reaction
Enzyme
Ampliﬁcation
principle
Venton et al.
1996
Peptide formation
and cleavage
Non-speciﬁc proteases
e.g. Thermolysin
Template protein:
ﬁbronogen
Turner and Flitsch group
2002
Aldol reaction
and cleavage
NANA aldolase
Template: WGA host
Uljin et al.
2009, 2016
Peptide formation
and cleavage
Thermolysin
Self-assembly through
intramolecular π-stacking
One of the earliest studies using enzyme-mediated DCC was performed by Venton et al. in 1996.
Venton’s group prepared a DCL consisting of a dynamic mixture of peptides formed by protease
enzymes.32 For this to occur it is necessary to have conditions that allow protease enzymes to both
form peptide bonds as well as hydrolyse them. The reversible conditions were obtained by using
non-speciﬁc protease enzymes together with high concentrations of starting materials. The group ﬁrst
showed that synthesis occurred in a reaction between the peptides YGG and FL with thermolysin to
form YGGFL, among other products.32 The use of bovine serum albumin (BSA) hydrolysates and
other hydrolysates were explored to ensure high concentrations of starting materials (amino acids and
peptides). The effect of BSA hydrolysate was tested by a simple enzymatic reaction with thermolysin,
bromelain, and the radio labelled peptide H3-WY. Figure 14 shows the difference in outcome when
BSA hydrolysates were added. Without BSA hydrolysates the main products were found to be the hy-
drolysis products H3-W and H3-Y. Upon addition of BSA hydrolysates other products were formed as
well, due to the establishment of a dynamic reversible reaction.32 The inﬂuence of a protein template
on the dynamic peptide mixture was investigated. A binding and stabilisation between the antibody
3E7 and the peptide YGGFL was tested and observed. Venton’s group expanded to search for peptides
that bind to the template protein ﬁbrinogen, which is a glycoprotein complex.32 The reactions were
performed with trypsin-BSA hydrolysates and ﬁbrinogen which was separated from the reversible
peptide reactions by a peptide permeable membrane. The binding and ampliﬁcation of the peptides
DKPDNF and GPR, among other peptides, were observed. The diversity of peptide formation made
it difﬁcult to analyse and identify the formed peptides. However, Venton et al. were able to show that
a diverse mixture of peptides in solution can be formed enzymatically and can be utilised through
15
==PAGE:28==
binding to a template protein to identify stabilised peptides.32
Figure 14: H3-WY reacted with or without BSA hydrolysates. Reaction without BSA hydrolysates (marked:
Reaction(-BSA)) showed mainly hydrolysis products. The reaction with BSA hydrolysates showed formation of
other products, supposedly synthesis products from a dynamic reversible reaction32. Adapted from ref. (32).
The ﬁeld of enzyme-mediated DCC was further developed by Turner and Flitsch’s group in 2002, to
design enzyme-mediated exchange reaction with N-acetylneuraminic acid aldolase (NANA aldolase)
and sialic acid analogues.31 NANA aldolase catalyses reversible aldol formation and cleavage reac-
tions. In this study, the enzyme catalysed reversible cleavage of sodium puruvate from sialic acid
derivatives, as seen in Figure 15a. The resulting small DCL was screened in situ against lectin wheat
germ agglutinin (WGA), which is a host for neuraminic acids. The sialic acid with the strongest
afﬁnity towards WGA was shown to be ampliﬁed upon addition. This is shown in Figure 15b, where
compound 1a (sialic acid), is ampliﬁed at the expense of the other sialic acid analogues. This means
that Turner and Flitsch’s group were able to alter the described enzymatic equilibrium with the use of
WGA as external stimuli.
Figure 15: a) Reversible reaction where NANA aldolase catalyses the cleavage of sialic acid derivatives to
aldol products and sodium pyruvate, in the presence of excess sodium pyruvate. b) Relative ampliﬁcation of
sialic acid analogues upon addition of WGA.31 Adapted from ref. (31).
16
==PAGE:29==
With the established acknowledgement of enzyme-catalysed reversible chemistry, further investiga-
tions were performed by Ulijn et al. in 2009 to demonstrate that enzyme-mediated DCLs can, in fact
be established as fully reversible and equilibrium-driven systems.8 The work of Ulijn and co-workers
showed a fully reversible self-assembling of peptide derivatives under thermodynamic control. The
peptide derivatives were formed from an Fmoc-amino acid and a dipeptide or amino acid ester with
the use of the endoprotease thermolysin as depicted in Figure 16. In general, Fmoc-protected peptides
were formed of different lengths. It was found that the species were able to self-assemble through
π-stacking to form stabilised anti-parrallel β-sheets yielding the most stable species possible through
internal templating. It was shown that the speciﬁc reaction between Fmoc-F and F2 was able to form
a hydrogel consisting of Fmoc-F3. Ulijn’s group also performed a competition study on the basis of
reactions between Fmoc-T and the nucleophiles F-OMe and L-OMe. When mixing all three build-
ing blocks the product distribution was observed to be Fmoc-T-F-OMe (82%) and Fmoc-T-L-OMe
(14%) indicating that the former is stabilised most through self-templating. A similar experiment
was set up where Fmoc-T and L-OMe were allowed to react and reach eqilibrium before addition of
F-OMe. This yielded the same ﬁnal yield of 82% Fmoc-T-F-OMe. This underlined that the enzyme-
mediated peptide formation was in fact under reversible thermodynamic conditions.8 Furthermore,
the work underlined the ability to amplify the most stable molecular species within a DCL. This laid
the foundation for formation of functional supramolecular nanostructures with high complexities and
few defects on the basis of self-assembly and ampliﬁcation of the most stable molecular components.8
Figure 16: Reaction between Fmoc-amino acids and a dipeptide or amino acid ester with the use of the endo-
protease thermolysin.8 Adapted from ref. (8).
Later on, Ulijn and co-workers expanded their work to investigate the possible applications of self-
assembling peptides.33 They succeeded with a screening method for all possible combination of
tripeptides by molecular dynamics simulations in combination with experimental results. This yielded,
for the ﬁrst time, a hydrogel consisting of unprotected tripeptides functioning at neutral pH without
organic solvents.33 Further approaches to investigate the discovery of supramolecular nanomateri-
17
==PAGE:30==
als consisting of enzyme-mediated self-assembled peptides were continued in 2016.34 Here, Ulijn et
al. used dipeptides as starting materials with the protease enzyme thermolysin. Thermolysin does
not cleave at the peptide terminus and therefore peptide bond formation rather than hydrolysis is
favoured for dipeptides. Again, the scope was to search for peptides with the best self-assembly abil-
ities in order to discover new nano-materials. The reaction conditions were explored including salts,
solvents, and dipeptide combinations, in order to change the selection and self-assembling process. It
was accomplished to form various nanomaterials in aqueous environment. This particular aspect was
considered promising for discovering applications in the ﬁelds of biomedicine.34
1.3.2
The current ﬁeld of enzyme-mediated DCC
The recent development in enzyme-mediated DCC involves dynamic formation of cyclodextrins
(CDs) explored by Dennis Larsen and Sophie Beeren.30 They have used enzyme-mediated DCC for
synthesis of CDs with cyclodextrin glucanotransferase (CGTase) under mild conditions. The enzyme
CGTase catalyses reversible formation of α(1→4) glycosidic linkages between D-glucopyranose
monomers and/or various α-1,4-D-glucans, and thereby it is possible to cyclize α-1,4-D-glucans to
form CDs. From addition of speciﬁc templates Larsen and Beeren succeeded in a selective synthesis
of α-, β-, and γ-CDs, as well as CDs containing 9 or 10 glucose units, as depicted in Figure 17.
Thereby, they have been able to show that template molecules can be exploited to obtain alternative
products to those selected by Nature from an enzyme-mediated DCL.30
Figure 17: Enzyme-mediated reaction between CGTase and various α-1,4-D-glucans to form a DCL of α-, β-,
and γ-CDs. Addition of a speciﬁc template induces a selective synthesis of α-, β-, and γ-CDs as well as CDs
containing 9 or 10 glucose units.30 Adapted from ref. (30).
18
==PAGE:31==
The DCL of CDs exists in an out-of-equilibrium system. The system acts under pseudo-thermodyna-
mical control, where the reversible formation of CDs are kinetically trapped for a period of time
(approximately one day30) which is long enough to utilise the formed DCL. The system is pseudo-
thermodynamic since the enzyme CGTase also catalyses an irreversible hydrolysis reaction which
forms a reducing end as depicted in Figure 18. The reducing ends cannot re-enter the CD equilibrium
and therefore the hydrolysis will eventually form monomers of glucose, which are the thermodynamic
product of the overall system. This also means that the overall concentration of CDs will decrease
over time.
Figure 18: Hydrolysis reaction catalysed by CGTase.30 Adapted from ref. (30).
The formation of CDs was explored in different reaction set-ups with α-, β-, γ-CDs and maltohexaose
as starting materials. With addition of CGTase the reactions were allowed to reach an equilibrium. It
was found that the same relative distribution of α-, β-, γ-CDs as well as various linear α-1,4-glucans
was obtained in the equilibrium, independently on the initial starting material. This was proof of
a transient interconvertible dynamic equilibrium under thermodynamic control. The transient DCL
was tested against several different templates to perform selective templated synthesis. α-CD was
synthesised by addition of the template sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in an 89% selection compared
to 38% without the template.30 Both β-CD and γ-CD were synthesised in more than 99% selection
with addition of the template 1-adamantane carboxylic acid or NaBPh4, respectively. It was possible
to obtain CD9 and CD10 in a lower selection by using the template Cs2B12I12 with a selection of 13%
CD9 and 4% CD10. γ-CD was still the main species formed with Cs2B12I12 as template even though
it has a lower binding afﬁnity compared to CD9 and CD10. This can be explained by the fact that
the overall energy of the system determines the altering of the equilibrium, meaning that the stability
of all the individual library members plays an important role.30 However, the formation of CD9 and
CD10 is still a signiﬁcant step in selective synthesis of non-native CDs with the use of an enzyme-
mediated DCL. Overall, it was shown that addition of a template can stabilise the formed CDs from
hydrolysis, since the overall concentration of CDs are higher with addition of template. This is due to
the stabilising interaction between guest and host.30
19
==PAGE:32==
The enzyme-mediated DCL of cyclodextrins was further explored by Larsen and Beeren by alter-
ation of reaction conditions, such as temperature, pH, solvents, and salinity.35 This was done in order
to investigate the stability of the transient dynamic system and to ﬁnd the best conditions to perform
selective templated synthesis. The temperature was investigated in a range between 5-37 °C because
at temperatures above 50 °C the enzyme was found to be inactive after one day. The temperature did
not affect the overall concentration of formed CD, however the amount of α-CD was increased with
higher temperatures as seen in Figure 19. This is due to the fact that entropy is more important for the
outcome at higher temperatures.35
Figure 19: The CD distribution and total concentration changes with temperature variation. Adapted from ref.
(35).
The pH was investigated in a range of 4 to 9. At a pH below 5 the enzyme was inactive in less than a
day.35 The enzyme was stable in the range of pH 5 to 9 which shows a great stability for the enzyme.
The equilibrium was reached more slowly at higher pH compared to lower pH and the pH did not
inﬂuence the distribution of CDs very much.35
Subsequently, Larsen and Beeren investigated the inﬂuence of the initial concentration of building
blocks. They used between 1−40 mg/mL of maltohexaose as starting material. They found that
for larger concentration of the starting material the DCL yielded more β-CD and γ-CD as seen in
Figure 20a. Furthermore, they found that the overall concentration of CDs, relative to linear sugars,
were highest when using 5 mg/mL of maltohexaose, however at lower concentrations the lifetime of
the dynamic system was very short as seen in Figure 20b. Therefore, the optimal initial concentration
was proposed to be between 10−20 mg/mL of maltohexaose.35
20
==PAGE:33==
Figure 20: a) CD distribution and maximum yield of CD with varied concentration of the starting material mal-
tohexaose. b) Lifetime of the dynamic system with varied concentration of the starting material maltohexaose.
Adapted from ref. (35).
Ethanol as a co-solvent was investigated and showed a stabilising effect on α-CD. It was suggested
that the stabilising effect was due to a weak binding interaction rather than a solvent effect.35 Further-
more, the effect of high salt concentrations was also found to favour formation of α-CD. The enzyme
showed incredible stability in salt concentrations of NaNO3 up to 7.5 M.35
With the established knowledge on how the reaction conditions can inﬂuence the outcome of the
enzyme-mediated equilibrium, it was tested whether the templated synthesis of α-CD could be im-
proved from the previously obtained 89% selection. With SDS as template it was possible to form
both 1:1 and 1:2 complexes with α-CD. The competitive formation of a 1:1 complex between β-
CD and SDS with similar binding afﬁnities made it difﬁcult to form α-CDs selectively as seen in
Figure 21a. Therefore, entropy can be exploited since entropic factors will generally disfavour the
formation of the 1:2 α-CD complex. However, at lower temperature (5 °C) the entropic factors will
have less inﬂuence and the formation of the 1:2 complex was achieved resulting in an overall selec-
tion of 99% α-CD as seen in Figure 21b. This result underlines the importance of investigating the
enzymatic system in order to optimise the desired outcome.35
Figure 21: a) Formation of 1:1 and 1:2 complexes with SDS as a template. b) CD distribution with temperature
variation. Adapted from ref. (35).
21
==PAGE:34==
1.4
Cyclodextrins
In the following section cyclodextrins will be described more thoroughly. Cyclodextrins were discov-
ered in 1891 from starch digested with Bacilus amylobactor.36 CDs are α-1,4-linked oligomacrocyles
composed of carbohydrate building blocks. α-, β-, and γ-CD contains 6, 7, and 8 D-glucose units, re-
spectively, as depicted in Figure 22a.37 These speciﬁc CDs are naturally occurring and therefore also
the most studied.38 However, as already seen in the study of Larsen and Beeren30 larger cyclodextrins
can be formed. The structure of cyclodextrins can be presented as a hollow cone. The interior of
CDs are relatively hydrophobic, since the carbon skeleton and the pyranose ether-oxygen create a
hydrophobic surface, whereas the hydroxyl groups are placed on the exterior of the cone resulting in
a hydrophilic exterior (Figure 22b). This makes CDs soluble in water. However, the hydroxyl groups
can form intramolecular hydrogen-bonds, mainly between neighbouring C2-OH and C4-OH, which
make CDs less hydrophilic compared to linear glycans.39
Figure 22: a) Structure of α, β, and γ-CD. Adapted from ref. (37). b) Cone structure of CDs. Adapted from
ref. (36)
The structural properties of CDs make it possible to form supramolecular host-guest interactions, i.e.
inclusion complexes, as well as supramolecular self-assembly aggregates. Most importantly, CDs
are capable of hosting hydrophobic molecules in aqueous environments as depicted in Figure 23.
Host-guest complexation is driven by a hydrophobic effect which is both enthalpically and entropi-
cally driven.40 When a guest molecule binds, the enthalpy is decreased signiﬁcantly upon release of
high energy water from inside the CDs cavity. The water molecules are high energy since the water
molecules can not orientate well inside the cavity to form stabilising hydrogen bonds. Furthermore,
the entropy is increased upon host-guest complexation as the hydrophobic regions will be aligned
to minimise the hydrophobic surface area in contact with the aqueous environment, and the ordered
water molecules are released into the bulk solution.40 The selectivity of a host-guest complexation
depends on the association constant in the binding to different CDs which often is in good correlation
with how much space the guest ﬁlls up in the respective CDs.41 Depending on the size and shape of
22
==PAGE:35==
the guest, higher-order inclusion complexes, e.g. 2:1, 3:1, or 1:2 CD/guest complexes, can be formed.
Figure 23: Concept of host-guest complex of CDs. Adapted from ref. (39).
Formation of host-guest complexes of CDs has many industrial applications such as in drug delivery
systems, cosmetics, food, ﬂavours, and excipients. Here, an important aspect is that CDs are non-toxic
and can be used in vivo.36 Especially, many applications have been seen in the ﬁeld of drug delivery.
The formation of a guest-host complex between a drug and a CD can have many advantages including
increased solubility of the drug, chemical stabilisation, and increased bioavailability. For example, an
improvement of the drug solubility can enhance the permeability across cell membranes.39
It is possible to make synthetic modiﬁcations of CDs.
Many derivatives have been synthesised
and investigated. The derivatives include amination, esteriﬁcation, and etheriﬁcation of primary and
secondary hydroxyl groups.36 A particular important derivative of CDs is monotosylated CDs from
which many different functionalities can be synthesised e.g azides, thiols, alkenes or amines.41 Syn-
thetic modiﬁcations of CDs can change the solubility, due to disruption of intramolecular hydrogen
bonding. Furthermore, the modiﬁcations can lead to a change in the volume of the cavity and thus
change the afﬁnity towards speciﬁc guest molecules. Another feature of synthetically modiﬁed CDs is
the ability to link either covalently or non-covalently to other cyclodextrins to form a supramolecular
construction.36 This means, that the diverse chemistry of CDs make them applicable in formation of
many different supramolecular structures and diverse host-guest inclusion complexes.36
1.5
Photoswitches
A photoswitches is a molecule that reversibly can transform light energy into different photostationary
states. The phototransformation can induce changes in geometry, polarity, or rigidity of molecular
structures leading to functional changes. Typical light-induced transformations include isomerisation
and ring-opening or -closing reactions.42
Photoswitches are utilised by Nature in, for example, the vision in human eyes. Inspired by Na-
ture, light-driven synthetic systems have been developed. Applications include, among others, smart
self-assembled materials, photocontrol over biological systems, intelligent optical devices, artiﬁcial
muscles, and molecular motors.42,43 A molecular propeller-type motor utilising light-induced cis-
trans isomerisations was described in section 1.1 as part of discoveries receiving the Nobel Prize in
23
==PAGE:36==
chemistry in 2016.
Photoswitches have also been applied in molecular solar thermal energy storage systems. The idea
behind the technology is to drive a thermodynamically unfavourable isomerisation reaction by so-
lar radiation.
Hereby, the solar energy is stored as chemical energy, which subsequently in an
exothermic reaction can be released as clean thermal energy.44 Brøndsted et al. have investigated
a dihydroazulene-vinylheptafulvene (DHA-VHF) couple as a possible system for storage of solar
energy.45 The DHA-VHF system undergoes ring-opening and -closing reactions by photoisomerisa-
tion of DHA into VHF, and thermal back-reaction of VHS into DHA as depicted in Figure 24.
Figure 24: Ring-opening photoisomerisation of a derivative of DHA into VHF.44 Adapted from (44)
Photoswitches have been incorporated into many supramolecular systems to include a light-responsive
motif to control the outcome. An example has been reported by Schalley et al. in a system where
light induces a reversible interconversion between a [c2]daisy chain and a pseudo[1]rotaxane. These
two supramolecular structures usually require different molecular designs, but with the incorporation
of an arylazopyrazole photoswitch, both structures could be obtained from the same building block
as depicted in Figure 25.46
Figure 25: The molecular design including an arylazopyrazole photoswitch enabling the reversible intercon-
version between a [c2]daisy chain (E,E-DC) and a pseudo[1]rotaxane (Z-L).46 Adapted from ref. (46).
The longer and rigid nature of the E-isomer of the arylazopyrazole photoswitch promotes the self-
complementary formation of the [c2]daisy chain, whereas the bend structure of the Z-isomer pro-
24
==PAGE:37==
motes the self-included pseudo[1]rotaxane. By irradiating the building block with light at 365 nm
more than 98% of the Z-isomer was obtained, and by irradiating at 530 nm more than 95% E-isomer
was obtained. The almost quantitative photoisomerisation of the arylazopyrazole show that the pho-
toswitch facilitates a high degree of photocontrol over a system.
Light is an ideal external stimulus of molecular systems because it constitutes a mild exposure that
can be applied with high temporal and spatial precision. These properties cause photoswitches to be
highly compatible with biological systems.47 However, short wavelengths are not compatible with bi-
ological systems and therefore red-shifting is often investigated to obtain photoswitching with longer
wavelengths. The most well-established types of photoswitches are azobenzenes, diarylethenes, and
spiropyrans.42 A discussion of diarylethenes and spiropyrans are outside the scope of this project but
have been reviewed by, among others, Irie48 and Kortekaas and Browne49, respectively. Azobenzenes
as photoswitches will be discussed in the following sections.
1.5.1
Azobenzenes
Azobenzenes are a class of photoswitches undergoing reversible isomerisation between cis- and trans-
isomers around a nitrogen double bond, as depicted in Figure 26a. The photoisomerisation property
of azobenzenes has been known for almost 85 years and is therefore one of the best characterised
photoswitches.47
Figure 26:
a) Structures and corresponding spaceﬁlling models showing electrostatic potentials
(red=electronegative to blue=electropositive) of cis- and trans-azobenzene. b) UV-vis absorption spectra of
cis- and trans-azobenzene dissolved in ethanol.47 Adapted from ref. (47).
The trans-azobenzene is almost planar with a dihedral angle of ∼0◦between the phenyl rings. This
results in a dipole moment near zero.47 The cis-isomer is bent with the benzene rings twisted in a di-
hedral angle of ∼55◦out of the plane from the azo group. cis-Azobenzene has a dipole moment of 3
Debye which is reﬂected in the models of electrostatic potentials in Figure 26a. The UV-vis absorption
25
==PAGE:38==
spectra of the two photostationary states cis-azobenzene and trans-azobenzene overlap substantially,
but can still be distinguished from one another as illustrated in Figure 26b. The cis-isomer has a
n−π∗band around 440 nm and two other bands at 280 nm and 250 nm with the latter being the most
intense, which means that it has the highest molar extinction coefﬁcient. trans-Azobenzene has a
weaker absorption band also around 440 nm and a strong π−π∗transition near 320 nm.47
The trans-azobenzene is the thermodynamically most stable isomer which results in a thermal cis-
to-trans relaxation process. Therefore, when left in the dark the equilibrium between the isomers will
be completely shifted towards the trans-isomer (>99.99%).47 The equilibrium can be shifted towards
the photostationary state of cis-isomer by irradiation with UV light at 340 nm. The trans-isomer can
be reformed by irradiating with blue light at 450 nm or leaving the solution in the dark.47 Due to the
substantial overlap of the absorption spectra as shown in Figure 26b, a maximum of 80% cis- and
95% trans-isomer can be obtained upon irradiation.47 Azobenzene photoswitches have been applied
in a wide range of materials, nanostructures, and biomolecules. For example, functionalising proteins
with azobenzene photoswitches enables photo-control over the conformation of secondary structure
elements and hence protein folding.50
As previously mentioned, red-shifting is often required to obtain photoswitches compatible with bio-
logical systems. Azobenzenes can be modiﬁed to be switchable in different regions of wavelengths.
This has been utilised to obtain azobenzenes switchable exclusively by visible light irradiation, which
enables in vivo-applications for biomedical purposes, among others.42,51
1.5.2
Binding interactions between cyclodextrins and azobenzenes
Binding interactions of cyclodextrins with unsubstituted and substituted azobenzenes have been widely
investigated and reported by, among others, Wu et al, Beeren and Larsen, and Harada and co-
workers.52–55
Harada and co-workers reported in 2011 a self-assembling gel system that could be regulated as a
response to photoisomerisation of an azobenzene moiety.55 Polyacrylamide-based hydrogels were
functionalised with either an azobenzene moiety to construct a guest gel or an α-CD or β-CD moiety
as the host gel, as depipcted in Figure 27. By mixing the α-CD host gel with the trans-isomer of
the guest gel, a combined gel formed by immediate self-adhesion. The assembled gel dissociated
by light irradiation at 365 nm inducing trans to cis isomerisation of the azobenzene. It was shown
that reversible self-adhesion was obtained by irradiating with light at 430 nm switching back to the
trans-isomer.55
In a mixture of the azobenzene guest gel with both α-CD and β-CD host gels, Harada and co-workers
showed that the trans-azobenzene guest gel self-adhered with the α-CD host gel. Upon light irradia-
tion at 365 nm the cis-azobenzene guest gel switched completely to self-assemble with the β-CD host
gel. Switching the guest gel back to trans-azobenzene, it re-adhered with the α-CD host gel. The
26
==PAGE:39==
trend of reversible adhesion and dissociation was substantiated by determination of binding constants
for the cis- and trans-azobenzene moieties in the guest gels with α-CD and β-CD. By NMR titration
experiments Ka = 2000 M-1 was determined for the trans-azobenzene guest gel with α-CD, which
was almost three times the magnitude compared to the complexation with β-CD. With an association
constant of Ka = 280 M-1 the binding of cis-azobenzene guest gel with β-CD was eight times higher
than for α-CD. The association constants emphasise that the reversible adhesion and dissociation can
be exploited in a photoswitchable gel assembly system.55
Figure 27: Chemical structures of host gels bearing an α-CD or β-CD, and a guest gel functionalised with
an azobenzene moiety. The characters x, y, and z indicate the molar ratios of acrylamide, host- or guest-
modiﬁed acrylamide, and N,N’-methylenebis(acrylamide), respectively, whereas r indicates that each polymer
was copolymerised randomly.55 Adapted from ref. (55).
A supramolecular system of a methoxy-substituted trans-azobenzene binding to β-CD was reported
in 2015 by Wu et al.53 The methoxy-substituted azobenzene was synthesised and connected to a
pyridinium group for water solubility. The methoxy-substituted azobenzene was shown to shift from
trans- to cis-isomer upon irradiation of red light causing disassembly of the supramolecular 1:1 host-
guest complex as illustrated in Figure 28. By irradiating with blue light or by means of heat, the
trans-isomer could be reformed enabling the re-formation of the host-guest complex, which illustrates
the reversibility of the system. A 2D NOESY NMR spectroscopy study suggested that the binding
interaction takes place between the hydrophobic cavity of the β-CD and the azobenzene as depicted
in Figure 28. The binding constants were investigated using NMR titration and a binding constant of
Ka = 1546 M-1 was determined for the methoxy-substituted trans-azobenzene to β-CD whereas Ka =
82.1 M-1 was determined for the methoxy-substituted cis-azobenzene to β-CD. This emphasises the
selectivity of the supramolecular binding. The supramolecular system was utilised in the formation
of light-responsive poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) hydrogels forming upon supramolecular complexation
between the trans-methoxy-substituted azobenzene and β-CD. Upon irradiation with red light the
hydrogel was transformed into a solution. The formation of hydrogel was proven to be reversible
since it could be reformed upon irradiation with blue light. Finally, it was demonstrated how the
light-responsive hydrogel could be exploited in the release of a protein. The hydrogel was shown to
27
==PAGE:40==
be compatible with biomaterials, such as tissue, due to the use of red light as stimuli.53
Trans-methoxy-substituted
azobenzene complex
Free Cis-methoxy-
substituted azobenzene
Free β-CD
Figure 28: Illusration of supramolecular interaction between methoxy-substituted azobenzene and β-CD.
Adapted from ref. (53).
In a similar study by Wu et al., a supramoplecular system of an isopropoxy-substituted azobenzene
and an unsubstituted azobenzene, both linked to a pyridinium group, was studied. Based on 2D
NOESY NMR spectroscopy and NMR titrations, the unsubstituted trans-azobenzene was shown to
bind strongly to α-CD and the isopropoxy-substituted cis-azobenzene was shown to bind strongly
to γ-CD in 1:1 complexes. All other possible combinations of complexes were shown to posses
small binding afﬁnities. The photoisomerisation going from trans- to cis-isomer of the unsubstituted
azobenzene could be induced by UV light whereas the photoisomerisation going from trans- to cis-
isomer of the isopropoxy-azobenzene could be induced by green light. Blue light induced cis to
trans isomerisation of both the unsubstituted and the isopropoxy-substituted azobenzene. This was
exploited in an orthogonal reversible system as shown in Figure 29.52
Trans-azobenzene 
Cis-azobenzene 
Cis-isopropoxy azobenzene 
Trans-isopropoxy azobenzene 
Figure 29:
Illusration of supramolecular orthogonal system of unsubstituted azobenzene, isopropoxy-
substituted azobenzene, α-CD, and γ-CD. Adapted from ref. (52).
28
==PAGE:41==
1.5.3
Photoswitches in DCC
Photoswitches have currently only been of limited use in DCC. The few reported applications include
photoswitches incorporated in building blocks56 or as an external template. In 2008 Waters et al.
reported a DCL formed from reversible hydrazone exchange reaction. The building blocks were
designed with the incorporation of an azobenzene functionality. Thereby, two types of exchange were
possible within the same dynamic library in terms of hydrazone exchange and cis-trans isomerisations
as illustrated in Figure 30.57 The library distribution was investigated before and after irradiation
with light at 360 nm. The resulting library proved to be very versatile and showed big changes in
library composition upon irradiation with light based on HPLC analysis. This emphasises how the
azobenzene functionality enabled a photoresponsive DCL. The library was subjected to a template
study where an oligoproline peptide guest was added to the library. After irradiation with light, the
thermal relaxation from cis to trans was followed and compared to an untemplated library. Waters et
al. discovered that some library members of the templated library would return to thermal equilibrium
at a slower rate compared to the untemplated library indicating a stabilising host-guest interactions of
those speciﬁc cis-azobenzene library members.57
Figure 30: Schematic illustration of a DCL formed from reversible hydrazone exchange between building blocks
with incorporation of an azobenzene functionality enabling a photoresponsive DCL. Adapted from ref. (57).
In 2016 Ulatowski et al. showed for the ﬁrst time that photoswitchable azobenzenes can be utilised
as templates in DCC to alter the distribution of a DCL by light.58 This approach has been further
studied by Beeren’s group in a DCL of kinetically trapped cyclodextrins operating under pseudo-
thermodynamic control. The system has previously been described in section 1.3.2.30 In the enzyme-
mediated library of CDs, Beeren and co-workers exploited the molecular recognition of a photo-
switchable template to control the selective formation of speciﬁc CDs by use of light.54 Initially, ﬁve
different azobenzene templates were selected (Table 3) which all showed markedly different ratios
of cis- and trans-isomers when exposed to ambient light versus UV light at 365 nm. The templates
were tested in DCLs formed from α-CDs in presence of CGTase, as depicted in Figure 31a. The
libraries had either been subjected to darkness or irradiation with UV light for 1 hour prior to addition
29
==PAGE:42==
of enzyme. The reaction mixture was continuously kept in darkness or under irradiation during the li-
brary study. Hereafter, the composition of each library was analysed by HPLC. In all cases the library
distributions were different depending on whether the reaction had been kept in the dark or irradiated
with UV light, as illustrated in Figure 31b. Without irradiation all azobenzene templates resulted in an
ampliﬁcation of α-CD which indicates that all of the trans-isomers studied selectively binds to α-CD.
Upon irradiation with UV light the concentration of β-CD was increased for one of the azobenzene
templates, template 1 (see Table 3). This indicates that the cis-1 isomer binds preferably to β-CD
whereas trans-1 binds more strongly to α-CD.54
Table 3: Physicochemical properties of azobenzenes 1–5a. Adapted from ref. (54)
For the other four templates irradiation led to a decrease in concentration of α-CD, but no ampli-
ﬁcation of β-CD. Beeren and co-workers suggested that this is either due to little or no interaction
between the cis-isomer and any of the CDs, or that a feasible favourable interaction between cis-
isomer and β-CD is surpassed by a strong binding between any remaining trans-isomer and α-CD.
The latter can occur due to the previously mentioned fact, that a small ratio of trans-isomer remains
even after irradiation with UV light.54
Figure 31: a) DCL of CDs formed by the reversible reaction of CGTase acting on α-CD. The cis- and trans-
isomers of the azobenzene template promote selective formation of speciﬁc CDs. b) HPLC chromatograms of
the DCLs without template and with template in the dark or upon irradiation with 365 nm UV light.54 Adapted
from ref. (54).
30
==PAGE:43==
The association constants of trans-1 and cis-1 binding to α-CD and β-CD were determined, where
the strongest interaction was found between trans-1 and α-CD as reported in Table 4. Beeren and co-
workers reported that trans-1 binds twice as strongly to α-CD than to β-CDs whereas the association
constant for cis-1 binding to β-CD is 15 times the magnitude of cis-1 binding to α-CD. This explains
why β-CD is ampliﬁed upon irradiation with UV light in the presence of azobenzene template 1.
Beeren et al. furthermore found that the rate of the background hydrolysis of CDs into glucose
monomers was increased upon irradiation with UV light. Beeren et al. have previously shown that
complexation of CDs hinders the hydrolysis.30 Therefore, they suggested that the faster hydrolysis is
a result of a weaker binding of both α-CD and β-CD to cis-1, which is formed upon UV irradiation,
compared to trans-1.54
Table 4: Association constants, Ka (M−1), for azobenzene template 1a. Adapted from ref. (54)
It was shown that the azobenzene-templated DCL acts under pseudo-thermodynamic control in a ki-
netically trapped system. Beeren and co-workers concluded, that the use of UV light can be utilised
to push the system further out of equilibrium to a higher energy dissipative state, which is also ki-
netically trapped. The switch between the two photostationary states of azobenzene controls which
kinetically trapped state is occupied by the system, and hence promote the modest selective formation
of either α-CD or β-CD.54
In a recent study by Yang et al. a photoresponsive hydrazone template was exploited in the same
enzyme-mediated DCL system with the aim of synthesising γ-CD in purely aqueous solution.59 The
hydrazone template was shown to change reversible between the E- and Z-isomer upon irradiation
with light at speciﬁc wavelengths, as shown in Figure 32a. The Z-isomer was shown to bind strongly
in a 1:2 stoichiometry (γ-CD:Z-hydrazone) and weakly to β-CD by isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) analysis and NMR titrations. The E-hydrazone template was shown to bind weakly to both β-
CD and γ-CD. This was utilised in the synthesis of γ-CD as the addition of the Z-hydrazone template
in a DCL of CDs showed an ampliﬁcation of γ-CD to ca. 60% (Figure 32b). As the enzymatic
reaction was stopped, free γ-CD could be obtained by irradiation with light at 410 nm to induce
Z-to-E isomerisation of the hydrazone template. Finally, the γ-CD was isolated using preperative
HPLC. Thereby, Yang et al. showed a new way of synthesising and isolating γ-CD from water via an
enzyme-mediated dynamic synthesis approach using light-control.59
31
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With E-hydrazone template 
With Z-hydrazone template 
No template added 
a 
b 
Figure 32: a) Photoswitching of the hydrazone template between the E- and Z-isomer upon light irradiation. b)
CD distribution percentage obtained from the enzyme-mediated DCLs of CDs. The distributions are shown for
left) no template added, middle) E-hydrazone template added, and right) Z-hydrazone template added. Adapted
from (59).
Through section 1.1−1.5 the background for this project has been established and it has been em-
phasised that dynamic combinatorial chemistry can be utilised in combinations with other ﬁelds such
as enzymology, cyclodextrin chemistry, and photoswitches. Furthermore, it has been revealed that
methods for studying the thermodynamics of binding interactions are important for understanding the
behaviour of supramolecular systems. An introduction to the thermodynamics of binding interactions
will be presented in the following section.
32
==PAGE:45==
1.6
Thermodynamics of binding interactions
To understand the behaviour and properties of molecules in mixtures, it is relevant to study the binding
interactions. A non-covalent binding interaction occurs when the binding interaction has a negative
Gibbs-free energy. The Gibbs-free energy is the sum of the enthalpy and the entropic term as deﬁned
in Equation 1.60
∆G◦= ∆H◦−T ·∆S◦
(1)
The change in enthalpy is deﬁned as the amount of heat that passes either in or out of a system,
whereas entropy is the level of disorder in the system. Changes in enthalpy, entropy, and temperature
can determine whether a binding interaction will occur or not. Therefore, it is important to look into
the enthalpic and entropic aspects of dynamic reversible interactions. A binding event is enthalpi-
cally favourable for ∆H◦< 0, and entropically favourable for ∆S◦> 0. Even though a negative ∆G◦
is required for a binding interaction to occur, the terms ∆H◦and T · ∆S◦in Equation 1 do not both
have to contribute to a negative ∆G◦. This means that binding can be either enthapically driven, en-
tropically driven, or both. Looking at the enthalpy term, the binding interaction will be enthalpically
favourable if the overall strength of non-covalent interactions is increased. Breaking a bond requires
a positive ∆H◦< 0, meaning that energy must be added to the system and vice versa. The solvent
is an important aspect for both enthalpy and entropy since the solvent interacts with all components
of the system. With respect to enthalpy, the strengths of the different solvent interactions have an
inﬂuence on the binding event. Desolvation of both the host and guest must happen before the host-
guest complex can be formed. Desolvation is energy consuming, but energy might be regained from
solvation of the host-guest complex and bond formation between guest and host. In terms of entropy,
a binding event is entropically favourable when the disorder of the system is increased. Disorder can
be increased by changes in the degrees of translational, rotational, and/or vibrational freedom.61 In
general, formation of a host-guest complex reduces the disorder for those species since two species
are combined into one complex. However, the solvent plays a very large role in the entropy deter-
minations. Overall, if the solvent becomes more disordered it can be entropically favourable to form
host-guest complexes.60
Another solvent effect worth mentioning is the hydrophobic effect, as described in section 1.4 for
CDs. The effect is often entropically driven. The hydrophobic effect is seen when water molecules
are highly ordered at a hydrophobic surface. The highly structured water molecules are low in entropy
since they have low degrees of freedom. When a hydrophobic molecule (i.e. a guest) binds to the
hydrophobic surface, the ordered water molecules are released into the bulk solvent and the disorder
is increased signiﬁcantly. This effect is very important for binding interactions in water.60
Based on all the above mentioned effects on the thermodynamics of a binding interaction, it can be
difﬁcult to balance these in order to increase the binding afﬁnity between guest and host. This is due
33
==PAGE:46==
to enthalpy-entropy compensation which is an aspect that describes the difﬁculty of improving either
the enthalpy or entropy without worsening the other. It is often seen that if one changes, ∆G◦stays
close to the same. For example, enthalpy-entropy compensation is observed when the afﬁnity of a
binding is strengthened, then simultaneously it entails a decrease in the degrees of freedom around
that bond, since it is in a more locked and rigid conformation. This means that the enthalpy is in-
creased while the entropy is also increased leading to a similar Gibbs-free energy62
Another deﬁnition of the Gibbs-free energy than the stated deﬁnition in Equation 1, is presented
in Equation 2, where Ka is the association constant, and R is the gas constant.62
∆G◦= −RT ·ln(Ka)
(2)
Equation 2 reﬂects that the strength of a reversible dynamic binding between a host, H, and a guest,
G, is deﬁned on the basis of the association constant Ka, which is deﬁned in Equation 3.
Ka = kon
ko f f
(3)
where kon and kof f are the rate constants of the reversible binding and unbinding of one host molecule
to one guest molecule, referred to as a 1:1 binding system, as seen in Equation 4.62
H +G
kon
−−−⇀
↽−−−
koff
HG
(4)
The association constant can also be deﬁned in terms of the free concentrations in solution of the host,
guest, and host-guest-complex at equilibrium (Equation 5).62
Ka =
[HG]
[H]·[G]
(5)
A large Ka value reﬂects a strong binding interaction. The dissociation constant, Kd of a binding
interaction is given as the reciprocal value of Ka and is therefore small for a strong binding. The
magnitude of Kd for host-guest binding interaction in biological systems, e.g. enzyme-inhibitor or
antibody-biomolecule interactions, is in the nanomolar (nM) to micromolar (µM) range. For synthetic
systems typical Kd values are in the millimolar (mM) range which reﬂect that the superior afﬁnities in
Nature are hard to resemble in the laboratory.62
A general equation for [HG] in terms of Ka, [H]0, and [G]0 can be derived from Equation 5 by initially
substituting with the initial concentrations of host and guest, [H]0 = [H]+[HG] and [G]0 = [G]+[HG],
as given in Equation 6.
34
==PAGE:47==
Ka =
[HG]
([H]0 −[HG])·([G]0 −[HG]) =
[HG]
[H]0 ·[G]0 −[H]0 ·[HG]−[G]0 ·[HG]−[HG]2
(6)
An equation with the quadrant of [HG] is obtained. By isolating [HG]2 an equation of second order
in [HG] is obtained as given in Equation 7.
[HG]2 −
 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0

·[HG]+[H]0 ·[G]0 = 0
(7)
The quadratic equation can be solved to derive a general expression for [HG] in terms of Ka, [H]0,
and [G]0 as presented in Equation 8.
[HG] = 1
2


 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0

−
s 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0
2
−4·[H]0 ·[G]0


(8)
The reversible binding between a host and a guest depends on their concentrations when they are
combined. The degree of complexation, given in Equation 9, deﬁnes the fraction of host in solution
that has a guest molecule bound to it, which equals the molar fraction, X, of host-guest complex. The
degree of complexation enables the calculation of how much of the guest that will be bound to the
host at a given concentration.62
Degree of complexation = XHG = [HG]
[H]0
(9)
With respect to Equations 5 and 8 the degree of complexation depends on the concentrations of both
host and guest. For example, the lower concentration of host and guest the lower degree of complex-
ation. Equation 5 implies that a higher Ka gives a higher concentration of complex formed, which
leads to a higher degree of complexation. The relationship between Ka and ∆G◦, given in Equation 2,
further entails that a small change in ∆G◦leads to a big change in the degree of complexation.62
1.6.1
Experimental determination of Ka
The association constant can be determined experimentally. This is usually done by titration experi-
ments to obtain a so-called binding isotherm.
The binding isotherm
The binding isotherm is a curve of the theoretical change in concentration of complex as a function
of added concentration of guest under a ﬁxed concentration of host, [H]0, and constant temperature.62
For a 1:1 binding system, where one host molecule binds to one guest molecule to form a host-
35
==PAGE:48==
gust complex, the binding isotherm curvature shows a hyperbolic shape as depicted in Figure 33.
The linear-like correlation in the beginning indicates that initial addition of guest leads to complex
formation. As the concentration of added guest approaches [H]0 and is further increased the curvature
ﬂattens out as the host becomes saturated with guest. The stoichiometric ratio between [H]0 and [G]0
is marked as the intersection between the two grey dotted lines in Figure 33. The curvatures for
different Ka values clearly indicate that the binding isotherm depends on the strength of the binding.
It is seen that for lower association constants the curve becomes quite ﬂat which means that it requires
more and more guest to saturate the host. The binding isotherm is also dependent upon [H]0 and
similar ﬂat curvatures are seen for small [H]0 values compared to Ka. For obtaining optimal binding
isotherm curvatures it is good practice to have [H]0 near Kd.62
Figure 33: Binding isotherm curvatures for different Ka values (M−1) for a system with [H]0 = 0.001 M. The
intercept between the grey dotted lines indicates stoichiometry between [H]0 and [G]0.62
In order to plot an observed binding isotherm the concentration of host-guest complex must be de-
termined. This can be done by titration experiments where [HG] is determined after each addition of
guest to a ﬁxed concentration of host. In a titration experiment different detection methods can be
applied, where UV-vis and NMR spectroscopy are the most common techniques.63 These methods
measure a physical property of the solution that is proportional to [HG]. For UV-vis spectroscopy the
change in absorbance, ∆A, is measured upon formation of host-guest complex and for NMR spec-
troscopy the change in chemical shifts, ∆δ, is measured.
NMR titration
In an NMR titration experiment NMR spectra are acquired after each addition of guest. For host-guest
systems with slow kon and kof f rates relative to the NMR chemical shift timescale, a new, separate
set of signals appear in the NMR spectrum as the host-guest complex is formed.64 In such cases [H],
[G], and [HG] can be determined by integrating the peaks. However, in most cases the exchange and
36
==PAGE:49==
hence the kon and kof f rates are faster than the NMR time scale.62 This implies that separate signals
cannot be seen for the host-guest complex. Instead, the chemical shift of the observed signal, δobs, is
an average of the chemical shifts of host and host-guest-complex. As a result, δobs will be moving as
[HG] increases as Figure 34a illustrates. The corresponding observed binding isotherm depicted in
Figure 34b is obtained by plotting the change in chemical shift, ∆δ = δobs −δH, against [G]0.
Figure 34: a) Partial 1H NMR spectra showing the change in chemical shift with increasing concentrations of
guest. b) The resulting best ﬁt for the observed binding isotherm. Adapted from (30).
The observed signal is a weighted average of the chemical shifts of the host, δH, and the host-guest
complex, δHG. By weighting with the mole fractions of host and host-guest complex, Equation 10
arise.62
δobs = [H]
[H]0
·δH + [HG]
[H]0
·δHG = XH ·δH +XHG ·δHG
(10)
Non-linear curve-ﬁtting can be applied to the observed binding isotherm to determine Ka and the
maximum change in chemical shift, ∆δmax = δHG−δH. It requires an equation that relates ∆δ to [H]0,
[G]0, and Ka. Since XHG+XH = 1, Equation 10 is rewritten to Equation 11. By further rearrangements
and application of Equation 9 a formula for change in chemical shift is obtained in Equation 12.
δobs = (1−XHG)·δH +XHG ·δHG = δH +XHG ·(δHG −δH)
(11)
∆δ = δobs −δH = ∆δmax
[H]0
·[HG]
(12)
By substituting with Equation 8 non-linear curve-ﬁtting can be used to determine Ka and ∆δmax from
the observed binding isotherm as given in Equation 13.
37
==PAGE:50==
∆δ = ∆δmax
2[H]0
· 1
2


 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0

−
s 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0
2
−4·[H]0 ·[G]0


(13)
UV-vis titration
UV-vis titration experiments are performed in the same way as NMR titrations where spectra are mea-
sured for increasing guest concentration using a ﬁxed host concentration. The UV-vis method works
best for cases where the guest does not have any absorption bands interfering with those of the host
molecule or host-guest complex. Moreover, the molar extinction coefﬁcient of host-guest complex
must be different to the host to observe a signiﬁcant change in absorbance upon complexation. The
change in absorbance (∆A) is proportional to host-gust concentration as given in Equation 14 where
ε∆HG is the difference in the molar extinction coefﬁcients between the host-guest complex and the
free host.63,65
∆A = (εHG −εH)·[HG] = ε∆HG ·[HG]
(14)
As for the NMR titration [HG] is substituted with Equation 8 to obtain ∆A expressed in terms of Ka,
[H]0, and [G]0 as shown in Equation 15.
∆A = ε∆HG · 1
2


 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0

−
s 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0
2
−4·[H]0 ·[G]0


(15)
By non-linear curve-ﬁtting of the equation to a binding isotherm of ∆A against the concentration of
guest, the association constant Ka is obtained.
1.6.2
Experimental determination of ∆H◦and ∆S◦
The thermodynamic parameters ∆H◦and ∆S◦can be determined experimentally by analysis of the
Van’t Hoff relation, given in Equation 16, which is derived from Equations 1 and 2.
ln(Ka) = ∆S◦
R −∆H◦
RT
(16)
The analysis is dependent on measurements of Ka at different temperatures which can be obtained
from NMR titration experiments as described. From a Van’t Hoff plot (ln(Ka) versus 1/T) the ther-
modynamic parameters can be determined from the intercept and slope as depicted in Figure 35.62
For a positive slope, the reaction is exothermic, ∆H◦< 0, and for a negative slope, the reaction is
endothermic, ∆H◦> 0. For a positive y-intercept ∆S◦> 0 and for a negative intercept ∆S◦< 0. For
∆H◦> 0 and ∆S◦> 0 the reaction is said to be entropically driven and for ∆H◦< 0 and ∆S◦< 0 the
reaction is enthalpically driven.66
38
==PAGE:51==
Figure 35: Van’t Hoff plot for an endothermic reaction.
Isothermal titration calorimetry is another method to measure thermodynamic parameters. The tech-
nique determines Ka and ∆H◦in one analysis and by use of Equations 1 and 2, the parameters ∆S◦
and ∆G◦can be determined. ITC measures the heat change upon association of a host and a guest. A
solution of guest is added to a solution of host and the temperature change is compared to a reference
experiment where the guest solution is added to a blank solution.62 The temperature is measured in
terms of the power required for the host solution to maintain the same temperature as a reference cell
upon addition of guest. Less power is needed for an exothermic reaction and more power is required
for an endothermic reaction.66 The power is converted to the heat generated or absorbed for each
addition of guest simply by integrating the power over time. The quantity of heat required is plotted
against [G]0/[H]0 to produce a binding titration as seen in Figure 36. The overall heat of interaction
corresponds to ∆H◦.
Figure 36: Left) Raw data of power applied for each addition of guest solution. Right) Integrated data repre-
senting successive heat change against the molar ratio [G]0/[H]0.66 Adapted from (67).
An expression for the total heat change, Q, is deﬁned in Equation 17, where V is the volume of the
reaction vessel.67
Q = V ·∆H◦·[HG]
(17)
39
==PAGE:52==
By substituting with Equation 8 to express [HG] in terms of Ka, [H]0, and [G]0, non-linear curve-
ﬁtting of the heat versus [G]0/[H]0 can be applied to determine Ka and ∆H◦as given in Equation
18.
Q = V ·∆H◦· 1
2


 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0

−
s 1
Ka
+[H]0 +[G]0
2
−4·[H]0 ·[G]0


(18)
To conclude, the thermodynamics of binding interactions have been described including experimental
techniques to study binding interactions. With the presented methods the background for this project
has been established, and the project scope will be presented in the following section.
40
==PAGE:53==
2
Project scope
The aim of this project is to investigate the light-controlled synthesis of natural cyclodextrins using
enzyme-mediated dynamic combinatorial chemistry.
2.1
Short description of previous work
As presented in the introduction simple azobenzene templates can be utilised in light-controlled
enzyme-mediated DCLs to perform modest changes in library distribution between α- and β-CDs.54
Furthermore, the cis/trans-isomers of unsubstituted, methoxy-substituted, and isopropoxy-substituted
azobenzenes have shown different afﬁnities in the binding of the natural cyclodextrins including γ-
CD.52,53
Previous members of the group have investigated the syntheses of unsubstituted, methoxy-substituted,
and isopropoxy-substituted azobenzene templates with a pyridinium solubilising group as presented
by Wu et al.52,53 The unsubstituted and methoxy-substituted azobenzene templates were successfully
synthesised with the purpose of utilising the templates in light-controlled enzymatic DCLs of CDs.
However, the templates showed poor solubility in phosphate buffered water, and therefore a compre-
hensive study of the azobenzene-based templates in DCLs of CDs could not be performed.
2.2
Aim of this project
The speciﬁc aim of this project is to synthesise a set of unsubstituted (1, Azo), methoxy-substituted
(2, mAzo), and isopropoxy-substituted (3, ipAzo) azobenzene templates. The templates will in-
clude a solubilising group as presented in Figure 37. The solubilising group was designed with four
carboxylic acids to give high solubility in H2O at neutral pH. The solubilising group is therefore
expected to increase the solubility of the azobenzene moieties compared to the previous pyridinium-
functionalised templates. The azobenzene moiety and the solubilising group are linked by an alkyl
chain. An alkyl chain length of approximately six carbon atoms is considered appropriate in order to
maximise the solubility of the template as well as avoiding the solubilising group to interfere with the
binding interactions of the azobenzene moieties.
The ratio between the cis- and trans-isomers of the azobenzene templates can be changed by irradi-
ating with light at speciﬁc wavelengths. Therefore, these templates are predicted to be a good choice
towards a more selective light-controlled synthesis of natural cyclodextrins using enzymatic DCC.
The photoswitching properties of the templates will be investigated using UV-vis spectroscopy and
NMR spectroscopy. Furthermore, binding studies using UV titrations and NMR titrations will be used
to study the binding afﬁnities towards α-, β-, and γ-CD. Finally, the templates’ effect on enzyme-
mediated DCLs of CDs will be investigated using HPLC analysis to determine the CD distribution.
41
==PAGE:54==
The inﬂuence of the templates will be examined under irradiation with light at different wavelengths
or conditions that favour the cis or trans isomer, respectively.
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
N
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
1, Azo
2, mAzo
3, ipAzo
Figure 37: Target templates.
42
==PAGE:55==
3
Results and discussion
In this section the synthetic and analytical experiments of the project will be discussed. First, the
syntheses towards the target templates Azo, mAzo, and ipAzo will be described and discussed. A
characterisation of the templates will follow, including an investigation of the photoswitching prop-
erties. Hereafter, the binding afﬁnities of the templates for the natural cyclodextrins are evaluated.
Finally, the examination of the templates’ effect in enzyme-mediated DCLs of CDs will be discussed.
3.1
Syntheses of templates
3.1.1
Synthetic pathway towards template Azo (1)
The template Azo (1) was synthesised from 4-(phenyldiazenyl)aniline (4) in a three-step reaction
pathway as depicted in Scheme 1. Azobenzene 4 was coupled to a bromo-functionalised alkyl chain
linker by a peptide bond. The protected solubilising group, phenol 6, was then installed by an alky-
lation reaction. The template was obtained by a subsequent hydrolysis of the esters to carboxylic
acids.
N N
H
N
O
Br
N N
NH2
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
OH
O
OH
O
i
1. ii,                                                                          , 79%
2. iii, 99%
N
N
OH
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
4
5
6
1, Azo
60%
Scheme 1: Synthetic pathway towards template Azo (1). i) 6-Bromohexanoic acid, EDC, DMAP, CH2Cl2. ii)
K2CO3, KI, DMF, 60 °C. iii) NaOH, THF, MeOH.
3.1.1.1
Synthesis of compound 5
In the ﬁrst step, azobenzene 4 and 6-bromohexanoic acid were reacted in a peptide coupling by use
of the coupling reagent 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) and
N,N-dimethylpyridin-4-amine (DMAP) as a catalyst.52 The reaction scheme is shown in Scheme 2.
43
==PAGE:56==
N N
NH2
HO
O
Br
H
N
+
EDC, DMAP
O
Br
CH2Cl2, 60%
4
5
N
N
Scheme 2: Reaction scheme of compound 5.
EDC is a commonly used coupling reagent for peptide couplings in solution. The coupling reagent
activates the carboxylic acid by formation of a highly reactive O-acylisourea species. DMAP acts as
a nucleophilic catalyst thus facilitating the attack of the nucleophilic aniline.68 The proposed reaction
mechanism for formation of the amide bond and a urea byproduct is seen in Figure 38.
N
H
N
C
N
O
O
Br
H
N
N
O
O
Br
O
O
Br
N
N
H
C
N
N
H
N
O
O
Br
C
N
N
H
N
Cl
H
Cl
Cl
O-acylisourea species
N
N
O
N
Br
H
N
N
H
N
H
O
Cl
N
N N
H2N
N N
H
N
O
Br
5
N
N
+
4
+
H
+
- H
Figure 38: Proposed mechanism for peptide coupling using EDC and DMAP.
Due to the high reactivity of the O-acylisourea this compound is prone to undergo intramolecular
reactions such as acyl migration to form an N-acylurea. The rearrangement is shown in Figure 39.
The N-acylurea species is an undesired side product because it is unreactive and thus the reaction
44
==PAGE:57==
cannot proceed any further.69 LCMS analysis of the reaction mixture did not show any formation of
the undesired N-acylurea product. The peptide coupling reaction proceeded slowly. After four days
the reaction was worked up and puriﬁed resulting in a 60% yield. Considering that no N-acylurea
side product was observed a higher yield was expected.
O
O
Br
C
N
N
N
H
O
N
Br
C N
H
O
N
Figure 39: Proposed mechanism for rearrangement from O-acylisourea to N-acylurea.
LCMS analysis of the reaction mixture revealed that the starting material, azobenzene 4, was still
present after four days. Since aniline is less reactive compared to a primary aliphatic amine, it could
have been advantageous to test if heating the reaction would have increased the yield. Other solvents
could also have been investigated for the peptide coupling, for example DMF which generally results
in good coupling efﬁciencies.70 Having produced plenty of the desired compound in high purity, no
optimisation study was performed for this particular step. The next synthetic step towards template
Azo was to react compound 5 with the ester-protected solubilising group, phenol 6.
3.1.1.2
Synthesis of ester-protected solubilising group, phenol 6
Phenol 6 was synthesised starting from diethyl-3-oxoglutarate (7) as presented in Scheme 3.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
NH2
1. NH4OAc, EtOH
2. NaBH3CN, HCl, 
EtOH/EtoAc, 35%
OH
HN
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
EDC, Oxyma
DMF, 65%
OH
HO
O
OH
O
7
6
8
9
Scheme 3: Synthetic pathway towards phenol 6.
45
==PAGE:58==
Synthesis of amine 8 by reductive amination
The initial step was a reductive amination of ketone 7, performed in two steps, to yield amine 8 as
shown in Scheme 4.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
NH2
1. NH4OAc, EtOH
2. NaBH3CN, HCl, 
EtOH/EtoAc, 35%
7
8
Scheme 4: Reaction scheme of amine 8.
Ketone 7 was treated with excess ammonium acetate to form the resulting imine. NaBH3CN and
HCl in EtOH/EtOAc (∼1 M) were added subsequently to reduce the imine to obtain amine 8, in
a 35% yield.71 The proposed mechanism for the two-step reaction is shown in Figure 40. As the
mechanism indicates the imine is formed through reversible reactions. A hemiaminal is formed by a
nucleophilic attack of ammonia. The reaction proceeds by loss of water to form an iminium ion.72 To
push the equilibrium towards imine formation the reaction was carried out in absolute ethanol with 3
Å molecular sieves to remove water formed during the reaction.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
NH2
NH3OAc
H
O
O
O
O
O
H
NH3
O
O
O
O
O
H
NH3
± H
O
O
O
O
O
H
NH2
H
- H2O
O
O
NH2
O
O
BH2
H
O
O
NH
O
O
NC
Na
± H
8
Figure 40: Proposed mechanism for formation of amine 8.
46
==PAGE:59==
The imine was formed over 22 hours as conﬁrmed using LCMS. Imine formation can not be detected
directly with LCMS because the formed imine is easily hydrolysed within the LCMS eluent system.
Therefore, the imine formation was conﬁrmed by making a small scale reaction with the reducing
agent to test whether the desired product was formed. By comparing with an LCMS chromatogram
of ketone 7 it was easily conﬁrmed that the amine was forming and thus the desired imine had been
formed in the ﬁrst step of the reaction.
The reductive amination was performed in two steps in order to avoid formation of a dimeric species
as shown in Figure 41. The dimeric species can be formed if the product (amine 8) reacts in a
second reductive amination. Therefore, when the reducing agent is added in the second step of the
reaction, after formation of the desired imine, there will be less ketone (7) available to react in a
second reductive amination.
O
O
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
Figure 41: Structure of dimeric species.
The reaction went to completion 1.5 hour after addition of NaBH3CN as conﬁrmed using LCMS.
The LCMS chromatogram indicated that only small amounts of the dimer was formed during the
reactiona. The reaction work-up was done by extracting the product from basic water (pH ∼14). This
extraction proved to be difﬁcult due to the polar nature of amine 8 and the extraction was optimised
in three test extractions as presented in Table 5.
Table 5: Optimisation of extractions of amine 8.
Test
Conditions
Outcome
Salt
Solvent
1
-
CH2Cl2 × 3
No extraction
2
K2CO3
CH2Cl2 × 3,
then EtOAc × 2
Partial extraction
3
K2CO3
EtOAc × 3,
then CH2Cl2 × 3
Improved extraction
The ﬁrst test extraction was performed with CH2Cl2 as reported in a similar protocol by York et al.,71
however this method was not successful. Therefore, K2CO3 was added to increase the polarity of the
aqueous phase in order to get a better separation of the phases and to push the amine out of the aqueous
a
Assuming the product and dimer ionises in the MS in a similar and thus comparable way.
47
==PAGE:60==
phase.73 Test extraction two and three showed that extracting with EtOAc was superior to extracting
with CH2Cl2. The ﬁnal extraction method was similar to attempt three however the aqueous phase
was extracted ﬁve times with EtOAc followed by two times with CH2Cl2 with addition of K2CO3. It
was not possible to extract all of the product into organic solvent. The product was puriﬁed with ﬂash
column chromatography to separate the product from the dimeric species to give a pure product in an
adequate yield of 35%.
Synthesis of phenol 6
The third step in the synthesis of phenol 6 was a double peptide coupling reaction between amine 8
and 5-hydroxyphthalic acid (9) using EDC and ethyl cyano(hydroxyimino)acetate (oxyma) in DMF
to yield compound 6 as a white solid in a 65% yield as shown in Figure 42. The reaction was followed
using LCMS and TLC and after 24 hours the mono-coupled product was still present. The reaction
was worked up since the reaction did not seem to proceed any further. However, it could have been
tested whether heating the reaction could have pushed the reaction towards completion to give a better
yield.
O
O
O
O
NH2
OH
HN
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
EDC, Oxyma
DMF, 65%
OH
HO
O
OH
O
8
6
9
Figure 42: Reaction scheme towards compound 6.
The proposed mechanism is very similar to the mechanism proposed for the peptide coupling pre-
sented for the synthesis of compound 5 in Figure 38. The main difference is that oxyma was used as
an additive that reacts with the O-acylisourea species in order to reduce the reactivity. This inhibits un-
desired rearrangement reaction to form N-acylurea.70 The reaction between the O-acylisourea species
and oxyma yields an activated ester which facilitates the attack of the nucleophilic amine to yield phe-
nol 6 in a good yield.
3.1.1.3
Synthesis of compound 10 by an alkylation reaction
The azobenzene compound 5 was coupled to phenol 6 by an alkylation reaction. The reaction was
performed in DMF at 60 °C with excess K2CO3 and catalytic amount of KI as shown in Scheme 5.
48
==PAGE:61==
H
N
O
Br
K2CO3, KI
DMF, 60 oC, 79%
OH
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
N
N
5
6
10
Scheme 5: Reaction scheme for compound 10.
The reaction is a Williamson ether synthesis following an SN2 nucleophilic substitution mechanism.
The base deprotonates the phenol group to the corresponding phenolate ion which is a better nucle-
ophile. KI was used as a catalyst because iodide is a better leaving group than bromide, since it is
a weaker base. Iodide acts as a nucleophile to form the alkyl iodide from the corresponding alkyl
bromide as illustrated in Figure 43. The nucleophilic phenolate ion then approaches the tetrahedral
carbon 180° away from the iodide leaving group to make a back side attack which leads to an inver-
sion of conﬁguration.74 In all SN2 reactions performed in this project the R2 group is either a proton
or identical to R1 and hence the tetrahedral carbon is not chiral. DMF was chosen as solvent since it
is a polar aprotic solvent which facilitates SN2 reactions. An aprotic solvent is poor at solvating the
phenolate anions which make them more nucleophilic.22
The alkylation reaction was followed by TLC analysis and LCMS chromatography which revealed
that the reaction was complete after reacting overnight. The reaction was worked up by a general
method, which was applied for all alkylation reactions performed in this project. The reaction mix-
ture was concentrated in vacuo, water was added, and the aqueous phase was extracted with an or-
ganic solvent. The resulting crude product was puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography to obtain
compound 10 in 79% yield.
49
==PAGE:62==
I
Ar
O H
C
O
O
O
+
Ar
O
- HCO3
-
Br
-
I
I
R1
R2
H
Br
R1
R2
H
Ar
O
I
R1
R2
H
O
R1
R2
H
Ar
Figure 43: Proposed SN2 mechanism for alkylation of phenols including the transition state.
3.1.1.4
Synthesis of template Azo (1)
To obtain the Azo template, the four esters in the solubilising group were hydrolysed in a saponiﬁ-
cation reaction. Compound 10 was dissolved in THF and MeOH, and treated with large excess of
aqueous NaOH (1 M) at room temperature, as depicted in Scheme 6.
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
OH
O
OH
O
THF, MeOH, 99%
NaOH
10
1, Azo
N
N
N
N
Scheme 6: Reaction scheme to obtain template Azo (1).
The hydroxide-ion-promoted hydrolysis proceeds via a nucleophilic acyl substitution pathway. The
mechanism is proposed in Figure 44.75 The nucleophilic hydroxide ion attacks the carbonyl carbon
of the ester forming a tetrahedral intermediate. The intermediate can either collapse into the original
50
==PAGE:63==
ester by loss of the hydroxide ion, or the corresponding carboxylic acid can form by eliminating an
ethoxy group. The ethoxy group is a stronger base than the carboxylic acid, and therefore, the ﬁnal
product is the carboxylate ion.74
C
O
O
R
+
HO
C O
R
O
OH
C
O
O
R
H
+
O
C
O
O
R
+
HO
Figure 44: Mechanism for hydroxide-ion-promoted ester hydrolysis.
After complete hydrolysis of all four esters, as indicated by LCMS chromatography, the reaction
mixture was concentrated in vacuo to remove MeOH and THF. Then, the pH was adjusted to ∼1 by
addition of aqueous HCl (6 M) which led to immediate precipitation of an orange solid. The product
was collected to obtain the Azo template in a 99% yield.
3.1.2
Synthetic pathway towards template mAzo (2)
The template mAzo was synthesised from 2,6-dimethoxy-aniline and 3,5-dimethoxy-aniline in a four
step reaction pathway as depicted in Scheme 7. The synthetic pathway for steps i−iii was inspired by
work reported by Wu et al.53
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH
O
Br
i, ii
NH2
O
O
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
5
iii
iv, 55%
v, quant.
11
2, mAzo
12
52%
25%
Scheme 7: Synthetic pathway towards mAzo. i) HCl, NaNO2, 0 °C ii) 3,5-dimethoxy-aniline, K2CO3, 0 °C. iii)
6-bromohexanoic acid, EDC, DMAP, CH2Cl2. iv) 6, K2CO3, KI, DMF, 60 °C. v) NaOH (aq.), THF
51
==PAGE:64==
3.1.2.1
Synthesis of azobenzene 11
The ﬁrst step was a diazonium coupling reaction, shown in Scheme 8, to establish the azo functionality
in azobenzene 11. An aqueous mixture of NaNO2 was added to a suspension of 2,6-dimethoxy-aniline
in HCl at 0 °C to yield the corresponding diazonium ion. The diazonium ion was added to an aqueous
suspension of 3,5-dimethoxy-aniline kept at 0 °C. The pH was adjusted to 8−9 to yield azobenzene
11 as a red solid in a 25% yield.
i) HCl, NaNO2, 0 °C
ii)
,  K2CO3, 0 °C, 25%
NH2
O
O
O
O
NH2
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
11
Scheme 8: Reaction scheme towards azobenzene 11.
The proposed mechanism is shown in Figure 45, where the ﬁrst step is to make a reactive electrophile
nitrogen species which can react with the nucleophilic aniline. By loss of water the very unstable
diazonium ion is made. The diazonium ion can then react through a coupling reaction with 3,5-
dimethoxy-aniline to form azobenzene 11. This step proceeds via electrophilic aromatic substitution
which is kinetically controlled.76 Both the amine and the methoxy are electron donating groups that
activate the aromatic ring. However, the reaction is under acidic conditions meaning that the aniline is
mainly protonated. A protonated aniline is electron withdrawing and will pull away electron density
via an inductive effect from its ortho position. This leaves the position between the two methoxy
groups as the most nucleophilic site.
The reaction was performed at approximately 0 °C to prevent the diazonium ion to act as a leaving
group which happens spontaneously through an SN1 reaction with nitrogen gas as the leaving group.
This is normally known from a nucleophilic aromatic substitution pathway where the formed planar
carbocation can react with a nuclophile e.g. water to form a phenol.77 The SN1 process is slowed down
at lower temperatures making it possible to control the reaction and enable the diazonium coupling
reaction. The phenol byproduct was not observed in the conducted LCMS chromatograms.
52
==PAGE:65==
NH2
O
O
N
O
O
H
N
O
OH
H
N
O
OH2
N O
O
  - H2O
N
O
O
N O
N
O
O N
O
- NO2
NH2
O
O
N
O
NH
O
O
N
O
H
±
N
O
O
N
OH
H
N
O
O
N
OH2
- H2O
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
H
- H
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
N
O
O
N O
+
- H
Diazonium
11
Figure 45: Proposed mechanism for formation of azobenzene 11.
Some problems were encountered during the reaction which can explain the relatively low yield. The
reaction was repeated three times in order to increase the yield and some practical aspects of the pro-
cedure were optimised. In general, the timing was crucial during this reaction, since the diazonium ion
is unstable. It is important to proceed with the second step of the reaction when the diazonium ion has
formed to minimise the nucleophilic aromatic substitution pathway. The formation of the diazonium
ion was followed by observing when the starting material dissolved. However, this was not straight
forward since the starting material is a very black solid and it is difﬁcult to differentiate between a
black solution and a black solid suspended in a black solution. Another problem encountered during
the reaction was the stickiness of the reagents and the product. The stickiness made the handling of
the reaction mixture difﬁcult in relation to stirring and during work-up. The yield was improved from
3% to 25% by optimising the timing of the reaction and by applying mechanical stirring.
By NMR analysis of azobenzene 11 it was shown that both the cis- and trans-isomers were present
in the product (Figure 46). However, only a small amount of the cis-isomer was present in the NMR
sample prepared in deuterated DMSO. The cis-isomer could be transformed into the thermodynami-
cally more stable trans-isomer by keeping the NMR sample in darkness and at 60 °C overnight. This
53
==PAGE:66==
is seen in the aromatic region of the NMR spectra, where the top spectrum contains small amounts of
the cis-isomer and in the bottom spectrum the cis-isomer has been converted to trans-isomer.
= cis 
= trans 
Figure 46: Aromatic region of the 1H NMR spectrum of azobenzene 11 in DMSO-d6: Top) As prepared. Bottom)
After keeping the sample in darkness and at 60 °C overnight.
3.1.2.2
Synthesis of compound 12
Azobenzene 11 was functionalised in a peptide coupling with a bromo-linker as shown in Scheme 9.
Azobenzene 11 and 6-bromohexanoic acid were dissolved in CH2Cl2 with addition of EDC, and
DMAP in catalytic amounts to obtain product 12 as a dark red solid in a 52% yield.
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
Br
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH
O
Br
+
DMAP, EDC
O
HO
CH2Cl2, 52%
11
12
Scheme 9: Reaction scheme for compound 12.
The reaction proceeds through a similar mechanism as proposed in the synthesis of compound 5, pre-
sented in Figure 38. The reaction was performed as a 30 hours reaction and proceeded as expected
without any problems. The product was puriﬁed and isolated as a mix between the cis- and trans-
isomer, with the trans-isomer as the main isomer, as conﬁrmed by NMR spectroscopy. As for com-
pound 11 the cis-isomer could be transformed into the thermodynamically more stable trans-isomer
by keeping the NMR sample in darkness and at 60 °C overnight.
54
==PAGE:67==
Synthesis of compound 13
Phenol 6 and compound 12 were reacted with excess K2CO3 and KI in an alkylation reaction to yield
compound 13 in a 55% yield as shown in Scheme 10. The reaction is an SN2 reaction performed at
60 °C with the same proposed mechanism as presented in the synthesis of compound 10 in Figure 43.
The reaction was worked up after 24 hours by concentrating in vacuo followed by extraction, basic
and acidic washes, and then puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography. The work-up proved to be
complicated since the compound is amphiphilic and therefore has a strong tendency to form emul-
sions. Different work-up and puriﬁcation methods were tested as presented in Table 6. Method one
shows the initial work-up and puriﬁcation method leading to extensive emulsiﬁcation and thus loss
of product. To avoid extraction, method two was tested, where the reaction mixture was concentrated
in vacuo and subsequently puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography. However, compound 6 and
product 13 co-eluted in the applied CH2Cl2 and MeOH eluent system, and the puriﬁcation was not
successful.
K2CO3, KI
DMF, 60 °C, 55%
OH
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH
O
Br
O
O
O
O
13
12
6
Scheme 10: Reaction scheme towards compound 13.
In a third method different solvent systems leading to a better separation were tested. Flash column
chromatography with acetonitrile and toluene proved to be able to get separation between compound
6 and product 13. In the ﬁnal method four, the work-up was improved by a complete removal of
DMF before extraction, minimising emulsiﬁcation during work-up and thus obtaining the product in
55
==PAGE:68==
a good purity and yield. This method is the preferred method because extraction and washing is an
easy way to remove excess reagents. The product was isolated in a 55% yield as a mixture of cis-and
trans-isomers as conﬁrmed using NMR spectroscopy.
Table 6: Optimisation of work-up and puriﬁcation method.
Method
Work-up
Puriﬁcation
Outcome
1
Concentrated in vacuo
Extraction and wash
Gradient ﬂash column chromatography
(CH2Cl2 : MeOH, 97 : 3
Extensive emulsiﬁcation during work-up
Pure product, but low yield
2
Concentrated in vacuo
Gradient ﬂash column chromatography
(CH2Cl2 : MeOH, 97 : 3)
Impure product
3
Concentrated in vacuo
Gradient ﬂash column chromatography
(CH2Cl2 : MeOH, 97 : 3),
then isocratic ﬂash column chromatography
(MeCN : toluene, 40 : 60)
Pure product, but extensive puriﬁcation
4
Concentrated in vacuo to dryness
Extraction and wash
Gradient ﬂash column chromatography
(CH2Cl2 : MeOH, 97 : 3)
Pure product
3.1.2.3
Synthesis of template mAzo (2)
To obtain the mAzo template, the esters were hydrolysed to the corresponding carboxylic acids as
shown in reaction Scheme 11. Compound 13 was treated with excess aqueous NaOH (1 M) in THF
and the product was obtained in a quantitative yield after 4 hours at room temperature. The product
was isolated as a red solid by precipitation in aqueous HCl (6 M). The reaction mechanism is the
same as the one proposed in the synthesis of compound 1 in Figure 44.
In the ﬁrst attempts of performing the hydrolysis reaction, cleavage of the amide group next to the
azobenzene was observed during the reaction, as conﬁrmed by LCMS analysis. Signiﬁcant amide
cleavage was observed for larger excess of aqueous 1 M NaOH and if the reaction was left stir-
ring after reaction completion. Normally, amide bonds are considered stable under the applied reac-
tion conditions at room temperature. Heat is usually required to hydrolyse amide bonds under basic
conditions.74 The amide group is placed in the meta position to the methoxy groups on the aromatic
ring. The electron density at the nitrogen atom of the amide bond will be smaller due to an induc-
tive effect making the lone-pair less available towards resonance stabilisation which can explain why
the amide bond in compound 13 is prone towards hydrolysis. In the presence of the amide cleavage
products, a re-precipitation was necessary to remove the small amount of the cleavage products. The
re-precipitation was performed from DMF into a cold mixture of aqueous HCl(1 M)/THF (9 : 1).
This proved to be more efﬁcient in removing the side product than pure aqueous HCl (1 M) since
azobenzene 11 proved to be soluble in THF. DMF was chosen as the solvent for re-precipitation since
the mAzo template (2) reacts spontaneously with alcohols to form esters and all other common polar
solvents failed to dissolve the template.
56
==PAGE:69==
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
NaOH
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
THF, quant.
13
2, mAzo
Scheme 11: Reaction scheme towards template mAzo (2).
57
==PAGE:70==
3.1.3
Synthetic pathway towards template ipAzo (3)
The ipAzo template was synthesised in a pathway as presented in Figure 47, starting from benzene-
1,3,5-triol (14) and 2-nitro-1,3-benzenediol (16), with inspiration from procedures reported by Wu
and co-workers for steps i−iv.52
NO2
OH
OH
NO2
O
O
NH2
O
O
N
O
O
N
O
O
OH
ii
iii
iv
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
HO
OH
i
15, v, 55%
14
15
16
17
18
19
OH
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
6
19, vii, 46%
3, ipAzo
O
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Br
vi
20
18%
76%
75%
69%
viii, 97%
Figure 47: Synthetic pathway for template ipAzo. i) 2-iodopropane, K2CO3, DMF, 50 °C. ii) 2-iodopropane,
K2CO3, DMF, 90 °C. iii) SnCl2, HCl, EtOH, reﬂux.
iv) NaNO2, HCl, 0 °C. v) NaOH, 0 °C. vi) 1,6-
dibromohexane, K2CO3, 60 °C, DMF. vii) NaH, DMF. viii) NaOH, THF.
58
==PAGE:71==
3.1.3.1
Synthesis of phenol 15
In order to synthesise phenol 15 different reaction conditions were tested. For all reactions, benzene-
1,3,5-triol (14) was treated with K2CO3 and reacted with an isopropane halide as presented in Scheme 12.
OH
O
O
OH
HO
OH
X
+
K2CO3
DMF
14
15
Scheme 12: General reaction scheme for phenol 15. The reaction conditions tested are listed in Table 7.
The reaction is an SN2 reaction where two phenol groups are alkylated with isopropane halides. The
mechanism is similar to the alkylation of compound 5 as shown in Figure 43. The reaction is not
selective in order to alkylate only two out of the three phenol groups in compound 14 which results
in low yields.52,78 Different synthetic strategies were considered. Protecting one phenol group prior
to alkylation of the two remaining phenol groups has been reported. The overall yield was slightly
increased compared to direct di-alkylation.79 It was decided to directly alkylate compound 14 in order
to limit the number of synthetic steps. Several reaction conditions were tested to push the reaction
towards the di-alkylated product 15.
Starting from a protocol reported by Taylor et al. compound 14 was treated with K2CO3 (5 eq.), KI (5
eq.), and 2-bromopropane (5 eq.) in DMF.78 The temperature dependence of the reaction was tested
by varying the applied temperature from 50 to 90 °C as presented in Table 7.
Table 7: Optimisation of conditions for synthesising compound 15. DMF was used as solvent in all attempts.
#
Reagents
Temp.
Outcome
1
2-bromopropane (5 eq.), K2CO3 (5 eq.), KI (5 eq.)
50 °C
Product and side products
2
2-bromopropane (5 eq.), K2CO3 (5 eq.), KI (5 eq.)
70 °C
Product and more side products
3
2-bromopropane (5 eq.), K2CO3 (5 eq.), KI (5 eq.)
90 °C
Product and more side products
4
2-iodopropane (5 eq.), K2CO3 (5 eq.)
50 °C
Product and side products
Faster, 18% yield
The reactions were followed using TLC and LCMS. LCMS data from reactions 1 to 3 after 40 hours
are presented in Figure 48. UV chromatograms were used to estimate the ratios between the deter-
mined products. Mass-to-charge ratios corresponding to a mono-alkylated intermediate, the desired
di-alkylated product 15, a tri-alkylated product, and another higher-mass side product with [M+H]+
= 339 m/z were found in signiﬁcant amounts for reactions 1 to 3. This indicates that alkylation of one
phenol group activates O-alkylation of the other phenol groups. The Hammett substituent constant,
σm, may explain this trend. A hydroxyl group has an electron withdrawing effect on the meta position
with σm = 0.12, whereas alkoxy groups have a less electron withdrawing meta-effect e.g. σm(ethoxy)
59
==PAGE:72==
= 0.015. This means that for each O-alkylation the corresponding phenoxides of the remaining phenol
groups become better nucleophiles.80
Increasing the temperature seems to push the reaction towards more alkylated products which is
in agreement with the fact that applying more energy to the system speeds up the reaction. With
increasing temperature, other side products than the ones already mentioned are formed as seen in
the UV chromatograms in Figure 48 e.g. at retention times 1.4 and 2 minutes (90 °C). Overall,
a temperature of 50 °C was considered most suitable in order to minimise the formation of side
products.
Time
50°C
70°C
90°C
AU
AU
AU
MS ES+
MS ES+
MS ES+
MS ES+
Figure 48: UV chromatograms for reactions 1 to 3 after 40 hours from LCMS analysis. For selected peaks,
the corresponding extracted ion chromatograms are shown together with the proposed molecules. The elution
times for the chromatogram at 50 °C are different from those at 70 °C and 90 °C due to instrument deviations.
Reaction 1 was worked up by diluting the reaction mixture with water and extracting with ethyl ac-
etate. The crude mixture of products was separated by ﬂash column chromatography leading to the
collection of three different products according to TLC analysis. The products were further inves-
tigated by 1H NMR spectroscopy. Two products were characterised as the mono-alkylated product
and the desired product 15, respectively. The third product was not characterised, however LCMS
60
==PAGE:73==
analysis revealed a mass-to-charge value of, among others, [M+H]+ = 339 m/z. The NMR spectrum
of the characterised side product is included in Appendix 7.1.0.13.
To increase the ease of the reaction, 2-iodopropane was used directly in stead of 2-bromopropane and
KI catalyst as given in entry 4 in Table 7. After 5 hours under these reaction conditions LCMS chro-
matography revealed an UV chromatogram similar to attempt 1 at 50 °C in Figure 48. The reaction
was worked up after 5 hours and puriﬁed to obtain compound 15 in an 18% yield. To synthesise more
product the reaction in entry 4 was repeated with a reaction time of 23 hours. When the reaction
time was lengthened to 23 hours, compound 15 was obtained in a 17% yield. This indicates that
the di-alkylated product does not accumulate and the achievable ratio of product compared to side
products do not change with the different reaction times tested. This is consistent with the UV inves-
tigations shown in Figure 48. To avoid side products and increase the ease of the reaction attempt 4
was reported as the ﬁnal protocol to synthesise compound 15.
3.1.3.2
Synthesis of nitrobenzene 17
2-Nitro-1,3-benzenediol (16) was reacted with 2-iodopropane in an alkylation reaction to obtain ni-
trobenzene 17 as illustrated in Scheme 13.
HO
NO2
OH
I
NO2
O
O
DMF, 90 oC, 76%
+
K2CO3
16
17
Scheme 13: Reaction scheme for nitrobenzene 17.
Compound 16 was treated with excess K2CO3 in DMF and reacted with 2-iodopropane at 90 °C for
17 hours to obtain nitrobenzene 17. The phenol groups are alkylated in an SN2 mechanism similar
to previously proposed in Figure 43 for the synthesis of compound 10. In this reaction the secondary
alkyl halide leads to a more crowded transition state which increases the energy of the transition state.
The reaction was carried out at 90 °C to induce the progress of the reaction by adding more energy to
the system. Nitrobenzene 17 was obtained in a 76% yield in an overnight reaction.
3.1.3.3
Synthesis of aniline 18 by reduction of nitrobenzene 17
Nitrobenzene 17 was reduced to aniline 18 as depicted in Scheme 14. To improve the yield and to
speed up the reaction, different reaction conditions were tested as reported in Table 8.
61
==PAGE:74==
NO2
O
O
O
O
NH2
17
18
Scheme 14: General reaction scheme towards aniline 18. The tested reaction conditions are listed in Table 8.
Nitrogen is reduced via a redox reaction from oxidation state +3 to oxidation state -3. The balanced
redox equation is depicted in Figure 49.
Ar
NO2
+
3 Sn2+
Ar
NH2
+
3 Sn4+
+3
-3
6 H+
2 H2O
+
+
Figure 49: Redox equation for reduction of nitrobenzene.
The reduction reaction has been performed previously in the group with a 20% yield using excess
SnCl2 and dilute HCl in ethanol under reﬂux. Initially, this procedure was performed starting from
6 eq. SnCl2. The reaction progressed slowly, within days, and an additional 4 eq. SnCl2 was added
before nitrobenzene 17 was consumed according to TLC analysis. Therefore, different protocols were
investigated to improve the yield. Many different protocols have been reported for the reduction of
nitroaromatics, from a Bechamp reduction over various metals to biotic reduction.81 The different
procedures are listed in Table 8. They were tested on a 50 mg scale and evaluated based on TLC
analysis, LCMS analysis, reaction time, and yield of the crude products.
Table 8: Optimisation of the reduction of nitrobenzene 17 to aniline 18.
Procedure
Reducing agent
Conditions
Temp.
Reaction time
Outcome
1
SnCl2 (10 eq.)
HCl (2 eq.), EtOH
80 °C
∼5 hours
Completion
2
SnCl2 dihydrate (2 eq.)52
EtOAc
60 °C
> 4 days
Failure
3
Fe powder (8 eq.)82
AcOH : EtOH : H2O
(2 : 2 : 1)
90 °C
∼2 hours
Completion,
side products
4
Zn powder (15 eq.)83
NH4Cl (10.5 eq.),
acetone : H2O (5 : 1)
R.t.
∼1 hour
Completion,
side products
Procedure 1 in table Table 8 shows a repetition of the performed reaction, this time starting from
10 eq. SnCl2. The reaction time was reduced to approximately 5 hours on the 50 mg scale by
initially adding the extra equivalents of reducing agent. In the work-up, aqueous NaOH was added to
precipitate Sn(OH)2 which was removed by suction ﬁltration through Celite®. The resulting ﬁltrate
was extracted with CH2Cl2 to obtain a crude oil in approximately 60% yield. A 1H NMR spectrum
of the crude product revealed the desired compound with only small amounts of impurities.
Procedure 2 represents a reduction protocol using SnCl2 dihydrate (2 eq.) in ethyl acetate at 60 °C as
it was reported by Wu et al. for reduction of nitrobenzene 17.52 The reaction led to some formation
62
==PAGE:75==
of product within 17 hours, but it did not progress any further. After four days the nitrobenzene 17
was still the major species in the reaction mixture according to TLC analysis. The balanced redox
equation (Figure 49) clariﬁes that not enough equivalents of reducing agent was applied. This is a
reasonable explanation why this procedure was not successful.
Test reactions 3 and 4 were performed according to protocols reported by Newhouse et al. and Feng
et al., respectively.82,83 Procedure 3 was carried out at 90 °C with excess iron powder and acetic
acid. The protocol for reaction 4 applied excess zinc powder and NH4Cl at room temperature. Both
test reactions ran to completion within 2 hours, but also a side product appeared according to TLC
analysis. Analysis of LCMS chromatograms revealed a mass of [M+H]+ = 417 m/z corresponding
to a dimeric species of aniline 18. Iron and zinc have larger reduction potentials than tin(II), which
can explain the faster reaction rates using iron and zinc compared to tin(II) as reducing agent.66 The
conditions applied in procedure 1 was chosen as the preferred protocol based on a promising crude
yield and purity. When applying the reaction conditions of reaction 1 on a larger scale (1.5 g) the
reaction was run to completion overnight. After the described work-up the crude oil was puriﬁed by
dry column vacuum chromatography (DCVC) to yield compound 18 in a 75% yield.
3.1.3.4
Synthesis of azobenzene 19
Compound 15 and aniline 18 were reacted in a diazonium coupling reaction as depicted in Scheme 15
to synthesise azobenzene 19. The mechanism for this type of reaction has been described for the
synthesis of azobenzene 11 as shown in Figure 45.
O
O
OH
O
O
NH2
1. HCl, NaNO2, 0 oC
O
O
N
N
O
O
OH
2.
, NaOH, 0 oC, 55%
18
15
19
Scheme 15: Reaction scheme for azobenzene 19.
A diazonium ion was formed from compound 18 under acidic conditions at approximately 0 °C. Upon
addition of compound 15, a sticky, red solid precipitated. Similar to the problems described in the
synthesis of compound 11 the stickiness caused the need for mechanical stirring. The crude product
was puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography. The product was obtained as an orange solid in a 55%
yield.52
63
==PAGE:76==
3.1.3.5
Connecting azobenzene 19 and phenol 6
Different approaches were considered for connecting azobenzene 19 and the ester protected solubil-
ising group, phenol 6. Both molecules have a phenol group available for coupling to a linker. Using
1,6-dibromohexane as a linker, alkylating both phenols in two subsequent nucleophilic substitution
reactions was proposed. A general reaction scheme for alkylation of azobenzene 19 to synthesise
compound 21 is shown in Scheme 16.
Br
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
21
O
O
N
N
O
O
OH
19
Br
Br
base
Scheme 16: General reaction scheme for compound 21. The tested reaction conditions are presented in Table 9.
With inspiration from a method previously shown to be successful in the alkylation of phenols
(Scheme 5) and protocols reported by Li et al. and Makriyannis et al., different procedures were
tested as presented in Table 9.84,85 The test reactions were performed on a 10 mg scale. An excess of
1,6-dibromohexane was used in order to increase the probability that azobenzene 19 reacts with only
1,6-dibromohexane and not the mono-alkylated product 21.
Table 9: Test reactions performed to alkylate compound 19 with 1,6-dibromohexane.
#
Conditions
Outcome
1
C6H12Br2 (10 eq.), K2CO3 (5 eq.), DMF, 60 °C
Not run to completion
2
C6H12Br2 (4 eq.), KOH (1 eq.), H2O, reﬂux
Product, side products
3
C6H12Br2 (5 eq.), NaH (1 eq.), DMF, r.t.
Full conversion to product
The test reactions were followed and evaluated based on LCMS analysis. For entry 1, LCMS chro-
matography after 2 hours revealed the presence of [M+H]+ = 593 m/z and [M+H+2]+ = 595 m/z in
approximately 1:1 ratios corresponding to the isotopic pattern of the desired product 21 containing
one bromine atom. According to UV chromatograms, more product 21 was formed from 2 to 18
hours of reaction, but the reaction did not run to completion within 46 hours even though azobenzene
19 was still present. This suggests that the applied base K2CO3 might not be efﬁcient in deproto-
nating the phenol group in azobenzene 19. In entry 2, product 21 was present after 30 minutes, but
many side products were also formed as conﬁrmed using LCMS. For entry 3, the reaction had run to
completion within 15 minutes without formation of side products according to the UV chromatogram
and the corresponding mass spectrum. This indicates that NaH deprotonates the phenol efﬁciently
and the resulting phenolate ion is a good nucleophile leading to a relatively fast alkylation reaction.
64
==PAGE:77==
The reaction conditions of entry 3 were applied on a 100 mg scale and the reaction had run to com-
pletion within 15 minutes. The reaction mixture was diluted with water, extracted with ethyl acetate,
and puriﬁed by DCVC. However, 1H NMR spectroscopy revealed that the product was not pure. A
mass spectrum of the product showed the presence of at least three different compounds: The aniline
18, which must be a result of cleavage of the azo functionality, the desired product 21, and thirdly, a
compound with the isotopic pattern [M+H]+ = 1105 m/z and [M+H+2]+ = 1107 m/z in approximately
1:1 ratio. This isotopic pattern ﬁts with a dimeric product from an electrophilic aromatic substitution
pathway as the proposed structure in Figure 50 hypothesises. This indicates that compound 21 is not
stable due to the electron-rich and reactive aromatic rings, in agreement with the chemical properties
discovered in the synthesis of phenol 15.
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
O
O
N N
O
O
O
Br
Exact Mass: 1104.5762
Figure 50: One possible proposed structure for the side product corresponding to the isotopic pattern [M+H]+
= 1105 m/z and [M+H+2]+ = 1107 m/z.
In order to avoid uncontrollable side reactions an approach of initially alkylating the solubilising
group, phenol 6, with 1,6-dibromohexane and then performing a subsequent alkylation with azoben-
zene 19 was tested. A successful procedure for alkylating the phenol in phenol 6 has already been
reported in the synthesis of compounds 10 and 13. A similar protocol was applied as depicted in
Scheme 17. Phenol 6 was treated with K2CO3 and reacted with 1,6-dibromohexane in DMF at 60
°C. After reacting overnight, LCMS analysis revealed that the reaction had run to completion. The
reaction mixture was worked up and puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography to obtain the desired
compound 20 in a 69% yield.
65
==PAGE:78==
OH
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
Br
Br
O
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Br
K2CO3
DMF, 60oC, 69%
6
20
Scheme 17: Reaction scheme for compound 20.
The next step in the synthesis towards template ipAzo was an alkylation reaction between compound
20 and azobenzene 19. The alkylation was performed using NaH as base. Entry 3 in Table 9 indicates
that NaH is suitable for deprotonating the phenol group in azobenzene 19. Azobenzene 19, compound
20, and NaH were dissolved in DMF at room temperature to synthesise compound 22, as illustrated
in Scheme 18. The reaction was carried out under dry conditions in order to avoid deactivation of
NaH. The reaction led to formation of the desired product according to LCMS chromatography and
the reaction was run to completion within 23 hours. The reaction mixture was worked up and puriﬁed
by DCVC to obtain the product as a red solid in a 46% yield. An 1H NMR spectrum showed the
desired product 22 in high purity.
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
+
O
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Br
DMF, 46%
O
O
N
N
O
O
OH
NaH
19
20
22
Scheme 18: Reaction scheme for compound 22.
66
==PAGE:79==
3.1.3.6
Synthesis of template ipAzo (3)
The last step towards synthesising the template ipAzo was a hydrolysis of the four esters. The re-
action is depicted in Scheme 19 with a similar procedure as described for hydrolysis of compound
13. The reaction was followed using LCMS chromatography which revealed that all four esters were
hydrolysed after 2 hours. The product was isolated by precipitation upon addition of aqueous 6 M
HCl and no further puriﬁcation was necessary. Template ipAzo (3) was obtained in a 97% yield.
THF, 97%
NaOH
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
22
3, ipAzo
Scheme 19: Reaction scheme for compound 3, ipAzo.
3.1.4
Synthesis of solubilising group 25
Another solubilising group was synthesised as presented in Scheme 20. 2-Amino-2-hydroxymethyl-
propan-1,3-diol (23) was treated with excess t-butyl acrylate (24), in a ﬁve-day long reaction to yield
solubilising group 25. The reaction did not run to completion but the products, where one or two
hydroxyl groups were left unreacted, were easily separated in ﬂash column chromatography to obtain
the product as a colourless oil in a 61% yield.86
67
==PAGE:80==
H2N
O
O
O
O
O
H2N
OH
HO
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
NaOH
DMSO, 61%
23
24
25
Scheme 20: Reaction scheme for compound 25.
The mechanism is proposed as shown in Figure 51. The reaction is a conjugate Michael addition
under basic conditions which goes through an enolate intermediate. One could image that the nu-
cleophile could react in a direct 1,2-addition. However, this reaction pathway is reversible whereas
the conjugate addition is slower but irreversible i.e. the thermodynamic product. Heating the reac-
tion might have pushed the reaction towards completion. Furthermore, the unhindered nature of the
terminal alkene on t-butyl acrylate (24) also promotes conjugate addition.77
NH2
HO
O
OH
O
O
NH2
O
HO
HO
O
O
NH2
HO
O
OH
OH
H
HO H
- H2O
- OH
NH2
OH
O
HO
O
O
H2N
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Repeat two times
25
Figure 51: Proposed mechanism for formation of solubilising group 25.
This solubilising group 25 was synthesised as an alternative to the solubilising group 6 in case it did
not give the desired solubility to the ﬁnal templates Azo, mAzo, and ipAzo. However, this was not
the case, and therefore a set of templates linked to the solubilising group 25 was not synthesised.
68
==PAGE:81==
3.2
Characterisation of templates
A structural characterisation of the three successfully synthesised photoswitchable templates Azo,
mAzo, and ipAzo was performed using NMR spectroscopy. All NMR studies of the templates were
performed in 100 mM phosphate buffered D2O at pH 7.5 and at 298 K. All templates were charac-
terised before any light treatment. In general all templates were stored in darkness for a minimum of
15 hours before all analytical studies were performed, unless otherwise stated.
Template Azo was characterised as shown in Figure 52. The characterisation was performed at 2 mM
concentration in order to obtain separation of overlapping signals and a good signal to noise ratio.
Since the template had been stored in darkness prior to analysis, the template was almost exclusive
found as the trans-isomer.
                              
 
3 
4 
1, 2 
5, 12 
11 
13 
10 
THF 
DHO 
6, 14 
7, 9 
8 
”grease” 
Figure 52: 1H NMR of the trans-isomer of the Azo template at 2 mM concentration. All marked peaks corre-
sponds to the trans-isomer. The artefact around 4.79 ppm is due to the applied water suppression which also
causes the neighbouring peak to diminish.
With the aim of also characterising the cis-isomer of the Azo template the sample was irradiated
69
==PAGE:82==
with UV light at 365 nm for 10 minutes to induce trans to cis isomerisation. The resulting 1H NMR
spectrum is reported in Figure 53.
                                 
 
DHO 
THF 
3 
4 
5 
12 
1, 2 
3, 4 
11 
11 
1, 2, 5 
13 
10 
14 
6 
7, 9 
8 
= cis 
= trans 
Figure 53: 1H NMR of the of the Azo template at 2 mM concentration after irradiating with UV light at 365
nm for 10 minutes. The artefact around 4.79 ppm is due to the applied water suppression which also causes the
neighbouring peak to diminish.
The signals in the aromatic region are overlapping which complicated the assignment of peaks to
the trans-isomer and cis-isomer, respectively. The assignment of peaks in Figure 53 are based on a
corresponding COSY spectrum of the Azo template after 10 minutes irradiation at 365 nm. A partial
COSY spectrum of the relevant aromatic region is shown in Figure 54. The analysis revealed that the
two sets of protons ortho to the azo bond moved approximately 0.9 ppm upﬁeld when going from
the trans to the cis isomer resulting in two overlapping doublets at around 6.97 ppm. In general, all
aromatic protons in the cis-isomer are more shielded than the corresponding protons in the trans-
isomer. This is consistent with a study reported by Jones et al.87
70
==PAGE:83==
= trans
6.90
6.95
7.00
7.05
7.10
7.15
7.20
7.25
7.30
7.35
7.40
7.45
7.50
7.55
7.60
7.65
7.70
7.75
7.80
7.85
7.90
7.95
8.00
δ (ppm)
6.7
6.8
6.9
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
7.9
8.0
δ (ppm)
3
4
5
12
1, 2
11
1, 2, 5
11
3, 4
= cis
Figure 54: Partial COSY spectrum of the Azo template at 2 mM concentration in D2O phosphate buffer after
irradiating with UV light at 365 nm for 10 minutes.
Template mAzo was characterised at 10 mM concentration, as shown in Figure 55. The trans- and
cis-isomer peaks were identiﬁed by analysing which peaks would increase or decrease in intensity
upon irradiation with speciﬁc wavelengths of light. The signals corresponding to the trans- and cis-
isomers were separated from one another clearly indicating the trend that the cis-isomer protons are
more upﬁeld than the trans-isomer protons.
71
==PAGE:84==
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
2.29
4.29
10.26
0.59
12.49
2.03
2.50
0.10
0.10
2.11
1.94
0.07
3.16
1.00
6.8
7.0
7.2
7.4
7.6
ppm
3.8
4.0
4.2
ppm
2.0
2.5
ppm
1 
 
2 
 
3, 4 
 
5 
 
9 
10 
 
1 
 
5 
 
2 
 
3, 4 
6 
7 
8 
HDO 
12 
11 
 
13 
 
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
1
4
5
2
3
7
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
12
14 
 
”grease” 
= cis 
= trans 
Figure 55: 1H NMR of the mAzo template at 10 mM concentration. All peaks not speciﬁed as cis or trans are
overlapping peaks from both isomers.
Template ipAzo was characterised at 10 mM concentration after it was stored in ambient light to be
able to characterise the cis- and the trans-isomer, as shown in Figure 56. The trans and cis-isomer
peaks were identiﬁed the same way as for the mAzo-template. Similarly, it was observed that the
cis-isomer protons are more upﬁeld than the trans-isomer protons on the azobenzene moiety of the
ipAzo template.
72
==PAGE:85==
= cis 
= trans 
   
                          
 
19 
18 
1 
2
1 
11
 
1 
20 
3, 5, 7, 9 
12, 17 
21 
13, 16 
14, 15 
4, 6, 8, 10 
19 
1 
2
1 
11
HDO 
7.80 
Figure 56: 1H NMR of the ipAzo template at 10 mM concentration. All peaks not speciﬁed as cis or trans are
overlapping peaks from both isomers.
The presented NMR spectra of the templates show that the templates were synthesised in a high purity.
Furthermore, the spectra show that before light treatment the samples contained mainly trans-isomer.
It was possible for all templates to assign speciﬁc peaks belonging to exclusively the cis- or the trans-
isomer. This is very useful in the investigation of the photoisomerisation of the compounds. With the
established structural characterisation of the temples, the photoswitching properties of the templates
were characterised using UV-vis and NMR spectroscopy.
73
==PAGE:86==
3.2.1
UV-vis absorption spectra
The photochemical isomerisation of each template was investigated using UV-vis spectroscopy. The
templates were expected to change between the cis- and trans-isomers upon irradiation with light at
speciﬁc wavelengths. The wavelengths used for irradiation were inspired by studies reported by Wu
et al. and are presented in Table 10.52,53 Unless stated otherwise, a power of 700 mA was applied for
irradiation with UV ligt at 365 nm, and all other wavelengths were applied with a power of 1000 mA.
Table 10: Overview of speciﬁc wavelength (and corresponding colour) applicable to induce photochemical
isomerisation of template Azo, mAzo, and ipAzo towards cis- or trans-isomers, respectively.
Template
Cis
Trans
Azo
365 nm (UV)
470 nm (Blue)
mAzo
625 nm (Red)
470 nm (Blue)
ipAzo
530 nm (Green)
470 nm (Blue)
All templates were investigated starting from before any light treatment at a 50 µM concentration in
100 mM phosphate buffered water at pH 7.5. The Azo template was irradiated with UV light at 365
nm at a lower intensity of 200 mA for a total of 2 minutes and 15 seconds. The mAzo template was
irradiated with red light at 625 nm for a total of 2 hours. Finally, the ipAzo template was irradiated
with green light at 530 nm for a total of 15 minutes. Further irradiation after the speciﬁed time did
not lead to further change in the absorption spectra.
Figure 57−59 show the obtained absorption spectra from 250 nm to 600 nm and illustrate the changes
going from mainly trans-isomer to the largest possible amount of cis-isomer for the speciﬁc wave-
length. For the Azo template, the photostationary state at 365 nm can be obtained within 2 minutes and
15 seconds. The biggest change happens within the ﬁrst 25 seconds indicating that the photochemical
isomerisation is fast. In another attempt using 700 mA UV light at 365 nm, the photostationary state
was reached within 15 seconds as shown in Appendix 7.2, Figure 87. On the other hand, it takes
up to 2 hours before the mAzo template reached the photostationary state at 625 nm. For the ipAzo
template the photostationary state at 530 nm is reached in 15 minutes, but the change in the absorp-
tion spectra is minor compared to the spectra for Azo and mAzo. This indicates that irradiating with
light at 530 nm does not induce a large amount of trans to cis isomerisation. Therefore, irradiating
with light at 365 nm and 625 nm were tested to see whether more cis-isomer could be obtained. The
resulting absorption spectra, presented in Figure 60, showed that irradiating with light at 365 nm did
not induce any change, whereas 625 nm gave more trans to cis isomerisation. Based on this result,
625 nm was used in subsequent studies of the photochemical trans to cis isomerisation of template
ipAzo.
74
==PAGE:87==
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorbance spectra of Azo
Before light treatment
5 s
10 s
15 s
20 s
25 s
35 s
45 s
2 min 15 s
Figure 57: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM Azo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light treatment
and after irradiation with light at 365 nm (200 mA).
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorption spectra of mAzo
Before light treatment
5 s
15 s
2 min
8 min
15 min
30 min
45 min
1 h 15 min
2 h
Figure 58: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM mAzo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light
treatment and after irradiation with light at 625 nm.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorption spectra of ipAzo
Before light treatment
5 s
30 s
2 min 30 s
15 min
Figure 59: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM ipAzo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light
treatment and after irradiation with light at 530 nm.
75
==PAGE:88==
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorption spectra of ipAzo upon irradiation of different wavelength
Before light treatment
15 min, 530 nm
30 min, 365 nm
2 h, 625 nm
Figure 60: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM ipAzo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light
treatment and after irradiation with light at 530 nm, then 365 nm, then 625 nm.
One characteristic of the obtained absorption spectra is the presence of isosbestic points. Isosbestic
points appear in absorbance spectra when there is interconversion between two species emphasising
that it is in fact a photoisomerisation from trans- to cis-isomer that is observed in the absorbance
spectra.88 Comparing the presented absorbance spectra a trend can be observed for all the templates.
A λmax for the trans-isomer is observed around 325−360 nm corresponding to a π −π∗transition.
Upon irradiation with light, the intensity of the absorption band corresponding to the π −π∗transition
decreases. Simultaneously, a rise in absorbance around 440−460 nm corresponding to an n−π∗tran-
sition is observed as the cis-isomer forms, in accordance with the work reported by Wu et al.47,52,53
A similar study was performed for all three templates starting from the maximum amount of cis-
isomer obtained in the previous study and switched back to maximum amount of trans-isomer pos-
sible upon irradiation with blue light at 470 nm. The obtained UV-vis spectra are shown in Fig-
ure 61−63 of the Azo, mAzo, and ipAzo template, respectively.
The study shows that the photoisomerisation is reversible. However, less trans-isomer is obtainable
by irradiation with blue light at 470 nm for the Azo and mAzo templates compared to cis-to-trans
relaxation. For the ipAzo template the amount of trans-isomer is approximately the same after ir-
radiating with blue light at 470 nm compared with the sample before light treatment. Based on the
presented absorption spectra it is difﬁcult to determine the degree of obtained conversion. Therefore,
the photoisomerisation will be investigated quantitatively using NMR spectroscopy.
76
==PAGE:89==
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorbance spectra of Azo
Before light treatment
2 min 15 s, 365 nm
1 min 30 s, 470 nm
Figure 61: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM Azo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light treat-
ment, to maximum of cis-isomer from irradiation with UV light at 365 nm, to after irradiation with blue light
at 470 nm.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
250
350
450
550
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorption spectra of mAzo
Before light treatment
2 h, 625 nm
3 h, 470 nm
Figure 62: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM mAzo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light
treatment, to maximum of cis-isomer from irradiation with red light at 625 nm, to after irradiation with blue
light at 470 nm.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorption spectra of ipAzo
Before light treatment
2 h, 625 nm
15 min, 470 nm
Figure 63: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM ipAzo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light
treatment, to maximum of cis-isomer from irradiation with red light at 625 nm, to after irradiation with blue
light at 470 nm.
77
==PAGE:90==
3.2.2
Determination of photostationary states by NMR spectroscopy
The photostationary states of templates Azo, mAzo, and ipAzo were determined at 10 mM in phos-
phate buffered D2O after heating the samples at 30 °C overnight. The photostationary states were
obtained by irradiating the NMR samples with light at the speciﬁc wavelength presented in Table 11.
Table 11: Overview of speciﬁc wavelength (and corresponding colour) applicable to induce photochemical
isomerisation of template Azo, mAzo, and ipAzo towards cis- or trans-isomers, respectively.
Template
Cis
Trans
Azo
365 nm (UV)
470 nm (Blue)
mAzo
625 nm (Red)
470 nm (Blue)
ipAzo
530 nm (Green)
and 625 nm (Red)
470 nm (Blue)
The NMR samples were irradiated until no more change was observed in the obtained NMR spectra
to ensure that the photostationary state had been reached. The obtained NMR spectra are shown in the
stack plots of the aromatic regions in Figure 64−66, which illustrates the change from trans-isomer to
cis-isomer, and back to trans-isomer by means of light irradiation. Based on the structural 1H NMR
characterisation it was possible to determine the ratio between cis- and trans-isomers as summarised
in Table 12 including the ratio before any light treatment. The ratios were determined from the marked
signals and speciﬁed integral in each spectrum.
Table 12: The cis/trans ratio before light irradiating and in photo stationary states at indicated wavelength for
template Azo, mAzo, and ipAzo (10 mM in 100 mM phosphate buffered D2O).
Azo
mAzo
ipAzo
cis/trans ratio
cis/trans ratio
cis/trans ratio
Before irr.
365 nm
470 nm
Before irr.
625 nm
470 nm
Before irr.
530 nm
625 nm
470 nm
3:97
61:39
23:77
5:95
92:8
34:66
9:91
50:50
65:35
24:76
The obtained ratios show that all templates showed reversible photoisomerisation properties with
signiﬁcant change in the cis/trans distribution upon light irradiation. cis-Azo could be obtained in
61% by irradiating with light at 365 nm. Light irradiation of mAzo and ipAzo at 625 nm led to
92% and 65% conversion to cis-isomers, respectively. This means that the largest conversion to cis-
isomer was obtained for the mAzo template. For all templates, cis to trans isomerisation could be
induced by irradiation with light at 470 nm, resulting in a photostationary state containing 66−77%
of trans-isomers. Furthermore, it was observed that the induced change towards trans-isomers by
means of light did not give great amounts of trans-isomer compared to the thermodynamic starting
point obtained by heating in the dark. However, in general the study of the photostationary states
show good photoswitching capabilities of the templates and no photodegradation was observed at any
point.
78
==PAGE:91==
Before light treatment 
365 nm, 30 min 
470 nm, 10 min 
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
O
OH
O
OH
O
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
13
14
12
11
OH
N
N
Azo, 10 mM 
= cis 
= trans 
H4, H3 
 
H3, H4 
H3, H4 
H3, H4 
H4, H3 
H4, H3 
 
Figure 64: Stacked 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region for determination of cis/trans ratios of template Azo
(10 mM) before light treatment, after irradiating with UV light at 365 nm for 30 minutes, and after irradiating
with blue light at 470 nm for 10 minutes. The remaining peaks from the cis-isomer are not marked in the top
spectrum since the amount is insigniﬁcant.
79
==PAGE:92==
 
 
 
H5 
 
H5 
 
Before light treatment 
625 nm, 13 hours 
470 nm, 3 hours 
 
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
1
4
5
2
3
7
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
12
mAzo (10 mM) 
H5 
 
H5 
 
H5 
 
H5 
 
= cis 
= trans 
Figure 65: Stacked 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region for determination of cis/trans ratios of template
mAzo (10 mM) before light treatment, after irradiating with red light at 625 nm for 13 hours, and after irradi-
ating with blue light at 470 nm for 3 hours.
80
==PAGE:93==
Before light treatment 
470 nm, 60 min 
530 nm, 60 min 
625 nm, 150 min 
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
1
13
12
10
9
8
7
6
14
5
4
3
21
20
19
18
17
15
16
2
11
ipAzo (10 mM) 
= cis 
= trans 
H2 
 
H2 
 
Figure 66: Stacked 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region for determination of cis/trans ratios of template
ipAzo (10 mM) before light treatment, after irradiating with green light at 530 nm for 60 minutes, after ir-
radiating with red light at 625 nm for 150 minutes, and after irradiating with blue light at 470 nm for 60
minutes.
3.2.2.1
Concentration dependency of the photostationary states
To test the concentration dependency of the photostationary states, the photostationary state at 365
nm were determined for template Azo also at a 2 mM concentration. The obtained stack plot of the
aromatic region is seen in Figure 67.
81
==PAGE:94==
Before light treatment 
365 nm, 20 min 
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
O
OH
O
OH
O
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
13
14
12
11
OH
N
N
Azo, 2 mM 
= cis 
= trans 
H3 
H4, H3 
H4 
H4 
H3 
Figure 67: Stacked 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region for determination of cis/trans ratios of template
Azo (2 mM) before light treatment and after irradiating with UV light at 365 nm for 20 minutes.
Table 13: The cis/trans ratio of 2 mM Azo template
before light irradiating and after irradiating with
UV light at 365 nm in 100 mM phosphate buffered
water at pH = 7.5. The similar cis/trans ratio of the
10 mM Azo template is added for comparison.
Azo (2 mM)
Azo (10 mM)
cis/trans ratio
cis/trans ratio
Before irr.
365 nm
Before irr.
365 nm
0:100
78:22
3:97
61:39
The determined ratios are presented in Table 13.
It was observed that the maximum amount of cis-
isomer obtainable by irradiating with UV light was
increased at lower concentration of template.
A
similar tendency could be expected for the mAzo
and ipAzo templates. This tendency is thought to
be explained based on aggregation of the trans-
isomers. At lower concentrations and thus lower
amount of aggregation, the trans-isomer is less sta-
bilised through aggregation and more prone to un-
dergo photoisomerisation. This idea is supported by
the fact that all peaks marked as trans in Figure 64 - Figure 66 change chemical shift as the cis/trans-
ratio changes (examples are marked with dashed lines). For all templates it was observed that as the
ratio of cis increased, the aromatic azobenzene trans-peaks moved downﬁeld.
82
==PAGE:95==
3.2.3
Aggregation studies
To investigate the aggregation of the templates, a dilution series of the templates were analysed using
NMR spectroscopy. The samples were investigated before light treatment, since it would be expected
that the trans-isomers would have the strongest tendency to aggregate based on the more ﬂat struc-
tures. 1H NMR analysis of template Azo in varying concentrations from 10 mM to 0.05 mM was
performed. The resulting 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region are shown in Figure 68 which illus-
trates how the peaks move in a downﬁeld direction as the sample becomes more dilute and thus less
aggregated. This corresponds to the aromatic protons becoming more deshielded with lower concen-
trations and less aggregation. This can suggest that the trans-isomer of template Azo can π-stack in a
parallel displaced manner.
7.25
7.30
7.35
7.40
7.45
7.50
7.55
7.60
7.65
7.70
7.75
7.80
7.85
7.90
7.95
δ (ppm)
10 mM
8 mM
6 mM
4 mM
2 mM
1 mM
0.5 mM
0.1 mM
0.05 mM
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
O
OH
O
OH
O
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
13
14
12
11
OH
N
N
Azo
H4
H3
H11
H1, H2, H12, H5
Figure 68: Stacked 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region of template Azo. Dashed red line indicates how the
marked peak moves upon concentration change. The samples contain only trans-Azo.
Figure 68 reveals that the chemical shift of the peaks do not change from 0.1 mM to 0.05 mM.
This indicates that there is no aggregation below the concentration of 0.1 mM. A similar study was
performed for the mAzo and ipAzo templates. The stacked 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic regions
are shown in Figure 69 and Figure 70, respectively. Again, the peaks do not change from 0.1 mM
to 0.05 mM, therefore binding studies should be performed at 0.1 mM to avoid competition from
83
==PAGE:96==
aggregation.
6.30
6.35
6.40
6.45
6.50
6.55
6.60
6.65
6.70
6.75
6.80
6.85
6.90
6.95
7.00
7.05
7.10
7.15
7.20
7.25
7.30
7.35
δ (ppm)
10 mM
5.0 mM
2.6 mM
1.0 mM
0.1 mM
0.05 mM
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
1
4
5
2
3
7
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
12
mAzo
H5
H11
H2
H5
H2
H1
= cis
= trans
Figure 69: Stacked 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region of template mAzo. Dashed red line indicates how the
marked peak moves upon concentration change. The changes in cis/trans distribution are due to contamination
with ambient light.
6.25
6.30
6.35
6.40
6.45
6.50
6.55
6.60
6.65
6.70
6.75
6.80
6.85
6.90
6.95
7.00
δ (ppm)
10 mM
7.5 mM
5.0 mM
2.5 mM
1.0 mM
0.5 mM
0.1 mM
0.05 mM
= cis
= trans
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
1
13
12
10
9
8
7
6
14
5
4
3
21
20
19
18
17
15
16
2
11
ipAzo
H2
H11
H2
H11
Figure 70: Stacked 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region of template ipAzo. Dashed red line indicates how
the marked peak moves upon concentration change.
84
==PAGE:97==
3.3
Binding studies
According to the work of Wu et al. on similarly substituted azobenzenes presented in section 1.5.252,
the trans-Azo template is proposed to have a strong binding afﬁnity towards α-CD, trans-mAzo to-
wards β-CD, and the cis-ipAzo template is proposed to bind γ-CD. In order to quantify the binding
afﬁnities the association constants were determined experimentally by titration experiments as de-
scribed in section 1.6.1. 1H NMR is a very informative method where changes in chemical shifts for
both cis and trans protons of the templates can be followed upon addition of cyclodextrin molecules.
UV-vis spectroscopy is suitable for titration experiments at low concentration.63 As revealed in sec-
tion 3.2.3 the trans-isomers of all templates aggregate at even low concentrations. Therefore, the
titration experiments must be performed at low concentrations in order to ensure a reliable concen-
tration of free template in solution. Titration experiments using UV-vis spectroscopy was therefore
investigated.
3.3.1
UV-vis titration experiments
A titration experiment was performed using a 50 µM solution of Azo template in buffer. The host
solution was kept in darkness overnight prior to analysis to ensure the presence of only the trans-Azo-
isomer. During the titration the concentration of template was kept constant while the concentration
of speciﬁc cyclodextrin guest molecules was gradually increased. After each addition of guest a UV-
vis absorption spectrum was recorded. For α-CD as guest the resulting UV-vis spectra are shown in
Figure 71a. The two isosbestic points indicates the presence of two species which were assigned the
free trans-Azo template and the trans-Azo-α-CD complex, respectively. Upon addition of α-CD, the
λmax increased and was red-shifted whereas the absorbance at 425 nm decreased. The absorbance at
370 nm was plotted against the concentration of α-CD to construct a binding isotherm. The binding
isotherm has a hyperbolic shape which is indicative of a 1:1 binding system where one trans-Azo
template molecule interacts non-covalently with one α-CD molecule to form a host-guest complex.
Equation 15 in section 1.6.1, relates the observed change in absorbance with Ka, [H]0, [G]0, and
the molar extinction coefﬁcient difference ε∆HG. By applying non-linear curve-ﬁtting the association
constant was determined by ﬁtting Equation 15 to the binding isotherm, yielding Ka(trans-Azo, α-
CD) = 4100 ± 130 M-1. The magnitude of the association constant is similar to the one previously
reported by Beeren et al. for a similar azobenzene.54 The UV-vis titration methodology was therefore
further investigated.
85
==PAGE:98==
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
250
300
350
400
450
500
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
0.0 eq.
0.4 eq.
1.0 eq.
2.6 eq.
5.1 eq.
7.4 eq.
14 eq.
21 eq.
28 eq.
a) trans-Azo with α-CD
b)
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0
0.1
0.2
ΔA (370 nm)
[α-CD] (M)
Ka (trans-Azo with α-CD) = 4100 ± 130 M-1
Figure 71: a) UV-vis absorption spectra for 50 µM trans-Azo template in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5,
upon addition of α-CD. b) Fitted binding isotherm based on change in absorbance at 370 nm.
For the titration experiment of cis-Azo with α-CD the Azo template was irradiated with UV light
to obtain as much trans to cis isomerisation as possible. However, as determined in section 3.2.2,
it is not possible to achieve full conversion to cis-Azo. This complicates the UV-vis titration since
observed changes in absorbances upon addition of α-CD may arise from differences in the cis/trans
ratio, cis-Azo to α-CD complexation, or trans-Azo to α-CD complexation. The UV-vis absorption
spectra with increasing α-CD concentrations are shown in Figure 72. Upon addition of α-CD the
absorbance increases for all wavelengths throughout the spectrum which implies the lack of isosbestic
points. From the UV-vis absorption spectra it was not possible to extract data from the free hosts
and complexes separately, since no physical property could be assigned to the individual species.
Therefore, 1H NMR titration experiments were performed.
a) cis-Azo with α-CD
b)
0.01
0.06
0.11
0.16
0.21
0.26
0.31
0.36
250
300
350
400
450
500
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
0.0 eq.
8.8 eq.
20 eq.
35 eq.
52 eq.
75 eq.
100 eq.
150 eq.
200 eq.
250 eq.
300 eq.
375 eq.
0.173
0.178
0.183
0.188
0.193
0.198
0.203
0.208
0.213
290
295
300
305
310
315
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
0.0 eq.
8.8 eq.
20 eq.
35 eq.
52 eq.
75 eq.
100 eq.
150 eq.
200 eq.
250 eq.
300 eq.
375 eq.
Figure 72: a) UV-vis absorption spectra for mainly cis-Azo template upon addition of α-CD. b) Zoom of UV-vis
absorption spectra. Conditions as in Figure 71.
3.3.2
1H NMR titration experiments
With respect to the aggregation studies 1H NMR titrations were performed at 0.1 mM template solu-
tions. At this concentration the 1H NMR signal of the templates are well above the limit of detection.
86
==PAGE:99==
The concentration of templates was kept constant and the chemical shifts of the templates were moni-
tored while the concentration of cyclodextrin was gradually increased. The titration experiments were
performed by acquiring a 1H NMR spectrum after each aliquot of cyclodextrin added to the constant
template solution. In order to acquire sufﬁcient data points in the sloping part of the binding isotherm,
the number of equivalents of guest added in each aliquot was determined based on the expected bind-
ing afﬁnity. For hosts where only a weak or no binding afﬁnity for the guest was expected, several
equivalents of guest were added in each aliquot and only six data points were acquired. As for the
UV-vis titration attempt, titration experiments for the trans-isomers of the templates were ﬁrst inves-
tigated. The studies in section 3.2.2 revealed that keeping the templates in darkness for a minimum
of 15 hours at 30 °C ensured almost entire relaxation to trans-isomer. Therefore, the NMR samples
were treated similarly prior to the titration experiments. By carrying out the titration experiments in
darkness, the association constants for the trans-isomers of the templates were determined by ﬁtting
the binding isotherms based on the monitored changes in chemical shifts to a 1:1 binding model as
described in section 1.6.1. The templates are expected to bind the natural cyclodextrins in a 1:1 sto-
ichiometry based on work reported by Wu et al.52,53 and Beeren et al.54 The 1:1 binding system is
often assumed unless the NMR spectra and the observed binding isotherm proves otherwise.63
Calculating the binding constants for the cis-isomers of the templates are tricky since complete con-
version to cis-isomer cannot be obtained by photoisomerisation and hence both isomers are present
in the host solution. This means that the host exists as a mixture of cis- and trans-isomers and the
speciﬁc concentrations of each isomer is not constant. When a cyclodextrin guest is added to a cis-
template solution with simultaneously presence of the trans-isomer, competitive binding interactions
exist between cis-isomer to guest and trans-isomer to guest. For these reasons a binding isotherm for
the cis-isomer and hence a simple 1:1 binding model cannot be applied to determined the association
constant for the cis-isomers.54
A methodology to calculate binding constants in mixtures of hosts has been developed. Beeren and
Meier have developed a NMR titration method for simultaneously determination of multiple binding
constants for a guest that binds to more than one host in a mixture. When a binding constant, Ka,
and the maximum chemical shift change, ∆δ a,max, for one host-guest complex are known, the binding
constants for the remaining host-guest complexes can be determined. During the titration it must be
possible to assign a chemical shift to a speciﬁc host. When guest is added to the mixture of hosts, the
observed changes in chemical shifts, ∆δ a for the known host and ∆δ b for another host, are plotted
against each other. By ﬁtting the data points to Equation 19 the two unknowns, Kb and ∆δ b,max, can
be determined.54,89
∆δb =
∆δb,max ·∆δa ·Kb
∆δa,max ·Ka −∆δa ·Ka +∆δa ·Kb
(19)
87
==PAGE:100==
Speciﬁcally, for the titration experiments of cis-templates, the mixture of hosts consist of both the
cis- and the trans-isomers, where Ka,trans and ∆δ trans,max are known from ﬁtting to the 1:1 binding
isotherm. Upon addition of cyclodextrin the resulting changes in chemical shifts, ∆δcis and ∆δtrans,
are plotted against each other. By deﬁning trans = a and cis = b the binding constant for the cis-
isomer, Kb,cis, can be obtained by ﬁtting the ∆δcis versus ∆δtrans plot to Equation 19. Applications of
the methodologies to calculate association constants will be described for the speciﬁc templates.
Template trans-Azo as host
In the titration experiments with host trans-Azo the desired trans-isomer was the only isomer observed
in the acquired 1H NMR spectra. The results of the titration experiment with trans-Azo template are
illustrated in Figure 73. For the titration of trans-Azo template with α-CD guest, partial 1H NMR
spectra for the aromatic regions are shown in Figure 73b. Upon addition of α-CD, all aromatic
protons moved downﬁeld indicating host-guest complexation. The two doublets most downﬁeld in
the partial 1H NMR spectra diminish into the baseline during titration, and the protons around 7.60
ppm overlap during titration. This could be an effect of intermediate exchange compared to the NMR
chemical shift timescale.64,90 The observed chemical shift change, ∆δobs, of the singlet most upﬁeld
in the aromatic region, H11, was used to construct the binding isotherm. The absolute value of ∆δobs
was used with respect to the performance of the algorithm applied in the ﬁtting procedure. For a
1:1 binding interaction the best non-linear curve ﬁt of the binding isotherm was ﬁtted according to
Equation 13 in section 1.6.1, as shown in Figure 73b. The resulting association constant Ka(trans-
Azo, α-CD) = 8070 ± 560 M-1 was obtained.
The 1H NMR titration experiment carried out for trans-Azo with the β-CD guest also led to change
in chemical shifts indicating a binding interaction. The binding constant was determined to Ka(trans-
Azo, β-CD) = 1800 ± 110 M-1 based on ﬁtting the observed chemical shift change for H11 as shown
in Figure 73c.
For the titration experiment of trans-Azo with the γ-CD guest, the aromatic peaks broadened and
diminished into the baseline upon addition of γ-CD, as shown in Figure 73d. The ﬁtted binding
isotherm was therefore based on the chemical shift changes of the aliphatic peak corresponding to
proton H14 in Figure 73a to obtain Ka(trans-Azo, β-CD) = 260 ± 30 M-1.
As expected, in accordance with the work of Wu et al. the trans-Azo host has the strongest binding
afﬁnity towards α-CD among the natural cyclodextrins.52,53 Howewer, the weaker binding interac-
tions with mainly β-CD but also γ-CD might inﬂuence the selectivity in the synthesis of cyclodextrins
using trans-Azo as template. All calculated binding constants are summarised in Table 14.
88
==PAGE:101==
7.30
7.40
7.50
7.60
7.70
7.80
7.90
8.00
8.10
8.20
δ (ppm)
1.0
2.0
3.5
5.3
7.1
9.1
11
14
17
21
25
30
0.0
Eq. α-CD  
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Δδ (ppm)
[α-CD] (M)
H11
a) trans-Azo
b) trans-Azo with α-CD
c) trans-Azo with β-CD
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
[β-CD] (M)
Δδ (ppm)
7.40
7.50
7.60
7.70
7.80
7.90
δ (ppm)
1.1
2.2
3.8
5.8
7.8
10
13
16
21
27
34
36
0.0
Eq. β -CD  
H11
2.40
2.50
2.60
2.70
2.80
7.40
7.50
7.60
7.70
7.80
7.90
8.00
δ (ppm)
0.0
6.0
16
35
65
107
Eq. γ-CD  
H14
d) trans-Azo with γ-CD
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Δδ (ppm)
[γ-CD] (M)
Ka (trans-Azo, α-CD) = 8070 ± 560 M-1
Ka (trans-Azo, β-CD) = 1800 ± 110 M-1
Ka (trans-Azo, γ-CD) = 260 ± 30 M-1
Figure 73: a) Trans-Azo template with assigned proton numbers. Partial 1H NMR spectra and ﬁtted 1:1 binding
isotherms based on ∆δobs of the speciﬁed proton number upon addition of b) α-CD, c) β-CD, and d) γ-CD. The
titrations were performed with 0.1 mM template solutions in 100 mM phosphate buffer in D2O, pH 7.5, at 298
K.
89
==PAGE:102==
Template cis-Azo as host
In the titration experiments with cis-Azo, the NMR samples with template solution were irradiated
with UV light at 365 nm at least three hours before starting the experiment and again ﬁve minutes after
each addition of guest. The Azo template solution existed, as expected, as an interconverting mixture
between cis- and trans-isomers. A theoretical structure for the cis-Azo template is shown in Fig-
ure 74a. For the speciﬁc titration of cis-Azo with α-CD guest the chemical shifts for the trans-isomer
diminished during the titration as depicted in Figure 74b. The chemical shift of a peak corresponding
to the cis-isomer and trans-isomer, respectively, could not be followed during titration and hence,
∆δcis versus ∆δtrans could not be plotted against each other to ﬁt a value for Ka(cis). The presence of
trans-isomer could not be neglected because a high association constant for trans-Azo to α-CD was
calculated. By qualitative analysis of the changes in chemical shifts two things can be mentioned.
Firstly, the two most downﬁeld doublets corresponding to protons H3 and H4 in the trans-isomer dis-
appear after addition of one equivalent α-CD which indicates intermediate exchange relative to the
NMR chemical shift timescale.64 Secondly, the two overlapping doublets of protons H3 and H4 in the
cis-isomer around 7 ppm start moving downﬁeld after addition of more than three equivalents α-CD.
Together, this indicates a competitive binding event where the binding interaction of trans-Azo to
α-CD is stronger than for cis-Azo binding to α-CD thus Ka(cis-Azo, α-CD) ≪8070 M-1.
For the titration of cis-Azo with β-CD the partial 1H NMR spectra of the aromatic region is shown in
Figure 74c. The ratio of trans-isomer was so small that the corresponding peaks were estimated under
the limit of detection indicating a very low concentration of trans-isomer. Therefore, the observed
chemical shift changes of protons H3 and H4 originating solely from the cis-isomer was used to
generate the binding isotherm as depicted in Figure 74c. From ﬁtting to a 1:1 binding model according
to Equation 13 the binding constant Ka(cis-Azo, β-CD) = 2780 ± 120 M-1 was obtained. However,
this value might not be accurate due to competitive binding interaction with small amounts of trans-
Azo which has not been taken into account.
A similar situation was observed for the titration of cis-Azo with γ-CD. From the ﬁtted binding
isotherm based on the overlapping protons H3 and H4 in the cis-isomer (Figure 74d) a binding con-
stant of Ka(cis-Azo, γ-CD) = 180 ± 20 M-1 was calculated. For the 1H NMR titration experiments
with cis-Azo, the highest association constant was calculated for cis-Azo binding to β-CD. Moreover,
weak binding interactions of cis-Azo to α-CD and γ-CD were determined.
90
==PAGE:103==
6.90
7.00
7.10
7.20
7.30
7.40
7.50
7.60
7.70
7.80
7.90
8.00
8.10
δ (ppm)
1.0
2.0
3.5
5.3
7.1
9.1
11
14
17
21
25
37
0.0
Eq. α-CD  
6.80
6.90
7.00
7.10
7.20
7.30
7.40
7.50
7.60
7.70
7.80
7.90
8.00
δ (ppm)
0.0
1.1
2.2
3.8
5.8
7.8
10
13
16
21
27
34
40
Eq. β-CD  
c) cis-Azo with β-CD 
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
Δδ cis (ppm)
[β-CD] (M)
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Δδ cis (ppm)
[γ -CD] (M)
6.7
6.8
6.9
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
7.9
8.0
8.1
8.2
8.3
δ (ppm)
0.0
6.0
16
35
65
107
Eq. γ-CD  
d) cis-Azo with γ-CD 
a) cis-Azo
b) cis-Azo with α-CD 
Ka (cis-Azo, β-CD) = 2780 ± 120 M-1
Ka (cis-Azo, γ-CD) = 180 ± 20 M-1
H3, H4
= cis
= trans
H3, H4
H3, H4
Figure 74: a) Cis-Azo template with assigned proton numbers. b) Partial 1H NMR spectra of cis-Azo upon
addition of α-CD. The dotted red line is added to help the eye see the chemical shift change. Partial 1H NMR
spectra and ﬁtted 1:1 binding isotherms based on ∆δobs of the overlapping cis-protons H3 and H4 upon addition
of c) β-CD and d) γ-CD. Conditions as in Figure 73.
91
==PAGE:104==
Template trans-mAzo as host
In titration experiments for trans-mAzo, full conversion to the trans-isomer was not obtained. For
titration of trans-mAzo with α-CD the ratio of cis-isomer was estimated to be negligible as the cis-
signals were weak and did not change in chemical shifts upon addition of α-CD i.e. interfere with the
binding interaction. As shown in Figure 75b, the changes in chemical shift of the H2 proton in the
trans-molecule were small and a very weak association constant of Ka(trans-mAzo, α-CD) = 140 ±
40 M-1 was determined.
Similar assumptions applied to the titration of trans-mAzo with β-CD. The observed chemical shift
changes of the aromatic region are very small for the equivalents of β-CD added. A stack plot of
the 1H NMR spectra together with the ﬁtted binding isotherm are shown in Figure 75c. The obtained
association constant is Ka(trans-mAzo, β-CD) = 970 ± 190 M-1. The datapoints for ∆δobs plotted
against the concentration of β-CD deviate from the ﬁtted 1:1 binding model which is reﬂected in a
relatively large uncertainty of the association constant. This might be due to the very small changes
in the observed chemical shifts causing a relatively larger error of ∆δobs.
In the titration experiment of trans-mAzo with γ-CD the NMR sample was not successfully kept
away from ambient light resulting in a mixture of cis- and trans-isomers in the approximate ratio 1:2,
respectively, as depicted in Figure 75d. For both isomers the changes in chemical shifts were insignif-
icant compared to the equivalents of γ-CD added indicating a very weak binding interaction. In the
titration experiments for the trans-mAzo template with the natural cyclodextrins, it was found that
the binding afﬁnity of trans-mAzo for β-CD is almost seven times greater than for α-CD, whereas
the binding afﬁnity for γ-CD is estimated to be insigniﬁcant.
92
==PAGE:105==
= trans
= cis
Eq. α-CD  
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.000
0.002
0.004
Δδ trans (ppm)
[α-CD] (M)
a) trans-mAzo
b) trans-mAzo with α-CD
Ka (trans-mAzo, α-CD) = 140 ± 40 M-1
c) trans-mAzo with β-CD
6.62
6.66
6.70
6.74
6.78
6.82
6.86
6.90
6.94
6.98
7.02
7.06
δ (ppm)
0.0
1.1
2.2
4.2
6.2
9.1
13
17
21
27
33
39
Eq. β-CD  
H2
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
Δδ trans (ppm)
[β-CD] (M)
H2
H5
d) trans-mAzo with γ-CD
H5
Ka (trans-mAzo, β-CD) = 970 ± 190 M-1
6.54
6.58
6.62
6.66
6.70
6.74
6.78
6.82
6.86
6.90
6.94
6.98
7.02
7.06
δ (ppm)
0.0
5.2
13
28
60
100
H2
6.35
6.40
6.45
6.50
6.55
6.60
6.65
6.70
6.75
6.80
6.85
6.90
6.95
7.00
7.05
δ (ppm)
3.0
12
37
69
100
Eq. γ-CD  
H2
Figure 75: a) Trans-mAzo template with assigned proton numbers. Partial 1H NMR spectra of trans-mAzo and
the ﬁtted binding isotherms based on observed chemical shift changes for proton H2 upon addition of b) α-CD
and c) β-CD. d) Partial 1H NMR spectra upon addition of γ-CD. Conditions as in Figure 73.
93
==PAGE:106==
Template cis-mAzo as host
The mAzo template solution was irradiated with 625 nm light overnight prior to the titration experi-
ments to induce trans to cis isomerisation. A cis/trans ratio of approximately 8:1 was obtained. This
means that both the cis- and the trans-isomers were present as hosts and therefore, Equation 19 was
used for calculating the binding constants for the cis-isomers.
Template cis-mAzo illustrated in Figure 76a was titrated with α-CD obtaining the 1H NMR spectra
presented in Figure 76b. The observed chemical shift changes were very small. The ∆δcis was plotted
against ∆δtrans and by ﬁtting to Equation 19, as illustrated in Figure 76b, the association constant
Ka(cis-mAzo, α-CD) = 50 ± 20 M-1 was obtained. This value is subjected to a high level of uncer-
tainty which might be caused by the small changes in chemical shifts. It is fair to conclude that the
binding afﬁnity of cis-mAzo towards α-CD is low, probably in the 101 order of magnitude which is
in accordance with work reported by Wu et al.53
In the titration of cis-mAzo with β-CD, peaks corresponding to both the cis-isomer and trans-isomer
moved upon addition of β-CD. The corresponding plot of ∆δcis versus ∆δtrans were ﬁtted according
to Equation 19, as shown in Figure 76c. The resulting association constant Ka(cis-mAzo, β-CD) =
670 ± 20 M-1 entails that both cis- and trans-mAzo have signiﬁcant binding interactions with β-CD.
For titration of cis-mAzo with γ-CD very small changes in chemical shifts were observed. The
intensity of signals originating from the trans-isomer were weak and almost 100 equivalents of γ-
CD were added with almost no change in chemical shift. Therefore, the association constant was
calculated by ﬁtting to the binding isotherm based solely on the ∆δcis as shown in Figure 76d to
obtain Ka(cis-mAzo, γ-CD) = 7 ± 5 M-1. Overall, the 1H NMR titration studies of cis-mAzo show
that the template almost exclusive binds to β-CD.
94
==PAGE:107==
H2
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
Δδ cis (ppm)
Δδ trans (ppm)
b) cis-mAzo with α-CD
Ka (cis-mAzo, α-CD) = 50 ± 20 M-1
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.000
0.001
0.002
Δδ cis (ppm)
Δδ trans (ppm)
Ka (cis-mAzo, β-CD) = 670 ± 20 M-1
c) cis-mAzo with β-CD
H2
6.46
6.50
6.54
6.58
6.62
6.66
6.70
6.74
6.78
6.82
6.86
6.90
6.94
6.98
δ (ppm)
0.0
3.0
12
37
69
100
Eq. γ-CD  
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Δδ cis (ppm)
[γ-CD] (M)
Ka (cis-mAzo, γ-CD) = 7 ± 5 M-1
H2
H2
= trans
d) cis-mAzo with γ-CD
6.56
6.60
6.64
6.68
6.72
6.76
6.80
6.84
6.88
6.92
6.96
7.00
7.04
7.08
δ (ppm)
0.0
5.2
13
28
60
100
Eq. α-CD  
6.60
6.64
6.68
6.72
6.76
6.80
6.84
6.88
6.92
6.96
7.00
7.04
δ (ppm)
0.0
2.2
10
31
49
60
Eq. β-CD  
H2
H2
= cis
a) cis-mAzo
Figure 76: Partial 1H NMR spectra of mAzo and ﬁtted plots of ∆δcis versus ∆δtrans based on observed chemical
shift changes of proton H2 upon addition of a) α-CD and b) β-CD. c) Partial 1H NMR spectra of mAzo and
ﬁtted 1:1 binding isotherm based on ∆δobs of cis-proton H2 upon addition of γ-CD. Conditions as in Figure 73.
95
==PAGE:108==
Template trans-ipAzo as host
In the titration experiments with trans-ipAzo, the presence of cis-isomer was non-existing or so small
that it was neglected. Upon addition of α-CD small changes in chemical shifts were observed. The
binding isotherm was constructed from the ∆δobs of the aromatic proton H2 as illustrated in Fig-
ure 77b. By ﬁtting Equation 13 to the binding isotherm the association constant Ka(trans-ipAzo,
α-CD) = 170 ± 20 M-1 was obtained. For the titration of trans-ipAzo with β-CD (Figure 77c) the
association constant was calculated to Ka(trans-ipAzo, β-CD) = 74 ± 9 M-1 based on proton H2. In
the titration with γ-CD the H2 proton moved slightly by addition of huge excess of γ-CD indicating
a weak binding interaction in accordance with the calculated Ka(trans-ipAzo, γ-CD) = 29 ± 8 M-1.
The partial 1H NMR spectra and the ﬁtted binding isotherms are shown in Figure 77d. Template
trans-ipAzo does not have any signiﬁcant binding afﬁnity for the natural cyclodextrins, in accordance
with the work reported by Wu et al.52
96
==PAGE:109==
6.10
6.20
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
6.80
6.90
δ (ppm)
0.0
6.0
18
39
74
Eq. α-CD  
100
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.000
0.001
0.002
Δδ trans (ppm)
[α-CD] (M)
Ka (trans-ipAzo, α-CD) = 170 ± 20 M-1
H2
6.10
6.20
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
6.80
6.90
δ (ppm)
0.0
5.2
15
31
52
73
Eq. β-CD  
H2
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Δδ trans (ppm)
[β-CD] (M)
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
6.80
6.90
Δδ (ppm)
0.0
48
107
219
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Δδ trans (ppm)
[γ-CD] (M)
Eq. γ-CD  
H2
Ka (trans-ipAzo, β-CD) = 74 ± 9 M-1
Ka (trans-ipAzo, γ-CD) = 29 ± 8 M-1
a) trans-ipAzo
b) trans-ipAzo with α-CD
c) trans-ipAzo with β-CD
d) trans-ipAzo with γ-CD
Figure 77: a) Trans-ipAzo template with assigned proton numbers. Partial 1H NMR spectra and the corre-
sponding ﬁtted binding isotherm based on ∆δobs of H2 upon addition of b) α-CD, c) β-CD, and d) γ-CD.
Conditions as in Figure 73.
97
==PAGE:110==
Template cis-ipAzo as host
For titration experiments with the cis-ipAzo template the NMR samples with template solution were
irradiated with 625 nm light overnight before starting the titration experiments. The template existed
as a mixture between cis- and trans-isomers with the most intense signals originating from cis-ipAzo.
Upon addition of α-CD the observed chemical shifts of cis- and trans-isomers moved slightly. The
observed chemical shift changes of proton H2 from the trans- and the cis-isomer, respectively, were
plotted against one another as shown in Figure 78b. By applying the previous described method of
ﬁtting the plot of ∆δcis versus ∆δtrans the association constant Ka(cis-ipAzo, α-CD) = 33 ± 9 M-1 was
obtained.
In the titration experiment of cis-ipAzo with β-CD, chemical shift changes for both isomers occured.
The H2 proton from the trans-isomer could be followed, whereas the H2 originating from the cis-
isomer broadened upon addition of β-CD. Instead, the aromatic triplet H1 at 7.10 ppm was used
for the cis-isomer for plotting ∆δcis versus ∆δtrans, as depicted in Figure 78c, resulting in the ﬁtted
association constant Ka(cis-ipAzo, β-CD) = 220 ± 50 M-1.
Finally, a 1H NMR titration experiment with cis-ipAzo and γ-CD was performed. Upon addition of
γ-CD the proton signals from the cis-isomer moved and the linewidth broadened resulting in unde-
tectable signals after a few equivalents of γ-CD added. As before mentioned, this indicates that the
binding interaction between cis-ipAzo and γ-CD is in the intermediate exchange regime on an NMR
chemical shift timescale.64 The signals originating from trans-isomer did not diminish and could be
followed throughout the titration experiment with small changes in chemical shifts. A ∆δcis versus
∆δtrans plot was established for the ﬁrst few data points based on chemical shift changes of the aro-
matic doublet H2 for the trans-isomer and the aromatic singlet H11 for the cis-isomer as depicted in
Figure 78d. An estimate of the binding afﬁnity was obtained by ﬁtting to the ∆δcis versus ∆δtrans plot
where up to 7.8 equivalents γ-CD was added compared to ipAzo template. The resulting association
constant Ka(cis-ipAzo, γ-CD) = 5900 ± 900 M-1 indicates a relatively strong binding interaction but
should not be granted more than an estimate. The estimated association constant is greater than ex-
pected compared to what have been reported by Wu and co-workers who reported a Ka of 1659 ±
57 M-1 for the same azobenzene moiety attached to a different solubilising group.52 The 1H NMR
experiment of cis-ipAzo with γ-CD should be repeated with addition of smaller aliquots of γ-CD
to obtain more datapoints around the sloping part of the binding curve and hence calculate a more
reliable binding constant. Overall, the 1H NMR titration experiments of cis-ipAzo revealed that the
cis-ipAzo shows the signiﬁcantly greatest binding afﬁnity to γ-CD of the natural cyclodextrins.
98
==PAGE:111==
Ka (cis-ipAzo, α-CD) = 33 ± 9 M-1
Eq. α-CD  
6.10
6.20
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
6.80
6.90
δ (ppm)
0.0
6.0
18
39
74
107
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.000
0.001
0.002
Δδ cis (ppm)
Δδ trans (ppm)
b) cis-ipAzo with α-CD
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Δδ cis (ppm)
Δδ trans (ppm)
Ka (cis-ipAzo, β-CD) = 220 ± 50 M-1
c) cis-ipAzo with β-CD
5.90
6.00
6.10
6.20
6.30
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
6.80
6.90
δ (ppm)
0.0
1.0
2.5
4.9
7.8
11
15
19
23
29
25
42
0.0000
0.0002
0.0004
0.0006
0.0008
0.00
0.05
0.10
Δδ cis (ppm)
Δδ trans (ppm)
Ka (cis-ipAzo, γ-CD) ~ 5900 ± 900 M-1
= trans
= cis
H2
H2
Eq. β-CD  
6.40
6.50
6.60
6.70
6.80
6.90
7.00
7.10
7.20
7.30
δ (ppm)
0.0
5.2
15
31
52
73
H2
H2
H1
H2
H11
a) cis-ipAzo
d) cis-ipAzo with γ-CD
Eq. γ-CD  
H2
H11
Figure 78: Partial 1H NMR spectra of ipAzo and the corresponding ﬁtted plots of ∆δcis versus ∆δtrans upon
addition of a) α-CD, b) β-CD, and c) γ-CD. Conditions as in Figure 73.
99
==PAGE:112==
Summary of 1H NMR binding studies
Table 14 summarises the calculated and estimated association constants for the templates with the nat-
ural cyclodextrins. The corresponding best-ﬁt values determined for the maximum change in chemical
shift, ∆δmax, are tabulated in Appendix 7.3 (Table 16). To conclude, trans-Azo showed a high bind-
ing afﬁnity towards α-CD and β-CD although the association constant was signiﬁcantly larger for
the binding interactions with α-CD. The greatest quantiﬁed binding afﬁnity for the cis-Azo template
was found for the binding interactions with β-CD. In an enzyme-mediated dynamic combinatorial
library of cyclodextrins, cis-Azo is expected to bind β-CD, whereas trans-Azo is expected to bind to
α-CD. The mAzo template did not show any great binding afﬁnities towards the natural cyclodex-
trins, although association constants in the 500-1000 M-1 range were calculated for both the trans-
and the cis-isomers with β-CD. Therefore, it is not expected that the different isomers of the mAzo
template will be selective in the synthesis of different CDs. Instead, both the cis- and the trans-mAzo
templates are expected to amplify β-CD in a dynamic combinatorial library of CDs. For the ipAzo
template the signiﬁcantly greatest association constant was estimated from the titration experiment
with cis-ipAzo template and γ-CD. The cis-ipAzo template is therefore expected to amplify γ-CD in
an enzyme-mediated DCL of cyclodextrins.
Table 14: Association constants, Ka (M-1), for cis- and trans-isomers of Azo, mAzo and ipAzo templates with
α-, β-, and γ-CD in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, in D2O at 298 K. *Estimated by qualitative analysis.
Template
Azo
mAzo
ipAzo
trans
cis
trans
cis
trans
cis
α-CD
8070 ± 560
≪8070*
140 ± 40
50 ± 20
170 ± 20
33 ± 9
β-CD
1800 ± 110
2780 ± 120
970 ± 190
670 ± 20
74 ± 9
220 ± 50
γ-CD
260 ± 30
180 ± 20
Insigniﬁcant*
7 ± 5
29 ± 8
∼5900 ± 900
100
==PAGE:113==
3.4
Templated enzyme-mediated interconversion of cyclodextrins
Through analytical experiments it has been shown that the templates show good photoswitching prop-
erties without signs of photodegradation and the cis/trans ratio can be changed by irradiation with
light at speciﬁc wavelengths. Furthermore, is has been shown through binding studies that speciﬁc
isomers of the templates have a stronger afﬁnity towards speciﬁc natural cyclodextrins. By exploiting
the templates in a DCL with CGTase catalysed interconversion of cyclodextrins it is expected that a
light-controlled synthesis of cyclodextrins can be performed.
3.4.1
Light-controlled synthesis of cyclodextrins
The CGTase-mediated DCL of cyclodextrins were investigated in the presence and absence of the
templates Azo, mAzo, and ipAzo, respectively. The libraries were prepared staring from 10 mg/mL
α-CD with 65 µL CGTase stock solution per mL of reaction mixture. These type of libraries have
previously been investigated by Larsen and Beeren as described in the introduction section 1.3.2.30
As described, the system of interconverting CDs is kinetically trapped in an pseudo-thermodynamic
system and will eventually hydrolyse towards linear glucans and glucose as the thermodynamical
product. However, the libraries starting from 10 mg/mL α-CD can be utilised in templated synthesis
since the libraries are trapped under pseudo-thermodynamic control for at least 24 hours. In all
untemplated or templated libraries described in the following sections, the template mixtures were
kept either in darkness overnight or subjected to light of speciﬁed wavelengths in a period of time
efﬁcient to ensure maximum of trans- or cis-isomer, respectively, prior to addition of enzyme. All
libraries were performed at room temperature and all reference libraries (untemplated) were subjected
to the exact same conditions as the templated libraries in order to determine the template effect. All
libraries were followed using HPLC-ELSD analysis to obtain the library distributions of CDs over
time.
Azo-templated libraries
Two 10 mM Azo-templated libraries were investigated and compared to reference libraries. The
trans-Azo-templated library was performed in darkness, while the cis-Azo library was performed
under constant irradiation with UV light at 365 nm. Figure 79 shows the HPLC chromatograms of
the untemplated vs. the two Azo-templated libraries. The library distributions were followed from 15
minutes to 5 hours. By integrating the present peaks in each chromatogram the distribution percentage
of α-, β-, and γ-CD over time can be obtained, as shown in Figure 80. b
b
The non-linearity of the ELSD data was compensated by a calibration.
101
==PAGE:114==
 
 
 
 
α
1,61
2,00
2,50
3,00
3,50
4,00
4,50
5,00
5,50
6,00
6,50
7,00
7,50
7,96
15 min
1 h
30 min
2 h
3 h
4 h
5 h
β
γ
Retention time (min)
1,61
2,00
2,50
3,00
3,50
4,00
4,50
5,00
5,50
6,00
6,50
7,00
7,50
7,96
Retention time (min)
15 min
2 h
3 h
4 h
5 h
30 min
1 h
α
β
γ
α
1,61
2,00
2,50
3,00
3,50
4,00
4,50
5,00
5,50
6,00
6,50
7,00
7,50
7,96
Retention time (min)
15 min
2 h
3 h
4 h
5 h
30 min
1 h
β
γ
No template 
Trans-Azo template 
15 min
1 h
30 min
2 h
3 h
4 h
5 h
β
γ
1,61
2,00
2,50
3,00
3,50
4,00
4,50
5,00
5,50
6,00
6,50
7,00
7,50
7,
α
Retention time (min)
No template 
Cis-Azo template 
Figure 79: Top) HPLC chromatograms from 15 minutes to 5 hours of the untemplated library (left) and the
trans-Azo-templated library (right) performed in darkness. Bottom) HPLC chromatograms from 15 minutes to
5 hours of the untemplated library (left) and the cis-Azo-templated library (right) performed under constant
irradiation with UV light at 365 nm.
102
==PAGE:115==
No template 
Trans-Azo template 
No template 
cis-Azo template 
Figure 80: Top) distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 5 hours of the untemplated
library (left) and the trans-Azo-templated library (right) performed in darkness. Bottom) distribution percent-
age of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 5 hours of the untemplated library (left) and the cis-Azo-templated
library (right) performed under constant irradiation with UV light at 365 nm. The libraries were performed
using 10 mg/mL α-CD with and without 10 mM template in 100 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.5 and at room
temperature.
The library reached pseudo-equilibrium after approximately two hours where the ﬁnal distribution
percentage of natural CDs was stabilised. The hydrolysis products, i.e the linear α-glucans, are not
included in Figure 80 since it is not of particular interest in this project. However, it can be seen that
the total amount of cyclodextrins decrease over time due to the described hydrolysis. With absence of
template the observed distribution at pseudo-equilibrium was 31% α-CD, 56% β-DC, and 13% γ-CD
similar to the untemplated distribution reported by Larsen and Beeren.30 The untemplated distribution
did not change upon irradiation with light. In the presence of the trans-Azo template a small ampli-
ﬁcation of α-CD was observed. On the other hand the library irradiation with UV light at 365 nm,
hence under inﬂuence of cis-Azo, showed an ampliﬁcation of β-CD. This illustrates that the different
isomers of the Azo template in fact changes the library distribution of CDs in good accordance with
the obtained binding constants. Surprisingly, the ampliﬁcation of α-CD in the trans-Azo-templated
103
==PAGE:116==
library did not yield α-CD as the main library member even though the template showed a high bind-
ing constant towards α-CD. This can be due to the fact that a relatively high binding constant towards
β-CD was also observed and therefore the stabilisation and thus ampliﬁcation of α-CD can not out-
compete the ampliﬁcation of β-CD. In comparison, Beeren and Larsen54 obtained an ampliﬁcation
of α-CD above 80% with a similar azobenzene template as presented in section 1.5.3 in a DCL with
2 mg/mL sugar and 2 mM template. Therefore, other conditions for this type of cis-Azo-templated
libraries could be explored.
mAzo-templated libraries
A similar study of 10 mM mAzo-templated libraries was investigated and compared to reference
libraries as shown in Figure 81. The obtained distribution does not show any signiﬁcant change
from the reference library, except a very small ampliﬁcation of β-CD for both trans- and cis-mAzo-
templated libraries. This result is in agreement with the obtained binding constants from the binding
studies. However, the result is inconsistent with the work of Wu et al.53 who reports a relatively strong
binding afﬁnity between β-CD and a trans-isomer of a methoxy-substituted azobenzene moiety and
a small binding afﬁnity between β-CD and a cis-isomer of a methoxy-substituted azobenzene moiety.
However, the molecules used in the study by Wu et al. were different in the way that the solubilising
pyridinium group is smaller an therefore the binding could have involved other recognition moieties.
The solubilising group used in this project is signiﬁcantly larger which excludes the opportunity for
the mAzo template to thread through the β-CD via the solubilising end of the molecule. This means
that the templates used in this project can only bind to β-CD via the azobenzene end. The results
found through the NMR and library studies indicate that the mAzo template does not give the desired
selectivity in a light-controlled synthesis of CDs and therefore, the template will not be investigated
any further.
 
 
cis-mAzo template 
Trans-mAzo template 
No template 
Figure 81: Distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 6 hours of; Left) the untemplated
library. Middle) the trans-mAzo-templated library performed in darkness. Right) the cis-mAzo-templated
library performed under constant irradiation with red light at 625 nm. Conditions as in Figure 80.
104
==PAGE:117==
ipAzo-templated libraries
To complete the initial investigations of the templates’ effect on the library distribution, a similar
study was performed with 10 mM ipAzo-template. The resulting distributions of CDs are shown in
Figure 82. The distributions show that the trans-ipAzo template does not affect the library distribution
very much, whereas the cis-ipAzo template shows a great ampliﬁcation of γ-CD compared to the
reference library. From Figure 82 it can not be seen whether the pseudo-equilibrium has been reached
for the cis-ipAzo-templated library because the distribution of CDs did not stabilise within ﬁve hours.
However, it looks like the distribution was almost stable after ﬁve hours. Therefore, for all subsequent
studies involving ipAzo the studies were performed for at longer time to ensure that the pseudo-
equilibrium was reached to obtain the ﬁnal distribution percentage.
 
 
 
cis-ipAzo template 
trans-ipAzo template 
No template 
Figure 82: Distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 5 hours of; Left) the untemplated
library. Middle) the trans-ipAzo-templated library performed in darkness. Right) the cis-ipAzo-templated
library performed under constant irradiation with red light at 625 nm. Conditions as in Figure 80.
3.4.2
Libraries with varying light conditions
From the initial studies of the templates in libraries of CDs, it was clariﬁed how the different template
isomers affect the library distribution of CDs. Trans-Azo showed ampliﬁcation of α-CD, cis-Azo
showed ampliﬁcation of β-CD, and cis-ipAzo showed ampliﬁcation of γ-CD. Consequently, Azo-
and ipAzo-templated libraries showed promising results in light-controlled synthesis of the natural
cyclodextrins. Therefore, these templates were further investigated to test whether a change in distri-
bution could be induced by change of light conditions during a library study. Libraries with 10 mM
Azo and ipAzo, respectively, were tested starting from dark with mainly trans-isomers, then irradi-
ated with a speciﬁc wavelength to induce trans to cis isomerisation, and ﬁnally irradiated with blue
light at 470 nm to switch back to the trans-isomers. The obtained distributions of CDs from the study
are shown in Figure 83 which illustrates nicely how the library distribution adapts to the change of
conditions by irradiating with light at different wavelengths. As expected, irradiating with blue light
105
==PAGE:118==
at 470 nm did change the library distribution towards the trans-isomer-templated distribution. This
shows the reversibility of the systems and hence the doubly dynamic properties of the DCLs. How-
ever, the amount of trans-isomer in the photo-stationary state at 470 nm is smaller than the starting
point from darkness as previously presented in Table 12. This is especially seen for the the ipAzo-
templated library where the γ-CD is still the main library member after irradiating with blue light at
470 nm.
Azo template 
ipAzo template 
No template 
No template 
Figure 83: Top) distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 13 hours of the untemplated
library (left) and the Azo-templated library (right) performed starting from darkness, then irradiated with UV
light at 365 nm, and ﬁnally irradiated with blue light at 470 nm. Bottom) distribution percentage of α-, β-,
and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 26 hours of the untemplated library (left) and the ipAzo-templated library (right)
performed starting from darkness, then irradiated with red light at 625 nm, and ﬁnally irradiated with blue
light at 470 nm. Conditions as in Figure 80.
With the shown ampliﬁcations of α-, β-, and γ-CD, the ampliﬁcation of α-CD was further investi-
gated to test whether it could be optimised towards a more selective outcome. It was hypothesised
106
==PAGE:119==
that a library with a larger amount of Azo template compared to concentration of sugar would lead
to a more selective ampliﬁcation of α-CD. Therefore, a library starting from 5 mg/mL α-CD and 10
mM Azo was tested. The library was again started from darkness, then irradiated with UV light at
365 nm to induce formation of cis-isomer, and ﬁnally irradiated with blue light at 470 nm to switch
back to trans-isomer. A library with 5 mg/mL α-CD reaches pseudo-equilibrium faster but is also
hydrolysed faster as described in section 1.3.2. Therefore, the study was performed in 3 hours inter-
vals in a total of 9 hours. The obtained distribution is illustrated in Figure 84 and shows that α-CD
can be ampliﬁed as the main library member with a modest excess compared to β-CD. Furthermore,
this investigation emphasises that optimisation of conditions is important to improve the selectivity.
Based on the presented templated libraries it has now been established that both α-, β-, and γ-CD can
be ampliﬁed and synthesised as the main library member in the DCL of CDs under light-control.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 mg/ml a-CD, 10 mM Azo template 
No template 
Figure 84: Distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 9 hours of; Left) the untemplated
library. Right) the Azo-templated library starting from darkness, then irradiated with UV light at 365 nm,
and ﬁnally irradiated with blue light at 470 nm. The libraries were performed using 5 mg/mL α-CD with and
without 10 mM template in 100 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.5 and at room temperature.
3.4.3
Two templates in one library
The light-controlled synthesis of cyclodextrins was further investigated in a library containing both the
Azo- and ipAzo templates. The idea was to hopefully demonstrate a change in the distribution going
from mainly α-CD, to mainly β-CD, and ﬁnally mainly γ-CD within the same library. The library
study was therefore designed with 5 mg/mL α-CD and 10 mM of both Azo- and ipAzo template. The
library was started from darkness to contain the two trans-isomers. Here, trans-Azo was expected to
amplify α-CD and trans-ipAzo was not expected to amplify any library members. Upon irradiation
with UV light at 365 nm, cis-Azo would be formed and amplify β-CD. Finally, upon irradiation with
107
==PAGE:120==
red light at 625 nm, γ-CD would be ampliﬁed by binding of cis-ipAzo. The obtained distribution of
CDs is seen in Figure 85. The ampliﬁcation of α- and β-CD was demonstrated as expected, however
γ-CD was not ampliﬁed under the ﬁnal irradiation with red light at 625 nm. A UV-vis study of the
Azo template showed that red light at 625 nm induces cis-to-trans isomerisation (Appendix 7.2).
Therefore, the lack of ampliﬁcation of γ-CD upon irradiation at 625 nm is thought to be due to the
lower binding constants between cis-ipAzo and γ-CD compared to the trans-Azo binding constants
to α-CD and the simultaneous relatively high binding constant to β-CD. Therefore, the cis-ipAzo can
not compete with the binding of the Azo template.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 mg/ml a-CD, 10 mM Azo + ipAzo template 
No template 
Figure 85: Distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 9.5 hours of; Left) the untemplated
library. Right) the Azo- and ipAzo-templated library starting from darkness, then irradiated with UV light at
365 nm, and ﬁnally irradiated with red light at 625 nm. The libraries were performed using 5 mg/mL α-CD
with and without 2 × 10 mM template in 100 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.5 and at room temperature.
Based on the result, it was tested whether a more orthogonal system could be obtained using green
light at 530 nm instead of red light at 625 nm to induce isomerisation towards cis-ipAzo. The system
would be more orthogonal if green light at 530 nm would not induce formation of trans-Azo, but
still would induce enough isomerisation towards cis-ipAzo to obtain a signiﬁcant ampliﬁcation of
γ-CD. Therefore, a UV-vis study of the Azo template upon irradiation with green light at 530 nm was
conducted. Unfortunately, the UV-vis absorption spectra showed that cis-to-trans isomerisation of the
Azo template was in fact induced by green light at 530 nm, similar to the isomerisation induced by
red light at 625 nm (Appendix 7.2). Not surprisingly, the library study performed with green light at
530 nm instead of red light at 625 nm, showed an almost identical outcome with only a small increase
in the distribution percentage of γ-CD (Figure 86). However, the distribution of γ-CD might not have
reached pseudo-equilibrium after 9.5 hours (590 minutes) as the curve has not been stabilised yet.
Therefore, any certain conclusions can not be stated. Nevertheless, the change between green and red
108
==PAGE:121==
light did not show signiﬁcant changes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 mg/ml a-CD, 10 mM Azo + ipAzo template 
No template 
Figure 86: Distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 9.5 hours of; Left) the untemplated
library. Right) the Azo- and ipAzo-templated library starting from darkness, then irradiated with UV light at
365 nm, and ﬁnally irradiated with green light at 530 nm. Conditions as in Figure 85.
For comparison, the library studies containing two templates were also performed starting from 10
mg/mL α-CD and 10 mM of both Azo- and ipAzo templates. The obtained distributions (Appendix
7.4) show that α-CD is less ampliﬁed under these conditions, as previously shown for a library with
10 mM Azo-template starting from 10 mg/mL α-CD. A little more γ-CD is obtained under these
conditions, but the ampliﬁcation is still minor compared to the distribution obtained in the reference
libraries.
In a future perspective it would have been interesting to test and optimise the conditions of the double-
templated library e.g. by addition of more ipAzo template than Azo template to hopefully amplify
more γ-CD. However, this could lower the ampliﬁcation of α-CD and most likely many tests and
changes of conditions would be necessary to optimise the outcome of the dynamic libraries of CDs.
To conclude, it was shown that Azo- and ipAzo-templated libraries can be exploited in an ampliﬁ-
cation and synthesis of α-, β-, and γ-CD, respectively, as the main library member in DCLs of CDs
under light-control. Optimisation of conditions i.e. template and sugar concentrations were shown to
increase the selectivity of the ampliﬁcation of α-CD. This emphasises the further possibility of ﬁne-
tuning and optimising the library distributions towards a more selective light-controlled synthesis of
CDs.
109
==PAGE:122==
4
Conclusion and future perspectives
In this project light-controlled synthesis of α-, β-, and γ-CDs was investigated by exploiting azobenzene-
templated enzyme-mediated dynamic combinatorial chemistry. Three different azobenzene templates
were successfully synthesised: Unsubstituted azobenzene Azo (1); methoxy-substituted azobenzene
mAzo (2); and isopropoxy-substituted azobenzene ipAzo (3). In the synthesis of the templates, differ-
ent synthetic pathways were investigated and synthetic procedures were optimised where necessary.
All templates exhibited the desired 10 mM solubility in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, at
room temperature, which proved a good solubility of the applied solubilising group.
The photoswitching properties of the templates in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, were
characterised by NMR and UV-vis spectroscopy. 1H NMR spectroscopy revealed that the templates
existed almost entirely as the thermodynamically stable trans-isomers after storage in darkness. The
photostationary states of the templates were investigated at 10 mM concentration in 100 mM phos-
phate buffered D2O. More than 60% cis-Azo could be obtained by irradiating with light at 365 nm.
Light irradiation of mAzo and ipAzo at 625 nm led to 92% and 65% conversion to cis-isomers, re-
spectively. For all templates, cis to trans isomerisation could be induced by irradiation with light at
470 nm, resulting in a photostationary state containing 66−77% of trans-isomers. The aggregation
tendencies of the templates were investigated by analysing a dilution series by 1H NMR spectroscopy.
The analysis revealed that the trans-isomers of each template aggregate at concentrations above 0.1
mM.
The binding interactions of both the cis- and the trans-isomer of each template with α-, β-, and
γ-CD were investigated by 1H NMR titration experiments. The experiments revealed that the trans-
Azo template has the highest binding afﬁnity towards α-CD with Ka = 8070 ± 560 M−1, whereas the
highest quantiﬁed binding afﬁnity for cis-Azo was found towards β-CD. The mAzo template did not
show any great binding afﬁnities towards the natural cyclodextrins although association constants in
the 500-1000 M-1 range were calculated for both the trans- and the cis-isomers with β-CD. For the
ipAzo template the signiﬁcantly greatest association constant was calculated for cis-ipAzo with γ-CD.
The templates’ effect on CGTase-mediated DCLs of CDs was investigated using HPLC analysis to
determine the CD distributions. The inﬂuence of the templates was examined under irradiation with
light at different wavelengths or conditions that favour the cis or trans isomer, respectively. Compared
to an untemplated reference library the trans-Azo template led to modest ampliﬁcation of α-CD, cis-
Azo ampliﬁed β-CD, whereas both cis- and trans-mAzo led to a very small ampliﬁcation of β-CD.
The cis-ipAzo showed a great ampliﬁcation of γ-CD, resulting in an increase of synthesised γ-CD
from 13% to more than 60% of the total concentration of CDs. These results are in accordance with
110
==PAGE:123==
the binding afﬁnities determined from 1H NMR titration experiments.
Libraries with multiple changes in light conditions were tested with template Azo and ipAzo, re-
spectively, proving that light could be applied as an external stimulus to change the distribution of
cyclodextrins in the DCLs as a result of cis−trans isomerisation. This emphasises that the presented
system exhibit doubly dynamic properties. Different library conditions, in terms of sugar and tem-
plate concentrations, were tested in order to enhance the selectivity towards a speciﬁc library member.
Finally, a library containing both the Azo and ipAzo templates was irradiated with light at various
wavelengths. The α- and β-CDs were successfully ampliﬁed, however, under the applied conditions
γ-CD was not ampliﬁed by irradiation at 625 nm or 530 nm, indicating that cis-ipAzo can not com-
pete with the binding of the trans-Azo template.
In a future perspective it would be interesting to study the binding interactions between the templates
and the natural cyclodextrins by, for example, a 2D NOESY NMR experiment. This could be per-
formed with the aim of determining how the speciﬁc template and cyclodextrins bind to one another.
In addition, it would be interesting to test and optimise more conditions for the DCLs towards a
more selective light-controlled synthesis of CDs. Especially, optimisation of the DCLs with multiple
azobenzene templates is necessary in order to improve the selectivity and control the outcome of the
enzymatically driven DCL. This might require investigations of different photoswitchable templates
with a better orthogonality with regard to the ampliﬁcation of speciﬁc cyclodextrins at speciﬁc wave-
lengths. Nevertheless, the approach of using multiple photoswitchable templates simultaneously in
an enzyme-mediated DCL opens up new opportunities for using light to remotely control the outcome
of enzymatic reactions.
111
==PAGE:124==
5
Experimentals
5.1
Genereal methods and materials
α-Cyclodextrin, β-cyclodextrin, γ-cyclodextrin, buffer salts, deuterated NMR solvents, and reagents
used for synthesis of templates were purchased from commercial suppliers and used as received. Dry
column vacuum chromatography (DCVC) was performed using silica gel 15–40 µm purchased from
Merck. Flash column chromatography was performed using silica gel 40–63 µm purchased from
Merck. Standard-Supercel-Z Celite® was used for dry loading compounds on. HPLC grade sol-
vents or better were used from commercial suppliers for all chromatographic analyses. Anhydrous
solvents were obtained from Innovative Technology PS-MD-7 Pure-solve solvent puriﬁcation. High
purity water (Milli-Q) was obtained by ﬁltering deionised water through a commercial water puriﬁ-
cation system (Merck Millipore Synergy UV). Molecular sieves (VWR Chemicals) were activated
using microwave at 800 W for 4 × 1 minutes and subsequently dried under high vacuum. Colourless
FisherbrandTM Microcentrifuge Tubes 0.6 mL were used for sample preparation (acidiﬁcation and
centrifugation) of HPLC samples, while colorless 2 mL glass vials with PTFE-lined screw-cap septa
with a 0.2 mL glass insert were used for short term sample storage and injection on chromatographic
equipment. A stock solution of CGTase derived from Bacillus macerans was kindly gifted to our
group by Amano Enzyme, Inc., Nagoya, Japan. It was used after spin ﬁltration, and stored at 5 °C.
All reactions were monitored either by reversed-phased ultra-performance liquid chromatography
mass spectrometry (RP-UPLC-MS) or by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) using Merck aluminium
sheets covered with silica (C60). Visualisation of the TLC plates was conducted under UV-light or by
staining with a developing agent. All new compounds were characterised using NMR, RP-UPLC-MS
(ESI), HRMS (ESI), and melting point where appropriate. NMR samples were measured in capped
standard 5 mm borosilicate glass NMR tubes. Assignments of 1H NMR spectra were achieved by the
use of standard 1H NMR methods and standard 2D NMR techniques: 1H–1H COSY, 1H–13C HSQC
and HMBC when useful. For samples containing both cis- and trans-isomers the 1H NMR spectra
were integrated so a peak consisting of overlapping signals for a proton from both isomers was in-
tegrated as one molecule. For example, a CH2 group from an aliphatic chain was integrated as two
protons, even though both the cis- and trans-isomers were present in the sample.
5.2
Instruments
HPLC chromatographic analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientiﬁc Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC
(ultra-high pressure) system with a Waters Acquity UPLC BEH Amide 1.7 µm 2.1 × 150 mm column
maintained at 30 °C. The system was equipped with an autosampler which was maintained at 20
°C. Injection volumes were 10 µL. For detection, the chromatographic system was connected to an
Agilent Technologies 1260 Inﬁnity ELSD, operating at evaporator and nebulizer temperatures of 90
112
==PAGE:125==
and 70 °C, respectively, and an N2 gas ﬂow of 1.0 L/min.
NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker Avance III 400 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with
Prodigy broadband observe (BBO) or acquired on a Bruker Avance III 400 MHz NMR spectrometer
equipped with a BBO SmartProbe. Chemical shifts (δ) were reported in ppm and coupling constants
(J) were reported in Hz. NMR spectra were referenced against residual solvent peaks. Measurements
were performed at 298 K.
ESI-HRMS were performed on a SolariX ESI FTMS spectrometer. External calibration of the spec-
trometer was conducted with sodium triﬂuoroacetate cluster ions.
Analytical RP-UPLC-MS (ESI) analysis was performed on a S2 Waters AQUITY RP-UPLC system
equipped with a diode array detector using a Thermo Accucore C18 column 2.6 µm, 2.1 x 50 mm;
column temp: 50 °C; ﬂow: 0.6 mL/min). Acid run: Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Solvent
B: 0.1% formic acid in MeCN. Gradient for short run: 5% B to 100% B in 2.4 min., hold 0.1 min.,
total run time 2.6 min. Gradient for long run: 5% B to 100% B in 3 min., hold 0.1 min., total run
time 5 min. The LC system was coupled to a SQD mass spectrometer operating in both positive and
negative electrospray modes. The temperature for all recordings was approximately 20 °C.
UV-vis absorption spectra were measured with a double beam Specord 210 Plus spectrometer from
analytik jena. All measurements were performed in a 3.5 mL Hellma Quartz cuvette at room temper-
ature.
Melting points were measured on a Stuart SMP 30 melting point apparatus and are uncorrected.
A Heraeus Biofuge Pico centrifuge was used for the preparation of samples for HPLC analysis.
An Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810R was used for the synthetis of the mAzo (2) and ipAzo (3) templates.
For experiments involving light irradiation, all the LEDs were of the brand ThorLabs and driven by
an adjustable power supply (0-1.2 A), and they were operated at their highest permitted power input
(as deﬁned by the supplier). Unless stated otherwise, the LEDs were operated at 1000 mA for the
nominal wavelengths of 625 nm, 530 nm, and 470 nm, and for the nominal wavelength of 365 nm the
LED were operated at 700 mA.
5.3
Synthesis of compounds
In the assignment of synthesised compounds, data from 13C NMR and HRMS are only included for
new molecules which have not been published. 1H NMR spectra for all synthesised molecules and
COSY spectra for the target templates are found in Appendix 7.1.
113
==PAGE:126==
5.3.1
Synthetic procedures towards template Azo (1)
5.3.1.1
Synthesis of compound 5
N N
NH2
HO
O
Br
H
N
+
EDC, DMAP
O
Br
CH2Cl2, 60%
8
9
10
5
7
6
4
3
2
1
4
5
N
N
The experimental procedure was adapted from ref. (52).
6-Bromohexanoic acid (1.99 g, 10.2 mmol), 4-phenyldiazenylaniline (4) (2.05 g, 10.4 mmol), EDC
(1.94 g, 10.1 mmol), and DMAP (0.247 g, 2.02 mmol) were dissolved in CH2Cl2 (470 mL) resulting
in an orange solution. The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 4 days. The solvent was
removed in vacuo and the solid crude was puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography (diameter: 7.5
cm, isocratic eluent: CH2Cl2) to yield the product as an orange solid (2.28 g, 6.09 mmol, 60%).
Rf = 0.25 (CH2Cl2).
M.P.: 145.9 - 147.0 °C.
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.96-7.88 (m, 4H, H3, H4), 7.69 (d, J = 8.6 Hz, 2H, H5), 7.54-7.43
(m, 3H, H1, H2), 7.37 (br s, 1H, NH), 3.43 (t, J = 6.7 Hz, 2H, H10), 2.42 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H, H6),
1.92 (tt, J = 6.7, 7.4 Hz, 2H, H9), 1.79 (tt, J = 7.7, 7.4 Hz, 2H, H7), 1.55 (m, 2H, H8). The data is in
agreement with previously published data.52
5.3.1.2
Synthesis of compound 8
O
O
O
O
NH2
3a
2
1
4
H H
3b
O
O
O
O
O
1. NH4OAc, EtOH
2. NaBH3CN, HCl, 
EtOH/EtoAc, 35%
7
8
The experimental procedure was adapted from ref. (71).
To a solution of diethyl-3-oxoglutarate (7) (20.03 g, 0.10 mol) in absolute ethanol (350 mL) with acti-
vated molecular sieves (12.36 g, 3Å) was added ammonium acetate (24 g, 0.38 mol). The formed
suspension formed was stirred for 22 hours and then NaBH3CN (7.16 g, 0.11 mol) and HCl in
EtOH/EtOAcc (∼1 M, 600 mL) were added, resulting in a suspension with pH ∼3 (by Litmus test).
c
The ∼1 M solution of HCl in EtOH/EtOAc was made by the slow addition of acetyl chloride (60 mL) to a cooled (0
°C) solution of absolute ethanol (800 mL, from a newly opened bottle). The reaction was stirred at 0 °C for one hour
and then at room temperature for two hours.
114
==PAGE:127==
The suspension was stirred for 1.5 hours, then ﬁltered and the resulting ﬁltrate was concentrated in
vacuo. The resulting oil was dissolved in water (200 mL) and K2CO3 (20 g) was added. Then aque-
ous NaOH (2 M, 200 mL) was added to adjust the pH to > 13 and the aqueous phase was extracted
with ethyl acetate (5 × 200 mL). The combined organic extracts were washed with brine (3 × 160 mL)
and dried over Na2SO4, ﬁltered and concentrated in vacuo to leave a crude yellow oil. The crude oil
was puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography (diameter: 8.5 cm, length: 15 cm, ∼7.5 g of crude oil,
isocratic eluent: MeOH : CH2Cl2 , 5 : 95) to yield the product as a yellow oil (7.09 g, 0.034 mol,
35%).
Rf = 0.28 (CH2Cl2 : MeOH, 95 : 5). Stained with KMnO4.
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 4.15 (q, J = 7.2 Hz, 4H, H2), 3.63 (tt, J = 8.0, 4.7 Hz, 1H, H4), 2.51
(dd, J = 15.8, 4.7 Hz, 2H, H3a/H3b), 2.40 (dd, J = 15.8, 8.0 Hz, 2H, H3a/H3b), 1.26 (t, J = 7.2 Hz,
6H, H1). 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 171.9, 60.7, 45.4, 41.8, 14.3.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C9H17NO4 204.1231; found 204.1235.
5.3.1.3
Synthesis of compound 6
OH
HN
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
2
3a
1
4
5
6
H
H
3b
O
O
O
O
NH2
EDC, Oxyma
DMF, 65%
OH
HO
O
OH
O
8
9
6
To a solution of compound 8 (4.70 g, 23.0 mmol) and 5-hydroxy-isophthalic acid (9) (2.04 g, 11.0
mmol) in DMF (120 mL) was added oxyma (3.31 g, 23.0 mmol) and EDC (4.41 g, 23.0 mmol). The
solution was left stirring at room temperature for 24 hours, after which the reaction mixture was di-
luted with water (600 mL) and extracted with EtOAc (5 × 160 mL). The combined organic phases
were washed with aqueous HCl (1 M, 200 mL), aqueous saturated NaHCO3 (4 × 160 mL) and brine
(3 × 160 mL) before the combined organic phases were dried over MgSO4, ﬁltered and concentrated
in vacuo to remove excess solvent. The crude product was puriﬁed by DCVC on silica gel (diameter:
6.5 cm, crude product adsorbed on Celite®) eluting with a 7.5% ethyl acetate gradient in heptane
starting from heptane, to yield the product as a white solid (4.13 g, 7.47 mmol, 65%).
Rf = 0.55 (EtOAc : heptane, 3 : 1 with addition of 0.5% glacial acidic acid).
115
==PAGE:128==
M.P.: 113.7 - 114.0 °C
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.53 (t, J = 1.4 Hz, 1H, H5), 7.48 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 2H, NH), 7.39 (d, J
= 1.4 Hz, 2H, H6), 4.82 (dtt, J = 8.5, 6.1, 6.1 Hz, 2H, H4), 4.15 (q, J = 7.1 Hz, 8H, H2), 2.82 (dd, J =
16.1, 6.1 Hz, 4H, H3a/H3b), 2.78 (dd, J = 16.1, 6.1 Hz, 4H, H3a/H3b), 1.24 (t, J = 7.1 Hz, 12H, H1).
13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 171.5, 166.5, 157.5, 135.9, 117.7, 116.8, 61.1, 44.0, 38.1, 14.3.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C26H36N2O11 553.2392; found 553.2416.
5.3.1.4
Synthesis of compound 10
H
N
O
Br
K2CO3, KI
DMF, 60 oC, 79%
OH
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
13
15
14a
12
11
16
O
5
6
10
N
N
N
N
H H14b
Compound 5 (300 mg, 0.802 mmol) and compound 6 (478 mg, 0.865 mmol) were dissolved in dry
DMF (10 mL) to an orange solution. Oven dried K2CO3 (277 mg, 2.00 mmol) and catalytic amount
KI (63 mg, 0.38 mmol) were added, and the reaction mixture was stirred at 60 °C for 22 hours. The
black mixture was concentrated in vacuo to a few mL. The residue was diluted with water (10 mL)
and extracted with ethyl acetate (15 mL then 3 × 10 mL). The combined organic extracts were suc-
cessively washed with 1 M NaOH (10 mL), 0.1 M HCl (10 mL), and brine (10 mL), then dried over
MgSO4, ﬁltered, and concentrated in vacuo. The crude product was puriﬁed by ﬂash column chro-
matography (diameter: 3 cm, isocratic eluent: heptane : EtOAc, 1 : 2) to obtain the product as a pale
orange solid (535 mg, 0.632 mmol, 79%).
Rf = 0.25 (heptane : EtOAc, 1 : 2).
116
==PAGE:129==
M.P.: 113.1 - 114.5 °C.
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 8.06 (br s, 1H, NH), 7.90 (m, 4H, H3, H4), 7.76 (br d, J = 8.7 Hz,
2H, H5), 7.67 (t, J = 1.4 Hz, 1H, H12), 7.47 (m, 3H, H1, H2), 7.39 (d, J = 1.4 Hz, 2H, H11), 7.37 (d,
J = 8.6 Hz, 2H, NH), 4.83 (dtt, J = 8.6, 6.2, 5.8 Hz, 2H, H13), 4.15 (q, J = 7.1 Hz, 8H, H15), 3.99
(t, J = 6.3 Hz, 2H, H10), 2.82 (dd, J = 16.0, 5.8 Hz, 4H, H14a/H14b), 2.73 (dd, J = 16.0, 6.2 Hz,
4H, H14a/H14b), 2.45 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 2H, H6), 1.80 (m, 4H, H7, H9), 1.54 (m, 2H, H8), 1.25 (t, J =
7.1 Hz, 12H, H16). 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 171.4, 165.8, 159.4, 152.8, 141.1, 136.1, 130.9,
129.2, 124.2, 122.9, 119.9, 117.4, 116.4, 68.1, 61.0, 43.8, 37.9, 37.8, 28.6, 25.6, 25.2, 14.3.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C44H55N5O12 846.3920; found 846.3930.
5.3.1.5
Synthesis of template Azo (1)
H
N
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
THF, MeOH, 99%
NaOH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
O
OH
O
OH
O
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
13
12
11
OH
H
N
N
N
10
1, Azo
N
N
14a 14b
H H
Compound 10 (360 mg, 0.426 mmol) was dissolved in THF (25 mL) and MeOH (50 mL) to an orange
solution. 1 M NaOH (25 mL) was added, and the reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature
for 2 hours. The solution was concentrated in vacuo until approximately 7 mL remaining and 6 M
HCl was added to adjust the pH to 1. The resulting precipitate was collected by suction ﬁltration,
washed successively with 0.1 M HCl and water, and dried under high vacuum to obtain the product
as a red solid (310 mg, 422 mg, 99%).
117
==PAGE:130==
M.P.: 212.4 - 214.9 °C.
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 10.36 (br s, 1H, NH), 8.53 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H, NH), 7.86 (m, 7H,
H3, H4, H5, H12), 7.54 (m, 5H, H1, H2, H11), 4.58 (m, 2H, H13), 4.07 (t, J = 6.2 Hz, 2H, H10),
2.61 (dd, J = 15.8, 7.4 Hz, 4H, H14a/H14b), 2.53 (dd, J = 15.8, 6.4 Hz, 4H, H14a/H14b), 2.42 (t, J =
7.4 Hz, 2H, H6), 1.75 (m, 4H, H7, H9), 1.51 (m, 2H, H8). 13C NMR (100 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 172.2,
165.0, 158.4, 152.0, 147.4, 142.5, 136.0, 131.0, 129.4, 123.7, 122.3, 119.2, 118.7, 115.7, 67.8, 44.0,
38.5, 36.5, 28.5, 25.3, 24.8.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C36H39N5O12 732.2522; found 732.2536.
5.3.2
Synthetic procedure towards template mAzo (2)
5.3.2.1
Synthesis of compound 11
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
1
3
2
4
5
1. HCl, NaNO2, 0 °C
2.
,  K2CO3, 0 °C, 25%
NH2
O
O
O
O
NH2
11
The experimental procedure was adapted from ref. (53).
2,6-Dimethoxy-aniline (0.543 g, 3.50 mmol) was added to a solution of H2O (0.66 mL) and concen-
trated HCl (0.86 mL). It became a suspension of black solid. The mixture was cooled to app. 0 °C
using an ice bath and NaNO2 (0.241 g, 3.50 mmol) dissolved in H2O (2.5 mL) was added dropwise.
The mixture, a black solid in a yellow/black solution, was stirred at app. 0 °C for 25 minutes, where
upon the black solid dissolved. This solution was added dropwise to a suspension of 3,5-dimethoxy-
aniline (0.543 g, 3.50 mmol) in H2O (20 mL) kept at app. 0 °C, after which 3,5-dimethoxy-aniline
went into solution. The pH was adjusted to 8-9 by adding aqueous saturated NaHCO3 and a red solid
precipitated. The mixture was stirred overnight at room temperature. The crude slurry was ﬁltered
with suction and the precipitate was collected. The solid was dissolved in ethyl acetate, and puriﬁed
by ﬂash column chromatography (diameter: 4.5 cm, length: 10 cm ) eluting with a gradient of 10%
MeOH starting from 1 : 1, MeOH : EtOAc, to yield the product as a red solid (0.230 g, 0.720 mmol,
25%).
Rf = 0.27 (1 : 1, EtOAc : MeOH).
M.P.: 193.0 - 196.2 °C.
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.13 (t, 1H,J = 8.4 Hz, H5), 6.70 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 2H, H4), 5.98
118
==PAGE:131==
(br s, 2H, NH2), 5.93 (s, 2H, H1), 3.66 (s, 6H, H2/H3), 3.65 (s, 6H, H2/H3). The data is in agreement
with previously published data.53
5.3.2.2
Synthesis of compound 12
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH
O
Br
2
5
4
3
1
6
7
8
9
10
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
Br
+
DMAP, EDC
O
HO
CH2Cl2, 52%
11
12
The experimental procedure was adapted from ref. (53).
6-Bromohexanoic acid (0.153 g, 0.780 mmol), EDC (0.170 g, 0.890 mmol) and DMAP (0.0147 g,
0.120 mmol) was dissolved in CH2Cl2 (37 mL). The colourless solution was stirred at room tem-
perature for 30 min. Compound 11 (0.260 g, 0.820 mmol) was added and the solution turned dark
red. The solution was stirred overnight at room temperature then diluted with CH2Cl2 (50 mL) and
washed with aqueous HCl (0.1 M, 4 × 60 mL) and aqueous saturated NaHCO3 (3 × 60 mL). The
organic phase was dried over MgSO4 and ﬁltered. The ﬁltrate was loaded on Celite® and puriﬁed
by ﬂash column chromatography (diameter: 2.5 cm, length: 10 cm) eluting with a gradient of 20%
EtOAc starting from 1 : 1, heptane : EtOAc, to yield the product as a black solid (0.198 g, 0.400
mmol, 52%).
Rf = 0.35 (EtOAc : heptane, 80 : 20).
M.P.: > 400 °C
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 10.13 (br s, 1H, NH (trans)), 9.87 (br s, 1H, NH (cis)), 7.26 (t, J
= 8.2 Hz, 1H, H1 (trans)), 7.15 (s, 2H, H5 (trans)), 7.06 (t, J = 8.2 Hz, 1H, H1 (cis)), 6.86 (s, 2H, H5
(cis)), 6.77 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2H, H2 (trans)), 6.54 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2H, H2 (cis)), 3.71 (2 s, 12H, H3, H4
(trans)), 3.56 (t, J = 6.7 Hz, 4H, H10), 3.54 (s, 6H, H3/H4 (cis)), 3.48 (s, 6H, H3/H4 (cis)), 2.36 (t,
J = 7.5 Hz, 2H, H6 (trans)), 2.27 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 2H, H6 (cis)), 1.84 (m, 4H, H9), 1.62 (m, 4H, H7),
1.43 (m, 4H, H8). The data is in agreement with previously published data.53
119
==PAGE:132==
5.3.2.3
Synthesis of compound 13
OH
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH
O
Br
O
O
O
O
1
4
5
2
3
7
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
16
15
12
12
6
13
K2CO3, KI
DMF, 60 °C, 55%
Compound 12 (1.37 mg, 0.28 mmol) and compound 6 (0.169 g, 0.310 mmol) were dissolved in DMF
(4.5 mL). Oven dried K2CO3 (96 mg, 0.70 mmol) was added to the solution. KI (46 mg, 0.28 mmol)
was added and the solution was heated to 60 °C and the red solution was stirred for 24 hours. The
solution was then concentrated in vacuo until ∼0.5 mL solvent remained. Water (20 mL) was added
and the resulting aqueous solution was extracted with CH2Cl2 (2 × 20 mL, then 1 × 10 mL). The
combined organic phases were washed with aqueous NaOH (1 M, 2 × 10 mL), aqueous HCl (0.2 M,
20 mL), and brine (10 mL). The organic solution was dried over Na2SO4, ﬁltered, and evaporated in
vacuo to yield the crude product. The crude product was puriﬁed using ﬂash column chromatography
eluting with a gradient starting from CH2Cl2 to 3% MeOH in CH2Cl2, to yield the product as a red
solid (149 mg, 154 mmol, 55%).
Rf = 0.28 (CH2Cl2 : MeOH, 98 : 2).
M.P.: 69.1 - 71.2 °C
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 10.16 (br s, 1H, NH (trans)), 9.89 (br s, 1H, NH (cis)), 8.54 (d, J
= 8.0 Hz, 4H, NH), 7.82 (t, J = 1.2 Hz, 2H, H12), 7.47 (d, J = 1.2 Hz, 2H, H11 (trans)), 7.44 (d, J =
1.2 Hz, 2H, H11 (cis)), 7.24 (t, J = 8.4 Hz, 1H, H1 (trans)), 7.15 (s, 2H, H5 (trans)), 7.05 (t, J = 8.4
120
==PAGE:133==
Hz, 1H, H1 (cis)), 6.87 (s, 2H, H5 (cis)), 6.76 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 2H, H2 (trans)), 6.55 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 2H,
H2 (cis)), 4.65 (m, 4H, H13), 4.10-3.99 (m, 20H, H10, H15), 3.73-3.69 (2 s, 12H, H3, H4 (trans)),
3.53 (s, 6H, H3/H4 (cis)), 3.48 (s, 6H, H3/H4 (cis)), 2.63 (m, 16H, H14), 2.39 (t, J = 7.2 Hz, 2H, H6
(trans)), 2.30 (t, J = 7.2 Hz, 2H, H6 (cis)), 1.84-1.63 (m, 8H, H9, H7), 1.51 (m, 4H, H8), 1.12 (t, J
= 7.2 Hz, 24H, H16). 13C NMR (100 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 172.3, 170.9, 165.5, 158.8, 153.5, 151.7,
142.2, 136.4, 134.5, 134.4, 129.0, 119.2, 116.1, 105.8, 96.1, 68.4, 60.5, 56.5, 56.4, 44.5, 39.0, 37.0,
28.9, 25.7, 25.6, 14.5.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C48H63N5O16 966.4343; found 966.4349.
5.3.2.4
Synthesis of template mAzo (2)
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
1
4
5
2
3
7
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
12
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
NaOH
THF, quant.
13
2, mAzo
Compound 13 (32 mg, 0.0331 mmol) was dissolved in THF (3 mL) to a dark red solution. Aqueous
NaOH (1 M, 0.75 mL) was added and the solution was stirred 4 hours at room temperature. THF
was evaporated under reduced pressure and aqueous HCl (6 M, 2 mL) was added and a red precip-
itate was formed immediately. The suspension was centrifuged at 12000 rpm, and the supernatant
was discarded. The red precipitate was washed with water 2 times by suspending in 2 mL water and
centrifuging at 12000 rpm. The water was discarded and the precipitate was dried in vacuo to yield
the product as a red solid (30.9 mg, 0.0362 mmol, 100%).
121
==PAGE:134==
M.P.: 61.1 - 68.8 °C
1H NMR (400 MHz, D2O) δ 7.64 (m, 2H, H12), 7.42 (d, J = 1.0 Hz, 4H, H11), 7.38 (t, J = 8.4 Hz,
1H, H1 (trans)), 7.20 (t, J = 8.4 Hz, 1H, H1 (cis)), 6.93 (s, 2H, H5 (trans)), 6.84 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 2H, H2
(trans)), 6.73 (s, 2H, H5 (cis)), 6.61 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 2H, H2 (cis)), 4.64 (quint, J = 6.9 Hz, 4H, H13),
4.12 (t, J = 6.4 Hz, 4H, H10), 3.84 (2s, 12H, H4 (trans), H3 (trans)), 3.59 (s, 6H, H4 (cis)/H3 (cis)),
3.55 (s, 6H, H4 (cis)/H3 (cis)), 2.50 (m, 16H, H14), 2.44 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 4H, H6), 1.86-1.69 (m, 8H,
H9, H7), 1.51 (m, 4H, H8). 13C NMR (100 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 173.0, 172.3, 165.3, 158.7, 153.7,
151.8, 136.6, 129.2, 116.2, 105.9, 96.2, 68.3, 56.6, 56.4, 44.5, 38.9, 37.0, 34.6, 29.0, 25.8, 25.2.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C40H47N5O16 854.3091; found 854.3102.
5.3.2.5
Synthesis of compound 15
OH
O
O
OH
HO
OH
I
+
K2CO3
DMF, 50 oC, 18%
4
3
2
1
14
15
To a suspension of benzene-1,3,5-triol (14) (2.00 g, 15.9 mmol) and K2CO3 (11.0 g, 79.6 mmol) in
DMF (100 mL) was added 2-iodopropane (6.35 mL, 63.5 mmol). The reaction mixture was heated to
50 °C and left to stir for 5 hours. The reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature, diluted with
water (100 mL) and extracted with ethyl acetate (3 × 50 mL). The combined organic extracts were
washed with brine (50 mL), dried with MgSO4, ﬁltered, and concentrated in vacuo. The brown, crude
oil was puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography with gradient elution (diamater: 4.5 cm, 1.3 g crude,
eluent: heptane : EtOAc, 95 : 5 gradient to 70 : 30) to yield the product as a viscous, brown-tinted oil
(0.606 g, 2.9 mmol, 18 %).
Rf = 0.5 (heptane : EtOAc, 2 : 1)
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 6.04 (t, J = 2.0 Hz, 1H, H4), 5.98 (d, J = 2.0 Hz, 2H, H3), 4.46
(septet, J = 6.1 Hz, 2H, H2), 1.31 (d, J = 6.1 Hz, 12H, H1). The data is in agreement with previously
published data.52
122
==PAGE:135==
5.3.3
Synthetic procedures towards template ipAzo (3)
5.3.3.1
Synthesis of compound 17
HO
NO2
OH
I
NO2
O
O
DMF, 90 oC, 76%
+
K2CO3
1
2
3
4
16
17
To a solution of 2-nitroresorcinol (16) (1.55 g, 9.99 mmol) and K2CO3 (4.15 g, 30.0 mmol) in DMF
(100 mL) was added 2-iodopropane (2.3 mL, 23 mmol). The reddish black solution was heated to 90
°C and left to stir for 17 hours. The DMF was removed in vacuo and H2O (50 mL) was added to the
residue. The aqueous phase was extracted with ethyl acetate (3 × 25 mL) and the combined organic
extracts were dried with MgSO4, ﬁltered, and concentrated in vacuo to yield the crude as a brown oil.
The crude was puriﬁed by DCVC (diameter: 4.0 cm, length: 7 cm) eluting with a 3% ethyl acetate
gradient in heptane starting from pure heptane. The product was obtained as a pale yellow solid (1.81
g, 7.56 mmol, 76%).
Rf = 0.40 (heptane : EtOAc, 80 : 20).
M.P.: 50.2 - 51.1 °C.
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.39 (t, J = 8.5 Hz, 1H, H4), 6.86 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 2H, H3), 4.72
(septet, J = 6.1 Hz, 2H, H2), 1.23 (d, J = 6.1 Hz, 12H, H1). The data is in agreement with previously
published data.52
5.3.3.2
Synthesis of compound 18
NO2
O
O
O
O
NH2
SnCl2, HCl
EtOH, reflux, 75%
1
2
3
4
17
18
1,3-diisopropoxy-2-nitrobenzene (17) (1.48 g, 6.19 mmol) and SnCl2 (11.7 g, 61.7 mmol) were dis-
solved in ethanol (160 mL) and aqueous HCl (3 M, 4.0 mL) was added. The milky-white solution
was stirred at 85 °C under reﬂux for 23 hours. The reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature,
and aqueous NaOH (3 M) was added to adjust the pH to 11. The white precipitate formed (Sn(OH)2)
was removed by suction ﬁltration through Celite®. The ﬁltrate was extracted by CH2Cl2 (3 × 50 mL),
and the combined organic extracts were dried with MgSO4, ﬁltered, and concentrated in vacuo. The
brown, crude oil was puriﬁed by DCVC (diameter: 4.0 cm) eluting with a 1% ethyl acetate gradient
123
==PAGE:136==
in heptane starting from pure heptane. The product was yielded as a yellow-tinted liquid (0.97 g, 4.6
mmol, 75%).
Rf = 0.45 (heptane : EtOAc, 85 : 15)
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 6.49 (m, 3H, H3, H4), 4.46 (septet, J = 6.1 Hz, 2H, H2), 1.25 (d,
J = 6.1 Hz, 12H, H1). The data is in agreement with previously published data.52
5.3.3.3
Synthesis of compound 19
O
O
N
N
O
O
OH
9
8
7
6
5
1
2
3
4
4
3
O
O
OH
O
O
NH2
1. HCl, NaNO2, 0 oC
2.
, NaOH, 0 oC, 55%
18
15
19
The experimental procedure was adapted from ref. (52).
A solution of 2,6-diisopropoxyaniline (18) (700 mg, 3.34 mmol) in water (0.64 mL) and concentrated
HCl (0.82 mL) was cooled to 0-5 °C in an ice bath. NaNO2 (242 mg, 3.51 mmol) was dissolved in
water (3.4 mL) and added dropwise to the cold solution, which immediately turned orange, and it
was left to stir for 20 minutes in an ice bath. Meanwhile, 3,5-diisopropoxyphenol (15) (703 mg, 3.34
mmol) and NaOH (227 mg, 5.69 mmol) were dissolved in water (2.5 mL) resulting in a clear, pale
brown solution. The phenolate mixture was cooled to 0-5 °C in an ice bath and then added dropwise
to the orange diazonium solution. The reaction was left to stir for 16 hours at room temperature. The
formed precipitate was collected, dissolved in ethyl acetate and concentrated in vacuo. The crude
product was puriﬁed by ﬂash column chromatography (diameter: 3 cm) eluting with a gradient start-
ing from 2% MeOH in ethyl acetate to 6% MeOH in ethyl acetate. The product was yielded as an
orange solid (793 mg, 1.84 mmol, 55%).
Rf = 0.23 (EtOAc : MeOH, 98 : 2)
M.P.: 118.3 - 119.5 °C.
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 11.64 (br s, 1H, OH), 7.03 (t, J = 8.4 Hz, 1H, H1), 6.59 (d, J = 8.4
Hz, 2H, H2), 5.73 (s, 2H, H9), 4.66-4.53 (m, 4H, H3, H5, H7), 1.48 (d, J = 6.1 Hz, 6H, H6), 1.37 (d,
J = 6.1 Hz, 18H, H4, H8). The data is in agreement with previously published data.52
124
==PAGE:137==
5.3.3.4
Synthesis of compound 20
OH
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
Br
Br
K2CO3
DMF, 60oC, 69%
O
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Br
1
2
3a
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
H
H
3b
6
20
Compound 6 (500 mg, 0.905 mmol) and oven dried K2CO3 (315 mg, 2.28 mmol) were dissolved in
DMF (15 mL). 1,6-Dibromohexane (0.70 mL, 4.6 mmol) was added and the solution was let to stir at
60 °C for 18 hours. The reaction mixture was concentrated in vacuo to approximately 3 mL. Water
(15 mL) was added, and the aqueous phase was extracted with ethyl acetate (1 × 25 mL then 2 × 20
mL). The combined extracts were washed with aqueous NaOH (0.1 M, 15 mL) and brine (15 mL),
dried over Na2SO4, and concentrated in vacuo. The resulting yellow, crude oil was puriﬁed by ﬂash
column chromatography (diameter: 3 cm, length: 14 cm, gradient elution: EtOAc : heptane (1 : 1 to
2 : 1)) to obtain the product as a white solid (448 mg, 0.626 mmol, 69%).
Rf = 0.58 (heptane : EtOAc, 1 : 2).
M.P.: 67.8−68.9 °C
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.67 (t, J = 1.3 Hz, 1H, H5), 7.41 (d, J = 1.3 Hz, 2H, H6), 7.25 (d,
J = 8.5 Hz, 2H, NH), 4.81 (dtt, J = 8.5, 6.3, 5.6 Hz, 2H, H4), 4.15 (q, J = 7.1 Hz, 8H, H2), 4.03 (t,
J = 6.4 Hz, 2H, H7), 3.42 (t, J = 6.8 Hz, 2H, H12), 2.80 (dd, J = 16.2, 5.6 Hz, 4H, H3a/H3b), 2.71
(dd, J = 16.2, 6.3 Hz, 4H, H3a/H3b), 1.85 (m, 4H, H8, H11), 1.51 (m, 4H, H9, H11), 1.25 (t, J = 7.1
Hz, 12H, H1). 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 171.4, 165.8, 159.5, 136.1, 117.3, 116.3, 68.4, 61.0,
43.7, 37.8, 33.9, 32.8, 29.1, 28.0, 25.4, 14.3.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C32H47BrN2O11 715.2436; found 715.2448.
125
==PAGE:138==
5.3.3.5
Synthesis of compound 22
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
+
O
HN
O
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Br
DMF, 46%
O
O
N
N
O
O
OH
NaH
1
13
12
10
9
8
7
6
14
5
4
3
22
21
20
19
18
17
15
16
23
2
11
19
20
22
The experimental procedure was adapted from ref. (85).
Compound 19 (125 mg, 0.290 mmol), compound 20 (204 mg, 0.285 mmol), and NaH (12.2 mg 60%
dispersion in mineral oil, 0.305 mmol) were dissolved in dry DMF. The dark red solution was left
to stir at room temperature under inert nitrogen atmosphere for 23 hours. The reaction mixture was
concentrated in vacuo and the residual crude was puriﬁed by DCVD (diameter: 2.5 cm) eluting with
a 5% EtOAc gradient in heptane starting from pure heptane. The product was obtained as a sticky red
solid (140 mg, 0.131 mmol, 46%).
Rf = 0.30 (heptane : EtOAc, 1 : 1).
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.52 (2 d, J = 8.1 Hz, 4H, NH), 7.80 (d, J = 1.4 Hz, 2H, H19),
7.45 (2 d, J = 1.4 Hz, 4H, H18), 7.13 (t, J = 8.3 Hz, 1H, H1 (trans)), 7.01 (t, J = 8.3 Hz, 1H, H1 (cis)),
6.73 (d, J = 8.3 Hz, 2H, H2 (trans)), 6.50 (d, J = 8.3 Hz, 2H, H2 (cis)), 6.31 (s, 2H, H11 (trans)), 6.07
(s, 2H, H11 (cis)), 4.55 (m, 12H, H3, H5, H7, H9, H20), 4.04 (m, 24H, H12, H17, H22), 2.63 (m,
16H, H21), 1.75 (m, 8H, H13, H16), 1.49 (m, 8H, H14, H15), 1.11 (m, 72H, H4, H6, H8, H10, H23).
13C NMR (100 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 170.5, 165.0, 152.4, 149.5, 135.9, 115.7, 109.5, 95.9, 71.4, 71.2,
69.7, 69.5, 67.9, 60.0, 44.1, 38.6, 28.6, 25.4, 22.0, 21.9, 21.3, 14.0.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C56H80N4O16 1065.5643; found 1065.5675.
126
==PAGE:139==
5.3.3.6
Synthesis of template ipAzo (3)
THF, 97%
NaOH
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
HO
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
N
N
O
O
O
1
13
12
10
9
8
7
6
14
5
4
3
21
20
19
18
17
15
16
2
11
22
3, ipAzo
Compound 22 (140 mg, 0.131 mmol) was dissolved in THF (5 mL) and aqueous NaOH (1 M, 5 mL)
was added. The two-phase solution was left to stir at room temperature for 2 hours. The reaction mix-
ture was concentrated in vacuo until approximately 2 mL remaining, then transferred to a centrifuge
tube by aqueous NaOH (1 M, ∼2 mL). The pH was adjusted to 1 by addition of aqueous HCl (6
M, ∼5 mL), and the formed precipitate was collected and washed with water (2 × 5 mL) upon cen-
trifugation. After drying in vacuo the product was obtained as a red solid (121 mg, 0.127 mmol, 97%).
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.54 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H, NH), 7.88 (t, J = 1.3 Hz, 1H, H19),
7.50 (d, J = 1.3 Hz, 2H, H18), 7.26 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H, H1), 6.80 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H, H2), 6.43 (s,
2H, H11), 4.70 (m, 6H, H3, H5, H7, H9, H20), 4.15 (m, 4H, H12, H17), 2.58 (m, 8H, H21), 1.80 (m,
4H, H13, H16), 1.54 (m, 4H, H14, H15), 1.25 (m, 24H, H4, H6, H8, H10). 13C NMR (100 MHz,
DMSO-d6) δ 172.7, 165.4, 158.8, 136.4, 116.2, 71.8, 68.3, 44.5, 38.9, 29.1, 28.9, 25.8, 25.7, 22.3,
22.1.
HRMS (ESI+) m/z: [M+H]+ calculated for C48H64N4O16 951.4244; found 951.4263.
127
==PAGE:140==
5.3.4
Synthesis of compound 25
H2N
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
1
2
3
4
H2N
OH
HO
OH
O
O
+
NaOH
DMSO, 61%
23
24
25
The experimental procedure was adapted from ref. (86).
2-Amino-2-hydroxymethyl-propan-1,3-diol (2.430 g, 0.0200 mol) was suspended in anhydrous DMSO
(4 mL) and cooled to 15 °C under nitrogen. Aqueous NaOH (5 M, 400 µL) was added. t-Butyl acrylate
(13.92 mL, 0.095 mol) and the reaction mixture was allowed to reach room temperature and stirred
for 22 hours. More t-butyl acrylate (5.86 mL, 0.0400 mol) was added after 22 hours, and the reaction
mixture was stirred for additionally 116 hours. DMSO and excess t-butyl acrylate was evaporated
under reduced pressure. The crude product was puriﬁed using ﬂash column chromatography eluting
with a gradient starting from EtOAc : heptane, 1 : 1 + 0.05% NH4OH (v/v) to EtOAc : heptane, 3 : 1
+ 0.05% NH4OH to yield the product as a colourless oil (6.109 g, 0.0121 mol, 61%).
Rf = 0.23 (EtOAc : heptane, 2 : 1) with addition of 0.05% (v/v) NH4OH. Stained with KMnO4.
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 3.63 (t, J = 6.4 Hz, 6H, H2), 3.31 (s, 6H, H1), 2.44 (t, J = 6.4 Hz,
6H, H3), 1.44 (s, 27H, H4).
5.4
Analytical experiments
5.4.1
UV-vis spectroscopy
All template solutions were prepared in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffered water at pH = 7.5, and
stored in darkness. In all experiments a reference of air was used and the absorbance spectrum of
pure phosphate buffer was subtracted from the sample absorption spectra. A 3.5 mL Hellma Quartz
cuvette (labelled QS 282) with a 10 mm path length was used and placed facing the same direction
in the instrument during all measurement to ensure consistency. At least 1.5 mL of desired solution
was added to the cuvette to ensure that the light beam passed though the solution. All UV-vis spectra
were measured in the range 220−700 nm with a scans rate of 10 nm/s and a ∆λ of 1 nm. A slit width
of 1 nm was applied and lamp change was set at 320 nm.
Preparation of 100 mM sodium phosphate buffered H2O, pH = 7.5
A 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer in H2O at pH 7.5 was prepared from a stock solution of 0.5 M
128
==PAGE:141==
Na2HPO4·H2O and 0.5 M NaH2PO4·H2O in H2O. The stock solutions were mixed and diluted with
water to obtain the desired concentration and pH value.
Dilution series of template Azo
Samples containing 0.2 mM, 0.1 mM, 0.05 mM, and 0.025 mM of template Azo in 100 mM phosphate
buffered water were tested in order to determine the best concentration for the UV-vis experiments.
A concentration of 0.05 mM was chosen for all subsequent analyses with an absorbance below 1 in
the area of UV and visible light, 250−700 nm.
Photoswitching experiments
A general method was applied in all experiments: First, an absorption spectrum was measured before
any light treatment. Secondly, the samples were irradiated with light of speciﬁc wavelengths until no
more change was observed in the absorption spectrum. The samples were placed in a ﬁxed distance
from the light source in a customised box to be shielded from ambient light. The samples were moved
directly from the box to the instrument to minimise interference from ambient light, and the measure-
ments were performed instantly.
UV-vis titration experiments
For the UV-vis titration experiments a 50 µM solution of Azo template in 100 mM phosphate buffered
water, pH 7.5, was prepared. The guest solution was prepared by dissolving the desired amount guest
(α-CD) in the 50 µM Azo host solution to obtain a 5 mM concentration of guest. For the titration
with trans-Azo the solution was kept in darkness overnight prior to analysis to ensure the presence
of only the trans-isomer. 1500 µL of host solution was transferred to the cuvette using an Eppendorf
pipette. For the cis-Azo the cuvette was placed in a ﬁxed distance of a UV light (365 nm) source with
the a clear side facing the light 30 seconds prior to analysis. A UV-vis spectrum was measured for the
host solution. An aliquot of guest solution was added to the cuvette and the solutions were mixed by
pipetting up and down using the same pipette tip for an entire measurement series. A UV-vis spectrum
was recorded, another aliquot of guest solution was added and the procedure was repeated to obtain
the desired number of data points. For the cis-Azo titration experiment the cuvette was irradiated with
UV light for 15 seconds after each addition og guest solution. The difference in absorbance at speciﬁc
wavelengths was calculated as the absolute value of ∆A. The ∆A was plotted against the concentration
of guest and Equation 15 in section 1.6.1 was ﬁtted to the binding isotherm using the data analysis
software OriginPro (Version 2021. OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, MA, USA).62,63,91
129
==PAGE:142==
5.4.2
NMR studies
All stock solutions were stored in darkness a minimum of 15 hours before analysis. All NMR samples
were prepared in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffered D2O, pH = 7.5 in NMR tubes. In all irradia-
tion experiments the NMR sample was placed in a customised box with a ﬁxed length from the light
source. When handling the NMR sample the tubes were wrapped in foil to avoid irradiation from
ambient light. All NMR spectra were acquired at 298 K.
Preparation of 100 mM sodium phosphate buffered D2O, pH = 7.5
The 100 mM sodium phosphate buffered D2O, pH = 7.5 were prepared from a stock solution of 0.5
M Na2HPO4·H2O and 0.5 M NaH2PO4·H2O in D2O. The stock solutions were mixed and diluted
with D2O to obtain the desired concentration and pH value.
Determination of cis/trans ratios before any light treatment and at photostationary states
Photostationary states of the templates were determined at 10 mM for all templates and furthermore
at 2 mM for the Azo template. The NMR samples were stored in darkness at 30 °C at least 15 hours
prior to analyses. The photostationary states were obtained by irradiating the NMR samples with light
of the speciﬁc wavelengths until no more change was observed in the obtained NMR spectra. The
cis/trans ratios were determined from integrals of peaks that were assigned exclusively to the cis- or
trans-isomers of the templates. The same methodology was used to determine the cis/trans ratios of
the templates before any light treatment.
NMR titration experiments
For the NMR titration a host solution and a guest solution was prepared. A 0.1 mM host solution was
prepared by dissolving the desired template Azo, mAzo, or ipAzo in 100 mM phosphate buffered
D2O, pH = 7.5. The guest solution was prepared by dissolving the desired amount guest (α-, β-,
or γ-CD) in the 0.1 mM host solution. 500 µL host solution was transferred to an NMR tube. The
NMR sample was stored in darkness at 30 °C at least 15 hours prior to an titration experiment for
the trans-isomer. To obtain the cis-isomer the NMR sample was irradiated with light at appropriate
wavelengths prior to the titration experiment. A 1H NMR spectrum of the host solution was acquired.
The concentration of guest was gradually increased by adding aliquots of guest solution to obtain
the equivalents guest relative to host as reported in section 3.3.2. After each addition of guest an 1H
NMR spectrum was acquired. For titration with the host solution of cis-isomer, the NMR sample was
irradiated with appropriate light source ﬁve minutes prior to acquisition. By analyses of the resulting
spectra the changes in ppm values for a trans-proton and where relevant a cis-proton were tabulated.
The change in observed chemical shift was calculated as the absolute value of ∆δ = δobs −δH. For
titration experiments with one host change in chemical shift were plotted against the corresponding
guest concentrations and the binding isotherm was ﬁtted to a 1:1 binding model, as described in sec-
130
==PAGE:143==
tion 1.6.1. For all ﬁtting procedures were applied the data analysis software OriginPro (Version 2021.
OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, MA, USA). For titration experiments with both the trans- and
cis-hosts in solution the chemical shift changes of a cis-proton was plotted against the chemical shift
changes of a trans-proton and a ﬁtted to equation 19 as described in section 3.3.2.62,63,91
5.4.3
Procedure for setting up and monitoring CGTase-mediated DCLs of cyclodextrins
All reactions were set up in clear 2 mL glass vials. For libraries under irradiation with light the vials
were placed in a ﬁtted chamber in the exact same distance from the light source to ensure consistency.
The libraries were irradiated with light at all times during the studies, except when taking out samples
for analysis. The libraries were irradiated before starting the library in a period of time efﬁcient to
ensure full conversion to photostationary state. The libraries performed in darkness were stored in
darkness a minimum of 15 hours before starting the library and were kept in darkness at all time
during the studies, except when taking out samples for analysis. The CGTase enzyme stock solution
batch used in all libraries were: "srb_ae_a044 spin-ﬁltered Nov 2021" with addition of 65 µL enzyme
mixture per mL library reaction mixture in all cases to ensure the desired activity. All libraries were
performed in room temperature.
Libraries starting from 10 mg/ml α-CD
The reference libraries (untemplated) were prepared from a solution of 10 mg/ml α-CD in 100 mM
sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.5. Libraries were started by addition of CGTase stock solution.
The templated libraries were prepared from a solution of 10 mg/ml α-CD with the desired template(s)
at 10 mM in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.5. Libraries were started by addition of CG-
Tase stock solution.
Libraries starting from 5 mg/ml α-CD
The reference libraries (untemplated) were prepared from a solution of 5 mg/ml α-CD in 100 mM
sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.5. Libraries were started by addition of CGTase stock solution.
The templated libraries were prepared from a solution of 5 mg/ml α-CD with the desired template(s)
at 10 mM in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.5. Libraries were started by addition of CG-
Tase stock solution.
Sampling and analysis method
The libraries were analysed over time by taking out 3 µL samples from the library which were added
to a 120 µL quenching mixture consisting of 10 mM ammonium chloride in acetonitile : water (3
: 1) with 1% TFA. The 123 µL mixture was centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 4 minutes in a Heraeus
Biofuge Pico. After centrifugation, the top 110 µL fraction were transferred to an HPLC insert in
131
==PAGE:144==
a HPLC vial capped with screw caps equipped with PTFE lined rubber septa for injection in the
HPLC-ELSD system. An injection volume of 10 µL was used in all cases. The eluent system was
water (A) and acetonitrile (B), both with 0.1% formic acid. For separation, a linear gradient program
running from 25 to 45% eluent A over 8.00 minutes with a ﬂow rate of 0.60 mL/min was used, after
which the column was washed for three minutes with 100% eluent A. Before each injection, at least
ﬁve column volumes of the starting eluent was applied to condition the column. The resulting chro-
matograms were analysed and the peak area was converted to a concentration (by weight) through
calculations based on calibrations performed individually for G1−G3 as well as α-CD, β-CD, and
γ-CD by analysing stock solutions using the above-mentioned chromatographic method. Calibration
were not performed for G4−G8 since clean stocks of these sugars were not in hold. Therefore, the
ﬁtting parameter determined for G3 was assumed to ﬁt G4−G8. The assumption entails a error in the
calculated G4−G8 concentrations, however this error is thought to be insigniﬁcant since G4−G8 is
not of speciﬁc interest in this project. The calibrations were based on µg injected in the 0.018−3.66
µg range, and the resulting response curves were ﬁtted non-linearly (using OriginPro 2019b from
OriginLab Corp.) to a simple power equation.
M = k ·Ap
(20)
where M is the injected mass of the compound, A is the area under the peak in the chromatogram,
while the ﬁtted parameters k and p are referred to as the coefﬁcient and the exponent, respectively.
By knowing the exact dilution factor of the sampled aliquot and the injection volume used on the
chromatographic equipment, the calculated injected mass of a compound can easily be converted to a
concentration by weight in the actual reaction mixture.
The values of k and p obtained from these ﬁts, along with the errors on the ﬁts and the resulting
adjusted R2-values, are listed in Table 15 below.
Table 15: Values obtained from ﬁt for the calibration of the HPLC-ELSD method.
Species
k
p
k err. on ﬁt
p err. on ﬁt
Adj. R2 on ﬁt
α-CD
0.229
0.557
0.002
0.003
0.998
β-CD
0.237
0.557
0.003
0.004
0.997
γ-CD
0.257
0.551
0.002
0.002
0.999
G1
0.241
0.556
0.002
0.002
0.999
G2
0.300
0.543
0.002
0.002
1.000
G3
0.283
0.553
0.002
0.002
0.999
G4
0.283
0.553
G5
0.283
0.553
G6
0.283
0.553
G7
0.283
0.553
G8
0.283
0.553
132
==PAGE:145==
6
References
(1)
Cragg, P. J., Supramolecular Chemistry - From Biological Inspiration to Biomedical Applica-
tions; Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg London New York: 2010.
(2)
Lehn, J. M., Supramolecular Chemistry - Concepts and Perspectives; VCH Verlagsgesellschaft
mbH. D-69451 Weinheim (Bundesrepublik Deutschland): 1995.
(3)
The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1987 https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/1987/
summary/, (accessed: 09.02.2021).
(4)
Ramström, O. (2016). Scientiﬁc Background on the Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2016 Molecular
Machines. The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.
(5)
van Delden, R., ter Wiel, M., Pollard, M., Vicario, J., Koumura, N., Feringa, B. L., and Delden,
R. (2005). Unidirectional molecular motor on a gold surface. Nature 437, 1337–1340.
(6)
Frei, P., Hevey, R., and Ernst, B. (2019). Dynamic Combinatorial Chemistry: A New Method-
ology Comes of Age. Chem. Eur. J. 24, 60–73.
(7)
Corbett, P. T., Leclaire, J., Vial, L., West, K. R., Wietor, J.-L., Sanders, J. K. M., and Otto, S.
(2006). Dynamic Combinatorial Chemistry. Chemical Reviews. 106, 3652–3711.
(8)
Williams, R. J., Smith, A. M., Collins, R., Hodson, N., Das, A. K., and Ulijn, R. V. (2009).
Enzyme-assisted self-assembly under thermodynamic control. Nature Nanotechnology 4, 19–
24.
(9)
Beeren, S. R., and Sanders, J. K., in Dynamic Combinatorial Chemistry; Reek, J. N. H., and
Otto, S., Eds.; WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim: 2010; Chapter 1.
(10)
Rasmussen, B., Sørensen, A., Beeren, S. R., and Pittelkow, M., textupin Organic Synthesis and
Molecular Engineering; Nielsen, M. B., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey:
2013; Chapter 14.
(11)
Pappas, C. G., Mandal, P. K., Liu, B., Kauffmann, B., Miao, X., Komáromy, D., Hoffmann,
W., Manz, C., Chang, R., Liu, K., Pagel, K., Huc, I., and Otto, S. (2020). Emergence of low-
symmetry foldamers from single monomers. Nature Chemistry 12, 1180–1186.
(12)
Xu, S., and Giuseppone, N. (2008). Self-Duplicating Ampliﬁcation in a Dynamic Combinato-
rial Library. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 1826–1827.
(13)
Carnall, J. M. A., Waudly, C. A., Belenguer, A. M., Stuart, M. C. A., Peyralans, J. J.-P., and
Otto, S. (2010). Mechanosensitive Self-Replication Driven by Self-Organization. Science 327,
1502–1506.
(14)
Lam, R. T., Belenguer, A., Roberts, S. L., Naumann, C., Jarrosson, T., Otto, S., and Sanders,
J. K. (2005). Ampliﬁcation of Acetylcholine-Binding Catenanes from Dynamic Combinatorial
Libraries. Science 308, 667–669.
(15)
Caraballo, R., Dong, H., Ribeiro, J. P., Jiménez-Barbero, J., and Ramström, O. (2010). Direct
STD NMR Identiﬁcation of β-Galactosidase Inhibitors from a Virtual Dynamic Hemithioacetal
System. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 49, 589–593.
(16)
Grote, Z., Scopelliti, R., and Severin, K. (2003). Adaptive Behavior of Dynamic Combina-
torialLibraries Generated by Assembly of DifferentBuilding Blocks. Angewandte Chemie 42,
3821–3825.
133
==PAGE:146==
(17)
Severin, K. (2004). The Advantage of Being Virtual - Target - Induced Adaptation and Selec-
tionin Dynamic Combinatorial Librariess. Chem. Eur. J 10, 2565–2580.
(18)
Corbett, P. T., Otto, S., and Sanders, J. K. M. (2004). Correlation between Host-Guest Bind-
ing and Host Ampliﬁcation in Simulated Dynamic Combinatorial Libraries. Chem. Eur. J 10,
3139–3143.
(19)
Corbett, P. T., Otto, S., and Sanders, J. K. M. (2005). Competition between Receptors in Dy-
namic Combinatorial Libraries: Ampliﬁcation of the Fittest? J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 9390–
9392.
(20)
Jin, Y., Yu, C., Denman, R. J., and Zhang, W. (2013). Recent advances in dynamic covalent
chemistry. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42, 6634–6654.
(21)
Canal-Martín, A., and Pérez-Fernández, R. (2020). Protein-Directed Dynamic Combinatorial
Chemistry: An Efﬁcient Strategy in Drug Design. ACS Omega 5, 26307–26315.
(22)
Clayden, J., Greeves, N., and Warren, S., Organic Chemistry, 2nd; Oxford University Press:
2012; Chapter 27.
(23)
Cougnon, F. B. L., and Sanders, J. K. M. (2011). Evolution of Dynamic Combinatorial Chem-
istry. Accounts of Chemical Research 45, 2211–2221.
(24)
Takahagi, H., and Iwasawa, N. (2010). Crystallization-Controlled Dynamic Self-Assembly and
an On/Off Switch for Equilibration Using Boronic Ester Formation. Chem. Eur. J. 16, 13680–
13688.
(25)
Yan, J., Springsteen, G., Deeter, S., and Wang, B. (2004). The relationship among pKa, pH,
and binding constants in the interactions between boronic acids and diols — it is not as simple
as it appears. Tetrahedron 60, 11205–11209.
(26)
Li, J., Nowak, P., and Otto, S. (2013). Dynamic Combinatorial Libraries: From Exploring
Molecular Recognition to Systems Chemistry. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 9222–9239.
(27)
Sorrenti, A., Leira-Iglesias, J., Markvoort, A. J., de Greef, T. F., and Hermans, T. M. (2017).
Non-equilibrium supramolecular polymerization. Chem. Soc. Rev. 46, 5476–5490.
(28)
Ashkenasy, G., Hermans, T. M., Otto, S., and Taylor, A. F. (2017). Systems chemistry. Chem.
Soc. Rev. 46, 2543–2554.
(29)
Yang, S., Schaeffer, G., Mattia, E., Markovitch, O., Lui, K., Hussain, A. S., Ottelé, J., Sood, A.,
and Otto, S. (2021). Chemical Fueling Enables Molecular Complexiﬁcation of Self-Replicators.
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 133, 11445–11450.
(30)
Larsen, D., and Beeren, S. R. (2019). Enzyme-mediated dynamic combinatorial chemistry
allows out-of-equilibrium template-directed synthesis of macrocyclic oligosaccharides. The
Royal Society of Chemistry 10, 9981–9987.
(31)
Lins, R. J., Flitsch, S. L., Turner, N. J., Irening, E., and Brown, S. A. (2002). Enzymatic Gen-
eration and In Situ Screening of a Dynamic Combinatorial Library of Sialic Acid Analogues.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 41, 3405–3407.
(32)
Swann, P. G., Casanova, R. A., Frauenhoff, M. M., Urbancic, M., Slomczynska, U., Hopﬁnger,
A. J., Le Breton, G. C., and Venton, D. L. (1996). Nonspeciﬁc Protease- Catalyzed Hydrolysis/
Synthesis of a Mixture of Peptides: Product Diversity and Ligand Ampliﬁcation by a Molecular
Trap. Biopolymers 40, 617–625.
134
==PAGE:147==
(33)
Frederix, P. W. J., Scott, G. G., Abdul-Haija, Y. M., Kalafatovic, D., Pappas, C. G., Javid, N.,
Hunt, N. T., Ulijn, R. V., and Tuttle, T. (2014). Exploring the sequence space for (tri-)peptide
self-assembly to design and discover new hydrogels. Nature Chemistry 7, 30–37.
(34)
Pappas, C. G., Shaﬁl, R., Siccardi, H., Wang, T., Narang, V., Abzalimov, R., Wijerathne, N.,
and Ulijn, R. V. (2016). Dynamic peptide libraries for the discovery of supramolecular nano-
materials. Nature Nanotechnology 11, 960–968.
(35)
Larsen, D., and Beeren, S. R. (2020). Tuning the Outcome of Enzyme-Mediated Dynamic
Cyclodextrin Libraries to Enhance Template Effects. Chemistry — A European Journal 26,
11032–11038.
(36)
Valle, E. M. D. (2003). Cyclodextrins and their uses: a review. Process Biochemistry 39, 1033–
1046.
(37)
Stick, R. V., and Williams, S. J., Carbohydrates: The Essential Molecules of Life, 2nd; Elsevier:
2009; Chapter 9.
(38)
Welliver., M., and Mcdonough, J. (2007). Anesthetic Related Advances with Cyclodextrins.
The Scientiﬁc World 7, 364–371.
(39)
Jug, M., Nanomaterials for Clinical Applications; Elsevier Inc: 2020; Chapter 2.
(40)
Biedermann, F., Nau, W. M., and Schneider, H.-J. (2004). The Hydrophobic Effect Revis-
ited—Studies with Supramolecular Complexes Imply High-Energy Water as a Noncovalent
Driving Force. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53, 11158–11171.
(41)
Schmidt, B. V. K. J., and Barner-Kowollik, C. (2017). Dynamic Macromolecular Material De-
sign—The Versatility of Cyclodextrin-Based Host–Guest Chemistry. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
56, 8350–8369.
(42)
Pianowski, Z. L. (2019). Recent Implementations of Molecular Photoswitches into Smart Ma-
terials and Biological Systems. Chem. Eur. J. 25, 5128–5144.
(43)
Iwaso, K., Takashima, Y., and Harada, A. (2016). Fast response dry-type artiﬁcial molecular
muscles with [c2]daisy chains. Nature Chemistry 8, 625–632.
(44)
Nielsen, M. B., Ree, N., Mikkelsen, K. V., and Cacciarini, M. (2020). Tuning the dihydroazu-
lene – vinylheptafulvene couple for storage of solar energy. Russ. Chem. Rev. 89, 573–586.
(45)
Skov, A. B., Ree, N., Gertsen, A. S., Chabera, P., Uhlig, J., Lissau, J. S., Nucci, L., Pullerits, T.,
Mikkelsen, K. V., Nielsen, M. B., Sølling, T. I., and Hansen, T. (2019). Excited-State Topology
Modiﬁcations of the Dihydroazulene Photoswitch Through Aromaticity. ChemPhotoChem 3,
619–629.
(46)
Chu, C.-W., Stares, D. L., and Schalley, C. A. (2021). Light-controlled interconversion between
a [c2]daisy chain and a lasso-type pseudo[1]rotaxane. Chem. Commun. 57, 12317–12320.
(47)
Beharry, A. A., and Woolley, A. G. (2011). Azobenzene photoswitches for biomolecules.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 40, 4422–4437.
(48)
Irie, M. (2000). Diarylethenes for Memories and Switches. Chem. Rev. 100, 1685–1716.
(49)
Kortekaas, L., and Browne, W. R. (2019). The evolution of spiropyran: fundamentals and
progress of an extraordinarily versatile photochrome. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48, 3406–3424.
(50)
Zhu, M., and Zhou, H. (2018). Azobenzene-based small molecular photoswitches for protein
modulation. Org. Biomol. Chem. 16, 8434–8445.
135
==PAGE:148==
(51)
Beharry, A. A., Sadovski, O., and Woolley, A. G. (2011). Azobenzene Photoswitching without
Ultraviolet Light. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 19684–19687.
(52)
Wang, D., Wagner, M., Saydjari, A. K., Mueller, J., Winzen, S., Butt, H.-J., and Wu, S. (2017).
A Photoresponsive Orthogonal Supramolecular Complex Based on Host–Guest Interactions.
Chem. Eur. J. 23, 2628–2634.
(53)
Wang, D., Wagner, M., Butt, H.-J., and Wu, S. (2015). Supramolecular hydrogels constructed
by red-light-responsive host-guest interactions for photo-controlled protein release in deep tis-
sue. Soft Matter 11, 7656–7662.
(54)
Larsen, D., Bjerre, P. M., and Beeren, S. R. (2019). Light-controlled out-of-equilibrium as-
sembly of cyclodextrins in an enzyme-mediated dynamic system. Chem. Commun. 55, 15037–
15040.
(55)
Yamaguchi, H., Kobayashi, Y., Kobayashi, R., Takashima, Y., Hashidzume, A., and Harada,
A. (2011). Photoswitchable gel assembly based on molecular recognition. Nature Communi-
cations 3, 603.
(56)
Kathan, M., Eisenreich, F., Jurissek, C., Dallmann, A., Gurke, J., and Hecht, S. (2018). Light-
driven molecular trap enables bidirectional manipulation of dynamic covalent systems. Nature
Chemistry 10, 1031–1036.
(57)
Ingerman, L. A., and Waters, M. L. (2009). Photoswitchable Dynamic Combinatorial Libraries:
Coupling Azobenzene Photoisomerization with Hydrazone Exchange. J. Org. Chem. 74, 111–
117.
(58)
Ulatowski, F., Dabrowa, K., and Jurczak, J. (2016). Supramolecular detection of geometrical
differences of azobenzene carboxylates. Tetrahedron Letters 57, 1820–1824.
(59)
Yang, S., Larsen, D., Pellegrini, M., Meier, S., Mierke, D. F., Beeren, S. R., and Aprahamian,
I. (2021). Dynamic enzymatic synthesis of g-cyclodextrin using a photoremovable hydrazone
template. Chem 7, 2190–2200.
(60)
Bissantz, C., Kuhn, B., and Stahl, M. (2010). A Medicinal Chemist’s Guide to Molecular In-
teractions. J. Med. Chem 53, 5061–5084.
(61)
Anslyn, E. V., and Dougherty, D. A., Modern Physical Organic Chemistry; University Science
Books: 2006; Chapter 2.
(62)
Anslyn, E. V., and Dougherty, D. A., Modern Physical Organic Chemistry; University Science
Books: 2006; Chapter 4.
(63)
Thordarson, P. (2011). Determining association constants from titration experiments in supramolec-
ular chemistry. Chem. Soc. Rev. 40, 1305–1323.
(64)
Bain, A., in Encyclopedia of Spectroscopy and Spectrometry, 3th; Lindon, J. C., Ed.; Academic
Press: 2017, pp 180–187.
(65)
Hibbert, D. B., and Thordarson, P. (2016). The death of the Job plot, transparency, open science
and online tools, uncertainty estimation methods and other developments in supramolecular
chemistry data analysis. Chem. Commun. 52, 12792–12805.
(66)
Atkins, P., and de Paula, J., Atkins’ Physical Chemistry, 10th; Oxford University Press: 2014;
Chapter 6.
136
==PAGE:149==
(67)
Srivastava, V. K., and Yadav, R., in Data Processing Handbook for Complex Biological Data
Sources; Misra, G., Ed.; Academic Press: 2019; Chapter 9.
(68)
Albericio, F., and El-Faham, A. (2018). Choosing the Right Coupling Reagent for Peptides: A
Twenty-Five-Year Journey. Org. Process Res. Dev. 22, 760–772.
(69)
Van Vranken, D., and Weiss, G. A., Introduction to Bioorganic Chemistry and Chemical Biol-
ogy, 1st; Taylor and Francis Group: 2012.
(70)
Jad, Y. E., Khattab, S. N., De La Torre, B. G., Govender, T., Kruger, H. G., El-Faham, A., and
Albericio, F. (2015). EDC·HCl and potassium salts of oxyma and oxyma-b as superior coupling
cocktails for peptide synthesis. European Journal of Organic Chemistry 14, 3116–3120.
(71)
Crossley, M. J., Fisher, M. L., and Potter, J. J. (1990). β-Amino Acid Isomers of a Nat-
ural Substrate of the Enzyme γ-Glutamyl-amino Acid Cyclotransferase. Synthesis of (3S)-
3-Aminoglutaryl-(S)-alanine and (3R)- 3-Aminog lutaryl- (S)-alanine. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin
Trans. 1, 2363–2369.
(72)
Clayden, J., Greeves, N., and Warren, S., Organic Chemistry, 2nd; Oxford University Press:
2012; Chapter 11.
(73)
Brønsted, M., Becher, J., and Begstrup, M., Håndbog i organisk syntesetektnik, 1th; Gyldendal
A/S: 2011.
(74)
Bruice, P. Y., Organic Chemistry, 8th; Pearson Education: 2017; Chapter 9.
(75)
McMurry, J., Fundamentals of Organic Chemistry, 7th; Brooks/Cole: 2011.
(76)
Clayden, J., Greeves, N., and Warren, S., Organic Chemistry, 2nd; Oxford University Press:
2012; Chapter 21.
(77)
Clayden, J., Greeves, N., and Warren, S., Organic Chemistry, 2nd; Oxford University Press:
2012; Chapter 22.
(78)
Jayasundera, K. P., Watson, A. J., and Taylor, C. M. (2005). Synthesis of a tetrasubstituted
arylphosphonate via the anionic phospho-Fries rearrangement. Tetrahedron Letters 46, 4311–
4313.
(79)
Brabet, P., Cia, D., Guillou, L., Hamel, C., Vigor, C., Durand, T., Crauste, C., and Vercauteren,
J. New Lipophenol Compounds And Uses Thereof, 2015.
(80)
Patrick, G. L., An Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry, 6th; Oxford University Press: 2017.
(81)
Kadam, H. K., and Tilve, S. G. (2015). Advancement in methodologies for reduction of ni-
troarenes. RSC Adv. 5, 83391–83407.
(82)
Chen, Y., Turlik, A., and Newhouse, T. R. (2016). Amide α,β-Dehydrogenation Using Allyl-
Palladium Catalysis and a Hindered Monodentate Anilide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 1166–1169.
(83)
Yang, W., Lin, X., Zhang, Y., Cao, W., Liu, X., and Feng, X. (2020). Nickel(II)-catalyzed
asymmetric thio-Claisen rearrangement of α-diazo pyrazoleamides with thioindoles. Chem.
Commun. 56, 10002–10005.
(84)
Tan, Z., Hou, J., He, Y., Zhou, E., Yang, C., and Li, Y. (2007). Synthesis and Photovoltaic Prop-
erties of a Donor-Acceptor Double-Cable Polythiophene with High Content of C60 Pendant.
Macromolecules 40, 1868–1873.
(85)
Makriyannis, A., Nikas, S. P., Alapafuja, S. O., and Shukla, V. G. Fatty Acid Amide Hydrolase
Inhibitors, 2008.
137
==PAGE:150==
(86)
Ardona, C. M., and Gawley, R. E. (2002). An Improved Synthesis of a Trifurcated Newkome-
Type Monomer and Orthogonally Protected Two-Generation Dendrons. J. Org. Chem. 67,
1411–1413.
(87)
Wazzan, N. A., Richardson, P. R., and Jones, A. C. (2010). Cis-Trans isomerisation of azoben-
zenes studied by laser-coupled NMR spectroscopy and DFT calculations. Photochem. Photo-
biol. Sci. 7, 968–974.
(88)
Berlett, B. S., Levine, R. L., and Stadtman, E. R. (2000). Use of Isosbestic Point Wavelength
Shifts to Estimate the Fraction of a Precursor That Is Converted to a Given Product. Analytical
Biochemistry 287, 329–333.
(89)
Meier, S., and Beeren, S. R. (2014). Simultaneous Determination of Binding Constants for
Multiple Carbohydrate Hosts in Complex Mixtures. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 11284–11287.
(90)
Bryant, R. G. (1983). The NMR Time Scale. J. Chem. Educ. 60, 933–935.
(91)
Hirose, K., in Analytical Methods in Supramolecular Chemistry; Schalley, C., Ed.; Wiley-VCH
Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA: 2006; Chapter 2.
138
==PAGE:151==
7
Appendices
7.1
NMR spectra
7.1.0.1
1H NMR spectrum of compound 5
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
3, 4 
CHCl3 
5 
1, 2 
NH 
10 
6 
9         8 
7 
139
==PAGE:152==
7.1.0.2
1H NMR spectrum of compound 8
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
6.22
2.08
2.08
1.02
4.09
ppm
2.5
ppm
1H-NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
CHCl3 
H2O 
CH2Cl2 
MeOH 
1 
2 
3a 3b 
4 
O
O
O
O
NH2
3a
2
1
4
H H
3b
140
==PAGE:153==
7.1.0.3
1H NMR spectrum of compound 6
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
ppm
7.5
ppm
1H-NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
CHCl3 
EtOAc 
1 
2 
6 
NH 
5 
4 
3a 3b 
EtOAc 
4 
OH
HN
O
N
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
2
3a
1
4
5
6
H
H
3b
141
==PAGE:154==
7.1.0.4
1H NMR spectrum of compound 10
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
NH 
3, 4 
5 
12 
1, 2 
11 
NH 
13 
15 
10 
14a          14b 
6 
7, 9 
8 
16 
CHCl3 
142
==PAGE:155==
7.1.0.5
1H NMR spectrum of template Azo (1)
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
DMSO 
NH 
NH 
3, 4, 5, 12 
11 
1, 2 
10 
13 
14a, b 
6 
8 
7, 9 
143
==PAGE:156==
7.1.0.6
COSY spectrum of template Azo (1) in 100 mM phosphate buffer in D2O at pH 7.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
δ (ppm)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
δ (ppm)
144
==PAGE:157==
7.1.0.7
1H NMR spectrum of compound 11
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
12.00
2.03
1.86
2.05
1.02
5.95
ppm
1H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
DMSO 
H2O 
1 
2, 3 
5 
4 
NH2 
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH2
1
3
2
4
5
145
==PAGE:158==
7.1.0.8
1H NMR spectrum of compound 12
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
pp
2.93
2.91
2.79
0.69
2.03
1.83
6.93
12.67
0.52
0.60
1.92
0.56
0.47
1.84
1.05
0.24
0.84
6.8
7.0
7.2
ppm
3.6
3.8
4.0
ppm
2.3
2.4
ppm
H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
1 
(trans) 
2 
(trans) 
3, 4 
(trans) 
5 
(trans) 
6 
(trans) 
9 
10 
 
NH 
(trans) NH 
(cis) 
1 
(cis) 
5 
(cis) 
2 
(cis) 
3, 4 
(cis) 
6 
(cis) 
7 
8 
DMSO 
H2O 
EtOAc 
EtOAc 
EtOAc 
N
O
O
N
O
O
NH
O
Br
2
5
4
3
1
6
7
8
9
10
146
==PAGE:159==
7.1.0.9
1H NMR spectrum of compound 13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
12.55
2.24
4.07
1.94
8.21
1.51
8.74
10.66
2.05
0.18
1.34
0.19
0.15
1.39
0.66
2.00
0.93
1.89
-0.02
0.48
4.0
ppm
7.0
7.5
ppm
2.4
ppm
1.5 ppm
H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
1 
(trans) 
2 
(trans) 
3, 4 
(trans) 
5 
(trans) 
6 
(trans) 
9 
10 
 
NH 
(trans) 
NH 
(cis) 
1 
(cis) 
5 
(cis) 
2 
(cis) 
3, 4 
(cis) 
6 
(cis) 
7 
8 
DMSO 
H2O 
”grease” 
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
1
4
5
2
3
7
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
16
15
12
NH 
 
12 
11 
(trans, cis) 
13 
 
15 
 
14 
 
”grease” 
16 
 
147
==PAGE:160==
7.1.0.10
1H NMR spectrum of template mAzo (2)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
2.29
4.29
10.26
0.59
12.49
2.03
2.50
0.10
0.10
2.11
1.94
0.07
3.16
1.00
6.8
7.0
7.2
7.4
7.6
ppm
3.8
4.0
4.2
ppm
2.0
2.5
ppm
H-NMR (400 MHz, D2O) 
1 
(trans) 
2 
(trans) 
3, 4 
(trans) 
5 
(trans) 
9 
10 
 
1 
(cis) 
5 
(cis) 
2 
(cis) 
3, 4 
(cis) 
6 
7 
8 
HDO 
12 
11 
 
13 
 
14 
 
”grease” 
N
N
NH
O
O
NH
O
O
HN
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
1
4
5
2
3
7
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
12
148
==PAGE:161==
7.1.0.11
COSY spectrum of mAzo (2) in 100 mM phosphate buffer in D2O at pH 7.5
δ (ppm)
149
==PAGE:162==
7.1.0.12
1H NMR spectrum of compound 15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
CHCl3 
150
==PAGE:163==
7.1.0.13
1H NMR spectrum of the mono-aklylated side product formed in the synthesis of phenol
15
           
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
H2O 
DMSO 
EtOAc 
EtOAc 
151
==PAGE:164==
7.1.0.14
1H NMR spectrum of compound 17
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
H2O 
DMSO 
152
==PAGE:165==
7.1.0.15
1H NMR spectrum of compound 18
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
1 
2 
3, 4 
DMSO 
H2O 
NH2 
153
==PAGE:166==
7.1.0.16
1H NMR spectrum of compound 19
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
CHCl3 
OH  
4, 8 
2 
1 
9 
3, 5, 7 
6 
154
==PAGE:167==
7.1.0.17
1H NMR spectrum of compound 20
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
CHCl3 
5 
6 
NH 
4 
1 
2 
3a        3b 
7 
12 
8, 11 
9, 10 
155
==PAGE:168==
7.1.0.18
1H NMR spectrum of compound 22
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
NH 
19 
18 
1 
(trans) 
3, 5, 7, 9, 20 
1  
(cis) 
2 
(trans) 
2  
(cis) 
11 
(trans) 
11  
(cis) 
12, 17, 22 
H2O 
DMSO 
21 
13, 16 
14, 15 
EtOAc 
4, 6, 8, 10, 23 
156
==PAGE:169==
7.1.0.19
1H NMR spectrum of template ipAzo (3)
 
1H-NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) 
1  
DMSO 
NH 
19  
18 
2 
11  
21  
14, 15 
13, 16 
4, 6, 8, 10 
12, 17 
3, 5, 7, 
9, 20 
157
==PAGE:170==
7.1.0.20
COSY spectrum of template ipAzo (3) in 100 mM phosphate buffer in D2O at pH 7.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
δ (ppm)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
δ (ppm)
158
==PAGE:171==
7.1.0.21
1H NMR spectrum of compound 25
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
27.24
5.97
5.74
5.99
1H-NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
CHCl3 
2 
4 
H2N
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
1
2
3
4
1 
3 
159
==PAGE:172==
7.2
UV-Vis absorption spectra
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorbance spectra of Azo
Before light treatment
"15, 365 nm, 700 mA"
Figure 87: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM Azo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light treatment
and after irradiation with UV light at 365 nm, 700 mA.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorbance spectra of Azo
Before light treatment
2 min 15 s, 365 nm
6 min, 625 nm
23 min, 625 nm
Figure 88: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM Azo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light treat-
ment, then after irradiation with UV light of 365 nm (700 mA), then after irradiation with red light at 625 nm
(1000 mA).
160
==PAGE:173==
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
UV-vis absorption spectra of Azo
[A] as prepared
[A] 30 s (365 nm, 700 mA)
[A] 30 s (530 nm, 1000 mA)
[A] 2 min (530 nm, 1000 mA)
Figure 89: UV-vis absorbance spectra of 50 µM Azo in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.5. Before light treat-
ment, then after irradiation with light of 365 nm (700 mA), then after irradiation with green light at 530 nm
(1000 mA).
161
==PAGE:174==
7.3
Fitting value ∆δmax from NMR titration
Table 16: The best-ﬁt value for the maximum change in chemical shift, ∆δmax, and error determined for cis and
trans-isomers of Azo, mAzo and ipAzo templates with α-, β-, and γ-CD in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer,
pH 7.5, in D2O at 298 K.
Template
Azo
mAzo
ipAzo
trans
cis
trans
cis
trans
cis
α-CD
0.07292
± 0.00079
−
0.00712
± 0.00112
0.00619
± 0.00096
0.00365
± 0.00021
0.00691
± 0.00133
β-CD
0.08212
± 0.00146
0.03445
± 0.00038
0.00382
± 0.00027
0.00053
± 0.00003
0.004208
± 0.000367
0.12919
± 0.01664
γ-CD
0.10667
± 0.00048
0.10236
± 0.00351
−
0.26116
± 0.16058
0.03610
± 0.00662
0.13415
± 0.00699
162
==PAGE:175==
7.4
Obtained distribution percentages of CDs from HPLC-ELSD analysis of
DCLs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 mg/ml a-CD, 10 mM Azo + ipAzo template 
No template 
Figure 90: Distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 9.5 hours of; Left) the untemplated
library. Right) the Azo- and ipAzo-templated library starting from darkness, then irradiated with UV-light at
365 nm, and ﬁnally irradiated with red light at 625 nm. The libraries were performed using 10 mg/ml α-CD
with and without 2 × 10 mM template in 100 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.5 and at room temperature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 mg/ml a-CD, 10 mM Azo + ipAzo template 
No template 
Figure 91: Distribution percentage of α-, β-, and γ-CD from 15 minutes to 9.5 hours of; Left) the untemplated
library. Right) the Azo- and ipAzo-templated library starting from darkness, then irradiated with UV-light at
365 nm, and ﬁnally irradiated with green light at 530 nm. The libraries were performed using 10 mg/ml α-CD
with and without 2 × 10 mM template in 100 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.5 and at room temperature.
163
