==PAGE:1==
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґ
onбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
Master Thesis
DTU Space
DenmarkБ─≥s National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applicaбґ
tions
Master Thesis
February, 2022
By
Gabriel Cobos Tello
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusбґ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU Space, DenmarkБ─≥s National Space Institute, Elektrovej Bygning 327,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.space.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000бґ0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000бґ00бґ0000бґ000бґ0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000бґ0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000бґ00бґ0000бґ000бґ0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
Gabriel Cobos Tello бґ s186468
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
13/02/2022
COBOS 
TELLO, 
GABRIEL 
(FIRMA)
Digitally signed 
by COBOS 
TELLO, GABRIEL 
(FIRMA) 
Date: 2022.02.13 
09:10:31 +01'00'
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The work presented here was carried out as part of the SELENE project, with hopes of
achieving one of its minor goals of dependability assessment through fault injection. With
the expected final outcome being a tool capable of fault injection in the SELENE SoC,
which has a NOELбґV processing unit at its core. The work started with an extensive
field study of the background needed to develop an FPGA based fault injection tool, as
well as the current state of the art. The design of the tool implied the adaptation of an
existing fault injection tool, DAVOS, to fit the requirements of a new implementation techбґ
nology and processing unit, the NOELбґV. This adaptation consisted in the redefinition of
existing DAVOSБ─≥ classes, to enable the creation of new classes that would provide the
functionalities needed for injection in the NOELбґV. The tool also required of the creating
of a hardware injector in the form of a MicroBlaze processor, that would inject faults via
ICAP. The combination of both these elements made for a fault injection environment that
depended on host for control, while doing the actual injection on the hardware by means
of FPGA partial reconfiguration. The toolБ─≥s fault injection capabilities were verified by inбґ
jection experiments, were the impact of the faults was monitored, and corroborated when
checking the contents of the FPGAБ─≥s configuration memory. The representativity of the
results obtained when injecting into the NOELбґV processing unit, was validated through
various qualitative means, achieving satisfactory conclusions.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Gabriel Cobos Tello, MSc Electrical Engineering, DTU
Space technology study line, DTU Space.
Ilya Tuvoz, [PhD Researcher at SELENE], [SELENE, UPV]
Ilya was my technical supervisor for this project, and his guidance and assistance was
key for its success. His knowledge of software design, fault injection and dependability
assessment are unparalleled to anybody else I know, which makes him a great mentor.
But over all, the thing I am most thankful for, is the fact that he was always there to answer
questions, solve doubts or provide examples. He was also generous enough to show me
the intricate workings of DAVOS, an experience from which I learned immensely.
[Carles Hernц║ndez Luz], [Senior Researcher and Project Coordinator SELENE], [SEбґ
LENE, UPV]
Carles was, as project coordinator at SELENE, also a supervisor in this project. Despite
not being as involved as Ilya, something expected given how he supervises the work of
everyone at SELENEм╬ Carles still found time to discuss the project every week, providбґ
ing insightful feedback that greatly contributed to its success. Carles was also generous
enough to offer me a research position at SELENE, helping me develop my professional
skills further than I ever expected from a master thesis.
iv
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature Study
6
2.1
Background: General Fault Injection Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Background: Methods for Improved Fault Injection Performance
. . . . . . 15
2.3
Background: FPGA Based Fault Injection (FFI) on Xilinx Devices . . . . . . 21
3
Analysis and Design
33
3.1
Analysis: ACME, DAVOS or RapidWright for Partially Reconfigurable FFI . 33
3.2
A Host Controlled FFI Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.3
Injection Controller (Host) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.4
Injector (Board) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3.5
The NOELбґV Subsystem (Board) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4
Results and Comparison
57
4.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4.2
Injection in the NOELбґV Subsystem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.3
Injection in the Individual Modules of the NOELбґV Core
. . . . . . . . . . . 68
5
Conclusion
73
5.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A RapidWright Experimental Code
4
B Clock and StartUp Control Test Program
8
C Injection Results
11
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
Block diagram of a typical fault injection environment, based on [4]. . . . . .
8
2.2
Possible readouts from a digital system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3
Logical flow by which injection experiments can be improved in terms of
their run time and accuracy. Where accuracy implies representativity only
when the selected fault models are emulated according to the working enбґ
vironment of the DUT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
The effect of the margin of error (e) and total population size (N), on the
sample size (n). Figure made with MatLab and based on figures from [31, 21]. 16
2.5
An Algorithm to minimise experiment run times when estimating the failure
rate of a particular failure mode. With predefined sample and error margin
goals. Based on figures 4 and 6 from [33]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.6
Breakdown of XilinxБ─≥s architectural hierarchy at the fabric layer. Based on
a figure from [42]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.7
Xilinx VivadoБ─≥s representation of Basic Element of Logics (BELs), in the
image two routing BELs in the form of CLB muxes and two logic BELs in
the form of FlipбґFlops (FFs) are shown. Based on a figure from [42]. . . . . 22
2.8
Abstract representation of tiles with Б─≥XYБ─≥ coordinates and their connecting
nodes with unique naming schemes. Based on a figure from [42].
. . . . . 23
2.9
Relation of the abstract FPGA Layers. The configuration memory configбґ
ures the physical fabric of the FPGA to replicate the userБ─≥s design. Based
on figure 1. from [16].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.10 Relation between the types of bitstream frames used for FPGA configuraбґ
tion and the types of fabric resources they target. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.11 Logic flow for a generic FFI environment based on partial reconfiguration.
Based on figure 3.8(b) from [31]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.12 Relationship between Device Configuration Bits, Essential Bits, Prioritised
Essential Bits, and Critical Bits [38].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
2.13 Visual representation of the mapping of LUTs in the CM. Based on figure
3.10 from [31].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2.14 Logical flow by which FFI experiments can be improved in terms of their run
time and accuracy. Here the base ground for improvement is considered
the exhaustive injection in all of the CM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.1
Flowchart depicting the process of filtering out leaf cells by their type and
position in the netlistБ─≥s hierarchy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.2
Flowchart depicting the process of obtaining a cellБ─≥s FAR after having modбґ
ified the cell properties to identify its minor frame. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.3
Abstract Class Diagram of the current state of DAVOS as designed for Zynq
7бґseries devices. The model descriptions were provided by the creator of
DAVOS. For more details refer to [31] and the toolБ─≥s manual that will be
released in the near future.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.4
Block diagram of injection toolБ─≥s environment, showing the separation beбґ
tween host and board, their individual building blocks and their means of
communication. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.5
Abstract Class Diagram of the new DAVOS flow as designed for a MicroBбґ
laze injector and a NOELбґV DUT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
vi
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:8==
3.6
UML sequence diagram depicting the exchanges between the servers and
the controller by means of Linux sockets. The addresses of the MicroBlaze
registers are shown in the table.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.7
UML class diagram.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.8
The addresses of the MicroBlaze registers used to control the injection flow. 45
3.9
Vivado Block Diagram depicting the design of the MicroBlaze based injecбґ
tion unit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
3.10 Block diagram of the MicroBlaze subбґmodule in charge of controlling the
DUTБ─≥s clock and reset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3.11 Detailed view of the signals driving the subбґmoduleБ─≥s outputs, as well as
the enable for the reset down counter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3.12 Finite State Machine (FSM) responsible for controlling the subбґmodule.
. . 50
3.13 The Addresses of the Clock Buffer AXI registers used to control the DUTБ─≥s
clock and reset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.14 Representation of the different injection procedures for each of the tarбґ
getable logic resources. Based on figure 5.12 from [31]. . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.15 Block diagram of the MicroBlaze subбґmodule in charge of controlling the
DUTБ─≥s clock and reset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.16 The Addresses of the StartUp Control AXI registers used to control the GSR
flow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.17 Flow chart depicting the logical flow of the Б─²mic_appБ─² programme.
. . . . . 52
3.18 Block diagram of the simple counter dummy design used to test the injecбґ
torБ─≥s capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.19 Flow chart depicting the logical flow of the test program used to validate the
ability of the injector to read and write frames, control the clock and reset
of its DUT, and trigger Б─²GSRБ─². . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.1
Floorplan used for the injection campaign involving the entire NOELбґV subбґ
system for LUT and generalised essential bits injections. . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.2
Floorplan used for the injection campaign involving the individual modules
of the NOELбґV core for generalised essential bits injections. . . . . . . . . . 60
4.3
Recount of the dynamic instructions in each workload, sorted out by RISCбґ
V extension and category. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.4
Simplified logic flow for one single injection experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.5
Probability of failure(%) results after 50000 injections into the NOELбґV subбґ
system for area based injection for generalised essential bits . . . . . . . . 63
4.6
Probability of failure (%) results after 50000 injections into the NOELбґV subбґ
system for hierarchy based injection for LUTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
4.7
Failure Rate (FIT) results after 50000 injections into the NOELбґV subsystem
for area based injection for generalised essential bits . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
4.8
Failure Rate (FIT) results after 50000 injections into the NOELбґV subsystem
for hierarchy based injection for LUTs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.9
Probability of failure (%) results after simultaneous (i.e. two faults) injection
into the NOELбґV subsystem for generalised essential bits . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.10 Reliability of a NOELбґV core replica at different points in time after its initial
functioning (sea level) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.11 Reliability of a NOELбґV core TMR at different points in time after its initial
functioning (sea level) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Representation of the types of errors detected by means of fault injection.
Internal and Outputs values are to be compared to those of a Golden Run
for match or no match. The alarm is a feature of possible fault detection
mechanisms present in a given design.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2
Frame Address Register Description [39]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.1
Representation of the different FFI features and their expected impact of
the different implementation methods on them. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.1
Probability of failure (%) and Failure rate (FIT) results, for the 8 NOELбґV
core modules in each of the executed workloads. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
viii
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:10==
List of Symbols
Statistics in Fault Injection
e
margin of error
n
sample size
N
total population size
p
probability of failure
CI
confidence interval
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
ix
==PAGE:11==
List of Acronyms
FARM Model Acronyms
Б─²AБ─²
Set of Activation Trajectories
Б─²FБ─²
Fault List
Б─²FMБ─² Fault Model
Б─²LБ─²
Injection Location
Б─²MБ─²
Set of Measures
Б─²RБ─²
Set of Readouts
Б─²TБ─²
Injection Time
Б─²WБ─²
Set of Workloads
General Acronyms
AI
Artificial Intelligence
API
Application Programming Interface
ASIC Application Specific Integrated Circuit
BEL Basic Element of Logic
CCF Common Cause Fault
CLB Configuration Logic Block
CM
Configuration Memory
CMD Command Register
DVF Device Vulnerability Factor
DM
Design Memory
DSP Digital Signal Processor
DUT Design Under Test
ECC Error Correction Code
EDA Electronic Design Automation
EEE Electrical, Electronic and Electroбґmechanical
FAR Frame Address Register
FIFO First in First out
FIT
Failure in Time
FPGA Field Programmable Gate Array
FPU Floating Point Unit
FF
FlipбґFlop
x
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:12==
FFI
FPGAбґbased Fault Injection
FSM Finite State Machine
ICAP Internal Configuration Access Port
ISA
Instruction Set Architecture
LUT
LookбґUp Table
MTTF Mean Time to Failure
MIG
Memory Interface Generator
MMCM MixedбґMode Clock Manager
MMU Memory Management Unit
PCAP Processor Configuration Access Port
PIP
Programmable Interconnect Point
SBFI Simulationбґbased Fault Injection
SDC Silent Data Corruption
SEE Single Event Effect
SEU Single Event Upset
SLR Super Logic Regions
SoC System on Chip
TMR Triple Modular Redundancy
XSCT Xilinx Software CommandбґLine Tool
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
xi
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In the current era of selfбґdriving cars, AI controlled robots and commercial ventures into
space, safetyбґcritical systems have become a major concern for the tech industry. Safetyбґ
critical systems are those systems whose failure could result in loss of life, significant propбґ
erty damage, or damage to the environment [18]. These kinds of safetyбґfocused systems
allow for the reliable operation of a wide array of applications in many different fields. Yet,
achieving high levels of reliability is not a simple feat, specially considering the growing
complexity of modern hardware applications and the different environments safetyбґcritical
systems operate in. In the case of space applications, where failure can lead to a loss of
important services, monetary investments and in some cases life, reliability has taken a
leading role.
Spacecraft systems are of a distributed nature, with multiple subsystems connected to a
main bus [11]. These subsystems tend to have their own computing units, in the form of
embedded systems that can carry out computational tasks with varying levels of complexбґ
ity. Embedded systems are defined by their ability to process information while embedded
into enclosing products [26], but when employed in spacecraft subsystems, their reliability
also becomes a defining factor.
Usually, the design of embedded systems is focused around their efficiency when performбґ
ing their dedicated functions within the general system, reducing resource consumption
while meeting hard realбґtime constraints [26]. This holds true for safetyбґcritical applicaбґ
tions such as spacecrafts, with the additional requirement for high dependability. Deбґ
pendability is the ability of a system to avoid service failures that are more frequent and
more severe than is acceptable [3]. In most nonбґcritical systems, the limits of what can
be considered acceptable are more flexible than in safetyбґcritical systems such as those
deployed in space. Space applications endure exposure to extreme environmental condiбґ
tions, such as temperature, radiation [10], and the lack of affordable maintenance during
the missions duration [11]. All of this, leads to the need within space application for the
aforementioned dependability, a need shared by all safety critical applications.
The project presented here acknowledges this need for dependability in safetyбґcritical
applications, while raising the following question, how can dependability for a given sysбґ
tem deployed in a given environment be assured for a given amount of time? The way
to assure dependability can be separated into two highly related efforts, the means by
which to attain it and the means by which to validate how effectively it was attained. This
work will focus on the later, studying the background regarding the techniques and tools
used in the assessment and evaluation of dependability for safetyбґcritical systems. While
also proposing a new framework for the dependability assessment of GaislerБ─≥s NOELбґ
V [12] processor unit. The NOELбґV is a new cpu design by Gaisler using the RISCбґV
Instruction Set Architecture (ISA), and it is the main cpu in SELENE, a platform build for
safetyбґcritical applications. SELENE is a new highбґperformance computing platform for
safetyбґcritical applications that enables the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) while leveragбґ
ing open source RISCбґVбґbased components [15]. SELENE aims to cover the current gap
in the safetyбґcritical computing field, where the need for low cost, reduced size and low
power, highбґperformance embedded computing platforms able to host computationally inбґ
tensive applications in realбґtime, is not paired with ease for validating their dependability.
Based on its purpose to facilitate the introduction of new technologies into the safetyбґ
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
1
==PAGE:14==
critical systemБ─≥s market, SELENE seems to be the ideal project for the development of a
dependability assessment tool that could accelerate the processes of technology validaбґ
tion.
By using the current implementation of the NOELбґV at the core of the SELENE System
on Chip (SoC), this project aims to develop a dependability assessment tool for Field Proбґ
grammable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) based on FPGAбґbased Fault Injection (FFI). FFI is a
useful emulation based method by which to analyse system dependability along the deбґ
sign flow of the application, as it can be available quite early in the design process. The
tool will be limited to the NOELбґV core and will not encompass the entire SELENE SoC,
with the hopes of limiting the projectБ─≥s scope within realistic limits. FFI allows for high
levels of experimental performance, as it can be carried out during the execution of comбґ
plex computational processes that can not always be simulated during Simulationбґbased
Fault Injection (SBFI). Despite its benefits, FFI also comes with possible drawbacks perбґ
taining to its representativity and accuracy. Representativity is used to define the level to
which fault injection results will represent the dependability of a DUT when deployed in
its target environment [4], where as accuracy describes how close a result is to the real
dependability value. As the name states, FFI can only be carried out in FPGA devices,
and its results are only 100% representative if the design will be implemented in an FPGA.
This means that applications designed in FPGA but with ASICs as final hardware targets,
will only achieve relative representativity from FFI when assessing their dependability.
Furthermore, even in the case of applications with FPGAs as final hardware targets, FFI
can have accuracy issues due to the granularity of its injections. FFI requires of accuбґ
rate mapping between the netlist resources of the FPGA design and its Configuration
Memory (CM), in order to avoid unnecessary injections that will artificially improve the
robustness estimations.
In order to achieve high accuracy injections, the project will try to use existing tools that
could provide fine grained mapping of the FPGAБ─≥s CM, such as the RapidWright platform,
which can in theory establish a precise link between CM and netlist. RapidWright is an
open source platform that provides a gateway to VivadoБ─≥s backбґend implementation tools
[19], possibly allowing us to manipulate of the bitstream without requiring to know its comбґ
position. Without the use of existing tools, fine grained mapping of the CM will require of
the creation of custom Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) capable of decipherбґ
ing bitstreams according to their netlists. Deciphering the bitstream of Xilinx devices is
probably the most challenging aspect of accurate FFI, as the information available is very
scarce and Xilinx doesnБ─≥t facilitate any specific documentation for this purpose. Rapidбґ
Wright could help by providing a shortcut in which knowledge of the bitstream configuraбґ
tion is no longer required. Despite this, RapidWright is still a tool in development, and it
lacks full support for many use cases, one of which is FFI. As such, the extend to which
these will work in the context of FFI is still to be assessed, and results regarding the use
of RapidWright will be presented during this report.
This project will try to leverage the use of existing FFI tools as much as possible, while
focusing on the adaptation of one or multiple tools for the NOELбґV subsystem. As such,
some of the features required by a FFI tool capable of robustness assessment in the
NOELбґV subsystem are as follows:
Б─╒ controlled injection of faults by netlist area or design hierarchy, for robustness estiбґ
mation of particular components and validation,
Б─╒ as well as statistical fault injection in CM and Design Memory (DM) for robustness
estimation of the entire Design Under Test (DUT) (i.e. the NOELбґV subsystem).
2
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:15==
The first feature could be supported by the bitstream manipulation capabilities of Rapidбґ
Wright and the DAVOSБ─≥ injection APIs, as both can filter design elements hierarchically.
Yet, the amount of design elements DAVOS [34] can filter based on the netlist hierarchy
is limited to those it knows how to map. While in the case of RapidWright there is a possiбґ
bility that the entire design can be mapped via netlist hierarchy, as long as it can establish
a precise link between CM and netlist, allowing it to manipulate the bitstream according
to netlist changes. Filtering by netlist area would on the other hand require of the use of
DAVOS or ACME [1], which are also designed for statistical fault injection and as such
they could also be used to achieve the second objective. Statistical injection and netlist
area based injection would have to be added to the RapidWright framework if chosen as
the main injection tool.
In general, the motivation for this project could be summarised as the desire to create a
tool to evaluate the dependability of safetyбґcritical systems such as the SELENE platform,
focusing for now on its NOELбґV core. As such this project aims to present a new FFI tool
for the NOELбґV subsystem, proving metrics that evaluate the toolБ─≥s capabilities and the
representativity of its results. The tool will try to use existing APIs that provide the best
framework for FFI, rather than develop something completely original from the ground up,
as this would not be feasible in the available time. These APIs could be those provided by
RapidWright, DAVOS or ACME, as well as others discovered during the literature study.
Having said this, it is expected that the biggest inspiration will be DAVOS, as it is, to the
authorБ─≥s knowledge, the most well documented and complete open source injection tool.
Furthermore DAVOSБ─≥ main researcher is part of the SELENE project and a supervisor of
this project. Since this master thesis has been part the SELENE project, some of the work
presented here was carried out in collaborations with members of SELENE.
1.2
Objectives
The objectives for this project will encompass all the necessary steps for the adaptation
of existing tools, as well as the creation of new APIs for their use in a NOELбґV based FFI
environment. Some requirements will also be based on suggestions from the SELENE
project supervisor, as the tool will be ported to the entire SELENE SoC in the future. The
objectives were categorised as either mustбґhave or niceбґtoбґhave, based on the minimum
capabilities a fault injection tool for the NOELбґV subsystem should provide, and leaving
space for future work regarding the SELENE SoC. Having said this, none of the mustбґ
have objectives are by any means trivial, and them by themselves could be enough to
publish a research paper after the projectБ─≥s end date.
MustбґHave
Б─╒ The tool has to be able to carry out statistical fault injection in the designБ─≥s CM
and DM, in a similar way to DAVOS, providing results that allow for robustness
assessment of the whole design or individual modules.
Б─╒ Any design elements added to the DUT for the purpose of fault injection, i.e. Miбґ
croblaze, must be isolated from the DUT for any purpose other than fault injection.
Б─╒ The tool has to be integrated into a single platform, that can be executed from comбґ
mand line and feed an .XML file with the properties of the fault injection campaign
desired.
Б─╒ The tool must be portable to any implementation of the NOELбґV subsystem, by
means of the GRMON debugger and the use of a Microblaze as the generic injection
controller.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
3
==PAGE:16==
NiceбґtoбґHave
Б─╒ The fault injection experiments should be carried out in an accelerated manner that
allows for extremely fast injection, (i.e. 1000 injections per second).
Б─╒ The tool should to be able to replicate specific faults such as Common Cause Faults
(CCFs) for validation purposes, by means of fine grained bitstream manipulation.
Б─╒ The tool should be portable to any Xilinx device.
1.3
Challenges
The main challenges regarding this project arise from the complexity of the SELENE platбґ
form itself and the secretive nature of XILINXБ─≥s bitstream configurations. Furthermore,
the use of novel technologies that are still in development, such as RapidWright, implies
that there are risks regarding what can actually be achieved with them. Since not much
documentation is available, most validation of its capabilities has to come from direct
contact with the developers or rigorous testing on our side. Considering these factors the
challenges can be summarised as follows:
Б─╒ One of the greatest challenge of FFI environments using bitstream manipulation
techniques, is the deciphering of the XILINX bitstream. Xilinx does not publish the
bitstream compositions of its FPGAs, and as such it is impossible to know what
each bit represents in the netбґlist without some sort of reverse engineering. This
means that for the purpose of fault injection in this project, multiple methods to gain
understanding of the bitstream composition will have to be studied. Based on this,
it is expected to be able to at least replicate the methods employed by DAVOS or
ACME, but fine grained bitstream manipulation remains a big challenge.
Б─╒ A novel method to surpass the previous challenge would be that of RapidWright. Yet
this approach comes with its own challenges in the form of lack of documentation
and untested APIs for fault injection. As such the investment of time and resources
into testing RapidWrightБ─≥s capabilities for fault injection could prove fruitless if the
tool turns out to not be properly equipped for the task.
Б─╒ Working with a platform such as the NOELбґV core from Gaisler will prove quite chalбґ
lenging due to its complexity, and will require of constant collaboration with its enбґ
gineers for efficient and effective progress to be made. The NOELбґV subsystem
source files are somewhat confusing when detailing its design, specially when it
comes to the clock paths and the DDR4 memory. This could prove problematic
if the design has to undergo changes, as extensive debugging would have to be
done in order to ensure correct functioning. For these reasons, collaboration with
GaislerБ─≥s engineers will be needed along the project, and as such it could prove
quite challenging if the collaboration is not effective.
Б─╒ Fault injection in the DM, specifically registers, requires of an atomic instruction,
where the contents of the memory element have to be read, flipped and then written
back [31]. During this process, thousands of clock cycles could pass unless the
DUTБ─≥s clock is stopped, meaning that there will be no control over the accuracy
of the injection. In the case of the SELENE SoC and its NOELбґV core, controlling
the clock will prove quite challenging, as the existence of external DDR4 memory
means that the clock can not simply be stopped for each injection in the DM, or
otherwise the content of the external memory elements will be lost. This proves to
be the biggest challenge for fault injection in the DM.
4
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:17==
Б─╒ Another challenge will be that of validating the results of the fault injection experбґ
iments. Unlike in the case of other types of scientific studies, it is really hard to
obtain previously published results with which to compare with, and the availability
of multiple FFI tools that will work out of the gate under certain experimental condiбґ
tions, in order to generate a range of comparable results, is nonбґexistent. In order
to validate results the approach taken will have to be qualitative. Predictions will be
made based on experimental conditions, and the results will be studied based on
these predictions. The challenge will lay on finding convincing ways to validate the
toolБ─≥s results purely based on this qualitative assesment.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
5
==PAGE:18==
2
Literature Study
The literature presented in this section is split into two distinctive categories, background
on the theory needed for the project, and the current state of the art for the different topics.
The background will present the knowledge needed for the creation and understanding
of a FPGA based fault injection tool for a Safetyбґcritical RISCбґV platform. Such knowlбґ
edge will include topics related to general fault injection theory, methods used to improve
the performance of injection experiments, and a detailed explanation of Xilinx FPGA fabбґ
rics, their reconfigurable capabilities, and how to apply FFI to them. Basic knowledge
of FPGAs is assumed along side basic notions of digital design. Also the detailed disбґ
cussion of specific radiation environments, such as space, and why they need of safety
critical applications, is omitted for the sake of brevity and cohesiveness.
Discussions of the current state of the art will be reserved for topics that escape the scope
of this project but still remain interesting to mention due to possible benefits in FFI perбґ
formance. As such these topics are presented with the intention of laying out possible
routes for future work.
Everything discussed will be done while keeping under consideration the fact that the
testing platform will be a vc707 Xilinx evaluation board, with GaislerБ─≥s NOELбґV processor
as the DUT.
2.1
Background: General Fault Injection Theory
As previously introduced, there is an everбґgrowing need for faultбґfree operation in many
fields where safetyбґcritical systems are involved. This has made the task of assessing
dependability one of the main focuses of safetyбґcritical system development. Yet assessбґ
ing the dependability of a system is not a simple matter. Unlike system performance,
dependability can not be assessed by means of benchmark programs or standard test
methodologies [4], it needs of the close observation of the systemБ─≥s behaviour in the presбґ
ence of a fault. This implies that if we were to test the robustness of a system by having
it run until a fault occurs, we would be dependent on the Mean Time to Failure (MTTF),
which in the case of dependable systems can be in the order of years [4]. Hence, for
efficient development times on the part of safetyбґcritical systems, a way to artificially acбґ
celerate the appearance of faults had to be developed. It was to this purpose that fault
injection techniques were created. There are four different categories into which different
fault injection techniques can be classified (as stated in [4]):
Б─╒ hardwareбґimplemented fault injection: faults are injected in the physical system by
changing its internal state using a variety of different methods, such as logic analбґ
ysers, heavyбґion radiations, FPGAs, or laser beams. Depending on the injection
method chosen the number of available internal sites to inject into will vary. This
approach is very expensive and requires of extensive knowledge of the DUT device
as well as the target environment, but if done well it can provide very realistic results.
Б─╒ simulationбґbased fault injection: faults are only injected into a model of the system
by modifying it or using simulation scripts. In theory any part of the system can be
target by this method, but the ability of the simulator to replicate a realistic workload
will depend on the complexity the workload and the capacity of the simulation tool.
This kinds of injectors tend to be lowбґcost, with the realism of their results depending
on the simulation tool and the accuracy of the generated model.
6
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:19==
Б─╒ softwareбґimplemented fault injection: faults are injected into the implemented sysбґ
tem by means of software procedures. This allows faults to be injected in any loбґ
cation accessible to the software program. This kind of approach is very flexible,
but provides relative realism and can only be implemented in microprocessor based
systems.
Б─╒ hybrid fault injection: all previously described approaches implemented on the same
environment to obtain the widest range of results and accuracy in the experiments.
All four types of fault injectors will operate in the same fault injection environment, which
is described by the FARM model [2]. The FARM model is composed of four attributes [4]:
Б─╒ The Fault List (Б─²FБ─²) represents the set of Faults to be injected to the system. Every
element Б─²fБ─² of the fault list Б─²FБ─² has to be characterised by a Fault Model (Б─²FMБ─²) (i.e.
the type of fault, stuckбґat, bitбґflip, etc.), an Injection Location (Б─²LБ─²) (i.e. a logic/memбґ
ory element, a memory address, a pin, etc.), and an Injection Time (Б─²TБ─²) (i.e. a clock
cycle). In any given fault injection experiment the fault list will only cover a portion
of the entire fault space. The fault space is described as (Б─²FMБ─²xБ─²LБ─²xБ─²TБ─²), the multiбґ
plication of all possible fault models, in all possible locations at all possible injection
times. This description makes any fault space infinite, and as such eliminates the
possibility for exhaustive testing. Hence the fault list Б─²FБ─² should only cover a statisбґ
tically significant portion of the fault space, unless the fault space is restricted to a
subset of targets (i.e. fault collapsing).
Б─╒ The Set of Activation Trajectories (Б─²AБ─²) define the systems functionality during the
injection experiment. Since Б─²AБ─² controls the way the system will exercise itself durбґ
ing execution, it will also have a direct effect on the experimentБ─≥s duration, where a
more exhaustive or demanding Б─²AБ─² will increase the length of any given experiment.
As such the choice of Б─²AБ─² also affects the size of the fault space (Б─²FMБ─²xБ─²LБ─²xБ─²TБ─²) and
its sampled fault list. In the case of microprocessor systems Б─²AБ─² can also contain
the Set of Workloads (Б─²WБ─²), which are the benchmarks by which the systems perбґ
formance would be normally measured.
Б─╒ The Set of Readouts (Б─²RБ─²) will be outputted by the system during its execution. The
form of Б─²RБ─² will highly depend on the type of system being experimented on, as well
as the methods by which the systemБ─≥s behaviour is logged. The quality and detail
of the data provided in Б─²RБ─² will strongly affect the significance of any fault injection
results as well as the experimentБ─≥s duration [4]. This implies that there is always a
tradeбґoff between accuracy and time when selecting the appropriate Б─²RБ─².
Б─╒ The Set of Measures (Б─²MБ─²) is obtained after analysing the systemБ─≥s Б─²RБ─². Б─²MБ─² is used
to compute the dependability estimations of the DUT.
With the FARM model we can then define any given fault injection campaign as a collecбґ
tion of experiments, each corresponding to a fault Б─²fБ─² from the fault list Б─²FБ─², that has to be
injected while the system is fed a particular Б─²aБ─² from the set of activation trajectories Б─²AБ─² in
a workload Б─²wБ─² from the set Б─²WБ─² (in the case of microprocessors) [4]. The results from the
fault injections come in the form of Б─²MБ─² after the readouts Б─²RБ─² are studied for each experбґ
iment. As such the fault injection environment can be represented by figure 2.1, where
the implementation of each block will depend on the previously described classifications
for fault injection techniques.
The previous concepts present a way to model a fault injection environment, yet they do
not go into detail as to how to asses the realism of its results, the set of measures Б─²MБ─².
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
7
==PAGE:20==
Fault
List
Injector Tool
Controller
Activation
(Workload)
DUT
Logged DUT
behaviour (R)
Analyzed Data
(M)
Figure 2.1: Block diagram of a typical fault injection environment, based on [4].
Realism or representativity are two key aspects of any good fault injection environment,
permeating almost every aspect of it. As such any fault injection environment providing
credible measurements must respect the following qualities for each of its attributes:
Б─╒ Representativity (The Fault List Б─²FБ─²). The environment must be given a representaбґ
tive fault list, meaning a Б─²FMБ─² and Б─²LБ─² that emulates/simulates real faults for a given
environment. In other words, to be able to draw conclusions on the real system
performanceБ─  the fault injection environment must be able to Б─²inject those faults that
are representative for real faults using a representative distributionБ─² [24].
Б─╒ Low Intrusiveness (The set of Activation Trajectories Б─²AБ─²). Any fault injection enviбґ
ronment must have low intrusiveness with respect to the target system. Intrusion
introduced by the fault injection environment may corrupt the system behaviour [24],
meaning that the results will no longer represent the real system, but a version of it
with fault injection logic implemented.
Б─╒ Observability (The set of Readouts Б─²RБ─²). The fault injection environment must allow
observation of all important information relevant to evaluate the system state and
calculate results from the injection experiments [24]. This implies that there is a
lower limit for accuracy when it comes to Б─²RБ─², no matter the cost in time, the tool
must be able to accurately observe all important information relevant for evaluation.
Б─╒ Inspectability (The set of Measures Б─²MБ─²). All provided measures must be inspectable
by a third party, meaning that all derived measures from the complete experiment
execution and evaluation must be transparent and auditable [24].
Apart from the qualities pertaining the fault modelБ─≥s attributes, there is also the aspect
of recreating a realistic environment when injecting faults. Besides the faults there are
other system inputs that could influence the system behaviour, these inputs come from
the system environment, and must be realistically represented by means of environment
simulation [24].
2.1.1
The Set of Faults Б─²FБ─² (Fault List).
In order to achieve a representative fault list Б─²FБ─², the target system, its working environбґ
ment and the objectives of fault injection must be well known before hand. Different fault
injection techniques will achieve different goals, as such it is important to know the objecбґ
tive to be achieved before designing a particular fault list Б─²FБ─². Some common goals are
[4]:
Б─╒ understanding the systemБ─≥s behaviour under the effect of real faults,
Б─╒ evaluating the fault tolerance mechanisms embedded in the target system,
8
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:21==
Б─╒ and forecasting the faulty behaviour of the system, by obtaining measurements of
the efficiency of coverage provided by the embedded fault tolerance mechanism.
All three of these possible goals require of different fault list definitions, that will also deбґ
pend on the target system and its environment. Defining a fault list will require of the
selection of a fault model Б─²FMБ─², and fault locations Б─²LБ─². This has to be done in a way
that achieves a balanced tradeбґoff of confidence in the fault list, versus budget, time as
well as technical constraints. The selection of a bad fault list will invalidate the results of
the injection experiment , either due to the number of experiments not being statistically
meaningful or due to the faults not being representative of the potential faults of the real
environment [4].
The Fault Model Б─²FMБ─².
Given how faults depend on the target systemБ─≥s technology and the working environment
in which it is deployed, the selection of a fault model Б─²MБ─² is crucial in trying to achieve the
desired representativity. For instance in the case of space applications, most faults are
caused by radiation originating from the sun or galactic cosmic rays, in the form of enбґ
ergetic charged particles (i.e. electrons, protons, neutrons and heavy ions) [10]. These
kinds of radiation sources will affect Electrical, Electronic and Electroбґmechanical (EEE)
components by means of cumulative radiation effects, or Single Event Effects (SEEs),
which can be further categorised into destructive and nonбґdestructive. The relevance of
the different radiation effects will depend on the kind of technology deployed and its orбґ
bit/trajectory. Different technologies can be more or less susceptible to the distinct types
of radiations effects, while also showing different responses to the same radiation effect.
For instance, in the case of the well known Single Event Upset (SEU), a kind of nonбґ
destructive SEE, Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) and FPGAs will have
different responses due to their internal technologies. Furthermore, when also considerбґ
ing the final working environment of the system being tested, the prominence of certain
types of radiation sources will be different, as their potential occurrence rates will increase.
Hence pairing the considerations of the systemБ─≥s technology and its final working environбґ
ment, a set of dominant radiation effects plus their occurrence rates will be obtained (i.e.
FPGA SEU rate of 2 bits per day along a particular orbit). This information is what is used
to properly define the fault model.
Unfortunately, these considerations have to also be paired with the limitations of the availбґ
able fault injection environment, which can not always model the realistic faults [4]. This
proves to be a problem for applications were the most prominent faults can only be modбґ
elled by complex processes, or applications that have hard real time execution requireбґ
ments and as such can not allow for the performance overheads of complex fault injection.
An example of this would be the modelling of intermittent or permanent faults, which must
be kept active after injection, thus preventing the system from restoring their original state.
A permanent fault is often referred to as a Б─²StuckбґatБ─² fault, where a given bistable will conбґ
stantly stuck at a certain value, Б─≥0Б─≥ or Б─≥1Б─≥. SEUs on the other hand can be modelled with
a simple Б─²BitбґFlipБ─², which just require for the system execution to be stopped before they
are injected, leaving the system to perform as it may afterwards.
This project will focus on modelling SEUs, in order to emulate the types of faults realisбґ
tically encountered in space environments for FPGA devices, as well as trying to cover
the concerns for validations of certain fault tolerant systems deployed by the SELENE
engineers and researchers.
The Fault Locations Б─²LБ─².
Unlike in the case of the fault model, the selection of the fault locations depends solely
on the target system and the fault injection mechanism. The target system will define
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
9
==PAGE:22==
the set of fault locations that are interesting to test based on whether they are used or
not. Injecting in unused locations is redundant as it will have no impact in the systemБ─≥s
functioning and it will negatively impact the experiment run time, increasing injection times.
The fault injection mechanism will have an impact on the set of fault locations available,
as depending on the tool, only some locations will be reachable for injection. Hence
by pairing these two concepts the set of fault locations will be a subset of the desired
fault locations based on the rechability of the fault injection mechanism. In the case of
fault injection, rechability does not only represent the ability to inject faults in that target
location, but also the ability to exert control over it as well as observe it. Controllability and
observability can be a crucial requirements in more complex fault injection campaigns, for
instance, those where before injecting a fault, the state of the current fault location has
to be read an compared in order to inject the desired fault (i.e. injecting Б─²BitбґFlipsБ─² in
registers).
In the case of SELENE, the final systemБ─≥s technology will be a mixture of ASIC and FPGA,
while the development technology is purely based on a FPGA. The current fault injection
environment used in the SELENE project is based on SBFI with RTбґlevel models, while the
one developed in this study will be a hardwareбґbased fault injection environment carried
our by means of FFI. As such the work presented here will focus on FFI (section 2.3),
and will only discuss simulationбґbased fault injection as a means for comparison with FFI.
Based on the development technology, the set of desired fault locations will be separated
into two categories, CM and DM, where CM targets will be representative to those parts of
the system whose final implementation technology will be FPGA, and DM targets will be
representative of both FPGA and ASIC. Furthermore, given how the system tested will be
a SoC, the importance of injecting in the DM will be absolute, as these elements are crucial
for the correct operation of the system. With regards to the injection environment, the use
of FFI gives a high level of rechability to all fault locations due to the FPGA architecture
allowing us to inject in most targets, and the debugging tools of the SELENE SoC providing
observability and control over the experiments. Yet, given the complexity of the SoC
problems are expected to arose when trying to access targets whose state depends on
the clock cycle, as it might prove difficult to stop the clock for such a complex processor.
The Fault List Б─²FБ─².
Putting all these together we can obtain the two main elements that represent the fault list,
the model and the location. Now the only remaining element is the injection time. Bringing
the injection time into the equation renders the fault space basically infinite, as previously
explained. Thus the fault list can only represent portion of the entire fault space, and must
do so in a way that is statistically relevant. In most cases the faults can not be selected
using a simple uniform distribution, due to the fact that not all parts of a system will see
the same amounts of activation. For instance, in the case of a microprocessor executing
a repetitive task, there will be certain instructions that will see more use than others, as
such these instructions will be more critical to the systemБ─≥s execution [4]. It is important to
take the criticality of different system elements into consideration before injecting faults,
relating the distribution of faults to the systemБ─≥s element usage. Failing to do this could
mean that faults are injected in parts of the system that see very little or not use at all,
which for the most part, will have no impact on the systemБ─≥s functioning. As mentioned
before injecting in fault locations like this should be avoided.
In the case of SELENE fault collapsing techniques and statistical sampling will be used to
optimise the fault list. Fault collapsing is the process by which a fault listБ─≥s complexity is
reduced by removing redundant faults without affecting the statistically relevance of the
set of faults. Only faults whose effects are known beforehand will be removed, meaning
10
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:23==
that they will still be considered in the fault list but not actually injected. As far as SELENE
is concerned, this translates to the injection of faults in only those bits of the CM deemed
critical for the functioning of the SoC implemented in the FPGA. Any fault in the nonбґ
essential bits of the FPGA have been proved to have no effects on the designБ─≥s integrity
[31]. In the case of FPGA implemented designs this is the biggest optimisation to be had
when it comes to fault collapsing [1, 31], yet it only optimises the fault list with regards to
the CM and not the DM. For the later other approaches have to be considered [5, 6, 31].
2.1.2
The Set of Activation Trajectories Б─²AБ─².
In order to achieve low intrusiveness, the way in which the fault injection environment
communicates with the target system must be limited to fault injection. This implies that
the set of activation trajectories Б─²AБ─², must represent the actual inputs the target system
will receive during operation, through its normal channels, and in no way should it be
altered to facilitate fault injection or improve observability in ways that alter the systemБ─≥s
design. There is however a middle ground, in which Б─²AБ─² can focus on the fault injection
goals previously described (section 2.1.1), while still representing real inputs. In any case,
unless Б─²AБ─² is capable of stimulating all critical parts of the target system, the experiment
could suffer from incomplete results and no effect faults [4]. Incomplete results mean that
the set of activation trajectories Б─²AБ─² was not sufficiently exhaustive, not covering all critical
paths for the real system execution. This means that any results obtained will not be
representative of the system as a whole, and as such credible robustness estimates can
not be drawn from them. Similarly to this, the occurrence of no effect faults, can also affect
the credibility of results, as these kinds of faults which are classified as harmless could in
fact be potentially dangerous if Б─²AБ─² had been more exhaustive. The exhaustiveness of a
given set of activation trajectories is then given by the percentage of the fault list it is able
to cover [4].
In the case of SELENE, where the target system is implemented in an FPGA and the
technique selected for fault injection will be FFI (section 2.3), the set of activation trajecбґ
tories Б─²AБ─² can be modelled based on functional and behavioural methods that rely on the
expected systemБ─≥s behaviour. Or in other words, we can inject faults while running the
same processes the system would run during real execution in its working environment.
In this case Б─²AБ─² would just be a subset Б─²wБ─² of the set of real workloads Б─²WБ─². The workloads
used for this project will be provided by SELENEБ─≥s team, as the creation of new workloads
for fault injection escapes de scope of this work.
2.1.3
The Set of Readouts Б─²RБ─²
For the purpose of obtaining high levels of observability regarding the systems response
to the injection experiments, one would want the chosen readout mechanism to provide
the most detailed results. Yet this often proves to be costly in terms of execution time,
added hardware and design complexity [4]. Not to mention that added hardware and deбґ
sign complexity, due to the injection environment, can lead to intrusiveness and hence
less representativity, when not properly isolated. Furthermore, the readout mechanism is
not only limited by these drawbacks, but also by the type of design being tested and the
type of injection environment deployed.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
11
==PAGE:24==
CL
Internal (Regs/Mems)
Outputs (BUS/Mem)
Detection (Alarms)
DUT
Figure 2.2: Possible readouts from a digital system
In the case of digital systems, the readouts can come from multiple sources as shown
in figure 2.2. These readouts can then be observed under fault injection, allowing us
to define the effects of the particular fault in the DUT. Having said this, the effects of
faults are not always directly traceable, some faults that donБ─≥t cause a failure during the
execution of a workload might be latent and could cause a failure in future executions. As
such we categorise faults as shown in in table 2.1, where the different types of faults are
presented based on the correlation of the systemБ─≥s readouts to the ones obtained without
fault injection (Golden Run). There is also another category which is not represented in
the table, the possibility of a system hang. This kind of fault is not categorised based on
system readouts, but rather any fault witch locks the systemБ─≥s state, making it impossible
to execute further experiments, is considered a system hang.
This can be applied to FFI environments since the internal readouts can be obtained
from the CM, and the output and detection readouts will depend solely on the DUTБ─≥s
design. Yet, for complex systems such as SELENE the debugging mechanisms already
implemented may limit the extend to which desired readouts for injection assessment can
be obtained, limiting these to the capabilities of the debugging tools. These limitations
can be reduced if more means to communicate with the DUTБ─≥s modules are added, but
this comes at the cost of intrusiveness.
Type of Fault
Internal
(Regs/Mems)
Outputs
(BUS/Mem)
Alarm
(Exception/Flag)
Masked
Match
Match
No
False Alarm
Match
Match
Yes
Latent
No match
Match
DonБ─≥t care
Data Corruption
(Detected)
DonБ─≥t care
No match
Yes
Data Corruption
(Silent)
DonБ─≥t care
No match
No
Table 2.1: Representation of the types of errors detected by means of fault injection.
Internal and Outputs values are to be compared to those of a Golden Run for match or no
match. The alarm is a feature of possible fault detection mechanisms present in a given
design.
2.1.4
The Set of Measures Б─²MБ─²
For the purpose of this work, the relevant theoretical aspects related to the set of meaбґ
sures, are those pertaining to the way it is used in dependability assessment. The detailed
description of dependability requires of the quantification of its attributes, reliability, availбґ
ability, safety, integrity, and maintainability [3]. In this particular case the most relevant
12
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:25==
of these attributes is reliability, which is defined as Б─²the probability that the system will
operate correctly throughout the interval [t0, t], given that system was operating correctly
at time t0Б─² [31].
Reliability, R(t), is often expressed as Б─²the probability R that the system will survive up
to a specified time tБ─² [22]. The mean value of the reliability function is the MTTF. Comбґ
plementary to this concept of reliability is the idea of the probability of failure, F(t), which
describes the probability that a system will fail before a specific time t. Both of these can
be then used to describe what is commonly referred to as the failure rate, н╩(t) =
f(t)
R(t),
where f(t) is the failure density obtained from the derivative of the probability of failure.
This failure rate expresses the probability that a system, which has not yet failed at a time
t, will fail at a time t + dt.
If a constant failure rate, and exponential reliability function are assumed, one can obtain
the reliability of a system at time t by means of equation 2.1. And the MTTF can be
computed as shown in equation 2.2, assuming the same constant failure rate.
Rsystem = eБ┬▓н╩ц≈t
(2.1)
MTTF = 1
н╩
(2.2)
The opposite can also be done, where a reliability threshold of, for instance 0.99, is set in
order to calculate the time t at which it will be reached. This time t is normally considered
the mission time, as it will be the amount of time a system will be able to perform with
100% reliability.
In practice, when considering FFI, the probability of failure is not defined in terms of time,
but in terms of FPGA essential bits for a DUT (i.e. bits who can affect the DUTБ─≥s behaviour
when altered). In this case the probability of failure is described as the probability that the
design will fail when one of its essential bits is altered. This is often referred to as the
Device Vulnerability Factor (DVF), and it is a metric obtained from fault injection. Conбґ
sidering this new definition of the probability of failure, it is possible to also define a new
concept for the failure rate fro FFI, shown in equation 2.3:
н╩system = н╩F ц≈ K ц≈ NEB ц≈ DVF
(2.3)
where:
Б─╒ н╩F is a is a constant failure rate at seaбґlevel taken from XilinxБ─≥s device reliability
report [40]. Depending on the logic cells being injected into, one will need to take a
н╩F for CRAM or BRAM cells. It is provided in units of FIT/Mb.
Б─╒ K is the scaling factor for н╩F based on altitude.
Б─╒ NEB is the total population size (N) of essential bits for the implementation of the
system at hand.
The units of the failure rate in FFI are the Failure in Time (FIT), which is the measure of
the expected number of faults per one billion (i.e. 109) device operation hours. The set
of measures Б─²MБ─² obtained from FFI will then be the DVF as a probability value, that can
then be used to compute the failure rate н╩system[FIT] by means of equation 2.3.
Another important concept for the set of measures Б─²MБ─², is its inspectability, which is directly
dependent on the means by which the data was obtained. This implies that without a
properly documented set of readouts, Б─²MБ─² will not be traceable, thus making it difficult to
asses the following desired qualities in Б─²MБ─² [4]:
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
13
==PAGE:26==
Б─╒ Whether the provided error and confidence estimations for the statistical results are
accurate and representative of the real environment,
Б─╒ whether the results are properly correlated to the operating conditions,
Б─╒ whether the results defend specific conclusions and not just a generalised assumpбґ
tion that is not completely supported,
Б─╒ and whether the link between fault occurrence and the types of faults is clear.
In order to prevent this, one has to provide a clear view of how the readouts are obtained,
and how this will limit the measureБ─≥s capabilities in drawing conclusions for the dependбґ
ability of the system. In the case at hand the readouts will be limited to masked, Silent
Data Corruption (SDC), and hangs, and the ways by which these are obtained will be
transparently stated when describing the taxonomy of the software categorising them,
and the injection toolБ─≥s design.
14
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:27==
2.2
Background: Methods for Improved Fault Injection
Performance
As made abundantly clear by the combination of the FARM model [2] and the set of desired
qualities in fault injection [24], there are certain practices that can improve the efficiency
of fault injection experiments, both in time and results. These improvements could follow
a logical flow such as the one shown in figure 2.3, where the initial proposal to improve
on is the unfeasible injection of faults into the entire fault space. This section will describe
practices to improve the speed and representativity of fault injection experiments.
Б─╒Impossible for most 
experimental set-ups
Б─╒Unfeasible experiment 
times due to basically 
infinite fault lists
Exhaustive Injection 
into the entire fault 
space
Б─╒Requires adequate 
sampling of the fault 
population
Б─╒Confidence interval
Б─╒Could still lead to long 
experiment times
Statistical Injection 
into the entire fault 
space
Б─╒Depends on the correct 
use of fault collapsing 
techniques
Б─╒Experiment run time 
depends on how collapsed 
the fault list is
Exhaustive Injection 
into an optimised fault 
space
Б─╒Experiment times could 
be smaller without 
sacrificing accuracy
Statistical Injection 
into an optimised fault 
space
Reduced experiment 
run time
Improved accuracy
Reduced experiment 
run time &
Improved accuracy
Figure 2.3: Logical flow by which injection experiments can be improved in terms of their
run time and accuracy. Where accuracy implies representativity only when the selected
fault models are emulated according to the working environment of the DUT.
2.2.1
Statistical Fault Injection
The use of statistical sampling in fault injection is interesting because it can achieve faster
experiment run times while only adding assumable margins of error to the results. It is deбґ
fined as Б─²a method for drawing elements from a population such that all possible elements
in the population have a known and specified probability of being drawn and such that the
set of chosen elements has approximately the same distribution of characteristics as the
population from which it was drawnБ─² [20]. Here Б─²a population denotes a large group conбґ
sisting of individuals having at least one common feature, while a sample is nothing but a
part of the population that is selected in order to represent the entire groupБ─² [31]. The repбґ
resentativeness of the individuals forming the sample is crucial when drawing conclusions
for the entire population. In terms of fault injection, representativity in sampling would reбґ
fer to the importance of the fault targets for the systemБ─≥s functioning. As mentioned in
section 2.1.1, not all parts of the DUT see the same rate of activation, and as such are
not as critical for system functioning as others. This makes it hard for most systems to
sample their fault space with a uniform distribution, with some exceptions.
For now lets assume a given fault space can be sampled by means of a uniform disбґ
tribution, where individuals have equal criticality, and faults are injected to measure the
probability of failure (p). In such a case a margin of error (e) would be needed to
represent the maximum difference between the real value of p for the N and the value obбґ
tained from a provided sample. The sampled value of p should also lie within a given
confidence interval (CI). Considering this assumption, the required sample size (n)
needed to obtain the desired e for a given CI and p, can be calculated as shown in equaбґ
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
15
==PAGE:28==
tion 2.4 [21]. Similarly the margin of error (e) can be conversely computed as shown in
equation 2.5 [21].
n =
N
1 + e2 ц≈
NБ┬▓1
CI2ц≈pц≈(1Б┬▓p)
(2.4)
Both of these equations need of a preбґestablished confidence interval (CI) and probability
of failure (p) in order to calculate the sample size (n) or margin of error (e) respectively.
In the case of CI a common assumption in statistics is to use a value of 95% (CI = 1.96)
[17], meaning that 95% of the cases will provide values whose difference from the real
value will be within the margin of error e. In the case of p, which is unknown before the
injection experiment is carried out, a worst case scenario can be adopted where 50%
probability of error is assumed (p = 0.5) [21]. From the equations we can see that such a
pessimistic assumption makes it so that a larger sample size is required in order to keep
the margin of error (e) small.
e = CI ц≈
Б┬ 
p ц≈ (1 Б┬▓p)
n
ц≈ N Б┬▓n
N Б┬▓1
(2.5)
Another conclusion to be taken from the equations is that the sample size (n) increases as
population size increases, but only up to a point in which the required n becomes constant
for any number of N. Figure 2.4 shows this behaviour for different values of e, which also
proves the previous point that in order to obtain a smaller margin of error a bigger sample
size is needed. In the case of very large population sizes, which is often the case with
fault spaces, equation 2.4 can be simplified into equation 2.6.
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
Total Population Size (N)
101
102
103
104
105
Sample Size (n)
n for e=5% & p=50%
n for e=1% & p=50%
n for e=0.1% & p=50%
X 1778280000
Y 959882
X 316228000
Y 9604
X 316228
Y 384
Figure 2.4: The effect of the margin of error (e) and total population size (N), on the
sample size (n). Figure made with MatLab and based on figures from [31, 21].
n = CI2 ц≈ p ц≈ (1 Б┬▓p)
e2
(2.6)
A key study in terms of statistical sampling for fault injection is the one presented in [21], as
it provides basic concepts of how to apply standard statistical practices to the field of fault
16
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:29==
injection. This study establishes a hypotheses based on the assumption that the shared
characteristic between all members of the population, which is their ability to be affected by
a soft error at any clock cycle, follows a normal distribution. The study also uses random
sampling in the form of a uniform distribution, assuming all individuals in the population
equally likely to suffer a soft error. The total population is considered to be finite yet still
huge in size, after all, as previously mentioned in section 2.1, N depends on the circuit,
the fault model and the activation trajectories (i.e. number of clock cycles for execution of
the workload), which can easily lead to an infinite fault space and as such population size
if not restricted to a finite number. With this experimental setup the researchers in [21]
were able to achieve impressive results assuming a worst case scenario of p = 50% while
injecting into a total population of 4,063,170 fault targets. For a margin of error of 5% and
a confidence interval of 95% they where able to provide an estimate of the probability of
failure of their DUT in just 385 injections (i.e. n = 385). The number of injections rose as
they increased the confidence interval and decreased the margin of error, with a final e of
0.1% requiring 776792 injections (i.e. n = 776792). These results are quite promising for
systems where robustness assessment does not need more accuracy than that provided
by margins of error in the order of 1бґ5%. But in the case of safetyбґcritical systems, such as
Selene, it is necessary to get accurate estimates with errors in the order of 0.1%, meaning
that based on the results from [21] huge sample sizes would still be necessary, which in
turn would imply long experiment run times.
Yet, it is not always necessary to estimate the needed sample size before the injection
experiment, meaning that a worst case scenario (i.e. p = 50%) does not need to be
considered to obtain a sample size. It is often the case where one can simply choose
a sample size that is deemed representative based on the characteristics of the DUT.
This way the user has direct control over the experiment duration, at the cost of over or
under shooting the sample size requirements for their DUT, if not carefully considered.
When applying this approach to safety critical systems it is important to take into account
that the failure rate might be very low even when injecting a big number of faults. This
can prompt situations where the failure is so low that the margin of error is in the same
order of magnitude as the probability estimate (i.e. p = 0.16%, e = 0.11%). As such it
is possible to consider a dynamic relationship between margin of error and failure rate,
where p Б┴╔10ц≈e, in order to ensure the margin of error stays an order of magnitude smaller
than the probability of failure as it is being calculated after each consecutive injection.
Another aspect to consider is that in those cases where the number of failures is very low,
injections have to be carried out until a certain number of failures is achieved in order to
validate the approximation provided by p. This consideration is explained in [35], where
the following is stated:
n ц≈ p > 5
(2.7)
Equation 2.7 states that in order to trust the values obtained for p, at least 5 failures must
be encountered throughout injection. This could imply large sample sizes as the lower
limit for safety critical systems, and with the additional need for small margins of error, the
higher limit for the sample size can be quite massive.
The process of statistical fault injection can be further optimised when compared to [21],
and automatised when considering the manual approach just described. This is shown
in [33], where by means of an iterative approach it is possible to dynamically increase
the sample size until all necessary requirements for the statistical metrics are covered,
avoiding the possibility of over or under shooting the needed sample size.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
17
==PAGE:30==
State of the Art: Iterative Statistical Fault Injection
The first issue in the increase of required sample size (n) when decreasing the margin of
error (e), is the worst case scenario of p = 50% taken by the study in [21]. The researchers
in [33] point out that using equation 2.6 and estimating different values for p (i.e 70.83%,
6.25%, and 3.44%) the margins of error obtained for a the sample size of 385 with a
confidence interval of 95%, are б╠4.54%, б╠2.4%, and б╠1.825% respectively. This shows
that for those values of p who differ the most from the worst case (i.e 6.25%, and 3.44%)
the obtained margin of error is actually much smaller than the one desired, and as such
a smaller sample size could be used to obtain the same result. This revelation is useful
when considering the fact that probabilities of failure in safetyбґcritical systems are usually
much smaller than the worst case of p = 50%, and as such these systems could benefit
from this optimisation.
The study in [33] proposes a method of iterative fault injection where the goal is to achieve
a desired margin of error (e) in the minimum amount of time possible, while still injecting
a representative amount of faults considered the sample goal. A flow chart displaying the
algorithm proposed in [33] can be seen in figure 2.5.
Input:
Error Margin Goal (Egoal)
Sample Size Goal (ngoal)
Sample Step (nk)
Sample S = []
Inject nkб═faults and append to S
Calculate P for S
E = f(P, S)
no
yes
Eб═Б┴єб═Egoalб═
and Sб═Б┴╔б═nmin
Result
Figure 2.5: An Algorithm to minimise experiment run times when estimating the failure
rate of a particular failure mode. With predefined sample and error margin goals. Based
on figures 4 and 6 from [33].
In order to carry out the iterative process, it is also necessary to indicate a sample step by
which the sample size will be increased in each iteration. Since the value of p is not known
at the beginning of the experiment, it is necessary to first inject a number of faults equal
to the sample step, after which an initial value for p and e are obtained. These are then
compared to their respective goals, and if both of them are not met the iterative process
continues. This way in each cycle the number of injected faults increases by the sample
step and the p and e are recalculated until they both reach their desired values.
In the study shown in [33] this algorithm is used to test multiple failure modes, obtaining
the needed sample sizes for a established margin of error of 0.1% and sample step of
7800 faults. The results of these tests are then compared to the conservative approached
proposed by [21], where 784447 samples are needed, and for some of the fault models
the new sample sizes are as as small as 16% of the conservative one. This proves that
the iterative approach, despite being more complicated, can provide great efficiency in
fault injection experiment run times in those situations where the probability of failure is
very small and as such the margins of error have to be very precise.
Having said this, there will still be some cases where the samples needed to obtained preбґ
cise metrics will remain massive, and iterative fault injection will only ensure that these
18
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:31==
results are achieved in the most efficient manner achievable, without reducing the miniбґ
mum experiment run times.
2.2.2
Fault Collapsing
Given the theoretical description of the fault space provided by the FARM model [4], where
its multidimensional nature makes it impossible to carry out exhaustive injection experiбґ
ments, it is unhelpful to consider all the fault space as the population. In theory the fault
space can be reduced by means of fault collapsing, which is the process of pruning the
fault list according to the following criteria [5]:
Б─╒ Faults that are equivalent/dominant, these faults only need one of their representaбґ
tives included within the fault list,
Б─╒ and Faults whoБ─≥s result are known prior to injection, i.e. faults injected to unused
parts of the system, faults that will be detected by detection mechanisms, or faults
who will definitely cause an error.
The difficulty in applying fault collapsing comes from the classification of potential faults
into the above mentioned criteria. This is further complicated by the fact that the extend to
which faults can be classified highly depends on the type of injection environment being
designed. In the case of SBFI, where the DUT is described at RTбґlevel, there are three
methods for fault collapsing proposed by [6], Workload Independent Fault Collapsing,
Workload Dependent Fault Collapsing, and Dynamic Fault Collapsing. Each of this methбґ
ods achieve impressive fault collapsing numbers, pruning 80%, 10% and 5% of potential
faults respectively [6].
For hardwareбґbased injection the options for fault list collapsing will greatly depend on the
technology being experimented on. For instance in the case of FPGAs with FFI, a great
number of faults can be characterised as having their result known prior to injection. This
is the case for faults injected in parts of the CM and DM that are not critical for the DUTБ─≥s
functioning. The process to characterise this types of faults is very straight forward as it
consists on Xilinx essential bits, which are described in section 2.3.3.
In general a properly collapsed fault list could make it feasible in some cases for exhausбґ
tive fault injection. Nevertheless combining this method with that of iterative statistical
fault injection is expected to give the best results, improving both experiment run times
and accuracy as outlined in figure 2.3.
2.2.3
Acceleration Fault Injection Experiments
Another concept worth discussing when it comes to optimising fault injection is the speedбґ
ing up of the injection mechanism indifferently of the number of faults to inject, in other
words, making the injection of one fault and the analysis of any system readouts faster.
This can be a key optimisation in cases where even with a reduced fault space and statisбґ
tical sampling, the injection times end up causing lengthy experiment run times. Having
said this, methods to speed up individual fault injection vary vastly depending on the inбґ
jection mechanism.
In the case of hardwareбґbased fault injection, or more specifically FFI, the current state of
the art dictates that the fastest injection flows comes from exploiting the runбґtime partial
reconfiguration capabilities of modern FPGAs [7, 9, 1, 31]. Here the biggest advantage
comes from the fact that since faults are injected by modifying the CM (section 2.3.3), the
injection tool can be implemented fully inбґchip, thus avoiding any delays from communiбґ
cating with the host. This is possible by means of employing integrated microprocessors
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
19
==PAGE:32==
as injection controllers, as well as by using sufficient memory resources to store the data
needed for partial reconfiguration and readout comparison.
Such FFI tools fully deployed on chip greatly speed up fault injection experiments, providбґ
ing speeds several orders of magnitude better than those seen by simulationбґbased fault
injection [31]. Despite this, and as will be shown in section 2.3.2, the deployment of such
tools greatly depends on FPGA brands and their individual technologies, making fully inбґ
chip injectors device and DUT specific. This means that for more generalised injection
tools it is better to relay on host based systems, where some if not all of the injection
process is controlled by the host PC.
20
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:33==
2.3
Background: FPGA Based Fault Injection (FFI) on Xilinx
Devices
As mentioned throughout section 2.1 the work presented here will focus on FFI, a type
of hardware based fault injection. The devices employed for the fault injection experiбґ
ments will be Xilinx SRAM FPGAs, as they are the ones employed for the development of
the SELENE platform. As such this section will focus on the specific features and topics
related to FFI for Xilinx FPGAs, and a brief explanation of their architecture and reconfigбґ
urable capabilities will be given. The understanding of Xilinx devicesБ─≥ internal architecture
and the necessary processes for their reconfiguration is extremely important for the type
of FFI methodology this section will later focus on, partially reconfigurable FFI (section
2.3.2).
2.3.1
Xilinx FPGA Fabric Architecture and Terminology
The internal structure of the FPGA is referred to as its fabric, and it contains the highly
configurable logic and data paths, as well as memory elements that make possible to
implement custom hardware designs. FPGA fabrics change based on the device family
they belong to (i.e. 7бґseries, ultraбґscale, ultraбґscale+), but a general description of these
can be given as arrays of replicated configurable resources that can connect with each
other by means of configurable routing, which in general consists of switch boxes. The
connections between the inputs and outputs of the switch boxes are called Programmable
Interconnect Points (PIPs).
At a lower level the way these resources are scattered across the fabric follows the general
Xilinx architecture and its hierarchy, which can be seen in figure 2.6.
Xilinx
Architecture
Device
Б─╒ Collection of 
SLRs
SLR
Б─╒ Super Logic 
Region
FSR
Б─╒ Fabric Sub 
Region: Clock 
Region
Tile
Б─╒ Collection of 
Sites
Site
Б─╒ Collection of 
Bels
BEL
Б─╒ Basic Element of 
Logic
Device
SLR
FSR
Tile
Site
BEL
Figure 2.6: Breakdown of XilinxБ─≥s architectural hierarchy at the fabric layer. Based on a
figure from [42].
Here the lowest physical elements are the BELs, which are the atomic units of the FPGA
fabric. These physical components are separated into two categories, routing BELs and
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
21
==PAGE:34==
logic BELs, shown in figure 2.7. The first of these are basically routing muxes that can be
configured to organise the routing within the fabric, and they do not support any design
elements from the userБ─≥s netlist. The second type of BELs are those that enable the
implementation of the netlist cells from the design. Logic BELs are designed to enable the
implementation of one or more types of UNISIM cells from XilinxБ─≥s UNISIM library, which
are often used to implement the userБ─≥s logic. These mapping of the designБ─≥s resources
into logic BELs can be seen in Vivado when observing individual netlist leaf cells and their
position in the device floor plan.
Both types of BELs have configurable connections to route their input and output pins
internally, these are called site PIPs. In the case of logic BELs they must be unбґpopulated
(i.e. no leaf cells from the userБ─≥s netlist placed on them) in order for their inputs and
outputs to be used as PIPs, and in these cases they are commonly referred to as Б─°route
throughБ─² or Б─°routeбґthruБ─² [42].
LEGEND
Routing BEL
Logic BEL
BEL Pin
Figure 2.7: Xilinx VivadoБ─≥s representation of BELs, in the image two routing BELs in the
form of CLB muxes and two logic BELs in the form of FFs are shown. Based on a figure
from [42].
On the next hierarchical level we have the Sites. These instances hold what Xilinx refers to
as Slices, which in turn can be Configuration Logic Blocks (CLBs), as well as input/output
pads, First in First outs (FIFOs), or many other types of resources. They are arranged
by type and position in the fabricБ─≥s grid, with each site having a site type (i.e. SLICEL
or SLICEM in the case of CLBs) and a set of coordinates Б─≥XYБ─≥. This set of coordinates
refers to the rows and columns of the fabric layer, where in the case of 7 series FPGAs,
the site placed at the bottom left corner will have coordinates Б─≥X0Y0Б─≥, and the one placed
at the top right corner will have maximum value in rows and columns. Depending on the
type of site (i.e. SLICEL or SLICEM), different BELs will be present within it. Sites are
grouped together to form Tiles. Tiles form the grid of resources that defines each particular
device, and they are also given a set of coordinates to locate them across fabric rows and
columns, with bigger granularity than sites. Tiles are not physical resources, they are a
useful abstraction to organise the different sites, and as such they do not have input or
output pins, they only have wires that connect to sites or to other tiles by means of the
switch boxes present across the fabric. Wires connecting multiple tiles are called nodes,
and as shown in figure 2.8 they are given unique names to identify them across the fabric.
22
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:35==
INT_X12Y101
CLEL_R_X12Y101
EE2_W_BEG5
EASTBUSIN_FT0_21
CLEL_M_X13Y101
INT_X13Y101
EASTBUSIN_FT0_21
EE2_W_END5
Figure 2.8: Abstract representation of tiles with Б─≥XYБ─≥ coordinates and their connecting
nodes with unique naming schemes. Based on a figure from [42].
Finally the fabric is broken down into clock regions which are once again given Б─≥XYБ─≥ coбґ
ordinates, in this case with the thickest granularity. These clock regions ensure that the
deviceБ─≥s clocking resources can feed all of the design logic scattered across the fabric
in a manner that will respect timing requirements. Some devices also have Super Logic
Regionss (SLRs), which are identical dies of the fabric that are packed together into a
device, this is the case of Ultrascale+ devices. The understanding of column and row
coordinates in the fabric layer is extremely important for the deciphering of the bitstream,
which will be needed for partially reconfigurable FFI (section 2.3.2).
This mesh of combinational and sequential logic where custom digital designs can be
deployed, is made possible by a bitwise, fine grained architectural model, composed of
SRAM cells and known as the Configuration Memory (CM). This mesh of SRAMs cells
is not very well documented, but based on information from [40], we can theorise that
it is populated by two different types of SRAM cells, CRAMs and BRAMs, in the case
of Ultrascale devices there is a third type, URAMs. The CRAM type of SRAM cells are
responsible for configuring the layout of the FPGA fabric, they control the routing of reбґ
sources and their configuration, as well as the initial contents of the sequential elements
of the fabric, such as LUTRAMs, BRAMs and FFs. The BRAM and URAM types of SRAM
cells hold the contents of the BRAM and ultraбґBRAM resources in the FPGA fabric. Xilinx
refers to these two types of cells as nonбґchangeable and changeable memory respecбґ
tively. Nonбґchangeable elements are named this way due to the fact that the contents of
the CM representing them do not change during run time, where as changeable elements
might change as a design is running on the FPGA. Based on this knowledge the FPGA
can be broken down into abstract layers for better understanding of its architecture, as
shown in figure 2.9. CM cells are hence responsible for instantiating the different fabric
resources with their contents, configurations and routing. If the contents stored in these
cells are changed, the layout of the fabric will change, and in the case of BRAMs their
contents will be deбґsynchronised.
Figure 2.9: Relation of the abstract FPGA Layers. The configuration memory configures
the physical fabric of the FPGA to replicate the userБ─≥s design. Based on figure 1. from
[16].
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
23
==PAGE:36==
The contents of the different SRAM cells are loaded during FPGA programming by means
of the bitstream file. This bitstream is in charge of establishing all the contents of the CM
and as such it is the link between the userБ─≥s DUT and the FPGAБ─≥s fabric. Different Xilinx
FPGA families have different bitstream compositions and as such different procedures to
load them to the CM. For the sake of simplicity and due to the fact that the primary FPGA
used for testing during this project will be a 7бґseries Virtex FPGA, here we will discuss
only the aspects related to 7бґseries FPGAБ─≥s bitstreams. Bitstreams are composed of
commands for the FPGA configuration logic as well as configuration data. The bitstream
itself can be divided into three sections [39]:
Б─╒ Bus Width Auto Detection,
Б─╒ Sync Word,
Б─╒ and FPGA configuration.
The first section is transparent to most users and does not affect the configuration logic if
the device Mode pins are set to Master Serial, Slave Serial, JTAG, or SPI mode for FPGA
programming. The second section is used to allow configuration logic to align at a 32бґbit
word boundary, until this word is detected no packets will be processed by the FPGA [39],
and is once more transparent to most users. The third section contains the commands and
data for configuration. Configuration data targets the CMБ─≥s smallest addressable units, the
frames. Individual CM cells are arranged into these frames, and as such every time a cell
has to be read from, or written to the CM, the entire frame to which it belongs will have
to be read or written. Due to the limitations of partial reconfiguration in these devices,
reading a frame requires for the entire column of tiles to which it belongs to be accessed,
such a column spans the height (i.e. Б─≥YБ─≥ coordinate) of its entire clock region. In 7бґseries
FPGAs a frame is compromised of 101 memory words of 32 bits each, with 36 frames in
each column or major frame. 7бґseries FPGAs are also divided into two halves, the top
and the bottom, as such frames are separated into top frames and bottom frames. Every
frame has an address stored by a configuration register referred to as Frame Address
Register (FAR), which is divided into five fields (table 2.2).
Table 2.2: Frame Address Register Description [39].
Address Type
Bit Index
Description
Block Type
[25:23]
Valid block types are CLB, I/O, CLK (000), block RAM content (001), and CFG_CLB (010). A 
normal bitstream does not include type 011
Top/Bottom Bit
22
Select between top-half rows (0) and bottom-half rows (1).
Row Address
[21:17]
Selects the current row. The row addresses increment from center to top and then reset 
and increment from center to bottom.
Column Address
[16:7]
Selects a major column, such as a column of CLBs. Column addresses start at 0 on the left 
and increase to the right.
Minor Address
[6:0]
Selects a frame within a major column.
Б─╒ The first field specifies the kind of block to which the FAR points, these set the
type of frame being addressed. For instance, frames of typeбґ0 contain configuration
content for CLBs and LookбґUp Tables (LUTs) (000).
Б─╒ The second field represents to which half of the FPGA the frame belongs to.
Б─╒ The third field shows which row the frame belongs to. Rows values in 7бґseries
FPGAs depend on the Top/Bottom partition. Rows positioned in the Top section start
24
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:37==
counting at zero, from the middle of the partition, and increment upwards. Whereas
rows positioned in the Bottom section start at zero and increment downwards. In
terms of granularity the row address presented in the FAR reflects the clock region
Б─≥YБ─≥ coordinate.
Б─╒ The fourth field is the column to which the frame belongs to, referred to as the major
frame. In terms of granularity the column address presented in the FAR reflects the
tile Б─≥XБ─≥ coordinate.
Б─╒ The fifth and final field points directly to the desired frame. The column, or major
frame selected with the Column Address field is composed of multiple minor frames,
36 to be specific. These frames hold the words that configure the CM cells. In order
to change any bit within a frame, the entire major frame has to be read and written
back into the CM due to the requirements of the partial configuration process.
Bitstream Frames
Type-0 
Type-1 
Type-2 
CRAM
Logic Resources
LUT INIT
FF INIT
BRAM I/O REG INIT
BRAM
Contents of BRAM
CFG_CLB
Undocumented Xilinx 
Partial Reconfiguration 
Mask
SRAM cells
Figure 2.10: Relation between the types of bitstream frames used for FPGA configuration
and the types of fabric resources they target.
It is possible to guess the type of SRAM cells contained in a CM frame by observing the
first field of its FAR, with a clear breakdown of the resources controlled by each type of
block shown in figure 2.10. This distinction between CM cells (i.e. nonбґchangeable and
changeable memory respectively) is made due to the nature of sequential elements in the
FPGA fabric. Fabric resources configured by frames of type 1 can be manipulated during
the FPGAБ─≥s run time, but doing so would deбґsynchronise their contents with respects to the
rest of the DUT. Due to this reason the contents of sequential elements are not changed
by the CM after initial configuration, with further steps apart from altering the content of the
CM frames required when injecting faults into sequential elements by means of partially
reconfigurable FFI.
2.3.2
Partially Reconfigurable FFI
Throughout the years FFI has seen much development, with research and tools [34, 1,
30, 27, 29, 36] being published about it. And with the increase in the use of SRAMбґbased
FPGAs in safety critical applications such as space [14, 9], the FFI based fault injecбґ
tion environments have become not only a means to accelerate modelбґbased injection
experiments (section 2.2.3), but also a means of assessing the final dependability of a
system. When considering this second goal of dependability assessment, FFI techniques
will usually focus on the emulation of SEUs in the FPGAБ─≥s CM, as they pose the main
dependability threat to these systems [23], while also being capable of emulating bitбґflips
in changeable memory elements whoБ─≥s contents are kept in the BRAM and URAM SRAM
cells.
To this purpose FFI tools based around the capabilities for partial reconfiguration present
in modern Xilinx devices can be used, with the possibility to deploy the injection environбґ
ment almost entirely within the FPGAБ─≥s chip. These partially reconfigurable FFI environбґ
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
25
==PAGE:38==
ments obtain all the benefits of fast fault injection due to the internal architecture of the
FPGA devices, without needing to pose threats to the representativity of the experiments.
This is due to the nature of their fault injection process being isolated from the DUT, unбґ
like the case of other FFI techniques [31]. What makes this possible is the emulation of
faults by changing the contents of the CM, rather than the costly design instrumentation
proposed by other FFI techniques. Since faults in a real working environment would affect
the contents of the CMБ─≥s SRAM cells, which in turn would reconfigure the FPGA fabric,
the emulation of these faults by means of partial reconfiguration of the CM proves to be
ideal in terms of representation.
Having said that, this kind of approach also comes with drawbacks which are mostly reбґ
lated to the undocumented relationship between the FPGAБ─≥s fabric resources and its unбґ
derlying CM cells [31]. The first drawback would be that the type of fault models which can
be emulated will depend on how finely and accurately the CMБ─≥s contents can be altered.
Some types of faults to be studied for validation purposes might need processes that are
more complex than a single bit flip on the CMБ─≥s frames. Fortunately the most interesting
type of fault to model in robustness estimation, the SEU, is easily emulated with simple bit
flips. The second drawback is an extension of the first, and it is that the relation between
the bitstream and the fabricБ─≥s resources, which is unknown due to lack of documentation,
has to be understood in order to know how the DUT is mapped onto the bitstream. This
notion of the bitstreamБ─≥s mapping is necessary in order to know where in the DUTБ─≥s faults
are being injected when altering the contents of the CM frames, and without it one would
be injecting faults blindly. This would mean that the only possible way to limit the scope
of injection would be by means of limiting the frames to inject into with relation to the coбґ
ordinates of the fabric layer. To this purpose a part of the design, to be considered the
injection target, could be isolated in a section of the fabric while the rest of the design is left
untouched, then by using the coordinates of the isolated section faults could be limited to
only those frames representing it. Ideally one would like to be able to inject based on the
DUTБ─≥s netlist hierarchy, but this is not possible without mapping the bitstream, or in other
words deciphering the relation between the CM and fabric resources. A full breakdown
of the flow of a generic partially reconfigurable FFI environment can be seen in figure 2.11.
HDL MODEL
IMPLEMENT &
GENERATE BITSTREAM
CONFIGURE FPGA
PICK NEXT FAULT (FAULT LIST)
RESET DUT TO INITIAL STATE
RUN UNTIL INJECTION TIME (W)
PARTIAL RECONFIGURATION
FOR FAULT INJECTION
RUN FOR FAULT DURATION (W)
PARTIAL RECONFIGURATION
FOR FAULT REMOVAL
MORE RUNS
RUN UNTIL WORKLOAD (W) END &
TRACE EFFECTS (READOUTS)
END
YES
BISTREAM
MANIPULATION API
NO
FAULT 
SUPPORTED BY
API?
HDL MODEL
IMPLEMENT &
GENERATE BITSTREAM
CONFIGURE FPGA
PICK NEXT FAULT (FAULT LIST)
RESET DUT TO INITIAL STATE
RUN UNTIL INJECTION TIME (W)
PARTIAL RECONFIGURATION
FOR FAULT INJECTION
RUN FOR FAULT DURATION (W)
PARTIAL RECONFIGURATION
FOR FAULT REMOVAL
RUN UNTIL WORKLOAD (W) END &
TRACE EFFECTS (READOUTS)
BISTREAM
MANIPULATION API
FAULT 
SUPPORTED BY
API?
END
Figure 2.11: Logic flow for a generic FFI environment based on partial reconfiguration.
Based on figure 3.8(b) from [31]
26
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:39==
This lack of traceable and accurate bitstream manipulation in modern FPGAs, makes it
impossible to transparently update the CM in accordance to modifications carried out at
the netlist (i.e. design) level [31]. This used to be possible with older Xilinx systems by
means of libraries that are currently obsolete, such as Б─²JbitsБ─². This tool could be used
to emulate the effects of a wide range of transient and permanent faults by targeting the
reconfigurable elements of the FPGA fabric, an example of this can be seen in [8].
Currently there is a Xilinx tool named Б─²RapidWrightБ─² undergoing development that could
potentially replicate some of the functionalities of Б─²JbitsБ─². The Б─²RapidWrightБ─² java frameбґ
work allows the user to update the contents of their netlist independently from Vivado,
simply requiring an implemented design checkpoint and a bitstream file, and extracting
from these files the netlist and configuration array respectively. The configuration array is
a class in Б─²RapidWrightБ─² that Б─²represents an array as defined by the address space of the
FAR and holds all the frame data written to it by the packet list from the bitstreamБ─² [42].
This class is basically RapidWrightБ─≥s way of storing the data contained in the bitstream so
that the rest of its APIБ─≥s can access it. Using this class Б─²RapidWrightБ─² can in theory modify
the contents of the the bitstream by reflecting changes in the netlist on the configuration
array, this is done by using these APIs in their respective orders:
1
ConfigArray.updateUserStateBits();
2
Bitstream.updatePacketsFromConfigArray();
Nevertheless this has yet to be tested, as there is currently, to the authorБ─≥s knowledge,
no documented use of Б─²RapidWrightБ─² for fault injection, and very little information of the
capabilities of RapidWrightБ─≥s bitstream manipulation flow.
For the most part modern FFI environments have been forced to create their own bitstream
manipulation APIs to bridge de gap between the FPGA fabric and its CM. Most of these
environments use XilinxБ─≥s Internal Configuration Access Port (ICAP) to access the CM,
either controlling the experiments via XilinxБ─≥s own Б─²SEMбґIPБ─² [43], as shown by [1, 30], or by
means of controllers based on XilinxБ─≥s Microblaze micro controller unit [41], as shown by
[27, 29]. Some environments have been developed with Zynq embedded devices in mind
[34, 36], and as such make use of XilinsБ─≥s Processor Configuration Access Port (PCAP)
[44] to modify the CM, controlling the experiments by means of the Zynq embedded ARM
processor. What all of these approaches have in common is that the actual injection
of faults is done inбґchip by means of unбґintrusive CM manipulation, thus improving their
representativity and performance. Yet in order to achieve these benefits, these kinds of
techniques have to devise their own bitstream manipulation APIs, these will be discussed
next.
2.3.3
Bitstream Manipulation for Fault Injection
The general concept behind reconfigurable FFI is clear when emulating SEUs in the CMБ─≥s
nonбґchangeable memory. This process starts with the programming of the FPGA with
the DUT and the injection mechanism, after which the workload is executed until injection
time, and then the DUTБ─≥s clock is stopped. With the preбґselected fault location at hand, the
CM cell representing it will targeted, its value will be read, inverted, and written back. After
this the DUTБ─≥s clock is resumed allowing the workload to progress while the effects of the
fault are traced. The injection of the fault itself is simple, knowing the frame composition
and how to address it by means of the FAR, allows us to alter the values of the individual
CM cells by changing one or more bits of the 32 bit words contained within it. This new
frame can then be programmed into the CM by means of the ICAP or PCAP, as well as
a partial bitstream. The question here is how do we communicate to the injector which
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
27
==PAGE:40==
CM cell to target, or in other words, how do we locate our fault targets amongst all of the
frames and their 101, 32 bit words?
This remains the biggest challenge for FFI, given how the FPGA has to be treated as
a black box due to the link between frames and design elements being undocumented.
One way to address this in order to execute injection experiments would be to target all
of the CM, but this leads to massive injection campaigns where every CM cell is injected
into with hopes of hitting all relevant fault locations. Also, as mentioned in sections 2.1.1
and 2.2, this not only will affect the accuracy of results, but will also affect experiment
durations, which in the case of modern FPGAs with hundreds of Megabytes of CM could
imply unfeasible experiment run times. Reducing the sample to a smaller amount of cells
would still have negative implications for the accuracy of the experiment, while remaining
inefficient in terms of time [31].
A way to address this issue would be to apply the notion of fault collapsing to partially
reconfigurable FFI. This could be done by means of the well documented Xilinx essential
bits [38]. Essential bits are basically a subset of all the device configuration bits, shown
in figure 2.12, and they represent those CM cells which determine the circuitБ─≥s integrity
and functionality for the DUT implemented. These bits are generated by XilinxБ─≥s EDA
tools (i.e. Vivado) in the format of a bitmask file (*.ebc). With this file the bitstream can be
parsed and the cells considered critical for the DUT can be located, thus allowing targeted
injection campaigns where only representative faults will be injected. This parsing is inбґ
tended to be done by means of XilinxБ─≥s Б─²SEMбґIPБ─² unit, but it can also be done by means
of custom APIs, such as DAVOS [34]. This approach proves to be a great improvement
over injecting in all of the device configuration bits, as with a smaller sample size the exбґ
periment duration is reduced while maintaining good representativity. Injecting into the
essential bits is considered a form of fault collapsing here, due to the fact that it is known
that injecting in any nonбґessential bit wont have an impact on the systemБ─≥s functionality, as
proven by [31], which as mentioned in section 2.2.2 allows us to disregard these targets.
Unfortunately, the essential bits still fall short of the ability to tell us into which parts of the
design we are actually injecting, as they only provide us knowledge on bit criticality but no
information on the relation between CM and netlist. For this, methods like RapidWright,
or custom made bitstream mapping tools would have to be employed.
Device
Configuration Bits
Essential Bits
Prioritized
Essential Bits
Critical Bits 
Figure 2.12: Relationship between Device Configuration Bits, Essential Bits, Prioritised
Essential Bits, and Critical Bits [38].
As previously mentioned in section 2.3.2, RapidWright could in theory shed some light
on the relation between netlist and CM, allowing for the location of fault targets from a
design perspective. If RapidWright is found to be capable of FFI, it would allow for fineбґ
grained fault injection capable of validation experiments with multiple fault models, as well
28
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:41==
as robustness assessment in the face of SEU. Validation experiments against multiple
fault models would need of the location of fabric resources configured by the CM such
as LUTs, PIPs and Digital Signal Processors (DSPs), to name a few. Without the use
of tools like RapidWright, targeting these elements specifically would require of custom
bitstream mapping APIs capable of fine grained fault target location. However, there is
very little information available regarding the mapping of these elements in the CM for the
development of such tools.
Mapping of FPGA Resources for FFI
Previous studies have already discussed the issue of fine grained FFI, going as far as
describing the mapping of LUT resources [31]. LUT cells are mapped into LUT BELs of
either 64 or 32 CM bits. The contents of the LUT are decided by the INIT cell containing its
logic function and a relation between LUT BEL coordinates and the fragment of configuбґ
ration memory storing their INIT content is shown in figure 2.13. In the FPGA architecture
a major frame XT will hold a columns of CLB tiles, with each tile constituting two CLB
slices. Each CLB will have multiple fabric resources, but the contents of the LUTs are
hold specifically on minor frames 32бґ35 and 26бґ29. Slices with even coordinates will have
their LUT contents stored in 32бґ35, whereas those with odd coordinates will store them in
26бґ29. Inside the minor frames the LUT contents will be stored in two consecutive words,
and since each slice has four LUTs the contents of one particular LUT will be stored in a
halfбґword, as shown in figure 2.13. By combining this mapping with essential bits we could
theoretically achieve fine grained hierarchical fault injection for LUT resources, yet this is
not so straight forward, as the bitmask reported by XilinxБ─≥s essential bits reports all bits
in a LUT as essential, even if just partially used. Unfortunately, the knowledge pertaining
to LUT mapping provided in [31] can not be extended to other fabric resources such as
PIPs, and as such most of the fabricБ─≥s mapping remains a topic for future investigation.
Tile (X=0 : Y=0)
Tile (X=0 : Y=49)
Clock Region Tile Column
Slice M/L
Slice L
Slice M/L
LUT A
LUT B
LUT C
LUT D
LUT A
LUT B
LUT C
LUT D
LUT A
LUT B
LUT C
LUT D
LUT A
LUT B
LUT C
LUT D
Minor Frames 
(32 : 35)
Minor Frames 
(26 : 29)
Slice L
Fabric Coordinates
Bitstream Coordinates
Word 0
Word 1
Word 99
Word 100
Major Frame X = 0
Figure 2.13: Visual representation of the mapping of LUTs in the CM. Based on figure
3.10 from [31].
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
29
==PAGE:42==
An important downside of Xilinx essential bits is the fact that they only represent the nonбґ
changeable CM, and as such they do not represent any register or memory. In order to
also inject in the changeable CM, or in other words the DM (i.e. FF, LUTRAMS, BRAMS),
the essential bits have to be complemented with the Xilinx Logic Location file (*.ll) responбґ
sible for providing information on the location of registers and memories within the CM.
The .ll file conveniently lists the hierarchical location of each FF/LATCHБ─≥s (i.e. register)
corresponding readback cell in the CM, while the BRAMs (i.e. memory blocks) get the loбґ
cation of each of their separate bits listed without hierarchical references to the DUT. The
.ll file only lists information regarding used registers and memories, including LUTRAMs.
Similarly to the mapping of LUTs the course mapping of BRAM resources is also disбґ
cussed in [31]. In the case of 7бґseries FPGAs, which contain two types of BRAM, BRAM36
and BRAM18, the BRAM occupies 128 minor frames within the major frame. Of the two
types of BRAM, BRAM36Б─≥s content is stored in ten consecutive words of each of the miбґ
nor frames. Since each BRAM36 can effectively be seen as a pair of stacked BRAM18s,
the mapping of the later follow the same structure. The .ll file does not directly show
this mapping, it only reflects on the individual bits, and the way the bits are represented
greatly depends on the way the BRAM is configured for the DUT. In the particular case
of a 512 x 64 BRAM in simple dualбґport mode the data in the .ll file will span the range of
[0:32767], with even bits stored on the bottom BRAM18 and odd bits in the top BRAM18.
Each BRAM18 holds 16Kbits (512 ц≈ 32[bits] = 16, 384[bits]) of data when its data width is
9 (8 + 1) or 18 (16 + 2), this effectively means that a BRAM36 configured with data width
36 (32 + 4) will store 32Kbits of data (512 ц≈ 64[bits] = 32, 768[bits]). Nevertheless the CM
allocates 40 Kbits (32[bits]ц≈5ц≈128 = 40, 960[bits]) for the contents of the BRAM32, as its
necessary to account for Error Correction Code (ECC) bits when enabled. The different
types of BRAM bits in the CM are categorised in the .ll file by different identifiers, data
bits are annotated as Б─²Ram=B:BITБ─², whereas parity bits are marked as Б─²Ram=B:PARBITБ─².
It is possible to target any of these bits present in the .ll file for fault injection, with the
relevance of injecting in parity bits depending heavily on the DUT and the configuration of
the BRAM. Unfortunately the mapping of BRAM bits in the .ll file is not completely transбґ
parent, as these lack the hierarchical information relating them to the DUT. As such when
injecting in them one cant be sure as to which memory element of the design they are
actually testing. Furthermore in the case that a BRAM is only used to implement a small
memory, all of the unused data bits will still be reported in the .ll file. Meaning that accuбґ
rate injection in relevant/used bits will be a very challenging task which will require of the
fine grained mapping of the BRAMs, something that to the authorБ─≥s knowledge is currently
extremely difficult without more documentation from Xilinx.
This problem affecting the clarity by which BRAMs are mapped within the .ll file does not
repeat itself in the case of registers (i.e. FFs and LATCHs). These element are not only
mapped according to the location of their readback cells, but they also are mapped with
regards to the netlistБ─≥s hierarchical structure. This allows us to do fine grained injection in
registers both by area and hierarchy. Where as in the case of BRAM only coarse grain
injection by area is possible without further mapping information.
By means of combining the information provided by the .ll file, and the mapping of LUTs,
one can carry out netlist based hierarchical injection in these elements without the need
to constrain the design to an area of the fabric. Having said this, it is clear that there is
still improvements to be had with regards to fine grained injection in these elements, and
as such this will be discussed next.
30
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:43==
State of the Art: Fine Grained Mapping of Resources for FFI
In general, and based on the information from literature previously discussed, one could
say that partially reconfigurable FFI depends greatly on both the tools and documentation
provided by the FPGA manufacturers. In the case of Xilinx, a more detailed description
of the link between fabric resources and CM would greatly facilitate the work required to
create FFI based tools. Without this the capabilities of injection tools have to be restricted
to the fault targets provided by the essential bits and the .ll file. As such the injection
experiments that can be carried out are limited to exhaustive injection on essential bits
that can be further optimised via iterative statistical injection. This is shown in figure 2.14,
which in a similar fashion to figure 2.3, depicts the logical flow as to how the accuracy and
run time of FFI experiments can be improved.
Б─╒Impossible for most 
modern FPGAs and DUTs
Б─╒Unfeasible experiment 
times due to basically 
infinite fault lists
Exhaustive Injection into 
all the CM cells
Б─╒Requires parsing of the 
bitstream with the .ebc
file
Б─╒Reduced fault space due 
to effective fault 
collapsing
Exhaustive Injection into 
essential bits
Б─╒Requires of advanced 
injection algorithms
Б─╒Reduced fault space due 
to effective iterative 
sampling
Iterative Statistical 
Injection into essential 
bits
Б─╒Experiment run times are 
minimized while accuracy 
is maintained at the same 
level of exhaustive 
injection
Iterative Statistical 
Injection into optimised 
essential bits
Reduced experiment run time 
& Increase accuracy
Reduced experiment 
run time
Reduced experiment run time 
& Increase accuracy
Figure 2.14: Logical flow by which FFI experiments can be improved in terms of their run
time and accuracy. Here the base ground for improvement is considered the exhaustive
injection in all of the CM.
The last step of figure 2.14 represents the current state of the art in FFI. It represents
the optimisations of FFI accuracy (i.e. smaller margin of error) with regards to iterative
statistical injection in essential bits. These optimisations are focused on improving on the
listing of essential bits by Xilinx with regards to LUT elements. The concept is to provide
a subset of essential bits called optimised essential bits, that unlike XilinxБ─≥s essential bits,
correctly estimates the criticality of all of the LUTБ─≥s bits [31]. This provides and improveбґ
ment in result accuracy because it reduces the total population of faults, and as such the
required sample size for a specific margin of error becomes smaller too. Since a smaller
sample implies a shorter experiment run time, the margin of error to be obtained can
be also set to be smaller, thus compensating with the experiment run time but obtaining
higher accuracy.
Similarly to improving accuracy with regards to LUTs, there is also research being done
with regards to the accurate mapping of BRAM resources in order to allow for hierarchical
injection in these elements. Currently there is no link between BRAM bits in the .ll file and
memory resources from the DUT implemented in BRAM, meaning that there is no way
of knowing in to which of the DUTБ─≥s memory elements one is injecting when attacking a
particular BRAM bit. Some research into possible ways to improve the BRAM mapping
has been made in [31], but the results where only representative to a very particular use
case and not generalizable across all BRAM configurations and FPGA families. Furtherбґ
more BRAM bits can also be optimised with regards to their importance to design integrity
by means of fault collapsing. Not all bits present in the .ll file will have an impact on the
design when injected into. As such by discarding these bits in a similar fashion to the
case of LUTs and optimised essential bits, will also yield better experiment run times and
hence better accuracy if desired.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
31
==PAGE:44==
All these optimisations related to LUTs and BRAM bits are of an extremely complex nature,
and as such they escape the scope of this thesis. Still, similarly to the iterative fault
injection flow described in section 2.2.1, they remain extremely interesting proposals that
can easily be considered for future work.
32
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:45==
3
Analysis and Design
This chapter will present the considerations and decisions taken along the design of the
FFI tool carried out during this project. In particular the aspects presented will be:
Б─╒ The analysis of available FFI tools and the reasoning behind choosing DAVOS as
the foundation for the new injection environment.
Б─╒ The design of three additional classes for the DAVOS FFI module, these will provide
the necessary functionalities for injection in the NOELбґV subsystem with a MicroBбґ
laze injector.
Б─╒ The design of scripts in charge of controlling the NOELбґV subsystem and MicroBlaze
injector.
Б─╒ The design of a Microblaze injector in hardware and its embedded software.
Б─╒ The hardware modifications needed for a clock controlled NOELбґV subsystem.
For the sake of clarity, the discussion of the design will be broken down into sections
depicting the main building blocks of the tool at hand, each with a clear indication of
whether they belong to the Б─²host sideБ─² of the tool or the Б─²board sideБ─². This distinction
is important due to the fact that the nature of the FFI environment changes drastically
depending on which elements of its design are implemented on host or board.
Before going into any design details, the analysis carried out in order to choose the best
tool, in this case DAVOS, will be discussed.
3.1
Analysis: ACME, DAVOS or RapidWright for Partially
Reconfigurable FFI
Having discussed the background on the different topics relevant to the use of Partially
Reconfigurable FFI in this project, as well as the current state of the art, it is necessary
to also analyse the potential benefits and drawbacks of the available tools. Comparing
ACME, DAVOS and RapidWright together may not seem exactly fair, as the first two proбґ
vide full injection environments, while the later, RapidWright, only provides the promise of
netlist based bitstream manipulation. Nevertheless for the purpose of this project, Rapidбґ
WrightБ─≥s concept was sufficiently enticing to prompt for the development of a full injection
environment around it. For this reason the three of them where considered as candidates
for the foundation on which to develop the injection tool for GaislerБ─≥s NOELбґV subsystem.
3.1.1
ACME
ACME [1] is a tool developed by Luis Alberto Aranda from the ARIES Research Center, in
the University Antonio de Nebrija. It is based around the idea of fault collapsing by means
of XilinxБ─≥s essential bits and the use of the Б─²SEMбґIPБ─² as the injector controller. ACME
also provides a portable environment by which to test any DUT implemented in most
FPGAs from Xilnx, with the possibility to add support to any device by following steps
detailed in their documentation [1]. The ACME researches demonstrate the capabilities
of their tool by means of fault injection in a RISCбґV core, comparing the results with the
injection of faults in the same core without ACME. In this manner they provide evidence
for the fact that reducing the fault list to only those targets that have an impact on the
DUTБ─≥s functionality (i.e. essential bits), has a direct impact on the representativity of the
experiments for the same sample size.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
33
==PAGE:46==
Nevertheless, ACMEБ─≥s capabilities are also shared by DAVOS, as it uses the same fault
collapsing technique of essential bits. On top of this, DAVOS also provides the possibility
for injections in the DM, a functionality that ACMEБ─≥s injection controller Б─²SEMбґIPБ─² does not
provide. This meant that an injection environment based on ACME would be limited to
emulating SEUs, without the possibility to expand it to other types of fault models. This
would have a big impact on the representativity of future experiments, when using the tool
to inject in the entire SELENE SoC. Since SELENEБ─≥s final implementation technology will
be ASIC, only injections in the DM will be representative when evaluating its dependability,
as these are the only elements that utilise similar logic both in FPGA and ASIC. Based
on this reasoning, it was decided that the injection environment would be based around
DAVOS or RapidWright, with the combination of both also being a possibility.
3.1.2
RapidWright
RapidWrightБ─≥s concept is very enticing, specially when considering that it might be able
of transparent bitstream manipulation from a netlist perspective. Yet, despite the fact that
bitstream manipulation is mentioned as one of its API, there is very little official information
as to the extend to which this API can manipulate the bitstream, and no documented usage
for fault injection. As such this prompted us to carry out extensive experimentation on the
RapidWright framework in order to find out if it would be capable of fine grained FFI.
Experimental use of RapidWright
The experimental testing of RapidWright was done using a range of simple digital deбґ
signs implemented in the vc707 Xilinx evaluation board. This designs consisted of isoбґ
lated UNISIM components that simplified the process of targeting the desired leaf cells
for experimentation. Since the feature sought after was fine grained fault injection, exбґ
perimentation started by testing RapidWrightБ─≥s capabilities for filtering leaf cells from the
netlistБ─≥s hierarchy and obtaining their FARs. Filtering the cells is done as shown in figбґ
ure 3.1, with the list of filtered leaf cells saved as a global static. This process is straight
forward due to RapidWrightБ─≥s APIs, but the same can not be said for obtaining the FAR.
Startб═
Get_filtered_cells()
Desired cell type
Desiredб═Hierarchical
Path
Design.getCells()
NO
YES
Last Cell?
YES
NO
Does the type 
and path match the
selected cell?
Save Cell
Next Cell
End
Figure 3.1: Flowchart depicting the process of filtering out leaf cells by their type and
position in the netlistБ─≥s hierarchy.
Unfortunately RapidWright does not provide an API to obtain the FAR of the frame to which
a cell belongs, this is only possible at higher hierarchy levels. As such it is necessary to
identify the tile to which the cell belongs to, and then the block type of the tileБ─≥s column.
34
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:47==
From that perspective it is possible to obtain all the minor frames belonging to the column.
Yet, the real issue is the fact that there is no way to identify which of these minor frames
contains the cell by using the provided APIs. The work around for this problem was to go
frame by frame, cloning all the words within them, and saving them in a list, which would
then be compared to a similar list obtained after having modified the cell. This way it was
possible to identify the changed words and as such the frame or frames that contained
them. This process is shown in figure 3.2.
Start
Desired Leaf Cell
getConfigBlock(Cell.getTile())
getFrames()
Clone all Frame
Wordsб═
Change cell
properties
Clone all New Frame
Words
Compare and Identify
the Cell's Frame
Generate FAR :б═(BlockType<<23) | (TopBot<<22) |
(ClockRow<<17) | (BlockCol<<7) | (Cell's Frame)б═
End
Figure 3.2: Flowchart depicting the process of obtaining a cellБ─≥s FAR after having modified
the cell properties to identify its minor frame.
The process of chaining the cellБ─≥s properties was partially depicted in section 2.3.2, where
the concept of the configuration array was introduced. In order to better understand how
the properties of a netlist cell are changed and subsequently updated in the configuration
array it is useful to refer to [42] for examples. In the documentation we can see that the
standard procedure is as follows:
1
ConfigArray configArray = bitstream.configureArray();
2
//Change INIT value of selected cell
3
cell.getProperty("INIT").setValue("16'h1111");
4
ConfigArray.updateUserStateBits();
5
Bitstream.updatePacketsFromConfigArray();
After modifying the cellБ─≥s properties the changes are reflected on the configuration array,
which is then used to update the bitstreamБ─≥s contents. With the process depicted in figure
3.2, it is possible to not only update the bitstream, but to also get the FAR for the affected
frames, which for the purpose of FFI represents our fault targetБ─≥s address. The complete
code used to experiment with RapidWright can be found on Appendix A.
By using this combined approach of bitstream modification and obtaining the FAR, it was
possible to detect that some cells whoБ─≥s properties were being modified, had no impact
whatsoever on the configuration array. This meant that it was not possible to obtain the
FAR of the frames that would be affected by modifying these cells. This was also the case
when modifying the pins of the cells or their connections. After approximately a month of
testing and back and forth with RapidWright developers, the reason as to why some types
of netlist changes had no effect on the configuration array became clear. RapidWrightБ─≥s
Б─²ConfigArray.updateUserStateBits()Б─² is only capable of updating mapped bitstream bits,
so in other words the bits reflected in the logic location file (.ll). After this discovery it beбґ
came evidently clear that RapidWright was not gonna provide the fine grained capabilities
that were so interesting to begin with, only providing easy modification of bits that were
simple to map and modify by other means. This lack of documentation as to the capabiliбґ
ties of Б─²ConfigArray.updateUserStateBits()Б─² was brought up to RapidWrightБ─≥s developers,
prompting them to add a disclaimer in their documentation indicating the kind of user state
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
35
==PAGE:48==
bits it can modify, which can be seen in [42].
Since RapidWright would not bring a transparent and simple way of injecting faults via
netlist hierarchy, the idea of developing the injection environment in Java to integrate
RapidWrightБ─≥s APIs was dropped. Instead the focus of the study switched to adapting
DAVOS for non Zynq devices, as well as ultrascale and ultrascale+ families, which would
require of the development of new python modules to complements those already in exбґ
istence.
3.1.3
DAVOS
DAVOS stands for Б─²Dependability Assessment,Verification, Optimization, and SelectionБ─²
and it is an Electronic Design Automation (EDA) toolkit developed at Universitat Politц╗cбґ
nica de Valц╗ncia (UPV) by Ilya Tuzov, David de Andrц╘s and JuanбґCarlos Ruiz. DAVOS
enables the Б─²robustness assessment and the identification of dependability bottlenecks
in hardware designs, and the verification of deployed dependabilityбґrelated strategiesБ─²,
amongst other capabilities [34]. DAVOS was not chosen by a simple process of eliminaбґ
tion, but rather for the fact that, to the authorБ─≥s knowledge, it is the most complete and
advanced open source tool for fault injection available.
As it currently stands DAVOS provides the functionality to emulate SEUs in the CM and
bitбґflips in the DM, by means of locating fault targets in terms of fabric area, or netlist
hierarchy for those elements that are mapped (i.e. LUTs, BRAMs, FFs). The possible
fault targets for DAVOS are categorised in the following manner:
Б─╒ Type0 : generalised essential bits, or those bits of the CM categorised as Type0 by
their FAR.
Б─╒ LUT : essential bits pertaining to LUT elements only.
Б─╒ BRAM : bits pertaining to BRAM cells
Б─╒ FF : bits pertaining to FF cells
DAVOS also provides a highly configurable injection environment, where by means of .xml
files one can set up different injection experiments based on different needs. The fault
injection capabilities of DAVOS are based around fault collapsing by means of optimised
essential bits and the .ll file, iterative statistical sampling, and experiment acceleration
through board controlled injections. The biggest limitation for the use of DAVOS, apart
from the complexity of the methods it is based on, is that it has only been experimenбґ
tally applied for FFI in Zynq 7 series devices, and as such a big part of its environment
is designed around the embedded ARM processor these devices posses. A simplified
summary of the DAVOS environment can be seen in figure 3.3, where its different parts
are presented by means of an abstract UML class diagram, where the most important
modules are listed and their classes are given context on what they do.
Based on DAVOSБ─≥ structure, and the complexity of the NOELбґV CPU, it is expected that
the biggest challenge will be achieving a board controlled implementation of the DAVOS
environment with the NOELбґV as DUT. The NOELбґVБ─≥s readouts are meant to be accessed
via GaislerБ─≥s GRMON debugger, with the only way to change this implying intrusive design
modifications. As such, the initial design stages of the project will be focused on the develбґ
opment of an extension for the FFIHostBase class, to provide a host controlled injection
flow, as well as a way to interface with the GRMON debugger. Furthermore given how
currently the only available host side application for DAVOS is the FFIHostZynq class,
the development of a similar class with MicroBlaze as the targeted injection controller will
have to be considered too.
36
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:49==
DAVOS Injectorб═Side
FFI Module
Internal DAVOS Structure
FFIHostBase
Describes the basic functionality of FPGA-based fault injector for Xilinx FPGAs.
It Includes a single VivadoDesignModel item, which is targeted in fault injection
experiments.
It Provides a collections of methods to build a fault list for a VivadoDesignModel,
attending to different fault models and hierarchy/area filters, and injection modes.
Manages all basic injector infrastructure, such as loading design models,
building/loading/exporting fault lists, processing injection results, and exporting
fault injection reports.
This is an abstract class, defining an interface to be implemented by any derived
injector down the hierarchy, and does not define any particular injection flow.
FFIHostMonitored
Extends the FFIHostBase, defining a workflow for autonomous fault injectors
(managed by injection controllers on the board side). Such autonomous
board-side injectors should implement a predefined communication protocol,
based on status/request messages to the host side.
Host in such injectors delegates the control over the entire injection flow
(injection, fault classification, and recovery) to the board-side application.б═
As such the host application is in charge of:б═
б═ б═ -launching the injector,б═
б═ б═ -supplying it with the necessary data (essential bits, bitstream files, etc),
б═ б═ -configurting its operating mode (in form of a JobDescriptor),
б═ б═ -and monitoring the injection statistics reported from the board-side controller.
Defines several abstract methods that should be tailored (in a derived class) for
a concrete board-side FFI controller.
FFIHostZynq
Describes a host-side (client) application for a Zynq-based fault injector, which
extends on a FFIHostMonitored superclass.б═
Configures and launches the board-side fault injection application on the Zynq
platform, after which it enters a monitoring mode to retrieve and log the
injection results reported by Zynq Application.
Configuration Memory Module
(Bitstream Parser)
ConfigMemory
Describes a collection ofб═SLRs
after which the CM is modelled,
providing methods to parse theб═
bitstream and EBD file, extract CM
frames and log the CM content in
a readable way.
SuperLogicRegion
Describes a collection of Frames
for a single SLR, providing
methods to retrieve CM Frames
based on different filters
(i.e. FAR, Pblocks, etc)
FrameDesc
Describes CM Frames with a FAR,
an array of configuration data
(101 words 32 bits), the
correspondingб═essential bit mask,
and supplementary data.
FarFields
Describes the Frame Address,
with the 5 FAR fields:
Block type, Top/Bottom,б═Clock
Row, Major Frame, Minor Frame
1
1
N
1
N
1
1
1
Design Module
(Design Parser)
VivadoDesignModel
Describes a model of the DUT, relating the collection
of netlist cells (i.e. LUTs, Registers, BRAMs, etc) with
the device layout, and mapping them with the CMб═model.
It loads the design model from the Vivado project, parsing
and relating the design netlist, design floorplan, with the
bitstream and essential bits.
Provides methods for bit-accurate mapping of several
types of netlist cells (LUTs, FFs, BRAMs,LUTRAMs) with
the CM.
It invokes vivado whenever necessary to extract
netlist/floorplan/bitstream information from the
implemented design.
LutCellDescriptor
Describes the
data structure ofб═
LUT resources.
RegCellDescriptor
Describes the
data structure ofб═
FF resources.
BRAMCellDescriptor
Describes the data
structure ofб═BRAM
resources.
1
N
1
N
1
N
1
1
DeviceLayout
Describes the composition
and alignment of
CLB/BRAM/DSP Tiles on the
layout of the selected
FPGA part.
1
1
Figure 3.3: Abstract Class Diagram of the current state of DAVOS as designed for Zynq 7бґseries devices. The model descriptions were provided
by the creator of DAVOS. For more details refer to [31] and the toolБ─≥s manual that will be released in the near future.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
37
==PAGE:50==
3.2
A Host Controlled FFI Environment
As mentioned multiple times in the previous chapter, there are a lot of benefits from the
deployment of FFI tools fully onбґchip, such as increased experiment acceleration. Yet,
such types of designs come with many requirements on the side of the DUT and injecбґ
tion controller. First of all, the outputs of the DUT and its memory contents have to be
easily accessed by the injection controller while remaining isolated. Secondly, the injecбґ
tion controller has to have access to sufficient memory to store the values of the Б─²golden
runБ─² against to which compare the DUTБ─≥s readouts, the DUTБ─≥s bitstream and workload in
order to reload the system in the case of a Б─²HANGБ─², and the complete fault list. Even if
this requirements are met by a given DUT and injection controller, there are still many
more case dependent caveats that may come to the surface. The fact that a fully onбґchip
deployment depends so much on the design at hand, makes it extremely difficult for tools
based around it to be considered for generalised use, even if restricted to a processor
such as GaislerБ─≥s NOELбґV.
FFI Features 
Controlled by Host
Autonomous (Controlled by Board-
side App)
Experiment Performance
low
high
Intrusiveness
low
medium
Observability
high
medium
Ability to Support Different 
Fault Models
low
high
Flexibility (Portability)
high
low
Injection tool development time ->
low
high
Table 3.1: Representation of the different FFI features and their expected impact of the
different implementation methods on them.
In the case of the SELENE SoC the first complication of deploying a FFI tool fully on chip
comes with the first requirement for easy readout access. Since the SELENE SoC is
based around the NOELбґV, its readouts for debugging purposes have to be accessed via
GaislerБ─≥s debugging tool GRMON3, with no other obvious alternative that wouldnБ─≥t require
drastic changes to the DUTБ─≥s design and might risk becoming intrusive. Furthermore the
given implementation environment (i.e. vc707 & vcu118), the availability of memory reбґ
sources to store the data required to run injections on board is scarce, as most memory
is external DDR4 memory and the internal memory does not have sufficient capacity for
a full bitstream. Having said that, these are all issues that can be solved with sufficient
research and experimentation, meaning that a fully onбґchip implementation could be posбґ
sible. Yet the complexity of such a task would require a level of focus that would make
it impossible to develop other aspects of the tool alongside it in the available time. Furбґ
thermore it would also limit the possible applications of the tool designed, narrowing them
down to a single DUT. A detailed description of the trade off between FFI features and
host or board implementation can be seen in Table 3.1, where development time is also
considered. Based on this reasoning it was decided that the initial design and implemenбґ
tation of the tool would have part of its injection controller implemented in the Б─²host sideБ─²
to minimise development time and to allow for the first version of the tool to be of general
use for NOELбґV systems with GRMON3 debugging. A general block diagram of the toolБ─≥s
environment can be seen in Figure 3.4. There the separation between host and board,
with their individual elements and roles, is made clear.
This block diagram shows all the elements pertaining to the design at hand, with some of
them already provided by DAVOSБ─≥ existing functionalities, while others have been develбґ
38
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:51==
Build Design Files
Socket
Socket
VIVADO
Logic Location (.ll)
Essential Bits (.ebc & .ebd)
Bitstream (.hdf)
List of BELs (.csv)
Mapping of LUTs (.csv)
Compile
VITIS
SEU_Injector.c
Injector_App.elf
Workload.out
FFI_Tool.py (DAVOS)
Host_Microblaze.py
Generate Fault List
Load Fault List
Inject Fault
Run Workload
Remove Fault
Recover DUT
Generate Statistics
Workload.c
compile
ncc gcc
GRMON_server.do
GRMON3
Microblaze_server.do
XSCT
Injector_config.xml
NOELV (DUT)
External
DDR4
Memory
MEMORY
ACCESS
UART
Inject & Recover Faults
MicroBlaze (Injector)
MB
Internal
Memory
MEMORY
ACCESS
JTAG
ICAP
HOST
HOST
HOST
HOST
BOARD
BOARD
BOARD
BOARD
Figure 3.4: Block diagram of injection toolБ─≥s environment, showing the separation between
host and board, their individual building blocks and their means of communication.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
39
==PAGE:52==
oped specifically for the purpose of this project. This chapter will henceforth only discuss
the novel aspects of the design, providing context on the existing elements only when
context is due. These new elements discussed in this chapter are the:
Б─╒ MicroBlaze injector and memory hardware (board side),
Б─╒ the MicroBlaze embedded software carrying out the injections (board side),
Б─╒ the MicroBlaze server module (host side) acting as a bridge between the MicroBlaze
injector and the DAVOS injector controller,
Б─╒ the GRMON3 server module (host side) acting as a bridge between the NOELбґV
subsystem and the DAVOS injector controller,
Б─╒ and the DAVOS host based injection controller (host side) and the python classes
and methods of which it is composed.
Apart from designing the elements composing the design, it was also necessary to estabбґ
lish a way to categorise the readouts from the system as different types of faults. This was
an important first step since it would define the requirements for accessibility into the DUT
and as such would affect the design of the control modules. Given the established apбґ
proach of host controlled injection, it was decided to start designing with a reduced amount
of error types in mind, only those covered by the basic readouts that are easily accessible
for the environment depicted in Figure 3.4. These types of fault where Masked, SDC,
and hang. Since the DUT does not have any detection mechanisms implemented in it, all
data corruptions had to be considered silent. Hangs did not depend on readouts from the
system, but rather the lack of them. Every time the system became unresponsive after
injection for reasons related to the DUT, even if the fault injected had been considered a
masked, that fault will then be reбґcategorised as a hang. It was decided that hangs would
contribute to the failure rate of the design, since they prevented its normal functioning.
Latent faults, where the contents of internal memory does not match those prior to inбґ
jection, were also considered a potential initial fault type. Yet, Since reading the internal
contents of the memory by accessing the CM requires the DUTБ─≥s clock to be stopped,
these types of faults ended being left for future work, as controlling the clock proved a
challenging task on later stages of the design process.
3.3
Injection Controller (Host)
As previously mentioned in section 3.1.3, the use of a host side injection controller meant
the development of new DAVOS classes in order to support the requirements of such an
approach, as well as the specific needs of the NOELбґV readouts. These new classes can
be seen in Figure 3.5 where a general description of them is given and their hierarchy
within the FFI module is displayed. The complete DAVOS framework would then consist
of the combination of all modules and classes presented in Figures 3.3 and 3.5.
The host side injection controller is characterised by a series of key modules that can
be observed in Figure 3.4. These are the main DAVOS module, Б─²FFI_TOOL.pyБ─², the
GRMON debugger module, Б─²GRMON_server.doБ─², and the Xilinx Software Commandбґ
Line Tool (XSCT) module, Б─²Microblaze_server.doБ─². These three modules together are
in charge of all host side functions as well as interfacing with the DUT and the MicroBбґ
laze controller. The main DAVOS module provides all the functionalities described in its
abstract class diagrams, where as the GRMON debugger module and the XSCT module
provide the necessary instructions to run the NOELбґV subsystem and MicroBlaze respecбґ
tively.
40
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:53==
DAVOS Injectorб═Side
FFI Module
FFIHostBase
FFIHostControlled
Extends the FFIHostBase, defining a workflow for host controlled fault injectors.
Such host controlledб═injectors should implement a predefined synchronization
protocol, based on sockets on the host side.
Host in such injectors takes control over the entire injection flow (i.e. injection,
fault classification, and recovery).б═
As such the host application is in charge of:б═
б═ б═ -setting up the server sockets and controlling them,б═
б═ б═ -supplying each socket with the necessary data (i.e. essential bits, bitstream
б═б═б═б═б═files, etc) depending on their tasks,
б═ б═ -configuring the operating mode (in form of a JobDescriptor),
б═ б═ -and launching, controlling and monitoring the injections, logging statistics
б═б═б═б═б═based on the readouts from the board-side.
Defines several abstract methods that should be tailored (in a derived class) for
a concrete host-side FFI controller.
FFIHostMicroblaze
Describes a host-side (server) application for a MicroBlaze-based fault injector,
which extends on a FFIHostControlled superclass.б═
Configures and launches the board-side fault injection application on the
MicroBlaze platform. Has direct control over the injection process, telling the
MicroBlaze injector when to inject and recover faults. It monitors the injection
flowб═to retrieve and log the injection results from the NOEL-V via sockets.
FFIHostNOELV
Describes a host-side (client) application for a NOEL-V core, which
extends on aб═FFIHostMicroblazeб═superclass.б═
Resets the NOEL-V and provides it with a chosen workload. Logs the results of
fault injection by reading the NOEL-V's output memory and compares with the
GoldenRun values, stating the effect of the fault on the DUT.
FFIHostMonitored
FFIHostZynq
Figure 3.5: Abstract Class Diagram of the new DAVOS flow as designed for a MicroBlaze
injector and a NOELбґV DUT.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
41
==PAGE:54==
Microblaze_server.do
host_microblaze.py
GRMON_server.do
run at localhost:12346
run at localhost:12345
stdo: XSCT connected
stdo: DUT has been reset
communicate(123456, 
{cmd=0x1, FaultId=0x1}
dow MIC.elf
Reset
dow 0x20200 faultlist.dat
attach
reset
load workload.out
detach
mwr 0x20004 FaultId
mwr 0x20000 cmd
con
after 10 ms: return [mrd 0x20008 2] 
//{Status, FaultId} 
Inject FaultId
communicate(12345, cmd=0x1)
Run workload
#clean result buffer (depends on Workload)
wmem $resadr {0x0 * 128 bytes}
#kernel continue cmd     
wmem 0x1000000 cmd
#max time for kernel to execute
after 100 ms
#readback the results
res [mem $resadr 128]
#check against reference (golden run)
Status = (res == reference_res)
return: Status (pass/fail)
communicate(123456, 
{cmd=0x2, FaultId=0x1}
mwr 0x20004 FaultId
mwr 0x20000 cmd
con
Remove fault
after 100 ms: return [mrd 0x20008 2] 
//{Status, FaultId} 
Recover DUT
Connect MB
Connect DUT
Figure 3.6: UML sequence diagram depicting the exchanges between the servers and
the controller by means of Linux sockets. The addresses of the MicroBlaze registers are
shown in the table.
Since the injections are fully controlled on host, and the DUT and board side injector have
no channels of communication between them, there was a need to somehow synchronise
the two of them on the host side. Without a synchronised effort it would not be possible
to trace back the effects of faults and measure the results of the injection, as there will
be no way to evaluate the effect of each individual fault accurately. In order to avoid this
issue, sockets had to be used, opening up ports for both the MicroBlaze and the GRMON3
servers so that the DAVOS control module could control their execution. This was done
in the Linux environment, and the logic flow by which the different servers are called onto
by the DAVOS control module can be seen in Figure 3.6.
3.3.1
Main DAVOS Module for Host Controlled Injection
As shown in Figure 3.5 the module designed for host controlled injection is in direct inherбґ
itance from the top DAVOS module Б─²FFIHostBaseБ─². This top module is as provided by the
original DAVOS environment, and it creates the fault list for the DUT based on the userБ─≥s
instructions, as well as the results and metrics from fault injection. The newly designed
module inherits this functionality, extending it to suit host controlled injections by means
of new methods that are implemented in an abstract fashion to allow for different types
of injectors and DUTs. In Figure 3.7 we can see that the only two methods that are not
abstract are that of Б─²serv_communicate(host, port, in_cmd, timeout)Б─² and Б─²run()Б─². The first
one is in charge of the socket based communication to the two host deployed servers,
42
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:55==
connecting to them and sending/receiving messages within a timeout period. The second
method implements the entire injection flow, from the setting up of the DUTБ─≥s workload,
the loading of the fault list and the injection of faultsм╬ to the recovery of faults/DUT, as well
as the collection and processing of injection results. This is done by calling to the abstract
methods that are properly implemented in the lower hierarchical classes Б─²FFIHostMicrobбґ
lazeБ─² and Б─²FFIHostNOELVБ─².
FFIHostBase
+designб═:б═VivadoDesignModel
+sample_SEUб═(pb:б═Pblock,б═celltype:б═CellTypes,б═samplesize:б═int,б═multiplicity:б═int)
+fault_listб═:б═FaultDescriptorб═[б═]
+injstatб═:б═InjectionStatisticsб═
+lastfmodeб═:б═FailureModes
+faultload_files:б═Stringб═[б═]
+export_fault_list_bin(part_size:б═int)
+export_fault_list_csv()
+load_fault_list_csv(infile:б═string)
+initialize(logifle_to_restore:б═string)
+cleanup()
FFIHostControlled
+restart_periodб═:б═int
+inject_fault(idx:б═int)б═#abstract
+load_faultlist(part_idx:б═int)б═б═#abstract
+run()
+dut_recover()б═#abstract
+run_workload()б═#abstract
+remove_fault(idx:б═int)б═#abstract
+restart_kernel()б═#abstract
+serv_communicate(host,б═port,б═in_cmd,б═timeout)
FFIHostMicroblaze
+mic_appб═:б═string
+connect_microblaze()
FFIHostNOELV
+connect_dut()
+export_custom_essentialbits(targetfilter:б═dict(),б═foutб═:б═string)б═
+mic_scriptб═:б═string
+mic_portб═:б═int
+proc_xsctб═:б═Subprocess
+load_faultlist(part_idx:б═int)
+restart_all(msg:б═string)
+restart_kernel()б═
+inject_fault(idx:б═int)
+remove_fault(idx:б═int)б═
+dut_scriptб═:б═string
+dut_portб═:б═int
+proc_grmonб═:б═Subprocess
+restart_all(msg:б═string)
+run_workload()
+dut_recover()
Figure 3.7: UML class diagram.
Starting with the Б─²FFIHostMicroblazeБ─² class, one can see that out of the four attributes
two, Б─²mic_portБ─² and Б─²proc_xsctБ─², are used to specify the socket port and child application
running with XSCT respectively, and are needed to connect to the MicroBlaze server.
The other two attributes Б─²mic_appБ─² and Б─²mic_scriptБ─² represent the embedded software
application running on MicroBlaze, and the server script controlling MicroBlaze from host
(i.e. Microblaze_server.do), both of which are needed for the server and board injector
to execute their control flow. The Б─²proc_xsctБ─² attributes spawns a pexpect [28] based
subбґprocess that uses Б─²mic_portБ─² to connect to the MicroBlaze server running XSCT, it
feeds it the Б─²mic_scriptБ─² with the XSCT commands and the Б─²mic_appБ─² (i.e. the MicroBlaze
kernel), an in this way it programs the FPGA with the DUT and MicroBlaze injector with
its kernel at the ready. This is all done within the Б─²connect_microblazeБ─² method, which
upon successful connection with the server will state Б─²XSCT started at localhost:12346Б─².
After correctly setting up the subбґprocess and the socket with which to interface to it,
all subsequent methods that have to interact with MicroBlaze will have to make use of
commands send via the Б─²serv_communicate(host, port, in_cmd, timeout)Б─² method, set to
the socketБ─≥s port (i.e. localhost:12346).
The same process is replicated by the Б─²FFIHostNOELVБ─² class, with the main difference
being that the workload is not loaded when connecting to the DUT, like in the case of
Б─²mic_appБ─², but rather the workload is loaded by the Б─²dut_scriptБ─² in the form of a generic
kernel wrapper. This entire process is carried out by the Б─²connect_dut()Б─² method, which
upon achieving a connection to the server running the Б─²dut_scriptБ─², displays the mesбґ
sage Б─²GRMON started at localhost:12345Б─². Similarly to Б─²FFIHostMicroblazeБ─², this class
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
43
==PAGE:56==
also makes use of Б─²serv_communicate()Б─² when interfacing with the DUT once the Б─²conбґ
nect_dut()Б─² method has been executed.
These two methods are invoked consecutively right before the Б─²run()Б─² method from Б─²FFIбґ
HostBaseБ─² is executed. It is within the Б─²run()Б─² method that the rest of the methods from
Б─²FFIHostMicroblazeБ─² and Б─²FFIHostNOELVБ─² are called:
1. restart_kernel() : This method is invoked periodically after every 100 injections to
prevent MicroBlaze from crashing. It restarts the MicroBlaze kernel Б─²mic_appБ─² and
in the case of error will call the method Б─²restart_all()Б─² which will reprogram the entire
FPGA to remove any lingering errors that prevent the system from operating.
2. load_faultlist(PartIdx) : This method loads the fault list to MicroBlazeБ─≥s memory.
This is done in a segmented way due to the limitations of MicroBlazeБ─≥s memory
capacity, preventing all faults to be stored at once. As such faults are split in parts of
a 1000, each with their individual Б─²PartIdxБ─². This method loads each part individually,
checking each time whether the write was successful, and in the cases where it is
not, invoking Б─²restart_all()Б─².
3. inject_fault(Idx) : This method selects a fault from the fault list based on the experбґ
iment id Б─²IdxБ─², ensuring that all faults are injected in the order they are placed in
the fault list. The selected fault is then formatted into an injection command that
the MicroBlaze can process, then the status of the operation is chequed and upon
correct injection the message Б─²Injection status : OkБ─² will be displayed. In the case
of an error Б─²restart_all()Б─² will be invoked.
4. run_workload() : This method sends a kernel continue command that starts the
NOELбґVБ─≥s workload. The workload runs until completion upon which a status on the
result of the injection is produced. This status is read and saved to the Б─²LastFmodeБ─²
attribute from the Б─²FFIHostBaseБ─² top class. In the case the status signal returns an
empty, the result of the injection is characterised as a hang.
5. remove_fault(Idx) : This method carries out the opposite process to Б─²inject_fault(Idx)Б─²,
removing the fault rather than injecting it.
6. dut_recover() : This method checks whether the DUT works after the removal of a
fault. This is only done in the cases where the fault was not masked, and requires the
workload to be executed again to check its results against those of the golden run.
Only when the result is correct the experiments can continue, otherwise Б─²reset_all()Б─²
is called.
The Б─²run()Б─² method is executed in a loop until all the faults from the fault list are injected or
some conditions are met. These conditions have to do with the theory of statistical fault
injection mentioned in section 2.2.1, and ensure an optimal amount of faults to be injected
within a lower and upper sample size limit. These conditions are the following:
Б─╒ More than 5 SDCs and 1000 faults have to be injected, marking the lower limit for
the sample size.
Б─╒ If the margin of error e is an order of magnitude smaller than the probability of failure
for SDCs, the injections can be stopped before reaching the upper sample size limit
set by the user in the DAVOS configuration files.
Upon achieving the latter condition or having injected a number of faults equal to the
maximum sample size value, the program stops execution and its last statistical metrics
can be interpreted as the final results of injection. Faults are always injected before the
44
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:57==
execution of the DUT, and they stay present until the Б─²remove_fault()Б─² is executed at the
end of the workload.
3.3.2
MicroBlaze Server
The MicroBlaze server is a sub process of the main DAVOS control module, that as shown
in Figure 3.6, is in charge of parsing the commands received from the main DAVOS control
module, and based on them send commands of its own to the MicroBlaze injector on the
board side. The server initialises the MicroBlaze injector, loading its kernel, and then waits
in a loop until receiving a command. The server waits for 3 types of commands:
Б─╒ Load FaultList: takes a fault list package (i.e. 1000 faults) and sends it to the MicroBбґ
laze injector at the 0x20200 memory address. This is referred to as the Fault_list_ptr,
which can be seen in Figure 3.8. This command is the server side representation
of the Б─²loadбґfaultlist()Б─² routine from the main DAVOS control module.
Б─╒ Run Kernel: takes the Б─²mic_appБ─² program and loads it into the MicroBlaze injector
after resetting the processor. This command is server side representation of the
Б─²restart_kernel()Б─² routine from the main DAVOS control module.
Б─╒ Execute Command: this command sends a command from the main DAVOS conбґ
trol module directly to the MicroBlaze injector. This command to be send is formed
by the instructions of the command and the data used by the command, which are
both written into the MicroBlaze memory at addresses 0x20000 and 0x20004 reбґ
spectively. After sending the command the server waits for a reply in the form of a
status signal, which is read from the 0x20008 MicroBlaze memory address. All of
the addresses used by the host to communicate commands to the injector can be
seen in Figure 3.8.
HOST_SOCKET_ADR + offset
In:
0 (+0)  :
Command             (0x0 Б─⌠ NOP | 0x1 Б─⌠ Inject | 0x2 Б─⌠ Recover | 0xF Б─⌠ Terminate)
In:
1 (+4)  :
Data
           (Fault list index)
Out:
2 (+8)  :
Status
           (0x0 Б─⌠ idle | 0x1 Б─⌠ busy | 0x2 Б─⌠ error)
Out:
3 (+A)  :
Message to host  (i.e. echo fault.Id after successful injection)
Host_buf
0x20000
+0
Host_socket_ptr
0x20000
+0x200
Fault_list_ptr
Max: 128 KB
Figure 3.8: The addresses of the MicroBlaze registers used to control the injection flow.
The third command is the one in charge of the fault injection and removal functionalбґ
ity, and as such it represents the server side functionality of the Б─²inject_fault()Б─² and Б─²reбґ
move_fault()Б─² routines respectively. The entire logical flow of the MicroBlaze server and
its interactions with DAVOS can be seen in Figure 3.6.
3.3.3
GRMON Server
Similarly to the MicroBlaze server, the GRMON server takes instructions from the main
DAVOS control module and it instructs the DUT to behave accordingly. The main differбґ
ence being that the GRMON server only takes one command from DAVOS, which is the
one used to run the workload. Before waiting for this command the server resets the DUT
and runs the workload once to establish the results for the golden run. This is done in orбґ
der to ensure that there are no lingering faults between injection that would require of the
reprogramming of the FPGA. The GRMON server is workload independent, meaning that
it can run any kernel designed for the NOELбґV DUT. It only needs a few specifications in
order to run a particular workload, which are the compiled workload file and the address
of the results for this particular workload. With this information the server can then run
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
45
==PAGE:58==
the workload any amount of times necessary as long as the 0x1 command from DAVOS
is received. This command is the server side representation of the Б─²run_workload()Б─² comбґ
mand from the main DAVOS control module, and it writes a value of 0x1 on the 0x1000000
address of the NOELбґV memory. This 0x1 command is then used by the kernel wrapper,
as the signal to run the workload on the DUT. The Б─²dut_recover()Б─² routine from DAVOS
also makes use of the 0x1 command, as it runs the workload once after fault removal in
order to make sure that the fault no longer affects the DUTБ─≥s readouts. The entire logical
flow of the GRMON server and its interactions with DAVOS can be seen in Figure 3.6.
Analysis of the Set of Readouts (Б─²RБ─²)
The GRMON server is also in charge of relying the results of the injection back to DAVOS.
The results are obtained by a simple comparison of the readouts of the DUT after injection
with those obtained after the golden run executed at the beginning of the experiment.
Based on this comparison the server will send back a status signal of either masked or
SDC back to DAVOS. Davos will then use this results to compute its dependability metrics.
The types of result possible at the toolБ─≥s current state are masked, SDC and hang. Masked
and SDC are categorised by the GRMON server as previously explained, but hangs are
accounted for by DAVOSБ─≥ main control module after either losing communication with the
DUT or with GRMON after fault removal. The different reasons for which the experiment
can experience a hang related to the DUTБ─≥s robustness are vast, and a finer categorisation
of the possible hang types could be very interesting for future work consideration.
46
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:59==
3.4
Injector (Board)
This section will focus on the hardware design and embedded software of the MicroBlaze
injector, as well as the hardware modifications for a clock controlled DUT.
3.4.1
MicroBlaze
The MicroBlaze injector designed can be seen in Figure 3.9. There the injectorБ─≥s inputs
(i.e. GPIO, reset, clock) and outputs (i.e clock control, reset control) can be identified,
as well as the series of AXI based modules used to implement its functionalities. The
different AXI based modules are wired to MicroBlazeБ─≥s AXI interconnect module which
acts like an AXI crossbar, connecting the master (i.e. MicroBlaze) to the different slaves
(i.e AXI based modules). In this way the control over the different modules implementing
the necessary functionalities for a simple injector is done by means of the AXI protocol.
Out of all the modules present in Figure 3.9, only a few are of interest for a design discusбґ
sion, as the rest are either of a very simple nature and/or implemented by Vivado autoбґ
matically. The modules worth discussing are the Б─²Clock WizardБ─², Б─²AXI HWICAPБ─², Б─²Clock
BufferБ─², and Б─²StartUp ControlБ─². The clock wizard is a Vivado provided IP that was cusбґ
tomised to fit the implementation technology (i.e. 7 series vc707) and the requirements of
the DUT. It is basically a MixedбґMode Clock Manager (MMCM) that takes the differential
clock provided by the vc707 board and produces two single ended clock signals, one for
the MicroBlaze at 100 Mhz and one for the clock controlled version of the DUT, at 50 Mhz.
The necessity to convert the differential system clock to single ended is obvious, yet the
need to generate a clock signal to feed the DUT is a bit more complicated to understand,
and needs of the insight provided by the explanation of the Б─²Clock BufferБ─² module later
presented.
The AXI based ICAP module, Б─²AXI HWICAPБ─², is another Xilinx IP which provides the ability
to access the CMБ─≥s contents. This is done by means of commands provided by DAVOSБ─≥
Б─²SeuInjectorБ─² API that targets the CM frames and carries out all the necessary actions for
fault injection. This functionality is fully provided by DAVOSБ─≥ environment and as such no
additional design considerations had to be taken apart from including the IP in the block
design, and using the Б─²SeuInjectorБ─² commands to control it.
The two remaining modules, Б─²Clock BufferБ─², and Б─²StartUp ControlБ─², were designed from
scratch to provide the functionalities needed for the injection of faults into the changeable
memory (i.e. the DM), and as such their designs will be described in more detail.
Clock Buffer: Clock and Reset Controller
In order to inject faults at specific times of the workloadБ─≥s execution, the DUTБ─≥s clock and
reset must be controlled with great accuracy. In this particular situation accuracy refers
to asserting or deбґasserting a signal at an exact clock cycle. This is a necessity when
considering the emulation of bitбґflips in memory resources. Without a module like this,
injection in registers, LUTRAMs and BRAMs is not possible, as by the time their internal
bits are read and flipped, the continuous execution of the design will change the contents
of the memory elements. As such the values read and flipped will no longer represent
the current state of the design by the time they are written back. To prevent this from
happening the MicroBlaze controller has to be equipped with a sub module that allows
it to control the systemБ─≥s clock and reset depending on the commands received from
host. The requirement for host based control implies that the clock and reset control subбґ
module will have to be an AXIбґlite peripheral. A block diagram detailing the design of such
a module can be seen in Figure 3.10.
The subбґmodule controls the system clock (DUTБ─≥s clock) by means of the Б─²BUFGCEБ─²
clock buffer, with itself being controlled by an enable signal (Б─≥CLK_ENБ─≥ or Б─≥Free_CLKБ─≥).
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
47
==PAGE:60==
CLK_O_0
GPIO_EXT[31:0]
RST_O_0
StartupCtrl_AXI_0
StartupCtrl_AXI_v1.0 (Pre-Production)
S00_AXI
s00_axi_aclk
s00_axi_aresetn
axi_gpio_0
AXI GPIO
S_AXI
GPIO
gpio_io_i[31:0]
s_axi_aclk
s_axi_aresetn
axi_hwicap_0
AXI HWICAP
S_AXI_LITE
icap_clk
eos_in
s_axi_aclk
s_axi_aresetn
ip2intc_irpt
axi_timer_0
AXI Timer
S_AXI
capturetrig0
capturetrig1
generateout0
generateout1
pwm0
interrupt
freeze
s_axi_aclk
s_axi_aresetn
clk_wiz_1
Clocking Wizard
CLK_IN1_D
reset
clk_out1
clk_out2
locked
diff_clock_rtl
mdm_1
MicroBlaze Debug Module (MDM)
MBDEBUG_0
Debug_SYS_Rst
microblaze_0
MicroBlaze
INTERRUPT
DLMB
ILMB
M_AXI_DP
DEBUG
Clk
Reset
microblaze_0_axi_intc
AXI Interrupt Controller
s_axi
interrupt
s_axi_aclk
s_axi_aresetn
intr[1:0]
processor_clk
processor_rst
microblaze_0_axi_periph
AXI Interconnect
S00_AXI
M00_AXI
S01_AXI
S02_AXI
M01_AXI
M02_AXI
M03_AXI
M04_AXI
M05_AXI
ACLK
ARESETN
S00_ACLK
S00_ARESETN
M00_ACLK
M00_ARESETN
S01_ACLK
S01_ARESETN
S02_ACLK
S02_ARESETN
M01_ACLK
M01_ARESETN
M02_ACLK
M02_ARESETN
M03_ACLK
M03_ARESETN
M04_ACLK
M04_ARESETN
M05_ACLK
M05_ARESETN
microblaze_0_local_memory
DLMB
ILMB
LMB_Clk
SYS_Rst
microblaze_0_xlconcat
Concat
In0[0:0]
In1[0:0]
dout[1:0]
my_CLK_BUF_v1_0_0
my_CLK_BUF_v1_0_v1_0
s00_axi
CLK_I
CLK_O
RST_O
s00_axi_aclk
s00_axi_aresetn
reset
rst_clk_wiz_1_100M
Processor System Reset
slowest_sync_clk
ext_reset_in
aux_reset_in
mb_debug_sys_rst
dcm_locked
mb_reset
bus_struct_reset[0:0]
peripheral_reset[0:0]
interconnect_aresetn[0:0]
peripheral_aresetn[0:0]
Figure 3.9: Vivado Block Diagram depicting the design of the MicroBlaze based injection unit.
48
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:61==
The Б─≥Free_CLKБ─≥ signal is always high upon system boot and is meant to be used when
the system is running without fault injection experiments. Б─≥CLK_ENБ─≥ on the other hand is
the signal used by the injection tool to stop he clock before injecting a fault. This signal is
generated by a down counter that is initialised by the signal Б─≥INITБ─≥ of 32 bits when Б─≥StartБ─≥ is
high, and will count down by one on every clock cycle of the system clock (Б─≥SYS_CLK_IБ─≥)
until reaching zero. While the counter is active (value over zero) and Б─≥StartБ─≥ is low, the
signal Б─≥CLK_ENБ─≥ will be high, allowing the Б─≥SYS_CLK_IБ─≥ to feed the DUT. This way a
precise activation of the DUTs clock is achieved for a preбґselected amount of clock cycles.
The systemБ─≥s reset (SYS_RST) is also controlled in a similar manner to the clock, with
the only difference being that it is initialised only with 7 bits, and that its activation type
is controlled by a Б─≥Active_LowБ─≥ signal. A detailed analysis of the signals driving the subбґ
moduleБ─≥s outputs, Б─≥SYS_CLK_OБ─≥ and Б─≥SYS_RSTБ─≥, can be seen in Figure 3.11.
SYS_CLK_I
CLK_O
CLK_I
CLK_EN
BUFGCE
CLK_Dcnt
Active_Low[7] &
INIT[6:0]
AXI
REG_1
EN
AXI
REG_2
AXI
REG_3
AXI_CLK_I
SYS_RST
SYS_CLK_O
S_AXI_RDATA 32/
S_AXI_WDATA 32/
Free_CLK[1]
AXI-LITE PERIPHERAL FOR CLOCK & RESET CONTROL
Start[0]
IDLE
INIT_CLK_Dcnt
EN _CLK_Dcnt
INIT_RST_Dcnt
EN _RST_Dcnt
FSM
CLK_Dcnt_Val
RST_Dcnt
RST_Dcnt_Val
AXI
REG_0
INIT 32/
RST_O
slv_reg_wren
axi_awaddr[3:2] = 01
EN
slv_reg_wren
axi_awaddr[3:2] = 00
EN
EN
slv_reg_rden
axi_araddr[3:2] = 11
EN
slv_reg_wren
axi_awaddr[3:2] = 10
System Clock
AXI Clock
Figure 3.10: Block diagram of the MicroBlaze subбґmodule in charge of controlling the
DUTБ─≥s clock and reset
RST_Dcnt_val > 0
FSM_state_count
EN _RST_Dcnt
Circuit for activation of RST count enable (FSM)
RST_Dcnt_val > 0
Active_Low
RST_O
Circuit driving System Reset signal (RST_Dcnt)
CLK_Dcnt_val > 0
not Start
CLK_EN
Circuit drivingб═BUFGCE CEб═(CLK_Dcnt)
Figure 3.11: Detailed view of the signals driving the subбґmoduleБ─≥s outputs, as well as the
enable for the reset down counter.
The FSM responsible for controlling the subбґmodule can be seen in Figure 3.12. It has
three states, IDLE, where the down counters are disabled and the systemБ─≥s clock and
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
49
==PAGE:62==
reset not active, INIT, where both down counters have their initial values loaded, and
COUNT, where the down countersБ─≥ enable signals are driven high until they individually
reach zero. Since the count size of the clockБ─≥s down counter is always bigger, the state
machine takes its count value as the signal to transit from the COUNT state to IDLE. This
means that the enable signal for the resetБ─≥s down counter wont always be high while the
FSM is on the COUNT state, but it will also depend on the value of the counter, as can be
seen in Figure 3.11.
CLK_Dcnt_Valб═= 0
COUNT
(Start Down
Counters)
START =1
IDLE
START = 0
INIT
(Initialize
Down
Counters)
CLK_Dcnt_Valб═> 0
EN _CLK_Dcnt = 1
EN _RST_Dcnt = 1
INIT _CLK_Dcnt = 1
INIT _RST_Dcnt = 1
IDLE = 1
Figure 3.12: FSM responsible for controlling the subбґmodule.
The AXIбґLite peripheral only makes use of four registers to control the previously deбґ
scribed internal logic of the subбґmodule. Register zero holds the initialisation value for
the systemБ─≥s clock down counter, register one passes the Б─≥StartБ─≥ and Б─≥free_CLKБ─≥ signals,
and register two is in charge of the initialisation of the down counter for the systemБ─≥s reбґ
set as well as the Б─≥Active_LowБ─≥ signal. At the output, register three holds the value of
Б─≥CLK_ENБ─≥ in order to signal when the clock is functioning to the rest of the system. All
the AXIбґLite registers can be loaded and read from host. Register one is preбґloaded with
Б─≥free_CLKБ─≥ high, in order to ensure the systemБ─≥s clock is active during system boot.
In order to control the subбґmodule the MicroBlaze injector will send commands and estabбґ
lish the Б─²INITБ─² values of the down counters using the memory addresses shown in figure
3.13.
clock_ctrl_ptrб═+б═offset
In:
0б═(+0)б═б═:
Clockб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═(Durationб═ofб═theб═Clockб═Countб═Down)
In:
1б═(+4)б═б═:
Commandsб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═(0x0б═Б─⌠б═Startб═=б═1б═|б═0x1б═Б─⌠б═Freeб═Clockб═=б═1)
In:
2б═(+8)б═б═:
Reset
б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═(Durationб═ofб═theб═Resetб═Countб═Down)
Out:
3б═(+A)б═б═:
Flagб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═(BUFGCEб═clockб═enableб═value)
CLK_CTRL
0x44A00000
clock_ctrl_ptr
Figure 3.13: The Addresses of the Clock Buffer AXI registers used to control the DUTБ─≥s
clock and reset
StartUp Controller: Global Set/Reset Controller
Similarly to the clock buffer module, this module is necessary in order to inject faults
in changeable memory (i.e. the DM). But unlike the clock buffer, the reason for which
the Global Set/Reset Controller is necessary when injecting in the DM is not as straight
forward. Basically the Global Set/Reset Controller is in charge of driving a pin from the
Б─²STARTUPE2 PrimitiveБ─² [39] called Б─²GSRБ─² (Global Set/Reset). This pin when driven high
will assert a device wide asynchronous set/reset that reбґinitialises the CLB FFs. This
reбґinitialisation of the CLB FFs is a necessary step in the injection of faults in the DM
when we consider the fact that changeable memory elements can not be injected to by
simple bitstream modifications. The additional steps required to inject faults in FFs and
BRAMs can be seen in figure 3.14. FFs and BRAMs donБ─≥t have their internal states
accessible through the CM, as these will be constantly changing through out the designs
50
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:63==
LUT
FF/Latch
BRAM
TYPE0
Injection Layer
CM Layer
Fabric Layer
LUTБ─≥s CLB
CM Frame
FF/LatchБ─≥s CLB
CM Frame
BRAM Output
Reg/Latch
CM Frame
Un-Mapped 
Logic
CM Frame
2- Flip Bit[word][bit]
INIT
Minor frames
64 bits
3- Flip Bit[word][bit]
INIT
Minor frames
1 bit
3- Flip Bit[word][bit]
BRAM Content
18 Kbit (Type1)
2- Flip Bit[word][bit]
Minor frames
1- Read FAR
3- Write FAR
2- Read FAR
4- Write FAR
2- Read FAR
4- Write FAR
1- Read FAR
3- Write FAR
1- GCapture
5- Grestore (GSR)
1- GCapture
5- Grestore (GSR)
INIT
Minor frames
2x64 bit
Figure 3.14: Representation of the different injection procedures for each of the targetable
logic resources. Based on figure 5.12 from [31].
execution, as such one has to capture these states and store them in the INIT cells whose
contents can be accessed through read and write FAR operations. This is done by means
of the Б─²GCaptureБ─² command from the Command Register (CMD) in charge of instructing
the Б─²configuration control logic to strobe global signals and perform other configuration
functionsБ─² [39]. This command loads the current values of the registers to the capture
cells holding their INIT values. Once this cells are loaded one can proceed as normal,
reading, flipping and writing the frame bits. Since the altered value has to be loaded
back into the registers, one has to make use of the Б─²GRestoreБ─² command, which has the
same purpose as the Global Set/Reset. Unfortunately experimental use of the Б─²GRestoreБ─²
command did not provide the functionality expected, so it was decided to add a hardware
module with access to the Б─²STARTUPE2 PrimitiveБ─² and hence the Б─²GSRБ─² pin, rather than
debug XilinxБ─≥s complicated procedures. Following all these steps, and using the StartUp
Controller module,the contents of changeable memory elements can be flipped, as long
as their values donБ─≥t change throughout the process, or in other words, as long as the
clock is stopped.
Down_CNT
AXI
REG_1
EN
AXI
REG_3
EN
S_AXI_RDATA 32/
S_AXI_WDATA 32/
AXI-LITE PERIPHERAL FOR GSR CONTROL
Start[0]
IDLE
INIT
CNT
FSM
CNT_VAL
AXI
REG_0
EN
INIT 32/
slv_reg_wren
axi_awaddr[3:2] = 01
slv_reg_wren
axi_awaddr[3:2] = 00
slv_reg_rden
axi_araddr[3:2] = 11
PLREST
STARTUPE2




 GSR
Figure 3.15: Block diagram of the MicroBlaze subбґmodule in charge of controlling the
DUTБ─≥s clock and reset
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
51
==PAGE:64==
The module itself was designed with a similar interface to the clock buffer module, as it
is also based on the AXIбґlite protocol, its block diagram can be seen in figure 3.15. The
concept behind this design is to be able to drive the Б─²PLRESTБ─² signal high for a specific
number of clock cycles set by the Б─²INITБ─² signal. Once the FSM receives the start order
the down counter is initialised and starts counting down, while the value of the counter is
not zero, and the FSM is not on the Б─²INITБ─² state, Б─²PLRESTБ─² will be high. Б─²PLRESTБ─² drives
the Б─²GSRБ─² pin, reбґinitialising all the CLB FFs.
In order to control the subбґmodule the MicroBlaze injector will send commands and estabбґ
lish the Б─²INITБ─² values of the down counter using the memory addresses shown in figure
3.16.
clock_ctrl_ptrб═+б═offset
In:
0б═(+0)б═б═:
GSRб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═(Durationб═ofб═theб═GSRб═Countб═Down)
In:
1б═(+4)б═б═:
Commandsб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═(0x0б═Б─⌠б═Startб═=б═1)
Out:
3б═(+A)б═б═:
Flagб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═(GSRб═value)
STARTUP_CTRL
0x44A10000
startup_crtl_ptr
Figure 3.16: The Addresses of the StartUp Control AXI registers used to control the GSR
flow.
3.4.2
MicroBlaze Embedded Software
The MicroBlaze embedded software (i.e. the Б─²mic_appБ─²) is in charge of processing the
commands received from host and sending commands of its own to the different subбґ
modules. The Б─²mic_appБ─² is constantly waiting for host commands while on an infinite loop,
the moment the command is different from 0x0, the program will exit the loop and parse
the new command. Based on the received command the Б─²mic_appБ─² will either execute a
command of its own, setting its status to 0x1 busy, or exit the program. The entire logical
flow of the programme can be seen in figure 3.17. The initialise platform subбґroutine is a
command used for all Xilinx based embedded platforms, while the initialise injector subбґ
routine is a DAVOS provided method that sets up the Б─²AXI HWICAPБ─² and GPIO modules.
START
Initialise Platform
Initialise Injector
Initialise Pointers
NO
YES
host_cmd == 0x0
host_cmd = pointer_cmd
host_data = pointer_data
Status = 0
pointer_cmd = 0x0
YES
NO
host_cmd == 0xF
END
YES
NO
host_cmd == 0x1
Pointer_Status = 0x1
Status = FlipBits()
YES
NO
Status = 0
NO
host_cmd == 0x2
Pointer_Status = 0x1
Status = FlipBits()
YES
Pointer_Status = 0x0
message = host_data
Pointer_Status = 0x2
Error
START
Initialise Platform
Initialise Injector
Initialise Pointers
host_cmd = pointer_cmd
host_data = pointer_data
host_cmd == 0x0
Status = 0
pointer_cmd = 0x0
host_cmd == 0xF
END
host_cmd == 0x1
Pointer_Status = 0x1
Status = FlipBits()
Pointer_Status = 0x2
Error
Status = 0
Figure 3.17: Flow chart depicting the logical flow of the Б─²mic_appБ─² programme.
At the moment there is no support for clock and startup control commands from host, since
as will be described in section 3.5.1, a design where the NOELбґV clock is controlled by the
injector was not possible to implement in time for the projectБ─≥s deadlines. Nevertheless the
entire flow for clock controlled injection into memory elements was tested successfully on
52
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:65==
a dummy design with as simple counter as a DUT, shown in Figure 3.18. The purpose of
this dummy design was to test that the clock and reset could be controlled for the desired
number of clock cycles, as well as the Б─²GSRБ─² signal triggered at the appropriate time, all
while obtaining the expected results for the counterБ─≥s value. The entire logic flow of the
test program can be seen in Figure 3.19, where the test clock control and trigger Б─²GSRБ─²
methods are just in charge of sending commands to the respective subбґmodules. In this
particular case the clock controlБ─≥s down counter was initialised to a value of 1004, while
the resetБ─≥s down counter was initialised to 4. This way, given that the simple counter adds
one to its value every clock cycle, the final value of the counter should settle at 1000.
clk200n
clk200p
reset_I
reset_I_IBUF_inst
IBUF
O
I
MIC
FFICTR_wrapper
CLK_O_0
RST_O_0
diff_clock_rtl_clk_n
diff_clock_rtl_clk_p
reset
GPIO_EXT[31:0]
DUT
Counter
clk
rst
cnt[31:0]
Figure 3.18: Block diagram of the simple counter dummy design used to test the injectorБ─≥s
capabilities.
START
Initialise Platform
Initialise Injector
Test CLK Control
1004 CLK CNT
4 RST CNT
Read Frame 0xc1f
Read Counter
Results = 3E8
Write Frame 0xc1f
(Flip Bits)
Trigger GSR
Read Frame 0xc1f
Read Counter
Results = C17
END
Figure 3.19: Flow chart depicting the logical flow of the test program used to validate the
ability of the injector to read and write frames, control the clock and reset of its DUT, and
trigger Б─²GSRБ─².
Similarly the Б─²GSRБ─² controllerБ─≥s down counter was set to 5, to ensure that the device had
enough time to reбґinitialise its FFs with the flipped bits set by means of the Б─²write_frame()Б─²
method. After the counter had finished, the startup controller was used to inject faults in its
FFs . This was done by reading the result of the counter, 1000 (i.e. 3E8 in hexadecimal),
flipping the bits, and writing them back by triggering the Б─²GSRБ─². The result was then
manually checked by reading the affected frames, which should contain a value of C17
hex. By means of the routine shown in Figure 3.19, the ability of the system to inject
faults into the CM for changeable and nonбґchangeable memory was verified. The entire
test application for the clock and startup controllers can be seen in Appendix B.
3.5
The NOELбґV Subsystem (Board)
The NOELбґV subsystem was strategically chosen as the DUT for the injection tool due to
a couple of reasons:
Б─╒ The NOELбґV was chosen over other RISCбґV based embedded processors for the
fact that the SELENE SoC uses the NOELбґV subsystem at its core, as well as the
possibility to apply the injection tool to GaislerБ─≥s fault tolerant version of the NOELбґV
in the future.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
53
==PAGE:66==
Б─╒ While it is still a complex design for which it is impossible to understand every deбґ
tail without help from the engineers responsible for its creation, it is less complex
than the entire SELENE SoC. As such the NOELбґV was a better target for initial
experimentation.
Б─╒ Furthermore, the SELENE SoC is being developed in a Virtex UltraScale+ Xilinx
development board, which is used by all of the SELENE research team. Given
how the testing and use of an injection tool requires of hundreds of hours of board
based experimentation, the fact that the implementation board was shared, made it
impossible to use it to test the injection tool without disturbing the research of other
team members.
The NOELбґV subsystem is available for multiple development boards and can undergo
much customisation to suit the needs of each individual case. In this particular situation
the development board chosen was a 7 series Virtex development board (i.e. the vc707)
as it was of the 7бґseries family, making it easier to use with DAVOSБ─≥ current state, and it
was completely available for fault injection, thus enabling long experiment run times. The
subsystem was configured for a 64 bit general purpose implementation. It is based on
the RV64GCH ISA, with a 16 Kb 4бґways L1 cache, a Memory Management Unit (MMU)
and a Floating Point Unit (FPU) included. For the purpose of the work presented here
the NOELбґV will only be discussed in a simplified manner, where the general design is
referred to as the NOELбґV subsystem, and its main processing unit is referred to as the
NOELбґV core. For more information as to the characteristics and configurations of the
NOELбґV subsystem refer to chapter 97 of [13].
For the purpose of this work the implementation of the NOELбґV will be limited to only one
core, and communications with it will he held exclusively through UART, leaving the JTAG
interface of the FPGA free for communication with MicroBlaze.
3.5.1
A Clock Controlled NOELбґV
The base NOELбґV subsystem used as the DUT did not require any modifications at hardбґ
ware level for the injection of faults into essential bits of the CM, but the same can not be
said for the injection of faults into the DM. As previously mentioned, this kind of injection
flow requires of the stopping of the DUTБ─≥s clock. This requirement let to close inspection
of the NOELбґVБ─≥s clock tree, upon which it was confirmed that the clock was dynamically
generated depending on the use of external memory in the design. In the case that exбґ
ternal memory is present the clock is generated by a Xilinx IP core, the Memory Interface
Generator (MIG) [37], which is in charge of controlling the external memory. In the case
that no external memory is present the design gets its clock from GaislerБ─≥s own clock genбґ
erator IP. The inclusion of the MIG unit generated some issues regarding the extend to
which the clock could be controlled:
1. The MIG generates the clock automatically based on how it is configured during its
inclusion into the design, which is a necessary feature given how it must ensure
synchronous operation between the CPU and its external memory. In this particular
case this acts as an impediment, since, to the authorБ─≥s knowledge, there is no way
to signal to the MIG that it must stop generating the clock, at least not without cutting
the MIGБ─≥s clock altogether.
2. Even if it were possible to get the MIG to stop driving the designБ─≥s clock, it would
be very hard to prevent deбґsynchronisation between the contents of the external
memory and the state of the design. Furthermore, since the external memory is
DDR4 memory, its contents might be lost altogether upon stopping its clock
54
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:67==
This means that if control of the DUTБ─≥s clock is to be achieved, the easiest way is by
disabling the external memory and MIG altogether. This way clock generation can be
taken away from the DUT, by removing GaislerБ─≥s IP. The boardБ─≥s differential clock can
then be driven exclusively through the MicroBlaze injector, where the clock wizard will
generate the DUTБ─≥s clock. This was achieved successfully on the injector side, where
the functionality of the clock/reset and Б─²GSRБ─² control modules was tested on a dummy
design. Unfortunately the implementation of this clock control flow on the NOELбґV DUT,
was unsuccessful due to reasons that by the end of the project are still not completely
clear. In order to explain the difficulties and what is believed to be behind them, lets first
discuss the changes made to the NOELбґV design.
The idea behind removing the MIG was quite simple in theory, thanks to GaislerБ─≥s plug
and play interface controlled by a configuration file. Based on this the changes should just
have taken a few minor alterations of the aforementioned configuration file, with GaislerБ─≥s
dynamic code instantiation methods in charge of ensuring that all modules where genбґ
erated according to the new MIGбґless configuration. On the other hand, the removal of
GaislerБ─≥s clock generation IP had to be done manually. This IP was removed from the
code, including its pin pad, ensuring that all signals it drove would now be driven by the
signal coming from the MicroBlazeБ─≥s clock buffer module. The same procedure had to be
followed for the reset control logic. These changes were quite straight forward, with the
only difficulties coming from the constraints file that had to be adjusted to make the new
implementation possible. Since our knowledge of the NOELбґV constraints was quite limбґ
ited, it was decided to create dummy signals that did not drive any loads for those pins the
constraint file complained about, as an alternative to changing the file itself. In hindsight
this is not the smartest approach, as the information from the constraint file could have
provided some insight as to the problems that were encountered later down the line.
With the design in an implementable state it was possible to generate a bitstream that
could be programmed to the FPGA. Unfortunately despite the design being capable of
programming the FPGA, and connecting to host via GRMON, it was not possible for it to
perform any kind of memory writes, and hence could not execute workloads. This meant
that a process of debugging, that took the better part of a month, had to be carried out,
where the following problems were discovered:
Б─╒ GaislerБ─≥s plug and play interface was not working according to our expectations,
probably from lack of knowledge regarding its design. This was noticeable from the
moduleБ─≥s slave and master indices, which were not being correctly updated for the
AHB bus. This meant that there were conflicts between modules that would share
the same index, which was the case for the AHB RAM (i.e. the internal memory).
Б─╒ The constraints file needed to be changed in order to reflect the new design, the
creation of dummy signals for pins that drove modules that were not used in the
current implementation seemed to not be the best solution.
Б─╒ The ROMБ─≥s design and configuration had to be studied, as during simulation it beбґ
came evidently clear that it was not responding to requests from the AHB bus.
Given the lack of expertise as to the finer details of the NOELбґVБ─≥s design, it was necessary
to seek the help of GaislerБ─≥s engineers in order to ensure that the new configuration was
possible. The collaboration was successful, and the Gaisler engineers provided fixes for
the issues that were brought to them. Yet since this took approximately a month of back
and forth, these fixes were not implemented to the current experimental setup presented
in this Masters thesis, as there was no time to test them. It is expected that once the
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
55
==PAGE:68==
DUTБ─≥s design is updated with these changes, it will be possible to test injections into the
DM, as all other aspects required for this process are ready. For now, this aspect of the
injection tool must remain as future work. Due to these setbacks, the experimental setup
carried out, and the results obtained will only reflect injection into essential bits.
The source code showing all the elements of the design (i.e. software and hardware)
will be published as part of the SELENE projectБ─≥s GIT repository, once the tool has been
updated to work on the entire SELENE SoC and ready for scientific publishing.
56
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:69==
4
Results and Comparison
This chapter will provide insight into the results achieved during the projectБ─≥s duration.
First a description of the experimental setup established will be provided, followed by the
results obtained.
The aim of this chapter is to validate the injection tool and the representativity of its results.
As such the discussion and reasoning presented throughout this chapter will focus on how
it was possible to asses the toolБ─≥s ability to inject faults and the representativity and realism
of its metrics. The degree to which the robustness of the DUT (i.e the NOELбґV subsystem)
is sufficient for a particular environment, or how its dependability could improve, will not
be the main focus of the discussion. After all, the NOELбґV subsystem is not completely
representative of the final target environment (i.e the entire SELENE SoC), and it was
just meant as a stepping point for the development of the injection tool, so that its latter
adaptation to the final target environment would be less challenging.
In order to validate the toolБ─≥s working condition, the ideal method will be to somehow
accurately compare the metrics obtained here with those obtained by other tools and
methods, such as different FFI tools or SBFI applied to the same DUT under the same
experimental conditions. Unfortunately, this is harder than it seems for a series of reasons:
1. To the authorБ─≥s knowledge, there are no alternative open source FFI tools that can
be easily deployed without requiring extensive periods of testing and debugging
that escape the possibilities of this projectБ─≥s time frame. This meant that the metrics
obtained can not be compared to metrics obtained by means of other open source
FFI tools.
2. To the authorБ─≥s knowledge, there are no other publicly available results regarding
probability of failure, or failure rates, for the version of the NOELбґV subsystem being
tested, and if there were, much care would have to be taken when comparing them,
as the experimental conditions could be very different.
3. The process for setting up a SBFI experiment that evaluates the same DUT as FFI
under the same environmental conditions is an extremely time consuming task when
the DUT under consideration is such a complex CPU. This is due to the fact that
the CPUБ─≥s RTLбґmodel used for simulation has to be implementation based, which
impacts simulation times drastically and makes it hard for simulation environments
(i.e. ModelSim) to even process the RTLбґmodel to begin with, let alone modify it
to simulate faults. This makes this approach unfeasible in the available time frame.
Furthermore implementation RTбґmodels lack the same level of detail that their board
implemented counterparts, and as such the impact of faults can not be compared
to the degree of accuracy desired.
4. SBFI could be used to compare results when limiting the injection of faults to regбґ
isters, but given the reasons previously discussed in the Design chapter (section
3.5.1), the FFI tool can not inject faults in FFs and as such can not provide metrics
to compare against.
Based on these setbacks, a different way to validate the tool had to be sought out, evenбґ
tually deciding that a validation by parts would be the most appropriate. This approach
entails the separation of the tool into individual parts that can be separately validated by
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
57
==PAGE:70==
experimentation, with the aim of extrapolating the individual validations to the entire tool.
In the context of the tool at hand, the different parts to validate where:
1. the ability to change the CM frameБ─≥s contents through the ICAP, which was valiбґ
dated through the implementation of the injector with a dummy design consisting of
a simple counter (section 3.4.2),
2. the representativity of results regarding the DUTБ─≥s probability of failure, and comбґ
puted failure rate.
This last part was validated through extensive experimentation to obtain results that should
support theories for the dependability of the different modules of the NOELбґV subsystem
under different workloads and fault targets (i.e. generalised essential bits (Type0) or LUT).
The two types of experimental injection campaigns carried out can be categorised in the
following manner, which is based on the DUTБ─≥s floorplan:
Б─╒ Injections into the NOELбґV subsystem as a whole, both in generalised essential bits
(Type0) and LUTs.
Б─╒ Injections into the different NOELбґV core modules for generalised essential bits
(Type0).
4.1
Experimental Setup
The general experimental setup involved the preparation of two distinct injection camбґ
paigns that required separate DAVOS setups, two different implementations of the DUT
in terms of floorplan placement and routing, as well as different considerations in terms of
how to analyse, process and present both of their results. Whereas the common factors
shared by both of these injection campaigns were the FPGA board, the injection environбґ
ment, and the workloads run by the DUT.
In order to generate the fault list for both of the experimental setups, DAVOS has to make
use of VivadoБ─≥s design files and the coordinates of the fabric area where injections were
desired in each case. When injecting by area the targeted hierarchical element has to be
isolated in some part of the fabric in order to limit all injections to it, this is done by means of
VivadoБ─≥s Pblocks. Pblocks are basically fabric abstractions used to restrict the placement
of design elements during floor planning. The targeted design module can be placed in
one of these Pblocks, and its coordinates can be obtained by looking at its bottom left and
top right tiles. The coordinates have to be manually introduced by the user in the Б─²Injecбґ
tor_config.xmlБ─², along side with the fault model (i.e. LUT or generalised essential bits). In
the case of injecting in LUTs, it is also necessary to provide the netlistБ─≥s hierarchical eleбґ
ment within the Pblock, where LUT injections are desired. The Б─²Injector_config.xmlБ─² file is
used to configure DAVOS, and it must reflect the DUTБ─≥s implementation for any particular
experimental setup. Currently the relevant data fields present in the Б─²Injector_config.xmlБ─²
are the following:
58
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:71==
1
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>c
2
<data>
3
<DAVOS
4
.
5
.
6
.
7
<FFI
8
injector
= "MICROBLAZE"
9
injector_phase
= "on"
10
reportbuilder_phase
= "off"
11
device_part
= "7vx485tffg1761"
12
13
dut_scope
= "noelv0"
14
pblock
= "NOELV: X77Y2:X151Y147"
15
target_logic
= "TYPE0"
16
17
sample_size_goal
= "50000"
18
fault_multiplicity
= "1"
19
20
dut_script
= "grmon -u -uart /dev/ttyUSB0 -c /opt/FFI
/FFIMIC/host_grmon_1.do"
21
>
22
</FFI>
23
</DAVOS>
24
</data>
With the PblockБ─≥s coordinates, Б─²pblockБ─², or the hierarchical path , Б─²dut_scopeБ─², in the case
of Б─²target logic = LUTБ─², DAVOSБ─≥ experimental setup can be configured according to the
needs of the user. In this particular case, there was a total of 10 different DAVOS configбґ
urations needed to achieve the two different injection campaigns composing the general
experimental setup. The first injection campaign was composed of two distinct DAVOS
configurations injecting in the same hierarchical element, while targeting two different
kinds of logic, generalised essential bits and LUT. The floorplan and its respective isolatбґ
ing Pblock can be seen in Figure 4.1. The second injection campaign was composed of
the remaining eight DAVOS configurations, which in this case targeted only generalised
essential bits, while injecting into different hierarchical elements. The floorplan and its
respective isolating Pblocks can be seen in Figure 4.2. In the case of the second injecбґ
tion campaign the need for multiple Pblocks in the same floorplan was established by the
desire to maintain the placement and routing fixed throughout the eight different injection
experiments.
Figure 4.1: Floorplan used for the injection campaign involving the entire NOELбґV subбґ
system for LUT and generalised essential bits injections.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
59
==PAGE:72==
This homogeneity of floorplan placement and routing could not have been maintained with
eight different implementations of the design, each with one Pblock. It is worth mentioning
that the Pblock placement in this last setup is less than ideal, as it posses great limitations
to VivadoБ─≥s routing abilities, which in turn severely affect the timing and performance of
the design. Having said this, it is not a major concern that the design doesnБ─≥t perform well
during injection, as the results that are sought after are not those representing an accurate
estimation of the DUTБ─≥s robustness, but rather the validation of the tools capabilities. As
such it is unnecessary to inject into a realistic representation of the final implementation
of the DUT. The only necessary outcome from the injection campaign are robustness
estimates that can be compared with expectations based on the workloadБ─≥s performance
and the natural behaviour of FPGAБ─≥s in the face of faults.
Figure 4.2: Floorplan used for the injection campaign involving the individual modules of
the NOELбґV core for generalised essential bits injections.
As previously mentioned one of the common elements shared by both of the injection
campaigns are the workloads carried out by the DUT. In total there are seven workloads,
provided by the SELENE team, which had been developed for SBFI but can be equally
used for FFI. The workloads are the following, with descriptions as provided by SELENE:
1. Matmult : Matrix multiplication adapted from Mibenchбґautomotive with signed inteбґ
gers, multiplication with accumulation, and nested loops).
2. Dijkstra : DijkstraБ─≥s single source shortest path algorithm adapted from Mibenchбґ
networking.
3. AES : AESбґ256 encryption adapted from TinyбґAES library.
4. CRC : Cyclic redundancy check from Malardalen WCET benchmark.
5. QSORT : Quick sort (floating point) based on stdlib.
6. BS : Binary search (array of 20 keyбґvalue structures), with recursive function calls,
and nested loops. A heavily reworked version of BS from Malardalen WCET benchбґ
mark.
7. FIR : Finite impulse response filter adapted from Malardalen WCET benchmark withбґ
out major modifications.
60
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:73==
The use of the seven workloads for FFI was meant to allow for the comparison of results
between FFI and SBFI when injecting into FFs, but as previously described this was not
possible to the extend desired. Nevertheless the seven workload approach was mainбґ
tained in order to provide a diversified range of results. The use of the seven workloads
also justified the execution of the second injection campaign with the isolated NOELбґV
core modules, as different workloads should cause different rates of activation on the
different modules, affecting their dependability accordingly.
In order to properly estimate the impact of each individual workload on the activation patбґ
terns of the DUT, it is necessary to know the dynamic instructions executed by each of
them. With the instructions one can then predict which of the coreБ─≥s modules will see
more activity, or in other words which one will have to process more instructions or carry
out more operations. In order to achieve this purpose the workloads were simulated at
an RTLбґlevel recording the instructions executed at each cycle directly from the decoder
stage of the RISCбґV based pipeline. This instructions were then parsed by a simple python
program, which organised them based on the RISCбґV extension and category they beбґ
longed to. The complete count of all instructions executed by all workloads can be seen
in Figure 4.3.
RISCVб═Extension Instб═Category
W1
W2
W3
W4
W5
W6
W7
loads
901 1816 2210
3206
781
523
871
stores
623
539 1556
2201
740
515
473
shifts
662 1100 1546 28286
672
886
682
arithmetic
2140 4661 3984 14022 2650 2080 2546
logical
400
402 1796
5204
512
400
410
compare
1
1
1
17
39
1
11
branches
1281 3287 1924 11614 1614 1366 1362
jump&link
108
108
171
1161
326
127
106
multiply
160
0
0
4
13
0
225
divide
0
0
0
0
6
0
10
floatingLoad
0
0
0
9
148
0
0
floatingStore
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
floatingCompare
0
0
0
0
106
0
0
RV64I
RV64M
RV64F
Figure 4.3: Recount of the dynamic instructions in each workload, sorted out by RISCбґV
extension and category.
The instructions obtained from the parsing process are not an exact copy of those proбґ
cessed by the DUT during injection. This is due to the fact that the kernel wrapper conбґ
stantly running on the DUT in order to execute the workload after receiving a command
from host, is missing from the simulated workloads from which the instructions were obбґ
tained. This is a minor change that does not impact the representativity of the dynamic
instructions parsed. The only instructions missing will be those pertaining to the wrapper,
which are present in all workloads, and as such provide no distinctive factors between
them. Without the wrapperБ─≥s instructions we can still predict the activation of different
parts of the DUT for each of the workloads, as these activations will be the same with the
wrapper present.
The general process of fault injection for a single experiment, meaning one DAVOS conбґ
figuration running one workload and injecting 50000 faults, can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
61
==PAGE:74==
START
Configure Vivado
Design's Floorplan
Configure "Injector_config.xml"
with:
-Target Logic
-Hierarchy Element
-Pblock Coordinates
-Sample Size Goal
-Workload to execute
Launch Davosб═
and Wait for Results
END
DAVOS START
Connect to
Microblaze Injector
Connect to NOEL-V
DUT
Golden Run
Inject Fault
Run Workload
Remove Fault
Analise Readouts
YES
NO
Last Fault?
Return
Generate Fault List
Figure 4.4: Simplified logic flow for one single injection experiment.
62
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:75==
4.2
Injection in the NOELбґV Subsystem
The first injection camping was carried out in the entire NOELбґV subsystem and it targeted
LUTs and generalised essential bits by means of two distinct DAVOS configurations. A
total of 14 separate injection experiments were carried out, two for each workload, each
of which injected 50000 faults into the DUT. The number of faults to inject was decided
before the experiment, as it was considered a sufficiently big sample size when compared
to the total population of generalised essential bits. In the case of LUTs this sample size
would provide almost exhaustive results, as there are approximately 50000 LUTs present
in the design, and despite the possibility of multiple faults in the bits of a single LUT, the
approximation is still satisfactory. Nevertheless this sample size was selected prior to
adding the conditions regarding the margin of error. Had we the opportunity to repeat
this process, the conditions would have been used and less than 50000 faults would
have been injected, maintaining quality of results while saving time. The results of these
injection experiments can be seen in Figure 4.5 for generalised essential bits, and in
Figure 4.6 for LUTs.
1.17 б╠ 0.09
1.17 б╠ 0.09
1.70 б╠ 0.11
0.74 б╠ 0.08
1.64 б╠ 0.11
1.32 б╠ 0.10
1.79 б╠ 0.12
3.13 б╠ 0.15
3.23 б╠ 0.15
3.52 б╠ 0.16
4.41 б╠ 0.18
3.75 б╠ 0.17
3.04 б╠ 0.15
3.07 б╠ 0.15
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
1_MATMULT
2_DIJKSTRA
3_AES
4_CRC
5_QSORT
6_BINARY
SEARCH
7_FIR
PROBABILITYб═OFб═FAILUREб═(%)
Probabilityб═ofб═Failureб═perб═Workloadб═forб═NOELБ─░Vб═Essentialб═Bits
SDC
Hang
Masked
Figure 4.5: Probability of failure(%) results after 50000 injections into the NOELбґV subбґ
system for area based injection for generalised essential bits
The first thing to note from the results obtained is that the injections in generalised essenбґ
tial bits seem to have a bigger impact on the probability of failure in terms of SDC. This
aligns quite well with our expectations, as in the case of FPGAs it is the routing logic that
is responsible for most faults, and this kind of logic is injected into only when targeting
generalised essential bits. This hypothesis about the impact of faults in routing logic is
based on experimental results obtained from the previous version of DAVOS [31], whose
functionality was accurately verified through FFI and SBFI comparisons. As such, the fact
that this trend is also observable in the experimental results provided here, shows the vaбґ
lidity of these results to a qualitative degree. Ideally, one would want to be able to also
make quantitative predictions as to the expected probability of failures for each workload,
but this would only be possible with the use of independently obtained results for the same
experimental conditions, which as previously discussed is not currently possible.
The results presented in Figures 4.5 and 4.6 are dependent on the total population of
essential bits. This prompts us to translate the probability of failure to a more standardised
metric such as the failure rate in FIT. This was done by means of equation 2.3 from section
2.1.4. Using this equation the failure rate in FIT for each workload in both of the DAVOS
configurations was obtained and can be seen in Figure 4.7 for generalised essential bits,
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
63
==PAGE:76==
0.43 б╠ 0.06
0.59 б╠ 0.07
0.86 б╠ 0.08
0.21 б╠ 0.04
0.75 б╠ 0.08
0.45 б╠ 0.06
0.70 б╠ 0.07
2.75 б╠ 0.14
2.84 б╠ 0.15
3.02 б╠ 0.15
3.42 б╠ 0.16
3.09 б╠ 0.15
2.72 б╠ 0.14
2.74 б╠ 0.14
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
1_MATMULT
2_DIJKSTRA
3_AES
4_CRC
5_QSORT
6_BINARY
SEARCH
7_FIR
PROBABILITYб═OFб═FAILUREб═(%)
Probabilityб═ofб═Failureб═perб═Workloadб═forб═NOELБ─░Vб═LUTs
SDC
Hang
Masked
Figure 4.6: Probability of failure (%) results after 50000 injections into the NOELбґV subбґ
system for hierarchy based injection for LUTs
and in Figure 4.8 for LUTs.
20.60б═б╠ 1.28
21.05б═б╠ 1.29
25.01б═б╠ 1.44
24.68б═б╠ 1.34
25.81б═б╠ 1.45
20.91б═б╠ 1.30
23.26б═б╠ 1.39
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
1_MATMULT
2_DIJKSTRA
3_AES
4_CRC
5_QSORT
6_BINARY
SEARCH
7_FIR
FAILUREб═RATEб═(FIT)
FITб═perб═Workloadб═forб═NOELБ─░Vб═Essentialб═Bits
Figure 4.7: Failure Rate (FIT) results after 50000 injections into the NOELбґV subsystem
for area based injection for generalised essential bits
The FIT represents the actual robustness of a system and as such can be used to compare
between multiple implementations of the same DUT, as a means to asses the impact of
robustness enhancement techniques (i.e. fault tolerance) amongst other things. Using
FITs we can now observe that the failure rate of LUTs is on average 4 orders of magnitude
smaller that that of generalised essential bits. This is a reasonable result given how the
number of essential bits for LUTs is only about 30% of the total essential bits present in
the DUT. This once more provides qualitative validation of the results obtained.
A possible approach to show that the dependability increases or decrease as expected,
based on modifications of the experimental conditions, will be to inject multiple faults at
once. This will show an increase in both the probability of failure and failure rate. In order
to do this the only aspect of the experimental setup that had to be changed was the value
for fault multiplicity in the Б─²Injector_config.xmlБ─², which was set to two in order to inject two
simultaneous faults into generalised essential bits. The conditions regarding the margins
of error were used, and as such less than 50000 faults were injected per workload. The
results can be seen in Figure 4.9, were it is clear there has been an increase in probability
of failure when comparing to Figure 4.5.
64
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:77==
4.58б═б╠ 0.31
4.95б═б╠ 0.33
5.60б═б╠ 0.36
5.25б═б╠ 0.31
5.55б═б╠ 0.35
4.58б═б╠ 0.31
4.95б═б╠ 0.34
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
1_MATMULT
2_DIJKSTRA
3_AES
4_CRC
5_QSORT
6_BINARY
SEARCH
7_FIR
FAILUREб═RATEб═(FIT)
FITб═perб═Workloadб═forб═NOELБ─░Vб═LUTs
Figure 4.8: Failure Rate (FIT) results after 50000 injections into the NOELбґV subsystem
for hierarchy based injection for LUTs
1.95 б╠ 0.09
2.04 б╠ 0.09
3.46 б╠ 0.11
0.96 б╠ 0.08
4.08 б╠ 0.11
1.94 б╠ 0.10
2.90 б╠ 0.12
3.79 б╠ 0.15
3.97 б╠ 0.15
4.99 б╠ 0.16
5.57 б╠ 0.18
6.01 б╠ 0.17
3.51 б╠ 0.15
3.57 б╠ 0.15
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00
11.00
1_MATMULT
2_DIJKSTRA
3_AES
4_CRC
5_QSORT
6_BINARY
SEARCH
7_FIR
PROBABILITYб═OFб═FAILUREб═(%)
Probabilityб═ofб═Failureб═perб═Workloadб═forб═NOELБ─░Vб═Essentialб═Bitsб═(Multipleб═faults)
SDC
Hang
Masked
Figure 4.9: Probability of failure (%) results after simultaneous (i.e. two faults) injection
into the NOELбґV subsystem for generalised essential bits
Despite this increase in probability of failure, it is not possible to quantify exactly how much
the difference will be when going from single to dual faults. Common sense could dictate
that approximately twice the probability of failure would be expected, at least for SDC, as
this has been already experimentally shown in [31] with a previous version of DAVOS.
Yet in the experimental data obtained here not all workloads see the same increments.
For instance, in the case of CRC the increase is just under 30%, whereas in the case of
QSORT the increase is just under 60%. Nevertheless, this was an expected outcome,
those workloads that already saw the highest probability of failure, were expected to also
suffer the most from multiple faults, whereas the opposite is true for the less fault prone
workloads. Since the FIT/Mb metrics provided by Xilinx are based on SEU events, they
do not represent the case in which two faults affect the system simultaneously. As such
the probability of failure in the case of dual faults can not be translated to failure rate in
FIT.
In order to further validate the tools capabilities in accurately assessing dependability, it
would be ideal to apply simple a Triple Modular Redundancy (TMR) at device level, in
order to show that the tool will report negligible values for the FIT in the case of injecting
single faults. This will be carried out as future work due to lack of time, and experimental
results will ideally be presented during the defence of this project. For now, what can be
done is to obtain the reliability of a TMR implementation through theoretical means. This
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
65
==PAGE:78==
can be done by means of equation 4.1 from [32], where reliability is calculated as shown
in equation 2.1 from section 2.1.4.
Rtmr = (3 ц≈ R2
replica Б┬▓2 ц≈ R3
replica) ц≈ Rvoter
(4.1)
A replica will consist of a NOELбґV core, as they are the elements that will be triplicated
during TMR. The reliability of the voter is assumed to be at a constant 100%, as it will
not be implemented on hardware but rather on the host side software. The value for
the reliability of one replica as time progresses, can be seen in Figure 4.10, were the
reliability values have been calculated according to injection results for failure rate in FIT
of the NOELбґV core. The MTTF of a replica based on the experimentally calculated failure
rate, which is assumed constant, is of 3,912,065,0 hours.
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
1.01
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Reliability
Timeб═(h) Thousands
Replicaб═Reliabilityб═vsб═Time
Figure 4.10: Reliability of a NOELбґV core replica at different points in time after its initial
functioning (sea level)
When applying these results for the reliability of one replica to calculate the TMR, the
outcome is quite different, as shown in Figure 4.11. The theoretical calculation of a TMR
implementation, when using our injection results, shows that for an extended period of
time (i.e. > 2 million working hours), the reliability of the system stays above 0.99. This
is quite the improvement when compared to the values obtained from injection in the
simplex implementation (i.e. one single NOELбґV core). The theoretical behaviour of the
TMR system was as expected from literature [32, 25], which in turns points towards the
validity of the injection results of the NOELбґV core.
0.982
0.984
0.986
0.988
0.99
0.992
0.994
0.996
0.998
1
1.002
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Reliability
Timeб═(h) Thousands
TMRб═Reliabilityб═vsб═Time
Figure 4.11: Reliability of a NOELбґV core TMR at different points in time after its initial
functioning (sea level)
66
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:79==
Based on the theoretical values calculated, we expect to produce experimental results
that will follow the same trends when comparing between the reliability of a replica and its
TMR. We also expect to obtain a larger MTTF when using the experimentally calculated
failure rate for the TMRБ─≥s implementation.
In conclusion the observations drawn from the results obtained in this injection campaign
can be summarised as follows:
Б─╒ The trend in higher probability of failure (i.e. SDC), when injecting into generalised
essential bits, shown by an earlier version of DAVOS [31], which was verified by
means of quantitative comparisons, is also present in the results obtained here.
Б─╒ The difference in Failure Rate (FIT) value between generalised essential bits and
LUT fault targets, shows a trend that follows what was expected based on the perбґ
centages of essential bits covered by each of them.
Б─╒ The decrease in dependability when injecting two simultaneous faults, shows that
when changing experimental conditions the results follow the trends predicted.
Б─╒ The results obtained from the theoretical calculation of a TMR setup of the NOELбґV
core, follow the predicted behaviour, and it is expected that experimental values will
show the same behaviour too.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
67
==PAGE:80==
4.3
Injection in the Individual Modules of the NOELбґV Core
To further validate the representativity of toolБ─≥s results, it was decided to carry out a more
localised injection campaign that would target all the modules of the NOELбґV core, as
shown in Figure 4.2. This was done with the hopes that the different dependabilities of
the modules would correlate with the dynamic instructions executed by the workloads,
shown in Figure 4.3. A total of 57 injection experiments had to be carried out, 7 per each
module, testing all module and workload combinations. For the purpose of accelerating
the experiments, the number of injections was limited by means of the conditions deбґ
scribed in section 3.3.1, ensuring that the injections would stop once the margin of error
was a degree of magnitude lower than the probability of failure. In the cases where the
conditions were not met, the maximum amount of faults injected was of 50000.
In order to correlate the workloadsБ─≥ dynamic instructions with the probability of failure
shown by each of the DUTБ─≥s modules, it is important to understand what each module
does. Without going into the finer details the modules injected into are the following:
1. Floating Point Unit (FPU): A small, nonбґpipelined floating point unit in charge of
processing floating point numbers. It is expected that this module will only see an
increased probability of failure during injection into the fifth workload (i.e. QSORT)
as it used floating point numbers.
2. Memory Management Unit (MMU0): This unit is integrated into the cache controller,
providing mapping between virtual address spaces and physical memory.
3. Cache Memory (CMEM1): The memory instantiations for instruction and data caches.
4. NOELбґV Integer Unit (IU0): The NOELбґV dualбґissue 7 stage instruction pipeline. All
instructions are processed by this module, as such it is expected that its activation
will be quite constant throughout workloads, with the probability of failure increasing
or decreasing depending on the instruction distribution of each workload.
5. Multiplication Unit (MUL): The unit in charge or executing multiply instructions. It
is expected that this module will only see an increased probability of failure durбґ
ing injection into the first and seventh workloads (i.e. MATMULT, FIR) as they use
multiplication instructions.
6. Division Unit (MUL): The unit in charge or executing division instructions.
7. Branch Target Buffer (BTB0): Direct Mapped Branch Target Buffer to handle unбґ
aligned and compressed instructions.
8. Branch History Table (BHT0): A Branch History Table with configurable predictor.
Unfortunately it was not possible to test all the workloads on all of the modules, due to
technical issues encountered during the last two weeks of the project. These technical
issues were first encountered when testing workload number five, QSORT, on the MMU0
unit. The issue consisted of an unrecoverable hang, encountered during fault 15627,
that made every injection after it a hang too. This ended up causing the host side to
malfunction, losing connection with the GRMON socket. The issue was reproducible,
as it always occurred when injecting into the same bit of the MMU0 unit while running
QSORT. This was found to be the case also when running QSORT in the multiplication
and division units. The strange behaviour of the system prompted for a swift analysis of
the situation, that halted experimentation for a period long enough to make the testing of
workloads 5, 6 and 7 incomplete. Nevertheless the analysis of the issue led us to believe
that we had encountered a major system hang that was only recoverable after a complete
68
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:81==
Module
Workload
Totalб═Faults
Masked
p(%)
e(%)
SDC
pF(%)
e(%)
Hang
pF(%)
e(%)
FIT
FITб═meanб═e
1_matmultб═б═б═б═б═
50000
48645
97.29
0.14
65
0.13
0.032
1290
2.58
0.139
1.33
0.09
2_dijkstraб═б═б═б═
50000
48674
97.35
0.14
28
0.06
0.021
1298
2.60
0.139
1.30
0.08
3_aesб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
48642
97.28
0.14
40
0.08
0.025
1318
2.64
0.140
1.33
0.09
4_crcб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
48646
97.29
0.14
12
0.024
0.014
1342
2.68
0.142
1.33
0.08
5_qsortб═б═б═б═б═б═б═
25685
24625
95.87
0.24
371
1.44
0.146
689
2.68
0.198
2.02
0.18
6_binarysearch
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7_firб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
1_matmultб═б═б═б═б═
39661
38158
96.21
0.19
376
0.95
0.095
1127
2.84
0.164
4.17
0.30
2_dijkstraб═б═б═б═
40932
39396
96.25
0.18
375
0.92
0.092
1161
2.84
0.161
4.13
0.30
3_aesб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
22920
21847
95.32
0.27
375
1.64
0.164
698
3.05
0.222
5.16
0.45
4_crcб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
45392
43206
95.18
0.20
375
0.83
0.083
1811
3.99
0.180
5.30
0.32
5_qsortб═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
6_binarysearch
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7_firб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
1_matmultб═б═б═б═б═
9431
8744
92.72
0.52
354
3.75
0.384
333
3.53
0.372
0.64
0.07
2_dijkstraб═б═б═б═
20705
19640
94.86
0.30
343
1.66
0.174
722
3.49
0.250
0.45
0.04
3_aesб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
10534
9761
92.66
0.50
354
3.36
0.344
419
3.98
0.373
0.65
0.07
4_crcб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
42436
39626
93.38
0.24
308
0.73
0.081
2502
5.90
0.224
0.58
0.03
5_qsortб═б═б═б═б═б═б═
12604
11754
93.26
0.44
353
2.80
0.288
497
3.94
0.340
0.59
0.06
6_binarysearch
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7_firб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
1_matmultб═б═б═б═б═
28766
27420
95.32
0.24
378
1.31
0.132
968
3.37
0.208
11.47
0.89
2_dijkstraб═б═б═б═
23792
22534
94.71
0.28
377
1.58
0.159
881
3.70
0.240
12.97
1.04
3_aesб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
17582
16529
94.01
0.35
375
2.13
0.214
678
3.86
0.285
14.69
1.29
4_crcб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
47168
94.34
0.20
318
0.64
0.070
2514
5.03
0.192
13.89
0.71
5_qsortб═б═б═б═б═б═б═
24340
22931
94.21
0.29
377
1.55
0.155
1032
4.24
0.253
14.20
1.07
6_binarysearch
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7_firб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
1_matmultб═б═б═б═б═
10815
10206
94.37
0.43
330
3.05
0.324
279
2.58
0.299
0.21
0.02
2_dijkstraб═б═б═б═
50000
48759
97.52
0.14
0
0.00
0.000
1241
2.48
0.136
0.09
0.01
3_aesб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
48759
97.52
0.14
0
0.00
0.000
1241
2.48
0.136
0.09
0.01
4_crcб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
48758
97.52
0.14
0
0.00
0.000
1242
2.48
0.136
0.09
0.01
5_qsortб═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
6_binarysearch
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7_firб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
9396
8822
93.89
0.48
334
3.55
0.374
240
2.55
0.319
0.23
0.03
1_matmultб═б═б═б═б═
50000
48705
97.41
0.14
54
0.11
0.029
1241
2.48
0.136
0.26
0.02
2_dijkstraб═б═б═б═
50000
48740
97.48
0.14
10
0.02
0.012
1250
2.50
0.137
0.25
0.02
3_aesб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
48740
97.48
0.14
18
0.04
0.017
1242
2.48
0.136
0.25
0.02
4_crcб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
48751
97.50
0.14
4
0.01
0.008
1245
2.49
0.137
0.25
0.02
5_qsortб═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
6_binarysearch
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7_firб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
4124
3657
88.68
0.97
347
8.41
0.847
120
2.91
0.513
1.14
0.14
1_matmultб═б═б═б═б═
32232
30953
96.03
0.21
323
1.00
0.109
956
2.97
0.185
0.33
0.03
2_dijkstraб═б═б═б═
40341
38787
96.15
0.19
309
0.77
0.085
1245
3.09
0.169
0.32
0.02
3_aesб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
24436
23286
95.29
0.27
335
1.37
0.146
815
3.34
0.225
0.40
0.03
4_crcб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
47232
44793
94.84
0.20
297
0.63
0.071
2142
4.54
0.188
0.44
0.02
5_qsortб═б═б═б═б═б═б═
45080
43633
96.79
0.16
300
0.67
0.075
1147
2.54
0.145
0.27
0.02
6_binarysearch
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7_firб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
1_matmultб═б═б═б═б═
50000
48629
97.26
0.14
135
0.27
0.045
1236
2.47
0.136
0.17
0.01
2_dijkstraб═б═б═б═
50000
48628
97.26
0.14
134
0.27
0.045
1238
2.48
0.136
0.17
0.01
3_aesб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
48554
97.11
0.15
207
0.41
0.056
1239
2.48
0.136
0.18
0.01
4_crcб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
50000
48577
97.15
0.15
100
0.20
0.039
1323
2.65
0.141
0.17
0.01
5_qsortб═б═б═б═б═б═б═
43318
41972
96.89
0.16
273
0.63
0.075
1073
2.48
0.146
0.19
0.01
6_binarysearch
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7_firб═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═б═
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
Б─░
7Б─░BTB0
8Б─░BHT0
2Б─░MMU0
3Б─░CMEM1
4Б─░IU0
5Б─░MUL0
6Б─░DIV0
1Б─░FPU
Table 4.1: Probability of failure (%) and Failure rate (FIT) results, for the 8 NOELбґV core
modules in each of the executed workloads.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
69
==PAGE:82==
reconfiguration of the FPGA board. The problem laid within the fact that after the major
hang the host platform was still able to connect to the DUT, despite the previous injection
not having been successfully removed. This made the system believe that the DUT was
in operating condition, and as such kept injecting despite the repeated hangs. The fix
applied was a simple counter that checks whenever 3 consecutive hangs happen, and
reprograms the entire board accordingly. It was implemented successfully, and some of
the experiments affected by the issue were executed again, obtaining good results.
The appearance of this issue made us reбґexamine the already obtained results, tagging
as outliers those with larger numbers of hangs than expected. Upon close inspection
of their injection results it became obvious that some of the experiments, produced prior
to the identification of the issue, had also been affected by it, avoiding detection due to
the fact that in their cases socket communication did not fail. This did not simply invaliбґ
date multiple of the prior injection experiments, but it also revealed another mistake in the
Б─²dut_recover()Б─² method. This other issue would throw the tool into a hang loop even in
cases where there was no major hang. The reason behind this was that the tool would
check the workloadБ─≥s result after having removed a fault, upon failure it would then conбґ
sider it a hang, but would not reset the DUT before comparing results again. This made
the tool falsely identify that the DUT had been recovered in cases where it still was being
affected by a fault, and as such every injection thereafter was identified as an hang until
by other reasons the design would be reset. The fix was identical to the previous, simбґ
ply reprogramming the FPGA after 3 consecutive hangs, the only difference is that the
fix was applied at the first stage of Б─²dut_recover()Б─², whereas the previous fix was impleбґ
mented in the second stage. This fix was also implemented successfully and the injection
experiments affect by it where reбґexecuted, with satisfactory results.
Despite the appearance of these issues, preventing all workload and module combinaбґ
tions from being tested, it also had a positive impact, as it highlighted the need for a failure
tree. A failure tree would detail all possible states of the DUT during injection, and if imбґ
plemented at the toolБ─≥s design stage, it could have prevented the kinds of oversights that
lead to the issues encountered. The result that are considered correct have still been
used for the correlation of the modulesБ─≥ dependabilities and the workloadsБ─≥ dynamic inбґ
structions. The results of both the probability of failure (%) and the failure rate (FIT), can
be seen in Table 4.1. The missing results are due to the already mentioned delays, which
prompted for the prioritisation of those workload and module combinations whoБ─≥s results
were deemed most interesting.
Out of all the results present in Table 4.1, the ones that provide the most interesting inбґ
sights, are those pertaining to the FPU, Multiplication and Division units. Here we can
shows that modules that only see activation when certain instructions are executed, are
only gonna have high percentages of SDC during the execution of workloads that contain
those instructions. During other workloads the percentage of SDC is low because the
tested module does not impact the results of the processing unit.
70
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:83==
0.13б═б╠ 0.03
0.06б═б╠ 0.02
0.08б═б╠ 0.02
0.02б═б╠ 0.01
1.44б═б╠ 0.15
2.58б═б╠ 0.14
2.60б═б╠ 0.14
2.64б═б╠ 0.14
2.68б═б╠ 0.14
2.68б═б╠ 0.20
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
5.00
1_matmult
2_dijkstra
3_aes
4_crc
5_qsort
PROBABILITYб═OFб═FAILUREб═(%)
1Б─░FPU
SDC
Hang
Masked
(a) Probability of failure (%) results for injections into the
NOELбґV FPU unit while running the different workloads
during injection into generalised essential bits.
3.05б═б╠ 0.32
3.55б═б╠ 0.37
2.58б═б╠ 0.30
2.48б═б╠ 0.14
2.48б═б╠ 0.14
2.48б═б╠ 0.14
2.48б═б╠ 0.14
2.55б═б╠ 0.32
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
1_matmult
2_dijkstra
3_aes
4_crc
5_qsort
7_fir
PROBABILITYб═OFб═FAILUREб═(%)
5Б─░MUL0
SDC
Hang
Masked
(b) Probability of failure (%) results for injections into the
NOELбґV Multiplication unit while running the different workбґ
loads during injection into generalised essential bits.
0.11б═б╠ 0.03
2.46б═б╠ 0.45
8.41б═б╠ 0.85
2.48б═б╠ 0.14
2.50б═б╠ 0.14
2.48б═б╠ 0.14
2.49б═б╠ 0.14
3.32б═б╠ 0.52
2.91б═б╠ 0.51
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
1_matmult
2_dijkstra
3_aes
4_crc
5_qsort
7_fir
PROBABILITYб═OFб═FAILUREб═(%)
6Б─░DIV0
SDC
Hang
Masked
(c) Probability of failure (%) results for injections into the
NOELбґV Division unit while running the different workloads
during injection into generalised essential bits.
Figure 4.12
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
71
==PAGE:84==
Figure 4.12a shows a barбґchart with the results obtained from injections in the floating
point unit. Here it is obvious that the workload that produces the highest level of SDC is
QSORT, as it is the only workload that uses floating point data in its calculation. Figure
4.12b, on the other hand, shows a barбґchart with the results obtained from injections in the
multiplication unit. Here the two workloads that see the highest percentages of SDC are
MATMULT and FIR, as they are the ones with the highest number of multiplication instrucбґ
tion (Figure 4.3). Lastly, Figure 4.12c, provides the results obtained from injections in the
division unit. Here the results are more surprising since we see high SDC values for both
QSORT and FIR workloads, despite their respectively low number of division instruction,
6 and 10. It was expected that these two workloads would produce the highest values of
SDC in the DIV module, but the extend to which they did so was surprising. This large
probability of failure could be due to either vulnerabilities in the division module, or the
workload structure having great dependency on the few division instructions. In general
the results obtained validate our theory of probability of failure being greatly affected by
module activation. For the results of the other modules, refer to Appendix C.
With regards to the percentage of hangs, the comparison is not so straight forward. The
hangs have been categorised based on when the system becomes unresponsive, being
either when running the workload or when recovering the DUT. But the reasons behind
why the hangs occur are still unknown. As such making a prediction as to the amount of
hangs each workload would produce in each module was not possible.
Another thing to point out is that the results obtained, when translated to failure rate FIT,
show the kind of values we were expecting. The modules with the highest failure rates
were the FPU, MMU0 and IU0, as they are the biggest modules. The different workloads
have an impact on the failure rate, showing different values in each of the modules, yet
the population of essential bits is still its driving factor, establishing clear margins between
modules. The only exception is seen in the failure rate of the DIV module executing the FIR
workload, as borders the same FIT as the FPU module despite being five times smaller.
In conclusion the observations drawn from the results obtained in this injection campaign
can be summarised as follows:
Б─╒ The trend between dynamic instructions and probability of failure in the modules that
will see more activation due to them, has been shown experimentally to a qualitative
degree.
Б─╒ The values of the different failure rates agree with our estimations based on the size
of each of the modules, and the workload related probability of failure.
Pairing these observations with the ones obtained from the previous injection campaign,
we believe that the tool is capable of providing a realistic representation of a DUTs roбґ
bustness, and as such we consider that the toolБ─≥s results are valid.
72
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:85==
5
Conclusion
The project presented in this thesis was of considerable complexity in its ideation, design
and execution. A lot was done in a short period of time, which would not have been
possible without the support of SELENE, the expertise of GaislerБ─≥s engineers, and the
knowledge of the technical supervisor. The vast amount of theory and technical skills
needed for this project were learned throughout its execution, with very little knowledge of
software and fault injection present at the beginning. This made the previously mentioned
support key for the success of the project. Another key element of the success of the
project was the already advanced foundation that DAVOS had to begin with, and the
openness of its creator (i.e. the technical supervisor) to modify and expand its API to
allow for multiple kinds of fault injection environments.
During the time available for this project, it was possible to carry out an extensive literature
study that greatly increased the authorБ─≥s knowledge regarding fault injection. It was also
possible to study, analyse and compare different injection tools, achieving new knowlбґ
edge of software design, FPGA architecture and different programming and scripting lanбґ
guages. Given the devices used for the project, it was necessary to use Xilinx software,
which was not a big issue, as well as learn to work with GaislerБ─≥s tool chain, which was
more of a challenge. This made it so that a lot of time was spend becoming familiar with
GaislerБ─≥s libraries, tools and designs, as well as the configuration scripts used to work with
them. The fact that everything was done within the Linux environment also proved quite
challenging, having to learn how to use its command line to a relatively advanced level.
The development of the new python classes for DAVOS was done alongside the design of
the hardware necessary for fault injection and the modifications for the NOELбґV. All of this
was done in collaboration with the technical supervisor, who also worked on the SELENE
project, and as such was directly in charge of the development of this toolБ─≥s software.
The injection campaigns were carried out as soon as the tool was ready, with a period of
debugging at the start of the experimentation due to technical issues arising sporadically.
It was only possible to inject faults at a constant rate, without tool related problems, with
approximately one month left for the projectБ─≥s deadline, nevertheless issues were encounбґ
tered during this period too. This made it hard to obtain all the results desired, while still
allowing for a generous range of results that served the purpose of validating the tool and
its ability to accurately asses dependability.
The results provided from injection into nonбґchangeable memory by means of essential
bits and statistical sampling, fulfilled their objective of validating the toolБ─≥s capabilities, as
they followed the trends expected based on experimental conditions. This validation was
done exclusively through qualitative methods, with the only way to provide quantitative
verification being the comparison of results from two different injection methods under the
same experimental conditions. This was not possible in our case, due to the recreation
of the experimental conditions in an SBFI environment for comparison being unfeasible.
This would only had be possible if the tool had the ability to inject into the DM, as these
injection experiments are simpler to recreate in SBFI for comparative purposes.
Had I the ability to start the project again, I would have chosen to investigate further into
the details of RapidWrightБ─≥s bitstream manipulation API, discarding the idea of using it at
an earlier stage, and as such saving precious time that could have been invested in other
areas of the project. One such area would have been the adaptation of GaislerБ─≥s NOELбґV
design in order to facilitate clock controlled injections. This topic in particular could have
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
73
==PAGE:86==
benefited from swifter and more effective communication, from the authorБ─≥s part, with the
Gaisler engineers, thus possibly achieving the required assistance faster, and as such
allowing for the experimentation time needed for fault injection into changeable memory.
A lot of time was spend on the early stages of the clock controlled NOELбґV design, as
there were problems encountered from both the new logic being added, and from lack of
knowledge of GaislerБ─≥s design. Apart from the swifter communications, another solution
for this problem could have been avoiding the standalone NOELбґV design, using instead
the SELENE SoC as it is kept in a much better standard of maintenance. Yet this would
have brought other problems already discussed in the report. All and all, the fact that
it was not possible to achieve a version of the hardware ready for the injection into the
DM, is still a failure to meet one of our must have requirements. Having said this, it is
a failure that was not due to human error entirely, but rather to the intricacies of online
communications and bad timing. Nevertheless the ability to inject into the DM will be a
straightforward addition to the tool once the hardware is sorted out, which in theory should
be possible in a short period of time after this projectБ─≥s end.
Another aspect of the project that could have been carried out in a better manner, was the
prediction of the failing states of the DUT during the design stages. The use of a failure tree
could have avoided certain oversights that ended up causing precious experimentation
time at the later stages of the project.
In conclusion this was a very complex project that depended on the collaboration with
SELENE and Gaisler for its success, and without their guidance, the progress achieved
would have been much smaller. Thanks to this support, a lot was achieved that positions
the tool being presented as, to the authorБ─≥s knowledge, the most complete open source
injection tool available. Nevertheless, the work is not done yet, and in the months after
this thesisБ─≥ end, more research will be done to provide new features to the tool, allowing
for new fault targets and its use in different Xilinx FPGA families.
5.1
Future Work
The future work discussed here will be split in short and medium future work. With the
difference being that those things listed as short future work will be present at the defence,
whereas medium future work are those things that will be worked on until the end of May,
during the authorБ─≥s time in SELENE.
5.1.1
Short Future Work
The short future work will consist of completing the qualitative analysis of the results so
these can be presented during the defence.
Б─╒ Produce injection results for the last two workloads in the NOELбґV core setup, in
order to complete the qualitative evaluation of the effect of the different workloads
on the modules.
Б─╒ Setup a TMR implementation of the NOELбґV cores, with a software based voter
that compares results on host. This will provide another example of the qualitative
prediction of experimental results after changing experimental conditions.
5.1.2
Medium Future Work
The medium future work will consist of adding the toolБ─≥s missing features, such as injecбґ
tions into the DM, new failure modes, adaptation into other FPGA families, and quality of
life features to the software/hardware.
Б─╒ The priority will definitely be to get the clock controlled version of the hardware runбґ
ning. Whether it is directly in the entire SELENE SoC, or in the NOELбґV subsystem,
74
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:87==
remains to be debated
Б─╒ Produce experimental data to verify the effective implementation of the ability to
inject into the DM. This will be done via SBFI to FFI comparison, when injecting into
FF.
Б─╒ Adapt more advanced workloads, that can not be run with simulation, into FFI in
order to provide results that better represent the capabilities of an FFI tool.
Б─╒ Port the tool to UltraScale and UltraScale+ families, or in other words, to the SEбґ
LENE SoC. The main difficulty in this is to achieve reconfiguration across multiple
SLRs with one single controller. If it is decided to use the SELENE SoC to test clock
controlled injection, this will be need to be done first.
Б─╒ Expand the fault type categorisation to achieve a better understanding of the hangs,
as well as add latent faults. In order to detect latent faults we will first need clock
controlled injections.
Б─╒ Add an option for the tool to continue injection after being interrupted by any reason.
This would imply allowing the tool to save the injection results into a registry, so that
if desired, it can continue injecting from where it left off.
Б─╒ Add a temperature measurement module to the MicroBlaze injector that can read
the boardБ─≥s temperature sensor. This could be used for debugging purposes.
Б─╒ Add a remote controlled power unit so that the FPGA can be hard reset via software.
This could help in those cases where the FPGA becomes totally unresponsive.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
75
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
[1] Aranda, L. A., SanchezбґMacian, A., and Maestro, J. A. ACME: A tool to improve
configuration memory fault injection in SRAMбґbased FPGAS. IEEE Access 7 (2019),
128153Б─⌠128161.
[2] Arlat, J., Costes, A., Crouzet, Y., Laprie, J. C., and Powell, D. Fault Injection and Deбґ
pendability Evaluation of FaultбґTolerant Systems. IEEE Transactions on Computers
42, 8 (1993), 913Б─⌠923.
[3] Avizienis, A., Laprie, J.бґC., Randell, B., and Landwehr, C. Basic Concepts and Taxбґ
onomy of Dependable and Secure Computing. IEEE transactions on dependable
and secure computing 1, 1 (2004).
[4] Benso, A., and Carlo, S. D. The Art of Fault Injection. Tech. Rep. 4, 2011.
[5] Benso, A., Rebaudengo, M., Impagliazzo, L., and Marmo, P. Faultбґlist collapsing for
faultбґinjection experiments. In Proceedings of the Annual Reliability and Maintainбґ
ability Symposium (1998), IEEE, pp. 383Б─⌠388.
[6] Berrojo, L., Gonzц║lez, I., Corno, F., Reorda, M. S., Squillero, G., Entrena, L., Lopez,
C., Espacio, A., Madrid, S. A., Politecnico, S., and Torino, D. New Techniques for
Speedingбґup Faultбґinjection Campaigns. Automation and Test in Europe Conference
and Exhibition. IEEE. 2002 (2002), 847Б─⌠852.
[7] De Andres, D. Speedingбґup ModelбґBased Fault Injection of DeepбґSubmicron CMOS
Fault Models Through Dynamic and Partially Reconfigurable FPGAs. PhD thesis,
Universidad Politц╘cnica de Valencia, Valencia, 2007.
[8] De Andres, D., Ruiz, J. C., Gil, D., and Gil, P. Fault emulation for dependability
evaluation of VLSI systems.
IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration
(VLSI) Systems 16, 4 (4 2008), 422Б─⌠431.
[9] Di Carlo, S., Prinetto, P., Rolfo, D., and Trotta, P.
A fault injection methodology
and infrastructure for fast single event upsets emulation on Xilinx SRAMбґbased FPбґ
GAs. In Proceedings бґ IEEE International Symposium on Defect and Fault Tolerбґ
ance in VLSI Systems (11 2014), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc., pp. 159Б─⌠164.
[10] ESA. Space product assurance Techniques for radiation effects mitigation in ASICs
and FPGAs handbook. Tech. rep., 2016.
[11] Fortescue, P., Swinerd, G., and Stark, J. Spacecraft System Engineering. John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 8 2011.
[12] Gaisler. NOELбґV.
[13] Gaisler, C. A. GRLIB IP Core UserБ─≥s Manual. Tech. rep., 2021.
[14] Gantel, L., Berthet, Q., Amri, E., Karlov, A., and Upegui, A. FaultбґTolerant FPGAбґ
Based Nanosatellite Balancing HighбґPerformance and Safety for Cryptography Apбґ
plication. Electronics 10, 17 (9 2021), 2148.
[15] Hernandez, C., Flieh, J., Paredes, R., Lefebvre, C. A., Allende, I., Abella, J., Trillin,
D., Matschnig, M., Fischer, B., Schwarz, K., Kiszka, J., Ronnback, M., Klockars,
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
1
==PAGE:89==
J., Guire, N. M., Rammerstorfer, F., Schwarzl, C., Wartet, F., Ludemann, D., and
Labayen, M. SELENE: SelfбґMonitored Dependable Platform for HighбґPerformance
SafetyбґCritical Systems. In Proceedings бґ Euromicro Conference on Digital System
Design, DSD 2020 (8 2020), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.,
pp. 370Б─⌠377.
[16] HerreraбґAlzu, I., and LцЁpezбґVallejo, M. Design techniques for Xilinx Virtex FPGA conбґ
figuration memory scrubbers. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 60, 1 (2013),
376Б─⌠385.
[17] Jerrold, H. Z. Biostatistical Analysis (4th ed.), 4th ed. Pearson, 1999.
[18] Knight, J. C. Safety Critical Systems: Challenges and Directions. Proceedings of
the 24th International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE 2002 (2002), 547Б─⌠
550.
[19] Lavin, C., and Kaviani, A. RapidWright: Enabling Custom Crafted Implementations
for FPGAs. Tech. rep.
[20] Law Insider. Statistical Sampling Law Insider.
[21] Leveugle, R., Calvez, A., Maistri, P., and Vanhauwaert, P. Statistical fault injection:
Quantified error and confidence. In Proceedings бґDesign, Automation and Test in
Europe, DATE (2009), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 502Б─⌠
506.
[22] Lienig, J., and Bruemmer, H. Fundamentals of Electronic Systems Design. Springer
International Publishing, 2017.
[23] Lima Kastensmidt, F., Carro, L., and Reis, R. FaultбґTolerance Techniques for SRAMбґ
based FPGA. Springer, 2006.
[24] Lovric, T. Chapter 1.2 DEPENDABILITY EVALUATION METHODS Classification.
2003.
[25] Lyons, R. E., and Vanderkul, W. The Use of TripleбґModular Redundancy to Improve
Computer Reliability. IBM Journal (4 1962), 200Б─⌠209.
[26] Marwedel, P. Embedded System Design, fourth edition ed. Springer, Dortmund,
Germany, 2021.
[27] Nunes, J. L., Pecserke, T., Cunha, J. C., and ZenhaбґRela, M. FIRED бґ Fault Injector
for Reconfigurable Embedded Devices. In Proceedings бґ 2015 IEEE 21st Pacific Rim
International Symposium on Dependable Computing, PRDC 2015 (1 2016), Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 1Б─⌠10.
[28] Pexpect development team, and Spurrier, N. pexpect, 1 2020.
[29] Ramos, A., Maestro, J. A., and Reviriego, P. Characterizing a RISCбґV SRAMбґbased
FPGA implementation against Single Event Upsets using fault injection. Microelecбґ
tronics Reliability 78 (11 2017), 205Б─⌠211.
[30] Sari, A., and Psarakis, M. A Flexible Fault Injection Platform for the Analysis of the
Symptoms of Soft Errors in FPGA Soft Processors. In Journal of Circuits, Systems
and Computers (8 2017), vol. 26, World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte Ltd.
[31] Tuzov, I. Dependabilityбґdriven strategies to improve the design and verification of
safetyбґcritical HDLбґbased embedded systems. PhD thesis, UPV, Valencia, 2020.
2
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:90==
[32] Tuzov, I., Andres, D. D., and Ruiz, J. C. DependabilityбґAware Design Space Exбґ
ploration for Optimal Synthesis Parameters Tuning. In Proceedings бґ 47th Annual
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN
2017 (8 2017), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 121Б─⌠132.
[33] Tuzov, I., De Andrц╘s, D., and Ruiz, J. C. Accurate Robustness Assessment of HDL
Models Through Iterative Statistical Fault Injection. In Proceedings бґ 2018 14th Euroбґ
pean Dependable Computing Conference, EDCC 2018 (11 2018), Institute of Elecбґ
trical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 1Б─⌠8.
[34] Tuzov, I., De Andres, D., and Ruiz, J. C. DAVOS: EDA toolkit for dependability asбґ
sessment, verification, optimisation and selection of hardware models. In Proceedбґ
ings бґ 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and
Networks, DSN 2018 (7 2018), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.,
pp. 322Б─⌠329.
[35] Tuzov, I., De Andrц╘s, D., and Ruiz, J. C. Improving RobustnessбґAware Design Space
Exploration for FPGAбґBased Systems. In Proceedings бґ 16th European Dependable
Computing Conference, EDCC 2020 (9 2020), Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc., pp. 1Б─⌠8.
[36] Villata, I., Bidarte, U., Kretzschmar, U., Astarloa, A., and Lц║zaro, J. Fast and Accurate
SEUбґTolerance Characterization Method for Zynq SoCs. Tech. rep.
[37] Xilinx Inc. Zynqбґ7000 SoC and 7 Series Devices Memory Interface Solutions v4.2,
User Guide (UG586). Tech. rep.
[38] Xilinx Inc. Xilinx XAPP538 Soft Error Mitigation Using Prioritized Essential Bits. Tech.
rep., 2012.
[39] Xilinx Inc. 7 Series FPGAs Configuration User Guide (UG470). Tech. rep., 2018.
[40] Xilinx Inc. Device Reliability Report. Tech. rep., 11 2021.
[41] Xilinx Inc. MicroBlaze Micro Controller System v3.0 LogiCORE IP Product Guide
Vivado Design Suite. Tech. rep., Xilinx, 7 2021.
[42] Xilinx Inc. RapidWright, 2021.
[43] Xilinx Inc. UltraScale Architecture Soft Error Mitigation Controller v3.1 LogiCORE IP
Product Guide Vivado Design Suite. Tech. rep., Xilinx, 8 2021.
[44] Xilinx Inc. Zynqбґ7000 SoC Technical Reference Manual. Tech. rep., Xilinx, 4 2021.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
3
==PAGE:91==
A
RapidWright Experimental Code
Main Bitstream Manipulation Class
1
package com.xilinx.rapidwright.bitstream;
2
3
imports...
4
5
public class BitstreamManipulation {
6
7
public static List<FlistRecord > frecords;
8
public static ExperimentConfig conf;
9
public static Design design;
10
public static EDIFNetlist EDIFnetlist;
11
public static Bitstream bitstream;
12
public static ConfigArray configArray;
13
public static List<Cell> cells;
14
public static List<String> celltypes;
15
public static List<Cell> mycells;
16
public static List<EDIFHierCellInst > myEDIFcells;
17
18
public static void main(String[] args) throws FileNotFoundException ,
IOException {
19
20
//Load Configuration Parameters
21
conf = new ExperimentConfig();
22
load_parameters(args[0]);
23
24
//read DCP, BIT, create config array
25
design = Design.readCheckpoint(conf.DCP);
26
bitstream = Bitstream.readBitstream(conf.bitstream);
27
28
EDIFCell top = design.getTopEDIFCell();
29
30
configArray = bitstream.configureArray();
31
32
mycells = new ArrayList <Cell >();
33
cells = new ArrayList <Cell >();
34
celltypes = new ArrayList <String >();
35
myEDIFcells = new ArrayList <EDIFHierCellInst >();
36
frecords = new ArrayList <FlistRecord >();
37
38
//Grabs desired cells from physical netlist
39
get_filtered_cells("LUT4", conf.inj_scope);
40
41
Change_Cell_Netlist(mycells.get(0), 1);
42
43
FileOutputStream flist = new FileOutputStream("/home/gabcotel/WorkSpace/
RapidWright/Test_Files/LUT_check_RW.txt");
44
DataOutputStream dout = new DataOutputStream(flist);
45
46
for(int i = 0; i < frecords.size(); i++) {
47
dout.writeInt(frecords.get(i).exp_id);
48
dout.writeInt(frecords.get(i).FAR);
49
dout.writeInt(frecords.get(i).word_id);
50
dout.writeInt(frecords.get(i).mask);
51
}
52
53
flist.close();
4
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:92==
54
dout.close();
55
56
bitstream.updatePacketsFromConfigArray();
57
58
design.writeCheckpoint("/home/gabcotel/WorkSpace/RapidWright/Test_Files/
LUT_check_RW.dcp");
59
bitstream.writeBitstream("/home/gabcotel/WorkSpace/RapidWright/Test_Files/
LUT_check_RW.bit");
60
61
}
62
63
private static void load_parameters(String Pfile) {
64
try {
65
File file = new File(Pfile);
66
DocumentBuilderFactory dbf = DocumentBuilderFactory.newInstance();
67
DocumentBuilder db = dbf.newDocumentBuilder();
68
Document doc = db.parse(file);
69
doc.getDocumentElement().normalize();
70
System.out.println("Root element: " + doc.getDocumentElement().
getNodeName());
71
NodeList nList = doc.getElementsByTagName("Experiment2");
72
73
Element eElement = (Element) nList.item(0);
74
75
conf.DCP = eElement.getAttribute("DCP");
76
conf.bitstream = eElement.getAttribute("bitstream");
77
conf.essential_bits = eElement.getAttribute("essential_bits");
78
conf.mode = Integer.parseInt(eElement.getAttribute("mode"));
79
conf.stuck_at_val = eElement.getAttribute("stuck_at_val");
80
conf.inj_scope = eElement.getAttribute("inj_scope");
81
conf.inj_area = eElement.getAttribute("inj_area");
82
conf.target_logic = eElement.getAttribute("target_logic");
83
conf.sample_size = Integer.parseInt(eElement.getAttribute("
sample_size"));
84
conf.fault_multiplicity = Integer.parseInt(eElement.getAttribute("
fault_multiplicity"));
85
conf.fault_model = eElement.getAttribute("fault_model");
86
String [] r = eElement.getAttribute("injection_time_interval").split
(":");
87
conf.inj_time_from = Integer.parseInt(r[0]);
88
conf.inj_time_to = Integer.parseInt(r[1]);
89
conf.CCF_replicas = eElement.getAttribute("CCF_replicas").replace("{
", "").replace("}", "").replace(" ", "").split(",");
90
}
91
catch(Exception e) {
92
e.printStackTrace();
93
}
94
95
}
96
97
private static void get_filtered_cells(String CellType , String CellName){
98
for(Cell cellInst : design.getCells()){
99
cells.add(cellInst);
100
celltypes.add(cellInst.getType());
101
if(cellInst.getType().equalsIgnoreCase(CellType) && cellInst.getName().
contains(CellName) ) {
102
mycells.add(cellInst);
103
}
104
}
105
106
}
107
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
5
==PAGE:93==
108
private static void Change_Cell_Netlist(Cell cell, int ExperimentID) {
109
110
List<Integer > Frame_Index = new ArrayList <Integer >();
111
List<Integer > Word_Index = new ArrayList <Integer >();
112
113
int[][] UnchangedFrames = new int[36][101];
114
int[][] ChangedFrames = new int[36][101];
115
116
List<Integer > ChangedWords = new ArrayList <Integer >();
117
118
//Find cell block before changes
119
Block StandardBlock = configArray.getConfigBlock(cell.getTile());
120
Frame [] StandardFrames = StandardBlock.getFrames();
121
122
for (int frame=0;frame <36;frame++) {
123
UnchangedFrames[frame] = StandardFrames[frame].getWords().clone();
124
}
125
126
//Change INIT value of selected cell
127
cell.getProperty("INIT").setValue("16'h1111");
128
129
configArray.updateUserStateBits(cell);
130
131
132
//Find cell block after changes
133
Block TargetBlock = configArray.getConfigBlock(cell.getTile());
134
Frame [] TargetFrames = TargetBlock.getFrames();
135
136
for (int frame=0;frame <36;frame++) {
137
ChangedFrames[frame] = TargetFrames[frame].getWords().clone();
138
}
139
140
//Find changed words in bitstream to generate fault list
141
for (int frame=0;frame <36;frame++) {
142
for(int word=0;word <101;word++) {
143
if(UnchangedFrames[frame][word] != ChangedFrames[frame][word]) {
144
ChangedWords.add(ChangedFrames[frame][word]);
145
Frame_Index.add(frame);
146
Word_Index.add(word);
147
int mask = UnchangedFrames[frame][word] ^ ChangedFrames[frame][word
];
148
int FAR = get_FAR(TargetBlock , frame);
149
frecords.add(new FlistRecord(ExperimentID , FAR, word, mask));
150
151
}
152
}
153
}
154
}
155
156
private static int get_FAR(Block Block, int Minor) {
157
158
int result=0x0;
159
//Find out device series from Bitstream
160
Series series = bitstream.getSeries();
161
//Find out Block Type for current cell
162
int BlockType = Block.getBlockType(series);
163
//Get Row and column for current block
164
int Row = 0x0;
165
int Col = Block.getColumn(series);
166
167
if(series == Series.Series7) {
168
int TopBot = Block.getTopBotBit(series);
6
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:94==
169
//only for vc707
170
if (TopBot == 0) {
171
Row = Block.getClockRegion().getInstanceY() - 2;
172
}else if (TopBot == 1) {
173
Row = 2 - Block.getClockRegion().getInstanceY() -1;
174
}
175
result = (BlockType <<23) | (TopBot <<22) | (Row<<17) | (Col<<7) | (Minor)
;
176
}else
177
if(series == Series.UltraScale) {
178
int reserved = 0x0;
179
result = (reserved <<26) | (BlockType <<23) | (Row<<17) | (Col<<7) | (
Minor);
180
}else
181
if(series == Series.UltraScalePlus) {
182
result = (BlockType <<24) | (Row<<18) | (Col<<8) | (Minor);
183
}
184
return result;
185
}
186
187
}
Fault List Class
1
package com.xilinx.rapidwright.bitstream;
2
3
public class FlistRecord {
4
public int exp_id;
5
public int FAR;
6
public int word_id;
7
public int mask;
8
9
10
public FlistRecord(int exp_id , int FAR, int word_id , int mask) {
11
this.exp_id = exp_id;
12
this.FAR = FAR;
13
this.word_id = word_id;
14
this.mask = mask;
15
}
16
}
Experiment Config Class
1
package com.xilinx.rapidwright.bitstream;
2
3
import java.util.List;
4
5
public class ExperimentConfig {
6
public int mode;
7
public int sample_size;
8
public int fault_multiplicity;
9
public int inj_time_from , inj_time_to;
10
public String stuck_at_val;
11
public String inj_scope , inj_area , target_logic , fault_model , DCP, bitstream
, essential_bits;
12
public String [] CCF_replicas;
13
14
}
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
7
==PAGE:95==
B
Clock and StartUp Control Test
Program
1
#include "platform.h"
2
#include <xil_types.h>
3
#include <xil_assert.h>
4
#include <xhwicap.h>
5
#include "xparameters.h"
6
#include <stdio.h>
7
#include <stdlib.h>
8
#include <xil_printf.h>
9
#include "xgpio.h"
10
#include "SeuInjector.h"
11
12
#define DEBUG_MODE 1
13
14
InjectorDescriptor InjDesc;
15
16
void test_clk_ctrl(InjectorDescriptor *InjDesc , int clknum , int reset ){
17
if(InjDesc ->DebugMode)
18
xil_printf("test_clk_ctrl started\n\r");
19
20
//Number of clock cycles to issue
21
*(InjDesc ->clock_ctrl_ptr + 0) = clknum;
22
//Active high = 0 (bit 7), reset duration 4 clock cycles
23
*(InjDesc ->clock_ctrl_ptr + 2) = reset;
24
//Start = 1 (bit 0), free_clocking = 0 (bit 1)
25
*(InjDesc ->clock_ctrl_ptr + 1) = 0x01;
26
*(InjDesc ->clock_ctrl_ptr + 1) = 0x00;
27
28
//flag clock enable BUFGCE
29
while(*(InjDesc ->clock_ctrl_ptr + 3) != 0x0);
30
31
if(InjDesc ->DebugMode){
32
u32 cnt = XGpio_DiscreteRead(&(InjDesc ->Gpio), 1);
33
printf("Test result cnt = %x\n\r", cnt);
34
}
35
36
}
37
38
void trigger_gsr(InjectorDescriptor *InjDesc){
39
if(InjDesc ->DebugMode)
40
xil_printf("triggering gsr\n\r");
41
42
//Number of clock cycles to issue
43
*(InjDesc ->startup_crtl_ptr + 0) = 5;
44
45
//Start = 1 (bit 0), free_clocking = 0 (bit 1)
46
*(InjDesc ->startup_crtl_ptr + 1) = 0x01;
47
//*(InjDesc ->startup_crtl_ptr + 1) = 0x00;
48
49
//flag GSR
50
while(*(InjDesc ->clock_ctrl_ptr + 3) != 0x0);
51
52
}
53
54
int InjectorInitialize(InjectorDescriptor *InjDesc){
55
InjDesc ->host_socket_ptr
= (uint32_t*) HOST_SOCKET_ADR;
8
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:96==
56
InjDesc ->fault_list_ptr
= (FaultDescriptor*) HOST_FAULT_LIST_ADR;
57
InjDesc ->clock_ctrl_ptr
= (uint32_t*) CLK_CTRL_BASE;
58
InjDesc ->startup_crtl_ptr
= (uint32_t*) STARTUP_CTRL;
59
60
int Status;
61
u32 ConfigRegData;
62
/* Initialize the GPIO driver */
63
Status = XGpio_Initialize(&(InjDesc ->Gpio), XPAR_GPIO_0_DEVICE_ID);
64
if (Status != XST_SUCCESS) {
65
if(InjDesc ->DebugMode)
66
xil_printf("Gpio Initialization Failed\r\n");
67
return XST_FAILURE;
68
}
69
XGpio_SetDataDirection(&(InjDesc ->Gpio), 1, 0x00);
70
71
/* Initialize the HwIcap instance */
72
InjDesc ->CfgPtr = XHwIcap_LookupConfig(HWICAP_DEVICEID);
73
if (InjDesc ->CfgPtr == NULL) { return XST_FAILURE; }
74
Status = XHwIcap_CfgInitialize(&(InjDesc ->HwIcap), InjDesc ->CfgPtr , InjDesc
->CfgPtr->BaseAddress);
75
if (Status != XST_SUCCESS) { return XST_FAILURE;}
76
Status = XHwIcap_GetConfigReg(&(InjDesc ->HwIcap), XHI_IDCODE , &ConfigRegData
);
77
if (Status != XST_SUCCESS) { return XST_FAILURE; }
78
InjDesc ->HwIcap.DeviceIdCode = ConfigRegData & 0x0FFFFFFF;
79
80
if(InjDesc ->DebugMode)
81
printf("Device ID = %08x\n\r", ConfigRegData);
82
83
InjDesc ->DebugMode = DEBUG_MODE;
84
return(0);
85
}
86
87
int main()
88
{
89
init_platform();
90
InjectorInitialize(&InjDesc);
91
92
if(InjDesc.DebugMode)
93
printf("Injector Initialized\n\r");
94
95
test_clk_ctrl(&InjDesc , 1004, 0x04);
96
97
int Status = readFrame(&(InjDesc.HwIcap), 0x00000c1f , InjDesc.FrameData , 1);
98
99
100
u32 offsets[32] = {
3,28,33,58,67,92,97,122,131,156,161,186,195,220,225,250,259,284,289,314,323,348,353,37
101
102
if(InjDesc.DebugMode){
103
u32 cnt = XGpio_DiscreteRead(&(InjDesc.Gpio), 1);
104
printf("Test result = %x\n\r", cnt);}
105
106
for(int i=0; i<32; i++){
107
u32 word_id = offsets[i]/32;
108
u32 bit_id = offsets[i]%32;
109
110
if(InjDesc.DebugMode)
111
printf("bit[%d] = %d\n\r", i, InjDesc.FrameData[word_id]>>bit_id & 0x1);
112
113
InjDesc.FrameData[word_id] ^= ( 1 << bit_id);
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
9
==PAGE:97==
114
115
116
}
117
118
Status = writeFrame(&(InjDesc.HwIcap), 0x00000c1f , InjDesc.FrameData , 1);
119
120
trigger_gsr(&InjDesc);
121
122
Status = readFrame(&(InjDesc.HwIcap), 0x00000c1f , InjDesc.FrameData , 0);
123
124
if(InjDesc.DebugMode){
125
for(int k = 0; k < 101; k++) printf("Frame Word %03d -> \t %08x \n\r", k
,
InjDesc.FrameData[k]);
126
127
for(int i=0; i<32; i++){
128
u32 word_id = offsets[i]/32;
129
u32 bit_id = offsets[i]%32;
130
131
printf("bit[%d] = %d\n\r", i, InjDesc.FrameData[word_id]>>bit_id & 0x1);
132
}
133
134
u32 cnt = XGpio_DiscreteRead(&(InjDesc.Gpio), 1);
135
printf("Test result = %x\n\r", cnt);
136
}
137
138
cleanup_platform();
139
return 0;
140
}
10
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:98==
C
Injection Results
0.95б═б╠ 0.10
0.92б═б╠ 0.09
1.64б═б╠ 0.16
0.83б═б╠ 0.08
2.13б═б╠ 0.23
2.84б═б╠ 0.16
2.84б═б╠ 0.16
3.05б═б╠ 0.22
3.99б═б╠ 0.18
3.14б═б╠ 0.27
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
1_matmult
2_dijkstra
3_aes
4_crc
5_qsort
FAILUREб═RATEб═(%)
2Б─░MMU0
SDC
Hang
Masked
Probability of failure (%) results for injections into the NOELбґV MMU unit while running
the different workloads during injection into generalised essential bits.
3.75б═б╠ 0.38
1.66б═б╠ 0.17
3.36б═б╠ 0.34
0.730б═б╠ 0.08
2.80б═б╠ 0.29
3.53б═б╠ 0.37
3.49б═б╠ 0.25
3.98б═б╠ 0.37
5.9б═б╠ 0.22
3.94б═б╠ 0.34
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
1_matmult
2_dijkstra
3_aes
4_crc
5_qsort
FAILUREб═RATEб═(%)
3Б─░CMEM1
SDC
Hang
Masked
Probability of failure (%) results for injections into the NOELбґV CMEM unit while running
the different workloads during injection into generalised essential bits.
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
11
==PAGE:99==
1.31б═б╠ 0.13
1.58б═б╠ 0.16
2.13б═б╠ 0.21
0.64б═б╠ 0.07
1.55б═б╠ 0.16
3.37б═б╠ 0.21
3.70б═б╠ 0.24
3.86б═б╠ 0.28
5.03б═б╠ 0.19
4.24б═б╠ 0.25
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
1_matmult
2_dijkstra
3_aes
4_crc
5_qsort
FAILUREб═RATEб═(%)
4Б─░IU0
SDC
Hang
Masked
Probability of failure (%) results for injections into the NOELбґV IU unit while running the
different workloads during injection into generalised essential bits.
1.00б═б╠ 0.11
0.77б═б╠ 0.09
1.37б═б╠ 0.15
0.63б═б╠ 0.07
0.67б═б╠ 0.08
2.97б═б╠ 0.19
3.09б═б╠ 0.17
3.34б═б╠ 0.23
4.54б═б╠ 0.19
2.54б═б╠ 0.15
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
1_matmult
2_dijkstra
3_aes
4_crc
5_qsort
PROBABILITYб═OFб═FAILUREб═(%)
7Б─░BTB0
SDC
Hang
Masked
Probability of failure (%) results for injections into the NOELбґV BTB unit while running the
different workloads during injection into generalised essential bits.
0.27б═б╠ 0.05
0.27б═б╠ 0.05
0.41б═б╠ 0.06
0.20б═б╠ 0.04
0.63б═б╠ 0.07
2.47б═б╠ 0.14
2.48б═б╠ 0.14
2.48б═б╠ 0.14
2.65б═б╠ 0.14
2.48б═б╠ 0.15
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
1_matmult
2_dijkstra
3_aes
4_crc
5_qsort
PROBABILITYб═OFб═FAILUREб═(%)
8Б─░BHT0
SDC
Hang
Masked
Probability of failure (%) results for injections into the NOELбґV BHT unit while running the
different workloads during injection into generalised essential bits.
12
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
==PAGE:100==
Exploring Fault Injection in a RISCбґV Systemбґonбґchip for Safetyбґcritical Applications
13
==PAGE:101==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej Bygning 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.space.dtu.dk/
