==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
M.Sc. Dissertation Project
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor
Fano Lasers
by Kristian Seegert (s162588)
Supervisors at Quantum and Laser Photonics Group:
Prof. Jesper Mørk
Dr. Yi Yu
Dr. Mikkel Heuck
January 2022
==PAGE:2==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Contents
List of symbols
2
1
Introduction
4
1.1
A brief recap on Fano lasers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Motivation for coupled photonic cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
The Two-Cavity Fano laser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Motivation: Toy model of dispersive self-pulsing
8
2.1
Linear stability analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Simulations of dispersive self-pulsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Theory of lasers based on Fano mirrors
20
3.1
Temporal Coupled-Mode Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
The Fano Mirror . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Steady-state properties and the oscillation condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Dynamics of dispersive mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Dynamical Fano laser models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5.1
Derivation of dynamical models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5.2
ODE model applied to general dispersive mirror
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5.3
ODE model of single-mode Fano laser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Two-cavity Fano Mirror
38
4.1
Two coupled cavities - a photonic molecule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Coupled-Mode Theory on the two-cavity Fano-mirror . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.1
Eigenmodes and reflection spectras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Inclusion of nonlinearities in the mirror
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Two-cavity Fano Laser
53
5.1
Lasing modes and steady-state properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
ODE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2.1
Self-pulsing through Hopf-bifurcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
DDE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6
Discussion
83
7
Conclusion and Outlook
86
Bibliography
87
A Input-output curves ODE
91
1 of 93
==PAGE:3==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
List of symbols
Symbol
Description
Unit
Physical parameters
ωc
Nanocavity resonance frequency
s−1
ωs
Steady state laser oscillation frequency
s−1
ωr
Reference frequency
s−1
r1
Amplitude reflection coefficient, Fabry-Perot mir-
ror
-
r2, rR
Amplitude reflection coefficient, Fano mirror
-
k(ω, N)
Complex wavevector
m−1
L
Length of laser cavity
m−1
N
Carrier density in laser cavity
m−3
Ns
Steady state carrier density in laser cavity
m−3
Nr
Reference carrier density in laser cavity
m−3
c
Speed of light in vacuum
m s−1
n
Refractive index
-
c
Speed of light in vacuum
m s−1
Standard parameters used in simulations
Value/expression
λr
Reference wavelength in vacuum
1554 nm
ωr
Reference frequency
2πc/λr
nr
Reference refractive index
3.5
ng
Group refractive index
3.5
vg
Group velocity
c/ng
g
Material gain
m−1
gN
Differential gain
5 × 10−16 m2
Γ
Confinement factor
0.01
τs
Effective carrier lifetime
0.28 ns
α
Linewidth enhancement factor
1 (0 −5)
N0
Transparency carrier density
5 × 1021 m−3
GN
Gain constant, or differential gain per unit time
ΓvggN
2 of 93
==PAGE:4==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Abstract
The concept of a photonic crystal (PhC) Fano laser based on the coupling of a semi-open waveguide
to a side-coupled nanocavity was first proposed by Mørk et al. in 2014 [1], and has since been
studied extensively due to an incredible range novel photonic properties and possible applications
arising from the highly dispersive mirror Fano mirror. In this thesis we review the theory of Fano
lasers before generalising the approach to include several resonant cavity modes. The theory will be
applied to a particular case of a mirror based on two coupled nanocavities. Through simulations of
two different dynamical models, we show that under certain conditions the ”Two-cavity Fano laser”
may enter a regime of spontaneous self-pulsing which rapidly grow to a train of picosecond pulses
with repetition rates in the GHz regime. The self-pulsing mechanism is interpreted as self-sustained
relaxation oscillations resulting from the coupling between the highly dispersive mirror and the
passive refractive-index modulation from an oscillating carrier density. The pulsing mechanism
shows similarities with dispersive self-Q-switching in distributed-feedback lasers, and it neither
relies on saturable absorption or beating-type oscillations.
If the self-pulsing can be observed
experimentally it would be a first demonstration of such a type of self-pulsing in a nanolaser
setting.
3 of 93
==PAGE:5==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 1:
Left) Sketch of the Fano laser in a photonic crystal membrane.
Right) The Fano Mirror
reflectivity as function of the detuning. Both figures taken with permission from [1].
1
Introduction
In the modern information-centred society, semiconductor lasers are key enabling devices.
In
combination with optical fibres, they are widely implemented for the conversion of an electrical
signal to an optical one for long- and short range communication, with the paramount example
being the internet. The point is of course that with today’s fibre technology optical data transfer is
far superior to electronic signals in terms of losses and energy consumption. Further, following the
rapid growth of computationally heavy machine learning algorithms and deep learning protocols,
there is an ever increasing demand for smaller, faster and more energy efficient computing, and
a huge part of the energy consumption is not in the logical operations, but associated with data
transfer between computational units. When it comes to the actual logical computation, electronic
circuits does the job very well, but nowadays the electronic CPU’s are already so minaturised
and compact that the clock speed gets limited by joule heating and gate delays. Instead, faster
computing is enabled by having several CPU’s working in parallel on code optimised for such
parallel computing. However, electronic communication between CPUs also suffers from ohmic
losses and the speed is limited by RC constants. The solution is to combine electronic CPU’s
with on-chip optical interconnects that are both potentially faster and more energy-efficient. This
is a still a significant engineering challenge, as it not only requires reliable, electrically driven
microscopic laser sources, but also detectors, waveguides and modulators, and all these components
need to be properly developed and integrated.
1.1
A brief recap on Fano lasers
In this thesis we focus on a specific type of semiconductor laser called a ”Fano laser”, pioneered
by the works of the Quantum and Laser Photonics group at DTU Fotonik[1][14]. The Fano mirror
relies on ”Fano interference” for one or both of its mirrors. A schematic of the classical Fano
laser is shown in figure 1 (left), and the essential features are the semi-open waveguide that is
side-coupled to a nanocavity. Such a structure can be readily realised on a PhC platform as in
the schematic, but may also be implemented in a nanobeam setting. The section stretching from
the left end of the waveguide to the symmetry line below the nanocavity shall be referred to as
the laser cavity, or L-cavity for short. Active material in the form of buried quantum wells may
be localised to the L-cavity as indicated in schematic, but may also extend to the nanocavity.
The section past the symmetry line is denoted the through-port, and the cross-port denotes the
second waveguide above the nanocavity, which is not essential for operation, but does tend to yield
higher quantum efficiency. In the symmetry line below the nanocavity, a blocking hole denoted a
partially transmitting element (PTE) may also be present, and one can of course also imagine many
more possible variations. In this thesis we take a particular look at the presence of an additional
nanocavity besides the first one, but the basic principles of the laser are essentially conserved.
Thus we shall discuss the simplest case first, as depicted in the schematic.
First of all, a special thing about this laser is the way the lasing mode is formed. What happens is
4 of 93
==PAGE:6==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
that a continuum of modes in the waveguide couple to the discrete mode in the nanocavity, giving
rise to a ”bound mode in the continuum” with a Q-factor that depends sensitively on the length
of the L-cavity. In order to understand this, it makes sense to first focus on the properties of the
side-coupled nanocavity forming the ”Fano mirror”. A slightly simplified, but very helpful picture,
is to consider what happens to a plane wave propagating in the waveguide towards the nanocavity.
If the frequency of the propagating wave matches the resonant frequency of the discrete mode, then
light is effectively coupled into the nanocavity, and at the same time the resonant mode in the
nanocavity continuously leaks out in the waveguide in both directions. This results in interference
between the light going directly through and the light coming from the nanocavity, and if the
frequency matches the resonant frequency of the nanocavity, then these two optical paths will be
completely out of phase. As a result the nanocavity forms a highly dispersive mirror that only
reflects in a very narrow window around its resonant frequency, this is basically what lies at the
root of all the exotic properties of the Fano laser.
This kind of ”Fano interference” or ”Fano
resonance” between a continuum of modes and a discrete mode is in fact a very general wave
phenomenon that was first analysed by Ugo Fano in the context of atomic physics[4], and has since
been demonstrated in many branches of physics, including plasmonics, nanophotonics, condensed
matter physics, and nuclear physics. In this simplest version of the Fano mirror, the reflection
spectrum becomes a Lorentzian lineshape as shown in figure 1 (right) with the Q-factor of the
mode determining the width of the Lorentzian [1], and with a phase that changes smoothly from
zero to π when crossing the peak. However, in the presence of a PTE the reflection spectrum
takes the form of the celebrated ”Fano lineshape” that is highly asymmetric and goes from peak
reflection to complete transparency over narrow frequency range. The notion of a Fano resonance
is sometimes restricted to the asymmetric lineshape, but the Fano lineshape continues smoothly
into a Lorentzian, which can then be considered a special case of the Fano lineshape.
Many interesting features have already been demonstrated for the Fano laser. One of the very first
predictions when the Fano laser was proposed, was the possibility of frequency modulation in the
terahertz regime and the generation of ultra-short pulses[1]. An in-depth analysis of the former
is given in [7] along with a stability analysis of the lasing modes. The key is that the reflectivity
of the Fano mirror depends sensitively on the resonant frequency which again depends on the
refractive index in the nanocavity. Modulation of the refractive index is readily carried out by
either electrical or optical means, and this allows the Fano laser to be modulated through the Fano
mirror, which opens up a whole new way of active laser modulation. Optical modulation of the
Fano laser through the mirror has recently been reported in [5], demonstrating the feasibility of the
technique. Now, the type of modulation depends on where on the Fano mirror reflection spectrum
the laser is operated. In case of the Lorentzian lineshape operated at zero detuning, then if the
modulation is small, then only the phase of the mirror gets modulated, and this translates directly
to a frequency modulation. The mechanism has been likened to tuning the string of a guitar while
it is vibrating[8]. Similarly, the theoretical prediction is that this type of frequency modulation
is only limited by the adiabiatic wavelength conversion theorem, which is far in the terahertz
regime. The reason is that even if the resonant frequency changes much faster all timescales in
the system, then the phase condition is still uphold on average. It remains a challenge to actually
modulate the mirror that fast, but it completely bypasses the usual intrinsic limitations in any
kind of carrier-injection modulation. The modulation bandwidth of such schemes are limited by
the relaxation resonance frequency beyond which any carrier modulation is severely damped. Now,
if we instead operate the laser somewhere on the side of the Lorentzian peak and modulate the
resonant frequency, then we have combined frequency- and intensity modulation. If this modulation
is large, then it basically corresponds to turning the laser on and off. This type of modulation is
then a form of active Q-switching resulting in a train of high-intensity ultra-short pulses. Somewhat
similar, when we include the PTE, then the reflection can be tuned from ”on” to ”off” extremely
fast and with very high contrast. This has been proposed as a potential all-optical switch to be
used in neuromorphic photonic computing[3].
Aside from the prospects of active modulation, the Fano laser also shows promising features in
steady-state operation. It provides pure single-mode lasing and has recently been reported to have
an extremely narrow linewidth[6]. This is due to the most of the power being confined in the
nanocavity. Since only a small part of the electric field intensity is concentrated in the active part,
5 of 93
==PAGE:7==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
non-radiative losses are significantly reduced. Further, the Fano laser is of course susceptible to
fabrication imperfections and the BIC mode is fragile by nature, but the Fano laser has shown
to be surprisingly robust in experiments. Even though the BIC mode depends sensitively on the
round-trip phase in the laser cavity, the mirror phase also changes rapidly, so changes to the
refractive index in the laser cavity from for example heating will only slightly change the lasing
frequency, but merely the operating point on the reflection spectrum. Another robustness comes
in terms of suppression of coherence collapse from the external feedback, which is usually a source
of unwanted noise[13]. The robustness again comes from the nanocavity which can be interpreted
as providing additional ”storage time” in the system. In addition to being engineered towards
stable continuous wave operation, it has also been demonstrated experimentally that if the active
material extends to the nanocavity, then the nanocavity acts as a saturable absorber and the Fano
laser may enter a regime of steady self-pulsing from passive Q-switching[9]. Passive Q-switching
using saturable absorbers had so far been restricted to macroscopic lasers, and the Fano laser
was the first demonstration of a microscopic laser with self-sustained pulsing under continuous
wave pumping. A thorough theoretical and numerical investigation in the physical origin of the
self-pulsing is given [11]. While the primary mechanism is still saturable absorption, they show
that the round-trip phase condition also plays an important role. In [12] they show that after
an initial transient phase, the dynamics can adequately be explained in reduced two-dimensional
phase-space picture. One can imagine that such a self-pulsing microscopic laser may be applied as
an on-chip pulse source for optical communication and sampling.
1.2
Motivation for coupled photonic cavities
Now, in this thesis we ask the open question; if a Fano laser based on a single nanocavity already
provides such rich properties, what happens if we add a second nanocavity besides the first one? In
this case the mirror changes from a ”photonic atom” to a ”photonic molecule”, and if the cavities
are sufficiently close in frequency, the modes hybridize to form a bonding (or symmetrical) mode
and an antibonding (or antisymmetrical) mode[33].
Coupled photonic cavity structures are in themselves very interesting, and have garnered a lot of
attention, especially with the rise of the photonic crystal platform in the 90’s, which enable all
kinds of nanostructured systems. If two coupled cavities are of similar frequency and Q-factors,
then an optical excitation of one cavity will result in the optical energy oscillating between the
cavities, much like Rabi oscillations in a two-level cavity QED system when driven by an external
electric field. Many interesting experiments regarding coupled optical cavities have been proposed
and demonstrated. Relatively recently, it was shown by Hamel et al. that identical coupled cavities
containing active material could exhibit spontaneous mirror symmetry breaking under symmetrical
pumping conditions[42]. In this case the optical energy spontaneously settled in one cavity instead
of being evenly distributed, similar to how a standing mechanical beam will bend to one side or the
other if enough force is applied on top. The optical energy could then be ”kicked” from one cavity
to the other by sending in a short pulse, and the scheme has been proposed as a kind of optical
flip-flop. The spontaneous mirror symmetry breaking that has been observed is somewhat similar
to the macroscopic quantum self-trapping of polariton condensates in coupled micropillars [43].
Specifically, the bistable regime in the polariton system occurs when the self-interaction energy
is stronger than the coupling rate between the pillars, in which case it becomes energetically
favourable to concentrate the polariton population in one cavity.
Additionally, regarding the
coupled optical cavities it was shown when the coupling is increased, fast Rabi-like oscillations
between the cavities are to be expected, although an unambiguous experimental demonstration
remains. Further, if only one cavity is pumped and the other functions as a saturable absorber,
then self-sustained pulses should also be obtainable [44].
One can also imagine that if the nanocavities contain other forms of nonlinearities, then interesting
physics can happen.
Curiously, if one includes the optical Kerr effect in the modelling of the
nanocavities, then under certain conditions, the governing equations are exactly identical to the
polariton micropillar system, with the Kerr effect taking an identical form to the self-interaction
energy in the polariton condensates. The polariton system has shown a rich landscape of possible
physics in different parameter regime, including an AC Josephson mechanism for fast oscillations.
6 of 93
==PAGE:8==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
One can doubt whether similar dynamical regimes can be reached in an actual physical coupled
photonic cavity system, since the Kerr effect tends to be quite weak[17], but one can also imagine
that similar dynamics are possible with other types of nonlinearities in the nanocavities. For a
single cavity, it is well known that under continuous wave excitation, the cavity may enter a self-
pulsing regime resulting from either free-carrier dispersion induced by two-photon absorption [36],
or a retarded Kerr effect [37]. In these all cases, one can interpret the self-pulsing as arising from
self-phase modulation due to a nonlinear shift in the refractive index. It is only to be expected
that two cavities will add additional richness to the dynamics.
In our case, the cavities will be in the presence of a nearby waveguide. This provides a secondary,
indirect coupling channel in addition to the direct ”photon tunneling rate”. Many applications in-
cluding such systems have already been proposed, and many of them arise from cleverly engineered
optical switching schemes. Heuck et al. considered a system of two cavities on opposite site of a
waveguide with the direct transport blocked by air holes. What arises is comparable to a Mach-
Zender interferometer, where the two optical pathways interfere destructively if the nanocavities
have identical resonance frequencies[35]. This has been proposed as a kind of switching mechanism
for ”cancelling tails” of short pulses through active modulation of the resonance frequency in the
cavities. If a pulse is targeted towards each cavity, but with a slight delay, then transmission only
occurs in the narrow window between the pulses. In addition to switching schemes, the presence of
the waveguide also makes possible the coupling between distant cavities, with the type of coupling
depending on the acquired propagation phase in the waveguide. A recent proposal is to use distantly
coupled cavities for dynamical time-reversal of the complex envelope of an incoming wavepacket,
thus functioning as a mirror, but where the ”tail” gets reflected to the front of the wave[34]. The
mechanism relies on three distant side-coupled cavities, two of which are identical and the third
being detuned from the others. The system forms a symmetric and an antisymmetric eigenmode
being concentrated in the identical cavities, and the third eigenmode is primarily localised in the
central, detuned cavity. The symmetric and antisymmetric mode forms an upper- and a lower
level with the mode-splitting being two times the beating frequency between the modes. Cleverly,
they show that the sign of the mode-splitting can be dynamically tuned through a detuning of
the central cavity, and this reverses the sign of the beating frequency. When this is done actively
in response to an incoming wave, they show that the time-evolution of the complex envelope is
reversed. This has potential applications in the form of recovery of a distorted signal. Another very
recent demonstration consists of the coupling of distant quantum emitters embedded in distant
nanocavities by carefully tuning the propagation phase in the waveguide between them. When the
phase between the cavities is a multiple of π we obtain a BIC state due to Fano interference. The
configuration is akin to the Fano laser geometry when the left mirror (the terminated waveguide)
is substituted for an additional side-coupled nanocavity. Remote interaction between the quantum
emitters is demonstrated, which thus serves as a possible candidate platform in quantum networks
where multiple distant quantum emitters must interact. All in all coupled optical cavities already
exhibit many exciting features, and the integration in a Fano laser setting is an exciting prospect.
1.3
The Two-Cavity Fano laser
The main novel subject in this thesis is the theoretical and numerical analysis of a Fano laser based
on two coupled cavities. If we think about what we can hope to observe from such a setting, then
the possibility of passive self-pulsing is exciting. One can imagine, that if self-pulsing can occur
with active material in the cavities Hamel et al. has demonstrated, then such type of dynamics
might also be present in the in the context of a Fano laser geometry. One could imagine that
the oscillations between the modes could somehow be enhanced by the presence of active material,
even though the cavities themselves will be passive. Couple this with all the already exotic features
of the Fano laser, and many possible scenarios can be imagined.
Thus the objective of the thesis is to identify possible novel features present in the Two-Cavity
Fano laser. We shall do this from a theoretical point-of-view accompanied by numerical simulations.
Preferably we would like to observe something new rather than just a more complex version of a
single-cavity Fano laser. This is of course a very open-ended goal, with many possible directions. As
the thesis is of course written retrospectively, we can specify the direction a bit more and say that
7 of 93
==PAGE:9==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
we will focus on passive dynamics. As we shall see, the range of possible dynamics in the structure
is very rich, and a potentially novel type of self-pulsing is identified, that is clearly different from
saturable absorption. This type of self-pulsing depend on the dynamic interactions between a highly
dispersive mirror on the one hand, and on the other hand, passive refractive index modulation in
the laser cavity resulting from carrier relaxation oscillations. The most similar seeming mechanism
is the dispersive self-Q-switching observed in multi-section distributed-feedback lasers, but the
degree to which they are similar is an open question. In any case, if the type of self-pulsing can be
observed experimentally, it will be in a novel setting and on an orders of magnitude smaller scale.
The thesis is structured as follows; In section 2 we propose and analyse a phenomelogical ”toy
model” of laser with a dispersive mirror, which serves as kind of motivation for the general dispersive
self-pulsing theme. In section 3 we review the theory of Fano lasers, starting with the underlying
coupled-mode theory (section 3.1), in order to extend the Fano laser formalism to incorporate
multiple resonant modes. In section 3.2 we demonstrate the CMT approach on the single-cavity
Fano mirror and discuss its properties. General aspects of dispersive mirrors are discussed in section
3.4. The steady-state characteristics and the oscillation condition are introduced and discussed in
section 3.3, before we derive the dynamical models in section 3.5. In section 4 the two-cavity mirror
is analysed in depth. Section 4.1 considers the general properties of coupled cavities including the
eigenmodes, and then we derive the actual resonant transport properties in section 4.2, and analyse
the resulting reflection spectras. In section 4.3 we take a brief look at the prospects of nonlinear
effects in the two-cavity Fano mirror. In the final major section 5 the Two-Cavity Fano laser is
analysed. Section 5.1 concerns the lasing modes and steady-state properties. In section 5.2 an ODE
model is implemented, simulated and analysed. In this thesis the ODE model serves as the main
tool for qualitative insight in the dynamics. Finally, in section 5.3 a DDE model is implemented
and analysed, with the purpose being of confirming the findings of the ODE model as well as
getting as second perspective on the dynamics of the Two-Cavity Fano laser. The prospects and
robustness of the findings are discussed in 6, and the conclusions are summarised in 7 together
with an outlook on possible future studies.
2
Motivation: Toy model of dispersive self-pulsing
In this section we will take a look at a very general phenomenological model of a laser with a
dispersive mirror. The purpose is to provide some qualitative insight and intuition into what kind
of dynamics one could expect to observe in such a laser. The model is not about Fano lasers
specifically, but any laser, where one of the mirrors have an amplitude reflectivity that is frequency
dependent over a range of interest. In some sense, the purpose is to start with a zoomed out picture
and see how far we can get from purely intuitive reasoning, which can then serve as a reference
point for further analysis in this thesis.
As we shall see, if the ”dispersiveness” results in an extra gain term, and if this gain term is
somewhat retarded, then under certain conditions, the steady-state solution becomes unstable.
Physically, we can interpret this in the sense that the usual damped relaxation oscillations become
self-sustaining, and the laser undergoes a transition into passive pulsing. Since self-pulsing is a bit
of a recurring theme in this thesis, the section will also serve as a kind of overall motivation, and
by first analysing self-pulsing in the context of this simplified model, it allows us to introduce some
basic dynamical systems theory, as well as to discuss some typical characteristics, which can later
serve as a reference point.
As a starting point we briefly revisit the usual rate equations as given in [15] for example, where
we for simplicity neglect the spontaneous emission into the lasing mode, assuming we are pumping
sufficiently above threshold,
dN
dt = Rp −N
τs
−vgg(N)Np,
(1)
dNp
dt
= Γvgg(N)Np −Np
τp
.
(2)
8 of 93
==PAGE:10==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Here N and Np are carrier- and photon number densities, Rp is the rate of generation of carriers,
τs is the effective carrier lifetime with contributions from both spontaneous emission and non-
radiative decays, vg is the group velocity, g(N) is the material gain, Γ is the confinement factor,
and τp is the effective photon lifetime in steady-state. The gain is expanded linearly from the
transparency carrier density N0, such that g(N) = gN(N −N0) with gN being the differential gain.
As such, we neglect any gain-compression effects, and specifically, we assume ∂g/∂Np = 0. It is
given by
1
τp
= Γvggth = vg (αi + αm) = vgαi + 1
τin
ln

1
|r1r2|2

,
(3)
where Γgth is the threshold modal gain, αi are the internal losses, αm are the distributed mirror-
losses at the lasing frequency, τin = 2L/vg is the round-trip time, and r1 and r2 are amplitude
reflectivities of the mirrors.
Above the pumping threshold, in steady-state, the carrier- and photon number density is given by
N = Ns,
Np = Nps =
Rp −Ns/τs
vggN(Ns −N0).
(4)
Note that by using this expression for Nps, it means that we don’t differentiate between the steady-
state carrier density Ns, and the threshold carrier density Nth, which is really the one that defines
the threshold gain g(Nth) = gth, and the photon lifetime τp. By taking Ns = Nth the analysis
is made significantly more intuitive, by allowing us to think of the steady-state photon density
Nps as something we can tune independently through the pumping. The more exact relations are
given in the final part of this section, in equations (27) and (28), where the implications are briefly
discussed.
Linearizing around this solution, N = Ns + ∆N and Np = Nps + ∆Np, one can show that as long
as gN > 0, the steady-state is always stable.
d∆N
dt
= −
 1
τs
+ vggNNps

∆N −vggN(Ns −N0)∆Np
(5)
d∆Np
dt
= ΓvggNNps∆N,
(6)
This is easily seen, as the trace λ1 +λ2 = −1
τs −vggNNps is always negative, while the determinant
λ1λ2 = Γ(vggN)2(Ns −N0)Nps is always positive, giving two eigenvalues with negative real part.
Now, assume we have a dispersive mirror where the amplitude reflection depends on frequency. In
this case the steady-state characteristics depend sensitively on the lasing wavelength. Then one can
imagine that amplitude modulation of the carriers will result in frequency modulation through the
alpha-parameter, which in turn - through the Q-factor dependence on frequency in the dispersive
mirror - could amplify or dampen the amplitude modulation. This is sketched in figure (2). Again,
the point here is not that to say that this is always the way it works, but simply to provide some
intuition into what one could expect to observe. The question is now, could such a feedback loop
lead to modulational instability, resulting in self-pulsing?
To analyse this in a conceptually very simple manner, one can initially assume that the effective
photon lifetime is some function of N, through a carrier-dependence on the mirror loss
1
τp
= 1
τps
+ ∆αm(N),
1
τps
=
1
τp(ωs) = vgαi + 1
τin
ln

1
|r1r2(ωs)|2

(7)
where ∆αm(N) is an effective change in the the mirror loss per unit time, satisfying ∆αm(Ns) = 0.
By doing this, all the complicated dynamics of the phase-amplitude coupling is collapsed into this
unknown function. The purpose is simply to say that if we can model the laser in such a way,
then what does this imply for the dynamics. The specific form of ∆αm(N) is not important for
the mathematics here, but what we imagine is that somehow the instantaneous carrier density
affects Q-factor of the laser cavity. One way to imagine this is to say that the frequency ω(N)
is adiabatically slaved to the carrier density by the phase condition, and at the same time, that
the instantaneous mirror loss ∆αm(N) = ∆αm(r2(ω(N))) is simply an adiabatic tracking of the
9 of 93
==PAGE:11==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 2: Conceptual illustration of dispersive self-pulsing. A transient increase in carrier density δN
leads to an additional induced round-trip phase δϕ.
In order to uphold the oscillation condition, the
mirror phase arg(r(ω)) has to adjust accordingly, resulting in a frequency shift δω away from the steady-
state frequency ωs. The induced frequency shift then leads to an induced shift of the absolute reflection
δR, resulting in an induced change in the Q-factor δQ. Finally, the induced Q-factor corresponds to a
modulation of the effective gain, which completes the loop.
reflectivity at the instantaneous frequency. If we do this then we can think of ∆αm(N) as something
like
∆αm(N) ∼−1
τin
ln
 
|r2(ω(N))|2
|r2(ωs)|2
!
,
ω(N) ∼ωs +
αΓvggN∆N
1 + ∂ω arg(r2(ωs))/τin
(8)
where ω(N) is estimated by a linear expansion of the lasing condition at the steady-state solution,
and α ∝∂Nn/∂Ng is the linewidth enhancement factor, relating the derivative of the imaginary
part of the refractive index to the derivative of the real part. It will be introduced more formally
in section 3.3. The local stability of the steady-state solution will depend on the slope of ∆αm(N)
at N = Ns, and since we will anyway need this derivative later in the analysis, we might as well
immediately give an estimate of it using the above expression
αN ≡d∆αm
dN
|N=Ns ∼−αΓvggN
∂ω ln |r2(ωs)|2
τin + ∂ωϕ2(ωs).
(9)
One could call αN the ”differential loss”. αN > 0 (αN < 0) corresponds to a decrease (increase)
in the effective photon lifetime when the carrier density is increased beyond threshold.
The point is now that this cannot in itself change the local stability of the steady-state solution,
since a linearization will simply result in a correction of the differential-gain gN →gN −αN/Γvg
in the equation for ∆N ′
p. It doesn’t matter what function ∆αm(N) we choose, only it’s derivative
matter for the local stability, and as long as we still have ΓvggN > αN, which we will always
assume, then the steady-state will still be stable. Note that on the other hand if ΓvggN < αN,
then a decrease in carrier density would lead to increased effective gain, and for this to happen
there must be another solution to the lasing condition at a lower threshold modal gain, which is
then stable. In conclusion, if the response of the mirror is instantaneous, then in this toy model it
doesn’t matter how it responds, the qualitative dynamics will not be changed.
Now, as the next step, since dispersion often corresponds to delays in the time-domain (we shall
return to this in section (Ref dispersive mirrors)), it seems reasonable to assume that the change
in the photon lifetime is somewhat delayed meaning that the response of the mirror is somewhat
10 of 93
==PAGE:12==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
retarded. To include this effect in our toy model, we instead let
1
τp
= 1
τps
+ ∆τp(t),
(10)
d∆τp
dt
= 1
τm
 ∆αm(N) −∆τp

.
(11)
The photon lifetime is thus modelled to follow the carrier density through the previously discussed
function ∆αm(N), but this change happens on some characteristic timescale of the mirror τm,
which we denote the mirror delay. The instantaneous response is obtained in the adiabatic limit
of τm →0. The differential equations of the full system can finally be written as
dN
dt = Rp −N
τs
−1
ΓGN(N −N0)Np,
(12)
dNp
dt
=

GN(N −Ns) −∆τp

Np,
d∆τp
dt
= 1
τm
 ∆αm(N) −∆τp

,
where GN = ΓvggN is the differential gain per unit time. As we shall see later in section 3.4, a
retarded mirror will in the general case affect both the effective gain and the frequency, and these
will be coupled through both the dispersive mirror and the material gain via the α-parameter.
In that regard the toy model is likely a gross simplification, but we are still just interested in
the simplest possible picture that can capture some qualitative dynamics. And even if it doesn’t
resemble the real physical situation of a laser with a dispersive mirror, the generality of the model
makes it interesting enough to analyse anyway. Specifically, the model equations are completely
agnostic to where the function ∆αm(N) comes from and what shape it takes.
The previous
estimates of ∆αm(N) are thus primarily to motivate the intuition behind the model.
Looking at the overall equations, it seems like a relatively small change to the conventional rate
equations, and the differential equation for the loss term simply takes the form of an overdamped
oscillator driven by some function of carrier density. However, going to a 3-dimensional system
generally allows for a lot more ”wiggle-room” for complex dynamics. Compared to 3D, dynam-
ics in 2D is very restricted due to orbits not being allowed to cross, and as such limit-cycle (a
periodic orbit) will trap the phase-space in an inside and an outside. This is also the reason that
deterministic chaos is possible in 3D, but not in 2D.
Finally, we can briefly consider what the implications of the model could be. Imagine that αN < 0,
such that the instantaneous Q-factor is positively affected by the carrier density, and consider
the cycle of the usual relaxation oscillations combined with the conceptual picture in figure 2.
After a transient increase in carrier density, the Q-factor will rise, but after the extra carriers are
converted to photons, i.e. when the net material gain is zero GN(N −Ns) = GN(N −N0)−
1
τps = 0,
the photon number density will still continue to increase for a period on the order of the mirror
delay due to the Q-factor being above its steady-state value. Similarly, on the other side of the
cycle, the Q-factor drops below its steady-state value which allows for relatively more carriers to
be generated, due to less stimulated emission. As such it seems plausible that for αN < 0, the
introduction of the mirror delay increases the lifetime of the relaxation oscillation. Of course, a
smaller or bigger differential gain also affects the lifetime of the oscillations, but without a delay,
these oscillations will always eventually decay. On the other hand, with the introduction of an
extra delay in the system, it opens up the possibility that the oscillations become self-sustaining.
2.1
Linear stability analysis
Before we start, we will quickly outline some general terms from dynamical systems to clear up
any potential confusion. Phase space refers to the 3-dimensional system spanned by (N, Np, ∆τp).
If we let x denote a point in phase space, then an orbit in phase space refers to the curve in phase
space traced out by x(t) where x(t) is a solution to the dynamical equations. A fixpoint (also called
fixed point) is a point in phase space where
d
dtx = 0. A periodic orbit is an orbit that is periodic
11 of 93
==PAGE:13==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
x(t) = x(t + T), for all t. A limit-cycle is an isolated periodic orbit, in the sense that all nearby
orbits are not periodic (often in conservative systems, such as the undamped pendulum, there are
infinitely many periodic orbits, none of which are limit-cycles). Both fixpoints and limit-cycles are
examples of invariant sets, meaning any orbit starting in this set will never leave. A stable fixpoint
is a fixpoint where all nearby orbits never stray ”too far” from the fixpoint. A subset of stable
fixpoints are asymptotically stable meaning all nearby orbits converge towards the fixpoint as time
goes to infinity. We will not need to distinguish between the two types here, so whenever we talk of
”stable” we will mean asymptotically stable. An unstable fixpoint is a fixpoint that is not stable.
The terms attracting and repelling will also be used in the same sense as ”stable” and ”unstable”.
One can further distinguish between different types of stable and unstable fixpoints based on the
eigenvalues of the linearization, but this is not so important for the present analysis. Similar to
fixpoints, limit-cycles can also be both attracting, where all nearby orbits converge towards the
limit-cycle, and repelling where nearby orbits are pushed away. Finally, we do acknowledge that
there is some ambiguity in the term ”steady-state”. One can use the term in a general mathematical
sense meaning that the transient phase has passed, or in a stricter physical sense of ”continuous
wave operation” corresponding to a fixpoint of the dynamical system. We will restrict ourselves
to the latter meaning, so ”steady-state solution” and ”fixpoint” are used interchangeably, but of
course one could equally well say that a steady train of pulses is a kind of steady-state.
We are now ready to look at the stability of the steady-state solution. Linearizing around steady-
state, N = Ns + ∆N, Np = Nps + ∆Np, and ∆αm(N) = αN∆N, we get
d
dt


∆N
∆Np
∆τp

=



−τ −1
s
−τ −1
N
−(Γτps)−1
0
Γτ −1
N
0
−Γ(GNτN)−1
αNτ −1
m
0
−τ −1
m





∆N
∆Np
∆τp

,
(13)
where τ −1
N
= GNNps/Γ and τ −1
ps = GN(Ns −N0). τ −1
N
is the carrier relaxation rate associated
with stimulated emission, and τ −1
s
+ τ −1
N
is the effective carrier relaxation rate.
The dynamics of the linearization are determined completely by the eigenvalues λ of the system
matrix, and small deviations from the origin evolve as ∼eλt times an eigenvector. For a brief catch
up on linear systems, we refer to section 3.1. Whenever the system-matrix has no eigenvalues with
zero real part, the dynamics of the linearization will always be locally equivalent to the nonlinear
system.
The characterestic polynomial is
P(λ) = λ3 + a1λ2 + a2λ + a3,
(14)
a1 = 1
τm
+ 1
τs
+ 1
τN
(15)
a2 =
1
τmτs
+
1
τmτN
+
1
τNτps
(16)
a3 = −αN/GN + 1
τmτNτps
(17)
The solutions to this cubic polynomial gives the eigenvalues of the linearization, and for a stable
system, all eigenvalues must have negative real part. The actual eigenvalues will of course be a
mess to calculate analytically, however, if we initially are just concerned with stability, then one
can use Routh-Hurwitz criterion (see for example Differentialligninger og uendelige rækker by Ole
Christensen). Routh-Hurwitz criterion says that all roots of a polynomial of the form P(λ) have
negative real part if and only if,
a1 > 0,
a2 > 0,
a3 > 0,

a1
a3
1
a2
 = a1a2 −a3 > 0.
(18)
Note that τN, τps, τm, τs > 0, so the first two criterias are trivial.
a3 > 0 is satisfied by the
12 of 93
==PAGE:14==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
assumption of ΓvggN > αN. The final criteria can after some algebra be written as
−αN
GN
< ax−1 + a + b + bx,
(19)
x = τs
τN
,
a = τps

τ −1
s
+ τ −1
m

,
b = τ −1
s
 τps + τm

,
meaning that when the inequality is satisfied, the steady-state solution is stable. Note that
x = τs/τN = τsvggNNps = Rpτs −Ns
Ns −N0
(20)
is the rate of stimulated emission τ −1
N
scaled to the lifetime of the carriers τ −1
s
. By varying the
pumping rate Rp, we can independently tune x, while all the other time-constants (τs, τm, τps)
remain constant. As such x can be considered as the dimensionless power in the laser, or the
dimensionless above-threshold pumping.
Breaking the inequality (19) means that at least one of the roots of P(λ) have positive real part,
in which case the steady-state is unstable. Here we observe that if αN is sufficiently negative, then
one could imagine that it is possible to break the inequality. The inequality is sketched in figure
3a, with the solid line denoting the bifurcation curve (when the right-hand side and left-hand side
are equal), and the dotted lines are samples of specific values of αN. We observe that at sufficiently
low and high power, the system is always stable. We also observe that the mirror delay can neither
be too high, in which case b becomes large, or too low, in which case a becomes large. For realistic
parameters where τs is by far the longest timescale, a ≫b.
We can find the critical differential loss αN,c as the point at which the inequality (19) can be
broken for some power (x). I.e. for αN < αN,c < 0, there are real, positive solutions to the
equation −αN/GN = ax−1 + a + b + bx. The minimum of the RHS is given by
xmin =
ra
b ,
(21)
and the critical differential loss is then given by,
−αN,c
GN
= ax−1
min + a + b + bxmin
(22)
= (√a +
√
b)2
(23)
=
 r
τps

τ −1
s
+ τ −1
m

+
q
τ −1
s
 τps + τm

!2
.
(24)
In figure 3b the critical differential loss αNc is plotted versus mirror delay τm. The curve αNc(τm)
divides the parameter space in two sections, i.e. above the curve the system can be unstable for
some power, while below it it is always stable. As such figures 3a and 3b together form a snapshot
of a bifurcation surface. Note that αNc has a minimum in terms the mirror delay τm, but if τs is
much larger than all other time-constants, then b ≈0 and we get the approximate expression
αN,c ≈−aGN = −GNτps/τm = −G2
NNs/τm.
(25)
In this limit the critical value scales inversely proportional to the mirror delay.
Beyond the critical value, one can find the power interval where the steady-state is unstable, simply
as the two solutions to the equation
−αN
GN
=
a
xc(αN) + a + b + bxc(αN).
(26)
13 of 93
==PAGE:15==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
-2
-1
0
1
2
Figure 3: a) Stability diagram for (x, −αN/GN), showing the stable region below the bifurcation curve
given by a/x+a+b+bx+αN/GN = 0, and the unstable region above the bifurcation curve. For αN > αNc
(the blue curve), the system is always stable. When αN < αNc (the red curve), there is a range of x,
where the linearized system becomes unstable, with xc1(αN) and xc2(αN) denoting the first and second
bifurcation point. b) Stability diagram showing what regions in the (τm, αN)-parameter space where it
is possible to obtain an unstable system. The curve shows how the critical value αNc depends on the
mirror delay. c) The plot shows the real part of numerically computed eigenvalues for the three dotted
curves in (a). Only the one with the highest real part is shown for each set of parametes. d) Real and
imaginary part all three eigenvalues corresponding to the red curves in (a) and (c). One clearly identifies
a pair of complex conjugate eigenvalues crossing the imaginary axis two times, corresponding to a Hopf
bifurcation at each crossing. The third eigenvalue is always negative, and its eigenvector is normal to the
2-dimensional manifold on which the bifurcation occurs. Parameters used here are τps = τm = 1, and
τs = 5. OBS: τps is denoted τNp in the figures.
14 of 93
==PAGE:16==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
When we get significantly above the critical value, the two solutions can be approximated by
xc1 = −
a
αN/GN+a+b and xc2 = −(αN/GN + a + b)/b. As a quick check of our stability analysis,
we can numerically compute the actual eigenvalues. In figure 3c the real part of the eigenvalue
with highest real part is plotted versus power, for values of −αN/GN above (red), below (blue)
and at threshold (black). The parameters are the same as the ones used in 3a, with the colors
corresponding to the dotted lines in figure 3a. We observe that the computed eigenvalues agree
with the conclusions from the stability-analysis.
Figure 4: Sketch of the two types of Hopf bifurcations, showing the creation/anihilation of a limit-cycle
as the bifurcation parameter µ is varied accross a critical value µc. Perpendicular to the µ-axis, the plane
on which the spiralling occurs is sketched with r denoting some amplitude.
(Left) Supercritical Hopf
bifurcation. For µ < µc, there exist stable equilibrium point (A). At the critical point µ = µc the Hopf
bifurcation occurs, and a stable limit-cycle is born for µ > µc, while the stable equilibrium point becomes
unstable.
Points near (B) will be pushed outwards towards the limit-cycle.
(Right) Subcritical Hopf-
bifurcation. For µ < µc there exist a stable equilibrium point (C), surrounded by an unstable limit-cycle.
Points inside the limit-cycle is attracted to the equilibrium, while points outside limit-cycle (D) are pushed
away. At µ = µc the unstable limit-cycle is shrinks into an unstbale equilibrium point. Beyond µ > µc
there are no nearby attractors. Figure taken from [41].
Finally, having classified the conditions for this bifurcation to happen, i.e. the quantitative question
of where the bifurcation happens, we still need to consider what type of bifurcation occurs. To
determine this we do need to calculate the eigenvalues, but we do not have to compute them
for all possible combinations of parameters, since the qualitative dynamics must be the same. In
other words, within the regions confined by the bifurcation, we can assume that the system is
topologically robust (we will not delve on the possibility for global bifurcations here). As such we
can simply compute them for one set of parameters, and this is done in figure 3d, showing the
real and imaginary part of the three eigenvalues, for parameters corresponding to the red curve in
figure 3a and 3c over the same interval of x.
We clearly identify a set of complex conjugate eigenvalues with real part corresponding to the red
curve in 3, as well as one which is always real and very negative. The pair of complex conjugate
eigenvalues can be associated with the usual relaxation oscillations, and it is noteworthy that the
lifetime of the oscillations initially increases with power. This is the opposite trend compared to
the conventional rate equations, where higher power results in faster decay towards equilibrium.
The frequency increases with power, which is the same general trend that is explained by the
effective carrier lifetime being reduced by stimulated emission.
The complex conjugate eigenvalues crosses the imaginary axis, first in the positive direction at
xc1 ≈0.5 and later in the negative direction at xc2 ≈5.5.
The first crossing corresponds to
supercritical Hopf bifurcation where an initially stable spiral become unstable and a stable limit-
cycle with period 2π/ Im(λ) is born in the full nonlinear system[23], see figure 4. Intuitively, one can
think of the supercritical Hopf bifurcation by imagining an attracting focal point as an attracting
circle with zero radius, which at the bifurcation point grows into an actual attracting limit-cycle
with a finite radius. Technically, there is also the possibility of a subcritical Hopf bifurcation, where
an unstable limit-cycle surrounds the attracting focal point on the stable side of the bifurcation,
such that the unstable limit-cycle shrinks into a point and turns it into an unstable spiral. While
a formal proof involves calculating the ”Lyapunov-exponents” of the Hopf-bifurcation, for our
purpose it suffices to consider the actual physics before we simulate the full model, which is the
15 of 93
==PAGE:17==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
straightforward way to figure out the bifurcation.
The first time the eigenvalues cross the imaginary axis at x = xc1, the subcritical Hopf bifurcation
doesn’t really make sense, since this would imply the unstable limit-cycle existed in the low-
pumping regime above threshold, which seems unlikely. On the other hand, the supercritical Hopf
bifurcation makes perfect physical sense and can be interpreted as the usual relaxation oscillations
being able to sustain themselves. As for the second crossing at xc2, the most likely scenario is
simply another supercritical Hopf bifurcation, but in the reverse direction where the attracting
limit-cycle shrinks and disappears. Physically, a plausible explanation is that the effective carrier
relaxation rate 1/τs + 1/τN, which is dominated by stimulated emission, becomes too strong a
damping, similar to how the resonance peak of an intensity-modulated Fabry-Perot laser is damped
at high power. However, we cannot immediately rule out the subcritical Hopf bifurcation (again in
reverse direction compared to the description previously), in which case one could imagine that an
attracting fixed point coexisted with an attracting limit-cycle, separated by an unstable limit-cycle.
Before we continue with simulations, we briefly touch upon the meaning of the third eigenvalue,
which is purely real and negative. The corresponding eigenvector is denoted the ”strong” eigen-
vector or eigendirection. When we are near the bifurcation point, then all orbits in phase space
will quickly be attracted to a surface (called center manifold or critical manifold) which is locally
normal to the strong eigenvector and intersects the fixed point of the steady-state solution. In a
sense, it is on this two-dimensional submanifold that all the spiralling is happening, and on which
the bifurcation takes places. This is also why one in principle could imagine a subcritical Hopf bi-
furcation at xc2, since one can reasonably speak of ”inside” and ”outside” the unstable limit-cycle,
when the dynamics happen on a surface.
2.2
Simulations of dispersive self-pulsing
We now turn to the full toy model given in equation (12). In order to make the analysis a bit
more engaging, we will try to use relatively realistic parameters as far as possible. Specifically, the
parameters we use are the same as the ones used for simulations of the Fano laser in [14], which are
also the ones used later in the thesis, when we turn to the more realistic models specific to Fano
lasers. The physical parameters used are N0 = 5 × 1021 m−3, ng = 3.5, Γ = 0.01, gN = 5 × 10−16
m2, τs = 0.28 ns. As for the steady-state carrier density, we are free to choose Ns = 2N0, which
gives a photon lifetime of τp = ΓvggN(Ns −N0) ≈0.47 ps. Assuming |r1| = 1 and αi = 10 cm−2,
then for a cavity length of L ≈5µm, this corresponds to an absolute reflectivity of |r2(ωs)|2 ≈0.78.
For the mirror delay and the diffential loss we can only make reasonable guesses. For a Fano laser
based on a single resonant mode, a reasonable assumption is that the mirror delay should be closely
related to the Q-factor of the resonant mode. Taking the resonance frequency as ωc ≈1.2 × 1015
s−1 corresponds to a wavelength of approximately λ = 1550 nm, and if we then consider a Q-factor
of Q ≈1000, we finally arrive at the estimate τm ∼Q/ωc ∼1 ps. With these parameters, the
important dimensionless quantities are a = τps(τ −1
s
+τ −1
m ) = 0.4683 and b = τ −1
s
(τps+τm) = 0.052,
giving a critical differential loss of −αNc/GN = (√a +
√
b)2 = 0.5726. Now, for the purpose of
demonstration we choose −αN/GN = 0.8. We could try to use the previous estimate of αN, in
which case we note that −αN/GN ∼α∂ω ln |r(ωs)|2/(τin + ∂ω arg(r(ωs)), but assuming that the
slopes of |r(ω)|2 and arg(r(ω)) are of similar magnitude and positive, then the chosen value seems
fair.
The first Hopf bifurcation then occurs at xc1 = 1.4694 and the second one at xc2 = 60.8491. Con-
verting this to the required carrier pumping rate we get Rp1 ≈1.73Ns/τs and Rp2 ≈31.42Ns/τs.
So while the first Hopf bifurcation occurs at relatively low power, the second one occurs at very
high power, but this also depends on the value of −αN/GN which we chose ad hoc, so we will
not delve on the physical implicitations of it. Though we can consider the high power required for
the second Hopf bifurcation to be a result of the intrinsic carrier lifetime being by far the longest
timescale.
For good measure, it has been checked that the model shows the reasonable physics compared to
the conventional rate equations for Rp < Rp1. Specifically, for Rp < Ns/τs we do not observe
16 of 93
==PAGE:18==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
lasing, and for Ns/τs < Rp < Rp1 one observes the usual relaxation oscillations, but with the
lifetime of the oscillations increasing with power, as predicted from the linear stability analysis.
Overall, it is indeed observed that increasing the pumping beyond the critical value Rp1, a limit-
cycle is formed through the supercritical Hopf bifurcation and at very high power it high power
the limit-cycle shrinks, before it finally disappears through a second supercritical Hopf bifurcation
at Rp2. Just above the critical value Rp1, the limit-cycle is just a small circular orbit in phase-
space, which in the timetrace of N(t) and Np(t) just appears as a small self-sustained amplitude
modulation. However, when the pumping is increased beyond the critical value, the size of the
orbit grows rapidly, turning more and more into what looks like distinct pulses in the timetrace. In
figure 5 (top) timetraces of Np(t) and N(t) for Rp = 5Ns/τs are shown, with initial conditions near
the unstable steady-state. The phase-space shown below in 5 (bottom) is for the same parameters,
but with two orbits starting at some random initial position, showing the quick attraction towards
the 2-dimensional submanifold, where the spiralling occurs. The red curve is the asymptotic limit-
cycle. Focusing on the timetrace; from the overall picture we see that the small oscillations initially
grow exponentially in size (which is what is predicted from the local stability analysis), but after
around 0.5 ns, the photon density basically goes to zero at every oscillation, turning the small
modulations into pulses. After around 2 ns, the transient phase is over, and a steady train of
pulses is formed. The inset shows a zoom in of the pulsing behaviour, with Np showing distinct
peaks, and the carrier density showing a long period of building up carriers, before it rapidly
unloads. It is remarkable how much it resembles the passive Q-switching appearing in lasers with
a mirror that functions as a saturable absorbers, although the mechanism is quite different.
In figure 6 the evolution of the limit-cycle is shown for pumping values in the range Rp = 1.74Ns/τs
to Rp = 2.2Ns/τs. As a rule of thump for supercritical Hopf bifurcations, the size of the limit-cycle
grows proportionally to √x −xc1 for x close to xc1, which also explains the rapid growth seen here
[23]. Just after the bifurcation the period of the orbits is correctly predicted by the imaginary part
of the eigenvalues of the linearization, but this obviously only holds in the small-amplitude regime,
where the orbit is elliptical. The onset of the pulsing regime can be thought as when the shape of
the orbit in the (Np, N)-plane is distorted from an ellipse to more of a rounded half-circle. Note
how peak photon density occurs at a carrier density below threshold N < Ns, so it the photon
density keeps growing even the GN(N −Ns) < 0, due to sluggish mirror which is still at a higher
instantaneous Q-value. In the pulsing regime, the period is dominated by the slow build-up of
carriers, while the pulse itself is fast, as seen in the timetrace1. Specifically, by looking at the
carrier density, it is clear that the period of the pulses can be approximated by how much the
carrier density grows while Np ∼0, i.e. T ≈(Nmax −Nmin)/Rp. However, with the present
model, it does not make so much sense to further try to characterise the period of pulses, the
reason being, that we are obviously in the limit where spontaneous emission cannot be neglected if
one quantitatively accurate simulations. Just after the pulse, the cavity is quickly emptied, and in
reality it should just settle at some quasi-equilibrium given by the spontaneous emission into the
lasing mode. Instead, in the model simulated here, the orbits are exponentially attracted towards
Np = 0, which results in much longer time for the carrier density to build up, and as such the
pulses are basically too big for the given pumping rate.
To take the effect of spontaneous emission into account, we can simply model it with an average
rate given by the β-factor, by adding the term βΓN/τs in the equation for dNp/dt 2. By choosing
various values of β in the range 10−6 to 10−1, it has been checked that the overall qualitative
dynamics stays the same. In figure 7 (left) limit-cycles are plotted for different values of β and a
fixed pumping Rp = 5Ns/τs|β=0, and we clearly see that it shrinks significantly. Finally, in figure 7
(right) the input-output curve (Rp, max Np) is plotted for β = 10−3, with Rp scaled to Ns/τs|β=0.
It is generated by integrating away the transient, and then saving the peak- and minimum value
of the asymptotic timetrace of Np. We can then plot (Rp, min(Np) and (Rp, max(Np)) together,
to clearly observe the lasing transition as well as the first and second Hopf bifurcation.
1As a peculiar sidenote, within dynamical systems theory the term ”relaxation oscillations” refers to these
kind of slow-fast oscillations with a slow build-up of tension followed by a quick relaxation - a classical example
is the strongly nonlinear Van der Pol oscillator [23]. As such the physical relaxation oscillations bifurcated into
mathematical relaxation oscillations.
2τs includes both spontaneous emission and non-radiative recombination τ −1
s
= τ −1
sp +τ −1
nr , but we simply include
the factor τs/τsp in β, so we do not have to explicitly differentiate between τsp and τnr.
17 of 93
==PAGE:19==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Importantly, the qualitative aspect of the linear stability-analysis is not affected by the inclusion of
spontaneous emission into the lasing mode, but to get the correct quantitative behaviour, we have to
correct the expressions given earlier for Ns and Nps, which are only exact well above threshold. This
can also be seen by the calculated critical value for β = 0, Rp1 ≈1.73Ns/τs|β=0, while for β = 10−3
the input-output curve shows that the first Hopf bifurcation occurs at Rp1 ≈2.1Ns/τs|β=0. The
second bifurcation however occurs almost exactly at the calculated value Rp2 ≈31Ns/τs|β=0. This
can be be easily taken care of by using the exact expressions for the steady-state values. In this
case, the form becomes clearer when we treat Ns as the independent variable, which gives the
steady-state power Nps(Ns) and the required pumping Rp(Ns),
Nps(Ns) =
βΓNs/τs
(GN −αN)(Nth −Ns),
(27)
Rp(Ns) = Ns
τs
+ 1
ΓGN(Ns −N0)Nps(Ns),
(28)
where g(Nth) = g(Ns|β=0) = gth, is the threshold carrier density found by solving the oscillation
condition. So far we have treated Ns = Nth as equal, but for this purpose we have to make a
distinction. If we use the exact values to define the rates τ −1
N
= GNNps/Γ and τps = GN(Ns −N0)
in the linearized equations, then it is fair to assume the we can drop the extra terms involving β.
One of course has to check this to be sure, but we skip this here due to it not being relevant for the
rest of the thesis. We do note that the relevant dimensionless quantities a and b are only slightly
affected, since they do not involve the difference Nth −Ns, but for the dimensionless power it is
corrected to
x = τs/τN = τsvggNNps =
GN
GN −αN
βNs
Nth −Ns
.
(29)
With these corrections, the linear stability-analysis should still be valid. Note that the stability
diagrams drawn in figure 3 remain exactly the same (although in figure 3d we have to use the value
given for x instead of the pumping rate Rp), since they are written in terms of the dimensionless
quantities a, b, x, and αN/GN.
However, we can no actually tune x completely independently
through the pumping, since the pumping affects both Ns and Nps, and note also that x now depends
on αN, so Rp also depends on αN. As such if we want to draw stability diagrams in terms of the
actual physical parameters, such as Rp and αN, then we first have to find a bifurcation curve for Ns
and αN, i.e. the function αN,Hopf(Ns) that satisfyes the bifurcation criteria f(Ns, αN,Hopf(Ns)) =
0, where f(Ns, αN) = a(Ns)x(Ns, αN)−1 + a(Ns) + b(Ns) + b(Ns)x(Ns, αN) + αN/GN. Then we
can draw the bifurcation curve in the (Rp, αN)-stability diagram with the ugly parametrisation
(Rp(Ns, αN,Hopf(Ns)), αN,Hopf(Ns)). This simply shows the convenience of doing the stability
analysis with dimensionless units, and also why we initially dropped the spontaneous emission,
since the analysis is more intuitive without.
Finally, in a future study it would be interesting to delve more into the analysis of the pulsing
regime. Typically, what we are interested in are questions such as what parameters determine the
width of the pulses, and what parameters determine the period. We can of course brute force the
analysis numerically, but that is not really what we would be interested in this simple model -
or at least only as a tool to get a broad overview. But specifically, what one would analyse is to
determine whether it is the the mirror delay, or the effective photon lifetime, or rate of stimulated
emission, that determines how fast the pulse unloads. As for the frequency of the pulse train, we
already noted that it is basically given by T ≈(Nmax −Nmin)/Rp, but it would be interesting to
see if one could figure out what determines Nmax and Nmin. It seems obvious, that the value of
β is very important, since it determines how ”empty” the cavity becomes between each pulse, and
as such how fast the photon density builds up when the carrier density rises above the threshold
value. As we can see from 7 (left), the minimum value Np, which occurs when N ≈Nth scales
more or less linearly with β, and it would be nice if we could give a simple relation between β,
Np,peak,Np,min, T for example. But for now we will continue with some actual ”physical” models.
18 of 93
==PAGE:20==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 5: Simulations of the toy model for Rp = 5Ns/τs, and parameters given in main text. (Top)
Examples of time-traces for Np (left) and N (right) with initial conditions near (Ns, Nps), showing the
slowly growing oscillations and the onset of pulsing near 0.5 ns. After 1.5 ns the transient is almost gone.
The inset shows a zoom in of the asymptotic behaviour. (Bottom) Phase space showing two orbits with
initial conditions starting ”far” from equilibrium are quickly attracted to a two-dimensional submanifold
where they spiral out into the limit-cycle shown in red. Left is the full three-dimensional space (Np, ∆τp, N),
and right is a projection onto (Np, N). The climb of along Np = 0 happens slowly, and is the primary
contributor to the period of the oscillations. The width of the pulses is the characteristic timescale of the
”return trip” that takes the shape of a half-circle.
Figure 6: Evolution of limit-cycles, when the pumping is increased above the Hopf bifurcation. Just above
threshold of the Hopf bifurcation, the limit-cycle is circular/elliptical, but it very quickly gets distorted
due to almost ”hitting” the plane at Np = 0 (or axis in 2d, in the right plot).
19 of 93
==PAGE:21==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
1010
1012
1014
1016
1018
1020
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
10-1
100
101
1014
1016
1018
Figure 7: Left) Limit-cycles shown for fixed pumping and different values of β showing how the β-factor
pushes the minimum photon-density to the right, and generally shrings the limit-cycle. The value of Ns is
the threshold value Rp = 5Ns/τs|β=0. Right) ”S-curve” showing the lasing transition as well as the Hopf
bifurcations. Generated by plotting the maximum value and minimum value of Np after the transient is
gone. In continuous-wave operation the lines are on top of each other, but they clearly separate at the
Hopf bifurcation.
3
Theory of lasers based on Fano mirrors
In this section we will review the basics of the conventional Fano laser, including properties of
the Fano mirror, steady-state characteristics and dynamical models, and we will also give a brief
introduction to Temporal Coupled-Mode Theory which is really the conceptual framework behind
much of the work on Fano resonances in optical resonators [24]. The purpose is to establish a solid
understanding of the Fano laser that has already been studied theoretically and experimentally
for several years now.
This is key since many of the theoretical approaches and concepts can
immediately be generalised so it carries over to the new geometry in a natural way. Of course, it
is also to later be able to pin-point in what ways the two-cavity geometry can be an advantage.
3.1
Temporal Coupled-Mode Theory
In photonic platforms, such as a photonic crystal environment, we are often dealing with structures
that can be understood as several well-known components coupled together. Consider for example
the simplest possible Fano mirror; a line-defect waveguide with a nearby point-defect cavity. Now,
the isolated waveguide can be described with a band diagram showing a continuum of propagating
waves, and the isolated cavity can be described with a discrete set of resonant modes.
Then,
intuitively, we say that the modes in the waveguide couple to the modes in the cavity to form
the modes of the composite system, and this is basically the conceptual approximation underlying
the Temporal Coupled-Mode Theory (CMT). As such CMT can be understood as a phenomeno-
logical description of the dynamics in open resonant systems, where resonant modes interact with
propagating waves. Of course, in reality the only modes that ”exist” are the ones that come out
of Maxwell’s equations, but CMT has very often turned out to be a very good approximation and
in agreement with numerical simulations [26].
An excellent introduction to CMT is given in [25], and we will adopt the notation. Consider a set
of n resonant modes that couple to each other. The amplitude vector
a =




a1
a2
...
an




(30)
gives the amplitude of each resonant mode, normalised such that |an|2 is the energy in the n’th
mode.
20 of 93
==PAGE:22==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
In an ideal lossless setting, in case of an isolated nanocavity for example, the temporal dynamics
are given by a Hermitian matrix Ωdescribing the real resonant frequencies {ωi} and the coupling
between the modes {µij},
da
dt = −iΩa,
Ωij = δijωi + (1 −δij)µij,
(31)
where i is the imaginary unit and δij is the kronecker-δ. Since Ωis Hermitian, it’s eigenvalues are
real and Ωcan be diagonalised by a unitary transformation.
If we now include loss-channels, e.g. decay into nearby waveguides, then this can be incorporated
through the Hermitian loss matrix Γ, and the dynamics become
da
dt = (−iΩ−Γ)a.
(32)
The eigenvalues of the matrix ˜Ω≡Ω−iΓ are now in general complex, and the resulting modes
are known as ”quasinormal modes” in the literature.
Transient response. While this part is not particular to coupled-mode theory, but linear systems
in general, it is included here for the sake of convenience.
The general solution to the above
homogeneous system is a linear combination of n linearly independent solutions x1(t), x2(t), ..xn(t),
a(t) = c1x1(t) + c2x2(t) + (...) + cnxn = Φ(t)c,
c ∈Cn
(33)
where Φ(t) = [x1, x2, ..., xn] is called the ”Fundamental matrix” and consists of linearly independ-
ent solutions in its columns [27]. Φ(t) satisfies the matrix differential equation,
d
dtΦ(t) = −i˜ΩΦ(t).
(34)
Note that it is not uniquely defined, since any set of linearly independent solutions will constitute a
Fundamental matrix. The typical way to find linearly independent solutions is to look for solutions
of the form x(t) = ve−i˜ωt, i.e. to find the eigenvalues of ˜Ω. The eigenvalues are the roots of the
characteristic polynomial,
Det(˜Ω−˜ωI) = 0,
(35)
and the corresponding eigenvector vk of the k’th eigenvalue ˜ωk satisfy (˜Ω−˜ωkI)vk = 0.
If
˜Ωsatisfies ˜Ω˜Ω† = ˜Ω† ˜Ω, then eigenvectors corresponding to different eigenvalues will always be
orthogonal v†
kvj = 0 for ˜ωk ̸= ˜ωj, but in general this need not be the case, as will be discussed
later. For a particular solution that satisfies initial conditions a(t0) = a0, then
a(t) = Φ(t)Φ−1(t0)a0.
(36)
In a sense, Φ(t)Φ−1(t0) propagates the system from t0 to t. Compared to Φ(t) itself, the product
Φ(t)Φ−1(t0) is unique, and does not depend on choice of Φ(t). In fact, this product gives the
Green’s function in the time-domain for the system,
G(t, t′) = θ(t −t′)Φ(t)Φ−1(t′),
(37)
where G(t, t′) is a solution to the inhomogeneous matrix differential equation
d
dtG(t, t′) = −i˜ΩG(t, t′) + Iδ(t −t′),
(38)
with the causal requirement G(t, t′) = 0 for t < t′. Sometimes the term ”Green’s matrix”, or
”Green’s tensor”, or just ”transfer matrix” is also used. When the differential equation doesn’t
depend explicitly on time, meaning ˜Ωis constant, then G(t, t′) = G(t −t′) can only depend on the
time difference. Finally, if we add a driving term in the form of an arbitrary vector function u(t),
then the particular solution that satisfies a(t) = a0 is given by
a(t) = G(t −t0)a0 +
Z t
t0
G(t −t′)u(t′)dt′,
t > t0
(39)
21 of 93
==PAGE:23==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 8: Schematic of temporal coupled-mode theory. Figure modified from [25]
The CMT relations. Consider now the n resonant modes being coupled to m ports as in 8.
The incoming (outgoing) wave in port k is denoted sk+ (sk−), normalised such that |sk±|2 is the
corresponding power. Defining the column vectors s+ and s−,
s+ =




s1+
s2+
...
sm+



,
s−=




s1−
s2−
...
sm−



.
(40)
We can then in general write
da
dt = (−iΩ−Γ)a + KT s+,
(41)
s−= Cs+ + Da.
(42)
Here K and D are m × n-matrices describing the coupling between the resonant modes and the
propagating waves, and C is a unitary m × m direct scattering matrix that gives the non-resonant
transport.
The key in CMT is now that these matrices are not independent, but rather can be related to each
other through some very general physical principle. This results in the following relations,
D†D = 2Γ,
(43a)
K = D,
(43b)
CD∗= −D.
(43c)
The rigorous proofs can be found in [25], but we note that (43a) is a consequence of energy-
conservation.
If there is no incoming wave, then the negative derivative of the energy in the
resonant modes must equal the power in the outgoing waves. The power going out of the modes
is
−d
dt(a†a) = −a†(−iΩ−Γ + h.c.)a = 2a†Γa,
(44)
where h.c. denotes the Hermitian conjugate of the former, and we exploit that both Ωand Γ are
Hermitian. On the other hand, the outgoing waves have the power
s†
−s−= a†D†Da,
(45)
22 of 93
==PAGE:24==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
which proves relation (43a). The proofs of (43b) and (43c) are a little bit more elaborate and will
not be given here, but they are based on applying time-reversal symmetry, and the fact that if we
feed the resonators with exponentially growing waves that exactly match the quasinormal modes
of the resonator, then there is no outgoing wave.
In practice (43a) gives the absolute value of the coupling constants Dij, and (43c) is used to relate
the coupling phases. In addition to the relations in (43), one can also impose symmetries from
the specific configuration of interest. Finally, in addition to the coupling to waveguides, one can
introduce intrinsic loss-channels Γi to account for e.g. vertical scattering. This means Γ →Γw+Γi,
where Γw is the matrix used in (43a).
Harmonic response. The harmonic response of the system can be straightforwardly analysed
by transfer-function methods for linear systems [27]. If we assume that the incoming wave is a
monochromatic wave of the form s+(t) = sie−iωt, and look for harmonic (steady-state) solutions
of the form a(t) = G(ω)DT sie−iωt, then one finds
G(ω) = [i(˜Ω−ωI)]−1.
(46)
Since a monochromatic wave is a δ-function in the frequency domain, then we can also identify
G(ω) as a Green’s function, and it is exactly the Fourier transform of G(t, t′), which is the reason
for the slightly sloppy notation in order to not introduce more symbols than necessary.
Note
that G(ω) have poles in the complex plane at the eigenvalues of ˜Ω(the quasinormal modes of
the system), but if we only consider modes that actually couple to the waveguides, then all the
eigenvalues of ˜Ωhave negative real part.
Further, due to the linearity of the equations, we can in the general case for an arbitrary incom-
ing wave simply integrate all the individual frequency components. In other words, the Fourier
transform obtains the simple form
a(ω) = G(ω)DT s+(ω).
(47)
The outgoing wave is
s−(ω) = Cs+(ω) + DG(ω)DT s+(ω) ≡S(ω)s+(ω),
(48)
where S(ω) is the total scattering matrix relating the incoming and outgoing wave. The diagonal
terms in S(ω) gives the amplitude reflections and the cross-terms give the amplitude transmission
between the respective ports. Particularly, if we write the coupling matrix as DT = [dT
1 , dT
2 , .., dT
m],
such that di is the i’th row of D, then
Sij(ω) = Cij + diG(ω)dT
j .
(49)
If ˜Ωcan be diagonalised by a unitary transformation Λ = Q† ˜ΩQ, where Q = [v1, v2, .., vn] consist
of the eigenvectors of ˜Ωin its columns, then the elements of S(ω) can be written in the form of a
sum of Lorentzian peaks
Sij(ω) = Cij +
n
X
k=1
(divk)

d∗
jvk
†
i(ωk −ω) + γk
,
(Orthogonal modes)
(50)
where ωk and γk now refers to the actual eigenvalues. Important to note here, is that it is not
necessarily possible to actually diagonalise ˜Ωby a unitary transformation. The requirement for
this to be possible is that ˜Ωis a normal matrix, meaning that it should commute with its own
Hermitian conjugate ˜Ω† ˜Ω= ˜Ω˜Ω†. Obviously, this is the case for Hermitian matrices as well as
unitary matrices, but in our case we have ˜Ω= Ω−iΓ, where Ωand Γ are Hermitian. As such,
the requirement for ˜Ωto be normal is that ΩΓ = ΓΩ. This is discussed further in [25], where they
prove that if the number of ”independent” decay-ports is less than the number of leaky modes,
then there will always be non-orthogonal modes present in the system.
23 of 93
==PAGE:25==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 9: The single-cavity Fano mirror, sketching the definitions of the ports and the ”s”-fields. Figure
taken from [16].
3.2
The Fano Mirror
For a specific application of the CMT, we can consider the configuration of the ”mirror” in the
conventional Fano laser, sketched in figure (1). We have three ports and a single resonant mode ac
with resonant frequency ωc. The total decay rate is denoted γT = γc +γp +γi and consists of decay
to the two waveguides as well as intrinsic decay due to vertical scattering. We let s+ = (si, 0, 0)T
and s−= (sr, st, sp)T . The coupling matrix D = (d1, d2, d3)T is now just a column vector. In
general we can also have a blocking airhole (PTE) below the nanocavity with amplitude reflection
rB and transmission tB. By varying the position of the PTE slightly to the left or right, the
coupling rates to the left and right can differ, in which case one would split up the waveguide-
cavity coupling rate 2γc = γ1 + γ2, but we will for simplicity take γ1 = γ2. Additionally, when the
PTE is sufficiently far from the symmetry line, then effectively the PTE and the nanocavity can
be treated as a Fabry-Perot etalon [28]. In that case the spectral symmetry of the transmission
spectrum depends sensitively on the distance between the nanocavity and the waveguide. When
the PTE is in the symmetry-line below the nanocavity, the direct scattering matrix is
C =


rB
−itB
0
−itB
rB
0
0
0
1

.
(51)
The reason for the appearance of imaginary unit in front of tB is purely by convention, since the
requirement of C being unitary and symmetric, means that tB becomes real. Additionally, rB and
tB must satisfy r2
B + t2
B = 1. The dynamical equations are then
dac
dt = (−iωc −γT )ac + d1si
(52)
sr = d1ac + rBsi,
(53)
st = d2ac −itBsi,
(54)
sp = d3ac.
(55)
Here we already applied the ”trivial” relation (43b).
Before we even determine the coupling
coefficients, we can already write up the reflection r(ω) and the transmission in the through-port
t(ω) and cross-port tp(ω), which will be given by
r(ω) = rB +
d2
1
i(ωc −ω) + γT
,
t(ω) = −itB +
d1d2
i(ωc −ω) + γT
,
tp(ω) =
d1d3
i(ωc −ω) + γT
.
(56)
If rB = 0 we have a symmetric Lorentzian reflection and transmission, but for rB ̸= 0 the lineshapes
will in general have the characteristic asymmetrical Fano shape. Here r(ω) corresponds to S11(ω)
in the scattering matrix, but we might just as well have looked at an incoming wave from the right.
If the system is mirror-symmetric - which it is if the PTE is right below the nanocavity, and if the
cross-port doesn’t influence the coupling to the lower waveguide - and if we then put the reference
24 of 93
==PAGE:26==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
planes symmetrically around the symmetry-line, then we must have S11(ω) = S22(ω) [24]. As such
we can immediately determine that d2
1 = d2
2, leading to d1 = ±d2, where the + (−) is for a mode
with even (odd) symmetry with respect to the mirror-plane. This simplifies some calculations of
the phases, but we will still go through them to demonstrate the principle.
The magnitudes can of the coupling coefficients are found by applying (43a). We get
|d1|2 + |d2|2 + |d3|2 = 2γc + 2γp.
(57)
If the decay rates to the cross-port is independent of the others, then obviously |d3| = p2γp (or
one can also say that this simply defines γp), and additionally if the system below the nanocavity
is mirror-symmetric, then we must have |d1| = |d2| = √γc. We can then set
d1 = √γceiθ1,
d2 = √γceiθ2,
d3 =
p
2γpeiθ3.
(58)
The condition CD∗= −D leads to
rBe−iθ1 −itBe−iθ2 = −eiθ1,
(59)
−itBe−iθ1 + rBe−iθ2 = −eiθ2,
(60)
e−iθ3 = −eiθ3.
(61)
The third relation can be taken as eiθ3 = i. The two first can be put on a simpler form by realising
that the equations are symmetric under exchange of 1 and 2, which leads to
cos(2θ1) = −rB,
(62)
eiθ1−iθ2 = e2iθ1 + rB
itB
.
(63)
These equations are valid whenever the decay rates to the right and left are equal, but as mentioned
earlier, the mirror-symmetry simply gives exp(iθ1 −iθ2) = ±1.
In figure 10 the resulting lineshapes are plotted for rB = 0, rB = 0.5, and rB = 1. For rB = 0,
meaning the PTE is absent, the reflection spectrum is just a single Lorentzian. The phase is a
hyperbolic tangent from 0 to π, with the maximum slope at ω = ωc. For rB = 1/2, the reflection
peak is asymmetric takes the characteristic ”Fano lineshape”. For strongly detuned frequencies
the absolute reflection is simply given by |rB|2, but in the neighborhood of ω = ωc, the absolute
reflection drops from 1 to 0 when the detuning is varied on the order of 2γc. Due to this sharp
drop, the Fano lineshape has been proposed as a possible candidate for an all-optical switch to
be used in neuromorphic computing[3]. By actively tuning the resonance frequency through an
optical modulation pump, we can shift the spectrum relative to the incoming wave, achieving a
fast, high-contrast optical switch. For rB = 1, the reflection spectrum is an inverted Lorentzian,
so the transmission on the other hand becomes Lorentzian. The geometry in this case is when the
waveguide is completely blocked, and the only possible transmission is resonant transport mediated
by the nanocavity. If we for example remove the through-port, and only have the cross-port, then
the reflection spectrum is as shown, and the transmission to the cross-port will be Lorentzian. Of
course, the transmission to the cross-port will in general take a Lorentzian form, but it will peak
at |tp(ω = ωc)|2 = γcγp/γ2
T .
3.3
Steady-state properties and the oscillation condition
We will now consider an actual Fano laser. The right mirror in our laser cavity is the Fano mirror
formed by a single nanocavity with resonance frequency ωc and reflectivity r2(ω; ωc) = r2(ω).
For brevity we write r2(ω; ωc) = r2(ω) whenever it doesn’t cause confusion. The left mirror is
assumed to be non-dispersive and broad-band, r1(ω) = r1. Such a mirror can be easily realised by
simply terminating the waveguide, and FDTD simulations have shown to agree well with simply
considering it as a constant, r1 = −1 [16]. We assume the active material is confined to the L-
cavity, which can be achieved with the buried-heterostructure technique [29]. On the other hand,
25 of 93
==PAGE:27==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
1
2
3
4
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-1
0
1
2
3
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-2
-1
0
1
2
Figure 10: Lineshapes for the single-cavity Fano mirror. Parameters: ωc = 0, γi = 0.01γc, γp = 0.
if the active material extends to the nanocavity, then the Fano mirror acts as a saturable absorber.
This has been demonstrated to lead to self-pulsing under certain conditions, and the self-pulsing
can be interpreted as a form of passive Q-switching [9].
From a coupled-mode point of view, the inclusion of the left mirror simply introduces feedback of
an output port to an input port, i.e. si(ω) = rL(ω, N)sr(ω), where
rL(ω, N) = r1e2ik(ω,N)L
(64)
is the ”reflection” from the L-cavity as a whole. L is the distance between the mirrors and k(ω, N)
is the complex wavevector given by
k(ω, N) = ω
c n(ω, N) −i
2
 Γg(N, ω) −αi

,
(65)
where c is the speed of light in vacuum, N is the density of carriers in the active material, αi is the
distributed internal loss due to absorption outside the quantum wells, Γ is the confinement factor,
and g(N, ω) = g(N) is the gain which we will in all cases assume to be frequency independent.
This seems a good approximation due to the generally narrow spectral width of the nanocavity
reflection.
Combining the equations we end up with si(ω) = rL(ω, N)r2(ω)si(ω), which suggest that either
si(ω) = 0, or the lasing oscillation condition must hold
r1r2(ω)e2ik(ω,N)L = 1.
(66)
When we talk of ”solving” the oscillation condition it typically means that we simultaneously find
a steady-state carrier density Ns and a real oscillation frequency ωs that satisfies the equation.
However, for any N we can solve the equation in terms of ω alone, and the solutions are simply the
quasinormal mode frequencies (QNM) of the system. Below threshold the roundtrip losses exceed
the gain g(N) < gth, and the QNM frequencies will all have negative imaginary part. Increasing
the gain will push the QNMs toward the real axis, and at threshold g(Ns) = gth the round-trip gain
equals the losses, and the QNM frequency become purely real which corresponds to a transition
to lasing. The threshold modal gain is then given by
Γgth = αi + 1
2L ln

1
R1R2(ωs)

= ωs
vgQ,
(67)
where R1 = |r1|2 ≈1 and R2(ω) = |r2(ω)|2, vg is the group-velocity, ωs is the lasing fre-
quency at steady-state and Q is the quality-factor of the lasing mode, defined by the above
relation. The equation above is also denoted the amplitude condition, i.e. the result of equat-
ing |rL(ωs, Ns)r2(ωs)| = 1, and it gives the steady-state carrier density Ns whenever we know the
oscillation frequency ωs.
Above threshold, any additional carriers simply result in more output power with an ”electron to
photon” ratio given by the differential quantum efficiency. A good, energy-efficient laser will have
a low threshold modal gain and a quantum efficiency close to unity. This is in fact the primary
motivation for having a cross-port at all, since it turns out that the quantum efficiency is quite low,
26 of 93
==PAGE:28==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
when the light is collected from the through-port. This can be understood intuively when we realise
that during lasing the nanocavity field becomes very intense as can be seen from both experiments
and FDTD [16]. The outgoing wave in the through-port is a sum of the out-coupled field from the
nanocavity and the field going directly from the L-cavity, which interferes destructively, resulting
in a low through-port power. If there are no other channels then the intrinsic loss due to vertical
scattering in the nanocavity becomes a significant loss channel. On the other hand, if the cross-port
is present, the output power is simply proportional to the energy in the nanocavity resulting in a
significantly larger quantum efficiency. Of course, as discussed previously, it is not really ”right” to
think of separate fields interfering destructively, there is just a single QNM that spatially includes
both the nanocavity and the L-cavity, with the most intense spot being the nanocavity, and the
QNM is just much less confined in the cross-port than in the through-port.
Now, to actually solve the equations we need expressions for the gain and the refractive index.
For the refractive index, we assume that at some reference frequency ωr and reference carrier
density Nr we know the refractive index nr and the group refractive ng, and then we make linear
expansions of n(ω, N) around that reference. Similarly, the gain is expanded linearly around the
transparency carrier density N0 as follows
g(N) ≃gN(N −N0),
(68)
ω
c n(ω, N) ≃ωr
c nr + ng
c (ω −ωr) −1
2ΓαgN(N −Nr),
(69)
where gN is the differential gain. The latter term is equal to ωr
c (N −Nr)Γ ∂n
∂N

N=Nr,ω=ωr, and
it is taken care of by introducing the alpha-parameter (also called linewidth enhancement factor
or Henry-factor), which relates a change in gain with an associated change in phase. In other
words, it gives the proportionality constant between changes in the real and imaginary part of the
refractive index due to changes in the carrier density. It is defined by
α = −4π
λ
∂n/∂N
∂g/∂N ,
(70)
and in general it gives rise to phase-amplitude coupling. With these expansions, the exponent in
rL(ω, N) becomes
2iLk(ω, N) ≃2iLk(ωr, Nr) + τin(ω −ωr) + 1
2(1 −iα)GN(N −Nr),
(71)
with τin = 2L/vg being the round-trip time, and GN = ΓvggN.
Taking the argument of the
oscillation condition gives the phase condition,
arg(r1) + arg(r2(ωs; ωc)) + 2Lωs
c n(ωs, Ns) = 2πp,
(72)
where p is an integer. For α = 0 the phase condition and the amplitude condition decouples,
and the phase condition gives the oscillation frequency while the amplitude condition gives the
carrier density. For α > 0 one can instead solve the oscillation condition by assuming that at some
reference length Lr the laser oscillates at the chosen reference frequency ωr, and that this reference
frequency exactly matches the nanocavity resonance frequency ωc. Then
arg(r1) + arg(r2(ωr; ωr)) + 2Lr
ωr
c nr = 2πpr,
(73)
ΓgN(Nr −N0) = αi +
1
2Lr
ln

1
R1R2(ωr; ωr)

.
(74)
The oscillation condition can then be reformulated in terms of what happens when you shift your
cavity length away from the reference cavity length, or if you detune the resonance frequency from
the reference frequency. Subtracting the reference solution from (72) one ends up with
arg(r2(ωs; ωc)) −arg(r2(ωr; ωr)) + 2ωr
c nr(L −Lr) + 2ng(ωs −ωr)L
+ α
2
"
1 −L
Lr

ln(R1) + ln
 R2(ωs; ωc)

−L
Lr
ln
 R2(ωr; ωr)

#
= (ps −pr)2π,
(75)
27 of 93
==PAGE:29==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
which can then be solved numerically. Here ps −pr corresponds to different longitudinal modes
of the L-cavity, and one should be sure to find the one with the smallest threshold modal gain.
In [14] it is shown how the Q-factor and threshold modal gain depend on the cavity length and
the detuning of the resonance frequency from the reference, and essentially we only get a high Q-
factor whenever the cavity length is close to a whole number of half wavelengths of the nanocavity
resonance frequency.
Additionally, in conventional Fabry-Perot lasers, the lasing frequency is
quite dependent on the cavity length, but here the phase of the Fano mirror changes rapidly in
a neighborhood around the resonance frequency. Therefore, changing the cavity length results in
a significantly smaller change in lasing frequency compared to Fabry-Perot lasers, which has also
been shown experimentally [9].
3.4
Dynamics of dispersive mirrors
Before we continue with the Fano laser models, we will study the basics of dispersive mirrors. This
is essentially lays out the theoretical foundation of the intuition behind the toy model in section
2, and it also leads naturally to the derivation of the dynamical models.
Consider an arbitrary dispersive mirror with amplitude reflection given by r(ω). Intuitively, a
dispersive mirror can be thought of as a nonlocal operator in the time-domain. Additionally, if the
reflectivity can be decomposed in a non-dispersive part r0 and a dispersive part r1(ω), then
s−(ω) = r(ω)s+(ω) ⇒s−(t) = r0s+(t) +
Z ∞
−∞
r1(t −t′)s+(t′)dt′,
(76)
where the nonlocal response function is defined as
r1(t)e−iωst = 1
2π
Z ∞
0
r1(ω)e−iωtdω.
(77)
Note that causality requires r1(t < t′) = 0. Taking the derivative of (77), gives
dr1(t)
dt
e−iωst = 1
2π
Z ∞
0
−i(ω −ωs)r1(ω)e−iωtdω,
(78)
so with this definition of the Fourier transform, −i(ω −ωs) →
d
dt becomes a derivative in the
time-domain. In the case of a Fano mirror, if the eigenmodes are orthogonal, then by equation
(50) we can write the reflection as
r(ω) = r0 + r1(ω) + r2(ω) + r3(ω) + (...) = r0 +
n
X
k=1
d2
k
i(˜ωk −ω),
(79)
where r0 is the non-resonant reflection from potential PTE’s, and each rk(ω) = d2
k/i(˜ωk −ω)
corresponds to a lorentzian peak associated with an eigenmode, and where the coupling coefficients
dk = γkeiθk are now defined in terms of the eigenmodes. In this case, each eigenmode gives rise to
an integral in the form of the one in (76), and these integrals are simply identical to sk(t) = dkak(t),
where ak(t) is the amplitude of the k’th eigenmode and sk(t) is the reflected field originating from
that mode. In the time-domain, the response functions become exponentials,
rk(t −t′) = θ(t −t′)d2
ke−i(˜ωk−ωs)(t−t′),
(80)
and they can be interpreted as the ”ringing” of the eigenmode at a later time t, when excited
at time t′. While its Fourier transform - the reflectivity rk(ω) of the k’th eigenmode - gives the
steady-state solutions to the harmonically driven inhomogeneous equation, the response function
rk(t −t′) gives the transient solutions to the homogeneous differential equations. In general one
does not have to compute any Fourier transforms to derive the response function r(t −t′), as they
can be constructed directly from the solutions to the homogeneous system. We will do this in
section 4.1.
28 of 93
==PAGE:30==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 11:
Sketch of the weakly nonlocal limit, where r is much broader than s+ in the frequency
domain, but much narrower in the time domain. In the frequency domain we can expand r(ω) near ωs,
and in the time domain we can similarly expand s+(t′) around t′ = t, and then evaluate the convolution
integral, which is now independent of s+. Note that the integrals can exactly be related to the r(ω) and
its derivatives, evaluated at ω = ωs. This gives an alternative, but equivalent way of deriving equation
(89). As such, either one can Taylor expand r(ω) and then take the inverse Fourier transform (as we do
in the main text), or one can directly evaluate the convolution integral by a Taylor expansion of s+(t′).
Taking the derivative of the integral in (76) for the k’th eigenmode takes us back to the original
coupled-mode equations, written in terms of the derivative of the reflected field,
d
dt
Z ∞
−∞
rk(t −t′)s+(t′)dt′ = rk(0)s+(t) −i(˜ωk −ωs)
Z ∞
−∞
rk(t −t′)s+(t′)dt′
(81)
d
dtsk(t) = d2
ks+(t) −i(˜ωk −ωs)sk(t),
(82)
which just shows the consistency, in that the CMT equations can give us r(ω) and r(t −t′), but
we can also go the other way around. Remember that s−(t) = r0s+(t) + P dkak(t) = r0s+(t) +
P sk(t). As such, if the matrix ˜Ωdescribing the coupling of the resonant modes can be diagonalized
by a unitary transformation, then we can just as easily work with the reflected fields from the
eigenmodes, as the amplitude of the eigenmodes themselves.
Returning the general case of an arbitrary dispersive mirror, we can consider the ”weakly nonlocal”
limit, where r(ω) is much broader than s+(ω). In the time-domain this corresponds to s+(t) varying
slowly compared to how fast the response function r(t) decays, as is sketched in figure 11.
In this case r(ω) can locally be described by its Taylor expansion
r(ω) = r(ωs) + (ω −ωs) ∂r(ω)
∂ω

ωs
+ 1
2(ω −ωs)2 ∂2r(ω)
∂ω2

ωs
+ ...
(83)
= r(ωs)
h
1 −i(ω −ωs)j1 + (−i(ω −ωs))2j2 + ...
i
,
(84)
where we have introduced the coefficients jn to get the factor −i(ω −ωs) in front,
jn =
in
r(ωs)n!
∂nr(ω)
∂ωn

ωs
.
(85)
jn are simply the n’th derivative of the r(ω) scaled to r(ωs), and specifically j1 = i ∂ln r(ω)
∂ω
|ω=ωs.
Note that even if we include all inifinite terms in the Taylor series, the series will only converge
to r(ω) when the distance |ω −ωs| is smaller than the distance to the nearest pole in the complex
plane |ω −ωs| < |˜ωpole −ωs|. In other words r(ω) must be analytic on a disk in the complex plane,
centered on ωs and with radius ω −ωs. If we for example consider the Fano mirror, then each
29 of 93
==PAGE:31==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
eigenmode gives a pole in the complex plane, which just means that the width of the Lorentzian
peak limits the radius of convergence of the Taylor series. As such, in practice it won’t make
a difference, since one would anyway only use a Taylor expansion to describe a small part of
the Lorentzian peak. As an example of the approximate range of validity, a second order Taylor
expansion of the Lorentzian lineshape is shown in figure 12. From the lineshape alone it seems as
if the Taylor expansion is significantly better at capturing the magnitude than the phase, but one
should really go into the complex plane to get a better picture. In any case, for the parameters
chosen, the Taylor expansion seems to be good as long as |ω −ωs|/γ < 0.5.
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Figure 12:
2nd order Taylor expansion of Lorentzian reflection peak at ωs = ωc −1.46γ, showing
approximate range of validity. Solid lines are r(ω) and dashed lines are the second order Taylor expansion.
Left: plots of |r(ω)|2 and arg(ω)2. Right: r(ω) plotted in the complex plane.
Continuing, if we write the reflectivity as an exponential,
r(ω) = r(ωs) exp
 ρs(ω)/2 + iϕs(ω)

,
(86)
so ρs(ω) = ln
 r(ω)
r(ωs)

2
is the logarithm of the relative absolute value, and ϕs(ω) = arg(r(ω)) −
arg(r(ωs)) is the relative phase, then the first couple of coefficients become
j1 = i
1
2ρ′
s + iϕ′
s

= −ϕ′
s + i
2ρ′
s,
(87)
j2 = −1
2
 1
2ρ′
s + iϕ′
s
2
+
1
2ρ′′
s + iϕ′′
s
!
= −1
2
"1
2ρ′
s
2
−ϕ′2
s + 1
2ρ′′
s + i
 ρ′
sϕ′
s + ϕ′′
s

#
, (88)
where (′) is derivative with respect to ω evaluated at ω = ωs. The coefficients j1 and j2 are plotted
in figure 13 as functions of expansion point ωs in the case of a single Lorentzian lineshape as the
one in figure 12. The shape seem to follow some ”Kramer-Kronig relations”-like pattern, but it
has not been checked whether this is actually the case.
Consider now what this means for the reflected field in the time-domain. Specifically, with the
inverse Fourier transform defined as in (77), the slowly varying complex envelopes are related as
s−(ω) = r(ω)s+(ω) ⇒
1
r(ωs)s−(t) = s+(t) + j1s′
+(t) + j2s′′
+(t) + j3s(3)
+ ...
(89)
This shows that each derivative of r(ω) adds additional ”sluggishness” to the mirror. We should
note that in the case of a ”Fano lineshape” with r(ω) = rB + r1(ω) where r1(ω) is Lorentzian,
then the ”j”-coefficients will diverge near the point where r(ω) = 0. In that case it might be more
intuitive to define j(1)
m , which are the ”j”-coefficients for the Lorentzian lineshape. Similarly, if we
have a sum of a non-resonant term and n Lorentzians r(ω) = rB + r1(ω) + r2(ω) + ... + rk(ω) +
... + rn(ω), then the above equation can also be written as
1
r(ωs)s−(t) = s+(t) +
1
r(ωs)
k=n,m=∞
X
m,k=1
rk(ωs)j(k)
m s(m)
+ (t),
(90)
30 of 93
==PAGE:32==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
-5
0
5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
-5
0
5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Figure 13:
The dependence of the first two ”j”-coefficients on expansion point ωs for a Lorentzian
lineshape.
where m denotes the order of the derivative, and k is refers to the k’th resonant mode. The above
equation will not be used, but is just given to show that we can also treat the individual components
of r(ω) and not only the whole combined thing. Also, rk(ω) does not have to be Lorentzian in the
above equation.
We will primarily use equation (89) to get some qualitative intuition, as it doesn’t necessarily give
simpler dynamical equations. In practice, when we consider Fano mirrors and actual simulations,
then this expansion is probably of limited use, or at least only relevant for specific problems like
specifically studying the dependence of the dynamics on the shape of the reflection spectrum. The
coupled-mode description already does the job, is fairly simple, and doesn’t require any additional
assumptions about the width of the spectrum of s+(ω). Additionally, if we only have a single
resonant mode, then as soon as we go to 2nd order we haven’t gained anything in terms of number
of dimensions to keep track off. However, one could imagine that in a system with several modes,
then one specific mode was the most active, and the rest of them provided a kind of background,
in which case one could keep the couple-mode description of the primary mode, and expand the
rest to 1st order for example. The zero’th order would then have similar effects as a PTE.
3.5
Dynamical Fano laser models
In this section we take a look at three approaches to modelling the dynamics of a Fano laser.
First we derive the models in their general form, and then we take a brief look at the dynamical
properties of the conventional Fano laser. In general we will always (or at least can always) use
the coupled-mode equations for the Fano mirror to get an equation for s−(t). The whole challenge
is how to evaluate the round-trip in the laser cavity. In all cases, the starting point is to expand
k(ω, N), so the round-trip factor rL(ω, N) = r1e2ik(ω,N)L becomes an exponential in ω and N.
One can then either derive an ODE using the formalism from the previous section, or immediately
apply an inverse Fourier transform resulting in a translation in time, and as such an actual delay.
Key in both approaches is to only let N be time-dependent after the inverse Fourier transform.
3.5.1
Derivation of dynamical models
Continuing from the previous section, note that in (89) we didn’t assume anything about the func-
tion r(ω), and we might just as well apply it to
1
rL(ω,N) as to the Fano mirror rR(ω). Specifically,
s−(ω) =
1
rL(ω, N)s+(ω) = r−1
1 e−2ik(ω,N)Ls+(ω).
(91)
As such we can simply use the same first order expansion for k(ω, N) as we already used to solve
the oscillation condition to find the steady-state (ωs, Ns). We then get
rL(ω, N) ≃rLS exp
 iτin(ω −ωs)

exp
1
2(1 −iα)GN(N −Ns)τin

,
(92)
31 of 93
==PAGE:33==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
where rLS = rL(ωs, Ns) = r1 exp
 2iLk(ωs, Ns)

takes the form
rLS = r1 exp

2iLωsnr/c + 1
2τinGN(Ns −N0) −Lαi

.
(93)
So far the approaches have been the same, but now they diverge.
The ODE model.
Now, we can almost just use the formula from the previous section, i.e.
equation (89), by identifying j1 = ϕ′
s = τin and dropping the higher order terms, but we also have
to expand in N,
1
rL(ω, N) ≃
1
rLS

1 −iτin(ω −ωs) −1
2 (1 −iα) GN(N −Ns)τin

.
(94)
Now, after inserting the expansion in s−(ω) =
1
rL(ω,N)s+(ω), taking the inverse Fourier transform,
and isolating s′
+(t), we arrive at
ds+(t)
dt
= 1
2(1 −iα)GN(N(t) −Ns)s+(t) + 1
τin
 rLSs−(t) −s+(t)

,
(95)
where we let N = N(t) be time-dependent. The above equation will be referred to as the ”ODE-
model”, and it is then combined with some model of s−(t) depending on the system, and with a
rate equation for the carrier density. The rate equation for the carrier density can be identical to
the one presented in the toy model with Np ∝|s+|2, and the proportionality constant will depend
on the choice of normalisation, as well as expansion point (ωs, Ns),
dN
dt = Rp −N
τs
−1
ΓGN(N −N0)Np.
(96)
The full set of equations for the conventional Fano laser was first presented in [1] and a more
detailed derivation can be found in [11] as well as in [16]. They will be discussed later, but note
that so far the approach is completely general, in that we haven’t specified the right mirror yet.
As such the form above can be considered the ”conventional” rate equation for when one has to
keep track of the phase of the electric field.
Curiously, if we take s+(t) out of parenthesis in the last equation, then the equation somehow looks
like the toy model, with
1
τin (rLSs−/s+ −1) taking the role of the delayed mirror.
The DDE model. Returning to the round-trip factor,
rL(ω, N) ≃rL(ωs, N)eiτin(ω−ωs),
(97)
the corresponding response function (assuming N(t) to vary slowly compared to the round-trip
time) becomes
rL(t −t′, N) = rL(ωs, N)δ(t −t′ −τin).
(98)
As such the convolution in equation (76) of the response function with s−(t) gives a translation in
time
s+(t) = rL(ωs, N(t −τin))s−(t −τin),
(99)
where again we let N(t) be time-dependent.
Finally, we combine this with a coupled-mode description of the nanocavities. We let d denote the
row of the coupling matrix D that relates to the return port, so s−(t) = r0s+(t) + da(t), resulting
in
d
dta(t) = −i(˜Ω−ωsI)a(t) + dT s+(t),
(100)
s+(t) = rL(ωs, N(t −τin))
 r0s+(t −τin) + da(t −τin)

.
(101)
This is the general form of the ”DDE model”. In the present form s+(t) is written as a recurrence
relation, similar to how one can treat external feedback [46]. As such, the cavity fields couple
32 of 93
==PAGE:34==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
explicitly to themselves at a later time through the round-trip in the L-cavity. Conceptually, one
can solve the above equations using the ”method of steps”. Given that we know s+, N, and a on the
time interval t = [t0 −τin, t0], then we also automatically know s+ on the interval t = [t0, t0 + τin].
As such we can treat the equation for a simply as an inhomogeneous differential equation driven
by s+(t), and therefore in order to solve the DDE it is simply a matter of consecutively solving
ODE’s. The initial conditions are then provided in the form of a set of history functions for N, s+
and a on the time interval t = [t0 −τin, t0]. An important special case is when r0 = 0 where we
obtain,
d
dta(t) = −i(˜Ω−ωsI)a(t) + rL(ωs, N(t −τin))(dT d)a(t −τin),
(102)
where (dT d)ij = didj is an outer product.
The previous equation was technically a ”delay-
differential algebraic equation”, which could be converted to an actual DDE, but that would result
in an inifinite number of delay terms. In the model above, we only need to keep track of the system
one round-trip time previously, and when we have a finite number of delays, then there are already
efficient DDE solvers implemented in Matlab. This is in fact one of the advantages of the model,
in that it is almost as simple in its implementation as the ODE model. Specifically, dde23 does
the job.
The Iterative Travelling-Wave Model.
For completion we will also briefly touch upon a
third model, the ”Iterative Travelling-Wave Model”, or ”Iterative model” for short. It was applied
specifically to the Fano laser by Thorsten Svendsen [16], and is built on an approach that was
originally proposed to study semiconductor lasers with external feedback [30].
If we continue from equation (100), then note that the imhomogeneous equation has an analytical
solution in terms of s+(t),
a(t0 + ∆t) = G(∆t)a(t0) +
Z ∆t
0
G(∆t −t′)dT s+(t′ + t0)dt′,
(103)
where G(t −t′) = θ(t −t′)Φ(t)Φ−1(t′) is the Green’s function for the system of resonant modes as
defined earlier. Now, one kind of iterative model would be to simply brute force the above integral
to get an update for a, and this is basically what one does in the ”method of steps” described
previously for the DDE model. As such when one delves into the algorithm of the DDE, then it is
really a kind of iterative model. However, what one can do instead is to take steps of length τin
and simply assume that s+(t) can be taken as a constant between t and t + τin,
s+(t + ∆t) ≃s+(t),
for ∆t < τin
(104)
in which case it would suffice to evaluate the integral once and for all. Even simpler, when s(t) is
constant the inhomogeneous differential equation has the analytical solution,
a(t + τin) = G(τin)(a(t) −G(ωs)dT s+(t)) + G(ωs)dT s+(t).
(105)
Similarly, the carrier density is updated as
N(t + τin) = exp (−C2τin)

N(t) −C1
C2

+ C1
C2
,
(106)
where C1 = Rp + GNN0Np(t)/Γ, and C2 =
1
τs + GNNp(t)/Γ. This is the simplest form of the
Iterative model, and we end up with an iterated map. As it stands, the time-resolution is limited
to the round-trip time, but as described in detail in [16], one can further enhance the increase
the accuracy of the model by introducing additional discretion planes along the laser cavity, with
5 −10 discretion planes seemingly enough, depending on the application. This is really where
the iterative travelling-wave model gets its name from, as it simulates the full partial-differential
equation, by turning it into a set of discrete nodes (the discretion planes) where each node couples
to its neighbour.
Comparison of models. Which model to use really depends on the specific application, and
what one wants to analyse. In general the ODE-model is an extremely useful tool for characterising
33 of 93
==PAGE:35==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
small-signal modulation, stability of modes, and in general any kind of ”local” analysis, and even
far from equilibrium it often shows the correct qualitative behaviour. One should however be aware
that we can only expect the ODE model to be valid when τin(ω −ωs) ≪1. The reason for this
is that one expands the full exponential in rL(ω, N) in order to derive the ODE. On the other
hand, in both the DDE model and the Iterative model we didn’t expand the full exponential in
rL(ω, N), but only the k-vector, and as such we don’t need to assume that the frequency deviation
is limited to |ω−ωs|τin ≪1. As has been discussed in [16] and [46], the iterative model is therefore
believed to give more accurate results when analysing large-signal modulation in the context of
all-optical switching [3], and in systems with several active modes. Specifically, one can capture
jumps between neighbouring longitudinal modes of the laser cavity. It has also been applied to
analyse the small-signal frequency modulation response of the conventional Fano laser, when the
modulation speed enters the terahertz-regime, where the ODE model does not give the correct
response [16].
Since the DDE model is based on the same expansion of the k-vector, similar
arguments are expected to hold.
When considering computation time, the iterative model model has also been observed to be faster
than conventional ODE solvers (for Matlab ode45, ode23, etc.), when applied to similar problems.
This is reasonable, given that the ”G”-matrices are provided once, and then the algorithm simply
runs, without any need to evaluate errors, step-sizes, or similar. The iterative model is then also
likely to run faster than the DDE model. But on the other hand, the DDE model does not make
the assumption that s+(t) is constant within the time-span of τin. In fact if one does not introduce
additional discretion planes in the Iterative model, then the DDE model should be more accurate,
as the resolution of s+(t) is not limited by the round-trip time. However, we do note that in the
DDE model, there is some ambiguity in at what point one should evaluate N, as an increase in
carrier density affects both the backward propagating wave s−and the forward propagating wave
s+. Since we only let N(t) be time-dependent after the inverse Fourier Transform, then in the
regime where the model is valid (where N(t) does not vary significantly on the timescale of τin),
then the choice should not matter too much. One could take care of this by introducing additional
discretion planes as in the Iterative model, but that would also take away some of the arguments
for the DDE model, which is the simplicity of the implementation.
Finally, note that as long as we only use a single value for the carrier density, then we neglect any
kind of spatial- and spectral hole burning. Of course, when the modes are standing waves, then the
field intensity is largest at the peaks and valleys of the wave, so more carriers will be pumped at
these points which potentially can limit the achievable gain. In the iterative model it is possible to
take care of this by having separate carrier densities at each node, but at the same time, diffusion
of carriers will lessen the impact of the hole burning, and if one needs to add a model for diffusion,
then it suddenly becomes significantly more complicated. In any case, the models presented above
can of course always be modified for the purpose, and by including additional effects, such as gain
dispersion, carrier injection locking, external feedback, spontaneous emission noise etc.
3.5.2
ODE model applied to general dispersive mirror
Having introduced the models, we will now first study the ODE model in the context of an arbitrary
dispersive mirror, in order to draw some general conclusions. Remember that rLSrR(ωs) = 1 by
the oscillation condition, so evaluating rLSs−(t) = s−(t)/rR(ωs) by use of (89), we get
s′
+ = 1
2 (1 −iα) GN(N −Ns)s+ + 1
τin
 j1s′
+ + j2s′′
+ + ...

.
(107)
As mentioned earlier, it is not necessarily smarter to use this form, but it is worthwhile to study this
form to get some qualitative insight and intuition into what the shape of the reflectivity actually
mean for the dynamical equations, and we can already draw a few obvious conclusions. If all the
derivatives are zero, we immediately reobtain the Fabry-Perot laser, as we should. On the other
hand, if j2 ̸= 0 is not negligible, then suddenly the frequency and the effective gain of the laser
is not merely functions of N (given by the first term), but are instead solutions to a differential
equation. We will return to this, but note also that the first derivative j1 doesn’t actually change
34 of 93
==PAGE:36==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
the dynamics, but just result in an effective rescaling of the parameters. This can be seen by
rearranging the equation to
s′
+ = 1
2
(1 −iα)
τin −j1
τinGN(N −Ns)s+ +
1
τin −j1

j2s′′
+ + j3s(3)
+ + ...

.
(108)
As such, one can simply redefine GN, α, and j2,3,.. to take this effect into account.
We can interpret this in the sense that the slope of the mirror modifies the differential gain and
the degree of phase-amplitude coupling, and that we can have phase-amplitude coupling even for
α = 0, but from a mathematical point of view, it is the exact same equation. As such the possible
qualitative dynamics are unaffected, and in order to have any kind of extra delay in the system,
the 2nd derivative j2 must be important. This ability to tune the effective parameters through the
slope of the mirror can however still be an important property, if we are interested in optimising
the linewidth of the laser, by means of reducing the effective α, or on the other hand if we want a
stronger phase-amplitude coupling in order to observe some dynamical effect.
Now, we can briefly compare with our initial qualitative toy model. In a very simplified sense, if j2 ≈
0 then it corresponds to the model where the mirror reacted instantaneously, by an instantaneous
change in the effective lifetime,
1
τp =
1
τps + ∆αm(N). It perhaps become more clear, if we split the
modified gain term into the original gain term, and the addition that comes from the dispersive
mirror,
(1 −iα)
τin −j1
τinGN(N −Ns) = (1 −iα) GN(N −Ns) −(1 −iα)(ϕ′
s −i 1
2ρ′
s)
τin + ϕ′s −i 1
2ρ′s
GN(N −Ns).
(109)
The left term is the usual gain term including the steady-state photon lifetime, and the right term
can be interpreted as some complex analog of ∆αm(N). If one then splits the differential equation
for s′
+ in amplitude and phase, then everything would reduce to the adiabatic limit of the toy
model, and the real part of the second term above would give the function ∆αm(N).
On the other hand, as soon as the curvature (j2) of the mirror is important, then everything is sigini-
ficantly more complicated. We can try to set s′
+ =
  1
2g(t) −iω(t)

s+, such that g is the effective
gain and ω is the frequency of the slowly-varying envelope, then s′′
+ =

( 1
2g′ −iω′) + ( 1
2g −iω)2
s+.
Substituting this into (107) and taking into account only the first two terms in the Taylor expansion
of the mirror, we get
s′
+ =
1
2g −iω

s+,
(110)
−j2
1
2g′ −iω′

= 1
2(1 −iα)τinGN(N −Ns) −(τin −j1)
1
2g −iω

+ j2
1
2g −iω
2
.
(111)
The right-hand side is the characteristic polynomial of (107), when ∆N is interpreted as a constant.
In some sense the equation is qualitatively similar to the toy model, in that the gain is driven by
some function of N, but it is sluggish in its reaction.
But at the same time, this also shows
the limitations of the toy model, as we require a differential equation for both the gain and the
frequency, and they will in general be coupled and nonlinear. Also, in the above equation, it seems
that not only the mirror is delayed, but also the material gain is delayed as well, which we didn’t
consider in the toy model. Now, we could try to get something that looked even more like the
simple model, by playing around with the equation, but we will skip this here. Instead we will just
make some general observations. First, we can estimate the characteristic timescale of the mirror
lag (or really, the lag of the lasing mode as a whole),
τm ∼Re

−j2
−j1 + τin

.
(112)
We can use this as a guideline and say that when we rR(ω) has high local curvature relative to
the local slope, then this is where one could expect interesting dynamics to happen. Additionally,
note that when the imaginary part of the above ratio is zero, for example when both j1 and j2
35 of 93
==PAGE:37==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
are real, then g and ω are only coupled through the nonlinear term. In this case a linearization
will completely decouple the frequency and effective gain. For example, when the slope of absolute
reflection is zero ρ′
s = 0, i.e. on the top of a lorentzian reflection peak, then j1 = −ϕ′
s is purely
real. Additionally, if at the same time the second derivative of the phase is zero ϕ′′
s = 0, which is
also the case on top of a lorentzian peak, then also j2 = 1
2
 ϕ′2
s −1
2ρ′′
s

is real.
3.5.3
ODE model of single-mode Fano laser
Having studied the ODE model in general, we will now take a look at the conventional single-mode
Fano laser. They are usually presented in the following form,
dA+
dt
= 1
2 (1 −iα) ΓvggN (N −Ns) A+ + 1
τin
 
rBA+ + √γcAc
r2(ωs; ωc)
−A+
!
,
(113)
dAc
dt = (−i∆ω −γT )Ac + e2iθ1√γcA+,
(114)
dN
dt = Rp −N
τs
−
Γ
VLC
vggN(N −N0) × σ(ωs, Ns)|A+|2.
(115)
A+ is the slowly-varying complex envelope of the field propagating towards the Fano mirror. It
is related to s+ by s+ = √2nϵ0ceiθ1A+, where the phase comes from a choice of reference plane
just left of the symmetry-line of the Fano mirror. Ac is the slowly-varying complex envelope of the
nanocavity-field with the normalisation ac = √2nϵ0cAc. The term in the bracket corresponds to
rL(ωs, Ns)A−−A+, where A−is related to s−in the same way as A+ to s+. With this choice of
normalisation, the photon number density is Np = Γσ(ωs, Ns)|A+|2/VLC where VLC is the active
region volume, such that VLC/Γ is the volume of the L-cavity. σ(ωs, Ns) is an expansion parameter
relating A+ to the photon number, and it should be evaluated at steady-state [1]. It is given by,
σ(ωs, Ns) = 2ϵ0nng
ℏωs

1
Γgth −αi
(|r1| + |rR(ωs)|)(1 −|r1||r2(ωs)|)
|r1|
+
c
ωsn
|r1|
rR(ωs)| Im(rR(ωs))

.
(116)
The parameter σ is basically derived by assuming that the intensity in the L-cavity is described
by exponential growth, in which case the integrated intensity can be approximated from a single
reference plane. The detuning ∆ω = ωc −ωs + ∆ωNL is the detuning of the nanocavity reson-
ance frequency from the oscillation frequency, including any nonlinear effects that can be added
phenomenologically with the term ∆ωNL. In the first term in (113), the form ΓvggN(N −Ns) =
ΓvggN(N −N0) −1
τp is also sometimes used, in which case the photon lifetime τp should be eval-
uated at the steady-state. The other parameters that should be evaluated at the steady-state
solution (ωs, Ns) are Ns, ∆ω, rR(ωs; ωc) and σ(ωs, Ns).
The equations above have been studied relatively extensively since they were introduced in [1]. As
such we will not go too much into detail with the model, but just reference some basic features.
Comparing with the conventional laser rate equations as given in [15], the main difference is that
we have to actively keep track of the nanocavity field. It is possible to show that if γT is much
larger than all other rate constants, i.e. when the lineshape of the Fano mirror is broadened to
the point where the mirror is no longer dispersive, but broad-band, then one can adiabatically
eliminate Ac and retrieve the usual Fabry-Perot laser rate equations. This is what we also saw in
the general case of the dispersive mirror, when all the derivatives of r(ω) could be neglected. On
the other hand, the more typical scenario is that the round-trip time is the shortest. Note also
that the equations are invariant under the gauge-transformation A+ →A+eiϕ, Ac →Aceiϕ, so
only the phase-difference matter.
The threshold pump-level is (again neglecting spontaneous emission) given by Rp,th = Ns/τs. For
Rp < Rp,th the gain never gets to the point where it can overcome the losses, and the carrier
density simply goes towards Rpτs. Above threshold the extra carriers are converted to photons,
and the steady-state circulating power rises linearly with the excess pumping,
|A+
s |2 =
VLC(Rp −Rp,th)
ΓvggNσ(ωs, Ns)(Ns −N0) = VLC(Rp −Rp,th)
σ(ωs, Ns)Γvggth
,
Rp > Rp,th
(117)
36 of 93
==PAGE:38==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
In reality, the spontaneous emission will of course result in a non-zero power below threshold,
and the transition to lasing will be smoothed out, resulting in the characteristic ”s-curve” when
plotting the input pumping versus output power.
In this thesis we mostly focus on passive dynamics, but in case of the conventional single-mode
Fano laser, the arguably most interesting features are the steady-state characteristics (true single-
mode lasing and ultra-narrow linewidth [6]), and the active dynamics. Although we cannot yet
completely rule out any kind of self-pulsing in the single-mode Fano laser (without active material
in the nanocavity), it has not been found in simulations so far. Regarding the active dynamics, one
of the most interesting prospects of the Fano laser is the possibility to actively modulate the laser
through the nanocavity resonance frequency by either optical or electrical means. While electrical
modulation of the Fano laser is an active research topic, it haven’t been demonstrated yet, as it
requires additional engineering. On the other hand optical modulation have been demonstrated
in [5]. From a theoretical point of view, ∆ωNL can be considered the ”source” of the modulation
in the equations above, and one can then study the dynamics, by simply assuming that ∆ωNL
takes a specific form. In [1] they considered the Lorentzian lineshape for rB = 0 and studied the
modulated laser when operated at zero detuning ωc = ωs. Writing the nonlinear term resonance
shift as ∆ωNL = ϵγc sin(t), then ϵ ≪1 corresponds to the small-signal response and ϵ > 1
corresponds to large modulation.
For the small signal-response, we note that at the peak of the Lorentzian the modulation will only
result in frequency modulation, while amplitude modulation is only present to second order in ϵ.
What they show is that one can potentially reach modulation frequencies in the terahertz regime,
without being restricted by the carrier relaxation rate which usually sets a limit on the order of
10-40 GHz in macroscopic lasers. In all kinds of carrier injection modulation, the carrier relaxation
rate gives the upper limit for how fast the laser can be modulated, but by modulating the laser
via the resonance frequency of the mirror, then this ”restriction” is bypassed. When the phase of
the Fano mirror is modulated, the lasing frequency will change to satisfy the oscillation condition,
and even when the modulation frequency exceeds the inverse round-trip time plus the nanocavity
coupling rate, the lasing frequency will still follow the modulation almost instantaneously from the
adiabatic wavelength conversion. Basically, in this regime, the phase condition will be satisfied
”on average”, while the amplitude is not modulated at all.
When increasing the modulation amplitude ϵ, the pure frequency modulation gradually turns into
a combined frequency and amplitude modulation (which is also what one has at any non-zero
detuning), and then finally for ϵ > 1 into large, short pulses. The large-signal modulation can
thus be interpreted as basically turning the mirror on and off periodically, and is as such a form
of active Q-switching.
In conclusion, the challenge has been shifted from dealing with carrier dynamics in the laser
cavity, to dealing with modulation of the resonance frequency in the nanocavity. This is still a
significant challenge, as either one has to carefully engineer a PN-junction around the nanocavity
(in the case of electrical modulation), or use optical modulation schemes. The mechanisms for
optical modulation is discussed further in section 4.3, but all schemes (also in case of electrical
modulation) relies on modulating the refractive index of the nanocavity - and this is still difficult to
do fast. While the optical Kerr effect is instantaneous, it is also generally quite weak. Instead one
can rely on free-carrier dispersion from carriers generated by two-photon absorption, but in that
case the modulation frequency will also be limited by carrier dynamics, only now in the nanocavity.
As such it is still a significant experimental challenge to actually reach the theoretical possibility
of terahertz-modulation frequencies.
37 of 93
==PAGE:39==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
4
Two-cavity Fano Mirror
In this section we investigate the new Fano mirror based on two coupled nanocavities as shown in
(16). We note that transport properties of this configuration (among others) was analysed in [31].
Additionally, Jianhong Zhou et al. used a ”transfer matrix” approach to analyse the cascaded
system where we have a whole line of cavities with both direct and indirect coupling [32].
The section is structured as follows; in section 4.1 we consider two coupled resonators in isolation,
where we take a look at the eigenmodes and discuss the dynamics of coupled resonators. In section
4.2 we turn to the actual configuration and derive the CMT equations and the reflection, before
analysing the various reflection spectras and how they depend on the parameters.
Finally, in
section 4.3 we consider nonlinear effects in the nanocavities, discuss the physics, and study the
resulting dynamics.
4.1
Two coupled cavities - a photonic molecule
In this section we study the physics of two coupled optical resonators.
Such coupled cavities
are sometimes denoted ”photonic molecules” in the literature [33], due to the similarity with
how atomic orbitals hybridize to form molecular orbitals. Specifically, within the framework of
LCAO (”Linear combination of atomic orbitals”), one treats the hybridized molecular orbitals as
a superposition of the original atomic orbitals, and for two identical atomic orbitals this leads
to a bonding and an antibonding orbital. This is conceptually similar to the way coupled-mode
theory approximates the ”actual” optical modes as superpositions of the well known modes for the
isolated systems, which for two identical modes leads to a symmetric and an anti-symmetric mode.
For now, we just consider two coupled resonators, realised in whatever way. The dynamical equa-
tions for the amplitudes of resonant modes 1 and 2, a1 and a2, were presented in section 3.1, and
are given by
da1
dt = (−iω1 −γ1 −γi)a1 −i˜µa2,
(118)
da2
dt = (−iω2 −γ2 −γi)a2 −i˜µa1,
(119)
(120)
where ω1 and ω2 are the original resonant frequencies, γ1 and γ2 decay rates related to coupling
to other modes or to a waveguide, and γi is an intrinsic loss related to e.g. vertical scattering.
˜µ = µ′ +iµ′′ is the total effective complex coupling rate from all channels including both direct and
indirect coupling. If there is no indirect coupling, then µ′ usually dominates [10][42]. In section 4.2
we will find that for our particular geometry we have ˜µ = µ + √γ1γ2eiϕw, where µ is the (assumed
real) direct coupling - sometimes denoted the photon tunneling rate - and √γ1γ2eiϕw is the indirect
coupling through the waveguide, the phase of which is determined by the effective length between
the cavities. However for analysing the dynamics we do not need to know the explicit form, and
we will simply work with the general form ˜µ = µ′ + iµ′′.
On matrix form the system reads
da
dt = −i˜Ωa.
(121)
Using the formalism from section 3.1, we look for the eigenvalues of the system. If there was no
coupling between the cavities, then the eigenvalues (quasinormal modes) would be ˜ω1,2 = ω1,2 −
iγ1,2−iγi. For convenience we define the following quantities; the center frequency ω0 = 1
2(ω1+ω2),
the average decay rate γ0 = 1
2(γ1 + γ2) + γi, the detuning ∆′ = ω2 −ω1 of the cavity resonant
frequencies and the loss detuning ∆′′ = γ2 −γ1. We can then define ˜ω0 = 1
2(˜ω1 + ˜ω2) = ω0 −iγ0,
and ˜∆= ∆′ −i∆′′ = ˜ω2 −˜ω1.
The definitions are sketched in figure 14, and can be summarised as
˜Ω=
 
˜ω0 −
˜∆
2
˜µ
˜µ
˜ω0 +
˜∆
2
!
=
ω1 −iγ1 −iγi
µ′ + iµ′′
µ′ + iµ′′
ω2 −iγ2 −iγi

.
(122)
38 of 93
==PAGE:40==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
The eigenvalues are then given by
˜ω± = ˜ω0 ±
v
u
u
t
 ˜∆
2
!2
+ ˜µ2,
(123)
and the corresponding eigenvectors v± satisfy (˜Ω−˜ω±I)v± = 0. We can now look at two different
cases, ˜∆= 0 and ˜∆̸= 0.
Figure 14: Sketch of how the quasinormal modes ˜ω1,2 of cavity 1 and 2 couple to form a symmetric mode
(+) and an anti-symmetric mode (−). First row (a) shows identical cavities ˜ω1 = ˜ω2 = ˜ω0, while second
row (b) shows detuned cavities, ˜ω2 −˜ω1 = ˜∆, First column (1) shows the splitting in the complex plane
(ω′, ω′′), while the second column (2) sketches the frequency splitting. Note the similarity with molecular
orbital diagrams used in chemistry. As such we could also have chosen to label the eigenmodes A and B
for ”Antibonding” and ”Bonding”.
Degenerate modes (identical cavities), ˜∆= 0: If the original modes are degenerate (ω1 = ω2,
γ1 = γ2), then ˜ω± = ˜ω0 ± ˜µ, so µ′ gives frequency splitting and µ′′ gives the loss splitting,
Re(˜ω±) = ω± = ω0 ± µ′,
(124)
Im(˜ω±) = −γ± −γi = −γ0 ∓µ′′.
(125)
The eigenvectors are orthogonal and can be normalised as v± = (1, ±1)T /
√
2, corresponding to a
symmetric mode (+) and an anti-symmetric mode (−). We obtain the solutions
x1(t) = v−e−i˜ω−t,
x2(t) = v+e−i˜ω+t.
(126)
Important to note is that these solutions by themselves are simply decaying exponential functions
with a phase factor. If only one of these solutions are excited, then the energy in each cavity decays
exponentially and the distribution of energy remains constant. So in order to have any kind of
oscillations of energy, we need to excite both solutions. Continuing, the fundamental matrix and
it’s inverse become
Φ(t) = e(−iω0−γ0)t
√
2
 ei˜µt
e−i˜µt
−ei˜µt
e−i˜µt

,
Φ−1(t) = e(iω0+γ0)t
√
2
e−i˜µt
−e−i˜µt
ei˜µt
ei˜µt

(127)
39 of 93
==PAGE:41==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
and we get the Green’s function
G(t, t′) = θ(t−t′)Φ(t)Φ−1(t′) = θ(t−t′)e(−iω0−γ0)(t−t′)
 cos ˜µ(t −t′)
−i sin ˜µ(t −t′)
−i sin ˜µ(t −t′)
cos ˜µ(t −t′)

. (128)
Consider a scenario where we initially at time t′ excite only the first cavity, a0 = (1, 0)T , then a(t)
is simply given by the first column in this matrix. In that case the energy will oscillate between
the cavities with frequency 2µ′ corresponding to the frequency difference between the two modes.
However, one will only observe these oscillations as long as both modes are excited, and if the
loss-splitting µ′′ is non-zero, then the system will tend towards the mode with the longest lifetime.
This also means that in order to observe oscillations at all, we need to have a frequency splitting
at least as large as the fastest decay rate, i.e. |µ′| ≳γ0 + |µ′′|.
Another point is that flipping the sign of µ′ effectively means that one flips the sign of the beat
frequency, ω+ −ω−→ω−−ω+. In other words, it swaps which mode is red-shifted and which
is blue-shifted. While this might not sound like a big deal, it basically means that if one can
actively flip the sign, then one can perform time-reversal of the envelope oscillations. This has
been demonstrated both theoretically and experimentally in [34].
Detuned cavities, ˜∆̸= 0: In reality the cavities will always suffer from fabrication imperfections,
and we will never have truly identical cavities. But as long as the detuning is still relatively small,
then many of the qualitative aspects remain the same. Of course, the mode splitting is no longer
given by 2˜µ, but by ˜∆± = ˜ω+ −˜ω−which satisfies
˜∆2
± = ˜∆2 + 4˜µ2.
(129)
The beat frequency of the energy oscillations are then just given by Re( ˜∆±). Note that in this
case, what we have been referring to as the ”photon tunneling rate” (µ′) also affects the decay rates
and what we have been referring to as the ”loss splitting” µ′′ also affects the frequency splitting.
Note that the effective coupling can also potentially lift the original detuning, so if ˜∆2 + 4˜µ2 is
purely real, then for Re( ˜∆2 + 4˜µ2) > 0 we have loss degeneracy where Im( ˜∆±) = 0, and for
Re( ˜∆2 + 4˜µ2) < 0 we have frequency degeneracy, where Re( ˜∆±) = 0. Of course, total degeneracy
occurs when ˜∆2 + 4˜µ2 = 0, i.e. when ˜µ = ±i ˜∆/2.
Finally, it is worth noting that when the detuning is small, then to first order in ˜∆/˜µ the eigenvalues
doesn’t change,
˜∆± ≈2˜µ
 
1 +
˜∆2
8˜µ2
!
,
| ˜∆| ≪|˜µ|.
(130)
A small detuning will still affect the eigenvectors to first order though. Writing the eigenvectors
on the form v−= (1, −h−)T /
p
1 + |h−|2 and v+ = (h+, 1)T /
p
1 + |h+|2 then after inserting we
find
h−= h+ ≡h =
˜∆± −˜∆
2˜µ
≈1 −
˜∆
2˜µ +
˜∆2
8˜µ2 .
(131)
Note that the absolute value is to first order only affected by the real part |h| ≃1 −Re( ˜∆/2˜µ),
which results in more localised spatial profiles of the optical modes. The imaginary part on the
other hand will in general result in the eigenmodes being non-orthogonal,
v†
−v+ = h −h∗
1 + |h|2 ≈−i Im
 ˜∆
˜µ
!
,
| ˜∆| ≪|˜µ|.
(132)
The eigenvectors will only be non-orthogonal when ˜∆and ˜µ exactly align with the origin in the
complex plane, such that the triangle (0, ˜∆, ˜µ) becomes a line, i.e. when the phase difference is 0
or π. This is also corresponds to the eigenmodes and the original modes lying on the same line in
the complex plane, as sketched in figure 15.
40 of 93
==PAGE:42==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 15: Sketch of the orthogonality criteria. In a) Im( ˜∆/˜µ) ̸= 0, so the resulting eigenmodes are
non-orthogonal, while in b) Im( ˜∆/˜µ) = 0 and the eigenmodes are orthogonal. The special case of identical
cavities ˜∆= 0 can be considered as a special case of b).
4.2
Coupled-Mode Theory on the two-cavity Fano-mirror
We will now consider the specific configuration shown in figure (16). Let cavity 1 be the left cavity,
and cavity 2 be the right cavity. We imagine that cavity 1 and 2 each has a single resonant mode
that contribute to the resonant transport. Adopting the CMT formalism introduced in section
3.1, we can initially think of the configuration as a two-mode resonator with each mode being
connected to two ports, meaning we have four ports in total. The assumption is here that the
coupling between the cavities and the waveguide is localized to right below the cavities. In reality
it is probably more right to think of the coupling as distributed over some area, but the coupling
will be strongest right below the cavity anyway.
Figure 16: Two resonators with direct coupling µ and indirect coupling through the waveguide γweiϕw
Continuing from the previous section, we let a1,2 denote the amplitudes of the modes and ω1,2 the
resonant frequencies of the isolated cavities. The real direct coupling µ is the coupling strength
in absence of the waveguide. As mentioned previously, µ can be thought of as the overlap of the
modes 1 and 2, and is referred to as the ”photon tunneling rate”[42]. The modes decay to the
waveguides with rates γ1,2 and additionally we let γi be an intrinsic decay rate that is taken as
equal in both cavities.
The outgoing waves are collected in the column vector s−= (s1−, s2−, s3−, s4−)T , and the incoming
wave is s+ = (s1+, s2+, s3+, s4+)T . We are mainly interested in the reflection and transmission
41 of 93
==PAGE:43==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
of a wave coming from one side, so we will call s1+ = si, s1−= sr and s4−= st, and neglecting
any external feedback we set s4+ = 0. In addition to the ”usual” CMT equations we have to
deal with the fact that s+ is not independent of s−, but rather related by s3+(ω) = eiϕs2−(ω)
and s2+(ω) = eiϕs3−(ω), where ϕ = k(ω)L is the accumulated phase from propagation in the
waveguide. The CMT equations are then
da
dt = (−iΩ−Γ) a + DT s+,
(133)
s−= Cs+ + Da,
(134)
s+ = s(0)
+ + Bs−,
(135)
with
Ω=
ω1
µ
µ
ω2

,
Γ =
γ1 + γi
0
0
γ2 + γi

,
(136)
C =




0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0



,
D =





√γ1eiθ1
0
√γ1eiθ2
0
0
√γ2eiθ3
0
√γ2eiθ4




,
B =





0
0
0
0
0
0
eiϕ
0
0
eiϕ
0
0
0
0
0
0




,
(137)
where s(0)
+
= (si, 0, 0, 0)T . The relations between a, s+ and s−are sketched in figure 17a. Here
we already applied the results from section 3.1 and 3.2 on the coupling matrix D assuming that
the resonant modes have either even or odd symmetry with respect to their respective vertical
symmetry-lines. The coupling phases are then related as θ2 = π −θ1 and θ4 = π −θ3.
An important point in the approximations here is that B = B(ω) is technically a function of
frequency. In the time-domain the exponential eik(ω)L will result in a delay of the slowly varying
envelope, i.e. s2+(t) = eik(ωr)Ls3−(t −τ) where ωr is the center frequency. The question is then
whether we can ignore this delay. Obviously, in continuous wave operation we can simply take
ϕ as a constant. Otherwise, the requirement is basically that (ω −ωr)τ ≪1, meaning that the
instantaneous frequency shouldn’t deviate more than the inverse propagation time. Or in other
words, if the distance between the cavities is on the orders of a few wavelengths, then the amplitude
of the propagating waves must not vary much over that length. On this basis it seems reasonable
to ignore the frequency dependence of ϕ, as long as we’re not dealing with ultra narrow pulses.
Also, we note that having already made the significant approximation of localised coupling, it is
not certain that we actually get a more ”physical” model by having a single delay. However, it
could also makes sense to include the delay, if for some application we actually rely on it. Heuck
et al. showed that when the cavities are on opposite side of the waveguide, and the non-resonant
transmission is zero, then the resonant transmission is proportional to the detuning of the cavity
resonance frequencies [35]. They proposed a switching scheme using slightly time-delayed optical
pulses focused at each nanocavity, to only open the transmission window for a very short time.
This could be used to cut of the tails of pulses to get rid of unwanted patterning effects sampling
devices for example.
Now, ignoring the delay, we note the matrices B and C form a feedback loop, which we can use to
expand both the incoming and outgoing wave as
s+ = s(0)
+ + BCs+ + BDa = (I + BC + (BC)2 + ...)(s(0)
+ + BDa),
(138)
and
s−= s(0)
+ + CBs−+ Da = (I + CB + (CB)2 + ...)(Cs(0)
+ + Da),
(139)
which warrants the definition T = P∞
n=0(CB)n. This is sketched in figure 17.
In the present case the series terminates after the first two terms, but if we had a PTE below each
cavity, then this formulation would take care of the non-resonant feedback in a nice way. Inserting
the expansion and defining D′ = TD, C′ = TC, and M = DT BTD, the CMT equations become
da
dt = (−iΩ−Γ + M) a + D′T s(0)
+ ,
(140)
s−= C′s(0)
+ + D′a.
(141)
42 of 93
==PAGE:44==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 17: How s−, s+ and a are related before (a) and after (b) we expand the feedback loop by defining
the matrix T. Here D′ = TD, C′ = TC, and M = DBTDT .
On this form we have incorporated the waveguide-mediated coupling between the cavities directly
in the dynamical equations for a, and we do not have to keep track of s2± and s3±. As such, we
can drop the rows and columns in C′ and D′ related to port 2 and 3, and the equations take the
form of a two-mode resonator coupled to only two ports. Indeed, if we do that, then we have
C′ =
 
0
eiϕ
eiϕ
0
!
,
D′ =
 √γ1eiθ1
√γ2eiϕ+iθ3
√γ1eiϕ+iθ2
√γ2eiθ4
!
,
M =
 
0
γweiϕw
γweiϕw
0
!
(142)
where γw = √γ1γ2 and ϕw = θ2+ϕ+θ3 is the combined coupling phase of the waveguide-mediated
coupling between the modes. We then end up with the combined system matrix,
˜Ω′ = Ω−iΓ + M =
 
ω1 −iγ1 −iγi
µ + iγweiϕw
µ + iγweiϕw
ω2 −iγ2 −iγi
!
.
(143)
Comparing with the form of the total coupling in section 4.1, we have ˜µ = µ′+iµ′′ = µ+iγweiϕw, so
µ′ = µ−γw sin ϕw and µ′′ = γw cos ϕw. With this expression of ˜µ, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
follows from section 4.1. The implications are discussed in the following section along with the
resulting reflection spectras. Note that the direct and indirect coupling completely cancels each
other out when γw = µ and sin ϕw = π/2.
We could now define Ω′ = Re(˜Ω′) = Ω−Im(M) and Γ′ = −Im(˜Ω′) = Γ −Re(M) to get a set
of equations exactly like in [25]. The new set of equations should then obey the CMT relations
in (43), which we can quickly check. Obviously, Ω′ and Γ′ are both Hermitian, since they are
both real and symmetric. C′ is symmetric and unitary. K′ = D′ is trivial. Using the relations
θ2 = π −θ1, and θ4 = π −θ3, we can write
D′†D′ =

2γ1
−2γw cos ϕw
−2γw cos ϕw
2γ2

= 2Γ′,
(144)
and
C′D′∗=
 √γ1e−iθ2
√γ2eiϕ−iθ4
√γ1eiϕ−iθ1
√γ2e−iθ3
!
= −
 √γ1eiθ1
√γ2eiϕ+iθ3
√γ1eiϕ+iθ2
√γ2eiθ4
!
= −D′,
(145)
so the new CMT equations do indeed obey time-reversal symmetry and energy conservation.
We note that we could have started from a ”two modes two ports” interpretation from the begin-
ning, and then just derived the relations above. The end result would of course be the same, but
the implicit assumptions in the model wouldn’t be as clear. For convenience we will now drop the
dashes (′) in the notation again D′ →D, C′ →C, Ω′ →Ω, Γ′ →Γ, ˜Ω′ →˜Ω.
The total scattering matrix become
S(ω) = C + DG(ω)DT ,
G(ω) = [i(˜Ω−ωI)]−1.
(146)
If we ignore the intrinsic decay, then S(ω) is unitary as it should be. The amplitude reflection is
given by r(ω) = S11(ω) = S22(ω) and the transmission is t(ω) = S12(ω) = S21(ω).
43 of 93
==PAGE:45==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 18: Sketch of interpretation of r(ω) as a sum over all possible optical pathways, which reduces to
the four independent pathways shown in red, blue and green (the two green pathways are equivalent), and
the loop in purple.
For convenience we can define
gn(ω) =
1
i(ωn −ω) + γn + γi
,
(147)
gn can be thought of as Green’s function for the isolated resonant modes. We then get
G(ω) =
1
1 −g1(ω)g2(ω)(i˜µ)2

g1(ω)
−g1(ω)i˜µg2(ω)
−g2(ω)i˜µg1(ω)
g2(ω)

(148)
The total reflection can then be written as
r(ω) = γ1g1(ω)e2iθ1 + γ2g2(ω)e2i(ϕ+θ3) −2γwei(θ1+ϕ+θ3)g1(ω)g2(ω)i˜µ
1 −g1(ω)g2(ω)(i˜µ)2
(149)
We can interpret this form of the reflection by noting that we can identify each term in the
numerator with one of the four independent pathways of an incoming photon as sketched in figure
18. The first term r1 = γ1g1(ω)e2iθ1 corresponds to coupling to the 1st mode and then back out,
and is exactly equal to the amplitude reflection of cavity 1 in isolation. The second term e2iϕr2
similarly corresponds to reflection from the 2nd mode, but where we also have free propagation
in the waveguide. The 3rd term, which is the sum of two identical terms, corresponds to the two
ways we can couple into one mode, jump to the other (both directly and indirectly), and then back
out. All other imaginable pathways can be decomposed into one of these four pathways times a
number of ”loops” that are represented by the product g1(ω)(i˜µ)g2(ω)(i˜µ) in the denominator. As
such the reflection simply takes the form of a sum of all possible paths that goes in and comes out
of the same side. Finally, having made these observations, we note one can divide out the factor
e2iθ1 in r(ω), and rewrite exp(iϕ + iθ3 −iθ1) = −exp(iϕw) which shows that ϕw is the only phase
that matters for the shape of the reflection spectrum, while 2θ1 just gives a contribution to the
global phase.
Similarly, one can treat the transmission as the sum of possible optical pathways, and the expression
becomes
t(ω) = eiϕ + −eiϕγ1g1(ω) −eiϕγ2g2(ω) −γw(eiθ1+iθ4 + ei(θ2+2ϕ+θ3))g1(ω)g2(ω)i˜µ
1 −g1(ω)g2(ω)(i˜µ)2
,
(150)
but we will from now on only focus on the reflection spectrum. Note that due to the intrinsic
losses from vertical scattering in the cavities, then |t(ω)|2 + |r(ω)|2 ̸= 1 does in general not equal
unity. However, whenever the intrinsic decay is negligible compared to the waveguide coupling
44 of 93
==PAGE:46==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Q-factor of the eigenmodes, then |t(ω)|2 + |r(ω)|2 ≃1, which is generally the case whenever ϕw is
sufficiently far from 0 or π.
Identical cavities: In the specific case of identical cavities, we get the eigenvalues
˜ω± = ω0 ± (µ −sin ϕw) −iγi −iγw(1 ∓cos(ϕw)),
(151)
and the eigenvectors v−and v+ are orthogonal. In the basis of {v−, v+} the Green’s function for
the system is diagonal
Q†G(ω)Q =

g−(ω)
0
0
g+(ω)

,
g±(ω) =
1
i(ω± −ω) + γ± + γi
,
(152)
where Q = [v−, v+]. The coupling matrix then transforms as
DQ =
d1−
d1+
d2−
d2+

=
p
2γweiϕw/2
 
eiθ1 cos
 ϕw/2

−ieiθ1 sin
 ϕw/2

−eiθ4 cos
 ϕw/2

−ieiθ4 sin
 ϕw/2

!
.
(153)
One can check the CMT relations also hold in this basis, which they should, and which they do.
Due to the symmetry of the modes we must have d1−= −d2−, and d1+ = d2+. The scattering
matrix can then be written as
S(ω) =
 
d2
1−g−(ω) + d2
1+g+(ω)
eiϕ + d1−g−(ω)d2−+ d1+g+(ω)d2+
eiϕ + d2−g−(ω)d1−+ d2+g+(ω)d1+
d2
2−g−(ω) + d2
2+g+(ω)
!
,
(154)
where for example d2−g−(ω)d1−is coupling from port 1 to the antisymmetric eigenmode and then
out to port 2.
r(ω) = r−(ω) + r+(ω) = e2iθ1+iϕw

γ−
i(ω−−ω) + γ−+ γi
−
γ+
i(ω+ −ω) + γ+ + γi

.
(155)
The reflection can then clearly by identified as the sum of the reflections from the eigenmodes of
the coupled cavities. Finally, in the time-domain, the response function for the return port is given
by
r(t, t′) = d1G(t, t′)dT
1 = r−(t, t′) + r+(t, t′).
(156)
We will not explicitly use the response function, but it is included here for completion.
4.2.1
Eigenmodes and reflection spectras
We will now take a look at the resulting reflection spectras and how they depend on parameters. For
identical cavities, some sample reflection spectras are shown in figure 19 along with the individual
Lorentzians. In figure 20 we have sketched the general connection between the reflection spetrum,
the eigenmodes, and the parameters µ and ϕw, for identical cavities. In figure 21 the effect of cavity
detuning and intrinsic decay rate are shown. Finally, in figure 23 a broad overview of the absolute
reflection is given for selected values of 0 ≤µ/γw ≤5 and the whole range of ϕw ∈[−π, π], where
the splitting of the modes due to the direct coupling is clear. Before we talk about these, we will
lay out the general picture to get an overview.
If we take a step back and consider all possible parameters, then we have ω, ω1,2, γ1,2, γi, µ,
ϕ, θ1,2,3,4, which is a considerable parameter space. Obviously, it can immediately be reduced
significantly, and we have already noted that only ϕw = ϕ + θ2 + θ3 has any relevance to the
reflection spectrum. Also, the central frequency ω0 just serves as an absolute reference, and the
average waveguide coupling rate γ0 = (γ1 + γ2)/2 sets the relevant scale. As such, the relevant
parameters and variables are
(ω −ω0)/γ0,
∆′/γ0,
∆′′/γ0,
µ/γ0,
ϕw,
γi/γ0,
(157)
To make the analysis a bit more straightforward, we will mainly consider identical cavities (γ1 =
γ2 = γ0 = γw, ω1 = ω2 = ω0), and then in end consider the implications of small detunings.
45 of 93
==PAGE:47==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
5
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-2
-1
0
1
2
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 19: Reflection spectras for various parameters and identical cavities.
46 of 93
==PAGE:48==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 20:
Sketch of the eigenmodes ˜ω−and ˜ω+ in the complex plane, with the resulting reflection
spectrum shown above.
Similarly, we will focus on a small intrinsic decay rate γi = 0.001γ0, and in the end consider the
implications of higher γi.
Now, in (155) we observe, that if we are not interested in the global phase, then all we need to
know is the eigenvalues that are given in equation (151). The real part then gives the position of
the corresponding Lorentzian peak, while the imaginary part gives the width. The overall effect of
changing µ and γw is sketched in figure 20 with the eigenmodes sketched in the complex plane below
real axis, and the resulting reflection spectra plotted on top for approximate values. Intuitively we
can think of the direct coupling µ as setting the initial separation, and from that point the indirect
coupling traces out a circle of radius γw when the phase ϕw is varied from 0 to 2π. The distance
from the top of the circle to the real line is given by the intrinsic decay rate. For moderate values
of µ/γw the lineshapes from the individual peaks will overlap somewhat, but in the strong coupling
regime µ > 5γw they will appear almost completely separate. In that case, the reflection spectrum
is just two Lorentzians without any interference patterns, and as such the strong coupling regime is
not the most interesting. Note that µ →−µ and ϕw →ϕw + π gives the same reflection spectrum,
only with the symmetry of the modes being switched. As such we take µ > 0 unless otherwise
specified. Additionally, ϕw →π −ϕw corresponds to swapping the Q-factors of the modes, the end
result being a mirrored reflection spectrum. An example of the combination of the previous two
transformations, which result in µ →−µ and ϕw →−ϕw, is shown in 19 (row two).
Symmetric mode-splitting: When µ > 0 and ϕw = −π/2, then the reflection spectrum appears
as two Lorentzian peaks as in figure 19 (top left). The explicit expression is
r(ω) = e2iθ1+iϕwγw

1
i(ω0 −µ −γw −ω) + γw + γi
−
1
i(ω0 + µ + γw −ω) + γw + γi

.
(158)
This kind of mode-splitting is sometimes denoted Autler-Townes mode-splitting[10], but we will
simply refer to it as the ”symmetric mode-splitting”. Characteristic for the symmetric shape is
that the decay rates of the modes will be equal, and so will the coupling rates. In the time-domain
this means that for a fixed value of µ and γw, this value of ϕw = −π/2 will result in the ”most”
oscillating transient response, in the sense that the beating frequency will be the largest, while at
the same time, the decay rate of the fastest decaying mode is minimized. On the other hand, if
ϕw = +π/2, then the intrinsic coupling and the direct coupling is completely out of phase, and
acts against each other. Depending on the value of µ this can result in the Lorentzians partly
cancelling each other out as in figure 19 (top right).
BIC: When ϕw = 0 (ϕw = π), the lifetime of the symmetric (antisymmetric) mode is maximized
and we have ˜ω+ = ω+ + µ −iγi (˜ω−= ω−−µ −iγi). This corresponds to a BIC-state where
47 of 93
==PAGE:49==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-5
0
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 21: Dendence on intrinsic decay rate (Left) and detuning (Right).
the eigenmode does not leak to the waveguide at all, but at the same time the mode cannot be
excited at all by the incoming wave, d1+ = 0 (d1−= 0), and as such the Lorentzian peak simply
disappears completely. The explicit expression for ϕw = 0 is
r(ω) = e2iθ1+iϕw
2γw
i(ω0 −µ −ω) + 2γw + γi
.
(159)
The resulting reflection spectrum is plotted in figure 19 row three, and we observe that we end
up with just a single broad Lorentzian corresponding to the fast decaying mode. Physically, we
can attribute this to resulting from destructive interference between the outgoing fields leaking
from cavity 1 and 2. If we set γi = 0 and ϕw = ϵ, then in the limit of ϕw →0 the Lorentzian
of the BIC becomes infinitely thin, but still peaks at |r(ω+)| = 1. As such in this limit, we can
think of the leaky mode as suddenly becoming non-leaky and bound for a very specific parameter
value, when changing this parameter continuously, which is what we mean by ”Bound mode in the
continuum”.3
Quasi-BIC: For any finite γi and ϕw close to 0 or π, the reflection spectrum is highly asymmetric
as shown in figure 19, row two, and also in figure 21 (left) for different values of γi. Locally, on the
far side of the narrow peak, the reflection looks similar to the Fano lineshape of the single cavity
with a PTE present, but now with a curved background from the broad eigenmode. We can think
of this shape as an almost BIC, or ”quasi-BIC”, in that the eigenmode couples to the external
ports just enough for the waveguide-coupling to still dominate over the intrinsic decay. In this
case, the result is that a large intensity builds up in the nanocavities and also in the waveguide
between the cavities, as shown in figure 22 for ϕw = π/8 and γi/γw = 0.001. For ϕw ∼0, the
Lorentzian for the quasi-BIC peaks at |r+(ω = ω+)|2 = γ2
+/(γ+ + γi)2, so we could for example
calculate for what value of γi/γw the peak has dropped to 50% reflection |r+(ω+)|2 = 0.5, for a
given ϕw. This occurs when γ+ + γi =
√
2γ+, or
γi
γw
= (
√
2 −1)(1 −cos ϕw).
(160)
For ϕw = −π/8 we get 50% reflection peak from the quasi-BIC alone when γi/γw ≈0.032. In
figure 21 (left) we see how the total reflection depends on γi, and we observe that increasing the
intrinsic decay rate makes the overall spectrum less sharp looking, and the peak drops from ∼97%
for γi/γw = 0.001, to ∼85% at γi/γw = 0.01, and finally to ∼40% at γ+/γi = 0.1. The intrinsic
decay rate doesn’t seem to influence the Fano interference much however, as the reflection still
drops to almost zero beyond the quasi-BIC, even for relatively large values of γi. On the other
3We note that there is some controversy regarding the BIC-term - specifically, the bound mode comes out
naturally by working with the coupled-mode theory and just two resonant modes, which do not form a continuum.
As such, a better name might be ”interference trap”, but this is basically just what people use the term BIC for in the
literature. Additionally, the coupling is mediated by the waveguide, which has a continuum of allowed propagating
modes, and it is in the middle of this continuum that a bound mode, or trapped mode, can be found.
48 of 93
==PAGE:50==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
2
4
6
Figure 22: The power of the almost ”trapped” fields s2−and s3−, when ϕw gets close to 0 or π (in this
case ϕw = π/8).
hand, if we consider the influence of detuning, and increase ∆′ from 0 to 1.5γw = µ, then not
much changes, except that the Fano intereference is diminished. But even for relatively significant
detunings ∆= 0.5γw = µ/3, the reflection spectrum is almost completely preserved. In some
sense it seems as if the detuning simply reduces the interference patterns between the Lorentzian
peaks, which physically also seems perfectly reasonable. The observations that γi smoothes out the
reflection spectrum and slightly lowers the peaks, and that ∆′ tended to diminish the interference
patterns, seemed to be quite general for all parameter values.
Frequency degeneracy: When µ < 1 the circles drawn in figure 20 overlap, and it is possible
to have the Lorentzians exactly on top of each other. This occurs when sin ϕw = µ/γW and an
example is shown in figure 19 (bottom left). In this case the overall spectrum looks like two tilted
peaks, but it is really one thin peak ”substracted” from a broad peak. Locally, near ω = ω0 the
reflection looks like an inverted Lorentzian, and then the background is the broad peak. Keeping
sin ϕw = µ/γw constant, then in the limit of µ/γW →0, we get something like a BIC ”inside”
the broad background Lorentzian, which result in a broad reflection peak with a very narrow
transmission window. In the other limit of µγw →1, the Lorentzians obtain the same size and
completely cancels each other out, in which case we have complete transparency, as plotted in 19
(bottom right). This corresponds to the parameter values where µ = −iγweiϕw in which case the
two coupling channels between the nanocavities interfere destructively, resulting in ˜µ = 0. Note
that in this limit, the detuning between the cavities become increasingly important. Also, this
limit coincides with the case of ϕw = π/2 as in figure 19 (top right) when we let µ →0+, in which
case the Lorentzians move closer together, and the combined peak shrinks more and more.
49 of 93
==PAGE:51==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 23: |r(ω; ϕw, µ)|2 plotted on a color scale versus ω and ϕw for µ/γw = {0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2.5, 5}. The
white lines denote ϕw = −π/2, 0, π/2.
50 of 93
==PAGE:52==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
4.3
Inclusion of nonlinearities in the mirror
So far everything has been assumed to be linear where all properties can be solved exactly. Char-
acteristic for driven linear systems is that asymptotically the system will always follow the driving.
If the input is a continuous wave (CW), then in steady-state the output will also be a continuous
wave, and in general one will never get any new frequencies in the output, that wasn’t already
present in the input. This is in stark contrast to nonlinear systems, where any products in the time-
domain dynamical equations leads to a convolution in the frequency domain, meaning frequencies
gets mixed.
We have assumed the resonant frequencies to be fixed quantities determined by geometry alone,
with the implicit assumption that the refractive index is fixed for any given frequency. In reality
the refractive index is a dynamical quantity that depends on the state of the system and can be
modulated in several ways. The refractive index is known to the depend on temperature (the
thermal effect), optical intensity (the Kerr effect), the presence of excited carriers (free-carrier
dispersion and band-filling), see [17] for a discussion on the various effects. Of course the refractive
index also depends on strain and possible the presence of an applied electric field, but these require
additional engineering and will in general not be present in passive structures.
In addition to changes in the real refractive index, one will also always modulate the absorption to
some degree. This follows from the refractive index and the absorption (imaginary part of refractive
index) being related through Kramers-Kronig relations. In fact through Kramers-Kronig relations
one can relate free-carrier dispersion (FCD) with free-carrier absorption (FCA), and the Kerr-effect
with two-photon absorption (TPA). In continuous wave operation and low power these effects can
typically be neglected, but on the other other hand one often relies on nonlinear effects for active
modulation of the refractive index. This is extensively studied in various optical switching scheme
and can be accomplished optically by focusing a beam on the nanocavity and tuning it to a
resonant mode that is not involved in the transport. As an example, we have already studied
how the resonant transport of the Fano mirror, both the conventional and the advanced, depend
sensitively on the resonant frequency of the cavities. For the single-cavity Fano laser, one of the
major theoretical predictions is the possibility of frequency-modulation in the Terahertz-range, if
one can modulate the resonant frequency of the Fano mirror that fast[1]. This is so far still a
theoretical prediction, since actually modulating the refractive index that fast is difficult.
In any case, the typical way to model these effects is to include them phenomenologically in the
coupled-mode equations by introducing a nonlinear resonance frequency shift [17],
∆ωNL = −KKerrI + KCarNc −i (KT P AI + KF CANc)
(161)
where I is an intensity, Nc is a carrier density in the nanocavity, −KKerrI is the term corres-
ponding to the Kerr-effect, KCarNc corresponds to FCD and band-filling, −iKT P AI corresponds
to the change in absorption due to TPA and KF CANc corresponds to FCA. The constants KKerr,
KCar, KT P A and KF CA gives the strength of the corresponding nonlinear effect, and their actual
expressions can be found in [17].
In addition to active modulation where we imagine the refractive index being modulated ”from the
outside” by a secondary source, one can also imagine that field being modulated is also itself the
source of the modulation, meaning that we have a passive modulation. Especially in nanocavities
with high Q-factor and low mode-volume, nonlinear effects might be important even at moderate
pumping. Malaguti et al. have theoretically investigated a PhC nanocavity coupled to a waveguide
and shown how different nonlinear effects in the nanocavity can lead to several interesting phe-
nomenons including self-pulsing, where the power of the reflected and transmitted wave oscillates
in time [36][37].
One can easily imagine that if we now have two nanocavities then interesting physics is also very
likely to occur. Particularly, one could imagine that the sharp features present in the strongly
asymmetric Quasi-BIC spectrum could do something dramatic, if a nonlinear resonant frequency
shift suddenly brought the Quasi-BIC into proximity with the pump detuning, or that the beating
oscillations in the symmetric regime could be amplified.
51 of 93
==PAGE:53==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 24: A sample of the possible fast oscillations that can be found.
The left column shows the
steady-state characteristics without the nonlinearities included. Right column shows fast Rabi-oscillations
for the energy in the nanocavities, and the resulting modulated signal in the reflected and transmitted
field.
Particularly, the Kerr effect has been investigated and we will just show a few examples of possible
dynamics.
The choice of looking at the Kerr effect was simply because it was the fastest to
implement. However, the point in the following overview of the simulations is more to show what
kind of dynamics one could imagine from just any kind of nonlinearity. Not that all nonlinearities
are equivalent, but very often when it is the real part of the resonant frequency that includes
nonlinearities, then the result is some kind of self-phase modulation. Even in the case of FCD
induced by TPA, then since the carriers are induced by a nonlinear absorption, it can still be
considered some mediated self-phase modulation.
On matrix form the nonlinear coupled-mode equations are then,
da
dt = −i(˜Ω+ ∆ΩNL(a) −ωi)a + dT √
P,
∆ΩNL = −K

|a1|2
0
0
|a2|2

.
(162)
where the incoming wave is si =
√
Pe−iωit, and P pumping power which is taken to be real
without loss of generality. Now we can obviously tackle this problem from many sides including
many possible parameter regime. If we allow for asymmetric pumping, then we can choose d as
we want, but we will just consider a incoming wave, in which case d = d1. For the simulations
here K = 1 is used. In general a lot of very interesting dynamics can be found, but we will just
show two typical examples; the presence of fast oscillations, and the presence of bistability and
hysteresis loops. Of course, CW operation is still the ”usual” outcome at low power.
Fast oscillations In figure 24 a typical sample of the type of self-pulsing we may encounter in this
system is shown. The parameters µ = 1.5, ωi = 0 and ϕw = −ϕ/12 corresponds to an Quasi BIC,
with the linear steady-state properties given in the left column. In the right we see the energy in
the in the nanocavities showing fast Rabi-oscillations with a frequency of approximately 2π/γw.
The typical feature of these oscillations are that they are really fast, but not really individual
pulses. More of a relatively deep modulation.
In figure 25 bifurcation diagrams are shown with P as the bifurcation parameter. The left plot
shows a bifurcation curve in the form of the input power P and the maximum and minimum energy
52 of 93
==PAGE:54==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 25: Bifurcation diagrams with P as bifurcation parameter. Left: dashed curved are numerical fix
point solutions, dots denote the maximum and minimum value of the asymptotic simulated trajectories.
Right: Evolution of the CW solutions and limit-cycles. Vertical curves are dashed curves on the left plot.
in the cavities. The dashed lines are numerically computed solutions to the fix point equations, and
we note that for P > 2 the dashed lines are on top of each other. Note also that not all parts of the
solution branches have been found. The dots represent simulations of the differential equations.
When a dot coincides with the dashed line, the continuous wave (fix point) solution is stable,
otherwise unstable. The dots that don’t lie on a dashed curve give the minimum and maximum
energy of the limit-cycles. The right plot shows the same simulations, but in the complex plane,
with the fully drawn vertical lines as solutions to the fix point equations, the black dots denoting
a stable CW solution, and the horizontal curves showing stable limit-cycles. The high energy,
low power part from P = 0..0.1 should be ignored. Note that we observe both a bistable regime
involving two CW solutions, a Hopf bifurcation on the upper branch, and bistability between the
stable limit-cycle and the stable CW between P = 0.5..2.
Bistability and hysteresis loops If we now instead choose a symmetric reflection spectrum with
ϕw = −π/2 and µ = 1, then at negative input detuning a classic hysteris loop can be observed,
as shown in 26. Two stable solution branches can be observedm and if we dynamically raised the
power slowly, then at P = 8 the stable CW disappers in a saddle-node bifurcation by colliding
with an unstable solution that is not shown here. Note that the vertical lines show where the
numerical solver suddenly jumped to the other stable branch.
In reality the upper and lower
branch are connected through an unstable branch so the full solution branch makes an S-shape. A
likely explanation why fast oscillations was observed for the quasi BIC, but not the symmmetric
reflection spectrum for these parameters, is that the detuning of the driving frequency plays an
important role, and in relative terms the detuning is more severe in the quasi BIC case.
These two quick examples can serve as a motivation for future investigations. We will not spend a
long time discussing the physics of the findings. What we did show very briefly is that the coupled
cavity can transition to a state of fast oscillations when we had a ”sharp” feature in the reflection
spectrum.
5
Two-cavity Fano Laser
In this section we consider the Two-cavity Fano laser in its entirety. We model the laser cavity
in the same way as for the conventional Fano Laser.
In this sense, the only difference in the
coupled-mode description of the structure is the addition of the feedback of the reflected field,
s+(ω) = rL(ω, N)s−(ω).
53 of 93
==PAGE:55==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 26:
Similar plots as in figure 25, but for a symmetric reflection spectrum with a negatively
detuned incoming wave. A classic bistable s-shape is observed, and we note that there must be an unstable
solution branch connecting the upper and lower branches.
For convenience we will write rL = rL(ω, N), whenever it doesn’t cause confusion. The right mirror
will be denoted rR(ω) = dG(ω)dT , where again d refers specifically to the row of the coupling
matrix related to the return port. In section 5.1, we study the lasing modes and the oscillation
condition. Then we turn to actual simulations, first applying the ODE model and then the DDE
model.
5.1
Lasing modes and steady-state properties
In order to shed some light on the oscillation condition and the lasing modes we will take a look
at the coupled-mode equations for the full system. In order to solve the oscillation condition,
one can of course also use the same scheme as described for the conventional Fano laser, where
we assume that reference solution ωr exactly matches the central frequency of the mirror ω0 for
some specific reference length Lr. In general, this still a convenient scheme for solving finding the
steady-state solution. However, if we do not ”merely” want to find numerical solutions, but also
want an intuition into how they depend on the system parameters, then it is worthwhile to look
at the actual CMT equations.
Combining s+(ω) = rL(ω, N)s−(ω) with s−(ω) = da(ω), and the CMT equation −iωa(ω) =
−i˜Ωa(ω) + dT s+(ω), we obtain the oscillation condition on matrix form,
−i
h
˜Ω−ωI + irLdT d
i
a(ω) = 0.
(163)
The usual form can be obtained by multiplying from the left with dG(ω) = di(˜Ω−ωI)−1. One
way to interpret the equation is to say that ω must be an eigenvalue of ˜Ω+ irLdT d, meaning the
characteristic polynomial must be solved self-consistently. The matrix is given in the usual (1/2)
basis as
˜Ω+ irLdT d =
˜ω1
˜µ
˜µ
˜ω2

+ irL
 d2
1
d1d2
d1d2
d2
2

(1/2),
with d = [d1, d2] = exp(iθ1)[√γ1, −√γ2 exp(iϕw)]. In case of degenerate modes, where the (+/−)
basis diagonalises ˜Ω, we can also write the matrix as,
˜Ω+ irLdT d =
˜ω−
0
0
˜ω+

+ irL
 d2
−
d+d−
d+d−
d2
+

(+/−),
(164)
with d = [d−, d+] = √2γw exp
 iθ1 + iϕw/2

[cos
 ϕw/2

, −i sin
 ϕw/2

]. From a coupled-mode per-
spective, the eigenmodes of the mirror now talk to each other through the term irLd+d−.
54 of 93
==PAGE:56==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Looking at the matrix above, we can work with the original isolated resonant modes (1/2), or we
can use the eigenmodes of the isolated Fano mirror (+/−). In case of identical cavities, it makes
sense to work with a+ and a−, since ˜Ωcan be diagonalised, and because the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of the mirror obtain a simple form. In the general case however, when cavity 1 and 2
are detuned, the expressions are more complicated, and since the eigenvectors will not necessarily
be able to diagonalise ˜Ωthen there is less of an advantage to use them. In any case, we will use
them when they provide some insight, and simply say that when we use them they will always
refer to identical cavities.
Before continuing, it makes sense to define the normalised trace of dT d
T = d2
1 + d2
2
2d1d2
= −γ1e−iϕw + γ2eiϕw
2γw
,
(165)
which for identical cavities gives T = −cos ϕw. In addition, we define the parameter K,
K = d2
1 −d2
2
2d1d2
= γ2eiϕw −γ1e−iϕw
2γw
,
(166)
which for identical cavities is K = i sin ϕw. Finally, we can define a coupling parameter ˜µL that
gives the coupling between the cavity 1 and 2 due to the L-cavity,
˜µL = irLd1d2 = −iγwrLe2iθ1+iϕw.
(167)
˜µL = ˜µL(ω, N) just as rL. With these definitions the modes in the full system satisfy the tran-
scendental equation,
˜ω = ω0 −iγ0 −iγi + ˜µLT ± 1
2
˜∆L,
 ˜∆L
2
!2
=
 ˜∆
2 + ˜µLK
!2
+ (˜µ + ˜µL)2 .
(168)
Since both ˜µL and ∆L depend on ˜ω, the above equation must be solved self-consistently. The
expression is equivalent to the oscillation condition in the general sense, where the ˜ω is not restricted
to be real, and as such also describes the modes of the cold cavity. Important to note is that
although it looks like ˜∆L is a detuning between the modes, then the if ˜ωA is a self-consistent
solution to the equation with a ”+”, then we cannot immediately assume that there is another
solution at ˜ωB = ˜ωA −˜∆L(˜ωA). In fact, due to ˜µL(ω) = ˜µL(˜ωs)eiτin(˜ω−˜ωs), then we can expect to
find infinitely many complex solutions. This is of course also observed in the phase condition, as the
accumulated phase after one round-trip must be an an integer times 2π, arg(rL(ω, N)rR(ω)) = p2π.
What we can be sure of however, is that for any specific choice of N, then there will only be finitely
many solutions above any horizontal line in the complex plane.
Numerically, the above equation can be solved by simple ”fixed point iteration”. If we interpret the
right-hand side as a map (˜ω) →f±(˜ω; N), meaning we actually two different maps f+ and f−, then
a fixed point ˜ω∗of the map that satisfies f±(˜ω∗; N) = ˜ω∗is a solution to the equation. Assume ˜ω∗
is a solution, then nearby points will be attracted to ˜ω∗as long as |f ′
±(˜ω∗; N)| < 1, where prime
is derivative w.r.t. ˜ω. This makes it really fast to compute the actual quasinormal modes for any
N not too large, as the maps can be computed simultaneously for many initial conditions. One
can then visually observe how the modes are pushed towards the lasing threshold at Im(˜ω) = 0.
Although we are not absolutely certain that the iteration converges, it is observed to work fairly
well for the purpose. One can of course always apply more refined root-finding algorithms, such
as Newton-Raphson, or simply use a conventional root-finding solver as fsolve in the Numerical
Optimization package in Matlab.
In addition to finding the quasinormal modes, one can also use the eigenmode equation to look for
parameters of potential interest. Although, ∆L ̸= 0 is not actual detuning between modes, it is
still true that if ˜ωA is a solution, where ∆L(˜ωA) = 0, then this will be a degeneracy point in the
sense that a small change of parameters (for example the cavity length) will result in two distinct
modes appearing. Additionally, if this point of degeneracy happens near the lasing threshold, then
we can expect two modes become active at almost the same time. Although it is not exactly clear
55 of 93
==PAGE:57==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Figure 27: Reflection spectrum of the Fano mirror rR(ω) (fully drawn lines) plotted together with the
inverse round-trip 1/rL(ω, N) (dashed lines). Increasing the gain by pumping of carriers pushes the absolute
value |1/rL(ω, N)|2 down, while the arg(1/rL(ω, N)) is increased. In steady-state, the laser oscillates at a
point where the both the phase- and amplitude condition is satisfied.
what one can use this for, one could expect that this results in beating-type self-pulsing. For
example, if ˜∆= 0, then for ˜µ/˜µL = −1 ± iK = −1 ± sin ϕw, we have ˜∆L = 0. We then just
need to make sure that at the same time ˜ω = ω0 −iγw −iγi −˜µL(˜ω, N) cos ϕw. In [38], [39] and
[40], they discuss the importance of gain- and frequency-degeneracy of the lasing modes in the
context dispersive self-Q-switching in two-section DFB lasers. It is as of yet not clear whether
these potential degeneracies play any important role in the present setting, but a potential study
would be to further characterise these degeneracy conditions, and test the dynamics near these
points.
Oscillation condition. Having considered the lasing modes in general, we will now look specific-
ally at the steady-state properties. This means we will consider the oscillation condition,
rL(ωs, Ns)rR(ωs) = 1,
(169)
where ωs is real.
In figure 27, an example of a solution to the oscillation condition is shown.
Increasing the carrier density brings |1/rL| down, while arg(1/rL) goes up.
The line at ωs =
ω0 + 1.488γw shows that at the specific carrier density, the phase condition and the amplitude
condition are uphold at the same time.
Again, one can compute the solutions with the numerical scheme described in section 3.3, but to
give a visual overview we can compute a contour plot and just extrapolate the zero-contour. I.e.
if we are interested in looking at the dependence on cavity length, then we can define a function
f(ω, L) = rL(ω, Ns(ω); L)rR(ω) −1, and plot the zero-contour of f(ω, L) in an (L, ω)-diagram.
The notation rL(ω, Ns(ω); L) signifies that L is a parameter. Ns(ω) is then given by the amplitude
condition,
ΓgN(Ns(ω) −N0) = αi + 1
2L

1
|r1rR(ω)|2

.
(170)
This is done in figure 28, where the left plot shows the round-trip phase arg(rL(ω, Ns(ω), rR(ω)))
as function of L and ω, with the color corresponding to the phase as given in the colorbar. The
black line is the zero-contour, arg(rL(ω, Ns(ω), rR(ω))) = p2π, showing what values of ω satisfies
the phase condition for a given L. The green (magenta) lines are contour-lines corresponding to
where the Fano mirror reflection is |rR(ω)|2 = 0.9 (|rR(ω)|2 = 0.5). The top right plot shows how
the threshold gain depends on cavity length, and the bottom right plot the resulting Q-factor.
Many of the general properties of the conventional Fano laser is of course conserved. Note especially,
that even though the quasi-BIC mode is much sharper than the other, the Q-factor peaks are almost
equally thin when it comes to the changing the cavity length. This also shows the robustness of
the Fano laser frequency towards small variations in cavity length. Now, we could of course look
at how the Q-factor changes for all kinds of parameters, but we note that much of the insight
56 of 93
==PAGE:58==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 28: Left: the phase condition plotted as a contour of the function arg(rL(ω, Ns(ω); L)rR(ω)) =
2pπ. The green (magenta) lines are contours for 90% (50%) absolute reflection |rR|2 = 0.9 (0.5). The two
right plots show the threshold modal gain and the resulting Q-factor.
are obtained from simply looking at the reflection spectrum. Having already spent a significant
amount of time on the reflection spectras we will continue with the dynamical models.
5.2
ODE model
Having studied the steady-state characteristics, we will now turn to actual simulations of the
dynamics of the two-cavity Fano laser. We will start with the ODE model, since it is the one that
is easiest to analyse and implement, and also because it is the one that has been studied the most
for the conventional Fano laser. For the actual implementation of the ODE model, we choose to
rescale the dynamical equations, which is simply a matter personal preference. Additionally, for
the ODE model we have only considered identical cavities, based on the reasoning that at the
relevant operating regimes we shall investigate, small detunings do not influence the reflection of
the Fano mirror much. Specifically, we are mostly interested in the parameters that result in a
”Quasi-BIC” reflection spectrum, and in lasing operation with ωs somewhat negatively detuned
from the thin Lorentzian peak. This means the laser is operated somewhere in the valley formed
by the two Lorentzian peaks, and where there is a significant positive ”upswing” in the reflection,
i.e. |r(ω)|2 shows a high positive curvature at ω = ωs. Since we shall focus on identical cavities,
the ODE model has been implemented in terms of the eigenmodes of the Fano mirror. These are
the ones we have so far named ”−” and ”+”, due to the convenience of the subscript matching the
mathematical expressions for the modes, but to avoid confusion with the forward- and backward
propagating fields s+ and s−, we will change the notation of the modes ω−→ωA and ω+ →ωB,
which fit the names ”Antibonding” and ”Bonding”. As such we make the following substitutions
for the dynamical variables,
˜s+ = k1s+,
˜aA = k1aA,
˜aB = k1aB,
n = N −Ns
Ns −N0
,
(171)
with
k1 =
s
τsGNσ(Ns, ωs)
2nϵ0cVLC
.
(172)
57 of 93
==PAGE:59==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
This is a point where the simple toy model actually was a help, since it clearly gives the relevant
scale for the power.
In fact we have |˜s+|2 = τsGNNp/Γ, which is exactly the ratio between
the rate of stimulated emission (GNNp/Γ) to the intrinsic decay rate of carriers (τ −1
s
), including
spontaneous emission and non-radiative recombination. In steady-state |˜s+|2 corresponds to the
dimensionless steady-state power x = τsGNNps/Γ = (Rpτs −Ns)/(Ns −N0) from the toy model,
which was identified to be the important scale for the power. With this normalisation, [˜s+] =
[n] = 1 are dimensionless, and then we simply scale the leftover ”time scales” in terms of some
characteristic timescale τs →τs/kt, τp →τp/kt etc, with kt = 1 ps. This in turn also makes ˜aA
and ˜aB dimensionless. The ODE model then takes the following form,
d˜s+
dt =
1
2τp
(1 −iα)n˜s+ + 1
τin
dA˜aA + dB˜aB
rRs
−˜s+

,
(173)
d˜aA
dt
= −i (˜ωA −ωs) ˜aA + dA˜s+,
(174)
d˜aB
dt
= −i(˜ωB −ωs)˜aB + dB˜s+,
(175)
dn
dt = 1
τs

x −n −(1 + n)|˜s+|2
,
x = Rpτs −Ns
Ns −N0
.
(176)
We emphasize that it is still the exact same equations. This form just shows a bit more clearly
what parameters actually influence the dynamics, and it also makes it a bit easier to estimate
the relative magnitude of the different terms.
Finally, if we want to apply stability analysis,
then this form makes it a bit more straightforward. Note we can still freely change the pumping
rate without affecting the scales, so what we imagine is that we first fix the geometry, which
determines τp, ωs, Ns, and rRs, and then we ”do the experiment and test the device”, by varying
the pumping rate. Note that x = 0 corresponds to the pumping threshold, and since we do not
include spontaneous emission into the lasing mode, then we will only consider above threshold
pumping. Above threshold, in steady-state, we have
|˜s+|2 = x,
˜aA,B =
dA,B˜s+
i(˜ωA,B −ωs),
n = 0.
(177)
The approach now is to first choose µ/γw and ϕw which fixes the eigenmodes as well as the reflection
spectrum. Looking at the reflection spectrum, we determine what frequency we want to be the
steady-state frequency ωs, and then we just calculate what cavity length is needed for the laser to
oscillate at this frequency, which finally fixes the steady-state carrier density Ns from the amplitude
condition. Note that, ideally we would like to look at the linearization of the steady-state like we
did with the toy model, but the resulting system matrix for the linearized system is 7-dimensional,
which would require a lot of time to analyse properly. Even for the conventional single-cavity Fano
laser, it is only at zero detuning that the eigenvalues have been thoroughly characterised [7]. It
definitely should be possible to analyse, but we will save it for a future study.
5.2.1
Self-pulsing through Hopf-bifurcation
Based on the results from the simulations, it has been observed that self-pulsing occurs in the para-
meter regime mentioned previously, i.e. the Quasi-BIC regime, with the laser operating somewhere
in the valley of the reflection spectrum. Thus, it makes sense to define some standard parameters
to use as starting point.
Qw = 500,
γw = ω0/2Qw,
µ = 1.5γw,
ϕw = −π/6,
α = 1.
(178)
Additionally, we will choose standard longitudinal mode number p = 23, which means that the
cavity length will always be on the order of 5µm, i.e. L ≈23λr/2nr ≃5.10µm. The round-
trip time will then be τin = 2L/vg ≈0.12 ps, with the exact roundtrip-time depending on the
lasing frequency.
For these parameters, the overall results of the simulations are summarised
in the stability diagram given in figure 29, and we identify a region at δs0 = (ωs −ω0)/γw ≈
0.93..1.43, where a transition to self-pulsing occurs above a certain threshold pumping rate through
58 of 93
==PAGE:60==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 29:
Stability diagram showing the regions of chaos along with the regions of continous wave
operation (CW regime), self-pulsing (SP) regime, and an approximate chaotic regime drawn in a dashed
ellipse. The chaotic regime is only approximate, and the dynamics in this regime vary a lot based on
the parameters, with regions of chaos intermixed with regions of complex, but stable limit-cycles. The
SP regime is enclosed by a lower- and upper branch of supercritical Hopf-bifurcations, Rp1 and Rp2, with
the black circles denoting measured values, and fully drawn lines being interpolations. The dotted lines
connecting the lower- and upper branch are estimates, drawn by hand. The stability diagram plotted on
top of the reflection spectrum of the Fano mirror, with the fully drawn line denoting |rR(ω)|2 and the
dashed lines denoting the individual Lorentzians of the peaks.
a supercritical Hopf bifurcation. The reflection spectrum in the background shows that over the
range of interest, the absolute reflection is in the range 0.40 < |rR(ωs)|2 < 0.45 resulting in a
steady-state carrier density of Ns ≈(21 −22) × 1021 m−3 ≈(4.3 −4.5)N0 and a photon lifetime
of τp ≈0.13 −0.14 ps.
Large-pulsing regime: An example of the dynamics above the Hopf-bifurcation, inside the self-
pulsing regime, is given in figure 30 for δs0 = 1.25 and Rpτs/Ns = 3, with initial conditions very
close to the steady-state solution. Note the striking similarity with the simulations from the toy-
model when compared to figure 5. Especially the limit-cycle projected onto the (|˜s+|2, N)-plane
shows all the same characteristics as the large pulses in the toy model did, with a slow build-up
of carriers followed by a quick relaxation pulse, and where the power keeps increasing for a bit
after the effective gain at steady-state is negative GN(N −Ns) < 0, which is what sustains the
limit-cycle. In figure 31 the RF- and optical spectrum is shown for the limit-cycle above, showing
repetition rates of 8.6 GHz corresponding to a period of 190 ps. The pulse width is on the order
of 5 ps, which has also been checked by looking at the actual pulses. On the optical spectrum we
see that the optical power peaks near the steady-state value, but is spread out over a significant
part of the reflection spectrum. We note that the optical spectrum still consist of individual peaks,
although they are very tightly spaced. We can briefly estimate the validity of the ODE model, by
noting that 1/(γw) ≈7.0τin, so at (ω −ωs)/γw = 1, we have (ω −ωs)τin = 0.14. As such, if we
assume that only the peaks above -30 dB matters, then it seems that the ODE model should still
be okay, although it is maybe on the limit.
In figure 32, the evolution of the limit-cycle can be seen for the values δs0 ≈1.42 and δs0 ≈1.21,
with more figures in Appendix A. The plots are computed in the same was as for the toy model,
by integrating away the transient and saving the minimum and maximum values of |˜s+|2, and then
sweeping over Rpτs/Ns. Note that we start the sweep above lasing threshold, due to not including
the β-factor. For δs0 ≈1.42 the curve looks similar to the toy-model with two smooth branches
and the Hopf-bifurcations clearly visible. For δs0 ≈1.21, which is near the bottom of the valley
59 of 93
==PAGE:61==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 30: Sample of unstable steady-state, with initial conditions very close to the steady-state solution.
Here ωs = ω0 + 1.25γw and RpNs/τs = 3.
Figure 31:
RF- and optical spectrum of the limit-cycle shown in figure 30. The optical spectrum is
plotted together with the reflection spectrum for the Fano mirror.
Figure 32:
Two samples of Rp-sweeps, for Rpτs/Ns = 1.26..100. Left (right) for ωs = ω0 + 1.4172γw
(ωs = ω0 + 1.2172γw), and standard parameters given in equation (178). Black curves show the maximum
and minimum value of |s+|2 after the transient has been integrated away, while the blue dashed curve
shows the steady-state value |s+,S|2 = x, (the plots say |s+,S| which is a mistake). In both plots we clearly
identify the first Hopf-bifurcation, but the second Hopf-bifurcation, where the self-pulsing stops, is only
visible in the left plot due to the sweeping interval of Rp. In the right plot, however, we identify some
strange behaviour at how power, which has been identified as the laser entering a chaotic pulsing regime.
The chaos observed is identified to originate in a cascade of period doubling bifurcations, i.e. the ”period
doubling route to chaos”.
60 of 93
==PAGE:62==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
in the reflection spectrum, the first Hopf bifurcation occurs earlier than for δs0 ≈1.42, but the
second Hopf bifurcation occurs for RpNs/τs > 100 and is not visible in the plot. Instead, what we
observe is some irregular pattern, especially for Rpτs/Ns > 50.
Presence of chaos: After checking the actual orbits, a very clear ”period doubling route to chaos
[23]” can be observed in this range, as shown in figure 33. We will not dwell too much on all the
rich dynamics that occurs at how power. First, it might be at such high power, that the gain
saturates well before we reach that level. Second, even in the steady pulsing regime, we saw in
the toy model that the β-factor had a significant effect, and as such one could imagine that the
spontaneous emission (when it is included as a fixed rate) tended to dampen the chaotic dynamics.
Finally, it is also not so clear whether the ODE model is actually valid in this regime. However,
for the purpose of demonstrating that something like this could happen, we will study at this
particular example.
At Rpτs/Ns = 40 we have a period-1 limit-cycle, and at Rpτs/Ns = 50 the limit-cycle is period-
2 meaning the system only returns to the same state after two pulses has passed. Somewhere in
between a period doubling bifurcation has occurred, which can be understood in the following sense;
if we define a Poincar´e section at for example |˜s+|2 = 100 and for a suitable interval of N, and then
track the intersections of the limit-cycle with the Poincar´e section, then we obtain the Poincar´e
return map. ”Period-n” then simply means that applying the Poincar´e map n times gives the same
state. The period-doubling bifurcation is thus really a bifurcation on this iterated map. It is well
known that a typical route to chaos is through a cascade of period-doubling bifurcations with the
period-doubling bifurcations happening faster and faster. The distance Rp,m −Rp,m−1 between
successive period-doubling bifurcations become smaller and smaller, with the relative distance
approaching the Feigenbaum constant Rp,m−1−Rp,m−2
Rp,m−Rp,m−1
→4.669.... In our case, at Rpτs/Ns = 57
one can barely distinguish sixteen lines, but at Rpτs/Ns = 57.2 the lines are already so dense
that they form essentially form thick bands. At this point the period is either very long, or the
dynamics are already chaotic, which we believe is the case. If we label the four bands that intersect
the Poincar´e section as XS, S, L, XL according to size of the following pulse, then we note that
the chaotic dynamics is still restricted to a repeating pattern of ”XL,XS,L,S”, but if it really is
chaotic, then the exact peak intensity of each pulse is unpredictable after long time.
As the system is essentially 6-dimensional (four absolute values and two relative phases), there is
obviously a whole myriad of ways to visualize all the dynamics and intricate patterns. A beautiful
projection of (˜aB/, |˜s+|2) is shown in figure 34 giving the relation between the A- and B-eigenmode.
But maybe the most clear visualization is to use the intensity in the slow eigenmode (B) as the
third axis in a (|˜s+|, ln |˜aB|, N)-projection. This is shown in the fourth and fifth row of 33 for
Rpτs/Ns = 57.3, with the 3D-projection being over a time interval of 5.6 ns, and the three 2D
projections being over a relatively short time interval of 560 ps in order to make each orbit more
visible. We clearly observe that during most of the trip around the attractor, the dynamics is
relatively well-behaved, but right near the end of the ”S” pulse, |˜aB| drops rapidly, and the band
seem to get twisted and stretched. Zooming closer in on the (|˜s+|, N)-projection we observe that
the XS-band just makes a turn, but the S-band partly folds onto itself, and the resulting chaos
can thus be explained in terms of a ”stretch-and-fold”-principle. This is the point where we can
really argue that it very likely is chaotic, although we do not present a formal proof. The fold
can also be seen in 34. If there was no folding anywhere, then the dynamics could still potentially
just be quasi-periodic motion on a topologically torus-shaped attractor, meaning the attractor can
be described by two phases with incommensurable frequencies. The torus then might just happen
to appear as thin bands in our chosen projection.
Further, the torus-attractor would only be
2-dimensional, but a strange attractor should have a fractal dimension, somewhat slightly larger
than 2, which means roughly speaking that the attractor has zero volume, but infinite area, and
this is precisely what is allowed through the repeated ”stretching and folding”. In contrast to the
torus, the topology of the present attractor is more like a Moebius band, which is different from the
torus in that it is locally two-sided, but globally one-sided, and thus non-orientable. If we didn’t
have the folding, then we could choose an ”upside” and follow the normal vector during one cycle
of the XL-XS-L-S pattern, and when we came back the upside would be the same. An easy way to
see this is to stitch together S+XS and L+XL, in which case we have a Moebius band, but cutting
the Moebius band up along its central line just gives a single long strip, with an even number of
61 of 93
==PAGE:63==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
twists. Finally, we take the edge of the strip, stretch it out and fold it onto the back-side of the
strip, and then we have something Moebius-like again.
We note that the attractor here significant qualitative resemblance with the well-known Roessler
Attractor, which is also formed through cascaded period-doubling bifurcations, also has a Moebius-
like topology and can be interpreted in similarly in terms of the stretch-and-fold principle [23].
As to origin of the folding it is likely due to some sensitive relation between the relative phases
of the fields. Particularly, ˜aB/˜aA = 0 lies right in the middle of the S-band, before it gets folded.
As such ˜aB must either go left or right of the origin and this quick flip of the phase in one or the
other direction will very briefly make the sum dA˜aA + dB˜aB more or less in phase with ˜s+. In
figure 34 (bottom right) the relative phase between ˜aB and ˜s+ is plotted versus |˜s+| which in a
sense replaces the time variable with what we could call the ”rotation count” −arg(˜aB/˜s+)/2π.
What we observe is that generally, the accumulated phase tends to increase. This makes sense
from the point that resonant frequency of the B-eigenmode is positively detuned from the steady-
state frequency ωB > ωs. Similarly, the A-eigenmode is negatively detuned from the steady-state,
and it has been checked that the phase-difference −arg(˜aA/˜s+) tends to ”spin” in the negative
direction. What we also observe is that sometimes after a pulse has passed, the B-eigenmode
makes a full ”rotation” where −arg(˜aB/˜s+)/2π increases by 2π, but other times we get several
pulses within the same rotation. If we were to track the sequence formed by counting the number
of pulses within each rotation (1,2,2,2,1,3,1,1,2,4,... in the plot), then this sequence could easily be
unpredictable beyond some horizon. If we briefly try to make a classical analogy, then in some very
simplified sense one can think of each eigenmode as acting like a waterwheel, with the phase giving
the rotation angle and the intensity being the displaced center of mass. The waterwheels then pick
up some of the forward propagating electric field ˜s+(t′) in the time bucket t′, and all time-buckets
continuously leak into the laser cavity at a future time t according to the response functions rA(t, t′)
and rB(t, t′), with their sum rR(t, t′) giving the oscillatory response of each particular time-bin.
At least, one can imagine that if both eigenmodes are detuned from ˜s+ in terms of frequency, and
both modes prefer to ”spin” in opposite directions, then this beating between the modes could
lead to some very complex dynamics.
Finally, a straightforward way to quickly get an overview of the dynamics is to plot the ”orbit
diagram” for the Poincar´e map. Basically, we sweep over the pumping levels and integrate away
the transient like in 32, but instead of plotting the maximum and minimum value of the intensity
|˜s+|2, we plot the intersections with Poincar´e section in terms of a suitable variable, which could
be N. This way we can immediately identify period-doubling bifurcations and more generally it
gives an overview of the complexity. We can then improve the Poincar´e section to make it more
generally applicable by using the nullcline for N, i.e. where N ′ = 0. A parametrization of the
Poincar´e section would then be,
|˜s+|2(s) = s,
N(s) = Ns + x −s
1 + s (Ns −N0) ,
for s ∈[0, x].
(179)
The Poincar´e section thus goes from (0, Rpτs) to the steady-state solution (x, Ns), and the orbit
diagram would immediately show the peak carrier density before each pulse. This way we would be
almost certain that the orbits hit the Poincar´e section exactly once per oscillation, and we would
also still be able to tell when the steady-state solution is stable. Ideally, this would have been the
approach from the beginning, but the chaotic regime was only found after the initial approach by
investigating the ragged curves in figure 32. However, due to time-constraints we will just briefly
look at the Poincar´e map for the single choice of the parameters used to visualize the attractor
at Rp = 57.3Ns/τs. In figure 35 (left) a single orbit on the Poincar´e map (Nm, Nm+1) is shown
for the parameters used to visualise. Here, orbit refers to the sequence Nm,Nm+1,Nm+2... where
Nm = N(tm) is the carrier density at the time of the m’th intersection. We clearly observe how
the four bands map to each other, and also how one can almost see the full map by stitching the
bands together. If we plot the sequence of every four intersections (N4m, N4m+4) then one observes
a smooth unimodal map (a 1D iterated map with a single peak) which looks surprisingly similar
to the logistic map. The period-doubling route to chaos is known to be a universal property of
such unimodal maps when ”stretched” in the vertical direction, and as such it is very likely that
the Poincar´e map of the chaos observed here will show something similar to the well known orbit
62 of 93
==PAGE:64==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 33: Row one to three: The period-doubling route to chaos in (|˜s+|2, N)-projection. Row four
and five: the resulting strange attractor for Rpτs/Ns = 57.3 in an (|˜s+|, ln |˜aB|, N)-projection. Parameters
used are µ = 1.5γw, ϕw = −π/6, γi/γw = 0.001, (ωs −ω0)/γw = 1.2172.
63 of 93
==PAGE:65==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 34: Top row: the strange attractor at Rp = 57.3Ns/τs plotted in (Re(˜aB/˜aA), Im(˜aB/˜aA), |˜s+|2)-
space with a zoom in near |˜s+| = 0..5 (right). Bottom left: time trace of |˜s+|2 at Rp = 57.5Ns/τs. Bottom
right: −arg(˜aB/˜s+) plotted versus |˜s+| at Rp = 57.3Ns/τs.
64 of 93
==PAGE:66==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 35: Poincar´e map for the strange attractor at Rp = 57.3Ns/τs. The left plot shows the return
map (Nm, Nm+1 with the four bands clearly distinguishable.
The right plot shows the period-4 map
(N4m, N4(m+1)) for an orbit being in the S-band at Nm=0. We observe a smooth unimodal map that
crosses the fix-point line (the diagonal) with steep negative slope (< 1) corresponding to an unstable fix-
point.
Figure 36: Sample of self-pulsing in the small-signal regime. Here ωs = ω0 + 1.25γw and Rpτs/Ns =
1.89162
diagram of the logistic map, where the bands start to merge together, and where one also finds
brief periods of periodic pulsing in between the chaotic regimes. It has been checked that when
we increase the pumping further, then the bands grow larger and at some point merge together,
and the pulsing becomes chaotic in the sense that trajectories seem to diverge faster (higher
Lyapunov exponent), but we will save the computation of the orbit diagram for a future study.
Having discussed this particular instance of chaos, we will just note that a lot of other interesting
dynamics can be found in the ”chaotic regime”.
Modulational regime:
While the presence of chaos is certainly interesting, the perhaps more important physics (or at
least as important physics) should be obtained in the small-signal regime, or modulational regime
as we called it previously, in order to study the origin of the self-pulsing. We already noted that
on the surface, the pulsing looks similar to the large pulses in the toy model, the question is now
whether the physics can be understood in a similar fashion. In figure 36 the limit-cycle is plotted
just above the self-pulsing threshold for δs0 = 1.25 and Rpτs/Ns = 1.89162, along with the RF-
and optical spectrum, showing a pulsing frequency of 8.6 GHz in the RF-spectrum, and the two
small peaks in the optical spectrum besides the lasing frequency match the pulsing frequency. The
limit-cycle is plotted along with the nullcline for N and the line at N = Ns where the net gain
is zero in steady-state. As such the ellipse is slightly tilted, and the power keeps growing for a
very brief moment after the net effective gain is zero, which is also what was observed in the toy
model. We can for sure already say that the pulsing is single-mode, and not a result of beating type
oscillations between two active modes. We also observe that the frequencies in the optical spectrum
are spread over a range where the overall absolute reflection shows a slight curvature (which has
been checked by zooming in on the fully drawn blue line), so the derivative of |r(ω)|2 is slightly
65 of 93
==PAGE:67==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 37:
Dependence of the self-pulsing on the α-parameter.
The timetraces in the left plot are
computed for exact same parameters and initial conditions. The middle and right plot shows the evolution
of the limit-cycle when α is varied, showing extremely fast transitioning to the large-pulsing regime.
different at the two side bands. If we consider the dynamics below the self-pulsing threshold then
increasing the power will increase the frequency of the relaxation oscillations, which pushes the
(transient) sidebands further away from the lasing frequency. One could imagine that the onset of
self-pulsing is related to when the sidebands are pushed far enough away from the lasing frequency
to have different local slopes of the absolute reflection (or phase or both). In order to test whether
the self-pulsing really is some kind of dispersive self-Q-switching originating from the gain-induced
frequency modulation, the first obvious test is to change α. This is done in figure 37. In the top
plot we have fixed all parameters with δs0 = 1.25 and Rpτs/Ns = 1.89612 as in figure 36, and
also fixed the initial conditions near the steady-state solution, so each window should be seen as a
new simulation, despite the common time variable. We then observe that for α < 1 the system is
stable, at α = 1 are pretty much exactly at the Hopf-bifurcation and for α > 1 spiralling grows.
This clearly shows that the α-parameter is key in the oscillations, and we can already say that the
oscillations are due to some kind of interplay between the gain-induced frequency modulation and
the dispersive mirror. What we also observe when looking at the resulting limit-cycles is that for
the parameters chosen, the size of the limit-cycle grows extremely fast for α > 1, and we are already
in the large-pulsing regime at α = 1.1. Increasing α initially just expands the limit-cycle, but for
α > 2 the peak carrier density doesn’t increase. Instead the tail of the pulse starts to wrinkle.
These small oscillations can be connected with oscillations of the energy in the two eigenmodes of
the mirror, and also be interpreted in terms of large phase-amplitude coupling when looking that
instaneous gain versus the instantaneous frequency. This is plotted in figure 38 for different values
of α, with the reflection spectrum in the background for visibility.
In order to analyse the mechanism of the self-pulsing, we can rewrite the dynamical equations for
66 of 93
==PAGE:68==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 38: Instantaneous frequency ω = −d
dt arg(˜s+(t)) versus instantaneous gain
d
dt| ln ˜s+|
˜s+ in terms of phase and power. This gives
|˜s+|′ =
1
2τp
n|˜s+| + 1
τin
Re
 QA(t) + QB(t) −1

|˜s+|,
(180)
ω+ =
1
2τp
αn −Im
 QA(t) + QB(t)

,
(181)
QA(t) = dA˜aA(t)
rRs˜s+(t),
QB(t) = dB˜aB(t)
rRs˜s+(t).
(182)
Here QA and QB can be thought of as quotients that give the instantaneous state of the two
eigenmode ”mirrors”. One can write up differential equations for QA and QB, but we will skip this
here, due to the expressions become somewhat complicated. The purpose is basically, to see if the
model can be interpreted like the delayed mirror we studied in the toy model. Note that in steady-
state we have QA,B = rA,B(ωs)/rRs, and QA + QB = 1, and we can also think of rA,B(ω+)/rRs as
the instantaneous driving, although this ignores the driving of ˜s+.
In figure 39 (left), we have plotted time traces of the terms in |˜s+|′ together with the instantaneous
frequency with the fully drawn red and blue curve corresponding to Re(QA−QAs)/τin and Re(QB−
QBs)/τin, and the dashed lines show the Re(rA,B(ω+(t))./r2s(ωs))/τin. If we just look at fully
drawn curves, then it first of all seems that for these parameters, the modes actually tend to
dampen the gain. Especially, the A-eigenmode is always completely out of phase with the gain,
so if we imagine a material-wise similar PhC laser, but realised in a simple line-defect cavity with
both ends terminated, then such a laser would more more gain during such a cycle. This actually
seems like the opposite scenario of what we considered in the toy model. However, when we look
at the driving (which is not the actual driving since it assume ˜s+ constant), then we observe that
the ∆QA is pretty much in phase with the driving, but ∆QB is very much out of phase. And we
observe that it is indeed ∆QB (or more precisely ˜aB) that is responsible for the extra ”gain” for a
brief period of time, since it becomes positive slightly before the material gain becomes negative.
Similarly, ∆QB becomes negative before the gain is positive, resulting in more loss on the other
side of the cycle. In general QB is more overlapped with the peaks of the power-curve. We also
observe that second derivative of QA and QB seems to be correlated with the driving, so in some
sense we could interpret it in the way that the instantaneous frequency is pulling the Q-factor, but
the Q-factor behaves more like an underdamped spring, than an overdamped one. As such a more
proper toy model would be to model the retarded mirror with a 2nd order differential equation
with some characterisc frequency and decay rate. However, we might also simply conclude that
while the toy model itself showed some correct behaviour, then we might be best off simply to not
try and reduce the Fano mirror to the toy model, and just try to understand what actually is going
on.
Thus we can try take a look at the actual reflected fields from the modes. In figure 40 time traces
of the absolute values and phases of the backward propagating field from the A- and B-eigenmode
67 of 93
==PAGE:69==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 39: Evolution of the different terms in |˜s+|′.
Figure 40:
Time evolution of the amplitude and phase of the reflected fieds.
Parameters are ωs =
ω0 + 1.25γw and standard parameters.
68 of 93
==PAGE:70==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 41: Left)Variations of amplitude and phase given in terms of the quantity ηLBand ηBL. Right)
Schematic model of the purpose of the relative phase.
after a roundtrip is shown, i.e. rLsdA,B˜aA,B = ˜sA,B/rRs. In dashed, black lines the ”driving”
rLsrA,B(ω+(t))˜s+(t) is shown, which corresponds to an adiabatic tracking of ˜s+. We note that
both eigenmodes almost adiabatically track ˜s+. For the absolute value, the delay is only less than
0.2 ps for both eigenmodes, but we note that the phase is slightly, but significantly delayed for
the B-eigenmode corresponding to a delay of about 2ps. This is what we can expect due to the
B-eigenmode being the one with the smaller coupling rate, i.e. the quasi-BIC mode. In the last row
we have plotted the time traces of the instantaneous ”cavity-to-waveguide”-interference in terms
of the phase-difference arg(˜s+) −arg(rLS˜sA,B). Note first that ˜sA has a positive phase, while ˜sB
has a negative phase. This is due to the steady-state lasing frequency being positively detuned
from the A-eigenmode, but negatively detuned from the B-eigenmode. As such the gain-induced
phase in ˜s+ from the refractive index modulation of the relaxation oscillations will shift the degree
to which the backward propagating fields are ”in phase” with the forward propagating field after
one round-trip. Of course, the α-induced phase will also translate to the cavity modes, so the
relative phase will not shift as much as the plots in the second row suggests. As a result, the
effect is not very strong for the A-eigenmode, and the oscillation amplitude of the relative phase is
only about 1% of the oscillation amplitude of the absolute phase. On the other hand, the effect is
quite significant for the B-eigenmode. Additionally, we observe that the oscillations of the relative
phase of the B-eigenmode is much larger than what one would calculate simply from tracking
arg(rB(ω+)./rRs˜s+) (the dashed line), so one can imagine that the oscillations can be interpreted
in the way that the relaxation oscillations hit some resonance of the ”relaxation” oscillations of the
relative phases between the laser cavity and the Fano mirror. Another important point is where on
the carrier relaxation oscillation cycle that the backward propagating field is more in-phase with
the forward propagating field after a round-trip. Here we observe that when the intensity in the
laser cavity rises, i.e. when we have gain, then ˜sB/rRs and ˜s+ are more out-of-phase, and when
the intensity drops they are more in-phase.
We can try to understand this by considering the laser cavity and each nanocavity eigenmode as
a reservoir of energy. We can then think of the absolute values as giving the amount of energy
in each reservoir, and the phase difference between the cavity modes and ˜s+ gives the efficiency
of the energy transfer between the reservoirs. The energy transfer between the reservoirs is then
given by
|˜s+| →|˜aB|′ : |dB| × ηBL × |˜s+|,
(183)
|˜aB| →|˜s+|′ : |dB/rRs| × ηLB × |˜aB|.
(184)
where ηBL = cos
 arg(dB˜s+/˜aB)

and ηLB = cos
 arg(dB˜aB/rRs˜s+)

. Similar equations can be
written for the A-eigenmode. The first two factors together gives the rate of the energy transfer,
and the factor ηBL gives the efficiency of the energy transfer from the L-cavity to the B-eigenmode
and vice-versa for ηLB. Both depend on the phase difference arg(˜s+/˜aB), but in an asymmetric way.
Figure 41 shows how the |˜s+|, |˜aB|, ηBL and ηLB varies together with the carrier density during
69 of 93
==PAGE:71==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
the cycle of the relaxation oscillation, with the curves shifted to their steady-state values. The
right figure sketches the definitions. What we observe is that generally the energy in the L-cavity
and the B-eigenmode seem to follow each other, which is of course expected. But note that on the
part of the cycle where we have gain (when N > Ns) then ηBL > ηLB (relative to steady-state),
so the coupling efficiency into the B-eigenmode increases while the coupling efficiency out into the
L-cavity decreases. This can be explained in terms of the positive frequency shift induced by the
α-parameter bringing the lasing frequency closer to the resonance of the B-eigenmode. As such the
energy distribution gets shifted towards the B-eigenmode when the intensity is building up, and tilts
back towards the L-cavity when the intensity starts to drop. This gives an intuitive understanding
of the self-pulsing as a resonance resulting from the combination of relaxation oscillations and
oscillations of the energy distribution in the L-cavity and the nanocavities. Specifically, when the
energy distribution gets shifted towards the B-eigenmode during the rise of the intensity, then we
store a larger portion of the energy in the nanocavities where it doesn’t contribute to stimulated
emission. Since only the photons in the L-cavity contribute to stimulated emission and as such to
the conversion of carriers to photons, then when we shift the distribution of energy, then we slightly
prolong the half-period of the relaxation cycle where the gain is greater than the losses, which result
in more carriers being excited in the mean time from the pumping. Additionally, better coupling
into the B-eigenmode also means that less power is ”lost” through the mirror, and this effect is
obviously most important when there is a lot of power in the L-cavity. This last point is where the
resonant behaviour can be understood. If the relaxation oscillations are too slow, then first of all
the phase difference will not vary as much, and the energy distribution will only change according
to an adiabatic tracking of the instantaneous frequency given by the Green’s function gB(ω) for the
eigenmode. If the energy distribution settled immediately, then note that the quantity QB (and
QA for that matter) would only be a function of N −Ns, and then we would have something exactly
equivalent to the ”instant” toy model, where we proved that self-pulsing can never happen. This
does seem to be the case for QA, which primarily results in a correction to the differential gain, due
to the fast eigenmode providing additional storage space. If the energy distribution between the
fast eigenmode and the laser cavity is 90:10 for example, then the circulating power in terms of the
photon number only rises by 1 for every 10 extra photons. More physically it corresponds to saying
that the electric field distribution of the real electromagnetic mode is largest in the nanocavity,
where we don’t have gain, and even when the distribution settles immediately, it will slow down
the rate of stimulated emission. However, if the energy distribution settles immediately, then it
would also start to be shifted back towards the L-cavity as soon as the carrier density has peaked,
and we would have increased losses immediately after the carrier density gets below threshold.
Instead, what we observe here is that when the carrier density peaks and we have the highest
rate of stimulated emission, then when the carrier density drops the energy distribution is shifted
more over towards ˜aB than for the same carrier density on the way ”up”, so when the carrier
density drops below threshold, we have a significant amount of extra energy in the B-eigenmode.
A possible reason is that since the efficiency is still in the favor of the B-eigenmode, then the
B-eigenmode simply gets the necessary time to catch up as the gain starts to drop. We can maybe
also say that it is a result of a slightly delayed phase-difference, or a combination of both effects.
This needs to be further understood. In any case, the extra power then fuels the laser cavity just
after the carrier density gets below threshold, where the coupling efficiency is again in the favor of
the L-cavity. The slow eigenmode in some sense draws out energy when the gain exceeds the cavity
losses, and sends it back in when the losses exceed the gain, with a slight delay. This provides a bit
of extra stimulated emission during the half-period of the relaxation cycle below the N = Ns-line,
which further brings down the carrier density. If this interpretation is correct, then we can say
that what sustains the oscillations is the extra ”storage” of photons during the half-period where
we have gain, which are then used for extra power in the half-period where the gain drops below
threshold. And this storing of photons is driven by the shifting relative phases, which is driven by
the relaxation oscillations through the phase-amplitude coupling from the α-parameter.
We can very briefly study this hypothesis by considering how the mirror responds to the relaxation
oscillations, even in the absence of the α-parameter. We can consider an incoming field with central
frequency ωs = ω0+1.25γw, and slowly-varying complex envelope ˜s+(t) = ˜s+0

1 + ϵ2 cos(2πfmt)

,
where fm is a modulation frequency, and ϵ ≪1 is the relative oscillation amplitude. As such, we
ignore the feedback in the whole system, and just look at the mirror. This corresponds to an
70 of 93
==PAGE:72==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 42: Response of the mirror to an amplitude modulation.
oscillating amplitude resulting in two optical sidebands at the frequencies ωs/2π ± fm. When the
transient has passed we have
˜s−(t) = ˜s+0rRs + ˜s+0ϵ

rR(ωs + 2πfm)e−i(2πfm)t + rR(ωs −2πfm)ei2πfmt
,
(185)
Similarly, we could split up ˜s−in ˜sA and ˜sB. We can then define the response as
H(fm) = ∆˜s−(fm)
∆˜s−(0) ,
(186)
where ∆˜s−is the oscillating amplitude. In figure 42 the black curve is the full response and the
red and blue line is the response from the B- and A-eigenmode respectively. What we observe
is of course a resonance at each of the eigenmodes, when the modulation frequency matches the
detuning from the eigenmode, and but the eigenmode is still relatively far above the self-sustained
relaxation oscillations as indicated in the dashed line.
It could be that when we include the
feedback from the round-trip in the laser cavity, then the resonance could be enhanced or damped,
but unfortunately we do not have time to continue down this road. Dependence on µ and τp:
The role of the direct coupling can be thought of as separating the eigenmodes in order to ”carve
a hole” in the reflection spectrum. The purpose is both to have sufficient positive curvature in
reflection spectrum at the lasing frequency (which always set in between the eigenmodes), but
also to have a sufficiently low steady-state photon lifetime. Both of these properties seem to be
correlated with stronger self-pulsing.
With regards to the positive curvature, it is still mostly
based on the results from the simulations as well as the analysis of the general dispersive mirror,
but we can also simply say that when rRs is reduced, then any kind of oscillations in ˜aA and ˜aB
have a stronger effect on ˜s+. Another point is that when the lower absolute reflection is due to
a detuning, then less energy will build up in the nanocavities. As such oscillations of the energy
in the nanocavities will also have a larger amplitude relative to the total intensity, although the
importance of this is not so clear. In appendix A a few input-output-curves are computed for
µ = 0.5γw and µ = 2.5γw, and with detunings corresponding in the middle of the reflection dip,
and slightly on either side. For µ = 0.5γw no self-pulsing was found. From this result as well as the
overall findings from the simulations, it seems that we cannot have τp too long compared to τin.
To really give a comprehensive description, one should analyze the eigenvalues of the linearization,
but one possible explanation is that we need some time-scale to ”compete” with τin, in order to
not be able to adiabatically eliminate the Fano mirror term in ˜s′
+. Increasing the cavity length will
increase both τp and τin, but the ratio τin/τp = 2Lαi + ln
 1/|r1|2|rR|2
will only increase slightly,
due to the mirror loss being the dominant term. It has been checked that shifting the cavity length
in steps of half wavelengths only has a minor influence other than providing a different scaling.
For a constant power corresponding to fixing x, shorter cavity lengths did tend to have somewhat
of a positive effect on the oscillations, but that is likely related to how τp and τin relates to the
other time constants in the system. A possible explanation is that just reducing τp and τin while
71 of 93
==PAGE:73==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 43: Dependence of µ and photon lifetime τp.
keeping everything else constant, including the steady-state power, means that the cavity can be
modulated faster and also that we simply increase the relative magnitude of the phase-amplitude-
modulation.
The cavity-waveguide coupling rate γw also decreases relative to 1/τin and 1/τp,
which suggests that the delay in mirror will be more pronounced. In any case, to ”tune” τin/τp
we have to have a detuning of the lasing frequency from the nanocavity resonance frequencies,
and if we want the lasing frequency to be in between the two eigenmodes, then µ can be used to
”independently” tune this separation. When we increase µ/γw, the dip in the reflection spectrum
becomes larger, and if we set the lasing frequency to be somewhere near the bottom of the dip,
then higher µ makes it possible for a lower photon lifetime. The result is that the critical pumping
rate for the onset of self-pulsing goes down when measured relative to threshold Rp1τs/Ns, however
the lasing threshold (and Ns) also goes up, so the input-output curves with Rp given in terms of
Ns/τs are maybe not the right picture. Another comparison is to again fix the power in the laser
cavity. That is, we compare different values of µ and ωs, but set the pumping such that the power
in the cavity is constant. This is done in figure 43 for a fixed detuning from the B-eigenmode,
ωs = ωB −0.75γw. What we observe is that decreasing the photon lifetime, does seem to increase
lifetime of the relaxation oscillations for a fixed power, and the Hopf-bifurcation occurs for these
parameters at τin/τp = 0.9. However, we must still keep in mind that we are also increasing the
threshold pumping, so in actual designs, a proper middle-ground must be found in this trade-off.
Dependence on coupling phase ϕw and coupling rate γw: We can think of γw as setting the
general timescale of the dynamics of the mirror. This goes for both the mode-splitting µ, and the
detuning of the eigenmodes from the lasing frequency ωA,B −ωs. Before the simulations, it was not
totally clear whether we wanted a ”fast” mirror or a ”slow” mirror. However, it now seems clear
that a slower mirror is important for the oscillations, which is also what was suggested already in
the toy model. In figure 44 (left) we have fixed µ = 1.5γw, ωs = ω0 + 1.25γw, γi = 0.001γw, and
varied γw = 2ω0/Qw, with all other parameters constant. We clearly observe the tendency that
increasing the cavity-waveguide Q-factor will increase the oscillations. Note that the shape of the
reflection spectrum is unchanged, but in absolute terms the spectrum is squeezed thinner. If we
continue with our hypothesis of the mechanism for the self-pulsing, then increasing the Q-factor
has two positive effects on the oscillations. First, it increases the delay in the mirror, and second,
the squeezing of the reflection spectrum means that the optical sidebands that form through the
phase-amplitude coupling of the relaxation oscillations will be closer to the lasing frequency. In
other words, the oscillations of the instantaneous frequency will make it travel over a bigger range
of the reflection spectrum.
Having noted that a higher Q-factor increases the oscillations, we
should still keep in mind that this is for a fixed ratio of γi = 0.001γw. If we set Qw = 1500 and
vary Qi = 2ω0/γi from 105 to 5000, then we observe that the growth rate of the oscillations drop
steadily. But self-pulsing still occurs at Qi = 10000, at which point the ratio is Qw/Qi = 0.15, so
the pulsing is relatively robust.
Regarding ϕw it controls the asymmetry of reflection spectrum, as well as increasing the Q-factor of
the quasi-BIC mode, however it is not really clear whether we actually need the asymmetric profile,
or just a high Q-factor for the positively detuned mode. In figure44 (right) we have a constant
lasing frequency at ωs = ωB −0.75γw, and we do indeed observe that when ϕw gets closer to zero,
then the self-pulsing at until some optimum. The total decay rate of the 2nd mode is given by
72 of 93
==PAGE:74==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
γB = γw(1−cos ϕw)+γi, so we can assume that the optimum is related to when intrinsic Q-factor
starts to dominate. One can say, that when we actually have two cavities, then it gives some extra
flexibility in terms of tuning the Q-factor, but still it is not clear whether we need one sharp peak
and one broad peak, or if two sharp peaks (in absolute terms) does the same job. After further
analysis, it has been observed that self-pulsing also occurs for the symmetric shape at ϕw = −π/2 if
we just increase Qw and still have the lasing frequency closer to the positively detuned mode. This
suggests that we mainly just need a high Q-factor, but again, a proper analysis of the eigenvalues
is needed.
Figure 44: Dependence on coupling-phase ϕw and cavity-waveguide coupling rate γw = ω0/2Qw.
Figure 45: Dependence on coupling-phase ϕw and cavity-waveguide coupling rate γw = ω0/2Qw. Stand-
ard parameters and Rpτs/Ns = 2.
Overall conclusions of the ODE model: In total, the simulations of the ODE model show
a very robust regime of self-pulsing, as well as some very interesting dynamics at high power.
A proper physical description of the relaxation oscillations is still needed, but it is definitely a
kind of Q-switching that results from the ”dispersiveness” of the mirror and the phase-amplitude
coupling through the passive refractive index modulation. The working hypothesis is that the usual
relaxation resonance is enhanced by the oscillations of the relative phases, resulting in a combined
resonance of the carriers, the lasing field, and the modes in the Fano mirror. If we consider the
cycle of the relaxation oscillations, then at the point of high power where g(N) = gth, the power
keeps increasing due to the energy stored in the positively detuned mode leaking back into the
laser cavity with a slight delay. Additionally, the relative phases also oscillates which increases
the effect of this response.
The general requirements is thus that we need to have a sluggish
mirror, and we need the delayed response of the positively detuned eigenmode to provide positive
feedback. The role of the negatively detuned mode (the A-eigenmode) is not as clear, but it has
been checked that no self-pulsing occurs when the lasing frequency is negatively detuned from both
eigenmodes. If we did see self-pulsing in this regime, then it is hard to see why we need two modes
and not just one. However, we do not, and we can imagine a couple of reasons for this. First,
a qualitative argument based on the analysis of the general dispersive mirror, is that we need a
significant positive curvature of the reflection spectrum, and having two Lorentzians form a valley
makes it possible to realize this scenario. A second possibility is that we need sufficient detuning
73 of 93
==PAGE:75==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
from the B-eigenmode, and as such need something to provide some ”background” reflection, in
order to not have a really unstable laser.
If this was the sole reason, then a blocking airhole
beneath a single cavity (the PTE) would also do the job. This is of course an obvious test, but
we have to skip this due to time-limits. A third possibility which seems very plausible, is that
when we have the quasi-BIC mode and the broad mode, then the broad mode corresponds to an
almost instantaneous reduction in the gain. This means that the relative importance of the delayed
eigenmode becomes more important. Already in the toy model, we saw that it is important for the
delayed response to be significant compared to the instantaneous response, and the broad mode can
be thought of as increasing this ratio by reducing the gain. A fourth possibility that is a bit more
of a guess, is that the two Lorentzians together serves to ”capture” the oscillations by making a
kind of potential well for the lasing frequency together, but on the other hand the necessity for this
is not so clear. Finally, it could be that the two modes simply gives the necessary extra oscillatory
behaviour, and that in terms of the original cavity modes the oscillations of energy between the
cavities is important, but it seems unlikely. The beating frequency doesn’t appear anywhere in the
simulations or the optical spectrum, and the timescale of the beating frequency for the standard
parameters is ∼0.2 ps which is much shorter than the both period of the oscillations and the delay
of the B-eigenmode.
In the end, the results seem promising for the theoretical possibility of self-pulsing. At the onset
of self-pulsing, the ODE-model should be valid and even in the large-pulsing regime, the frequency
deviation is still reasonably small compared to 1/τin, but in order to get some extra confirmation
of the results, we will now turn to the DDE-model. We still need to check the impact of a detuning
of the modes, and when we consider the large-pulsing regime we have to consider the effect of
spontaneous emission.
Due to constraints of time, we will leave the study of the spontaneous
emission for later, but the effect of detuning will be considered in the DDE model.
74 of 93
==PAGE:76==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
5.3
DDE model
In this section we consider the ODE model. The study will not be as elaborate as for the ODE
model, but mainly serves to confirm the results with a second model, that should be more accurate.
Compared to the ODE model, the DDE model has been implemented and normalised in a slightly
different way. First of all, we use the original cavity modes with amplitudes a1 and a2. This is to be
able to include non-zero detunings between the cavities, but we can still convert to the eigenmode
basis afterwards. The delay-differential equations then take the following form,
da(t)
dt
= −i˜Ωa(t) + rL0 exp
1
2(1 −iα)GN(N(t −τin) −N0)τin

dT da(t −τin),
(187)
dN(t)
dt
= Rp −N(t)
τs
−GN(N(t) −N0)|da(t)|2.
(188)
Here a is normalised such that Np = |da|2 is the photon density, but otherwise the model is in
”physical” units. In these equations the steady-state carrier density does not appear explicitly, and
this is due to the reason that in these simulations we choose to always expand the k(ω, N) from
the same reference point chosen as ωr = ω0 and Nr = N0. This is different from the ODE model,
where we have to use the steady-state as the expansion point of the k-vector, since we expand the
full exponential. In the DDE model however, the full exponential e2iLk(ω,N) is conserved in the
differential equations, and since we in any case make a linear expansion of the k-vector, then we
are basically free to always expand the k-vector around the same point. This does mean that for
different steady-state carrier densities, the refractive index will be slightly different. But on the
other hand, when we expand the k-vector from the steady-state, then for different steady-state
carrier densities, this corresponds to different refractive indices of the cold cavity. In some sense,
when we always use the same expansion point for the k-vector, then we use the same material
parameters for all simulations, but fixing the value of the refractive index at the steady-state
solution has the merit that we can focus our attention on the impact of other parameters without
being influenced by a slightly shifted refractive index at the steady-state carrier density. In any
case, it shouldn’t matter too much, and it has been tested that if we use the steady-state as the
expansion point, then the qualitative dynamics is not changed.
As mentioned previously, the DDE model is infinite dimensional, and it has the really nice property,
that the characteristic polynomial (when N is considered constant) simply takes us back to the
exact oscillation condition. In other words the eigenvalues of (187) are the actual complex lasing
modes that we considered at the start of this section for any N. That is, if we assume the form
a(t) = a0e−i˜ωt and insert this in the DDE, then we get what corresponds to usual characteristic
polynomial, and the factor a(t −τin) simply gives the roundtrip exponential in the rL(ω, N).
Consistency with the ODE model: In general, the DDE model confirms the findings of the
ODE model, with the onset of self-pulsing in the same general parameter regime. An example of
the Hopf bifurcation when we increase the pumping is shown in figure 46. The lasing frequency
is ωs −ω0 = 1.488γw, and we use the standard parameters ϕw = −π/6, µ = 1.5γw. Note that in
these plots, the pumping is given in the form Rpτs = X1021 m−3, so X = 21 corresponds to the
lasing threshold if Ns = 21 × 1021 m−3. Also note that in these plots the ”aA” mode is denoted
a−and the aB mode is denoted a+, which hopefully does not cause too much confusion (sorry!).
Further, note that in these simulations the orbits are continuous, due to the convenience of simply
providing the previous simulations as the ”initial history” for the next simulation. In the top left
plot we clearly observe how increasing the pump gradually increases the lifetime of the relaxation
oscillations, with the onset of pulsing somewhere in the range X = 50..60, which corresponds to
Rp1τs/Ns ≃2.5 −3 which is maybe slightly lower than for similar parameters in the ODE model,
but still in surprisingly good agreement. At X = 75 we let the asymptotic large-pulsing regime
settle in, and when we look at the resulting limit-cycle it also looks very much like both the ODE
model and the toy model. In the last row, the RF- and the optical spectrum is shown for X = 30
and X = 75. In the optical spectrum the reference wavelength λr = 2πc/ω0 is shown as the black
line, and we observe a single peak below the onset of self-pulsing, and in the large-pulsing regime
we observe what looks like a broad peak, but consists of closely spaced peaks. The RF spectrum
looks very similar to what was observed for the ODE model, and we note that the peak below
75 of 93
==PAGE:77==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
11.5
12
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
X 11.2317
X 9.94885
X 10.0536
1548
1550
1552
1554
1556
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
Figure 46:
Example of Hopf bifurcation in the DDE model. ωs −ω0 = 1.488γw corresponding to the
reflection spectrum in27. Top row shows the energy in the cavity eigenmodes. Second row shows the
steady pulsing-regime at X = 75 in terms of energy in the eigenmodes and carrier density evolution. Third
row shows the RF- and optical spectrum with the spectrum, below and above the self-pulsing threshold.
The peak in the RF-spectrum for X = 30 is damped with time.
76 of 93
==PAGE:78==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 47: Frequency Re(ω)(t) and gain Im(ω)(t) versus carrier density N. ˜ω+(N) denotes a solution to
the oscillation condition for a given carrier density.
corresponds to the damped relaxation oscillations. The pulse width is in very good agreement with
the ODE model, and the period of the pulsing also matches quite well. The exact period is not so
interesting to give a comprehensive description of when we do not include spontaneous emission.
Again, we will not go as in depth with the parameters as in the ODE model, but an important
check is still the dependence on the α-parameter. In figure 48 we set α = 0 in the left figure and
α = 3 in the right. In the left figure, the Hopf bifurcation never seem to occur, and increasing
the power only seems to make the relaxation oscillations die out faster. On the other hand, for
α = 3 the Hopf bifurcation occurs significantly earlier than in figure 46, not far above the lasing
threshold, so we observe the same general tendency where higher α gives a stronger response. This
suggests that the general results from the ODE model holds well, and that the mechanism of the
self-pulsing is similar.
Returning to the case of α = 1 as in figure 46. In figure 47 we have plotted the real and imaginary
part of the instantaneous complex frequency of the backward propagating field s−= da together
with the carrier density, showing how the frequency changes during a cycle of the pulsing. The
black dots are numerically computed solutions to the eigenvalue equation (the oscillation condition,
equation (168 )). We clearly observe that during the build-up of carriers, the fields almost track
the oscillation condition, and during the pulse it makes a large swing. In the last plot, note that
on the way up we pass Im(˜ω) = 0 very near the steady-state carrier density (the crossing of the
dotted line with Im(˜ω) = 0, but during the pulse (the downward swing) the trajectory ventures
significantly below Ns ≈21, before the intensity starts to drop when Im(˜ω) = 0. This further
suggests that the mechanism for the pulsing in this case is similar and not a special property of
how the DDE model is implemented.
Chaos in the DDE model. Interestingly, chaotic behaviour is also found at high power for
similar parameters as in the ODE model, and the type of chaos seems surprisingly similar. In
figure 49, an orbit projected to the (|s−, ln |a+|, N)-space is shown for X ≈300 which correspond
77 of 93
==PAGE:79==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 48: Dependence on the alpha-parameter. Standard parameters are used except for the changing
α. The power is indicated in the plot in the form Rp/τs = X × 1021 m−3.
Figure 49: Chaotic pulsing in the DDE model for ϕw = −π/6, µ = 1.5γw, ωs −ω0 = 1.25γw, Rp =
14.2Ns/τs.
78 of 93
==PAGE:80==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 50: Bistability in the DDE model. ϕw = −π/8 and otherwise standard parameters are used.
Initially the pumping is set to X = 50 and with an initial history of high carrier density. After the transit
phase is over, we observe a pulsing limit-cycle. Continuing these simulations, but lowering the pumping
rate to X = 30, the laser settles in continuous wave operation. Then after pushing the pumping rate back
up to X = 50, we observe that relaxation oscillations decay. The right plot shows a projection of the orbit
on to (|˜s−|2, N) in a semi-logarithmic plot. The sharp turn of the X = 30-curve should be considered an
artifact of the DDE model.
to Rp = 14.2Ns/τs, and we once again have a Moebius-like band that gets folded onto itself. The
period to chaos is also again a period-doubling cascade. It is not surprising that chaotic behaviour
is found in delay differential equations. This is routinely observed in semiconductor lasers with
external feedback which tend to lead to linewidth broadening and additional noise. However, it is
surprising that the type of chaos looks so similar, given that the actual equations in the DDE model
are quite different from the ODE model. Of course, they should be equivalent close to threshold
at least, but in the chaotic regime, the orbits venture relatively far from threshold. An important
quantitative point is that significantly less pumping is needed to reach the chaotic regime in this
model.
This suggests that the ODE model cannot giver a proper quantitative analysis of the
chaotic regime, which instead should be carried out with either the DDE model or the iterative
model. However, qualitatively, it seems very similar and for a future study of the chaotic regime,
it still makes sense to analyse the ODE model, since it seems to give good qualitative insight in
the dynamics.
Bistability in the ODE model. One interesting observation in the DDE model is the presence
of bistability in certain parameter regimes. It has not been checked thoroughly whether this is
also the case for the ODE model, but was not encountered in the analysis. The infinite dimensions
of the DDE model of course makes the presence of such situations more likely, but one then also
has to be extra vary of what one observes. In figure 50 we start the simulations at relatively high
carrier density field intensity and a pumping rate of X = 50, and we observe the orbit approaching
a stable limit-cycle of large pulses. Then when we decrease the pumping to X = 30, the pulsing
wears down and we approach continuous wave operation. Finally, we raise the pumping back to
X = 50, but now relaxation oscillations are damped. As such, for the same pumping rate we
both have initial conditions that give large pulses, and initial conditions that give continuous wave
operation. In this case one has to consider the physical aspects of the history. If some arbitrary
history is given, then it is not necessarily possible to reach the pulsing state.
When we also
consider spontaneous emission, then it is possible, that these bistable parameter regimes become
less important. However, it has been checked that if we start from continuous wave operation,
then we still transition to self-pulsing above a certain threshold, even if the pumping is raised very
slowly. And if we then rapidly drop the pumping rate from for example X = 80 to X = 50, then
the pulsing operation could be reached from a ”physical” history.
Transient beating-type oscillations and mode-hopping. One of the believed values of the
DDE model (and the iterative model) compared to the ODE model, is that they don’t expand the
full exponential, and thus are also valid far from equilibrium. Specifically, we are able to account
79 of 93
==PAGE:81==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 51: Example of transient beating-type oscillations and mode-hopping. Top left shows the reflection
spectrum. Top right shows imaginary part of solutions to the oscillation condition. Row two and three
show the time-evolution of the system in terms of the nanocavity fields (bottom row), and carrier density
and the backward propagating field.
80 of 93
==PAGE:82==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
for different longitudinal modes. As a demonstration of this as well as a demonstration of the
possibility of beating-type oscillations, we can consider the parameters µ = 13γw which gives such
a strong mode-splitting that each Lorentzian can satisfy the phase-condition simultaneously, but
for different cavity mode-numbers. The reflection spectrum is shown in figure 51 (top left), and the
cavity length is chosen such the oscillation condition is satisfied at a slightly lower carrier density.
The Q-factor of the two lasing modes (Im(˜ω±) is shown in the top right plot, and we see that the
+ mode crosses the real axis slightly earlier than the −mode. In the two last rows, simulations
are shown for a pumping of X = 35, with initial conditions near the steady-state solution of the
lasing mode with the highest threshold.
Initially, we observe relaxation oscillations where the
system relaxes in the ”−” mode, but then due to positive gain in the ”+” mode, the energy slowly
builds up, and during this transition, we observe very fast beating oscillations, when we look at
the individual cavity modes, as well as in the backward propagating field. Finally, after 3-4 ns, the
”+” mode grows large enough to out-compete the ”-” mode and bring down the carrier density to
a level where only the ”+” mode lases. This example shows that the DDE model correctly settles
with the mode with lowest threshold modal gain. Another interesting possibility, is the prospect
of ”gain degeneracy”, where both modes start to lase at the exactly the same threshold. This
has been observed, and it is definitely possible. It would then be interesting to test whether the
beating type oscillations could be present simultaneously with the dispersive oscillations, and if
some further combined resonance could be observed. It is not so hard to imagine that beating
type oscillations could be observed ”on top” of the dispersive oscillations, but any coupling seems
somewhat unlikely, as the beating type oscillations tend to be quite a lot faster than the carrier
density can follow. And we cannot just turn up the power since the the carrier oscillations are
also damped. As such it would require some quite tricky conditions. Specifically, the lasing modes
should be very close together and with a very high Q-factor. We do note that, while it hasn’t been
thoroughly investigated, beating type oscillations on the same longitudinal mode has also been
observed, when we have a narrow Lorentzian ”inside” a broad lorentzian, resulting in the inverted
Lorentzian spectrum which cuts the broad Lorentzian in two halves. This could be interesting,
however we will leave this for another time.
Dependence on detuning. In the ODE model we only considered identical cavities, but it makes
sense now to consider the impact of a detuning between the cavities, ∆= ω2 −ω1 ̸= 0. We can
consider the standard parameters with µ = 1.5γw and ϕw = −π/6 and increase the detuning from
∆= 0 in small steps up to ∆= 1.5. The results are shown in figure 52. Note that the cavity
length is fixed, and since the reflection spectrum changes, then so does the lasing frequency and
the threshold modal gain. What we in any case observe is that the detuning is not a problem at
all for the self-pulsing. The steady-state carrier density also increases together with the threshold
modal gain due to a larger ”dip” in the reflection spectrum where the phase-condition is satisfied.
As such the change in detuning also reduces the photon lifetime which can be the explanation why
the self-pulsing seems to become stronger, but at least it clearly shows that identical cavities is
not an essential requirement. In fact one can even question what the point of the direct coupling
is, if we can also ”split” the reflection spectrum with an intrinsic detuning. In figure 53 we have
set µ = 0, ϕw = −π/2 and ∆= 5γw. The resulting reflection spectrum is shown in the left figure,
and the cavity length is chosen such that the oscillation condition is satisfied at a slightly positive
detuning from the reference frequency. The dotted lines give are 1/rL(ω, Ns), showing the both
the phase condition and the amplitude condition is satisfied at the given frequency for N = Ns. In
the right the resulting limit-cycle is shown for some pumping level above the Hopf bifurcation, and
it looks very much like what we have seen when the mode-splitting comes from a direct coupling.
From a design perspective, this only makes the self-pulsing more robust.
Having analysed the proposed two-cavity Fano laser with both an ODE model and a DDE model,
it seems reasonable to conclude that they agree very well, and that the results we discussed more
in-depth in the ODE model carries over. Considering the new observations in the DDE model,
it is important to note that chaos sets in at a lower pumping rate than predicted by the ODE
model which emphasises that it needs to be understood, in order to avoid it in actual applications.
Second, detuning of the cavities does not seem to be a problem for the self-pulsing mechanism. The
mechanism still needs to be further understood, however, this significantly eases the fabrication
process.
81 of 93
==PAGE:83==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 52: Dependence on detuning of the cavity-modes. ∆is changed as indicated in the plots, but all
other parameters are fixed, including the pumping.
Figure 53: Left) Limit-cycle for the two-cavity system without any direct coupling. Right) operating
point on the reflection curve. Parameters are given above the plot and for Rp = 5Ns/τs.
82 of 93
==PAGE:84==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
6
Discussion
In this thesis we have analysed a microscopic PhC laser based on a two-cavity Fano mirror. First
we analysed the reflection and transmission on such a mirror by itself, and then we analysed the
combined system of Fano mirror + laser cavity. The mirror was analysed with coupled-mode the-
ory, and we analysed how the reflection spectrum is a ”reflection” of the eigenmodes of the coupled
system. Depending on the internal relation between the cavity eigenmodes, several interesting
resonance phenomenons was identified including mode-splitting, a quasi-BIC like reflection, and
Fano lineshapes and inverted Lorentzian lineshapes embedded inside another Lorentzian. Imple-
menting the dynamical models of the two-cavity Fano laser we observed self-pulsing behaviour over
a specific, but still relatively wide parameter regime.
Prospects of self-pulsing in the two-cavity Fano laser. The possibility of a microscopic laser
with a potentially novel type of passive Q-switching (as far as the author is aware, or at least in
very new setting) is very exciting. Microscopic self-pulsing lasers may possibly find application as
an on-chip pulse source in photonic integrated circuits. One thing is that until relatively recently,
passive Q-switching has only been observed in macroscopic lasers, with the single-cavity Fano
laser being the first demonstration of a microscopic self-pulsing laser. But the type of self-pulsing
we have analysed here is entirely different from any kind of passive Q-switching that involves
saturable absorbers. Specifically, we don’t modulate the losses in the mirror, and both cavity
fields are governed by linear equations with constant decay rates. Instead it is in some sense the
relative phases that gets modulated passively, and this modulation brings the forward propagating
field more or less in-phase with the cavity fields. The fact that one can still consider it a kind of
Q-switching is due to the interpretation of the self-pulsing as a modulation of how much power is
coupled to the nanocavities, and how much goes through. In other words it is not the Q-factor
of the nanocavities that get ”switched”, but the Q-factor of the lasing modes in the full system.
This already separates the self-pulsing from the conventional Fano laser with active material in
the nanocavity. In the self-pulsing single-cavity Fano laser, the phase condition is also observed to
play an important role, but the primary effect is still the saturable absorption. It is still a bit hard
to say whether this type of self-pulsing will be an advantage compared to not having a saturable
absorber. One thing is of course that we avoid a significant amount of losses from free-carrier
absorption which could make it more energy-efficient. In the present case we consistently observe
pulsing frequencies in the 10-20 GHz regime, and pulse widths on the order of 5 ps. If this holds
true, then they are slightly faster, and a factor of 3 narrower than the pulses that what were
demonstrated in [9]. However, since we have not included spontaneous emission yet, and since
spontaneous emission is generally quite significant in nanolasers with relatively high β-factors,
then it is hard to really compare actual numbers. One could imagine that the pulsing frequency
increased, while the peak power decreased, due to the faster build up of intensity, but this has to
be checked.
We can try to consider similarly looking systems that have demonstrated mechanisms that could
be somewhat similar the self-pulsing we observe in this case. If we remove the waveguide and
instead put the active material in each cavity, then we have a system that has been analysed and
characterised experimentally by Hamel et al.[42]. In their paper they consider a mirror-symmetric
system of two coupled nanocavities and they demonstrate that above some threshold pumping level,
the mirror-symmetry is broken spontaneously, and most of the energy will concentrate in one of the
nanocavities. In other words, the system becomes bistable and experimentally, they show that they
can switch which cavity the energy resides in by sending in a short pulse. At even higher pumping
level, the energy starts to oscillate between the cavities. If we first consider the similarities, then
they also have two identical coupled cavities that form a bonding and an antibonding mode, but
that is basically also where the similarity ends. First of all, there is no waveguide, so there is no
phase-condition at all that needs to be uphold, and there is no dispersive mirror. As such the
Q-factor of the modes do not depend as severely on the gain-induced frequency modulation. In
fact, they show that it is favourable to detune the cavity resonant frequencies slightly, in order to
compensate for the frequency shift due to the α-parameter so that the frequencies match at the
operating point. As such the α-parameter does not seem like something to rely on, but rather
something to take care of. Additionally, each nanocavity have their own carrier density, so the
83 of 93
==PAGE:85==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
modes do not compete for carriers. It also means that the cavities don’t act as extra ”storage”
of photons as in our case. As such the coupled cavities take up a completely different roles, and
according to the authors the oscillations that occur are similar to the AC Josephson effect. This
means the oscillations are actually more similar to the oscillations we saw earlier in the thesis when
we included the Kerr effect in nanocavities. Thus the relative phase between cavities is similar to
the ”Josephson phase” that drives the current between two coupled superconductors. It is possible,
that in our case we can also interpret the oscillating energy distribution between the eigenmodes
and the laser cavity with a Josephson Junction analogy - we already made the analogy that the
relative phases gives the ”efficiency” of the energy transfer - but in any case, the energy shifts
between an active site and a passive site plus the transmitted power, not two active sites that
are closed. Additionally, the self-pulsing in our system always starts as self-sustained relaxation
oscillations in the 10-20GHz regime, which is fast, but nowhere near any kind of Rabi-oscillation
frequency. In their system the oscillations are fast, in the 150GHz regime, and they note that it
is close to the direct coupling rate between the nanocavities. This shows that the pulsing in their
setup primarily is an ultrafast oscillation of the photon population. The fact that we have an active
site, and a passive site (or two passive sites rather), could thus easily be critical for the generation
of short pulses. The same group has also proposed the possibility of only pumping one of the two
cavities, in which case the other one acts as a saturable absorber [44]. Again the mechanism is
already different due to the saturable absorption, and also because it still consists of two high-Q
cavities, while the Fano laser (both the single-cavity and two-cavity model) contains a very low-Q
cavity in the form a semi-open waveguide.
In conclusion, the type of self-pulsing seems to be very different from any self-pulsing demon-
strated or proposed in microscopic lasers yet. Instead, a far more similarly seeming mechanism
is the dispersive self-Q-switching (from which we adopted the name) observed in multi-section
distributed-feedback (DFB) lasers. It was unambiguously demonstrated the first time by Sartorius
et al. in [38]. One section, called the laser section, is pumped above far above threshold, and a
second section, called the reflector section, is pumped near transparency. The lasing wavelength is
then tuned to a steep slope near the edge of the stopband of the reflector section, and this can be
done with a possible third section, called the phase section, by electrical means. The ”low level”
explanation is then that the dispersive feedback from the reflector section results in Q-switching
when the frequency is modulated, and the frequency gets modulated through the α-parameter. On
a superficial level, this is almost the exact way to explain the self-pulsing for the two-cavity Fano
laser. They also share the property of being single-mode oscillations. In our case this is clear when
we look at the optical spectrum in the modulational regime before the onset of large pulsing, where
a single central wavelength with two sidebands is observed. Of course, there are two nanocavity
eigenmodes, but in the combined laser system with the parameters we primarily focused on, then
there are no nearby solutions to the oscillation condition with comparable Q-factor.
The real
lasing mode will be distributed over both cavity eigenmodes, but that is still just a single lasing
mode. Again, we did also see beating type oscillations, but that was specifically when we tuned
the parameters such that the oscillation condition had several solutions near the same threshold.
Another similarity is the fact that the we have an active site in the form of the laser section, and
an almost passive site in the form of the reflector section that is kept near the transparency level.
This ”almost” passive section is in some sense similar to having the extra storage of a nanocavity,
allowing the power distribution to oscillate between sections of high gain and low (or none) gain. In
[45] they discuss the importance of the dynamical power distribution between the laser section and
the reflector section, and specifically they show that an indispensable requirement for self-pulsation
is that when the carrier density in the laser section rises above threshold, the power distribution
must shift towards the reflector section. I.e. if we define the fill factor as the power in the laser
section divided by the total power in the system, then the fill factor must have a negative derivative
with respect to gain, when evaluated at the steady-state solution. This is surprisingly similar to
our case, in that above threshold the α-parameter drives power distribution away from the laser
cavity into the slow cavity eigenmode, and below threshold the power distribution is driven back
towards the laser cavity. As such, when we zoom out, the mechanisms look quite similar, but it is
still in a very different setting. Each section in the DFB laser is on the order of several hundreds
of microns, and the reflector section is still an active cavity that has to be pumped. Note that
multi-section DFB lasers can also show self-pulsing when one section simply serves as a saturable
84 of 93
==PAGE:86==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
absorber, but that is not the case we are interested in.
Robustness of self-pulsing. When we consider the requirements for potentially observing self-
pulsing in the two-cavity Fano laser, then at least from the results of the simulations, the self-pulsing
seems quite robust. They also generally don’t need excessively high pumping, and it might even
be the other way around, that we should be vary not to pump the system too hard in order to
avoid the chaotic regime. We note that there is still ongoing research on the possibility of using
chaos in injection-locked lasers to send secret messages, by modulating the signal on top of the
chaotic attractor, but for our purpose the chaos is something we should try to avoid. Also, the
fact that we do not rely on nonlinear effects in the nanocavity makes the pulsing much more
likely to be observed. We still need to consider the effect of spontaneous emission into the lasing
mode, but this is not expected to significantly change the qualitative aspects of the self-pulsing.
When we consider the other ”physical” effects we have neglected, then neither gain-dispersion nor
spatial hole-burning seems to be significant problems. The self-pulsing is single-mode so the gain
should supposedly not vary much over the frequency of interest. Spatial hole-burning might have
an impact, but the diffusion of carriers significantly reduce the magnitude of effect. Sartorius et
al. have simulated the dispersive self-Q-switching in multi-section DFB lasers using an approach
similar to the iterative travelling wave model, and they found that when they implemented the
model with a distributed carrier density and include diffusion, then best match with experiments
was achieved with parameters that completely dampen the effect of spatial hole-burning [38]. It is
not entirely clear whether the effect is stronger or weaker when the lasing modes are confined to
a space two orders of magnitude smaller, but it would not be surprising if the effect is in any case
small. Regarding how ”physical” the self-pulsing is, then it definitely helps that it is somewhat
qualitatively similar to effects that have been observed, although in a different setting. When we
go into the actual picture of lasing mode as an actual solution to Maxwell’s equations, then it
still seems reasonable that if the refractive index in one part of the lasing mode gets modulated,
then the electric field profile is shifted, and this will concentrate more or less of the electric field in
the active region, along with changing the Q-factor of the mode. While it is not set in stone, the
explanation is at least not unbelievable.
When we consider the parameter regime where self-pulsing occurs, then the self-pulsing also seems
quite robust. Although we require some general properties of the reflection spectrum, it seems that
we do not depend on some very specific degeneracy conditions of the cavity modes. The lasers
will of course depend on the quality of the fabrication process, but based on the present analysis,
there is a significant amount of room for parameter deviations. We do require that the oscillation
condition is satisfied at the right frequency however, and this depends on the cavity length. This
was initially a challenge for unambiguosly and reproducibly demonstrating dispersive self-pulsing
in DFB lasers, since the lasing frequency is very dependent on the phase-condition. This is the
motivation for including a phase-section along with the laser section and the reflector section. The
problem is however not bigger than when the Fano laser is used for other purposes, and in any
case it is not an intrinsic limitation. We also need the right reflection spectrum and properties
for the cavity eigenmodes, including sufficient mode-splitting and high Q-factor, but these are all
properties that can be simulated and designed beforehand using either FDTD or Finite-Element
methods in COMSOL. We can imagine that the cavity-waveguide coupling quality factor can be
varied by the separation of the cavities from the waveguide, and the indirect coupling phase ϕw can
be controlled simply by varying the distance between the cavities, but this will of course also affect
the direct coupling. Significant amount of research has been devoted towards how to optimise the
coupling between cavities, including varying the size and shifting position of the surrounding hole,
and as such it seems reasonable to assume that it is possible to obtain a proper system. Of course,
what you then get out the numerical simulations are the actual modes of the full system, and it is
not necessarily straightforward to extract all the rate constants that appear in the rate equations.
There might not be a 1:1 correspondence between the ”physical” numerical simulations, and the
phenomenological coupling constants in the coupled-mode theory. However, this seems mainly to
be a challenge when one has to quantitatively compare experiments with simulations.
85 of 93
==PAGE:87==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
7
Conclusion and Outlook
In this thesis we have studied the theory of semiconductor Fano lasers and applied it to analyse
and simulate a Two-Cavity Fano laser based on two coupled cavities. The cavities are coupled
through both direct photon tunneling giving rise to frequency splitting, and through waveguide
mediated coupling, where the interference depends sensitively on the propagation phase in the
waveguide. The two channels together form an effective coupling that leads to hybridization of the
cavity modes into a bonding and an antibonding eigenmode. A wide range of resonant transport
phenomenons can be observed including Fano resonances, electrically induced transparency, and
a bound state in the continuum, resulting from the interference trapping of the fields leaving the
cavities when the propagation phase is a whole number of half wavelengths. In general, assuming it
is possible to control this propagation phase, then one can fine-tune the asymmetry of the reflection
spectrum. Here real numerical simulations of the mode profiles are needed to properly understand
the modes and their electric field profile.
Implementing both an ODE model and a DDE model to study the Two-cavity Fano laser it was
found that under certain operating conditions, the Fano laser enters an operating regime of self-
sustained ultra-short pulsing. The pulsing initially arises as the usual carrier relaxation oscillations
gain longer and longer lifetime with higher pumping, before they finally become undamped through
a Hopf-bifurcation. The pulsing initially appear as just a small oscillation, but rapidly grow in
modulation depth with higher pumping until a train of sub-ten picosecond pulses forms with
repetition rates on the order of 10-20 GHz. In some situations at higher pumping the pulse train
gradually becomes more and more complex through a cascade of period-doubling bifurcations
leading to chaos through the Feigenbaum scenario. We characterised the strange attractor to some
degree identifying it as a kind of spiral attractor with a Moebius-band like structure. The chaotic
regime is interesting in its own right, but it is also important to get an understanding of in order
to identify whether it causes serious problems for the robustness of the self-pulsing, and what can
be done about it.
As discussed extensively in the previous sections, the self-pulsing mechanism is potentially novel,
or at least appears in a novel setting. The increased lifetime of the relaxation oscillations are
interpreted as resulting from a coupling to the highly dispersive mirror. The coupling is mediated
by the α-parameter giving rise to modulation of the refractive index in the laser cavity.
This
changes the round-trip phase thus dynamically modulating the Q-factor of the lasing mode along
with driving more or less of the electric field into the nanocavity. The essential requirements is
that positive gain drives the frequency towards the resonance of a high-Q eigenmode of the mirror,
which must be positively detuned from the lasing frequency. The exact role of the second cavity
remain elusive, and whether two cavities is an intrinsic requirement, or just something that makes
life easier in terms of design freedom, has not determined once and for all.
In the near future, a proper stability-analysis of the lasing modes would be a natural next step. It
might require some approximations, in order to bring down the complexity, but it should be doable.
A proper understanding of the important time constants will greatly help the actual design process,
as well as make a proper physical explanation more clear.
Inclusion of spontaneous emission
followed by proper a quantitative analysis of the large-pulsing regime also seems like a natural
investigation. Further studies in to capturing the source of chaos and a proper characterisation
also makes good sense. In these big quantitative analyses, one should consider an implementation
of the Iterative Travelling wave model. In this thesis, we skipped the Iterative model on the basis
that the DDE model is significantly more straightforward when it comes to implementation, but
when it comes to huge number-crushing, then the Iterative model could easily be an advantage.
An additional exciting possibility with the iterative model is that it allows for the inclusion of an
actual delay between the cavities. While this might not matter much if the cavities are close, one
can experiment with distant nanocavities, so one essentially has both an active laser cavity, two
passive nanocavities, and a second, passive Fano cavity. This might allow for some interesting
dispersive feedback at least. It is also worth considering the impact of including a PTE in the
two-cavity design, which might quench the relaxation oscillations, but also, might not. In the end,
the prospects of a nanoscale self-pulsing Fano laser that shows single mode operation and does not
rely on saturable absorption is very exciting.
86 of 93
==PAGE:88==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
References
[1] Photonic Crystal Fano Laser: Terahertz Modulation and Ultrashort Pulse Generation,
J. Mork, Y. Chen, and M. Heuck
PRL 113 163901 (2014)
[2] High-throughput silicon nanophotonic wavelength-insensitive switch for on-chip optical net-
works,
Yurii Vlasov, William M. J. Green, Fenginan Xia
NPHOTON 2 242-246 (2008)
[3] All-optical non-linear activation function for neuromorphic photonic computing using semi-
conductor Fano lasers,
Thorsten S. Rasmussen, Yi Yu, Jesper Mork
Optics Letters 45 (14) 3844-3847 (2020)
[4] Effects of Configuration Interaction on Intensities and Phase Shifts,
Ugo Fano
Phys. Rev. 124 (6) 1866-1878 (1961)
[5] Direct Optical Modulation of Photonic Crystal Fano Laser via the Mirror,
G. Dong, S. L. Liang, Y. Yu, A. Sakanas, E. Semenova, K. Yvind, and J. Mork,
OSA Nonlinear Optics, paper NF2A.2 (2021).
[6] Ultra-coherent Fano laser based on a bound state in the continuum,
Yu, Y., Sakanas, A., Zali, A.R. et al.,
NPHOTON. 15, 758–764 (2021).
[7] Modes, stability, and small-signal response of photonic crystal Fano lasers,
Thorsten S. Rasmussen, Yi Yu, Jesper Mork
Optics Express 26 (13) 16365-16376 (2018)
[8] Photonic crystal laser based on Fano interference allows for ultrafast frequency modulation
in the THz range,
Thorsten S. Rasmussen, Yi Yu, Jesper Mork
Proc. of SPIE 10939 109390A-1 (2019)
[9] Demonstration of a self-pulsing photonic crystal Fano laser,
Yi Yu, Weiqi Xue, Elizaveta Semenova, Kresten Yvind and Jesper Mork
NPHOTON 11 81-85 (2017)
[10] Remote excitation between quantum emitters mediated by an optical Fano resonance, Yu, Yi
Delgoffe, Antoine Miranda, Alessio Lyasota, Alexey Dwir, Benjamin Rudra, Alok Kapon,
E..
Optica. 8. 10.1364/OPTICA.442594. (2021).
[11] Theory and simulations of self-pulsing in photonic crystal Fano lasers,
Thorsten S. Rasmussen, Yi Yu, Jesper Mork
NUSOD 2017, 83-84 (2017)
[12] Two-dimensional phase-space picture of the photonic crystal Fano laser,
Piotr M. Kami´nski, Samel Arslanagi´c, Jesper Mørk, and Jensen Li,
Phys. Rev. A 100, 053808 – (2019)
[13] Suppression of Coherence Collapse in Semiconductor Fano Lasers,
Thorsten S. Rasmussen, Yi Yu, Jesper Mork
PRL 123, 233904 (2019)
[14] Semiconductor Fano Lasers,
Jesper Mork, Yi Yu, Thorsten S. Rasmussen, Elizaveta Semenova, Kresten Yvind
JSTQE 25 (6) 2900314 (2019)
87 of 93
==PAGE:89==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
[15] Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits Second edition,
Larry A. Coldren, Scott W. Corzine, Milan L. Masanovic
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (2012)
[16] Light-matter interaction and laser dynamics in nanophotonic structures,
Thorsten Svend Rasmussen
Ph.D thesis, DTU Fotonik (2020)
[17] Switching characteristics of an InP photonic crystal nanocavity: Experiment and theory,
Yi Yu, Evarist Palushani, Mikkel Heuck, Nadezda Kuznetsova, Philip Trøst Kristensen, Sara
Ek, Dragana Vukovic, Christophe Peucheret, Leif Katsuo Oxenløwe, Sylvain Combri´e,
Optics Express 21 (25) 31047-31061 (2013)
[18] Ultrafast Coherent Dynamics of a Photonic Crystal all-Optical Switch,
Pierre Colman, Per Lunnemann, Yi Yu, Jesper Mørk
PRL 117 233901 (2016)
[19] Ultrafast parametric process in a photonic-crystal nanocavity switch,
Per Lunnemann, Yi Yu, Kristoffer Joanesarson, Jesper Mørk
Phys. Rev. A 99 053835 (2019)
[20] Investigation of Patterning Effects in Ultrafast SOA-Based Optical Switches,
Jing Xu, Xinliang Zhang, Jesper Mørk
IEEE JQE 46 (1) 87-94 (2010)
[21] High-speed ultracompact buried heterostructure photonic-crystal laser with 13 fJ of energy
consumed per bit transmitted,
Shinji Matsuo, Akihiko Shinya, Takaaki Kakitsuka, Kengo Nozaki, Toru Segawa, Tomonari
Sato, Yoshihiro Kawaguchi and Masaya Notomi,
NPHOTON 4 648-654 (2010)
[22] Few-fJ/bit data transmissions using directlymodulated lambda-scale embedded active region
photonic-crystal lasers,
Koji Takeda, Tomonari Sato, Akihiko Shinya, Kengo Nozaki, Wataru Kobayashi, Hideaki
Taniyama, Masaya Notomi, Koichi Hasebe, Takaaki Kakitsuka and Shinji Matsuo,
NPHOTON 7 569-573 (2013)
[23] Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: with Applications to Physics, Biology, Chemistry, and En-
gineering.
Steven Strogatz,
Westview Press (2015)
[24] Temporal coupled-mode theory for the Fano resonance in optical resonators,
Shanhui Fan, Wonjoo Suh, and J. D. Joannopoulos,
J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 20, 569-572 (2003)
[25] Temporal coupled-mode theory and the presence of non-orthogonal modes in lossless mul-
timode cavities,
Wonjoo Suh, Zheng Wang and Shanhui Fan,
IEEE JQE, 40, 10,1511-1518, (2004)
[26] On the Theory of Coupled Modes in Optical Cavity-Waveguide Structures,
P. T. Kristensen, J. R. de Lasson, M. Heuck, N. Gregersen and J. Mørk,
JLT, 35, 19, 4247-4259, (2017)
[27] Differential Equations and Infinite Series,
Ole Christensen,
Textbook, Mathematics 2, 232 (2017)
88 of 93
==PAGE:90==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
[28] Spectral symmetry of Fano resonances in a waveguide coupled to a microcavity,
Andreas Dyhl Osterkryger, Jakob Rosenkrantz de Lasson, Mikkel Heuck, Yi Yu, Jesper Mørk,
and Niels Gregersen,
Opt. Lett. 41, 2065-2068 (2016)
[29] Buried Heterostructure Photonic Crystal Lasers,
PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark,
Sakanas, A. (2019)
[30] Travelling Wave Line Model for Laser Diodes with External Optical Feedback,
F. Sporleder,
Proc. URSI, pp. 585-588, (1983)
[31] Coupled mode theory analysis of mode-splitting in coupled cavity system,
Qiang Li, Tao Wang, Yikai Su, Min Yan, and Min Qiu,
Opt. Express 18, 8367-8382 (2010)
[32] Transfer matrix” method for direct and indirect coupling of cascaded cavities in resonator-
waveguide systems,
Zhou, Jianhong and Meng, Ying and Song, Hongfei and Han, Wenbo and Mu, Da and Di,
Xu and Liu, Tianchen and Park, Wounjhang,
Opt. Comm., 329, 88-91, (2014)
[33] Optical Modes in Photonic Molecules,
Manfred Bayer, T. Gutbrod, Johann Reithmaier, A Forchel, Tom Reinecke, Peter Knipp, A.
Dremin, Vladimir Kulakovskii,
PRL, 81. 2582-2585. (1998)
[34] On-chip dynamic time reversal of light in a coupled-cavity system,
R. Konoikea, T. Asanob, S. Noda,
APL Photonics 4, 030806 (2019)
[35] Dual-resonances approach to broadband cavity-assisted optical signal processing beyond the
carrier relaxation rate,
Mikkel Heuck, Philip Trøst Kristensen, and Jesper Mørk,
Opt. Lett. 39, 3189-3192 (2014)
[36] Self-pulsing driven by two-photon absorption in semiconductor nanocavities,
Stefania Malaguti, Gaetano Bellanca, Alfredo de Rossi, Sylvain Combri´e, and Stefano Trillo,
Phys. Rev. A 83, 051802(R) (2011)
[37] Oscillatory dynamics in nanocavities with noninstantaneous Kerr response,
Armaroli, Andrea and Malaguti, Stefania and Bellanca, Gaetano and Trillo, Stefano and de
Rossi, Alfredo and Combri´e, Sylvain,
Phys. Rev. A., 84, 5, 1094-1622, (2011)
[38] Dispersive self-Q-switching in self-pulsating DFB lasers,
B. Sartorius, M. Mohrle, S. Reichenbacher, H. Preier, H. -. Wunsche and U. Bandelow,
IEEE JQE, 33, 2, 211-218, (1997)
[39] Self pulsations by mode degeneracy in two-section DFB lasers,
Wuensche, Hans-Juergen et al., Photonics West (1995).
[40] Mechanisms of fast self pulsations in two-section DFB lasers,
H. Wenzel, U. Bandelow, H. . -J. Wunsche and J. Rehberg,
IEEE JQE, 32, 1, 69-78, 1996,
[41] Evaluation of a Power System Stable Region Based on Hopf Bifurcation Theory,
Mayasuki Watanabe, Yasunori Mitani, and Kiichiro Tsuji,
Electrical Engineering in Japan, 142, 1, (2003)
89 of 93
==PAGE:91==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
[42] Spontaneous mirror-symmetry breaking in coupled photonic-crystal nanolasers,
Hamel, P., Haddadi, S., Raineri, F. et al.,
Nature Photon 9, 311–315 (2015).
[43] Macroscopic quantum self-trapping and Josephson oscillations of exciton polaritons,
Abbarchi, M., Amo, A., Sala, V. et al.
Nature Phys 9, 275–279 (2013).
[44] Self-pulsing nanocavity laser
A. M. Yacomotti, S. Haddadi, and S. Barbay
Phys. Rev. A 87, 041804(R) (2013)
[45] Wang Chun-lin, Wu Jian, Lin Jin-Tong
Chinese Phys. 12 528 (2003)
[46] Nonlinear Dynamics an Stochastic Behaviour of Semiconductor Lasers with Optical Feedback,
Jesper Mørk,
PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, (1988)
90 of 93
==PAGE:92==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
A
Input-output curves ODE
Figure 54: Input-output curves for the standard parameters.
91 of 93
==PAGE:93==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 55: Input-output curves for the standard parameters.
92 of 93
==PAGE:94==
Theory and Simulation of Semiconductor Fano Lasers
January 2022
Figure 56: Input-output curves for varying values of µ.
93 of 93
