==PAGE:1==
Ingrid Reiter Lindstrøm
A guide towards sustainable
business for food and beverage
businesses
Master of Science in Engineering
The National Food Institute
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
Master Thesis
February 2, 2022
By:
Ingrid Reiter Lindstrøm
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
The National Food Institute
Kemitorvet, Building 202
Kongens Lyngby Denmark,
Phone + 45 3588 7000
www.food.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface and Acknowledgements
This thesis was prepared at the Section for Sustainability, Department of Technology,
Management and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in fulfilment
of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Food Technology.
The thesis deals the development of a guide, which can be used for Danish food and
beverage business to implement sustainability as part of their business strategy.
The thesis was supervised by Associate Professor Stig Iriving Olsen, Department of
Technology, Management and Economics at The Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
And EHS&S Manager Pernille Jensen, at CP Kelco ApS.
I would like to thank my supervisors, Stig Iriving Olsen and Pernille Jensen, for their
valuable guidance, help, and feedback. Without them, this thesis would not have been
possible.
I would also like to thank my dear colleagues at CP Kelco, who have been a great
support not just on this project but also on my other projects during my B.Eng. and
M.Sc. studies.
I thank my friends and study comrades, which I can always count on for valuable
professional and technical advice, as well as good cheering and moral support.
And, my dearest friend and husband, for being my ”rubber duck” on so many occasions ­
thank you for your great patience and good talks.
Lyngby, February 2, 2022
Ingrid Reiter Lindstrøm ­ s153179
ii
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study investigates which sustainability aspects are most relevant for food and bev­
erage (FB) businesses in Denmark to implement United Nations (UN) Sustainable Devel­
opment Goals (SDGs) as part of their business strategy.
The most relevant SDGs were selected from Communications of Progress reports (CoPs)
published in 2020/2021 by UN Global Compact (UNGC) participants within the FB sector
in Denmark. Relationships between targets of the selected SDGs and the CoPs (called
ambitions) were identified and analyzed to identify the most reported targets, as well as
common themes for these targets. On the basis of UN’s full text of the individual targets
and the identified themes, Key Sustainability Items (KSI) were defined. The purpose of
the KSI was to guide other businesses towards working with the SDGs. The KSI were
applied to a case company and a stakeholder analysis was performed to identify potential
stakeholders’ interest in and influence on a FB business’ focus on sustainability.
Out of 37 UNGC participants 31 with a recently published CoP, was used to select the
most relevant SDGs, which are (in descending order of CoPs reporting on these): no. 12,
8, 13, 3, 6, and 5. For each of the six SDGs 2­3 of the associated targets accounted for
at least 67% of the ambitions.
This study have defined 29 Key Sustainability Items, which seems to be applicable for FB
businesses whether or not they are already working with the SDGs. KSI can be compared
to information on ambitions (disclosed or not), to identify improvement opportunities re­
lated to sustainability aspects. Businesses not currently working with the SDGs they can
use the KSI to implement the SDGs into their business strategy, while businesses already
working with and reporting on the SDGs can use the KSI to improve their strategy and the
quality of their disclosed information. When disclosing sustainability­related information,
all FB businesses should evaluate the quality of the information carefully, with respect to
its reliability and accuracy. High­priority stakeholders are identified as customers, future
employees, and investors/owners. FB businesses should therefore identify and consider
their expectations carefully, and keep them informed on plans, progress, and changes
related to sustainability aspects.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
iii
==PAGE:5==
Resume (Danish)
Dette projekt undersøger, hvilke bæredygtighedstemaer der er mest relevante for føde­
og drikkevare (FB) virksomheder i Danmark ved implementering af FN’s Verdensmål
(SDG’er) som en del af deres forretningsstrategi.
De mest relevante SDG’er blev udvalgt fra Communications of Progress­rapporter (CoPs)
offentliggjort i 2020/2021 af deltagere i FN’s Global Compact (UNGC) inden for FB­sektoren
i Danmark. Forholdet mellem delmålene for de udvalgte SDG’er og CoP’erne (kaldet am­
bitioner) blev identificeret og analyseret for at identificere de mest rapporterede delmål,
såvel som fælles temaer for disse delmål. På baggrund af FN’s fulde tekst af de enkelte
delmål og de identificerede temaer blev Key Sustainability Items (KSI) defineret. For­
målet med KSI var at guide andre virksomheder til at arbejde med SDG’erne. KSI’erne
blev testet på en casevirksomhed og en interessentanalyse blev udført for at identificere
potentielle interessenters interesse for og indflydelse på en FB­virksomheds fokus på
bæredygtighed.
Ud af 37 UNGC­deltagere blev 31 med en nylig offentliggjort CoP brugt til at vælge de mest
relevante SDG’er, som er (i faldende rækkefølge af CoP’er, der rapporterer om disse): nr.
12, 8, 13, 3, 6 og 5. For hver af de seks SDG’er udgjorde 2­3 af de tilhørende delmål
mindst 67% af ambitionerne.
Projektet definerer 29 Key Sustainability Items, som virker brugbare for FB­virksomheder,
om de pt. arbejder med SDG’erne eller ej. KSI kan sammenholdes med information
om ambitioner (offentliggjort eller ej) for at identificere forbedringsmuligheder relateret til
bæredygtighedsaspekter. Virksomheder, der ikke pt. arbejder med SDG’erne, kan bruge
KSI til at implementere SDG’erne i deres forretningsstrategi, mens virksomheder, der ar­
bejder med og rapporterer på SDG’erne, kan bruge KSI til at forbedre deres strategi og
kvaliteten af deres offentliggjorte information. Ved offentliggørelse af bæredygtighedsre­
lateret information, bør alle FB­virksomheder evaluere kvaliteten omhyggeligt mht. pålide­
ligheden og nøjagtigheden. Højpriorits interessenter for FB­virksomheder er identificeret
til at være kunder, fremtidige medarbejdere og investorer/ejere. Disses forventninger bør
identificeres og overvejes nøje og de bør holdes informeret om planer, fremskridt og æn­
dringer vedrørende bæredygtighedsaspekter.
iv
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
AAK
AAK AB
Arla
Arla Foods amba
Carlsberg
Carlsberg Group
Chr. Hansen
Chr. Hansen Holding A/S
CoC
Code of conduct
CoE
Cost of equity
CoP
Communications of Progress report, part of UNGC participation
CPK
CP Kelco ApS
D&I
Diversity and Inclusion
DRIP
Danish partnership for Resource and water­efficient Industrial food Pro­
duction
EHS&S
Environment, Health and Safety & Sustainability
FB
Food and Beverage
GHG
Green­House Gasses
HR
Human Resources
Huber
J.M.Huber Corporation
OHS
Occupational health and safety
Orana
Orana A/S
KSI
Key Sustainability Item
SBTi
the Science Based Target initiative
TBL
Triple bottom line
The 3 P’s
People, Planet, Prosperity
The 5 P’s
People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace, Partnerships (UN’s 5 P’s)
Toms
Toms Gruppen A/S
SDGs
UN’s Sustainable Development Goals
UNGC
United Nations Global Compact
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface and Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Resume (Danish)
iv
List of Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Relevant Sustainable Development Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
CP Kelco ApS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Stakeholder analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Theoretical concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Related literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methods
13
3.1
Defining Key Sustainability Items of selected SDGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Case company: CP Kelco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Stakeholder analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Results
17
4.1
Relevant Communication on Progress reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production
. . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
SDG no. 13: Climate action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.5
SDG no. 3: Good health and well­being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.6
SDG no. 5: Gender equality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.7
SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.8
Summarized list of Key Sustainability Items . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
vi
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
4.9
Stakeholder analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5
Case company: CP Kelco ApS
48
5.1
CPK & SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production . . . . . . . 48
5.2
CPK & SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.3
CPK & SDG no. 13: Climate action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.4
CPK & SDG no. 5: Gender equality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.5
CPK & SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.6
Case findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Discussion
55
7
Conclusion
58
8
Future work
60
References
61
A Appendix list
64
A.1 SDGs addressed in most recent CoP of 37 UNGC participants
. . . . . . . 65
A.2 Ambitions related to SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production 66
A.3 Ambitions related to SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth
. . . . 67
A.4 Ambitions related to SDG no. 13: Climate action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.5 Ambitions related to SDG no. 3: Good health and well­being
. . . . . . . . 69
A.6 Ambitions related to SDG no. 5: Gender equality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.7 Ambitions related to SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation . . . . . . . . . 71
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
vii
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Today it is safe to say that all businesses know about sustainability in one way or another,
whether they have implemented it into their business strategy or not. There can be many
reasons why a business wants to work with sustainability as part of its business strategy.
It could be motivated by a need to meet customer demand, gaining a competitive edge
towards customers (B2B market) or consumers (B2C market), or a recruiting strategy
towards getting the best and brightest workers within the field.
When starting the journey towards working with sustainability, many businesses will dis­
cover that they have already set, or even achieved, goals related to different sustainability
aspects. However, the motivation behind these goals is not to become more sustainable.
E.g.:
• reductions in water or energy consumption could come from goals focusing on low­
ering production costs
• phasing out hazardous chemicals could have been performed to comply with legis­
lation or standards
• focus on employee safety could be part of customer demand for the business to be
certified within an international standard
However, sustainability is a broad term, and businesses should be careful not to claim
themselves as being sustainable based on such relations to their current business strat­
egy. If other areas of the business’s strategy are found to be non­sustainable, the busi­
ness could be accused of greenwashing. Greenwashing is falsely claiming to be environ­
mentally friendly, and this can have a negative effect on the business’s competitiveness,
both in relation to customers and employees.
The present study is a master thesis project regarding how Danish food and beverages
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
1
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
(FB) businesses can implement sustainability as part of their business strategy.
The study is an attempt to develop a guide for such businesses towards working with
sustainability in their strategy. It will build on the United Nations (UN) framework for sus­
tainable development from 2015, which includes 17 Sustainability Development Goals
(SDGs) and 169 corresponding targets [1].
The SDGs cover both societal, environmental, and economic aspects of sustainability,
and focusing on the SDGs can help businesses gain a more holistic sustainability strategy.
Furthermore, the SDGs are well­known, and supporting these goals is a very visible way
of communicating the business’s sustainability strategy to all stakeholders. Not all 17
SDGs are, however, equally relevant for all businesses. This depends on their activities,
geographical location, stakeholders’ demands, etc.
A way of communicating the business’s contribution to the SDGs is through UN Global
Compact (UNGC), which is the world’s largest global corporate sustainability initiative.
UNGC participants must annually publish a Communications of Progress report (CoP),
in which they report on their progress towards the SDGs. The CoPs include a list of
which SDGs were addressed by activities described in this report. The list is part of the
submission of the CoP to UNGC, where the participants answered the question: ”Which of
the following Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) do the activities described in your
CoP address? [2].
In this study, the CoPs of Danish FB businesses will be examined to assess which SDGs
and corresponding targets are most commonly reported and how. The relationship be­
tween the targets associated with these SDGs and the CoPs are then analyzed to iden­
tify overall themes on how these businesses are working with the targets and hence the
SDGs.
The purpose of the analysis is to define what will be termed Key Sustainability Items (KSI).
KSI are defined on the basis of UN’s full text of an individual target and the identified
themes. Thereby, a KSI will refer to themes related to an SDG target, which other Danish
FB businesses can use when implementing the SDGs in their business strategy.
To test the results, the guide is applied to disclosed information of CP Kelco ApS (CPK),
which functions as a case company in this study.
2
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In 2015 United Nations agreed upon 17 goals (SDGs), where the global fulfilment of these
will secure a sustainable future for all countries, see fig. 2.1.
Even though each SDG can be viewed separately, they are interconnected and must all
be reached to fulfil the global goal of sustainable development [3].
This relationship is related to the accounting framework the triple bottom line (TBL), which
has the purpose of increasing a company’s business value by not only focusing on econ­
omy (Prosperity), but also on society (People) and the environment (Planet) [4, 5].
TBL is also referred to as the three P’s, with each P representing a dimension of the
sustainable development, which can be viewed in connection to specific SDGs:
• People: SDGs no. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 11
• Planet: SDGs no. 6, 13, 14 and 15
• Prosperity: SDGs no. 8, 9, 10 and 12
The remaining two SDGs refers to an extension of TBL with the two P’s Peace and Part­
nership (UN’s five P’s). SDG no. 16 focus on society as a whole, with peace and in­
clusivity as a foundation for the development of a sustainable world, free of violence and
fear. SDG no. 17 focus on the importance of companies, governments and individuals
working together, for the goals to be reached, and a sustainable world to be developed
[1].
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
3
==PAGE:12==
Background
Figure 2.1: United Nations 17 Sustainable Development Goals [6]
The SDGs framework also includes several targets for each SDG, as well as indicators
connected to the targets. UN developed 169 targets connected to the SDGs, which con­
tains both outcome­focused targets (i.e. targets with numbers) and means of implemen­
tation targets (MOI, i.e. lettered targets). This study will focus on numbered targets, as a
focus on outcome is generally more applicable for implementation into a business strategy
[1]. E.g. for SDG no. 12 target 12.a reads:
”Support developing countries to strengthen their scientific and technological
capacity to move towards more sustainable patterns of consumption and pro­
duction” [6]
In this example businesses might support their suppliers or specific businesses, but not
entire countries. This limitations underlines the importance of involvement from policy­
makers, governments, NGOs etc. to reach the SDGs.
2.1
Relevant Sustainable Development Goals
As not all SDGs are equally relevant for Danish food producers, this study will focus on
six SDGs, with each of the three P’s represented by two goals. The aim of doing so is
to gain a holistic perspective on sustainability as well as to include the interconnections
between the SDGs.
As previously stated UNGC participants have volunteered to communicate on how they
4
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:13==
Background
support the SDGs, which is disclosed to the public annually in a Communication of Progress
report (CoP). These business presumably prioritize their CoP in regards of resources
spend on working towards the SDGs, as well as assuring a high quality of the disclosed
information. Therefore, the CoPs of UNGC participants were used as data material, to
decide which SDGs to include in this study.
Out of the 18412 UNGC participants listed at https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is-
gc/participants/ on September 5 2021 [7], 37 adhered to the search criterias:
• Country = Denmark
• Sector = Food & Beverages
The 37 UNGC participants consisted of 18 companies and 19 small or medium­sized
enterprises (SME) (collectively referred to as businesses). Hereof 31 FB (food and bev­
erage) businesses had recently published a CoP, which included a list of which SDGs
were addressed by activities described within.
Five of the 17 SDGs seemed to be representative concerning which goals are relevant
for the Danish food­ and beverage businesses, as over half of the 31 businesses stated
this SDG to be part of their most recent CoP (see appendix A.1 for further details):
• SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production (90% addressing this SDG)
• SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth (74% addressing this SDG)
• SDG no. 13: Climate action (68% addressing this SDG)
• SDG no. 3: Good health and well­being (55% addressing this SDG)
• SDG no. 5: Gender equality (52% addressing this SDG)
Furthermore, they seemed to represent the SDGs connection to the three P’s, with relation
to Prosperity (SDG no. 8 and 12), People (SDG no. 3 and 5) and Planet (SDG no. 13).
All five were therefore included in this study.
As only one SDG was connected to the Planet, inclusion of a six SDGs with relation to
this P was desired, i.e. either SDG no. 6, 14 or 15. Nine businesses (32%) stated that
their most recent CoP addressed SDG no. 6 or 15, while only five (16%) addressed SDG
no. 14. Based on this SDG no. 6 was included in this study as well.
The full title of the six selected goals reads [3]:
• SDG no. 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well­being for all at all ages
• SDG no. 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
• SDG no. 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation
for all
• SDG no. 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for all
• SDG no. 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
• SDG no. 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
5
==PAGE:14==
Background
2.1.1
UNGC Participants
To investigate, how the businesses addressed these six SDGs in their CoPs, it was de­
cided only to include the CoPs of businesses, who stated that they reported on at least
five of the selected SDGs. This was chosen to get as much relevant information as possi­
ble from each included CoP. Based on this the CoPs from ten businesses were included,
with variation as to:
• Business type: Food Producers and Beverages
• Companies and SMEs
• Year of joining UNGC
• SDGs addressed (see appendix A.1 for further details)
Table 2.1: Danish UNGC Participants included in this study [7]
Name
Type
Sector
Joined on
Royal Unibrew A/S
Company
Beverages
15/10/2019
Bakkafrost
Company
Food Producers
04/12/2018
Orana A/S
SME
Food Producers
22/06/2016
Uhrenholt A/S
SME
Food Producers
16/03/2012
Carl J. Nielsen A/S
SME
Food Producers
01/09/2011
Danish Crown
Company
Food Producers
09/03/2011
Chr. Hansen Holding A/S
Company
Food Producers
09/09/2009
Carlsberg Group
Company
Beverages
16/05/2008
Arla Foods amba
Company
Food Producers
09/01/2008
AAK AB
Company
Food Producers
23/01/2003
2.2
CP Kelco ApS
CP Kelco ApS (CPK) was included as a case company, which involved their disclosed
information. CPK produces hydrocolloids, which are used as natural ingredients to im­
prove texture or stability, mostly in food products and also pharmaceutical and personal
care applications. CPK have manufacturing sites in Germany, Denmark, Brazil, USA
and China. The Danish site is located in Lille Skensved, near Køge, and produces Car­
rageenan, Pectin, and Refined Locust Bean Gum. Carrageenan is made from different
red algae species (seaweed), where pectin is made from dried citrus peel (leftovers from
juice production) [8, 9, 10].
CPK is owned by the family owned US corporation J.M. Huber Corporation, referred to as
Huber. Therefore, CPK employees follow Hubers code of conduct and Hubers principles.
CPKs business strategy is also affected by Huber, where CPKs goals and targets are
closely related to those set out by Huber. This includes their sustainability strategy, where
Huber in 2017 announced sustainability goals for 2022, which CPK must progress on.
From late 2020 their sustainability strategy included support of SDGs no. 6, 7, 8 and 12
as well [11, 12, 13].
6
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:15==
Background
Besides goals set out by Huber, CPK manufacturing sites sets their own goals, targets
and indicators. CPK Denmark is certified through international standards in management
systems regarding OHS, environmental, quality and food safety [9].
2.3
Stakeholder analysis
The stakeholder matrix, as shown in fig. 2.2, provides the business with an overview as
to which stakeholders have high impact on the future of the business and should be kept
satisfied (high influence), and which should be kept informed (high interest) [14].
Stakeholders with both high influence and interest (top right corner) require high priority
and most resources. They should be managed closely, and their expectations identified.
Stakeholders with high influence and low interest (top left corner) should be kept satisfied
and informed. Stakeholders with high interest and low influence (bottom right corner)
should be kept well­informed and involved to avoid mayor issues. Stakeholders with low
interest and low influence (bottom left corner) require minimal resources, though they
should be monitored [14].
Figure 2.2: Stakeholder matrix, classifications
2.4
Theoretical concepts
This section explains some of the theoretical concepts, which are relevant for this study,
while not part of the non­technical specialization of the MSc in Food Technology education
program from DTU.
Cost of equity
Cost of equity (CoE) is a financial term used by investors and companies, to understand
whether an investment is profitable. A lower CoE represents a faster return of the capital
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
7
==PAGE:16==
Background
invested into a project or a company and hence a more profitable investment. The CoE
can also be used by other stakeholder (i.e. customers, suppliers, employees etc.) to eval­
uate the company’s financial health, and is therefore relevant for none­listed companies
as well [15, 16, 17, 18].
Certification of raw materials
In this study three certification programs were mentioned for the raw materials cocoa, soy
and palmoil: UTZ­label1, RTRS (the Round Table for Responsible Soy) and RSPO (the
Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil) respectively.
For raw materials to be certified ac. to these programs, they must comply with the envi­
ronmental and social criteria which are part of the specific certification program. Compli­
ance is assessed through external audits within the certification program, and the audit
must be conducted by an independent certification bodies. These programs involve many
aspects of sustainable development, including deforestation, working conditions, labour
rights, adaptation to climate change, and water releases. [19, 20, 21].
Human Rights and Labour Rights
Human Rights are part of UN’s ten principles, for no. 1 (Businesses should support and
respect the protection of internationally proclaimed human rights) and no. 2 (Businesses
should make sure that they are not complicit in human rights abuses). These principles
are derived from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [2].
In relation to this study, article 23 and 24 are of special interest, as they describe the
Human Rights in relation to employment conditions and payment. Article 23 involves safe
and secure working environment, equal pay for equal work and without discrimination, fair
wages, and the right to form and to join trade unions. Article 24 describes the right to rest
and leisure with limitation of working hours and holidays with pay [22].
Concerning Labour Rights, these are part of UN’s principles no. 3 (Businesses should
uphold the freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective
bargaining), no. 4 (the elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory labour), no. 5 (the
effective abolition of child labour), and no. 6 (the elimination of discrimination in respect
of employment and occupation) [2].
Equality and non­discrimination
Equality is part of the very first article in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
”All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights” [22]
The concept includes that all humans have a right to be treated with the same level of
respect, in the eyes of the law, law­enforcement’s, authorities, policies and programs
as well as the ones defining such. Non­discrimination is an important part of equality,
though the concepts can be described separately. Article 2 includes the following forms
of discrimination: race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national
or social origin, property, birth or other status, as well as the political, jurisdictional or
international status of the country or territory to which a person belongs [22].
UN Principles no. 6 (Labour) includes discrimination in employment and occupation, and
mentions some possible characteristics not mentioned above: national extraction, social
origin, age, disability, HIV/AIDS status, trade union membership, and sexual orientation.
1UTZ certification program and UTZ­label was phased out in 2020, and replaced by the new Rainforest
Alliance seal
8
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:17==
Background
Furthermore, they encourage companies to consider additional additional grounds where
discrimination can occur, like work­related activities [2].
Diversity and Inclusion
Diversity and Inclusion (D&I) are two different concepts, though often used together. In
relation to employment and occupation diversity refers to the variation amongst employ­
ees, which could be regarding gender, race, age, level of education etc. Setting goals for
a diverse workforce, e.g. 50/50% male and females in a team, without considering the
aspect of inclusion can however lead to more or less valid accusations of tokenism [23,
16].
In relation to employment and occupation inclusion is concerned with whether all employ­
ees are being involved and offered equal opportunities for participation. With the example
above, inclusion refers to all teammembers having equal opportunities for involvement,
which also includes the structural aspects of the working environment, e.g. scheduling
meeting to accommodate that all members have equal opportunity for participating [23].
SMETA ­ social audit
SMETA stands for Sedex Members Ethical Trade Audit and is Sedex’s auditing program,
which focus on social aspects of businesses as well as their supply chain. The audit
program focus on social sustainability aspects related to health and safety for workers, and
Human Rights. Compliance is assessed through external audits within the certification
program, and the audit must be conducted by third­party audit companies, authorised by
Sedex [24].
SBTi
SBTi stands for Science­based target initiative and is a partnership formed by CDP, the
UNGC, World Resources Institute and the World Wide Fund for Nature. The purpose is to
reach a zero­carbon economy, by guiding companies when setting targets for reductions
of their greenhousegas (GHG) emissions. Defining the targets as science­based means
that they must be in line with the latest climate science, aiming at the goal set out by the
Paris Agreement (i.e. limit global warming to well­below 2°C above pre­industrial levels
and pursuing efforts to limit warming to 1.5°C). Setting the company’s SBTi includes a
full screening of emissions of scope 1, 2, and 3. The screening must be completed as
defined by the GHG protocol, where scope 1 is defined as direct GHG emissions, scope 2
as indirect GHG emissions from purchased electricity and scope 3 as other indirect GHG
emissions [25, 26].
DRIP
DRIP stands for the Danish partnership for Resource and water­efficient Industrial food
Production, and is a public­private partnership between food companies, technology com­
panies, universities and a GTS (approved technological service) institute. The goal of
DRIP is to establish techniques for reducing water­consumption in global Danish food
companies by 15­30%. Their vision is to encourage a ”water­fit­for­purpose” mindset,
which can reduce water­consumption while complying with food quality and safety re­
quirements [27].
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
9
==PAGE:18==
Background
2.5
Related literature
This section will present literature related to the background and framework of the present
study, which was used to develop and confirm the applied method.
2.5.1
Corporate finance and sustainability
Companies working with sustainability can use the SDGs as a framework for integrating
sustainability into their business model. This is indicated by the relationship between TBL
and the SDGs. Having sustainability be part of the business model can be a profitable
strategy. For the FB sector, the relationship between economy and sustainability has
been studied, indicating opportunities for improvement of CoE. The studies underline a
positive impact on corporate finance of sustainable disclosures from various communica­
tion channels (e.g. sustainability reports, news, and third party research) [16, 15].
The economic impact of disclosure on different sustainability aspects over a period of ten
years (from 2009­2019) was investigated by Garzón­Jiménez and Zorio­Grima (2021a).
Their study involved Fb firms from 35 different countries, including both developed and
developing countries. In this study, CoE represented corporate finance, where a negative
relationship can be viewed as a positive impact. The study included three sustainability
aspects: disclosure of CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) reports, carbon emissions,
and gender equality. These aspects relate to SDG no. 12, 13, and 5 respectively, and
hence to the three P’s Prosperity (SDG no. 12), Planet (SDG no. 13) and People (SDG no.
5) (see the top of this chapter). A negative relationship to CoE (i.e. a positive impact) was
seen for all three aspects, indicating an economic advantage for FB businesses focusing
on sustainability [16].
The inclusion of firms from different countries makes the results more generally related to
FB businesses all over the world. However, the study does not reveal if the relationship
between corporate finance and disclosure on sustainability aspects varies between coun­
tries, e.g. between developed and developing countries, or between different developed
countries.
With Denmark being a developed country, a study involving firms from other developed
countries was included, to address this issue. This study was by Raimo et al. (2020)
and concentrated on firms with headquarter in North America, Western Europe and Asia
Pacific. It also investigated the impact of disclosure on sustainability aspects on CoE.
It involved 171 firms and span for a similar period as for the study of Garzón­Jiménez
and Zorio­Grima (from 2010­2019). Results from this study also indicated an economic
advantage for FB businesses focusing on sustainability, as a negative relationship was
found between ESG disclosure and CoE. ESG refers to the three dimensions environ­
mental, social, and governance, and is a method that businesses can use to disclose
non­financial information [15, 28].
Studies involving other sectors than FB have also found a negative relationship between
CoE and disclosures on sustainability aspects. This relationship was studied for GHG
emissions, i.e. related to SDG no. 13, by Albarrak et.al (2019) and by Garzón­Jiménez
and Zorio­Grima (2021b) [17, 18].
The study by Albarrak et.al (2019) involved 584 US firms with 1737 observations over
seven years (from 2009­2015). The study by Garzón­Jiménez and Zorio­Grima (2021b)
10
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:19==
Background
involved 30 emerging countries 2, with 929 firms included over a period of six years (from
2014­2019) [17, 18].
In these studies, a positive relationship was found between high GHG emissions and
CoE, though a negative relationship was found for reporting on GHG emissions and CoE.
Garzón­Jiménez and Zorio­Grima (2021b) indicated that a greater disclosure of informa­
tion related to environmental issues as well as third­party assurance of CSR reports, had
a positive impact on corporate finance, through a lower CoE. Albarrak et.al (2019) stud­
ied the effect of communicating carbon­related information through Twitter3. The study
indicated a positive financial effect of this communication channel, which was found to be
unaffected by ESG disclosures [17, 18].
In several of the above studies, the communication channel was underlined as another
important point concerning disclosures on sustainability. Studies have indicated an ad­
vantage of using several channels, which can provide more updated information, and sup­
plement annual report(s). The argument is a decrease in information asymmetry, which in
turn reduces the perceived risk for stakeholders and improves their view of the firms’ finan­
cial corporate health. When disclosing information on sustainability, businesses should
also pay attention to the quality of the information, to ensure it is transparent and sufficient
[15, 17, 18].
Regarding information asymmetries, in April 2021 the European Commission adopted
a proposal for a Corporate Social Responsibility directive, which will revise the Non­
Financial Reporting Directive. The proposal includes updated requirements for the re­
porting on non­financial information, to make the information more reliable and accurate,
which also includes auditing of the reported information [29].
2.5.2
Non­financial reporting and the SDGs
Before disclosing of sustainability data, businesses should pay special attention to its
quality, to avoid accusations of greenwashing or tokenism. Here, the SDG framework
can be helpful, as the goals represent sustainability in a holistic perspective (i.e. the five
P’s), with several targets and indicators for each goal. Furthermore, communicating the
company’s efforts to take responsibility for sustainable development is made simple by
the well­known SDG icons.
To understand how comprehensive it would be for businesses to start reporting on the
SDGs, the relationship between the SDGs and current reporting methods is interesting.
In this aspect Sardianou et al. (2021) developed an SDG materiality analysis framework,
to assess the alignment of the SDGs and issues communicated in sustainability reports
within the banking sector. The study included 37 European banking institutions [30].
In this study, a literature review was performed in which the relationship between the SDGs
and non­financial reporting was examined, while also focusing on materiality analysis of
reporting sustainability. Based on this review and the content of the SDGs, they developed
58 key Materiality Items (MIs), which were all connected to an SDG. Each MI consisted
of an ID, starting with ID M_1 for SDG no. 1, as well as a short description [30].
E.g. for SDG no. 13 the connected MIs read:
2Emerging countries are countries not yet classified as developed, but could become so. Most known are
the ”BRIC coutries” , which include Brazil, Russia, India and China
3iCarbon
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
11
==PAGE:20==
Background
M_45: Reduce own greenhouse gas emissions, energy consumption
M_46: Green loans
M_47: Green investments
M_48: Internal environmental performance
To assess the relationship between an MI and an SDG a scoring system was applied.
Sardianou et al. described how scoring systems usually range from 0 to 3, 4, or 5. For
their study, the chosen scale was 0­5, where 0 was given for no relationship and 5 for a
very strong relationship [30].
The study found that the banking sector predominantly focused on issues related to eco­
nomic growth and working conditions, though the sector has a high indirect environmental
impact. Furthermore, the study found the linkage between the sustainability reports and
the SDGs to be rather weak [30].
Though focusing on sustainability issues, the included firms in the study by Sardianou et
al. might face negative publicity for not disclosing their impact on environmental issues.
With UN’s ambition for the SDGs of ”no one left behind”, the framework can be viewed as a
guide towards sustainability in all aspects. Implementing the SDGs in a business strategy
can therefore help businesses to gain the economic advantage of disclosing sustainability
information, and avoiding negative publicity.
12
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
To identify how Danish FB businesses can implement the SDGs in their business strat­
egy, this study first analyzed the CoPs of the ten UNGC participants listed in table 2.1.
Here it was assessed how these businesses were reporting on outcome­focused targets
associated to the six SDGs, with the aim of formulating Key Sustainability Items (KSIs)
for each of the six SDGs, as described in section 3.1.
Secondly CP Kelco ApS (CPK) was included as a case company, to assess if the KSIs
were relevant for a FB business not currently part of UNGC (see section 3.2.
Furthermore, a stakeholder analysis was performed to identify interest and influence of
potential stakeholders in regards to a FB business’ focus on sustainability.
3.1
Defining Key Sustainability Items of selected SDGs
KSIs were defined for targets associated to the six SDGs, concerning how other FB busi­
nesses could support each target.
This included the following steps:
1. Get an overview of the ten CoPs
2. Select relevant CoPs
3. Identify ambitions for associated targets
4. Define Key Sustainability Items
In section chapter 4: Results, steps 1 and 2 will be described collectively for the six SDGs,
where steps 3 and 4 will be described separately.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
13
==PAGE:22==
Methods
3.1.1
Step 1: Get an overview of the ten CoPs
The most recent CoP published by the ten businesses listed in table 2.1 were used to get
an indication of how detailed the UNGC participants reported on the SDGs. Specifically,
whether the business included details regarding which SDGs and associated outcome­
focused targets their activities had an impact on. Furthermore, of how detailed this impact
was described in the CoP, i.e. if specific actions were highlighted in relation to an SDG
target (high detail level/target level) or if an SDG icon was added to a chapter without the
connection being explained (low detail level/goal level).
3.1.2
Step 2: Select relevant CoPs
Based on the information on the detail level from step 1, four CoPs were chosen for further
analysis. When choosing these CoPs priority was given for reports where the impacts
were described on target level. The aim of this was to get as specific information as
possible, regarding how these businesses were working with the SDGs.
From ”Step 1: Get an overview of the ten CoPs” it seemed that the businesses which
joined UNGC earliest also included most information with value for this study in their CoP.
Possibly because these businesses had been working with the SDGs for most years.
Therefore, priority was also given to the earliest dates of joining UNGC, when choosing
the four CoPs.
3.1.3
Step 3: Identify ambitions for associated targets
The selected CoPs from step 2 were used to identify ambitions for each of the six SDGs.
Ambitions were defined as all current and planned activities, goals, targets, impacts etc.,
which were described in the CoPs in relation to an SDG or an associated target. For each
identified ambition the description in the CoP was compared to the full text of the target,
as well as associated UN indicators. Based on this is was classified as:
x = Target reported in CoP
(x) = Target not reported in CoP
M = Target reported, but not described in text
The three different classifications are elaborated below, with examples from ambitions
identified as related to target 12.2 (see fig. 4.3):
• The CoP of AAK includes a table of all impacted targets, with a row for each tar­
get. For 12.2 this includes the ambition ”Our current priority is to drive progress on
verified deforestation­free palm and soy supply chains.” [31].
This ambition was therefore identified as a target reported by the business in their
CoP and marked in the list with x.
• In the CoP of Danish Crown the contribution to the SDGs is mentioned in many sec­
tions with the text ”We support target (...)”. In the section ”Sustainable management
of agricultural land” the mentioned targets are 15.2, 15.3 and 15.9. However, the
following text from this section is assessed to be related to target 12.2: ”Grass as a
protein source for single­stomach animals is technically challenging but also inter­
esting (...) Danish Crown is part of the Dansk Protein Innovation partnership and
14
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:23==
Methods
participates in the Bio Value research project, which is seeking to find a profitable
method of extracting grass protein.” [32].
This ambition was therefore identified as a target not reported by the business in
their CoP but identified based on the assessment of the text, and marked in the list
with (x).
• The last option is when the business reports a relation to the target in their CoP
report, but it is unclear which action the business is taking to support the target.
These were marked as missing, with an M
For example, the CoP of Arla includes the section ”International Dairy Develop­
ment”, where target 12.2 is listed in their table under ”Impact” and then ”On Sus­
tainable Development Goals And Targets”. However the text is sparse, and a re­
lation could not be found between target 12.2, and the described ambition: ”Arla’s
sustainable dairy development programmes: reach 1,900 farms enrolled in the pro­
grammes in 2021. Continue to work with programmes in Nigeria, Ethiopia, Bangladesh,
China and Indonesia, with the focus on capacity building and strengthening the link
to Arla’s commercial dairy value chain.” [33]
3.1.4
Step 4: Define Key Sustainability Items
For each of the selected SDGs, the associated targets with the most identified ambitions
were chosen for further analysis. Targets with most ambitions were defined as the once
with an above­average number of related ambitions, compared to other targets associated
to the same SDG.
For the selected targets, all related ambitions were analyzed to identify main themes.
KSIs were them defined from analysing these themes in relation to the full text of the
target. As stated previously KSIs are defined as themes related to the targets, which
other Danish food and beverage (FB) businesses can use when implementing the SDGs
in their business strategy.
3.2
Case company: CP Kelco
The results of this analysis was several KSIs, which related to the selected targets of the
six SDGs. However, the purpose of this study was to guide companies to an increased
focus on sustainability. Therefore, CPK was included as another FB company, which
did not currently participate in UNGC. The identified KSIs were then applied to disclosed
information from this company, to gain understanding of how applicably the results were
for guiding other FB businesses.
3.3
Stakeholder analysis
A stakeholder analysis was performed in four steps:
1. Potential stakeholders for FB business’ were identified
2. Their interest in a FB business’ focus on sustainability, and their influence on its
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
15
==PAGE:24==
Methods
business strategy were described
3. The interests and influences were classified as high or low
4. All stakeholders were place in the stakeholder matrix , as shown in fig. 2.2
16
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This chapter firstly presents results related of the analysis of the ten CoPs, as described
in section 3.1. Concerning this analysis section 4.1 presents the results from ”Step 1: Get
an overview of the ten CoPs”, and ”Step 2: Select relevant CoPs”, while sections 4.2 ­
4.7 presents results from ”Step 3: Identify ambitions for associated targets”, and ”Step 4:
Define Key Sustainability Items”. In section 4.8 a list of all defined KSIs are presented.
Section 4.9 presents results of the stakeholder analysis, and results of the case company
are presented in chapter 5.
Sections 4.2 ­ section 4.7 concerns the selected six SDGs, the icons of which are shown
in fig. 4.1. Each of these sections include analysis of ambitions related to 2 to 3 targets,
and ends with a sub­conclusion containing KSIs defined for the individual SDG.
4.1
Relevant Communication on Progress reports
A high detail level in the CoP, with the inclusion of SDG targets, was found for:
• AAK AB: described specific ambitions for each target mentioned in their CoP [31]
• Arla Foods amba: included icons of the SDGs and targets, which they assess to be
impacted by the described ambitions [33]
• Carlsberg Group: included a table with the SDGs and targets, they assessed to be
impacted by their activities. The table included examples of related actions, though
this was on goal level [34]
• Danish Crown: included two sections in their CoP, where it was described which
targets the section related to. They did however include several targets, without
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
17
==PAGE:26==
Results
Figure 4.1: Sustainable Development Goals included in this chapter [6]
specifying which ambition related to which target or goal [32]
All above businesses published their Sustainability Report as their CoP, except for Arla
Foods amba where their Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Report was published.
For Bakkafrost a high detail level was also found, with a page dedicated for SDGs in
their CoP, which specified which targets they had a positive impact or negative impact on.
However, the page contained only a few lines for each SDG, and scarce information on
target level. The overall detail level was therefore considered low [35].
A lower detail level was found for the other half of the CoPs listed in table 2.1. They did
not mention which targets they supported, only which goals.
Chr. Hansen Holding A/S and Royal Unibrew A/S published their business Annual report
as their CoP. Carl J. Nielsen A/S and Uhrenholt A/S published their Sustainability Reports
and Orana A/S published their CSR report [36, 37, 38, 39, 40].
For further analysis and identification of ambitions, the four businesses with high detail
levels in their reporting of addressing the SDGs were chosen:
AAK AB: Food­Producing company of plant­based oils. Joined UNGC in 2003.
They listed nine SDGs as addressed in their CoP, hereof SDG no. 3, 5, 8, 12, and
13. They will be referred to as AAK
Arla Foods amba: Food­Producing company of milk and milk­based products.
Joined UNGC in 2008. They listed eleven SDGs as addressed in their CoP, hereof
SDG no. 3, 5, 6, 8, 12, and 13. They will be referred to as Arla
Carlsberg Group: Beverages company, producer of beers. Joined UNGC in 2008.
They listed ten SDGs as addressed in their CoP, hereof SDG no. 3, 5, 6, 8, 12, and
13. They will be referred to as Carlsberg
Danish Crown: Food­Producing company of meat from pigs and calves. Joined
UNGC in 2011. They listed eleven SDGs as addressed in their CoP, hereof SDG
no. 3, 5, 6, 8, 12, and 13. They will be referred to by name
18
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:27==
Results
SDG no. 12, which was the first SDG to be analyzed, presented an exception to the
above. In this case, Toms Gruppen A/S (referred to as Toms) and Chr. Hansen were also
included. As the method described in section 3.1 was not yet established, the procedure
at this early stage was to start with the oldest UNGC participant, hence Toms which joined
UNGC in 2006 was included [41, 36].
Toms contributes with 13 identified ambitions, eight of which are related to the targets
12.2, 12.3, and 12.5. Chr. Hansen contributes with seven identified ambitions, all of
which are related to the targets 12.2, 12.3, and 12.5.
4.2
SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production
SDG no. 12, which is shown in fig. 4.2, includes eight outcome­focused targets. From the
most recent CoPs of the six businesses, 97 ambitions were identified as being related to
one of these targets, with 67% of the ambitions related to targets 12.2, 12.3, and 12.5.
With six ambitions related to more than one target, the distribution was:
• 43% related to 12.2: Sustainable management and use of natural resources
• 16% related to 12.3: Halve global per capita food waste
• 31% related to 12.5: Substantially reduce waste generation.
Figure 4.2: Sustainable Development Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production
patterns [6]
The ambitions identified as related to the listed targets were included in the analysis, with
the results presented in the following subsections. All identified ambitions for this goal
can be found in appendix A.2.
4.2.1
Target 12.2: Sustainable management and use of natural resources
This section involves target 12.2, which is shown in fig. 4.3. For this target 42 related
ambitions were identified. From these ambitions the following themes were identified:
Packaging material, Raw materials, Suppliers, Utilities & Wastewater. Two ambitions did
not fit into these groups and are described as Others.
Raw materials
16 ambitions related to raw materials were identified, focusing on soy, cocoa, palm oil,
other crops, and animal fodder.
AAK, Toms, Arla, and Danish Crown all described ambitions for soy, palm oil, or cocoa,
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
19
==PAGE:28==
Results
Figure 4.3: Sustainable Development Goal 12 target 12.2: By 2030, achieve the sustainable
management and efficient use of natural resources [6]
with the main focus on deforestation­free raw materials.
For soy the described ambitions included certification acc. to ProTerra or RTRS (Round
Table for Responsible Soy), purchase of RTRS credits, documentation from suppliers,
substitution with other protein sources like horsebean, and following guidelines for re­
sponsible soy set out by FEFAC (European Feed Manufacturers’ Federation). Certifica­
tion is also described for cocoa­related ambitions (UTZ­certified). Furthermore, ambitions
included the protection of ecosystems as well as cocoa farmers and their families, which
embrace CFI (Cocoa Forest Initiative), WCF (World Cocoa Foundation), and GISCO (the
German Initiative on Sustainable Cocoa). For palm oil RSPO (Round Table of Sustainable
Palm Oil) certification is described, either for ingredients or plantations, and the Danish
Alliance for Responsible Palm Oil is mentioned by Toms Gruppen A/S.
AAK described such an ambition in their CoP:
”Our current priority is to drive progress on verified deforestation­free palm and
soy supply chains.” [31]
Carlsberg and Chr. Hansen included ambitions focused on higher­yielding crops, by in­
novation into more climate­resilient barley and biological protection, respectively. Danish
Crown described the optimization of animal fodder, by reducing feed consumption per
gained kg (pig farming) and investigations into alternative protein sources like grass (part
of Dansk Protein Innovation partnership) and horse beans (from the farmers’ fields).
Packaging materials
13 ambitions related to packaging material were identified, focusing on plastic, cardboard
boxes, and pallets.
AAK, Arla, Carlsberg, Chr. Hansen, and Danish Crown all described ambitions for reduc­
ing use of virgin plastic. Either by reducing the amount of packaging material required per
product, by substituting virgin plastic with recycled plastic, or by substituting virgin plastic
with renewable materials.
Arla described such an ambition in their CoP:
”However, we are continuously rethinking our use of plastic; replacing plastic
with fiber materials where possible, removing plastic components, converting
it into bio­based plastic, and increasing the recycled content.” [33]
20
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:29==
Results
Carlsberg also described a reduction in raw material, by using stronger and thinner card­
board boxes, and Danish Crown mentioned reduced raw materials for pallets, where non­
recyclable pallets are used to repair other worn­out pallets.
Utilities and wastewater management
8 ambitions related to utilities and wastewater management were identified in CoPs from
Carlsberg and Danish Crown, focusing on energy, water, and wastewater.
Energy was mentioned as reductions in the use of natural resources, explicitly coal, by
switching to renewable energy and by reducing energy consumption by re­use of energy
or increasing energy efficiency.
Carlsberg described such an ambition in their CoP:
”We are switching to 100% renewable electricity, eliminating use of coal and
adopting best practices and advanced technologies in production processes.”
[34]
Water­related ambitions were described by reductions in overall water consumption and
increased water recycling. Food safety concerns are mentioned, as a challenge for the
recycling of water. Ambitions related to wastewater management are interlinked with both
energy and water. The use of wastewater treatment is described for reuse of the water
used in production processes, and to recycle sludge and slurry for biogas production.
Suppliers
2 ambitions related to requirements the business placed on their suppliers. AAK men­
tioned a focus on raising awareness about sustainable management and natural resources,
and Danish Crown a requirement of life­cycle assessments of all packaging from suppli­
ers.
Others
2 ambitions were found without any connection to the other mentioned resources. AAK
mentions a general focus on circular solutions and recycling to further improve resource
management. And Toms mentions distributions of shade trees, regarding ambitions of
fighting deforestation.
4.2.2
Target 12.3 Halve global per capita food waste
This section involves target 12.3, which is shown in fig. 4.4. For this target 16, related
ambitions were identified in CoPs of AAK, Arla, Chr. Hansen, Danish Crown, and Toms.
From these ambitions the following themes were identified: product lifetime, and side­
streams.
Product lifetime
11 ambitions related to food waste reductions, through prolonging of the products’ lifetime,
were identified.
Arla and Danish Crown both mentioned packaging material as part of such an ambition.
Danish Crown described a redesign of a packaging solution with less plastic, which con­
tributed to a longer shelf­life. Arla described how ambitions of a longer shelf­life can be
challenged by ambitions for the reduction of plastic.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
21
==PAGE:30==
Results
Figure 4.4: Sustainable Development Goal 12 target 12.3: By 2030, halve per capita global food
waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along production and supply
chains, including post­harvest losses [6]
Arla described such an ambition in their CoP:
”Around one third of all the packaging material we use is plastic, which is still
necessary to fulfill the strict functional requirements that apply to food contact
material. However, we are continuously rethinking our use of plastic;” [33]
Furthermore, 2 ambitions were identified for Chr. Hansen, where the shelf­life of the prod­
uct was increased by food cultures or inoculants. Arla, Chr. Hansen and Toms described
ambitions for use of labeling products with better­explained expiration dates. E.g. using
the label ”Best Before” instead of ”Use by”, on products where this does not pose a health
risk, to encourage consumers to throw out less food. Arla and Danish Crown described
participation in initiatives like ”Denmark against Food Waste”, where they voluntarily sign
up with a target of reducing their food waste.
Side­streams
5 ambitions related to food waste reductions, through the utilization of side­streams were
identified in CoPs from AAK and Danish Crown.
AAK described such an ambition in their CoP:
”AAK has an impact on how to reduce food losses by utilizing its valuable
sidestreams to produce healthy and nutritious solutions.” [31]
They both described ambitions for utilization of waste streams, which are used for the pro­
duction of byproducts instead of waste, either by the business’ facilities or their business
partners.
4.2.3
Target 12.5 Substantially reduce waste generation
This section involves target 12.5, which is shown in fig. 4.5. For this target 30 related
ambitions were identified. From these ambitions the following themes were identified:
Recycling, reduction, prevention and r.euse
Recycling
17 ambitions related to waste reduction through recycling were identified, focusing on
the management of production sidestreams, raw & packaging materials, and consumer
22
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:31==
Results
Figure 4.5: Sustainable Development Goal 12 target 12.5: By 2030, substantially reduce waste
generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse [6]
behavior.
AAK, Carlsberg, Chr. Hansen and Danish Crown all described ambitions related to their
sidestreams. Treatment of wastewater to produce biogas and fertilizers was mentioned by
Carlsberg, Chr. Hansen and Danish Crown. AAK described a move to byproducts which
included collaboration with another business, which could utilize their spent bleaching
earth for organic fertilizer.
Chr. Hansen described such an ambition in their CoP:
”This (eluate, ed.) is still rich in nutrients and are therefore of value when
we pass it on for alternative production flows, where it is transformed to for
example biogas or fertilizers.” [36]
Ambitions regarding raw and packaging materials were mentioned by Arla, Chr. Hansen
and Danish Crown, especially with a focus on plastic. Use of packaging materials, which
is designed to be recyclable, either directly or after reprocessing is mentioned by all three
businesses. Arla used the phrase Design for circularity, which also refers to reuse and
combustion, as well as consumer disposal. Arla described mixed and contaminated plas­
tic as a challenge, which they were working on with their suppliers. They described py­
rolysis as a relevant technology, though it required high energy consumption, which is
yet another challenge. Danish Crown also mentioned this challenge and described their
collaboration with another company, which recycles their mixed plastic types or plastic
contaminated with meat juice; plastic types which are not suitable for reuse in the cur­
rent Danish systems. Furthermore, they mentioned challenges regarding food safety and
product quality, which must be ensured both for legal and competitive reasons. Concern­
ing raw materials, AAK mentioned better alternatives in process aids to increase recycling.
Influencing consumer behavior by helping them to sort waste correctly is described in
by Arla, Carlsberg, and Toms. Ambitions regarded informing consumers on the subject,
designing packaging for recycling, and collaborating with municipalities and retailers to
make it easier for the consumers.
Reduction
8 ambitions related to waste reduction through reduction were identified in CoPs from
AAK, Arla, Carlsberg, Danish Crown, and Toms. They focused on raw & packaging ma­
terials and management of production sidestreams.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
23
==PAGE:32==
Results
AAK and Arla described ambitions related to their sidestreams, where reductions were
described for hazardous waste and waste to landfill. AAK also mentioned ambitions for
reduced waste intensity per processed unit. Raw and packaging materials were men­
tioned by AAK, Carlsberg, Danish Crown, and Toms. The use of packaging material,
which is or can be recycled is mentioned. Here Toms also mentioned the challenges de­
scribed above, where the packaging material must fulfill many (and often contradictory)
requirements.
Toms described such an ambition in their CoP:
”There are many and often contradictory requirements to our packaging mate­
rials, which must protect the products for months. We need to balance these
requirements while at the same time develop the most responsible and sus­
tainable setup.” [41]
AAK mentioned prolonged shelf­life of products, and Danish Crown included ambitions
for responsible demolition of old factories, which leaves more materials ready for re­
purposing.
Prevention
3 ambitions related to waste reduction through prevention were identified in the CoP from
Danish Crown and Toms, focusing on management of production sidestreams.
Danish Crown described the utilization of meat from dairy cattle, and the replacement of
bedding in animal transport for a material, which can be utilized afterward, unlike previ­
ously used material. Toms described the use of a waste hierarchy in their waste manage­
ment, where prevention is the preferred method.
Danish Crown described such an ambition in their CoP:
”For instance, we currently use many tonnes of sawdust as bedding in our
animal transport vehicles and expect to replace it with straw bedding that can
be used for biogas production and afterwards as fertiliser for new straw.” [32]
Reuse
2 ambitions related to waste reduction through reuse were identified in CoPs from Carls­
berg and Danish Crown. Carlsberg described the treatment of wastewater, which can then
be reused. Danish Crown mentioned the reuse of worn­out pallets, which are repaired
with other, but non­recyclable, worn­out pallets.
4.2.4
Sub­conclusion for SDG no. 12
For FB businesses to support SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production
it was found that the most relevant targets were 12.2, 12.3, and 12.5, for which 43, 16,
and 30 ambitions were identified, respectively. Based on the themes of the identified
ambitions, and the full description of the targets (as shown in fig. 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5), KSI
1­7 were defined:
KSI 1: Sustainable production of raw materials
It was found that to support target 12.2 FB businesses could focus on deforestation­related
ambitions, which could include the use of raw materials from certified plantations or pur­
chasing of credits for responsible production.
24
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:33==
Results
KSI 2: Use of natural resources for raw materials
To support target 12.2 FB businesses could also focus on ambitions related to crop inno­
vations regarding their raw materials. Here more robust crops could decrease resources
used per raw material unit, or efficiency in the use of raw material could reduce raw ma­
terial usage per production unit.
KSI 3: Use of virgin plastic
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 12.2 by focusing on ambi­
tions to reduce their consumption of virgin plastic. This reduction could be pursued in
several ways, e.g. by reducing the use of plastic for packaging materials, substituting the
use of virgin plastic with recycled plastic, or by substituting the use of virgin plastic with
renewable materials.
KSI 4: Lifetime of finished products
It was found that to support target 12.3 FB businesses could focus on the lifetime of
finished products in their ambitions. Ambitions for expanding the lifetime of the product
could involve redesign of the packaging material to increase shelf­life, or by adding food
cultures, inoculants, etc. Ambitions could also involve better labeling of the expiration
dates, to encourage consumers’ reduced food waste.
FB businesses should be aware of challenges concerning food packaging material, where
ambitions for increased shelf­life can conflict with ambitions for sustainable packaging
materials.
KSI 5: Reduce food waste by utilizing side­streams
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 12.3 by focusing on am­
bitions related to the utilization of their side­streams, to produce new and valuable by­
products. To reach such ambitions, they could consider collaborating with other compa­
nies, who can use the side­streams in their production.
KSI 6: Reduce waste generation by reuse or prevention
It was found that to support target 12.5 FB businesses could focus on circular economy
thinking in their ambitions. This could involve managing waste­streams to produce valu­
able side­streams and by­products, e.g. treatment of wastewater to produce biogas and
fertilizers and to reuse the water in previous production steps. Other possible ambitions
could involve reductions in waste categories like hazardous waste, waste to landfill, or
waste intensity per processed unit.
KSI 7: Reduce own waste generation by recycling
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 12.5 by focusing on am­
bitions concerning rethinking of their raw and packaging materials, especially on plastic
content. Ambitions could involve better waste handling to increase recycling of materi­
als, less use of virgin materials, designing packaging materials for increased recyclability,
or designs to make the consumers sort the waste correctly. To reach such ambitions
they could consider collaborating with other companies, e.g. recycling centers, to explore
increased recycling.
FB businesses should however be aware of challenges related to such ambitions, like re­
cycling of mixed or contaminated plastic, and potential conflict with the many requirements
to food contact materials.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
25
==PAGE:34==
Results
4.3
SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth
SDG no. 8, which is shown in fig. 4.6, includes ten outcome­focused targets. From the
most recent CoPs of the four businesses, 69 ambitions were identified as being related
to one of these targets, with 80% of the ambitions related to targets 8.5, 8.7, and 8.8.
With 21 ambitions related to more than one target, the distribution was:
• 39% related to 8.5: Full employment and decent work with equal pay
• 14% related to 8.7: End modern slavery, trafficking, and child labour
• 51% related to 8.8: Protect labour rights and promote safe working environments
Figure 4.6: Sustainable Development Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable eco­
nomic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all [6]
The ambitions identified as related to the listed targets were included in the analysis, with
the results presented in the following subsections. All identified ambitions for this goal
can be found in appendix A.3.
4.3.1
Target 8.5: Full employment and decent work with equal pay
This section involves target 8.5, which is shown in fig. 4.7. For this target 27 related
ambitions were identified in CoPs of AAK, Arla, and Danish Crown. Of these 13 were
analyzed in section 4.3.3. From these ambitions two themes were identified: Occupational
Health and Safety (OHS), and equality
Figure 4.7: Sustainable Development Goal 8 target 8.5: By 2030, achieve full and productive
employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons
with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value [6]
26
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:35==
Results
Occupational health and safety (OHS)
17 ambitions related to OHS were identified, focusing on the working environment of their
employees, employees of their suppliers, and incident prevention.
AAK and Danish Crown described ambitions focusing on the working environment of their
employees, related to their capabilities and/or satisfaction. The capabilities of employees
were described through a focus on their competencies, evaluation of skills, and perfor­
mance development. Employee satisfaction was described through a focus on motivation,
career development, conducting an annual survey, engagement of employees, and man­
agement quality. AAK described how the working environment was included in their Code
of Conduct for employees. Danish Crown described the conduction of a skill and moti­
vation evaluation, which was used to identify the focus areas for new courses offered to
their employees. Furthermore, they described offers of retraining programs to employees
who were already worn out, or at risk of becoming so.
Danish Crown described such an ambition in their CoP:
”In 2020, we launched a programme involving more than 2,500 managers, set­
ting out to take the group’s management quality to a higher level and promote
employee satisfaction.” [32]
Ambitions focusing on the working environment for employees of their suppliers or incident
prevention are described in Section 4.3.3.
Equality
10 ambitions related to equality were identified, focusing on non­discrimination, and di­
versity (with 1 ambition focusing on both).
Ambitions focusing on non­discrimination were described through zero­tolerance policy,
ethical behavior training, investigations of reported incidents, non­harassment, and equal
pay. AAK described non­discrimination as part of their Code of Conduct for human re­
sources, where hiring, remuneration, etc. was based on objective factors.
AAK described such an ambition in their CoP:
”4 cases of discrimination were reported during 2020. Corrective actions were
taken to prevent incidents from happening again.” [31]
Arla described ambitions focusing on diversity, with a percentage of how teams must vary
concerning age and nationality. They also described diversity as well as equal opportu­
nities, as part of their ambition for their employees to live up to their full potential. Danish
Crown focused on diversity in ambitions regarding new employees, which included a pro­
gram for high­level education graduates, offering jobs for people on the edge of the labor
market, and a pilot project where contract staff was replaced by permanent employment.
4.3.2
Target 8.7: End modern slavery, trafficking and child labour
This section involves target 8.7, which is shown in fig. 4.8. For this target 10 related
ambitions were identified, from which two themes were identified: Human Rights and
modern slavery.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
27
==PAGE:36==
Results
Figure 4.8: Sustainable Development Goal 8 target 8.7: Take immediate and effective measures
to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking and secure the prohibition
and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers,
and by 2025 end child labour in all its forms [6]
Human Rights
All CoPs included ambitions regarding policies and codes of conduct with a focus on
Human Rights and/or the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. AAK
and Danish Crown both described focus on Human Rights in their code of conduct for
employees and suppliers. Carlsberg described the training of people managers on their
labor & Human Rights policy, with an assessment of compliance through audits in high­risk
markets.
Carlsberg described such an ambition in their CoP:
”Continued to train people managers on our Labour & Human Rights Policy.
Assessed compliance with the policy in potentially higher­risk markets through
audits in Bulgaria, Kazakhstan, Laos, Lithuania, Myanmar and Ukraine.” [34]
Furthermore, Danish Crown described a whistle­blower scheme for suspected non­compliance
and encouraging their suppliers to join Sedex. Risk assessment of issues or negative
impacts on Human Rights were described by AAK, Carlsberg, and Danish Crown. Con­
cerning their risk assessment, Danish Crown mentioned the use of Sedex’s data platform,
and performance and risk assessment tools.
Modern slavery
Danish Crown included ambitions, concerning risk of modern slavery, which goes against
the Human Right to freedom. One ambition described an obligatory UK report, where they
annually published their efforts on limiting the risk of modern slavery in their value chain.
Secondly, they described monitoring of third­party employment of contract staff, due to a
known risk of modern slavery.
4.3.3
Target 8.8: Protect labour rights and promote safe working
environments
This section involves target 8.8, which is shown in fig. 4.9. For this target 38 related
ambitions were identified. Of these, 7 ambitions were analyzed in section 4.3.2, and 2
were excluded since the relation to the target was unclear (i.e. classified as M). From
these ambitions three themes were identified: Labour Rights, occupational risks, and the
28
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:37==
Results
working environment.
Figure 4.9: Sustainable Development Goal 8 target 8.8: Protect labour rights and promote safe
and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in particular women
migrants, and those in precarious employment [6]
Occupational Risks
18 ambitions related to occupational risks were identified, focusing on incident statistics,
and prevention of incidents.
Regarding incidents prevention, Danish Crown described their occupational health and
safety management system and policy, and the launch of their Safety First campaign,
which encouraged their employees to take responsibility for the working environment.
AAK described a high focus on work environmental risks and prevention and training
of their employees. Both businesses described risk assessments of the workplace, in
ambitions to prevent incidents.
Ambitions from Arla, Carlsberg, and Danish Crown included several proactive actions:
• targets for near miss
• targets for behavioral observations
• high compliance with Life Saving Rules
• safety walks
• employee reported observations on safety risks and unsafe behaviors
• expert evaluation of the working environment
• reductions of heavy lifting and monotonously repeated work
• testing of exoskeletons to support their employees and reduce strain
Ambitions related to incident statistics were described by all businesses for accident fre­
quencies over three to six years, with the frequency defined as lost time per 200,000
working hours, 1 million working hours, or full­time equivalent.
Arla described such an ambition in their CoP:
”Our overall target is zero accidents and incidents, resulting in loss of working
time.” [33]
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
29
==PAGE:38==
Results
Furthermore, ambitions were described for the number of lost time accidents, for days of
absence, and days of absence per accident. These ambitions also included data for a
period of three to six years.
Working environment
7 ambitions related to the working environment were identified in CoPs from AAK, Arla,
and Danish Crown, focusing on employees and suppliers.
For suppliers, AAK described ambitions regarding a Code of Conduct for Suppliers of Raw
Materials, which included the working environment of their suppliers’ employees. They
also described ambitions for webinars, self­assessments, and training sessions of their
suppliers in this Code of Conduct. AAK and Arla described a focus on certification of raw
materials, using certifications that include the working environment. For their employees,
AAK described ambitions focusing on a Code of Conduct to be signed by the employees,
which also included the working environment. Danish Crown included ambitions for the
training of their employees, where they offered retraining programs to employees who
were already worn out, or at risk of becoming so.
Labor Rights
12 ambitions related to Human Rights & Labor Rights were identified, with 5 specifically
describing Labor Rights and the remaining ambitions, identified to be describing Human
Rights, analyzed in section 4.3.2.
Regarding Labor Rights, AAK described the percentage of employees covered by collec­
tive bargaining agreement, and Danish Crown described ongoing dialog with their coop­
erative members on the rights of their employees. AAK described how workers’ rights are
included in their Code of Conduct, both for suppliers and employees. Carlsberg described
the training of people managers on their labor & Human Rights policy, with an assessment
of compliance through audits in high­risk markets.
4.3.4
Sub­conclusion for SDG no. 8
For FB businesses to support SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth it was found
that the most relevant targets were 8.5, 8.7, and 8.8, for which 27, 10, and 38 ambitions
were identified, respectively. Based on the themes of the identified ambitions, and the full
description of the targets (as shown in fig. 4.7, 4.8 and 4.9), KSI 8­15 were defined:
KSI 8: Involvement of employees in work environmental issues
It was found that to support target 8.5 FB businesses could focus on ambitions related
to working environment related issues of their workers, including their satisfaction and
capabilities. Ambitions could involve engagement of employees at all company levels,
conduction of evaluations of their motivation and skills, as well as actions taken based on
these evaluations.
KSI 9: Equality throughout all of the organization
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 8.5 by focusing on ambitions
related to equality, like non­discrimination and diversity. Ambitions for non­discrimination
could include training of employees and implementation of such issues into the company’s
code of conduct and their policies, including for human resource tasks. Furthermore,
ambitions for diversity could include a variation of employees in regards to age, nationality,
30
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:39==
Results
education, etc.
KSI 10: Human rights as part of policies and code of conducts
It was found that to support target 8.7 FB businesses could focus on ambitions related to
Human Rights as part of their policies and code of conduct, and commit to focusing on
the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
KSI 11: Perform training and Human Rights assessments
Ambitions related to target 8.7 could also involve training of employees and suppliers,
as well as risk assessments of own and supplier­owned sites, conduction of audits, and
joining of Sedex with social auditing (SMETA).
KSI 12: Monitor and reduce incidents/accidents
It was found that to support target 8.8 FB businesses could focus on incidents, through
statistics and preventive actions. Ambitions for incident statistics could include data on
accidents frequencies over a three to six years period, like lost­time accident rates, num­
bers of lost­time accidents, number of days with absence, and average days of absence
per accident.
KSI 13: Prevention of incidents/accidents
Ambitions related to target 8.8 could also relate to the prevention of accidents. Such
ambitions could include several proactive actions, which the business can adjust based
on their occupational risks. Possible ambitions could involve reporting and investigation
of near­miss incidents; employees observations; compliance with life­saving rules; and
safety walks.
KSI 14: Involvement of employees in health and safety issues
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 8.8 by focusing on ambitions
related to employee involvement and training in health and safety issues. Ambition could
include consulting with experts to identify occupational risks and improve the working
environment.
KSI 15: Health and safety in the supply chain
Furthermore, FB businesses could support target 8.8 by focusing on ambitions related
to the safety and security issues of the workers of their suppliers, by engaging in deeper
collaboration with suppliers. Such ambitions could include having OHS issues as part of
the business code of conduct for suppliers, training the suppliers, or conducting audits.
Other possible ambitions could involve the use of certifications focusing on OHS, for raw
materials.
4.4
SDG no. 13: Climate action
SDG no. 13, which is shown in fig. 4.10, includes three outcome­focused targets. From
the most recent CoPs of the four businesses, 26 ambitions were identified as being related
to one of these targets, with 96% of the ambitions related to targets 13.2 and 13.3.
With 3 ambitions related to both targets, the distribution was:
• 58% related to 13.2: Integrate climate change measures into policies and planning
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
31
==PAGE:40==
Results
• 50% related to 13.3: Build knowledge and capacity to meet climate change
Figure 4.10: Sustainable Development Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and
its impacts [3, 6]
The ambitions identified as related to the listed targets were included in the analysis, with
the results presented in the following subsections. All identified ambitions for this goal
can be found in appendix A.4.
4.4.1
Target 13.2: Integrate climate change measures into policies and
planning
This section involves target 13.2, which is shown in fig. 4.11. For this target 15 related
ambitions were identified. From these ambitions the following themes, all concerning
emission of GHG, were identified: statistics, the Science­Based Target initiative (SBTi),
and risk assessment.
Figure 4.11: Sustainable Development Goal 13 target 13.2: Integrate climate change measures
into national policies, strategies and planning [6]
Statistics
7 ambitions describing statistics related to GHG emissions were identified in CoPs of AAK,
Carlsberg, and Danish Crown.
AAK and Carlsberg described development in percent for emissions per product unit or
plant, and AAK described development in percent for absolute emissions. Carlsberg de­
scribed ambitions for use of low­climate­impact technology, and for their breweries to
be carbon­neutral. Danish Crown described ambitions for their products to be climate­
neutral, and for zero emissions of GHG. Furthermore, they described the development of
the carbon footprint of Danish farmers and their abattoirs. Lastly, Carlsberg described an
32
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:41==
Results
ambition with a focus on joining efforts with other companies, towards urging the govern­
ments and the European Union leaders, for a reduction in GHG emissions.
The Science Based Target initiative (SBTi)
5 ambitions describing SBTi concerning GHG emissions were identified.
Danish Crown described ambitions for conducting environmental footprint analysis, which
they would use to define science­based targets and thereby document their progress
against the climate goal. AAK described that they had just signed SBTi, thereby commit­
ting to reduce their GHG emissions.
Carlsberg described such an ambition in their CoP:
Our targets, aligned with the Science­Based Targets initiative, are to cut our
beer­in­hand footprint by 15% by 2022 and by 30% by 2030 (from our 2015
baseline). [34]
Arla described 2 ambitions with SBTi.
One where they defined targets for reduction
in scope 1, scope 2, and scope 3 emissions for 2030, and one where they described
progress on these targets. Carlsberg also described SBTi, with targets for 2030 and the
progress they had achieved on their targets so far.
Risk assessment
3 ambitions describing risk assessments of GHG emissions were identified.
AAK and Carlsberg described the assessment of their emissions, as part of their ambi­
tion to reduce GHG emissions. The involvement of their suppliers was mentioned as an
important part of this assessment. Danish Crown described an LCA of the climate im­
pact from their production, to identify what part of the production has the highest negative
impact.
4.4.2
Target 13.3: Build knowledge and capacity to meet climate change
This section involves target 13.3, which is shown in fig. 4.12. For this target 13 related am­
bitions were identified. Of these, 3 ambitions focusing on GHG emissions were analyzed
in section 4.4.1. From these ambitions the following themes were identified: information,
product & raw materials, and risk assessment.
Information
4 ambitions related to information on climate change were identified in CoPs of AAK,
Carlsberg, and Danish Crown.
AAK described internal awareness­raising on climate change, with the use of climate
change scorecards on their sites. They also described an ambition with percent of their
revenue being connected to the SDGs, which included this target.
AAK described this ambitions in their CoP:
The revenue connected to our plant­based solutions is included in our am­
bition, percent of revenue connected to the Sustainable Development Goals.
[31]
Carlsberg described participation in the global disclosure system CDP, which has the aim
of incentivizing and guiding other companies towards environmental transparency and
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
33
==PAGE:42==
Results
Figure 4.12: Sustainable Development Goal 13 target 13.3: Improve education, awareness­ rais­
ing and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduc­
tion and early warning [6]
action. Danish Crown described sharing of their experience through participation in the
Danish Climate Partnership for the Food and Agriculture Sector.
Product & raw materials
4 ambitions focusing on products and raw materials concerning impact reduction were
identified in the CoPs of AAK and Arla. They described a focus on certification of raw ma­
terials, where environmental assessment is part of the certification program. Furthermore,
Arla described the UTZ­certification of cocoa, where the certification program includes
adaptation to climate change. AAK described a focus on plant­based alternatives, with
investments into a Plant­based Foods Global Center of Excellence, to increase innovation
into plant­based alternatives.
Risk assessment
2 ambitions focusing on risk assessment of climate change were identified in the CoP of
AAK. They described how physical risk has been assessed on all sites with the initiation
of corrective actions. Furthermore, they plan additional risk assessments of their supply
chains.
4.4.3
Sub­conclusion for SDG no. 13
For FB businesses to support SDG no. 13: Climate action it was found that the most
relevant targets were 13.2 and 13.3, for which 15 and 10 ambitions were identified, re­
spectively. Based on the themes of the identified ambitions, and the full description of the
targets (as shown in fig. 4.11, and 4.12), KSI 16­19 were defined:
KSI 16: Reduce GHG emissions through SBTi
It was found that to support target 13.2 FB businesses could participate in SBTi, to define
clear targets for how to reduce their GHG emissions. Ambitions regarding SBTi could
involve all steps of the business’s participation, from a focus on when they joined the
initiatives, to their progress toward defining and reaching their targets. Ambitions could
also involve the definition of scope 1­3 emissions, as well as individual targets for the
scopes, which could be described as well.
34
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:43==
Results
KSI 17: Monitor and reduce annual GHG emissions
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 13.2 by focusing on am­
bitions related to data on their annual GHG emissions. Such ambitions could focus on
products or plants and could include emissions for one or several of the previous years.
KSI 18: Raise awareness on climate change
It was found that to support target 13.3 FB businesses could raise awareness on climate
change, inside or outside their organization. To reach such ambitions, they could focus
on sharing experience and knowledge with other businesses, e.g. participating in part­
nerships or collaborations, or by transparent reporting of own actions and efforts.
KSI 19: Certification of suppliers of raw materials
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 13.3 by focusing on am­
bitions related to certification of their raw materials. Such ambitions could focus on the
certification program including criteria on environmental assessment or climate change
adaptations.
4.5
SDG no. 3: Good health and well­being
SDG no. 3, which is shown in fig. 4.13, includes nine outcome­focused targets. From the
most recent CoPs of the four businesses, 17 ambitions were identified, with 100% related
to targets 3.2, 3.3, 3.5, and 3.6.
With no ambitions related to more than one target, the distribution was:
• 24% related to 3.2: End all preventable deaths under 5 years of age
• 35% related to 3.3: Fight communicable diseases
• 41% related to 3.5: Prevent and treat substance abuse
Figure 4.13: Sustainable Development Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well­being for
all at all ages [3, 6]
The identified ambitions were all analyzed, and the results are presented in the following
subsections. All identified ambitions for this goal can be found in appendix A.5.
4.5.1
Target 3.2: End all preventable deaths under 5 years of age
This section involves target 3.2, which is shown in fig. 4.14. For this target 4 related
ambitions were identified, with one theme identified as infant health.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
35
==PAGE:44==
Results
Figure 4.14: Sustainable Development Goal 3 target 3.2: By 2030, end preventable deaths of
newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality
to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under­5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per
1,000 live births [6]
Infant health
AAK described ambitions focused on producing safe and essential nutrition for infants,
and on percent of their revenue being connected to the SDGs, which included this target.
Arla described an ambition for nutritious food, which low­income consumers could afford.
4.5.2
Target 3.3: Fight communicable diseases
This section involves target 3.3, which is shown in fig. 4.15. For this target 6 related
ambitions were identified, all from the CoP of Danish Crown, and with one theme identified
as communicable diseases.
Figure 4.15: Sustainable Development Goal 3 target 3.3: By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and combat hepatitis, water­borne diseases
and other communicable diseases [6]
Communicable diseases
Danish Crown described ambitions focusing on the use of antibiotics in pig farming: an
ongoing dialog with farmers to limit the use of antibiotics; procedures for when a pig can
be slaughtered if it has been treated; performing of frequent and random testings; and
marketing of antibiotic­free pigs. Furthermore, they included ambitions concerning the
contagious disease African swine fever. They described close monitoring of the disease
36
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:45==
Results
near their production sites and compliance with EU directives.
4.5.3
Target 3.5: Prevent and treat substance abuse
This section involves target 3.5, which is shown in fig. 4.16. For this target 7 related
ambitions were identified, all from the CoP of Carlsberg, and with one theme identified as
alcoholic beverages.
Figure 4.16: Sustainable Development Goal 3 target 3.5: Strengthen the prevention and treatment
of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol [6]
Alcoholic beverages
Carlsberg described ambitions focusing on alcohol­free beverages, with ambitions for
growing the market of alcohol­free brews, as well as the share of brands offering alcohol­
free alternatives. Other ambitions focused on drink driving and were also assessed to
be related to target 3.6 (reduce road injuries and deaths). The ambitions described cam­
paigns against drink driving, and equipment of company cars with alcolocks:
Alcolocks prevent people from driving if they are over the legal blood alcohol
limit. In many markets where there are no legal restraints to do so, we use
these in our company vehicles to encourage responsible behavior. [34]
Furthermore, they included ambitions concerning responsible drinking, which described
the completion of campaigns and supporting of the NGO International Alliance of Re­
sponsible Drinking, and focusing on underage drinking through age­restriction symbols of
equivalents.
4.5.4
Sub­conclusion for SDG no. 3
For FB businesses to support SDG no. 3: Good health and well­being it was found that the
most relevant targets were 3.2, 3.3 and 3.5, for which 4, 6 and 7 ambitions were identified,
respectively No KSIs, which other FB businesses could use to support the targets, could
be defined.
For target 3.2 only 4 ambitions were identified, which were related to 2 businesses and
one theme. Due to the small output of this analysis, it was assessed that the ambitions
could not reasonably be extrapolated to other FB businesses.
For targets 3.3 and 3.5 only ambitions for one business were identified. And as they
related to a company­specific product (slaughter pigs or alcoholic beverages), it was as­
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
37
==PAGE:46==
Results
sessed that the ambitions could not reasonably be extrapolated to other FB businesses.
4.6
SDG no. 5: Gender equality
SDG no. 5, which is shown in fig. 4.17, includes six outcome­focused targets. From the
most recent CoPs of the four businesses, 25 ambitions were identified as being related
to these targets, with 100% related to targets 5.1, and 5.5.
With 4 ambitions related to both targets, the distribution was:
• 42% related to 5.1: End discrimination against women and girls
• 75% related to 5.5: Ensure full participation in leadership and decision­making
Figure 4.17: Sustainable Development Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women
and girls [3, 6]
The identified ambitions were all analyzed, and the results are presented in the following
subsections. All identified ambitions for this goal can be found in appendix A.6.
4.6.1
Target 5.1: End discrimination against woman and girls
This section involves target 5.1, which is shown in fig. 4.18. For this target 10 related am­
bitions were identified. From these ambitions two themes were identified: organizational
context and diversity and inclusion (D&I).
Figure 4.18: Sustainable Development Goal 5 target 5.1 End all forms of discrimination against
all women and girls everywhere [6]
38
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:47==
Results
Organizational context
6 ambitions were identified which focused on non­discrimination of women through the
organizational contexts.
AAK and Arla described the non­differentiation of remuneration between men and women.
Arla also included promotion opportunities and described a target for zero discrimination,
harassment, and bullying.
Arla described such an ambition in their CoP:
Diversity is key to the success of the business. Arla’s policies do not differen­
tiate between men and women when it comes to promotion opportunities or
remuneration [33]
Identified ambitions also included awareness­raising in the organizations, which was de­
scribed by Carlsberg and Danish Crown. To gain an understanding of inclusivity Carlsberg
conducted an anonymous survey amongst their leaders, the outcome of which included
training of managers on unconscious bias and inclusive leadership. Furthermore, Carls­
berg described ambitions regarding percentage distribution between male and female
employees and included data on this distribution for the last six years.
Diversity and Inclusion (D&I)
4 ambitions were identified which focused on non­discrimination of women through D&I.
Policies or programs regarding D&I were described by AAK, Carlsberg, and Danish Crown.
AAK described initiation of such a program; Carlsberg the establishing of a council to
define their approach on the topic and integrated D&I into their HR (human resources)
processes; and Danish Crown how their policy included goals at their various managerial
levels.
4.6.2
Target 5.5: Ensure full participation in leadership and
decision­making
This section involves target 5.5, which is shown in fig. 4.19. For this target 18 related
ambitions were identified. Of these 1 ambition focusing on equal remuneration and 3 on
D&I were analyzed in section 4.6.1. From these ambitions two themes were identified:
statistics and working environment.
Statistics
10 ambitions focusing on statistics regarding women’s full and effective participation and
equal leadership opportunities were identified in the CoPs.
All businesses described ambitions regarding percentage distribution between males and
females amongst their leaders or managers. Arla and Carlsberg also included data on
this distribution for the last five and six years, respectively, while AAK and Danish Crown
described development compared to last year. Carlsberg and Danish Crown described
ambitions for building a pipeline of potential candidates/talents, through a high percentage
of new employees being female. For Danish Crown, this included their Graduate Program.
Carlsberg described such an ambition in their CoP:
Nearly half of our employees in the early stages of their careers are women
as we build a pipeline of female talent [34]
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
39
==PAGE:48==
Results
Figure 4.19: Sustainable Development Goal 5 target 5.5 Ensure women’s full and effective partici­
pation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision­making in political, economic
and public life [6]
Furthermore, Danish Crown described an ambition regarding their executive positions,
where they required at least one of the last three candidates for executive positions to be
a woman.
Working environment
4 ambitions focusing on the working environment regarding women’s full and effective
participation and equal leadership opportunities were identified.
AAK described offering leadership training to female supervisors and conducting a bian­
nual survey to ensure positive impact, by tracking progress and potential complaints.
Carlsberg focused on the working conditions for their employees, by describing how flexi­
ble working should be promoted in an upcoming roadmap for improvement. This roadmap
was based on a survey focusing on inclusivity, with anonymous participation of their lead­
ers. To increase the proportion of women in management, Danish Crown described ambi­
tion concerning their recruitment process and described avoidance of unconscious bias.
This was exemplified by the careful wording of their job ads.
4.6.3
Sub­conclusion for SDG no. 5
For FB businesses to support SDG no. 5: Gender equality it was found that the most rele­
vant targets were 5.1 and 5.5, for which 10 and 18 ambitions were identified, respectively.
Based on the themes of the identified ambitions, and the full description of the targets (as
shown in fig. 4.18, and 4.19), KSI 20­24 were defined:
KSI 20: No gender discrimination in the organizational structure
It was found that to support target 5.1 FB businesses could focus on creating a non­
discriminating organization in their ambitions. Ambitions could involve non­discrimination
regarding remuneration and promotion, as well as training of employees in unconscious
biases and inclusion.
KSI 21: Distribution between male and female employees
Ambitions related to target 5.1 could also involve distribution between male and female
employees, which could include the development over one or several of the previous
40
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:49==
Results
years.
KSI 22: Diversity and Inclusion in relation to gender
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 5.1 by focusing on ambitions
related to Diversity and Inclusion. Such ambitions could involve having D&I as part of the
business’s policies or programs, as well HR processes like recruitment or promotions.
KSI 23: Distribution between male and female leaders/managers
It was found that to support target 5.5 FB businesses could focus on the distribution be­
tween male and female leaders and managers in their ambitions. Ambitions for such
gender distributions could involve several managerial levels and data for one or more of
the previous years. Ambitions could also involve how the business plans on achieving a
more equal gender distribution, e.g. ambitions focusing on young talent or new employ­
ees.
KSI 24: Improve the working environment for females
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 5.5 by focusing on ambitions
related to improving the working environment. To reach such ambitions, they could con­
duct surveys amongst female managers and leaders, offer leadership training, promote
flexible working hours, and focus on unconscious bias e.g. in recruitment processes.
4.7
SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation
SDG no. 6, which is shown in fig. 4.20, includes six outcome­focused targets. From the
most recent CoPs of the four businesses, 28 ambitions were identified as being related
to one of these targets, with 79% of the ambitions related to targets 6.3, and 6.4.
With 3 ambitions related to both targets, the distribution was:
• 36% related to 6.3: Improve water quality, wastewater treatment, and safe reuse
• 54% related to 6.4: Increase water­use efficiency and ensure freshwater supplies
Figure 4.20: Sustainable Development Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management
of water and sanitation for all [3, 6]
The ambitions identified as related to the listed targets were included in the analysis, with
the results presented in the following subsections. All identified ambitions for this goal
can be found in appendix A.7.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
41
==PAGE:50==
Results
4.7.1
Target 6.3: Improve water quality, wastewater treatment and safe
reuse
This section involves target 6.3, which is shown in fig. 4.21. For this target, 10 related
ambitions were identified. From these ambitions two themes were identified: releases
into water and water reuse.
Figure 4.21: Sustainable Development Goal 6 target 6.3: By 2030, improve water quality by reduc­
ing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe
reuse globally [6]
Releases
5 ambitions focused on minimizing the release of hazardous chemicals and materials into
waters were identified.
AAK and Arla described a focus on certification of raw materials, using certifications that
included maintaining or improvements to the quality of surface and groundwater, as well
as disposal of chemicals. AAK also described how some of their wastewater required
sanitation, along with ambitions for increased knowledge and engagement to reduce water
consumption. Furthermore, they described the annual mitigation of water discharges.
Reuse
5 ambitions focused on increasing recycling and safe reuse of water were identified.
Treatment of process water, which could then be reused was described by both Carlsberg
and Danish Crown, as part of the partnership DRIP (the Danish partnership for Resource
and water­efficient Industrial food Production).
Danish Crown described such an ambition in their CoP:
Danish Crown’s most important DRIP project is underway at our Danish pig
abattoir in Horsens. Here we have been testing a pilot plant for the past two
years which, with the help of filtration techniques, ozone flotation and UV tech­
nology, can treat process water from abattoir robots [32]
Concerning this Danish Crown described that the quality of wastewater could be purified
to drinking water quality, without compromising food safety. Both of these businesses also
described research into further reuse of water, using the same or other technology as for
DRIP.
42
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:51==
Results
4.7.2
Target 6.4: Increase water­use efficiency and ensure freshwater
supplies
This section involves target 6.4, which is shown in fig. 4.22. For this target 15 related
ambitions were identified. From these ambitions two themes were identified: water with­
drawals and water­use efficiency.
Figure 4.22: Sustainable Development Goal 6 target 6.4: By 2030, substantially increase water­
use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to
address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity
[6]
Withdrawals
11 ambitions that focused on sustainable withdrawals of freshwater to address water
scarcity, were identified.
Returning withdrawn cooling water to its source is described by AAK, which CoP also
focused on not using water from areas with water stress as an ambition for sustainable
withdrawals.
Assessment of the withdrawals was described by AAK and Carlsberg. For this Carlsberg
described the identification of high­risk areas (using WWF’s Water Risk Filter) and the
development of new knowledge regarding global water risk.
AAK described such an ambition in their CoP:
To ensure sustainable water withdrawals AAK continuously check if any vol­
umes are withdrawn from areas with water stress and try to reduce municipal
water use [31]
Water usage as total consumption or consumption per product unit was described by AAK,
Arla, and Carlsberg, with ambitions for reductions. AAK and Arla described a focus on cer­
tification of raw materials, using certifications that included maintaining or improvements
to the quality and availability of surface and groundwater.
Water­use efficiency
4 ambitions that focused on increasing water­use efficiency to address water scarcity,
were identified.
Arla and Carlsberg described ambitions for monitoring and reducing water use. For Carls­
berg new efficiency measures had been introduced on one production site, and lessons
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
43
==PAGE:52==
Results
learned from these were to be shared with other sites. Regarding optimization of water
use, Danish Crown described a pilot project for increased water efficiency in boiling and
cooling operations. The project was part of their participation in DRIP.
4.7.3
Sub­conclusion for SDG no. 6
For FB businesses to support SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation it was found that
the most relevant targets were 6.3 and 6.4, for which 10 and 15 ambitions were identified,
respectively. Based on the themes of the identified ambitions, and the full description of
the targets (as shown in fig. 4.21, and 4.22), KSI 25­29 were defined:
KSI 25: Minimize release of hazardous chemicals and materials
It was found that to support target 6.3 FB businesses could focus on their release of
hazardous chemicals and materials into water sources in their ambitions. Ambitions could
involve certification of their raw materials, with certification programs that include criteria
on the quality of surface and groundwater, as well as disposal of chemicals.
KSI 26: Increase reuse of generated wastewater
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 6.3 by focusing on ambitions
related to reuse of their generated wastewater. To reach such ambitions, they could focus
on the treatment of the wastewater, to increase the quality. If doing so FB businesses
should however consider possible food safety risks.
KSI 27: Sustainable withdrawals of freshwater
It was found that to support target 6.4 FB businesses could focus on their withdrawals of
freshwater in their ambitions. Ambitions for sustainable water withdrawals could involve
assessment of the businesses’ current water withdrawals, to identify areas with water
stress and reduce or eliminate negative impact on these.
KSI 28: Increase water­use efficiency
Ambitions related to target 6.4 could also involve an increase in water­use efficiency by re­
duction of water consumption. This could be the total water­consumption or consumption
per product unit, which could include the development over one or several of the previous
years.
KSI 29: Certification of suppliers of raw materials
Another finding was that FB businesses could support target 6.4 by focusing on ambitions
related to certification of their raw materials. Such ambitions could focus on the certifica­
tion program including criteria on the quality and availability of surface and groundwater.
44
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:53==
Results
4.8
Summarized list of Key Sustainability Items
29 KSI were defined for the six selected SDGs, as seen in table 4.1. SDG no. 3 is not
part of the list, as no KSI from the selected targets could be defined, cf. section 4.5.4.
The list, therefore, contains KSIs related to the five SDGs:
• SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production
• SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth
• SDG no. 13: Climate action
• SDG no. 5: Gender equality
• SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation
Table 4.1: List of all defined Key Sustainability Items
Key Sustainability Item
Target
KSI 1: Sustainable production of raw materials
12.2
KSI 2: Use of natural resources for raw materials
12.2
KSI 3: Use of virgin plastic
12.2
KSI 4: Lifetime of finished products
12.3
KSI 5: Reduce food waste by utilizing side­streams
12.3
KSI 6: Reduce waste generation by reuse or prevention
12.5
KSI 7: Reduce own waste generation by recycling
12.5
KSI 8: Involvement of employees in work environmental issues
8.5
KSI 9: Equality throughout all of the organization
8.5
KSI 10: Human rights as part of policies and code of conducts
8.7
KSI 11: Perform training and Human Rights assessments
8.7
KSI 12: Monitor and reduce incidents/accidents
8.8
KSI 13: Prevention of incidents/accidents
8.8
KSI 14: Involvement of employees in health and safety issues
8.8
KSI 15: Health and safety in the supply chain
8.8
KSI 16: Reduce GHG emissions through SBTi
13.2
KSI 17: Monitor and reduce annual GHG emissions
13.2
KSI 18: Raise awareness on climate change
13.3
KSI 19: Certification of suppliers of raw materials
13.3
KSI 20: No gender discrimination in the organizational structure
5.1
KSI 21: Distribution between male and female employees
5.1
KSI 22: Diversity and Inclusion in relation to gender
5.1
KSI 23: Distribution between male and female leaders/managers
5.5
KSI 24: Improve the working environment for females
5.5
KSI 25: Minimize release of hazardous chemicals and materials
6.3
KSI 26: Increase reuse of generated wastewater
6.3
KSI 27: Sustainable withdrawals of freshwater
6.4
KSI 28: Increase water­use efficiency
6.4
KSI 29: Certification of suppliers of raw materials
6.4
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
45
==PAGE:54==
Results
4.9
Stakeholder analysis
Potential stakeholders was identified based on the most common stakeholders relevant
to FB businesses, as well as the ones included in the CoPs (step 1 in section 2.3). Listed
in alphabetical order the potential stakeholders and their potential interest and influence
were identified to be (step 2 and 3 in section 2.3):
Certification organs
Low interest: See the business as a (potential) client, and want to be the one guiding
them, also towards sustainability
Low influence: The business (or its customers) chooses whether it wants to be certified,
and by who
Consumers
High interest: Demand high sustainability in the final product; expect the B2C to ensure
their supply chain.
Low influence: Do not buy directly from the manufacturer.
Customers
High interest: Want their supply chain to be sustainable, to gain competitive advantage.
High influence: Necessary for the business existential; can choose to buy elsewhere.
Employees ­ current
Low interest: Some, but not all might find it interesting to follow their workplace’s progress
towards sustainability.
High influence: Necessary for continued operations.
Employees ­ Future
High interest: Want to be part of a business that reflects their interest in sustainability.
High influence: Necessary for continued operations, which include attracting new employ­
ees. Furthermore, attracting the best qualified can present a great competitive advantage.
Investors / owners
High interest: Want return on their capital, and views this as a profitable business strat­
egy.
High influence: Provides capital for continued operations.
Neighbours / local community
High interest: Want to decrease negative / increase the positive impact on the community
by the business operations.
Low influence: Would probably complain to the business first, though they could report
the business to the authorities or media if it was none­responsive.
NGO’s
High interest: Want to decrease negative / increase the positive impact on the planet and
society by the business operations.
Low influence: Can report the business to the authorities or media, which can impact the
image of the business towards other stakeholders.
Regulators
Low interest: Want the business to follow legislation, which can include sustainability di­
mensions.
High influence: Sets out regulations for how the business must operate, to be within the
law ­ these might conflict with sustainability initiatives, i.e. food safety, quality.
Researchers and universities
Low interest: Collaboration in various projects to increase knowledge in society
High influence: Can provide resources and know­how, and are part of technological de­
velopments.
46
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:55==
Results
Suppliers
Low interest: Want to collaborate with the business, to earn a profit, might be more inter­
ested in a business that has a solid business plan also in the future.
Low influence: Are necessary for continued operations, and can provide data on their
sustainability, which can be important for the business’s sustainability strategy.
The potential stakeholders were placed in a matrix based on their level of influence and
interest, as shown in fig. 4.23.
Figure 4.23: Stakeholder interest and stakeholder influence matrix
4.9.1
Sub­conclusion for stakeholder analysis
Customers, future employees, and investors/owners should be managed closely and al­
located the most resources out of all stakeholders. FB businesses should identify and
carefully consider their expectations regarding sustainability issues, and keep them in­
formed on plans, progress, and changes. These high­priority stakeholders are probably
equally important for all FB businesses, as they concern the basis of the existence of the
business.
FB business should also keep current employees, regulators, and researchers (universi­
ties) informed, though fewer resources can be allocated to this task. As they have high
influence, it is however important to keep them satisfied.
It is also important to inform and involve consumers, NGO’s and neighbors/the local com­
munity when concerning issues of their interest. This is much more dependent on the
individual FB business than the high­priority stakeholders. E.g. a company without close
neighbors might not need to involve the local community as much as a business placed
in the center of a city.
Lastly, the certification organs and suppliers were identified as stakeholders which de­
mand the least effort and resources. Not all businesses would put these as stakeholders,
but for some businesses, they are valuable business partners and should be monitored.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
47
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5
Case company: CP Kelco ApS
To support the results from Chapter 4, CP Kelco ApS (CPK) was included as a case
company for FB businesses that are not currently UNGC participants. In this chapter
disclosed information from CPK was compared to KSIs defined for SDG no. 5, 6, 8, 12,
and 13. A total of 29 KSIs, as shown in section 4.8.
The coherence between a KSI and information disclosed by CPK was classified as:
• No: information was not found which could be connected to this KSI
• Weak: information might be connected to this KSI
• High: information could be connected to some or all of aspects of this KSI
5.1
CPK & SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and
production
For SDG no. 12 KSI no. 1­7 were defined (see Section 4.2.4 for further details).
No coherence was found for KSI no. 1 and 2.
KSI 3: Use of virgin plastic. Weak coherence
CPK did not currently disclose information related to reductions in plastic consumption.
In their CSR report, CPK did, however, write that they have a high focus on recycling and
opportunities for more sustainable waste management [8].
This focus could have included the reduction of their virgin plastic consumption.
KSI 4: Lifetime of finished products. High coherence
48
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:57==
Case company: CP Kelco ApS
From their website, CPK described some properties of their products, which their cus­
tomers can benefit from when producing products for the consumers. An example of
this is the use of their GENU® Pectin for Long Shelf­Life Salted Buttermilk. With this in­
gredient, CPK supports the production of products with a prolonged lifetime, both during
transportation with heat exposure, and shelf­life in stores [42].
KSI 5: Reduce food waste by utilizing side­streams. High coherence
In their CSR report, CPK described that they cooperate closely with external partners
to utilize their residues, where the largest amount is from their pectin production. They
included the production of green energy at Solrød Biogas, as an example. Furthermore,
they wrote that they continue to investigate the utilization of sludge and seaweed residues
[8].
KSI 6: Reduce waste generation by reuse or prevention. High coherence.
In their CSR report, CPK described that they generally focus on waste reductions, with
diversions of waste towards recycling or beneficial reuse. Through Huber, CPK had a
goal for the reduction of waste to landfill. In their CSR report, CPK included statistics on
waste to landfill from 2016­2020 showing a decrease from 113 to 16 tons [8].
Another relation to this KSI was CPKs production of pectin, which is based on a former
waste stream from juice production (citrus peel).
It was found that CPK continued to develop ways to utilize these ”leftovers” in sustainable
ways. Their new product NUTRAVA® Citrus Fiber is an example of this [43].
KSI 7: Reduce own waste generation by recycling. Weak coherence
CPK did not currently disclose information related to rethinking waste handling nor the
design of their raw­ and packaging materials. In their CSR report, CPK did, however,
write that they had a high focus on recycling and opportunities for more sustainable waste
management [8]. This focus might have included resource consumption in their raw­ and
packaging materials.
5.2
CPK & SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth
For SDG no. 8 KSI no. 8­15 were defined (see Section 4.3.4 for further details).
KSI 8: Involvement of employees in work environmental issues. High coherence
CPK described several aspects of OHS in its CSR report. They wrote that they strive hard
to be a great place to work and that they are actively seeking feedback from employees
to ensure that the initiatives to improve health and well­being are meeting the employees’
wishes and expectations. Furthermore, they explained that an employee Engagement
Survey is conducted every third year. Thirdly they wrote that HR monitors employee
satisfaction in connection to the onboarding of new employees. And lastly, they wrote
about a yearly workplace assessment, including ”Social Capital” which in Denmark is
measured as cooperation, trust, and fairness. The results from this assessment showed
a high scoring of CPK in “Social Capital” with 86% in cooperation and 87% in trust and
fairness [8, 44].
No disclosed information was found regarding which actions CPK has taken/planned
based on these surveys.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
49
==PAGE:58==
Case company: CP Kelco ApS
KSI 9: Equality throughout all of the organization. High coherence
This KSI was mentioned in CPKs CSR under their section ”Occupational health and safety
­ Employees”. CPK referred to one of Huber’s four principles ”Respect for People” and
explained that they value employee diversity and superior teamwork and do not accept
discrimination due to gender, race, sexual orientation, age, nationality, religion, political
belief, etc. They also stated that they believe D&I contributes to the strengthening of unity
and well­being. Concerning this issue they mentioned their successful collaboration with
AspIT which is an educational program for people with autism spectrum conditions [13,
8].
KSI 10: Human rights as part of policies and code of conducts. High coherence
This KSI was mentioned in Huber’s code of conduct, which also applies to CPK. Huber
stated that the company supports and respects the protection of internationally recognized
human rights. It was included that the company will ensure that all employees are treated
humanely, with dignity and that they will never suffer physical or mental punishment or
any other form of abuse [12, 11].
KSI 11: Perform training and Human Rights assessments. High coherence
CPK mentioned this KSI in their ”Modern Slavery Act Statement”, which was found on their
website under ”Sustainability ­ UK Modern Slavery Act Statement”. They described how
all suppliers are requested to respect the principles and adopt practices in their Supplier
Code. They also explained their cross­functional team, which is dedicated to ensuring
compliance with this code. Besides the Supplier Code, it was stated that all suppliers are
required to comply with all applicable local laws and regulations as well as all interna­
tionally accepted standards anywhere operations are undertaken. They stated this as a
critical barrier to ensure that slavery and human trafficking are not taking place anywhere
along their supply chains [45].
CPK is also a member of Sedex, and SMETA (Sedex Members Ethical Trade Audit) audits
are conducted on their sites, which is related to this KSI as well [46].
KSI 12: Monitor and reduce incidents/accidents. High coherence
This KSI was mentioned in their CSR report in their section ”Occupational health and
safety ­ Safety”. They included lost time injury rate (LTIR) from 2016­2020, along with
available LTIR for the sector (i.e. 2016­2019) [8].
Other possible statistics, which were not disclosed by CPK, are numbers of lost­time ac­
cidents, number of days with absence, and average days of absence per accident.
KSI 13: Prevention of incidents/accidents. High coherence
CPK mentioned this KSI in their CSR report in their section ”Occupational health and
safety ­ Safety”. They stated that they strive to be a safe place to work and that they have a
major focus on preventing incidents through proactive safety initiatives and training. In the
report, they explained how all employees, contractors, and business partners are involved
in the creation of a common and proactive safety culture. Their employees contributed to
incident prevention by registration of near­misses and safety observations. Lastly, they
included the promoting of an open dialogue throughout the plant, as part of these efforts
[8].
Furthermore, their website mentioned their certification in the Safety and health standard,
which is another relation to this KSI [9].
50
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:59==
Case company: CP Kelco ApS
KSI 14: Involvement of employees in health and safety issues. High coherence
In their CSR report, CPK mentioned this KSI under their section ”Occupational health and
safety ­ Safety”. They explained that employees are involved when it comes to finding
solutions for challenges CPK faces. Concerning this, they described their Health and
Safety committee, which also acts as an ambassador for the employees. And the report
went on to explain a strong collaboration between this committee, management, and the
EHS+S department. [8]
KSI 15: Health and safety in the supply chain. High coherence
CPK mentioned this KSI in their ”Modern Slavery Act Statement”. They described how
all suppliers are requested to respect the principles and adopt practices in their Supplier
Code. They also explained their cross­functional team, which is dedicated to ensuring
compliance with this code. OHS issues were part of their Supplier Code, with topics like
safe and healthy working conditions, fair wages, non­discrimination and non­harassment
[45].
CPK is also a member of Sedex, and SMETA audits are conducted on their sites, which
is related to this KSI as well [46].
5.3
CPK & SDG no. 13: Climate action
For SDG no. 13 KSI no. 16­19 were defined (see Section 4.4.3 for further details).
No coherence was found for KSI no. 18 and 19.
KSI 16: Reduce GHG emissions through SBTi. Weak coherence
CPK did not mention SBTi in their disclosed information and was not listed as a company
working with SBTI on sciencebasedtargets.org. However, in their Living by the Huber
Principles report Huber mentioned LCAs for CP Kelco products [46]. CPK might therefore
have non­disclosed information relevant to this KSI.
KSI 17: Monitor and reduce annual GHG emissions. High coherence
In their CSR report under ”Environment ­ Energy”, CPK mentioned this KSI. They in­
cluded data on emissions of CO2 from their plant in Denmark from 2016­2020. They also
described their target for annual GHG reductions and progressions towards this. Further­
more, they stated that they are actively working on reducing CO2 emissions [8].
5.4
CPK & SDG no. 5: Gender equality
For SDG no. 5 KSI no. 20­24 were defined (see Section 4.6.3 for further details).
No coherence was found for KSI no. 21 and 23.
KSI 20: No gender discrimination in the organizational structure . High coherence
This KSI was mentioned in Huber’s code of conduct, which also applies to CPK. Huber
stated under Diversity and Equal Opportunities that no discrimination must occur in the
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
51
==PAGE:60==
Case company: CP Kelco ApS
workplace. The code further explained how gender, among other factors, must not be a
basis for development opportunities, hiring, advancement, etc. [12].
No disclosed information was found regarding the training of employees on unconscious
biases, or inclusion.
KSI 22: Diversity and Inclusion in relation to gender . High coherence
This KSI was part of the Huber principles, under the pillar Respect for People, which
also applies to CPK. CPK mentioned this principle in their CSR report under their section
”Occupational health and safety ­ Employees”. They explained that they value employee
diversity, and they believe that D&I helps strengthen the unity and well­being of their em­
ployees [46, 8].
KSI 24: Improve the working environment for females . Weak coherence CPK did not
currently disclose information related to improving the working environment of their female
employees. In their CSR report under their section ”Occupational health and safety ­ Em­
ployees”, CPK did however explain how they wish to retain employees by being attentive
to their individual needs for flexibility. The given examples are all related to time­limited
agreements, and not specifically for females [8]. This information might be related to this
KSI, like promoting flexible hours.
5.5
CPK & SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation
For SDG no. 6 KSI no. 25­29 were defined (see Section 4.7.3 for further details).
No coherence was found for KSI no. 27 and 29.
KSI 25: Minimize release of hazardous chemicals and materials . Weak coherence
No disclosed information was found regarding this KSI. However, on their website, CPK
had listed a certification in the ISO 14001 standard in Environmental management system
[9]. As ISO 14001 includes the organization’s environmental impact concerning water
releases, CPK might therefore have non­disclosed information relevant to this KSI.
KSI 26: Increase reuse of generated wastewater . Weak coherence
No disclosed information was found regarding this KSI. In their CSR report under their
section ”Environment ­ Water”, CPK did however describe their wastewater data. They
described how wastewater has decreased, mainly due to lower consumption of water for
their production [8]. This decrease in wastewater might also have included reuse, which
is related to this KSI.
KSI 28: Increase water­use efficiency. High coherence
This KSI was mentioned in their CSR report under their section ”Environment ­ Water”.
CPK described their target for reduction in water consumption, along with data from 2016­
2020 [8].
52
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:61==
Case company: CP Kelco ApS
5.6
Case findings
The resulting coherence between the defined KSI from Chapter 4 of this study, and the
information currently disclosed by CPK are found in table 5.1.
Out of the 29 KSI, high coherence was found for 15 KSI, weak coherence for 6 KSI, and
no coherence for 8 KSI. For all of the five SDGs a high coherence was found for at least
one KSI, and except for SDG no. 8, weak or no coherence was found for at least one KSI.
The assessment showed high coherence to all KSI for SDG no. 8, which fits with CPKs
current declaration of supporting this goal.
They also declared to support SDG no. 12, which seems consistent with a high coherence
for three KSI and weak coherence for another three of the seven associated KSI, though
no coherence was found for the last.
A discrepancy was found for SDG no. 6, which they declared to support, as no coherence
was found for two of six KSI, though high coherence for one KSI.
SDG no. 5 and 13 are not part of their current sustainability strategy, though a high
coherence was found to one and two KSI, respectively, and weak coherence with one
KSI for each goal.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
53
==PAGE:62==
Case company: CP Kelco ApS
Table 5.1: Comparing defined KSI with CPKs currently disclosed information
Coherence
Key Sustainability Item
High
Weak
No
SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production
KSI 1: Sustainable production of raw materials
x
KSI 2: Use of natural resources for raw materials
x
KSI 3: Use of virgin plastic
x
KSI 4: Lifetime of finished products
x
KSI 5: Reduce food waste by utilizing side­streams
x
KSI 6: Reduce waste generation by reuse or prevention
x
KSI 7: Reduce own waste generation by recycling
x
SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth
KSI 8: Involvement of employees in work environmental issues
x
KSI 9: Equality throughout all of the organization
x
KSI 10: Human rights as part of policies and code of conducts
x
KSI 11: Perform training and Human Rights assessments
x
KSI 12: Monitor and reduce incidents/accidents
x
KSI 13: Prevention of incidents/accidents
x
KSI 14: Involvement of employees in health and safety issues
x
KSI 15: Health and safety in the supply chain
x
SDG no. 13: Climate action
KSI 16: Reduce GHG emissions through SBTi
x
KSI 17: Monitor and reduce annual GHG emissions
x
KSI 18: Raise awareness on climate change
x
KSI 19: Certification of suppliers of raw materials
x
SDG no. 5: Gender equality
KSI 20: No gender discrimination in the organizational structure
x
KSI 21: Distribution between male and female employees
x
KSI 22: Diversity and Inclusion in relation to gender
x
KSI 23: Distribution between male and female leaders/managers
x
KSI 24: Improve the working environment for females
x
SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation
KSI 25: Minimize release of hazardous chemicals and materials
x
KSI 26: Increase reuse of generated wastewater
x
KSI 27: Sustainable withdrawals of freshwater
x
KSI 28: Increase water­use efficiency
x
KSI 29: Certification of suppliers of raw materials
x
Sum of coherence classifications
15
6
8
54
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This study analyses the CoPs of Danish FB businesses to identify how they work with and
report on the SDGs. From such reports, SDG no. 3, 5, 6, 8, 12, and 13 were found to
be the most interesting SDGs for Danish FB business. Therefore this study focused on
identifying and analyzing themes for targets associated with these six SDGs. Based on
this analysis and the UN’s full text of the individual targets, Key Sustainability Items (KSI)
were defined, which focus on how FB businesses in Denmark can support these SDGs.
As this study only involves six of the 17 SDGs, the resulting KSI focus on how FB busi­
nesses can support this subset of goals and targets from the UN’s framework for sus­
tainable development. As previously stated, the relevance of each SDG depends on
the individual business, including amongst other factors, their activities, geographical lo­
cation, and stakeholders’ demands. Any individual business might therefore find other
SDGs equally or more relevant to include in their business strategy.
To increase the relevance of this study for individual FB businesses, the selection of the six
SDGs was based on data from Danish UNGC participants. Hence, the sample included
businesses actively and publicly working towards the SDGs and annually reporting on
their progress through a CoP. This sample of 31 firms seemed representative for Danish
FB businesses as it was heterogeneous concerning company size, business sector, years
of UNGC participation, and which and how many of the 17 SDGs the most recent CoP
addressed.
The percentage of the 31 CoPs addressing the six SDGs varied, though it was at least
32%. SDG no. 12 was the most addressed with 90%, over 65% addressed SDG no.
8 and 13, and over 50% addressed SDG no. 3 and 5. It can therefore be argued that
SDG no. 12 is the most representative for Danish FB businesses, and no. 6 is the least
representative. In this study, the variation is visualized by the order in which the SDGs
are presented in chapter 4, as well as in the numbering of the KSI, listed in section 4.8.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
55
==PAGE:64==
Discussion
A study by Garzón­Jiménez and Zorio­Grima (2021a) highlighted three of these SDGs
(no. 5, 12, and 13) as interesting in regards to examining the FB sectors focus on sus­
tainability. Like this study, it included all three P’s, which were represented by a focus
on sustainability issues related to SDG no. 12 (Prosperity), SDG no. 13 (Planet), and
SDG no. 5 (People). Their study thereby substantiates both the relevance of the selected
SDGs as well as the inclusion of all three sustainability dimensions. Furthermore, the
study found a positive impact on corporate finance, indicating an economic advantage for
FB businesses focusing on the SDGs in their business strategy, which was also found in
a study by Raimo et al. (2020).
Identification of ambitions from CoPs is the basis for selecting which targets to analyze
further, from which relevant themes were identified, and hence KSI defined. Ambitions
were defined as all current and planned activities, goals, targets, impacts, etc., which were
described in the CoPs in relation to an SDG or an associated target. The identification
method is primarily qualitative, and therefore the objectivity is not very high; however, it
has a high degree of reproducibility: The identification was performed systematically, with
a listing of all ambitions related to the individual SDG. For each ambition, the list contained
a brief description, page number of the CoP and name of the business, and lastly, classi­
fication of the relation to the target. Selection of targets and identification of themes were
then performed based on these lists. The relevant CoPs are listed under References, and
the full lists of ambitions are included in appendix A.2 ­ A.7, for full reproducibility.
The assessment of which SDGs and targets are addressed in the CoP was performed by
the individual UNGC participant and hence is less objective. The subjectivity of the CoPs
could negatively influence the validity of this study. To reduce this effect, each described
relation between a target and an ambition was examined by comparing the ambition as
described in the CoP to the full text of the target. It was then classified as coherent with
the target, coherent with another target for the same or another of the six SDGs, or as
having no apparent coherence, respectively marked as x, (x), and M.
Identification of ambitions was based on CoPs from 4­6 large companies. This sample
was not only smaller than the sample used for selecting the six SDGs, it was also more
homogeneous as well. It included five businesses from food production and one from
the beverage sector, all with above­average years of UNGC participation as well as the
number of SDGs addressed. This can impact the use and extrapolation of the results,
as the sample might be less representative of Danish FB businesses. However, it was
regarded as an advantage that these companies had worked with UNGC and the SDGs
for many years, and due to their size, had a potential for impacting many different sustain­
ability dimensions. These companies, therefore, had a greater potential for contributing
knowledge and lessons learned relevant for different FB businesses.
In this study, 29 KSI were defined based on 4­6 CoPs and UN’s full text of the individual
targets. These KSI should provide Danish FB businesses with information on how to
support an SDG through a specific target. Of these, KSI 7 related to SDG no. 12, 8 to
SDG no. 8, 4 to SDG no. 13, 5 to SDG no. 5, and 5 to SDG no. 6. For SDG no. 3, no KSI
were defined, as the identified themes could not be extrapolated to other FB businesses.
Their application was tested by comparing them to disclosed information from a case
company to classify the coherence to each KSI. Coherence was classified as to whether
the disclosed information was found to be: connected to some or all of aspects of the KSI
(high coherence), potentially connected to the KSI (weak coherence), or not connected
to the KSI (no coherence).
The case company was currently supporting three of the five SDGs (no. 6, 8, and 12),
56
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:65==
Discussion
which involved 20 KSI. High coherence was found for all KSI related to SDG no. 8, and at
least one KSI of the other two SDGs, with a total of 12 KSI. No coherence was found for
3 of the 20 KSI, which could indicate a discrepancy between their disclosed information
and current ambitions. Weak coherence was found for 5 KSI related, which indicates
the disclosed information could be elaborated to more clearly reflect how the company
supports SDG no. 6 and 12. Furthermore, high coherence was found for 3 KSI related to
the two SDGs, which they did not currently support. This indicates that the case company
could potentially include these SDGs in their disclosed information, as part of which SDGs
they are addressing through current ambitions.
This study focuses on the disclosure of sustainability information as part of CoPs, which
includes sustainability and CSR reports. Annual reports like CoPs are, however, only
one of several possible communication channels for informing stakeholders regarding a
business’ sustainability ambitions. It goes beyond the scope of this study to analyze such
channels, though it should be noted that the literature included in this study indicates
a decreased information asymmetry by the use of various communication channels. A
decrease which might reduce the perceived risk for stakeholders and improve their view
of the business’s financial corporate health.
Another aspect available for stakeholders is information disclosed by third parties. In
this aspect, stakeholders with low interest and high influence could potentially influence
how the business is perceived by other stakeholders. In this study, a stakeholder analysis
was performed, which classified potential stakeholders ac. to whether their interest in and
influence on a FB business’ focus on sustainability was high or low. The analysis identified
that stakeholders with low interest and high influence might refer to current employees,
regulators, and researchers (universities).
Regarding the quality of information published in CoPs, a proposal to update require­
ments of non­financial reporting was adopted by the European Commission in April 2021,
and businesses should expect revision in this regulation. Part of the revision is for the
information published to be more reliable and accurate, including auditing for assurance.
The reliability issue on sustainability­related information could involve the aspect of which
of their impacts towards the SDGs, the business can accurately describe as being their
ambitions. For example, it might not be considered honest if a company described an
ambition to impact an SDG by following the law, e.g., keeping water releases below the
limit stated by the authorities especially, if the relevant legislation is not mentioned. Other
aspects of accuracy might be more challenging to determine, e.g., whether buying certifi­
cates contributes towards reaching the SDGs.
In this study, UN’s full text of the individual targets was used to improve the validity of
the KSI. However, the KSI are also based on the content of the CoPs, which reflects
the businesses’ subjective assessments. FB business could accommodate this issue by
considering the quality of disclosed information with respect to its reliability and accuracy.
This would also be in compliance with the upcoming requirements on non­financial report­
ing. Regarding these aspects, businesses should be critical towards which impacts they
can control and which they are obliged to perform so as not to overestimate their positive
impact.
Furthermore, it should be noted that the KSI are associated with specific SDG targets and
not the SDG itself. Having ambitions related to a few targets might, therefore, only partly
contribute towards the fulfillment of the specific SDG.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
57
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This study analyzed the most recent CoPs of Danish FB businesses to examine how other
such businesses can use the SDGs to implement sustainability as part of their business
strategy.
CoPs were chosen as data material, as they represent businesses volunteering to dis­
close their sustainability progress annually and presumably prioritize resources for work­
ing towards the SDGs as well as high quality of the disclosed information.
A small sample of 31 relevant CoP was available, and as it was heterogeneous in many
aspects, and with the abovementioned positive aspects of CoPs, the sample was found
to be representative of Danish FB businesses.
To represent all three P’s, two SDGs from each dimension were included, and this was
substantiated by related literature. SDG no. 3, 5, 6, 8, 12, and 13 were selected, as they
were identified to be addressed most frequently in the CoPs.
For each SDG, it was found that at least 67% of the ambitions related to 2­3 targets.
Ambitions related to these targets were analyzed to identify themes, which were then
used when formulating Key Sustainability Items (KSI). The exception being SDG no. 3,
where no Key Sustainability Items were identified due to the ambitions being too product­
specific or too few.
This resulted in the definition of 29 Key Sustainability Items, as listed in section 4.8, which
other FB businesses might use as guides for how to support one or more of the SDGs
associated targets. These were defined for five SDGs (listed ac. to most CoPs addressing
the SDG):
1. SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production, with 7 identified KSI
2. SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth, with 8 identified KSI
58
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:67==
Conclusion
3. SDG no. 13: Climate action, with 4 identified KSI
4. SDG no. 5: Gender equality, with 5 identified KSI
5. SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation, with 5 identified KSI
The application of the KSI was tested on a case company, which validated their use. It
was found that the Key Sustainability Items can be applied for FB businesses to assess
information on their ambitions in relation to one or more of the five SDGs.
FB businesses not currently working with the SDGs could use the KSI as a way of imple­
menting the SDGs into their business strategy.
FB businesses currently working with and reporting on the SDGs can use the KSI to
improve their business strategy and the quality of their disclosed information.
In both cases, the KSI can be used to assess disclosed as well as non­disclosed infor­
mation on current ambitions to identify improvement opportunities related to sustainability
aspects.
For targets associated with SDGs which the business is not already supporting, the KSI
can be used to assess coherence to current ambitions:
• high coherence can indicate that the related SDG target(s) could be implemented
in the business strategy, with minimal resources required
• weak coherence can indicate that the related SDG target(s) could be implemented
in the business strategy
• no coherence can indicate, that 1) the business is not currently working towards the
SDG target(s), or 2) no information is yet disclosed regarding the SDG target(s)
For targets associated with SDGs which the business is already supporting, the KSI can
be used to assess if the quality of the disclosed information could be improved for:
• high coherence assessments, by describing the relationship between ambitions and
SDG target(s)
• weak coherence assessments by including more details on ambitions to better ex­
plain how they support the SDG target(s)
• no coherence assessments, by including information on ambitions not currently dis­
closing
When disclosing sustainability­related information, FB businesses should consider using
other communication channels than the annual reports, e.g., social media like Twitter,
websites, press releases, etc., as the literature included in this study indicates a positive
impact on how stakeholders perceive the business.
When working with sustainability as part of the business strategy, customers, future em­
ployees, and investors/owners were identified as high­priority stakeholders for FB busi­
ness. Expectations of these should therefore be identified and carefully considered.
Other identified stakeholders and strategies towards them are: Current employees, reg­
ulators, and researchers should be kept informed and satisfied; Consumers, NGO’s and
neighbors/the local community should be informed and involved where relevant; and cer­
tification organs and suppliers should be monitored.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
59
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 8
Future work
This study provides a guide for Danish FB businesses to assess their sustainability in
relation to five SDGs. However, for the individual business, other SDGs might be more or
equally relevant. In this aspect, it could be interesting to examine the remaining SDGs in
a similar way, with defining of Key Sustainability Items for how Danish FB business could
work with targets associated with these. In such a study, the data material could also be
expanded to include CoPs from even more businesses. Expansion of the data material
could also include CoPs from previous years, which might still retain valuable information,
especially for FB businesses that are not yet working with the SDGs.
When expanding the time period of the CoPs, it could also be studied whether joining
UNGC is a profitable investment, as related literature indicates a positive economic ef­
fect of disclosing sustainability information. The related literature section of this study
could also be expanded to a literature review, with the purpose of investigating how FB
businesses other than UNGC participants are working with and reporting on the SDGs.
Particularly this could be interesting to investigate for Danish businesses. Further inves­
tigation into how businesses can report on the SDGs with a high quality of information
could also be interesting and helpful for businesses, to avoid accusation of greenwashing
or tokenism, as well as to fulfill upcoming regulations.
Finally, this study includes one case company, and it could be interesting to apply the
defined KSI on even more FB businesses to understand their applicabilities better. If
expanding the study to include more SDGs and defining more KSI, these would, of course,
be interesting as well.
Some or all of the abovementioned possibilities for further studies could be used for de­
veloping a roadmap for FB businesses on how to work towards as well as report on the
SDGs.
60
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:69==
References
[1]
United Nations. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop­
ment. Last visited: February 1st 2022. 2015. URL: https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda.
[2]
United Nations Global Compact. The Ten Principles of the UN Global Compact.
Last visited: February 1st 2022. URL: https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is-
gc/mission/principles.
[3]
United Nations. The 17 Goals. Click icon of an SDG to see targets. Last visited:
February 1st 2022. URL: https://sdgs.un.org/goals.
[4]
John P. Wilson. “The triple bottom line: Undertaking an economic, social, and envi­
ronmental retail sustainability strategy”. In: International Journal of Retail and Dis­
tribution Management 43.4/5 (2015). DOI: 10.1108/IJRDM­11­2013­0210.
[5]
Business and Sustainable Development Commission. “Better Business Better World.
The report of the Business & Sustainable Development Commission”. In: (2017).
[6]
United Nations. Communications materials. Last visited: February 1st 2022. 2019.
URL: https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/news/communications-material/.
[7]
United Nations Global Compact. Our Participants. Filters used are: Country = Den­
mark & Sector = Food & Beverage. Last visited: February 1st 2022. 2021. URL:
https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what-is-gc/participants/.
[8]
CP Kelco ApS. CSR Report 2020. Køge, Denmark, 2020.
[9]
CP Kelco ApS. About Us. Last visited: February 1st 2022. URL: https : / / www .
cpkelco.com/about-us/.
[10]
CP Kelco ApS. GENU® Carrageenan book. Last visited: February 1st 2022. 2002.
URL: http : / / www . bisi . cz / cmsres . axd / get / cms $ 7CVwRhc3USVqgzxkKF96gI $
2BChNrXcTq$2BOUdiEtz5TfYA$2Fg1ADRHMfXfdEjUsYQagqUs9N6byPOkok$3D.
[11]
CP Kelco ApS. Sustainability. Last visited: February 1st 2022. URL: https://www.
cpkelco.com/sustainability/.
[12]
J.M. Huber Corporation. J.M.HuberCorporation Code of Conduct. Atlanta, Georgia,
USA, 2022.
[13]
J.M. Huber Corporation. About ­ The Huber Principles. Last visited: February 1st
2022. URL: https://www.huber.com/about/the-huber-principles/.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
61
==PAGE:70==
REFERENCES
[14]
Paul Every. Stakeholder Management using the Power Interest Matrix. Last visited:
February 1st 2022. URL: https://www.solitaireconsulting.com/2020/07/stakeholder-
management-using-the-power-interest-matrix/.
[15]
Nicola Raimo et al. “Non­financial information and cost of equity capital: an empirical
analysis in the food and beverage industry”. In: British Food Journal 123.1 (2021).
DOI: 10.1108/BFJ­03­2020­0278.
[16]
Renato Garzon­Jimenez and Ana Zorio­Grima. “Sustainability in the food and bev­
erage sector and its impact on the cost of equity”. In: British Food Journal ahead­
of­print.ahead­of­print (2021a). DOI: 10.1108/BFJ­05­2021­0572.
[17]
Renato Garzon­Jimenez and Ana Zorio­Grima. “Effects of Carbon Emissions, Envi­
ronmental Disclosures and CSR Assurance on Cost of Equity in Emerging Markets”.
In: Sustainability 13.2 (2021b). DOI: 10.3390/su13020696.
[18]
Mohammed S. Albarrak, Marwa Elnahass, and Aly Salama. “The effect of carbon
dissemination on cost of equity”. In: Business Strategy and the Environment 28.6
(2019). DOI: 10.1002/bse.2310.
[19]
Rainforest Alliance. UTZ Certification (Now Part of the Rainforest Alliance). Last
visited: February 1st 2022. URL: https://www.rainforest-alliance.org/utz/.
[20]
Round Table on Responsible Soy. What is the Round Table on Responsible Soy
Association? Last visited: February 1st 2022. URL: https://responsiblesoy.org/about-
rtrs?lang=en#que-es.
[21]
Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil. RSPO Certification. Last visited: February 1st
2022. URL: https://rspo.org/certification.
[22]
United Nations. Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Last visited: February 1st
2022. 1948. URL: https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-
rights.
[23]
Hakon Mosbech. Da topchefen skiftede køn og opdagede, at alt, hun troede om
ligestilling, var forkert. Last visited: February 1st 2022. 2020. URL: https://www.
zetland.dk/historie/sejvJjNX-m8DPKqQ1-6bed4.
[24]
Sedex. SMETA Audit. Last visited: February 1st 2022. URL: https://www.sedex.
com/our-services/smeta-audit/.
[25]
Science Based Targets. Lead the way to a low­carbon future. Last visited: February
1st 2022. URL: https://sciencebasedtargets.org/how-it-works.
[26]
World Business Council for Sustainable Development and World Resources Insti­
tute. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol. A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Stan­
dard. Revised edition. Last visited: February 1st 2022. 2004. URL: https://ghgprotocol.
org/sites/default/files/standards/ghg-protocol-revised.pdf.
[27]
DRIP. Lad os bare sige det som det er… Last visited: February 1st 2022. URL:
http://drippartnership.dk/.
[28]
Nasdaq. ESG Reporting Guide 2.0. A Support Resource for Companies. Last vis­
ited: February 1st 2022. 2019. URL: https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/2019/11/26/
2019-ESG-Reporting-Guide.pdf.
[29]
European Commission. Questions and Answers: Corporate Sustainability Report­
ing Directive proposal. Last visited: February 1st 2022. 2021. URL: https://ec.
europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/QANDA_21_1806.
[30]
Eleni Sardianou et al. “A materiality analysis framework to assess sustainable de­
velopment goals of banking sector through sustainability reports”. In: Sustainable
Production and Consumption 27 (2021). DOI: 10.1016/j.spc.2021.04.020.
[31]
AAK Corporate Communications and AAK Global Sustainability. AAK Sustainability
Report 2020. Malmö, Sweden, 2021.
62
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:71==
REFERENCES
[32]
Leverandørselskabet Danish Crown AmbA. Danish Crown Sustainability Report
2019/20. Randers, Denmark, 2020.
[33]
Arla Foods in collaboration with Anna Michélsen. Arla Foods Corporate Responsi­
bility Report 2020. Viby J., Denmark, 2021.
[34]
Carlsberg Corporate Affairs (ed.) Carlsberg Group Sustainability Report 2020 ­ En­
vironment, Social & Governance Disclosures. Copenhagen V, Denmark, 2021.
[35]
Bakkafrost P/F. Bakkafrost Sustainability Report 2020. Glyvrar, Faroe Islands, 2021.
[36]
Chr. Hansen Holding A/S. Chr. Hansen Annual Report 2019/20. Let’s grow a better
world. Naturally. Hørsholm, Denmark, 2021.
[37]
Royal Unibrew A/S. Annual Report 2020. Faxe, Denmark, 2021.
[38]
Carl J. Nielsen A/S. 2020 Sustainability Report and code of conduct. Randers, Den­
mark, 2020.
[39]
F. Uhrenholt Holding A/S. Uhrenholt Corporate Sustainability Report 2020. Middel­
fart, Denmark, 2021.
[40]
Orana A/S. Annual Report 2020. Rynkeby, Denmark, 2021.
[41]
Toms Group A/S. Toms Group A/S. Our Responsibility 2020. Ballerup, Denmark,
2021.
[42]
CP Kelco ApS. Insights ­ Introducing GENU® Pectin for Long Shelf­Life Salted But­
termilk. Last visited: February 1st 2022. URL: https://www.cpkelco.com/salted-
buttermilk-insights.
[43]
CP Kelco ApS. Products ­ NUTRAVA® Citrus Fiber. Last visited: February 1st 2022.
URL: https://www.cpkelco.com/products/citrus-fiber/nutrava-citrus-fiber/.
[44]
Arbejdsmiljørådet. Social kapital. Last visited: February 1st 2022. URL: https://
www.amr.dk/inspiration-til-arbejdsmiljoeindsatsen/social-kapital/.
[45]
CP Kelco UK Limited. Modern Slavery Act Statement. Downloaded from url below,
Last visited: February 1st 2022. Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2021. URL: https://www.
cpkelco.com/sustainability/uk-modern-slavery-act-statement/.
[46]
J.M. Huber Corporation. Living by the Huber Principles. 2020 annual report. Down­
loaded from url below, Last visited: February 1st 2022. Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2021.
URL: https://www.huber.com/about/the-huber-principles/.
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
63
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX A
Appendix list
A.1 SDGs addressed in most recent CoP of 37 UNGC participants
A.2 Ambitions related to SDG no. 12: Responsible consumption and production
A.3 Ambitions related to SDG no. 8: Decent work and economic growth
A.4 Ambitions related to SDG no. 13: Climate action
A.5 Ambitions related to SDG no. 3: Good health and well­being
A.6 Ambitions related to SDG no. 5: Gender equality
A.7 Ambitions related to SDG no. 6: Clean water and sanitation
64
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:73==
Appendix list
A.1
SDGs addressed in most recent CoP of 37 UNGC
participants
Figure A.1: UNGC participants and SDGs they claim to address in their most recent CoP
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
65
==PAGE:74==
Appendix list
A.2
Ambitions related to SDG no. 12: Responsible
consumption and production
Ambitions related to the targets of SDG no. 12 were identified for AAK, Arla, Carlsberg,
Chr. Hansen, Danish Crown, and Toms. All ambitions were listed in a table, and then
separate tables were made for targets 12.2, 12.3, and 12.5, which were used for further
analysis.
All four tables are included in the attached file “Appendix 3 – SDG 12”. Below is a snippet
from the first table, where all ambitions are included:
Figure A.2: All ambitions identified for SDG no. 12 (snippet of the table)
66
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:75==
Appendix list
A.3
Ambitions related to SDG no. 8: Decent work and
economic growth
Ambitions related to the targets of SDG no. 8 were identified for AAK, Arla, Carlsberg,
and Danish Crown. All ambitions were listed in a table, and then separate tables were
made for targets 8.5, 8.7, and 8.8, which were used for further analysis.
All four tables are included in the attached file “Appendix 4 – SDG 8”. Below is a snippet
from the first table, where all ambitions are included:
Figure A.3: All ambitions identified for SDG no. 8 (snippet of the table)
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
67
==PAGE:76==
Appendix list
A.4
Ambitions related to SDG no. 13: Climate action
Ambitions related to the targets of SDG no. 13 were identified for AAK, Arla, Carlsberg,
and Danish Crown. All ambitions were listed in a table, and then separate tables were
made for targets 13.2 and 13.3, which were used for further analysis.
All four tables are included in the attached file “Appendix 5 – SDG 13”. Below is a snippet
from the first table, where all ambitions are included:
Figure A.4: All ambitions identified for SDG no. 13 (snippet of the table)
68
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:77==
Appendix list
A.5
Ambitions related to SDG no. 3: Good health and
well­being
Ambitions related to the targets of SDG no. 3 were identified for AAK, Arla, Carlsberg,
and Danish Crown. All ambitions were listed in a table, and then separate tables were
made for targets 3.2, 3.3, and 3.5, which were used for further analysis.
All four tables are included in the attached file “Appendix 6 – SDG 3”. Below is a snippet
from the first table, where all ambitions are included:
Figure A.5: All ambitions identified for SDG no. 3 (snippet of the table)
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
69
==PAGE:78==
Appendix list
A.6
Ambitions related to SDG no. 5: Gender equality
Ambitions related to the targets of SDG no. 5 were identified for AAK, Arla, Carlsberg,
and Danish Crown. All ambitions were listed in a table, and then separate tables were
made for targets 5.1 and 5.5, which were used for further analysis.
All four tables are included in the attached file “Appendix 7 – SDG 5”. Below is a snippet
from the first table, where all ambitions are included:
Figure A.6: All ambitions identified for SDG no. 5 (snippet of the table)
70
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
==PAGE:79==
Appendix list
A.7
Ambitions related to SDG no. 6: Clean water and
sanitation
Ambitions related to the targets of SDG no. 6 were identified for AAK, Arla, Carlsberg,
and Danish Crown. All ambitions were listed in a table, and then separate tables were
made for targets 6.3 and 6.4, which were used for further analysis.
All four tables are included in the attached file “Appendix 8 – SDG 6”. Below is a snippet
from the first table, where all ambitions are included:
Figure A.7: All ambitions identified for SDG no. 6 (snippet of the table)
A guide towards sustainable business for food and beverage businesses
71
