==PAGE:1==
Long-term model based evaluation of ﬂexible Model
Predictive Control in Kolding WRRF
Master Thesis
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Master thesis
Contents
1
Abstract
iii
2
Sammenfatning
iv
3
Acknowledgement
v
4
Introduction
1
5
Theory
2
5.1
Carbon and nitrogen removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
5.2
Estimating N2O emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5.3
state of the art section on process control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5.3.1
MPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6
Methods
10
6.1
simulation platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.2
Plant model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6.2.1
Kinetic Parameters and reactions rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.3
Rule-based control function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.4
MPC and modeling platform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.5
Objective functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.6
Electricity price and emissions from electricity consumption
. . . . . . .
15
7
Results
17
7.1
Plant model assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
7.2
rule and mpc
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
7.3
prediction horizon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
7.4
NDHA implementaion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
7.5
El prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7.6
Limits eﬀect on the MPC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7.7
WRRF performance under diﬀerent management objectives . . . . . . . .
24
7.8
N2O
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.9
Longterm evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
8
discussion
28
8.1
Choice of electricity scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8.2
limits eﬀect on MPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8.3
Volatility’s eﬀect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8.4
Scenarios eﬀect on control functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8.5
N2O emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
9
Conclusion
31
10 Future work
31
Appendices
36
Page i of 39
==PAGE:3==
A N2O
36
B Inﬂow
37
C R-packages
39
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
Long-term model based evaluation of
ﬂexible Model Predictive Control in
Kolding WRRF
Author: Christian Lunøe Holmboe* (s164298)
Supervisors:
Borja Valverde Pèrez*
Luca Vezzaro*
* Department of Environment Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Abstract
1
Abstract
WWRF are complicated systems that help us with limiting human’s impact on the
environment. WRRF’s operational costs are increasingly tied into complex elec-
trical supply and demand grids. The current rule-based control strategies are able
to control the activated sludge of the WRRF, but they are not ﬂexible. There is
a need for the control function to be able to optimize for chancing objectives and
have objectives that are not directly tied to the treatment process, such as power
use or emissions. One control function that can solve these problems is the model
predictive control. The model predictive control made by (Stentoft et al., 2021)
is tested in this paper. The MPC is tested in a plant model in MatLab/Simulink.
To evaluate how the control functions would eﬀect the N2O, the plant model was
chanced to have the NDHA biological model(C. Domingo-Félez and B. F. Smets,
2016). The NDHA models the diﬀerent pathways of N2O production, and there-
fore it was chosen. The MPC is tested and compared to the rule-based control,
by running them with diﬀerent electricity scenarios and for short and long time
periods. It was found that the MPC prediction horizon length did not aﬀect the
performance of the MPC. The MPC was able to run and control the plant model.
When compared to the rule-based control, the MPC resulted in total operation cost
of close to or a little less then the rule-based control. The runs also showed that
the MPC with management goal of total operation cost and the rule-based control
resulted in close to the same N2O emission. The N2O emissions were found to be
around 6 −12%kgn2O/kgN that is comparable to literature. In this thesis, it is
also shown what future work should be done to test and evaluate the MPC.
Page iii of 39
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
2
Sammenfatning
WWRF er komplicerede systemer, der hjælper os med at begrænse menneskers
påvirkning af miljøet.
WRRFs driftsomkostninger er i stigende grad bundet til
komplekse elektriske udbuds og efterspørgselsnet. De nuværende regelbaserede kon-
trolstrategier er i stand til at kontrollere det aktiverede slam fra WRRF, men de er
ikke ﬂeksible. Der er behov for, at kontrolfunktionen kan optimere til skiftende mål
og have mål, der ikke er direkte knyttet til renseanlægget, såsom strømforbrug eller
emissioner. En kontrolfunktion der kan løse disse problemer er den model predict-
ive control. model predictive control lavet af (Stentoft et al., 2021) testes i denne
artikel. MPC’erne er testet i en plantemodel i MatLab/Simulink. For at evaluere,
hvordan kontrolfunktionerne ville påvirke N2O emission, blev plantemodellen udvi-
get med den biologiske NDHA-model ((C. Domingo-Félez and B. F. Smets, 2016)).
NDHA modellerer de forskellige veje for N2O-produktion, og derfor blev den valgt.
MPC’erne testes og sammenlignes med den regelbaserede kontrol ved at køre dem
med forskellige el-scenarier og i korte og lange tidsperioder. Der blev fundet, at
længden af MPC-forudsigelseshorisonten ikke påvirkede MPC’ens ydeevne. MPC
var i stand til at køre og kontrollere anlægsmodellen. Sammenlignet med den re-
gelbaserede kontrol resulterede MPC i samlede driftsomkostninger tæt på eller lidt
laver end den regelbaserede kontrol. Kørslerne viste også, at MPC’en med styrings-
mål om samlede driftsomkostninger og den regelbaserede kontrol resulterede i tæt
på den samme N2O-emission. N2O-emissionerne blev fundet at ligge på omkring
6 −12%kgn2O/kgN, hvilket er sammenligneligt med litteratur.
Page iv of 39
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
3
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my gratitude for my two supervisors Borja Valverde Pérez and
Luca Vezzaro. They have both given me priceless guidance. They have been patient with
me when there has been a plethora of technical problems and helped me through them.
I also thank Peter Alexander Stentoft. His knowledge of the MPC and his help with it
has been so helpful. I would also like to thank Peter Alexander Stentoft, Susanne Ott
and Nikola Milanovic who all have worked on this project before me, and my thesis could
not be done without their previous work.
Page v of 39
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
4
Introduction
The Water Resource Recovery Facilities (WRRF) or formerly known as waste water
treatment plants (WWTP) are a critical aspect of making the impact of urban populations
as small as possible. The chance from talking about WWTP to WRRF are both based
on new technologies, but there is also a fundamental shift from viewing wastewater only
as a problem to also being a possible resource. The WRRF protects the waterways from
several negative impacts, including eutrophication oxygen depletion caused by discharge
of nutrients and organic matter respectively.
With a growing population and higher
ambitions for the eﬄuent quality, more eﬀective WWTPs are required (Mulas et al.,
2015). The activated sludge reactors are a vital part of the WRRFs, where microbes are
used to treat the water. One often used process is aeration of the water. This is done to
give oxygen for microbes that need it. The aeration is an ineﬃcient and expensive process
compared to the amount of air that has to be pumped to transfer oxygen to the water, but
it is also important for chemical oxygen demand (COD) and nitrogen removal. The large
energy is used to make the consumption and price of electricity important for WRRF.
The energy market is evolving, with an expansion of renewable energy sources that has
given rise to a more volatile price marked in Denmark and EU (Dong et al., 2019). Since
the current energy system is not ﬂexible enough, there has been an increasing number of
negative price events. In Germany there was an event with 19h out of 5 days with prices
of under -100 €/MWh(Nicolosi, 2010) where the normal price are around 88 €/MWh. In
this perspective, the WRRF can play a role. In fact, by controlling the time period where
most energy is used at a WRRF, the operation cost can be drastically lowered. Aeration
is therefore one of the main processes that the plant can adjust to lower its operational
cost because of the high-energy consumption and impact on the eﬄuent quality. The
aeration of the activated sludge is often controlled by measuring the dissolved oxygen
(DO) level and using proportional integral (PI) or proportional integral derivative (PID)
controls(Åmand and Carlsson, 2013). PI and PID have some limits and downsides, as
Han (Han, Liu and Qiao, 2019) points out. There are unknown dynamics in activated
sludge and the WRRF is a complex system. Therefore, these simple control strategies
sometimes have to be controlled by another controller to handle the complexity. The
necessary data needed for the controls can also be diﬃcult to measure with online sensors
because the waste water is an extreme environment (Han, Liu and Qiao, 2019). To control
the aeration and plant, WRRF often use automatic control strategies. One type of control
strategies is rule-based. The ﬁrst rule-based strategies were based around improving the
eﬄuent quality. This could be based on the inﬂuent loads or the concentrations in the
system. WRRFs’ operational costs are increasingly tied into complex electrical supply
and demand grids. More parameters such as the green house gas emissions, price etc,
have to be taken into account and there is a wish to optimize them. With all of these
objectives, the control strategies have to be more ﬂexible than they are today. The WRRF
should be able to chance the weight of each objective based on they current need. The
old rule-based methods are demanding to adjust, but model predictive control can be the
solution to this. Model predictive control (MPC) is control method that is very ﬂexible
and can have many objectives it optimize for.
In this paper, the a MPC made by P. Stentoft will be tested with help of a WRRF
model in Simulink®. This MPC has shown to be able to control the plant and gave
Page 1 of 39
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
some small savings compared to rule-based control. This paper will try to see if the same
results found in Kolding can also be seen when the MPC is run with a model(Stentoft
et al., 2021). The models will be made in Matlab® and Simulink® and be based on the
benchmark model (BSM1) made by the IWA Task group. The BSM1 will be modiﬁed
to better predicting the release of N2O based on the model made by (C. Domingo-Félez
and B. F. Smets, 2016). Because of the high global warming potential (GWP) of the
gas, there is a growing concern of trying to reduce its emission. The MPC will be run
over diﬀerent periods to see if what the strengths of the MPC are and if there are any
problems. The overall goal of this paper is to start the veriﬁcation of the MPC.
Aim
The aim of this thesis is the following.
• Implement the MPC and make it control the plant simulation.
• Test the eﬀect of limits and prediction horizon on the MPC.
• See if a more volatile electricity scenario would result in better performance of the
MPC compared to the rule-based.
• Evaluate the two control strategies with diﬀerent electricity scenarios.
• Implement the NDHA model to simulate the N2O production.
• Test how the diﬀerent control strategies eﬀect the N2O emissions.
• Perform a long term simulation and test of the two control strategies.
5
Theory
5.1
Carbon and nitrogen removal
When the Haber-Bosch process was invented, humans could ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen and
form ammonium artiﬁcially. The new extra nitrogen could be used as fertilizer to ﬁelds.
This increased the crops yield and made it possible to feed the growing population. The
real problem comes when the nitrogen leaves the ﬁelds and enter the ecosystems. Over
half the ﬁxed nitrogen that enters the ecosystem has an anthropogenic origin(Cabello
et al., 2009), and could be run-oﬀfrom ﬁelds or waste from humans. 30 % of nitrogen
staying on the ﬁeld is lost through denitriﬁcation partially ending up as N2O in the at-
mosphere (Cabello et al., 2009). The ﬁxed nitrogen released into waterways give rise to
several problems. If the nutrients are released into a stream, it will stress the ecosystem.
The ammonia and nitrite are toxic for aquatic animals, and can together with nitrate
lead to eutrophication. From the increasing ﬂow of nitrogen and our understanding of
how ﬁxed nitrogen may lead to a problem for the environment, it is desirable to ﬁnd
the main points of nutrient emission to the environment. These points should then tried
to be remove or decreased. This should be done without being at the expense of other
Page 2 of 39
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
environmental factores. One of these points are WRRF’s.
The most economical means for nitrogen removal in WRRF are biological processes (Lin
et al., 2009). Most common biological processes rely on the nitriﬁcation and denitri-
ﬁcation (with simultaneous carbon removal), whereby bacteria transform nitrogen from
NH4 to inert N2. The nitriﬁcation is governed by ammonium-oxidizing bacteria (AOB)
and nitrite-oxidizing bacteria (NOB). The denitriﬁcation is governed by denitrifying bac-
teria (HB). The removal of nitrogen by biological means can lead to emissions of the
unwanted greenhouse gasses (GHG). The nitrous oxide N2O that is a particularly prob-
lematic greenhouse gas. N2O has a lifetime of 121 years in the atmosphere and a global
warming potential of 265 GWP100(Stocker et al., 2013). The WRRF are today account-
able for 3 to 7.9 % of the anthropogenic emissions (Wang et al., 2016),(Law et al., 2012).
The N2O emissions has a high impact on a WRRF carbon footprint (Gustavsson and
Tumlin, 2013). To reduce the emission N2O, the production of N2O needs to be un-
derstood. In both nitriﬁcation and denitriﬁcation, N2O can be produced. There are a
multiple microorganism responsible for the N2O, which can be grouped on ammonium-
oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and denitrifying bacteria (HB). The way N2O is produced and
the rate of its production is governed by diﬀerent enzymes and diﬀerent environmental
factors.
AOB N2O production
AOB is the microorganism utilized to preform the ﬁrst step of oxidizing ammonium.
AOB obtains energy from oxidation ammonia (NH3) to nitrite (NO−
2 ). It consists of two
steps. First step is the oxidation of ammonia to hydroxylamine with the enzyme ammonia
monooxygenase (AMO) as a catalysis. The second step is hydroxylamine conversion to
nitrite by hydroxylamine oxidoreductase (HAO). It has been suggested that there is an
intermediary in the step from hydroxylamine to nitrite. Where hydroxylamine oxidezed
by HAO to Nitric oxide, and then from Nitric oxide to nitrite by a uncharacterized
enzyme(Soler-Jofra, Pérez and van Loosdrecht, 2021). Oxygen is used as the electron
acceptor for both steps (Carlos Domingo-Félez and Barth F. Smets, 2019).
Figure 1: N2O production pathway during nitriﬁcation and denitriﬁcation (Lv et al., 2019)
Page 3 of 39
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
AOB can produce N2O from two pathways (ﬁgure 1). Pathway 1 This pathway is called
the nitriﬁer nitriﬁcation (NN). NN is a biological mediated pathway that can result in
nitrous oxide emissions. In NN it is the cytochrome P460 (cyt P460) that is a part of
HAO, from the AOB that converts hydroxylamine (NH2OH) to Nitric oxide and is then
reduced to nitrous oxid (Caranto, Vilbert and Lancaster, 2016). The NN pathway is
prevelent when there is a high NH3 concentration and there is a high concentration of
NH2OH. Isotopic labeling studies has shown that there is an increase in nitrous oxide
emission when there is a transistion between an aerobic environment to an anoxic envir-
oment (Caranto, Vilbert and Lancaster, 2016).
The other pathway for N2O production by AOB is the nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation ND seen
as pathway 2 in ﬁgure 1. In the ND pathway NO−
2 is reduced to N2O with NO as a
intermediary. ND rate is increased at low DO concentration or high NO−
2 concentration
(Yan et al., 2017). The ND has been shown to be the dominant pathway in lab scale ex-
periments. Here there was found that it were around 80 to 77 % of the total nitrous oxide
that came from the ND pathway(Su et al., 2017). Therefore, it could be an advantage to
have NOB to oxidize nitrite to nitrate and have an optimal denitriﬁcation from the HB
to decrease the ND pathway.
It has been proposed that the AOBs possess a diverse enzymology, and there are still
enzymes responsible for N2O production that remain to be characterized. (Kozlowski,
Price and Stein, 2014).
HB N2O production
Heterotrophic bacteria (HB) are present in the activated sludge and they are essential
in the nitrogen cycle. There are denitriﬁers among the HB, and they are an essential
part of removing nitrogen from the wastewater. The HB denitriﬁers are reducing nitrate
and nitrite to N2 as seen in ﬁgure 1. The denitriﬁcation process involves four enzymes:
Nitrate reductase (NAR), Nitrite reductase (NIR), Nitric Oxide Reductase (Nitric oxide
reductase, NOR), and Nitrous oxide reductase (NOS)(Lv et al., 2019).
Figure 2: Nitrate is reduced to nitrogen gas under anaerobic condition via the denitriﬁcation
process . Arrows indicate an operon or gene required for each reaction to occur with metal
cofactor requisite for the enzyme complex. (Black et al., 2016)
They can all be inhibited under speciﬁc conditions, and special inhibition or not optimal
conditions for the enzyme nosZ can result in an accumulation of N2O (Black et al., 2016).
Page 4 of 39
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
The four enzymes are all reversibly inhibited by O2. The nosZ enzyme is particularly
sensitive to O2, so when there is O2 present in the system, there could be a build-up
of N2O. The limitation of electron ﬂow from the electron donor will also slow down the
NO−
x reduction. The nosZ has a relatively lower electron aﬃnity than the rest of the
enzymes.
This results in potential N2O building up when there is a high content of
nitrogen compared to the electron donor(C. Domingo-Félez and B.
F. Smets, 2016).
When there is a build up oﬀN2O in the system under the denitriﬁng face, then the N2O
can be emitted when the aeration turns on again and the N2O is oﬀ-gassed. The HB
production of N2O is sensitive to the C/N ratio where the NN and ND pathways are
not sensitive to it. It has been found that chancing the C/N ratio from 2.6 to 4.5 the
emission of N2O was 270 times higher at the high ratio (Kishida et al., 2004). The lower
C/N ratio give more organic carbon for the denitrifying and ensure it is not limited by
it.
Other parts of the nitrogen cycle
Even thought that the AOB and denitrifying HB are the main part of the nitrogen cycle
are there still other groups of bacteria there are a part of it. The NOB are a group of
bacteria there preform the same as AOB but utilize nitrite instead of ammonium. The
NOB processes are often quicker then the AOB processes (Cabello et al., 2009). The total
oxidation from ammonium to nitrate with following denitriﬁcation to nitrogen has long
been the preferred method. There are some down sides with this, by oxidicing nitrite
to nitrate there are more consumption of oxygen there has to be put into the system
with aeration. Another problem are there are a need for more organic carbon for the
denitriﬁcation (Bassin, 2017). These problems are not directly looked at in this paper
but could impact the N2O emissions. If there are insuﬃcient organic carbon then as talk
about in the section 5.1 there could be a increase of N2O emissions.
The same problem can come from aerobic HB. This is a broad group of bacteria where
they use the organic carbon as a carbon source and oxygen as the electron acceptor.
When aeration are on these will decrease the organic carbon in the tank and that could
limit the denitriﬁcation when the aeration are turned oﬀ. There are plant setup such
as (SHARON, single-reactor high-activity ammonia removal over nitrite), there tries to
work around these problems by decreasing the NOB(Bassin, 2017). These are not looked
at in this paper, but the important of NOB and aerobic HB has to be remembered.
5.2
Estimating N2O emission
WRRP is a substantial source of N2O, and therefore is the amount of N2O emission of
high interest. The production of N2O is complicated and the NN, ND, and HB are all
some ways N2O are produced at a WRRF. The nitrous oxide emissions are therefore often
estimated based on diﬀerent methods. The IPCC has come with a emission factor that
calculates the nitrous oxide emission based on the total nitrogen coming to the WRRF
and other parameters such as income group etc. (Masuda, n.d.). There are also models
made from empirical data that calculate the nitrous oxide emission. The nitrous oxide
emission was found to be empirical determent in one paper to be 0.124–0.152 kg N2O-
N/kg consumed NH+
4 −N (municipal wastewater) (Ali, Ahmed and Kim, 2014). There
Page 5 of 39
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
is also a model based approach where the WRRF is modeled. The Activated Sludge
Model No. 1 (ASM1, (Scheuer et al., 1987)) does not have nitrous oxide incorporated
but is often used as the groundwork for such a model. For this thesis it is interesting
to see if chancing the aeration time can chance the diﬀerent concentration of the many
intermediate compounds in the nitrogen cycle, and thereby decrease the N2O emission.
Because of this, the nitrous oxide emission will be estimate with a model based approach.
There are multibel models there models the N2O production in WRRF. The models don’t
always have all the pathways in N2O production. Some of the models are only modeling
the NN or the ND pathway and some dont have the abiotic pathway. All the pathways
are contribute to the emissions so a model there would incorporate all are preferred.
The nitrogen that is leaving the WRRF in the eﬄuent also contributes to the total
N2O emission. To calculate this emission the equation made by IPCC is used in this
thesis(IPCC, 1992).
N2OEffluent,Dom = NEffluent,Dom ∗EFEffluent ∗44
28
(5.1)
Where:
• N2OEffluent,Dom = N2O emissions from domestic wastewater eﬄuent in inventory
year, kg N2O/yr
• NEffluent,Dom = nitrogen in the eﬄuent discharged to aquatic environments, kg
N/yr.
• EFEffluent = emission factor for N2O emissions from wastewater discharged to
aquatic systems kg N2O −N/kg −N
The emission factor is 0.005 in this paper.
5.3
state of the art section on process control
WRRF is a large industrial process with many diﬀerent types of process and mass streams.
To make sure that the eﬄuent reach the eﬄuent limits, the diﬀerent systems have to be
controlled. The WRRF is receiving a varying inﬂow with a ﬂuxtuating concentration and
load of pollution. This puts a pressure on all the control functions and demands that
they are able to handle chancing conditions. In this paper, we look at the control of the
biological system of the WRRF. This section focuses only on activated sludge reactors.
To run the model the optimal control function has to be chosen.
The heart of automatic control functions is the feedback loop. The feedback loop is based
on the following:
Page 6 of 39
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
Figure 3: Visualization of the fundamental structure of a feedback-loop. (Quesel et al., 2016)
The controlled variable is measured and the signal is then eﬀecting the controller. As
seen in ﬁgure 3 it is the result of the control, and the disturbance there results in the new
control. The advantages of a feedback system are that there are often many disturbances
or inputs to a system. So, it would be complicated to control the system based on all
of them, but the results of all of them are easier to measure (McLaughlin, McLean and
Bonthron, 1981). Feedback systems are used in many places from thermostats in houses
but also in aeriation of activated sludge. The controller is given a desired oxygen level in
the tank or a set point r. The tank has an oxygen sensor that sends the current concen-
tration back to the controller ym. Then the setpoint r is compared to the current state
ym, and the error e is sent to the controller. Then the controller sends a signal to the
pumps to turn on or oﬀu. How the controller reacts on controlled variable is governed
by what kind of controller it is.
A common used control function is a PID. Here, the controller looks at the size of the
diﬀerent between the set-point r and the controlled variable ym. The diﬀerent then de-
termines the control. If the oxygen level is much lower then the set point, then the pump
will pump a lot of air. On ther other hand, if the concentration is close to the set point,
the pumps slows down. This are a simple and classic control loop. There is no need for a
lot of computing power, and the set point can be easily chanced. This system is very good
at controlling a simple parameter, temperature, ﬂow rate, or oxygen concentration. PID
control can have problems when there is a long time delay that can result in oscillation
around the set-point(McLaughlin, McLean and Bonthron, 1981). Strong non-linearities
in the system can also decrease the eﬀectiveness of the PID control.
A way to come around these problems is a rule-based control. Rule-based control, includ-
ing knowledge-based control and fuzzy control(Weijers and Preisig, 2000). Here there are
some clear mathematical set functions that determine how the system should be con-
trolled.
The control is made from knowledge of the system but it is also limited by
the same. The activated sludge in a WRRF can be controlled by a rule based control.
Knowledge of how the nitriﬁcation and denitriﬁcation functions determine the periods
of aeration. The rule-based control receives data from a sensor in the system and then
determine based on its rules to give an output eighter to a actuators or to another con-
troller.
A system where one controller gives a set point value to a other controller is called a
cascade control. This setup is often used when there are interacting systems or pro-
Page 7 of 39
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
cess variables that can be combined for more optimal performance. Cascade loops can
be coupled with RBC and PID. The main and obvious problem with rule-based control
function is that if the system chance, so if the internal rules don’t ﬁt the reality, the
system can not adapt.
The activated sludge system is multivariable, nonlinear, time-variable and stiﬀ, input con-
straints are present, and load and temperatures vary considerably (Weijers and Preisig,
2000). These condition has to be handled for a process control to work. The rule-based
control can control systems like this but the control function can be more and more com-
plex to handel these constraints.
More complex control strategies exist. One of them is model predictive controls (MPC),
and how the MPC runs compared to the rule-based is interesting.
5.3.1
MPC
Model predictive control (MPC) is a control method, that has been used in many diﬀer-
ent settings. It was used in the 1980s to control the dynamics of petrochemical plants
(Zhan and Grassi, 1999). In comparison to other control strategies, MPC can incorpor-
ate system constraints that arise from requirements put on the system (G. Takács and
Rohal’-Ilkiv, 2012). In short, the mpc is as follows: The MPC is based on a iterative
optimization of a process for a deﬁned and constant horizon. A basic and more simpliﬁed
way of explaining an MPC is as follows: The MPC works to regulate a plant. A plant
is a process there has a series of set-points that result in one or more outputs. This
could be an industrial chemical plant or a WRRF. The plant is sampled at each deﬁned
time step. The sampling can be from sensors or estimates based on other inputs, and
the samples can be from the time-step and back in time or just at the given time. The
sampled state for the plant is then used to calibrate the MPC model, which predicts the
plant performance. The calibrated model is validated by seeing if the mpc would predict
the sampled data based on past control inputs. The MPC can now model what future
states of the plant would be based on future set-points.
The MPC is evaluating its output by a so-called cost function. The cost function could be
the amount of waste produced, cost of the process, or heat generated. This cost function
is what the MPC wants to minimize or maximize depending on whether the cost-function
is a positive or a negative thing. Based on the model calibrated by the states taken at the
time step, the future cost function can be calculated based on what future set-points are
given to the plant. The MPC is, as stated, only optimizing for a deﬁned time horizon. The
MPC will give what the cost function will be in the next time horizon. The cost function
is then minimized/maximized for the next time horizon by testing diﬀerent future actions
(set-points) and calculating the cost function for them. The set-points giving the lowest
cost-function value are then sent back to the plant, witch will use them to control the
actuators. When the next deﬁned time step comes (sample time in ﬁgure(4), the whole
process starts again. The time-steps between each optimization (sample time) are shorter
than the prediction horizon, as seen in ﬁgure 4. The MPC can be a part of a cascade
control or a stand alone controller.
Page 8 of 39
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
Figure 4: Visualisation of how the MPC work in regard to time.
Takács Gergely (G. Takács and Rohal’-Ilkiv, 2012) has a nice way of describing the diﬀer-
ence between an MPC control compared to a traditional proportional–integral–derivative
(PID) controller. A controller is like a human steering a car. A PID is trying to steer
the car and hold it on the road, but it is only able to see out of the rear-view mirror. An
MPC is, on the other hand, able to look out of both the back mirror and front window.
The MPC is just like a human, it sees how the road before aﬀected the car previously,
and then it looks ahead and predicts how that will aﬀect the car. Then the controller can
choose the path that is most optimal. The MPC can also take real limits or boundaries
into account, just like a human, it can know how steep a curve it can go in a turn or how
fast the car can turn.
In WRRF MPC has been shown to be able to control and optimize for many diﬀerent
parameters. P.A. Stentoft showed in his paper that an MPC could optimize for total
operation and control the plant (Stentoft et al., 2021). The MPC made in that paper
is the one that will be used in this thesis. It was found that the MPC resulted in a
total operation cost that was between 60 DKK cheaper to 70 DKK more expensive then
the rule-based control(Stentoft et al., 2021). The MPC made by P.A. Stentoft were in-
vestigated to see its N2O emission, but it was estimated as a function of an ammonia
removal rate, modeled according to two correlations found in (Blum, Jensen and Barth F.
Smets, 2018). As stated earlier, the production of N2O is complicated. Therefore the
MPC should be investigated with other ways to estimate the N2O emissions. The MPC
should also be further validated with using detailed biological models(Stentoft et al.,
2021). These things will be investigated in this paper. An MPC has also been tested
on a model of the kolding WRRF, where the MPC controlled the volume of a storage
tank before the WRRF. Here the MPC could control when there should be sent more or
less water to the WRRF. It was shown that the MPC could result in lower aeriation cost
(Stentoft et al., 2020).
Page 9 of 39
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
6
Methods
6.1
simulation platform
The plant model is implemented on Matlab2020b® and Simulink®. The MPC control
function is implemented in R® and R-studio®. The R is R-4.0.4 version and R-studio is
RStudio-1.2-5033 version. There has to be payed special attention to the packages what
version used in R , they can be seen i appendix C
Plant setup
The plant described in the Simulink are Kolding WRRF in Denmark. The WRRF has
a treatment capacity of 125,000 PE with a load of 75,000 PE. The plant is using the
BioDenitro system for the biological treatment (Halvgaard et al., 2017). The BioDenitro
system consists of tanks in pair that are interconnected. From a control perspective the
tanks oxygen level can be controlled and the ﬂow of water between the tanks can also be
controlled. How the BioDenitro are controlled is discussed later in section 6.3. The tanks
can both be aerated or not. This gives the possibility to be denitriﬁying or nitriﬁng in
both tanks. The system can be in all 4 conﬁgurations seen in ﬁgure 5.
Figure 5: BioDenitro biologiacal system for a WRRF. Illustration of the diﬀerent states the
system can be in.
The BioDenitro system’s advantages are that it is ﬂexible and can adapt to diﬀerent loads
and ratio of carbon/nitrogen(Halvgaard et al., 2017). The Kolding WRRF only has an
NH4 and NO3 sensor in one of the tanks. Therefore the MPC will only be given data
from this tank, when it calculates the control strategy. If diﬀerent data or more data
could improve the MPC performance are not investigated. But This setup will show if
the MPC can run with few input data from a complicated system.
Page 10 of 39
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
6.2
Plant model
Kolding WRRF has been modeled in a simulink model.modiﬁed from an implementation
of the BSM1 model to represent the alternating plant conﬁguration. The model itself is
composed of several elements shown in ﬁgure(6).
Figure 6: BioDenitro biologiacal system for a WRRF. Illustration of the diﬀerent states the
system can be in.
Here in ﬁgure(6) the overview of the WRRF can be seen. It consists of a primary clariﬁer,
activated sludge and a secondary settler. The orange box in ﬁgure(6) is the MPC that
is implemented in the simulink model.
The (1 in) is the waste water that comes to
the WRRF it is dry weather ﬂow and repeating days of the same concentrations. The
concentration and inﬂow can be seen in appendix (B). When the biological model were
chanced the ﬂow from combiner1 were split up to have more states. The activated sludge
box here and how it is controlled in ﬁgure 6 is of special interest in this thesis. What the
diﬀerent boxes in ﬁgure 6 are made up of can be seen in appendix?.
The Settler box is built on the Takács model that is a 1-D non-reactive settler model (I.
Takács, Patry and Nolasco, 1991). This model sees the settler as 10 separate horizontal
layers. The Takács model models only the 1-D movement of vertical movement from
layer to layer. The settler is non-reactive, meaning no biological or chemical reactions
occur within this unit, hence the concentrations of compounds do not change. The solids
are also instant and evenly distributed in the layer.
Page 11 of 39
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
Figure 7: BioDenitro biologiacal system for a WRRF. Illustration of the diﬀerent states the
system can be in.
Figure 7 is a sub box of the activated sludge box in ﬁgure 6. The box Areated here in
ﬁgure 7 is the biological model of the activated sludge. The start point for the biological
model is the ASM1 model. Later the biological system were modeﬁed to have the NDHA
insted of the ASMI1. The box "N-ND phase activator" is the rule based controller that
is controlling the activated sludge. There is an arrow from the rule based controller to
the box "PI cotroller with Kla calculation" that indicates how the rule-based controller
has given the PI controller its set point. This is a clear example of cascade control. The
orange box in ﬁgure(7) is how the MPC takes over for the rule based control.
Model to describe N2O production
There are many ways of describing how nitrogen is converted in the a WRRP. It can be
more or less complicated and have nitrogen in multiple diﬀerent states. The ASM model
that many model based control functions are based on has nitrogen in four diﬀerent
compounds.
• NO =Nitrate and nitrite nitrogen
• NH =NH4 and NH3 nitrogen
• Soluble biodegradable organic nitrogen
• Particulate biodegradable organic nitrogen
The nitriﬁcation step from ammonia to nitrate and also the denitriﬁcation step from
nitrate to nitrogen gas are both described as one step (Scheuer et al., 1987). From theory,
it is explained that from knowing the diﬀerent speciation of nitrogen in the nitrogen cycle
we can describe the production of N2O (Lv et al., 2019). For this thesis, it is of interests
to see how the diﬀerent MPC strategies aﬀect the N2O emission.
Page 12 of 39
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
To describe the N2O production in this thesis, the ASM1 model will be modiﬁed so the
biological part of the activated sludge model is replaced with the model NDHA,(Nitriﬁer
nitriﬁcation,nitriﬁer Denitriﬁcation, Hetrotrophic denitriﬁcation and Abiotic pathways)
made by (C. Domingo-Félez and B.
F. Smets, 2016).
This model takes nitrogen in
diﬀerent states into account and describes both the Autotrophic N2O production, Het-
erotrophic N2O production and Abiotic N2O production.
For simplifying the model the abiotic contribution to the total N2O production was re-
moved, as its contribution is negligible at normal operational conditions. It was shown
that the abiotic part was very low or close to non under experiments (Su et al., 2019).
The Simulink plant model has also been chanced to have more state variabels, to work
with the NDHA. The SNH are split up in Ammonium and in Hydroxylamine. And SNO
has been split to nitrite, nitrate Nitric oxide, nitrous oxide and nitrogen gas. The split
to more states is made after the primary treatment to chance as little as possible to the
model that is not directly a part of the activated sludge. The inﬂuent SNH is chosen to
be Ammonium and the SNO that are close to 0 in the inﬂuent is chosen to be nitrate.
6.2.1
Kinetic Parameters and reactions rates
The rates that govern the rate of denitriﬁcation are sensitive and the rates chosen will
have eﬀect on the results. The initial rates are from literature (Massara et al., 2018). The
parameters will be tested by running the plant model and make a scenario assessment.
The rates and eﬄuent concentration will be used to assess the model implementation. If
the scenario assessment is not satisfying the parameters will be manually calibrated to
get reasonable trends.
6.3
Rule-based control function
The way of controlling the aeration of the activated sludge tanks have for a long time
been controlled by a rule-based approach. It is often the concentration of one or more
species of nitrogen that determent if it should be areated. The Kolding plant model
had a rule-based control function that controls the BioDenitro biological treatment. The
rule-based control will be tested and compared to the MPC. This rule-based function
is looking at NH4 and NO3. The input to the control function is the concentration of
Nitrate and ammonium in the tank 1. The input signal then determines the min and
max concentration of ammonium that there can be in the tank before the control function
turns the aeration on or oﬀ. The goal for the Control function is to keep the concentration
of ammonium within the control lines.
Page 13 of 39
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
5
10
15
(2,6)
(3,3)
(5,2)
(8,8)
NO3 [mg/l]
NH4 [mg/l]
Min
Max
Figure 8: The rule-based control function of the BioDenitro system visualized. The control
functions space of operation and control lines. The minimum and maximum concentration of
NH4 can be before the control-function try to chance the system are visualized with control
lines.
In ﬁgure(8) the range of concentrations that are withing the desired range are easily seen.
At any given point the reactor 1 has a corresponded point on the graph. The control
function tries to keep the reactor within the boundaries of the min max line. At point
(2,6) the NH4 is above the Max value and the aeration turn on. At point (3,3) the
control current state of the reactor is continued because has not crossed either the min
or max. At point (5,2) the reactor has crossed the min control line an the areation are
has therefore turned oﬀ, and the reactor starts its denitriﬁng face. An extreme situation
is point (8,8) as the reactor is below the Min control line and above the max control
line. Here, the Control goes into backup strategy. The backup strategy is to remain in
the current phase for the maximum amount of time. The maximum and minimum times
are 1.9 hours and 0.4 hours. When the system then reaches the max time, it then turns
to the next face for the max time and repeating this unto the tank’s state is within the
control area.
6.4
MPC and modeling platform
The model prediction control is integrated in the Simulink model. The model runs 6
hours on a rule-based system but after that evert 5th hour that the MPC is run. Its
tested to see if the MPC take control and that it can control the plant.
The MPC
is given a objective function to minimize and some limits. The limits are the average
eﬄuent concentration of total nitrogen of 8mg/l and NH in form of ammonium and
ammonia of 3mg/l. The MPC gets the last 24 hours of concentrations of nitrogen and
oxygen concentrations in the activated sludge tanks and the aeration status in the tanks,
the MPC are also given the ﬂow direction of the BioDenitro plant. These data will be
used to predict the variables that the MPC uses for predicting the next 24 hours. It
also gets the hourly electricity price for the next 24 hour, to calculate the cost function.
The object function chosen in the MPC will be minimized while still complying with the
Page 14 of 39
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
limits. The MPC is built to parameter estimate each 15 hours. The parameter estimation
is done so the MPC can make better predictions. Theses parameters could be estimated
every 15 hours, but to minimize calculation time and chance of calculation errors, the
parameters have been calculated once. 24 hours of reactor data that were run with the
rule-based control were given to the MPC that was used to that parameter estimate.
To ensure these were good parameters and not a small local optimum, the estimation
was run 3 times each time with the previous run’s result as a start point. Why this is
possible is that this is a simulation, and therefore the parameters of the biological model
are constant, and there is no chance in temperature or microbial communities. If a run
with varying temperature, it would necessary that the MPC re-estimates the parameters.
The MPC are build with a prediction horizon of 24 hours, the eﬀect of the length of the
prediction horizon were tested. The limits chosen are based on Danish legislation that set
limits for eﬄuent concentrations. The national legislation only has a limit of 8mg/l total
N(Poulsen, 2007), but Kolding municipality has their own limit on NH4 of 2 mg/l. The
NH limit is increased to 3 mg/l because the MPC had problems with holding it within
the constraints. The eﬀect of the constrains were tested to see how it impact the MPC.
These constraints are easily implemented in the control function and shows the ﬂexibility
and how easy it is to incorporate real life constraints.
6.5
Objective functions
To test MPC control functions, there are 3 diﬀerent management objectives. These will
be tested and see how they eﬀect the system both on cost and GWP to see both how
ﬂexible the MPC is and the trade-oﬀs from the diﬀerent objectives. The objectives are
taken from P. Stentof’s paper (Stentoft et al., 2021), objectives B and are the same but
objective A and C have been chanced. The objectives are as following:
• Objective A: Eﬄuent total-N optimization, considering only the mean eﬄuent con-
centration of ammonium, Hydroxylamin, nitrite and nitrate.
• Objective B: Electricity consumption optimization: considering the varieng prices
• Objective C: Total operational costs optimization , considering electricity consump-
tion and eﬄuent taxes;
6.6
Electricity price and emissions from electricity consumption
The MPC optimizes for diﬀerent parameters. Both for total cost and for aeration cost.
The varying electricity price plays a part. The more volatile, the more opportunities
there are for the MPC to choose times where the price is relatively low. The electricity
price chosen to be used in the modeling will therefore be important. For this test of the
MPC, there were chosen 5 diﬀerent electricity price scenarios, to understand how the
price eﬀects the performance of the MPC. There are chosen extreme scenarios to see the
range of the MPC. Both electricity prices where the MPC can shine and places where the
mpc maybe will have a hard time outperforming the rule-based controller.
Page 15 of 39
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
The volatility was estimated by using realized volatility (RV). This is the sum of squared
high-frequency returns. The RV is calculated by the following equation for each day t.
RVt =
M
X
j=1
r2
t,j
(1)
The rt,j is the prices change between two adjacent prices (Dong et al., 2019). This is
used to ﬁnd data series where the price are very ﬂuctuating. A high electricity price
would not automatically result in good results for the MPC, but if the price is high one
hour and relatively low the next hour, then the mpc can delay the areation and hour to
lower the cost. There will be runs with short time periods between 3 to 16 days and long
simulations of 365 days. The scenarios to ﬁnd are the following.
Scenario 1 is a recent year but with relatively low RV. This scenario will be used for
short and long term evaluation.
This is chosen to represent a normal year with low
volatile price marked. Will be used for 16 days and 365 days simulations.
Scenario 2 is a recent year with high volatile price marked where the price is especially
high. This is contrary to scenario 1. This scenario will be used for short and long term
evaluation. Will be used for 16 days and 365 days simulations.
Scenario 1 and 2 will be found in the last couple of years. 2021 has been pointed out as
a year where market, geographic, and political factors have all collided to make a special
high price and volatile year (Liboreiro and Filippis, 2021). For scenario 1 2018 was chosen
to check if it would work. 2018 and 2021 will be explored to see if they ﬁt for the test.
Scenario 3 is a constant electricity price. This is an extreme. The MPC will not be able
to optimize for electricity price here, but the optimization for eﬄuent cost and total cost
could work. The price will be chosen as the average hourly price of scenario 2. This will
be used for short term evaluation. Will be used for 16 days simulations.
Scenario 4 is a special high price and RV Scenario. The prices are taken from the scen-
ario 2 and are the days with the absolute highest RV. The days are then duplicated to
expand the time needed. This will be used for short term evaluation. Will be used for
16 days simulations.
Scenario 5 After October 2008, when there has been the possibility of negative prices,
some periods, the price can be negative because of execs power (Nicolosi, 2010). A scen-
ario with negative prices are chosen to see how this could aﬀect the MPC. A time period
from scenario 1 with negative prices will be taken and duplicated for the need. Will be
used for 16 days simulations.
Page 16 of 39
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
7
Results
7.1
Plant model assessment
The rule-based control was altered to ﬁx some errors. The main error was a problem
with the counting of the time that the aeriation has been on and oﬀ. The rule-based
control counts the time it has been in a setting to see if it can shift. There had been
put a maximun and minimum time for each phase to make sure it did not try to turn on
and oﬀeach second or something that the system does not allow. The counter for the
denitriﬁng phase were incorrectly built and it did not reset when it left the phase. This
resulted in the following:
1.28
1.3
1.32
1.34
1.36
1.38
0
1
2
3
4
NO3 [mg/l]
NH4 [mg/l]
Oxygen
NH4
Control linje
Figure 9: Run with rule based controlfunction. Error indication
Here in ﬁgure 9 That the NH4 goes under the control line but the areaiton does not turn
oﬀ. This is because the counter thinks it has been too long in the denitriﬁng state and
can therfore not turn oﬀ. It is ﬁrst when the areiation timer hits max time that it turns
oﬀ. This error resulted in some exploding senarios where the NO3 increased drastically.
This were ﬁxed by resetting the counter each time the system chanced state. More minor
mistakes and errors were also found and corrected, but I will not go into detail about
those.
7.2
rule and mpc
The two main control strategies were run to see if they were able to control the system
and run it with under the eﬄuent limits. The run was with MPC with Objective C. The
strategies have diﬀerent patterns and the system will diﬀer quickly. In Figure 10 The
oxygen concentration for tank 1 can be seen. This is the most direct way to see how
the control function works. The ﬁrst 0.75 days are the same because it is the rule-based
control there governs the upstart for both control systems. After here there are a clear
picture of the diﬀerent systems.
Page 17 of 39
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
0
1
2
Time [d]
Concentration [mg/l]
Rule-based control
MPC
Figure 10: Comparison of oxygen concentration in tank 1 for run with rule-based control and
MPC with management goal of total operation cost
7.3
prediction horizon
300
500
700
900 1,100 1,300 1,500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Prediction horizon (min)
Mean total cost normalized
Figure 11: Runs of 100 days with diﬀerent length of prediction horizons normalized to a run
with 360 min horizon. the mean value of the normalized value with bars with the standard
deviation are illustrated
The MPC makes a control strategy for the next time periode, but this is longer than
the time between iteration as described in theory. To determine how long the prediction
horizon should be, the plant model was run for 100 days controlled with the MPC with
the objective function on total cost. The biological model was the ASM model. The
prediction horizon the MPC used was chanced to get a picture of its impact. The runs
were with prediction horizons between 360 minutes to 1440 minutes , 6 hours to 24 hours.
The total cost for each day was taken in all the runs and normalized to the corresponding
Page 18 of 39
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
day for the run with 360 min. In Figure(11) the result can be seen. The results shows
that there are no improvement in total cost with increased prediction horizon. To remain
consistent, a prediction horizon of 1440 min was chosen for the rest of the paper. This
was mainly done because if the mpc fails the next evaluation, the model still has a control
to work from.
7.4
NDHA implementaion
The parameters that the NDHA biological model was made with was ﬁrst tested with
the rule-based control.
Figure 12:
Run with default parameters from the paper from C. Domingo-Félez (Carlos
Domingo-Félez and Barth F. Smets, 2020)
When running the system with the NDHA biological model with parameters found from
literature, the following concentration of nitrate in the reactors and eﬄuent behave as
seen in ﬁgure 12. The Simulink runs smoothly the ﬁrst 1.2 days but when the concen-
tration of nitrate exceeds 20 mg/l the calculation time increase substantial. The reason
behind this increase in calculation time is not well understood, but a combination of
diﬀerent factors is possible. The rule-based control function operates based on the con-
centration of nitrate and ammonium. With the current biological model the rule-based
control function is not able to control the plant with the new dynamic.
Two parameters, SS aﬃnity constant for hetrothops and maximum NO3-reduction rate
were found to have special aﬀect on the nitrate concentration. The range of these para-
meteres that could be expected was found in literature (Hiatt and Grady, 2008) (Ni et al.,
2013) (Henze et al., 1999). These parameters were chosen as the parameter space to be
Page 19 of 39
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
investigated. The parameters from literature make the minimum and maximum. For
each parameter the minimum, mean, and maximum value were chosen to be run for 14
days. The runs were evaluated based on the eﬄuent concentration of nitrate table(1) and
the N2O direct emissions table(2).
ks/µ
4.8
2.43
2.3/2/1.8
40
2.31
2.6
2.61
22
2.24
2.27
2.45
4
1.94
2.18
2.26
Table 1: N2O Emission [Kg/day] from simulation over 14 days with the NDHA biological
model. The SS aﬃnity constant for hetrothops and maximum NO3-reduction rate, are variabel.
ks/µ
4.8
2.43
2.3/2/1.8
mean
40
3.995
8.79
9.99
7.59
22
4.22
8.81
11.68
8.24
4
5.29
10.91
15.32
10.51
mean
4.50
9.51
12.33
Table 2: NO3 average eﬄuent concentration [mg/l] from simulation over 14 days with the
NDHA biological model. The SS aﬃnity constant for hetrothops and maximum NO3-reduction
rate, are variabel
in both table(1) and table(2) there is a pattern in both. In table (1) lower Ks and higher
µ the lower N2O emission. At the high µ and low Ks the denitriﬁcation would have
the highest rate of all the scenarios, here the N2O emission are the lowest. This could
possible be attribute to that the NOS enzyme is not limited and is reducing nitrous oxide
to Nitrogen gas. To run the model forward the ks and µ were chosen to be 4 and 4.8.
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
0
5
10
15
Time [d]
Concentration [mg/l]
NO3 eﬄuent
NO3 reactor
NH4 reactor
Figure 13:
Run with rule-based control with SS aﬃnity constant for hetrothops and
maximumNO3-reductionrate at 4 and 4.8
Page 20 of 39
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
Here in Figure 13 it can be seen how the new parameters improve the denitriﬁcation and
nitriﬁcation. The new parameters allow the model to run because the concentrations
remain low.
7.5
El prices
To ﬁnd Scenario one and two, 2018 and 2021 were looked at. The data are from the Nord-
pool online databases of the European power exchange. The area looked at is Denmark
West market(Nord Pool Spot, 2016). In ﬁgure(14a) it is clear to see that 2021 generally
had a higher electricity price compared to 2018, and that in the last part of 2021, the
peaks get higher, and there is higher ﬂuctuation.
mean price [dkk/MWh]
Standart deviation
Coeﬃcient of variation
2021
655.4
481.7
73%
2018
328.3
112.3
34%
Table 3
In table 3 a quick statistical analysis has been done. It is clear that the two years are
very diﬀerent. These will be chosen to be looked more into, by looking at the RV.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
Time [d]
Price [dkk kWh−1]
2018
2021
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
0
2
4
6
·106
Realized volatility [RV
2018
2021
(b)
Figure 14: a) The Hourly electricity price taken from Nordpool Denmark West market. for
year 2018 and 2021. b) The realized volatility for electricity prices pr day for year 2018 and
2021.
In ﬁgure 14b the RV are shown for the two years. There is a clear trend that 2021 experi-
ences a high RV in the last part of the year. 2018 shows not nearly as high RV as 2021 and
is relatively consistent. These years will be used as scenario 1 and 2 for the test of the mpc.
The mean price of 2018 from table 3 is 328.3 dkk/MWh. The price is a reasonable price
up to date and if a WRRP should get a deal to pay a ﬁxed price for power, this could be
Page 21 of 39
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
the price. This price will be used for Scenario 3
Seen in ﬁgure 14b in the period day 270-300 in year 2021, the RV is especially high. These
days will be used for the scenario 4, and the time series is then duplicated to expand to
ﬁt the use.
From ﬁgure 14a, day 85 to 87 for year 2021 have a period of negative prices, with a
minimum of -222.77 dk/MWh. These days will be used for the scenario 5, and the time
series are then duplicated to expand to ﬁt the use.
The two scenarios needed for long term evaluation are already shown in ﬁgure 14a. The
scenarios 3, 4 and 5 can be seen here in ﬁgure 15 .
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
Time [d]
Electricity price [kg/MWh]
negativ
high
constant
Figure 15: Electricity prices for the 4 difrent scenarios. 1) negativ 2)high 3)constant
volatility’s eﬀect on eﬀect of MPC
To see if volatility have a eﬀect on the advantage of MPC compared to the rule-based
strategy, two scenarios were ran with MPC and rule-based controls. Scenario 3 and 4
were chosen to run for 5 days. The average RV for the senario 3 were 0 and 277919 for
senario 4.
rulebased [dkk]
mpc [dkk]
Diﬀrens [%]
Scenario 3
22835
22835
4
Scenario 4
18423
19010
3
Table 4: Total cost for 4 runs with diﬀerent control strategies and diﬀerent electricity prices.
The MPC is run with a limit of 3 mgNh/l and an objective function total operation cost. The
simulations were run for 5 days.
In table 4 the eﬀect of RV on which control function there are preforming best in from
of total operation cost. The diﬀerent control functions are very close to each other. And
there are no real diﬀerence between scenario 3 and 4.
Page 22 of 39
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
7.6
Limits eﬀect on the MPC
The MPC has the possibility to incorporate boundaries that are based on real life de-
mands. The Kolding municipality demands that the NH-eﬄuent cannot be above 2mg/l.
This is not a national limit, but it is based on the local restriction. The constraints are
not on the rule-based control, so this would put extra constraint on the MPC and when
they are compared only on the total cost, it could give a wrong picture of it. The eﬀect
of the limit is tested here to see if and how much it eﬀect the total cost.
Figure 16: Run with management goal of total cost on 16 days with increasing nh limit, run
on the electricity price scenario 1
Here in ﬁgure 16 the Nh limit eﬀects on the total operation can be seen. For the Objetive
C the total operation cost falls with a increasing limit. For Objetive A and Objetive B
there are jumps up and down with increasing nh limit. These jumps are properly coursed
by the management goal. If looked at Objetive B.
Figure 17: Run with management goal of aeration cost on 16 days with increasing nh limit,
run on the electricity price scenario 1
Here in ﬁgure(17), the aeriation cost is decreasing with higher nh limit. This means that
increasing nh limit will result in better results for the management goal but only for its
Page 23 of 39
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
own objective. The total operation cost falls with increasing limit in ﬁgure(16), after 3
mgnh/l there is no eﬀect on the total operation cost. The real plant is run with 2 mg/l
Nh but for this paper, the MPC will be given a limit of 3 mg/l nh. This is to not give the
mpc a constraint that the rule-based control function is not following to make it easier
to compare the MPC to the rule-based.
7.7
WRRF performance under diﬀerent management object-
ives
The MPC is now implemented as a controlfunction, and its nh limit found.
How it
preforms under diﬀerent electricity scenarios and diﬀerent management strategies is in-
vestigated in this section.
The total cost seen in ﬁgure(18) and ﬁgure(19) shows that the management control func-
tion Objective A results in the lowest total cost for both senario 1 and 2. To understand
the management function’s inﬂuence on the total cost, the cost has been split op in
aeration cost and eﬄuent cost.
Figure 18: The three management strategies from the MPC and the rulebased control func-
tions, performances for the 3 cost sections. Run on 16 days with a NH-limit for the MPC of 3
mg/l. The electricity price are scenario 1
Page 24 of 39
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
Figure 19: The three management strategies from the MPC and the rulebased control func-
tions, performances for the 3 cost sections. Run on 16 days with a NH-limit for the MPC of 3
mg/l. The electricity price are scenario 2
Figures 18 and 19 shows how the diﬀerent management strategy is performing in the
diﬀerent cost categories. Both for aeration cost and eﬄuent cost, it is the management
strategy that focuses on the speciﬁc cost there preform best in that cost category. Total
cost is the only management strategy that is not the best for its category. In ﬁgure 19,
the cost of operation cost can be seen, so that the eﬄuent tax and the aeration cost are
both close to the same for all control strategies. For the low el price seen in ﬁgure 18,
the management strategy for aeration cost and total cost have the aeration cost as half
of what the eﬄuent cost are. The spread of total cost is also higher for the scenario 1
than the scenario 2. The runs showed a saving of 2087 DKK/day when choosing MPC
with total cost compared with the rule based control at scenario 1. With scenario 2 the
MPC with total cost was 570 dkk/day more expensive the the rule-based control.
Figure 20: The three management strategies from the MPC and the rulebased control func-
tions, performances for the 3 cost sections. Run on 16 days with a NH-limit for the MPC of 3
mg/l. The electricity price are scenario 3
Page 25 of 39
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
Figure 21: The three management strategies from the MPC and the rulebased control func-
tions, performances for the 3 cost sections. Run on 16 days with a NH-limit for the MPC of 3
mg/l. The electricity price are scenario 5
Seen in ﬁgure(20) and ﬁgure(21), the runs with scenario 3 and 5 are shown. in ﬁgure(20)
the price is constant, and there is no time where it is a more optimal to use energy. Here,
it is seen that the total and aeration cost management mpc is performing the best in the
ariation catagory, because the aeration time can still be lowered. The total operation
cost management option is better or close to the same as the rule-based control function.
In ﬁgure 21, The control function’s performance under electricity scenario 5 is shown.
For aeration cost price category, all the control strategies are the same, but the MPC
objective A are the only one with high aeriation cost.
To summarize:
price scenario
mpc
rule
mpc/rule
gain [dkk/day]
1
76801
110199
70%
2087
2
110199
101064
109%
-570
3
77918
73154
107%
-297
5
53720
52413
102%
-81
Table 5: The summaries of how the mpc objectiv 3 are compared to the rule based control in
total operation cost for a run of 16 days.
From table 5, the operation cost from the diﬀerent electricity scenarios and how MPC
with objective 3 and rule-based control function compare can be seen. For price scenario
1, there is a good gain of 2087 dkk pr day to gain if MPC is used instead of rule-based
control, while in the other scenarios, there is a loss of between 570 to 81 dkk/day. Scenario
1 and 2 are taken from real world data and 3 and 5 are extreme cases. There is no way
to say if in the future, real electricity prices will look more like 1 or 2, and if there will
be a monetary gain from switching from rule-based to MPC. The advantages with MPC
were described previously as being able to control based on limits and objectives that are
not directly linked to operations costs, and the GWP of the plant should also be taken
into account. In the next section, the control functions will eﬀect N2O
Page 26 of 39
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
7.8
N2O
As described in the theory section, the production and emission of N2O is based on the
direct emission from the WRRF and the indirect from the nitrogen in the eﬄuent. The
indirect emissions were calculated with equation 5.2. The rule-based control function
and the MPC with the there management options have been tested for 16 days and then
looked at the total N2O emission that is the sum of the indirect and direct.
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure 22: The two electricity scenarios 1) 2018 and 2) 2021 were run for 16 days. Each
Scenario were run with 4 diﬀerent control strategies MPC objective 1,2,3 and the rule-based
control. The direct N2O and indirect N2O were added.
Here in ﬁgure(22), the electricity in scenario 1 and 2 is shown. Both scenarios show how
the diﬀerent control functions eﬀect the total N2O. The results from the other scenarios
are shown in appendix A. From the ﬁgure(22), it shows how the MPC with the manage-
ment objectives of eﬄuent price are resulting in the highest N2O emissions. For the price
scenario 2 the management objectives of eﬄuent are around twice the amount compared
to the rule-based control function. It was run for 16 days where there is an inﬂuence of
16.4 tons of total N. From this the production of N2O compared to inﬂuence nitrogen is
between 6 −12% kgN2O/kg −N for the scenario 2. 6 −12% is a reasonable emission
when looking at the ratio given in the theory of 12.4−15% (Ali, Ahmed and Kim, 2014).
From all the scenarios, it was between the MPC management objective’s total cost and
the rule-based control that had the lowest N2O emissions, for 3 of them it was the MPC,
and for one, it was rule-based.
7.9
Longterm evaluation
The model was run with electricity price scenarios 1 for 100 days. It was not the full
365 days because the simulation slowed down the longer it ran. This problem was purely
due to Matlab and the computing power.
Scenario 1 were run with MPC with the
management objectives of total operation cost. To compare the eﬃciency of the MPC,
the rule-based control function was also run.
Page 27 of 39
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
MPC
Rule-based
diﬀrence [%]
655619
510499
22 %
Table 6: Table over
Here in table(6) the rule-based control are clearly cheaper and result in 22 % lower total
operation cost.
8
discussion
8.1
Choice of electricity scenarios
The electricity scenarios were chosen based on quick statistical analysis and one para-
meter: the realized volatility(RV). Scenarios 1 and 2 were chosen based on these. From
the RV, it was clear to see that these are clearly very diﬀerent, but it was not tested many
years to see what the natural range of RV there is. The two scenarios were not designed
to test the total range of what a natural year could look like but to just show how two
diﬀerent years would eﬀect the control functions. Scenarios 3 to 5 were all real extremes,
but they were made to explore how the diﬀerent control strategies would behave.
New parameters chosen for the NDHA model
It was shown in ﬁgure 12 that the parameters found in literature (Carlos Domingo-Félez
and Barth F. Smets, 2020) resulted in high NO3 concentrations and slowing down the
model. The Concentrations were also way above the eﬄuent limits. Because of this,
the scenario was assest to be implausible, and the parameters had to be chanced. To
solve this problem the proper solution would be to calibrate the model based on data
from Kolding WRRF. This would make the model data more closely assemble the real
concentrations that could be observed in the real world. A new calibration of the model
would require data from the ﬁeld, and reliable data. This thesis did not have the time
for a calibration of the model. To solve this problem, new parameters were manually
chosen. The substrate aﬃnity constant for hetrothops (Ss) and maximum NO3-reduction
rate (µ). These parameters where chanced to values found in literature(Henze et al.,
1999)(Hiatt and Grady, 2008)(Ni et al., 2013). These values were not from the same
publication and therefore not the same calibration.
This would mean that the new
parameters still would not result in a biological model that would behave like Kolding
in real life.
This has been accepted because this thesis does not investigate the real
implication of chancing the control function but how the diﬀerent control functions will
behave over long simulations and how they diﬀer in N2O emission compared between
control functions and management objectives. Because of these reasons, the results from
this paper can be used, but if the work should continue, it should be investigated and
calibrated from the model to the Kolding plant.
Page 28 of 39
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
8.2
limits eﬀect on MPC
The limits that are incorporated into the MPC to represent the Kolding plant’s eﬄuent
limits of 2 mg/l NH4 were tested. The limits put in the MPC are on of the control
functions strength because it shows how rules or constraints put on the system can
be incorporated. The MPC can quickly be altered to handle new legislations or other
constraints that can come in the future. The limits put on the system were show to eﬀect
the cost. Lower limits resulted in higher overall price. With increasing the limit, the
better the MPC was to lower the cost for each of its management goals. The limit put
on the MPC could result in the MPC not preforming as well as the rule-based control,
but the limits are often put as a hard rule on the system so if it is not within this limit,
the system would not be reasonable.
8.3
Volatility’s eﬀect
By comparing MPC and rule-based control run at two very diﬀerent RV, the eﬀect of
it was tested. It was expected that the higher RV would Give the MPC an advantage
because then what hour aerated would have a huge impact on the aeration cost. There
was observed no real change in how the MPC fared compared to the rule-based control
function. The reason behind this could be the limitations of the system. The BioDenitro
plant is nearly always aerating one tank, and therefore, it is hard to hit only the low price
hour.
8.4
Scenarios eﬀect on control functions
The diﬀerent electricity scenarios clearly had an eﬀect on the total cost for each control
function. Scenario 1 clearly was the one where MPC performed the best compared to
the rule-based control. Scenario 2 had very low diﬀerence between the diﬀerent control
functions. These were the two real life price scenarios. Scenario 2 was a special high
price year and RV as stated in the theory section. So, it is hard to determine if the more
realistic scenario is 1 or 2, but if you take the mean of the two scenarios, it is saving of
1517 dkk/day. This is a substantial saving and much higher then the saving found in
(Stentoft et al., 2021).
Scenarios 3 and 5 both showed that the rule-based and MPC both perform pretty similarly
and the rule-based was only a little cheaper. Scenario 5 showed that the MPC could not
outperform the rule-based when there were times where aeration would result in negative
costs. The reason behind this probably arises from the plant setup. The WRRF is a
BioDenitro plant so the plant chances the aeriation in both tanks, but there are very
short times when the aeriation is oﬀfor both tanks. It was also shown i results that the
aeration management goal for the MPC often resulted in close to the same aeration cost as
rule-based control. This would indicate that the system does not give the control function
much room to move the aeration time. The electricity time is also in sections of 1 hour,
so moving aeration time with 30 min within the same hour does not result in a diﬀerent
aeration cost. These results could indicate that the BioDenitro plant is not optimal for
electricity cost optimizing. It has been shown that a MPC controlling the volume of a
storage tank upstream from the WRRF resulted in lower aeration prices(Stentoft et al.,
Page 29 of 39
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
2020). If the aeration cost for Kolding WRRF is wanted, a diﬀerent approach should be
taken, and that could be some form of MPC that controlled the volume of the storage
tank or one there combined both MPC’s.
8.5
N2O emissions
The NDHA biological model was implemented and was able after the chances to the
rates to run properly. The emission of N2O compared to the amount of converted total
nitrogen was within what could be expected from literature(Ali, Ahmed and Kim, 2014).
The diﬀerent control functions and management goals resulted in diﬀerent emissions. The
rule-based control and the MPC with total operation cost had the lowest N2O emissions
in the diﬀerent scenarios, often it was the MPC thaat was lowest, but the rule-based
was close. It should be tested if the MPC could use a management goal where N2O is a
part of the cost function. The MPC could estimate the N2O based on removal of total
nitrogen.
Long term evaluation
The simulation were run for 100 days and it were shown that the rule-based control
resulted in 22 % total operation cost compared to the MPC for scenario 1. This is in
contrast to the results there were found for the runs of 16 days. As stated in the results
there were a time constraint on the long term evaluations and it were not possible to
redo the simulation and replicate the results. This result could indicate that the MPC
maybe can hit a bad state over long time periods. The way the MPC are made with the
limits are that they result in a high cost. If the total nitrogen eﬄuent cant be kept under
8 mg/l then the system will prioritize to hold nh under its limit for all cost. So if the
the system ﬁrst get out oﬀcontrol its hard to get it back. The MPC will aeriate more to
ensure the NH under its limit, and therefor keep the total nitrogen high. The simulation
should be run again and how often this happens should be checked.
Rule-based compared to MPC
The MPC and the rule-based control functions have been tested many ways and been
evaluated on many parameters. The MPC has constraints put on it that the rule-based
does not, but the limit was raised to 3 mg/l NH4 where it did not have a huge impact
on the total cost. It was diﬀerent control strategies there performed best under diﬀerent
parameters and scenarios as described before. But from all the diﬀerent evaluations that
were a picture of the MPC to be close to or better then the rule-based control. Even if
the monetary gain is so small that it doesn’t matter, the MPC still has a huge advantage.
The management goals given to the MPC are easily chanced. If the eﬄuent tax would
go up, it could easily be implemented. Also, if there should come some strict national
restriction on nitrogen or only on NH4, the MPC already has that limit implemented
and as shown, the limit can be chanced. The rule-based control is not easy to chance and
it would take time to make a new one. In this paper, I learned to control the MPC and
give it new limits and chance some of the constants in the management objectives. It
would not be too diﬃcult to make it so WRRF operators could do this by them self. This
Page 30 of 39
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
would give the operator the freedom for them to determine what they want to optimize
for.
9
Conclusion
The goal for this paper was to test the MPC on a model of the Kolding WRRF, and
compare it to a rule-based control function. The MPC were compared to the rule-based
control both on cost but also N2O emissions. The MPC was implemented in the plant
model and shown to be able to run the plant. To see how the diﬀerent control functions
would eﬀect N2O emissions, the ASM-NDHA model (C. Domingo-Félez and B. F. Smets,
2016) was implemented in the plant model. The rates and parameters for the NDHA were
assessed and were manually chanced to fulﬁll how the plant was expected to behave.
The prediction horizon for the MPC was tested to see if the length of it had an impact on
the performance of the MPC. It were found that increasing the prediction horizon had no
direct impact on the performance of the MPC. The MPC and rule-based control function
were tested on diﬀerent electricity scenarios on 16 day simulations. The MPC saved 2087
dkk/day for electricity in scenario 1 with the management goal of total cost compared to
the rule-based control. This was the scenario with the largest diﬀerence between the two
control functions. The other scenarios showed chanced around 570-81 dkk, but for them
it was the rule-based control that had the lowest cost.
The N2O emissions were found to be around 6 −12%kgn2O/kgN that are comparable to
literature. The diﬀerent control functions all had a diﬀerent amount of N2O emissions,
but the MPC with management goal of eﬄuent cost had the highest emission. Rule-based
and the MPC with management goal of total operation cost both had low N2O emissions,
but the MPC were lowest most of the time.
10
Future work
Many parts of the MPC and how it compared to the rule-based control function were
tested in this paper, but the are many other parts that could be investigated.
• The MPC can estimate the parameters it uses to predict future control strategies.
In this paper, the biological model has constant rates. If the temperature would
chance, then the biological model would chance. It would be interesting to see how
the MPC runs compared to the rule-based control with chancing temperatures.
• As stated before in the paper, the constants and rates used here were manually
adjusted. It would be interesting to calibrate the model to data.
• Because of time and computing power, the full 365 days were not run. A longer
run and with diﬀerent MPC management goals would be beneﬁcial for research.
Page 31 of 39
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
References
Ali, T. U., Ahmed, Z. & Kim, D. J. (2014). Estimation of N2O emission during wastewater
nitriﬁcation with activated sludge: Eﬀect of ammonium and nitrite concentration
by regression analysis. Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 20(4),
2574–2579. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2013.10.042
Åmand, L. & Carlsson, B. (2013). The optimal dissolved oxygen proﬁle in a nitrifying
activated sludge process - Comparisons with ammonium feedback control. Water
Science and Technology, 68(3), 641–649. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2013.287
Bassin, J. P. (2017). New processes for biological nitrogen removal. Advanced biological
processes for wastewater treatment: Emerging, consolidated technologies and intro-
duction to molecular techniques (pp. 143–203). Springer International Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-58835-3{\_}5
Black, A., Hsu, P. C. L., Hamonts, K. E., Clough, T. J. & Condron, L. M. (2016). Inﬂuence
of copper on expression of nirS, norB and nosZ and the transcription and activity
of NIR, NOR and N2OR in the denitrifying soil bacteria Pseudomonas stutzeri.
Microbial Biotechnology, 9(3), 381–388. https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.12352
Blum, J. M., Jensen, M. M. & Smets, B. F. [Barth F.]. (2018). Nitrous oxide production in
intermittently aerated Partial Nitritation-Anammox reactor: oxic N2O production
dominates and relates with ammonia removal rate. Chemical Engineering Journal,
335, 458–466. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEJ.2017.10.146
Cabello, P., Roldán, M. D., Castillo, F. & Moreno-Vivián, C. (2009). Nitrogen Cycle.
Encyclopedia of Microbiology, 299–321. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012373944-
5.00055-9
Caranto, J. D., Vilbert, A. C. & Lancaster, K. M. (2016). Nitrosomonas europaea cyto-
chrome P460 is a direct link between nitriﬁcation and nitrous oxide emission.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amer-
ica, 113(51), 14704–14709. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / PNAS . 1611051113/ -
/DCSUPPLEMENTAL
Domingo-Félez, C. [C.] & Smets, B. F. [B. F.]. (2016). A consilience model to describe N2O
production during biological N removal. Environmental Science: Water Research
and Technology, 2(6), 923–930. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ew00179c
Domingo-Félez, C. [Carlos] & Smets, B. F. [Barth F.]. (2019). Regulation of key N 2
O production mechanisms during biological water treatment. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology, 57, 119–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COPBIO.2019.03.006
Domingo-Félez, C. [Carlos] & Smets, B. F. [Barth F.]. (2020). Modelling N2O dynam-
ics of activated sludge biomass: Uncertainty analysis and pathway contributions.
Chemical Engineering Journal, 379. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEJ.2019.122311
Dong, S., Li, H., Wallin, F., Avelin, A., Zhang, Q. & Yu, Z. (2019). Volatility of electricity
price in Denmark and Sweden. Energy Procedia, 158, 4331–4337. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.EGYPRO.2019.01.788
Gustavsson, D. J. & Tumlin, S. (2013). Carbon footprints of Scandinavian wastewater
treatment plants. Water Science and Technology, 68(4), 887–893. https://doi.org/
10.2166/WST.2013.318
Halvgaard, R., Fogtmann, ; Vezzaro, L. ; Grum, M. ; Munk-Nielsen, T. ; Tychsen, P. ;
& Madsen, H. (2017). Stochastic Greybox Modeling for Control of an Alternating
Page 32 of 39
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
Activated Sludge Process (G. Balint, B. Antala, C. Carty, J.-M. A. Mabieme, I. B.
Amar & A. Kaplanova, Eds.). Uniwersytet ślaski, 07, 343–354. https://doi.org/
10.2/JQUERY.MIN.JS
Han, H. G., Liu, Z. & Qiao, J. F. (2019). Fuzzy Neural Network-Based Model Predictive
Control for Dissolved Oxygen Concentration of WWTPs. International Journal of
Fuzzy Systems, 21(5), 1497–1510. https://doi.org/10.1007/S40815-019-00644-8
Henze, M., Gujer, W., Mino, T., Matsuo, T., Wentzel, M. C., Marais, G. V. & Van
Loosdrecht, M. C. (1999). Activated sludge model No.2D, ASM2D. Water Science
and Technology, 39(1), 165–182. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0273-1223(98)00829-4
Hiatt, W. C. & Grady, C. P. L. (2008). An Updated Process Model for Carbon Ox-
idation, Nitriﬁcation, and Denitriﬁcation. Water Environment Research, 80(11),
2145–2156. https://doi.org/10.2175/106143008X304776
IPCC. (1992). THE REFINEMENT TO THE 2006 IPCC GUIDELINES FOR NA-
TIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES. Developments in Precambrian
Geology, 10(100), v–vi. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-2635(08)70113-0
Kishida, N., Kim, J. H., Kimochi, Y., Nishimura, O., Sasaki, H. & Sudo, R. (2004). Eﬀect
of C/N ratio on nitrous oxide emission from swine wastewater treatment process.
Water Science and Technology, 49(5-6), 359–371. https://doi.org/10.2166/WST.
2004.0775
Kozlowski, J. A., Price, J. & Stein, L. Y. (2014). Revision of N2O-producing pathways in
the ammonia-oxidizing bacterium Nitrosomonas europaea ATCC 19718. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology, 80(16), 4930–4935. https://doi.org/10.1128/
AEM.01061-14
Law, Y., Ye, L., Pan, Y. & Yuan, Z. (2012). Nitrous oxide emissions from wastewater
treatment processes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 367(1593), 1265. https://doi.org/10.1098/RSTB.2011.0317
Liboreiro, J. & Filippis, A. d. (2021). Why Europe’s energy prices are soaring and could
get much worse. https://www.euronews.com/2021/10/28/why-europe-s-energy-
prices-are-soaring-and-could-get-much-worse
Lin, Y.-M., Tay, J.-H., Liu, Y. & Hung, Y.-T. (2009). Biological Nitriﬁcation and Deni-
triﬁcation Processes. Biological Treatment Processes, 539–588. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-60327-156-1{\_}13
Lv, Y., Zhang, S., Yang, Y., Liu, Y., Xie, K. & Zhong, J. (2019). N2O emission and control
strategy in diﬀerent wastewater treatment processes. E3S Web of Conferences, 118,
04029. https://doi.org/10.1051/E3SCONF/201911804029
Massara, T. M., Solís, B., Guisasola, A., Katsou, E. & Baeza, J. A. (2018). Development of
an ASM2d-N2O model to describe nitrous oxide emissions in municipal WWTPs
under dynamic conditions. Chemical Engineering Journal, 335, 185–196. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/J.CEJ.2017.10.119
Masuda, S. (n.d.). Contributing Authors.
McLaughlin, R. K., McLean, R. C. & Bonthron, W. J. (1981). Fundamentals of Automatic
Control. Heating Services Design, 83–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-408-
00380-3.50006-8
Mulas, M., Tronci, S., Corona, F., Haimi, H., Lindell, P., Heinonen, M., Vahala, R. &
Baratti, R. (2015). Predictive control of an activated sludge process: An applic-
Page 33 of 39
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
ation to the Viikinmäki wastewater treatment plant. Journal of Process Control,
35, 89–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPROCONT.2015.08.005
Ni, B. J., Ye, L., Law, Y., Byers, C. & Yuan, Z. (2013). Mathematical modeling of nitrous
oxide (N2O) emissions from full-scale wastewater treatment plants. Environmental
Science and Technology, 47(14), 7795–7803. https://doi.org/10.1021/ES4005398/
SUPPL{\_}FILE/ES4005398{\_}SI{\_}001.PDF
Nicolosi, M. (2010). Wind power integration and power system ﬂexibility–An empirical
analysis of extreme events in Germany under the new negative price regime. Energy
Policy, 38(11), 7257–7268. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2010.08.002
Nord Pool Spot. (2016). Market Data | Nord Pool. https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/
Market- data1/#/nordic/table%20http://www.nordpoolspot.com/Market-
data1/Elspot/Area-Prices/SYS1/Yearly/?view=table
Poulsen, T. L. (2007). Spildevandsbekendtgørelsen - Bekendtgørelse om spildevandstil-
ladelser m.v. efter miljøbeskyttelseslovens kapitel 3 og 4. Retsinformation.Dk,
2017(1469). https://www.retsinformation.dk/forms/r0710.aspx?id=113752#
Kap8
Quesel, J. D., Mitsch, S., Loos, S., Aréchiga, N. & Platzer, A. (2016). How to model and
prove hybrid systems with KeYmaera: a tutorial on safety. International Journal
on Software Tools for Technology Transfer, 18(1), 67–91. https://doi.org/10.
1007/S10009-015-0367-0
Scheuer, C., Boot, E., Carse, N., Clardy, A., Gallagher, J., Heck, S., Marron, S., Martinez-
Alvarez, L., Masarykova, D., Mcmillan, P., Murphy, F., Steel, E., Ekdom, H. V.
& Vecchione, H. (1987). A general model for single-sludge wastewater treatment
systems (G. Balint, B. Antala, C. Carty, J.-M. A. Mabieme, I. B. Amar & A. Ka-
planova, Eds.). Water Research, 21(5), 505–515. https://doi.org/10.2/JQUERY.
MIN.JS
Soler-Jofra, A., Pérez, J. & van Loosdrecht, M. C. (2021). Hydroxylamine and the nitro-
gen cycle: A review. Water Research, 190, 116723. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
WATRES.2020.116723
Stentoft, P. A., Munk-Nielsen, T., Møller, J. K., Madsen, H., Valverde-Pérez, B., Mikkelsen,
P. S. & Vezzaro, L. (2021). Prioritize eﬄuent quality, operational costs or global
warming? – Using predictive control of wastewater aeration for ﬂexible manage-
ment of objectives in WRRFs. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.116960
Stentoft, P. A., Vezzaro, L., Mikkelsen, P. S., Grum, M., Munk-Nielsen, T., Tychsen,
P., Madsen, H. & Halvgaard, R. (2020). Integrated model predictive control of
water resource recovery facilities and sewer systems in a smart grid: Example of
full-scale implementation in Kolding. Water Science and Technology, 81(8), 1766–
1777. https://doi.org/10.2166/WST.2020.266
Stocker, T. F., Qin, D., Plattner, G. K., Tignor, M. M., Allen, S. K., Boschung, J., Nauels,
A., Xia, Y., Bex, V. & Midgley, P. M. (2013). Climate change 2013 the physical
science basis: Working Group I contribution to the ﬁfth assessment report of the
intergovernmental panel on climate change. Climate Change 2013 the Physical
Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 9781107057999, 1–1535. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324
Page 34 of 39
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
Su, Q., Domingo-Félez, C., Jensen, M. M. & Smets, B. F. (2019). Abiotic Nitrous Oxide
(N 2 O) Production Is Strongly pH Dependent, but Contributes Little to Overall
N 2 O Emissions in Biological Nitrogen Removal Systems. Environmental Science
and Technology, 53(7), 3508–3516. https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.EST.8B06193
Su, Q., Ma, C., Domingo-Félez, C., Kiil, A. S., Thamdrup, B., Jensen, M. M. & Smets,
B. F. (2017). Low nitrous oxide production through nitriﬁer-denitriﬁcation in
intermittent-feed high-rate nitritation reactors. Water Research, 123, 429–438.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.WATRES.2017.06.067
Takács, G. & Rohal’-Ilkiv, B. (2012). Basic MPC Formulation. Model Predictive Vibration
Control, 207–251. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-2333-0{\_}6
Takács, I., Patry, G. G. & Nolasco, D. (1991). A dynamic model of the clariﬁcation-
thickening process. Water Research, 25(10), 1263–1271. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0043-1354(91)90066-Y
Wang, Y., Lin, X., Zhou, D., Ye, L., Han, H. & Song, C. (2016). Nitric oxide and nitrous
oxide emissions from a full-scale activated sludge anaerobic/anoxic/oxic process.
Chemical Engineering Journal, 289, 330–340. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEJ.
2015.12.074
Weijers, S. & Preisig, H. (2000). Robustness Analysis of Model Predictive Control of
Activated Sludge Plants. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 33(10), 545–550. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S1474-6670(17)38597-X
Yan, X., Zheng, J., Han, Y., Liu, J. & Sun, J. (2017). Eﬀect of inﬂuent C/N ratio on
N2O emissions from anaerobic/anoxic/oxic biological nitrogen removal processes.
Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 24(30), 23714–23724. https://doi.
org/10.1007/S11356-017-0019-X
Zhan, Q. & Grassi, V. G. (1999). An Industrial Approach to Implementing MPC in
Speciality Chemical Plant. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 32(2), 6603–6608. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S1474-6670(17)57128-1
Page 35 of 39
==PAGE:42==
Appendices
A
N2O
The N20 emission both direct and indirect.
Figure 23: Scenario 1
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 24: Scenario 1
B
Inﬂow
Graph over the inﬂow there are generated.
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 25: Scenario 1
Figure 26: Scenario 1
38
==PAGE:45==
Figure 27: Scenario 1
C
R-packages
To run the model proberly the folowing packages were used
• Base (4.0.5)
• BiodnControl (0.0.0.9023)
• Matrix (1.4-0)
• RcppEigen (0.3.3.9.1)
• TMB (1.7.22)
39
==PAGE:46==
40
