==PAGE:1==
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to
α-Neurotoxins
A Kinetic Study of Cross-Reactive Clones
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to
α-Neurotoxins
A Kinetic Study of Cross-Reactive Clones
Master Thesis
February, 2022
By
Nina Štrancar
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the DTU Bioengineering, Department of
Biotechnology and Biomedicine, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of immunology, protein
engineering and pharmacokinetics.
Nina Štrancar - s190368
Signature
Date
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
ii
13/02/2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
With snake envenoming becoming a global issue, research has been conducted to improve
current antivenom treatments. As the venom consists of groups of components causing
toxicity, focus has shifted onto mixtures of broadly-neutralizing antibodies which could
target and neutralize entire such groups of toxins. Further improvement in eﬀicacy of
antibodies can be achieved by taking advantage of an immunoglobulin G (IgG) recycling
mechanism, which gives opportunity for multiple antigen-binding events during an IgG’s
life. This requires pH-sensitive epitope-paratope binding, which releases the antigen for
lysosomal degradation, whereas the IgG can reenter circulation and bind more antigens.
The project at hand focuses on discovery of pH-sensitive epitope-paratope binding of clones
generated without any pH selection pressure. The clones were products of a previously
conducted phage display, which identified cross-reactive binders against α-cobratoxin (α-
Ctx) and α-elapitoxin (α-Etx). Kinetic studies were performed using a selection of cross-
reactive clones and their binding was evaluated against α-Ctx, α-Etx and an additional α-
neurotoxin: α-bungarotoxin (α-Btx). Their KD and kdis at two different pH, physiological
and endosomal, were used to evaluate cross-binding and pH-sensitive behaviour of the
clones. Two clones of interest were identified, A01, which was pH-sensitive to all three
toxins, and was a strong binder to α-Ctx and α-Etx; D11, which was pH-sensitive to only
α-Btx, but a strong binder to all three toxins. The two clones were expressed, purified
and used for crystallization screens of clone-toxin complexes. All tested clones exhibited
varying levels of pH-sensitivity and showed differences in binding aﬀinities for the same
clone to different toxins, as well as between similar clones, suggesting that the contributions
between epitope and paratope vary between each clone-toxin complex.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank Andreas for giving me the opportunity to be a
part of the TPL’s team. It was a pleasure and a valuable experience to work in a group
full of young, talented and knowledgeable people.
A special thanks to everyone within a few meters’ radius of my lab bench, who had
the energy and patience to guide and advise me if I was in doubt. You have been the most
generous and helpful, and made time fly away during the hours spent in the lab.
Lastly, I wish to thank Jack for taking on the responsibility of supervising me. It was
an honour to work with you and learn. I admire the time you took to ensure I was able
to achieve the goals set for the project, discuss and immerse in the data, and bring under-
standing to every detail I might have had questions about.
Nunc est bibendum.
Nina Štrancar, MSc Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering, DTU
Author of this thesis.
Andreas Hougaard Laustsen-Kiel, Professor, DTU Bioengineering, Department of
Biotechnology and Biomedicine
Supervisor.
Jack Wade, PhD Student, DTU Bioengineering, Department of Biotechnology
and Biomedicine
Supervisor.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
iv
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
α-Btx
α-bungarotoxin
α-Ctx
α-cobratoxin
α-Etx
α-elapitoxin
BLI
Biolayer interferometry
C
Constant
CDR
Complementarity-determining region
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Fab
Fragment antigen-binding
FcRn
Neonatal Fc receptor
GDP
Gross domestic product
HC
Heavy chain
His
Histidine
Ig
Immunoglobulin
IGVL
Immunoglobulin light-chain variable region
KD
Dissociation constant
kdis
Dissociation rate constant
kon
Association rate constant
LC
Light chain
MHCI
Major histocompatibility complex class I
MW
Molecular weight
PTM
Post-translational modification
SDS-PAGE
Sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
scFv
Single-chain variable fragment
SEC
Size-exclusion chromatography
SPR
Surface plasmon resonance
V
Variable
VD
Volume of distribution
VR
Retention volume
WHO
The World Health Organization
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Snake Envenomings - A Global Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
The α-Neurotoxins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Antibody Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Antibody Recycling and pH-Sensitive Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Discovery and Engineering of pH-Sensitive Antibodies . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Biolayer Interferometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Materials and Methods
14
2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results
17
3.1
Experimental Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Selection of Cross-Reactive High-Aﬀinity Clones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Biosensor Toxin Coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Biolayer Interferometry of Fab
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Expression and Purification of A01 and D11 scFvs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
Crystallography Screens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Discussion
34
4.1
Kinetic Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Examining pH-Sensitive Epitope-Paratope Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
scFv-Toxin Complex Formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Perspectives
41
6
Conclusion
42
Bibliography
43
A Toxin Sequences and Alignment
50
B Clones’ Specifications
51
C Kinetic Analysis Curve Fitting
52
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Snake Envenomings - A Global Issue
The lives of people residing in tropical and subtropical areas of the planet are endangered
by the presence of venomous snakes, which envenom up to 2.7 million people annually.
Not only 100,000 deaths occur for this reason, but three times the amount of people are
left permanently disabled via amputations and other damage caused by the snake bite
every year (J P Chippaux 1998; Kasturiratne et al. 2008). Due to the scope of this issue
and the lack of intervention, the World Health Organisation (WHO) classified snakebite
envenomings as a neglected tropical disease in 2017 (Jean Philippe Chippaux 2017). To
make the situation worse, most countries where envenomings occur have a low gross do-
mestic product (GDP), and are ill-equipped for production, storage and administration of
treatment. Emerging from the socioeconomic aspect is under-reporting of the issue and the
lack of trust in the treatment by the healthcare professionals and the public (Harrison et al.
2009). In turn, manufacturers of the treatment may be forced to decrease their product
variety or stop the production altogether. The lack of demand over the years resulted in
a dramatic price increase per dose, making it less accessible where needed (Williams 2015).
The most effective treatment currently available are snake antivenoms. For the past 100
years since their discovery their production principle has not changed. First, venom from
captive snakes is gathered via milking (Sasa, Ortega, and Bonilla-Murillo 2017) and used
to repeatedly inject animals, such as sheep and horses to induce production of neutraliz-
ing antibodies (Landon and Smith 2003; Silva and Tambourgi 2011). Thereafter, blood
enriched with antibodies is collected from the animals and plasma is separated (León,
Vargas, et al. 2018). To isolate the active components from the plasma - the immunoglob-
ulins (Igs) - further purification via a wide range of methods is necessary, which results in
either whole Igs or F(ab’)2 fragments (for further elaboration on these forms of antibodies,
refer to Section 1.3) (León, Vargas, et al. 2018). Following the purification step, the Igs
or fragments are diluted or concentrated to desired values and formulated to be used on
victims of envenoming.
However, whilst good quality antivenoms can save lives, there are several issues arising.
Firstly, their effectiveness is limited by their manufacturing. Snake venoms are known to
greatly vary in their composition, even within species (Casewell, Jackson, et al. 2020). The
resources available may not provide coverage to this variety. The antivenoms produced
may be made against one subspecies’ venom, which does not necessarily provide protection
against another subspecies found in a different region (Fry et al. 2003). The richness in
variation presents a challenge, as it is too resource intensive to produce an antivenom for
each snake. In addition to the existing problem, antivenoms are produced by taking the
entirety of the antibody pool generated by venom exposure. The mixture of antibodies
is reported to contain up to 70% of non-venom related Igs, severely limiting the thera-
peutic potential of a single antivenom dose (Laustsen, Gutiérrez, et al. 2018). Moreover,
adverse reactions after injecting such mixtures into snakebite victims are common - either
due to antivenom contamination, low purity or immunogenicity, as they originate from
non-human sources (León, Herrera, et al. 2013). All in all, the collection of the presented
drawbacks results in the need for a high dose required for neutralization, while simulta-
neously producing adverse reactions because of the very same high dose (Ferraz et al. 2019).
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
2
==PAGE:9==
So far, modern methods have made it possible for the scientists to explore which parts of
the venom contribute to its toxic effects. As a matter of fact, anywhere between 50 and
200 components in whole venom are the cause of toxicity, comprising protein families such
as secreted phospholipases A2 (PLA2s), snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMP), snake
venom serine proteases (SVSP) and three-finger peptides (3FTX) (Slagboom et al. 2017).
Analysis of snake venom through proteomics and transcriptomics now allows the design
of antibodies which should be developed and incorporated into treatment to increase its
eﬀicacy. The major targets for neutralization appear to be families of 3FTX and PLA2s
in particular, owing to their prevalence in snake venom and LD50 (Laustsen, Lohse, et al.
2015; Xiao et al. 2017). As there seems to be sequence conservation on epitopes within
toxin groups, one antibody may be produced to broadly neutralize a toxin group from
several species at once (Wagstaff et al. 2006; Casewell, Wüster, et al. 2013).
In such
case, diagnosis of the bite is not as detrimental to treatment success, as the antivenom
should treat a larger array of snake bites. Furthermore, fewer antibodies for treating a
larger amount of snakebites makes the market broader, all amounting to improved cost-
feasibility of the treatment.
Additionally, identifying which components of traditional antivenom are strong toxin
binders can filter out nonfunctional antivenom segments and improve treatment qual-
ity. Using techniques such as in vitro immune libraries which select specific toxin binders
can be utilised (Richard et al. 2013). Through in vitro displays, which link genotype and
phenotype, the sequence of the target-specific neutralizing antibody is known, enabling im-
provements and development. One advantage of this is the possibility of humanization of
the antibodies or their derivatives, further improving their treatment safety (Engmark et
al. 2016; Laustsen, Johansen, et al. 2017). Furthermore, the ability to assay for particular
traits during the display, such as cross-binding, pH-dependency or other factors, provides
opportunity to make treatment eﬀicient to such extent that aforementioned challenges of
current antivenom productions are averted (Laustsen, Gutiérrez, et al. 2018). The future
of safe and economically feasible next generation antivenoms rests on the shoulders of the
current research.
1.2
The α-Neurotoxins
In 1963, first neurotoxins were characterized and isolated from the venom of Bungarus
multicinctus (Chang and C. Y. Lee 1963). Based on their electrophoresis separation, they
were given the names of α-Bungarotoxin, β-Bungarotoxin and γ-Bungarotoxin. Subse-
quent research revealed that α-Bungarotoxin (α-Btx) causes irreversible neuromuscular
blocking effects via binding to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (Changeux, Kasai, and
C.-Y. Lee 1970). As more snake venom-derived neurotoxins were analysed, the ones which
exhibited postsynaptic blocking, such was the case with α-Btx, were given a prefix of α-.
α-Neurotoxins have been isolated from elapid and hydrophid venoms, as well as colubrid
snakes (Lumsden et al. 2005; Pawlak et al. 2006). They act systemically, and need to go
through circulation to exert their effects (Laustsen, Gutiérrez, et al. 2018). Structure-wise,
the α-Neurotoxins are three-finger toxins, which are characterised by three adjacent loops
coming from their globular hydrophobic core whilst having an overall linear spacial struc-
ture. The core itself is linked together via four disulfide bridges. A visual representation
of typical α-Neurotoxins can be found in Figure 1.1.
The three toxins of interest in this report are α-Cobratoxin (α-Ctx), α-Bungarotoxin (α-
Btx) and α-Elapitoxin-Dpp2d (α-Etx). Noted from Figure 1.1, all share a typical three-
finger structure.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Secondary structure of three α-Neurotoxins: (A) α-Cobratoxin (4AEA), (B)
α-Bungarotoxin (1HC9) and (C) α-Elapitoxin-Dpp2d (4LFT). Structures are available
on the RCSB PDB and were visualized using UCSF Chimera 1.15 (Pettersen et al. 2004).
The typical three finger structure is apparent.
α-Ctx can be found in species of the genus Naja, and has been isolated with 3D structure
obtained from Naja kaouthia, Naja naja siamensis and Naja naja oxiana venoms (Betzel
et al. 1991; Lynagh et al. 2020; Walkinshaw, Saenger, and Maelicke 1980; Nickitenko et al.
1993). They are members of the Elapidae family of snakes and can be found throughout
Central, Southwest and Southeast Asia (Samel et al. 2008; Tan et al. 2015; Slowinski and
Wüster 2000).
α-Btx, as mentioned previously, has been isolated and crystallised from the venom of
B. multicinctus. The natural habitat of this Elapidae family snake is similar to the Naja
genus, predominantly in Southeast Asia (Mao et al. 2017).
α-Etx can be found in the venom of Dendroaspis polylepis polylepis, commonly known
as the Black Mamba, yet another member of the Elapidae family (C.-I. A. Wang et al.
2014). Unlike the other two genera mentioned before, this snake inhabits Eastern and
Southern Africa (Hodgson and Davidson 1996).
Comparing the three α-neurotoxins through pairwise sequence alignments yields the fol-
lowing results: a) α-Ctx and α-Btx share 58.2 % sequence identity; b) α-Ctx and α-Etx
share 78.6 % sequence identity; c) α-Btx and α-Etx share 57.7 % sequence identity. The
alignment was performed using EMBOSS Water, which is a local alignment algorithm
software available on the EMBL-EBI (Madeira et al. 2019). All the sequences in FASTA
format and their alignments can be found in Appendix A.
From the data available, α-Ctx and α-Etx are more homologous to one another than
to α-Btx. This is despite the geographical differences outlined in the previous paragraphs
- α-Ctx and α-Etx originate from snakes from Asia and Africa respectively, hence less
homology would be expected than between α-Ctx and α-Btx.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
4
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Antibody Structure
Antibodies, also known as immunoglobulins (Ig), are produced as a part of an immune
response when antigens are encountered in the body. As such, they make for excellent
therapeutics which can be clinically validated, with FDA recently approving the 100th
antibody-based drug in April of 2021 (Mullard 2021). Structurally, they are proteins as-
sembled by two identical heavy chains (HC) and two identical light chains (LC), as can
be seen on Figure 1.2. The LC can fall into one of two classes - κ or λ. Additionally, HC
can be either α, γ, δ, ϵ or µ (Rodrigo, Gruvegård, and Alstine 2015). Based on the classes
of HC, Igs are divided into five isotypes: IgM, IgG, IgA, IgD and IgE. Each of the chains
consists of a variable (V) domain and one or more constant (C) domains. From now on,
only IgG will be discussed, as it is the most prevalent and therapeutically relevant form
(Schroeder and Cavacini 2010). The size of an average IgG is 150 kDa (Sanz et al. 2005).
Figure 1.2: Structure of an IgG antibody and its fragments.
Denoted are the heavy
and the light chains, variable and hypervariable regions, disulphide bonds, variable and
constant domains, as well as Fc, Fab and F(ab’)2 fragments. The two antigen binding
sites are located on the hypervariable region of the two Fab fragments. Additionally, scFv
is visualised as a type of an antibody-like protein.
Fragmentation studies via enzymatic digestion on IgG elucidated which parts of an IgG
play a role in antigen recognition and binding. Digestion with papain resulted in two Fab
fragments, both of which bind to an antigen, as well as a Fc fragment. Similarly, using
pepsin, IgG is split into a Fc fragment, along with a dimeric F(ab’)2, which is able to
cross-link and bind antigens. The resulting fragments are also denoted on Figure 1.2. The
binding itself occurs at the antigen binding site - also known as the paratope. It is formed
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
5
==PAGE:12==
by pairing of the V domains of HC and LC, each of which contains three complementar-
ity determining regions (CDRs). The paratope interacts with an epitope present on the
antigen (Schroeder and Cavacini 2010).
Aside from antigen binding, antibodies perform other functions. The Fc fragment car-
ries out effector functions via interacting with the other parts of the immune system, for
example, Fc acts in antibody-dependent cellular-mediated and complement-dependent cy-
totoxicities. A number of immune cells possess receptors which can bind this particular
fragment.
Additionally, the human IgG’s Fc binds to a receptor neonatal Fc receptor
(FcRn), which saves it from degradation within the cell (Sanz et al. 2005). As such, it
extends its serum half-life.
Advances in antibody engineering led to creation of synthetic antibody-related structures,
which are able to bind antigens and are of variable sizes and valencies. An example of
such is a single chain fragment variable (scFv), which has one antigen binding site and
is depicted in Figure 1.2. An average scFv comes at approximately 30 kDa. Advantages
of having aforementioned structures available include ease of production in comparison to
their parent structure and easened tissue penetration (Sanz et al. 2005). The decreased
size of the structure takes away from the half-life of the protein in the body. In some
cases, such as in vivo imaging and radioimmunotherapy this trait is desired. In combina-
tion with elevated tissue penetration, short half-life ensures that the structure ends up at
the right place in the body, targeted via the antigen-binding domain and degrading once
the target is reached (Huston et al. 1993). In other cases, the reduced half-life presents a
disadvantage. As the structures lack the Fc part, they cannot be rescued with the mech-
anism mentioned above. To contravene this, Ab fragments may be chemically modified
via PEGylation or associating fragments together to increase molecular weight per unit,
which slowens the degradation process (A. Jain and S. Jain 2008; Rodrigo, Gruvegård,
and Alstine 2015).
1.4
Antibody Recycling and pH-Sensitive Binding
IgG is the most prevalent Ig in circulation and functions as one of the first defenses in
protective immunity from toxins and pathogens alike (Schroeder and Cavacini 2010). Its
importance can be highlighted by the fact that maternal IgG is transferred to the fetus
prior to its ability to have its own eﬀicient humoral response (Palmeira et al. 2012). Owing
to its significance, a recycling/transporting system exists in the body, which prolongs the
circulation time of IgG, as well as allows transfer of it through the placenta.
A receptor which plays a major role in IgG recycling and transport is the neonatal Fc
receptor (FcRn). It can specifically bind to the Fc part of an IgG and albumin, and was
found to be structurally similar to major histocompatibility class I molecules (MHC-I),
which are responsible for antigenic peptide presentation to T cells (Roopenian and Ak-
ilesh 2007). The primary role of the IgG recycling system via FcRn is to prolong the
circulation time of IgG and allow its transport (Roopenian and Akilesh 2007). Experi-
ments on FcRn-deficient mice demonstrated that the half-life of IgG in circulation was
reduced from 6-8 days to just 1 day, which is considered an ordinary time of circulation in
other serum proteins not readily filtered by kidneys (Roopenian, Christianson, et al. 2003).
Thus, the recycling mechanism performs a major role in preserving the IgG homeostasis.
Seeing that IgG Fc is homodimeric, two FcRn units are necessary for IgG binding, with
stoichiometry of the interaction 2:1 (FcRn:IgG) (M. Raghavan, Y. Wang, and P. J. Bjork-
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
6
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: IgG recycling. A pinocytic vesicle allows the entrance of various serum proteins
and IgGs into the cell. FcRn inside the endosome has a high aﬀinity for IgG at an acidic
pH and binds it. When sorting of the FcRn-IgG occurs, serum proteins and other non-
receptor bound entities are degraded in the lysosome, whereas IgG bound to the FcRn
separates in a recycling endosome. Once exiting the cell, IgG dissociates due to lower
aﬀinity at the physiological pH and reenters the extracellular environment (Raimund J.
Ober et al. 2004).
man 1995). Furthermore, binding of IgG to FcRn is pH-dependent, with FcRn exhibiting
strong aﬀinity for IgG at pH 6.0-6.5 but not at physiological pH 7.0-7.5 (Malini Ragha-
van, Bonagura, et al. 1995). Investigations into the underlying molecular causes for the
pH-dependence, using methods such as mutagenesis, crystallization and inhibition studies,
revealed that it is linked to several histidine residues at the IgG-FcRn interface (Kim et al.
1994; Malini Raghavan, Chen, et al. 1994; Burmeister, Huber, and Pamela J. Bjorkman
1994).
An illustration of the IgG recycling process can be seen on Figure 1.3. First, IgG non-
specifically enters a cell through a pinocytic vesicle. Following the entrance to the cell and
the pH dropping to 6.0 or below, IgG binds to FcRn contained within the vesicle - sorting
endosome. IgG-FcRn complexes are separated from the sorting endosome to a recycling
endosome, whereas other non-receptor bound serum proteins are sorted to the lysosome
for degradation (Raimund J. Ober et al. 2004). The complexes make their way out of the
cell and IgG is released from the receptor once the pH increases back to the physiological
value (R. J. Ober et al. 2004). With that, it escapes the destined degradation and can
instead be reused.
Existing knowledge of the function and interactions involving the FcRn provide oppor-
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
7
==PAGE:14==
tunity for improving current antibody-based treatments, including targeted delivery, ex-
tension of the half-life and enhancing clearing (Pyzik et al. 2019). In particular interest for
this project is modification of the half-life, as it implies higher eﬀicacy of antibody-based
treatments, lower or less frequent dosing as well as lower cost of treatment (Chan and
Carter 2010).
The aforementioned extension of the half-life is possible via tailoring of the interaction
between Fc and FcRn. This can be done by, for example, finding mutations which in-
crease the binding aﬀinity at pH 6.0 but not 7.4 (Hinton et al. 2004; Zalevsky et al. 2010).
Additionally, an emerging possibility for antibody-based fragments, which lack the Fc re-
gion, is to associate them with an IgG/Fc, so they can take advantage of the recycling
mechanism and significantly improve their circulation time (Presta 2008). However, some
studies which aimed to engineer increased IgG-FcRn aﬀinity found that there was no
improvement in the half-life due to an increased aﬀinity at both, pH 6.0 and 7.4 (Datta-
Mannan et al. 2007; Acqua et al. 2002). In summary, this way of extending the half-life
cannot always produce expected in vivo results as hoped.
With the FcRn interaction modification explored, other possibilities arise. Much like the
pH-dependent interaction between the FcRn and Fc, pH-dependency can be introduced
into the IgG-antigen binding - but inverted. A study by Igawa et al. achieved high aﬀinity
binding between tocilizumab (an IgG-based drug) and IL-6 at physiological pH, which
was then engineered to decrease when exposed to endosomal-like environment of pH 6
(Igawa, Ishii, et al. 2010). This is of particular interest in cases where antigens wish to be
degraded in the lysosome, while the antibody can be recycled, and can even experience
more than one antigen-binding event in its lifetime. This property is not given, as in a
common scenario regular IgGs only bind one antigen per antigen binding site during their
circulation time (Igawa, Mimoto, and Hattori 2014). Furthermore, antigens may be con-
tinuously produced, adding to the dosing size and frequency challenges. With an antibody
which captures an antigen, delivers it for degradation, and unbound reenters circulation,
such needs can be met, creating a net flow of antigen to the lysosome (Kroetsch et al.
2018). In essence, engineering of pH-sensitive antibody-antigen interactions holds a great
promise in solving current limitations of antibody-based treatments.
1.5
Discovery and Engineering of pH-Sensitive Antibodies
In the hope of exploiting the cellular recycling system as described in Section 1.4 and
release of antigens for degradation during it, researchers have investigated pH-sensitive in-
teractions and found that pH dependency is related to the presence of ionizable histidine
residues (Kulkarni et al. 2010).
Histidine
Histidine (His) is one of the 20 natural amino acids which are the building blocks of
proteins (Ingle 2011). As such, it plays a role in protein-protein interactions, oftentimes
being the key amino acid residue in enzyme catalytic reactions due to its unique physico-
chemical properties (A., J., and K. 2003). The side chain of His is imidazole, a structure
which displays an aromatic motif with alternating double bonds enclosed in a heterocyclic
form (see Figure 1.4). The aromatic structure provides opportunity for π-π or cation-π
interactions. Additionally, one of the nitrogens enclosed in the ring may act as a hydrogen
bond acceptor and the other one may act as a hydrogen bond donor (Liao et al. 2013).
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
8
==PAGE:15==
His may assume a neutral or a protonated form (Ingle 2011).
Depicted in Figure 1.4
are the two forms: neutral at the physiological pH of 7.4, and protonated at pH 6.0,
as is the case in acidified endosomes. The acidic pKa= 6.5 value is close to neutral, so
both forms are naturally present in the body, providing chemical complexity which affects
protein-protein interactions depending on the pH value. For example, an attractive force
is experienced if a neutral His interacts with a cation via cation-π interactions. However,
if His is protonated and hence positively charged, a repulsive force is observed between
the cation and His+ (Liao et al. 2013). Indeed, the protonation of His plays an important
role in intermolecular interactions - in its neutral form it is apolar and hydrophobic, whilst
protonated it is polar, positively charged and hydrophilic (Rotzschke et al. 2002).
Figure 1.4: Ionization of the imidazole group on histidine. The structure is depicted at
pH 7.4 in its non-protonated form, such is at the physiological pH, as well as at pH 6.0,
where imidazole assumes a predominantly protonated form.
When a His residue is present on an IgG, it is neutrally charged in the blood whilst proto-
nated in the endosome. Protonation and deprotonation can act as pH-dependent molecular
switches, where groups of residues change interactions and rearrange their bonds based on
the charge, affecting the overall tertiary and quaternary structure of the protein (Rotzschke
et al. 2002). For example, if a hydrophobic interaction is ongoing between a His on an IgG
and another protein at pH 7.4 (bound), then the hydrophobic interaction will be disrupted
(unbound) if the pH drops down to 6 and the His becomes positively charged, releasing
the bound protein from the Ig.
However, the molecular switch concept is not dependent only on the environmental pH,
but is also related to individual pKa values of each His residue in the interacting protein.
Notably, the value may change due to (in)accessibility of polar solvent or presence of
other proton-donating groups in His’ proximity, making each effective pKa unique and
environment-dependent (Kampmann et al. 2006). Overall, the extent to which pH sensi-
tivity can be observed was shown to be dependent on both, the number of His residues
and the magnitude of their pKa value changes (Murtaugh et al. 2011).
Histidine Scanning
To design antibodies which exhibit pH-dependent binding, a systematic approach has
been developed called histidine scanning. The underlying principle relies on His residue
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
9
==PAGE:16==
being the key player in pH-sensitivity and hence each residue in the antibody’s CDR re-
gion (refer to Figure 1.2) is replaced with His (Ito et al. 1992). One by one, the mutants
may be tested for pH-sensitive binding and the optimal His position may be discovered.
Ideally, the substitution retains most of the original binding aﬀinity whilst providing the
antibody with pH-dependent binding properties. Pragmatically, however, this is not the
case and a balance between the two properties needs to be found (Schröter et al. 2015).
The approach has proved to be useful as de novo rational design, whilst successfully demon-
strated in literature, is heavily limited due to numerous interactions taking place and the
lack of structural information needed for reliable predictions (Strauch, Fleishman, and
Baker 2013; Spassov and Yan 2013).
Yeast Display and Phage Display
Technologies such as yeast display and phage display allow for direct selection of pH-
sensitive binders. Whilst making use of different organism formats, both platforms result
in antibody-derived fragments expressed on the surface of either S. cerevisiae or a phage
(Sheehan and Marasco 2015). The antibody-derived fragments on the individual carri-
ers differ from each other through random mutations on their residues, providing various
binding properties. The result are vast libraries with numerous antibody-derived fragment
combinations, which can be screened and selected for their antigen aﬀinity (Clackson et al.
1991). Not only the aﬀinity, the pH component can also be introduced into the selection
process, resulting in antibody-derived fragments which present themselves as high-aﬀinity
binders that are also pH-sensitive (Traxlmayr et al. 2014; Bonvin et al. 2015). As of 2021,
14 Ab-based therapeutics on the market were identified using phage display, making it
a successful Ab discovery platform, further strengthening its applicability value (Alfaleh
et al. 2020; Valldorf et al. 2021). Reportedly, the phage and yeast display technologies
are also less-labour intensive than histidine scanning and present a sound strategy in pH-
sensitive protein engineering (Bonvin et al. 2015).
Overview
Overall, the availability of new technologies enables screening and design of pH-sensitive
antibodies and their fragments. To understand what traits in terms of kinetics are ex-
pected from such designs, the Table 1.1 was compiled from reviewing current literature on
the topic, ranging from antibodies obtained from histidine scanning to ones from yeast and
phage display (Igawa, Ishii, et al. 2010; Bogen et al. 2019; Bonvin et al. 2015). It provides
an overview of expected rate constants and fold differences in their koff at varying pH
amongst the engineered entities that have been selected and labeled pH-responsive. The
table illustrates that typical kon values at pH 7.4 range between 104 and 105 M−1s−1,
whilst the koff at the same pH ranges from 10−4 to 10−3 s−1. In comparison, the koff
range at pH 5.5 is reduced, establishing itself at 10−3 to 10−2 s−1. A ratio between the
two koff values has been calculated to illustrate what is expected from a successful design.
Through examination of the presented data, fold differences in the range of 4 to 151 may
be found. As a reference, the ratio was also calculated for non-pH-sensitive parent entities
presented in the exemplary literature, and was found to be approximately 2 throughout
the included studies (Igawa, Ishii, et al. 2010; Kroetsch et al. 2018; Bogen et al. 2019;
Bonvin et al. 2015). The fold difference between koff values is expected even in non-pH
responsive Abs, as lowering of the pH affects binding regardless of design.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
10
==PAGE:17==
Additionally, study by Bonvin et al. found that variation between antibody-based for-
mats is anticipated in terms of their fold differences. Specifically, Fab showed increased
koff ratios (and hence more pH-sensitivity) compared to the IgG format - 12 versus 5 in
the case of C7, and 151 versus 22 in the case of the 1A4 entity (Bonvin et al. 2015).
Some of the investigations proceeded with in vivo studies, where kinetic investigations
were performed in mice or monkeys. This was the case for the study done by Igawa et
al., where engineered antibodies showed a significant improvement in valuable parameters
involved in pharmacokinetics, such as duration of inhibition as compared to the non-pH-
sensitive parent. Furthermore, the study reaﬀirmed that the improvement was due to the
successful recycling of the antibody (Igawa, Ishii, et al. 2010). The particular study is
further discussed in Section 4.1.
pH 7.4
pH 5.5
Ratio koff5.5
koff7.4
Source
kon
koff
kon
koff
PH1 #
2.6E+05
5.7E-04
1.0E+05*
4.3E-03*
7.5
(Igawa, Ishii, et al. 2010)
PH2 #
5.3E+05
1.0E-03
3.5E+05*
1.5E-02*
15
(Igawa, Ishii, et al. 2010)
L2 #
2.98E+04
6.86E-04
9.00E+03*
2.75E-03*
4
(Kroetsch et al. 2018)
L6 #
4.68E+04
4.42E-04
2.38E+04*
1.94E-03*
4.3
(Kroetsch et al. 2018)
K39 
\
9.83E-04
\
1.56E-02
15.9
(Bogen et al. 2019)
K40 
\
7.65E-04
\
1.2E-02
15.7
(Bogen et al. 2019)
CV1 
\
9.68E-04
\
1.76E-02
18.2
(Bogen et al. 2019)
CV2 
\
11.5E-04
\
1.67E-02
14.5
(Bogen et al. 2019)
CV3 
\
6.36E-04
\
1.52E-02
23.9
(Bogen et al. 2019)
C7 #
43.6E+04
4.8E-03
\
1.86E-02*
5
(Bonvin et al. 2015)
C7 n
1.7E+04
7.1E-04
\
8.8E-03*
12
(Bonvin et al. 2015)
1A4 #
80.4E+04
8.3E-04
\
1.8E-02*
22
(Bonvin et al. 2015)
1A4 n
2.7E+04
2.7E-04
\
4.78E-02*
151
(Bonvin et al. 2015)
Table 1.1: An overview of the current progress made on pH-sensitive antibody design. The
format in which the rate constants were tested is denoted by the following: (#) denotes
IgG, () bispecific antibody and (n) Fab. The kon and koff rate constants are given
in M−1s−1 and s−1, respectively.
The values denoted with ”*” were measured at pH
6.0 rather than 5.5. Furthermore, the ratio between the koff5.5 (or 6.0) and koff7.4 was
calculated for each measurement.
1.6
Biolayer Interferometry
To analyse interactions between biological molecules, a method has been developed called
Biolayer Interferometry (BLI), which offers label-free detection of interacting entities. A
visual representation of this event can be seen and elaborated in Figure 1.5.
The principle of detection relies on optics; the interference of white light reflecting from
two surfaces on the tip of the biosensor is analysed. The inner surface acts as a reference
and is referred to as the ’optical layer’. The outer surface is the ’biocompatible surface’
and serves to measure the amount of molecules interacting with its surface. The sensors
come unfunctionalized since they lack the bioelement. The element can vary, and can be
anything ranging from small toxins to larger antibodies up to whole cells, as long as it
can interact with the biocompatible surface (Verzijl et al. 2017). The surface is coated
with a chemical which can form strong interactions with the bioelement. As a typical
example, this could be streptavidin, which forms a strong interaction with biotin in the
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
11
==PAGE:18==
case of biotinylated analytes.
Figure 1.5: The underlying detection principle of BLI. Visualised is the tip of a biosensor,
which consists of an optical layer, as well as a biocompatible surface.
The surface is
modified in such way that the detecting entity, such as an antibody (pictured) or any other
tagged biomolecule - like a biotinylated toxin - can bind to it. This could be done via a
streptavidin-biotin interaction or any other strong interaction, depending on the biosensor
surface modification. When the biomolecule is attached to the surface, it can bind the
analyte in solution. As this occurs, the thickness of the layer will change depending on how
many molecules are bound. In the experiment, white light is focused from the stem down
to the tip of the sensor and is reflected from the optical layer and the biocompatible surface.
The change in layer thickness causes a difference in interference pattern of the reflected
light coming from the internal optical layer surface, which serves as a reference, and the
biomolecule coating. The change in the pattern is directly proportional to the number of
analytes bound to the layer. Other species present in the solution do not influence the
signal, only the bound entities are detected via layer thickness change. The interference
pattern is processed and the resulting phase shift can be visualised on the graph on the
right side (∆λ). (Concepcion et al. 2009)
It is during the first step of the method that the biosensor is dipped into a 96- or 384-well
plate and is coated with the bioelement. Once bound, it can interact with the analyte
present in other wells and measure various parameters as mentioned before. With the ana-
lyte associating and dissociating, the thickness of the surface either increases or decreases,
causing a change in the interference pattern between the reflected beams of the optical
layer and the biocompatible surface (Do et al. 2008). The pattern is processed and the
phase shift is directly proportional to the thickness of the layer and plotted as change in
nanometers (nm) over time.
BLI offers a real-time insight of various measurables, such as binding specificity, asso-
ciation and dissociation rates as well as concentration with a high degree of accuracy
(Concepcion et al. 2009). Moreover, it can be used for an array of biological applications
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
12
==PAGE:19==
such as drug screening, library screening, drug discovery and drug process development,
amongst others (Petersen 2017; Dysinger and King 2012; Wartchow et al. 2011).
De-
creasing the cost of BLI analysis is possible with reusing of the sample solution in the
wells, which is not a viable option with traditional methods (Abdiche et al. 2008). As the
detection occurs on the tip of the biosensor and is related to specific binding, matrix sur-
rounding the sample plays little role in accuracy of the measurements, decreasing the need
for sample preparation (Do et al. 2008). In spite of that, modification of the bioelement is
still necessary for it to be able to interact with the biocompatible surface. In comparison
to well-established assays such as ELISA, no labels are needed, eliminating the expensive
reagents normally used (Petersen 2017). Furthermore, in the case of antibody screening,
ELISA signals are inherently influenced by the concentration of binders in solution (e.g.
from hybridoma) and cannot provide an accurate overview of which are the high-aﬀinity
binders. This is made possible by knowing the dissociation rates, as obtained from BLI
analysis, which were shown to better correlate with true high-aﬀinity binders (Lad et al.
2014).
Nonetheless, BLI is not the only real-time label-free technology available on the market.
A distinguished competitor is Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) coupled with a microflu-
idics channel or like, which can measure kinetic parameters, aﬀinity, concentrations, much
like BLI. An important advantage of SPR is that it is an established technology, the
output is well-understood and supported by numerous articles, which provide the outline
for experiment design and understanding of various factors which influence the kinetic
measurements (Kamat and Rafique 2017). This is not always the case with BLI, as it is
a newer technology and the reproducibility of the results has varied, especially for whole
antibody formats, alongside the uncertainty of what exact factors play a role in kinetic
measurements (Yang et al. 2016; Abdiche et al. 2008). Furthermore, SPR setups allow for
experimental temperatures between 4 and 40 ◦C, whereas only ±4◦C room temperature
are available for BLI setups (Kamat and Rafique 2017).
SPR comes with its disadvantages too; firstly, it does not offer as high throughput of
sample as BLI does, limiting the amount of samples analysed per day, a particularly im-
portant parameter in drug screening and discovery (Lad et al. 2014; Keighley 2011). This
is due to the increased sample preparation time for SPR and the lack of 96- or 384-well
format. Secondly, due to coupling with microfludics, crude samples may cause blockages
in the system (Gaudreault et al. 2021). Additionally, non-specific surface binding is a
well-known limitation in label-free technologies, particularly if experiments are not metic-
ulously performed and poorly controlled (Schuck and Zhao 2010; Helmerhorst et al. 2012;
Shah and Duncan 2014). Both of the methods share an additional problem of mass trans-
port limitations, which occurs when too many detecting biomolecules have been attached
to the sensor surface. This causes a decrease in observed association and dissociation rate
constants, as there are too many biomolecules in comparison to the analyte concentra-
tion, lowering the availability of the analyte and later causing it to re-associate during the
dissociation phase (Schuck and Zhao 2010; Kamat and Rafique 2017). The phenomenon
ultimately results in unreliable and undervalued data, and requires consideration in exper-
imental design.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
13
==PAGE:20==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Materials
For the experiments, the buffers and media in Table 2.1 were used. Fabs in PBS and
biotinylated α-Btx, α-Ctx and α-Etx were kindly provided by Line Ledsgaard Jensen, a
member of the lab.
Table 2.1: Buffers and Media
Name
Components/
Source
Kinetics Buffer (10X)
Pall ForteBio LLC, 18-1105
HPES-MES Buffer
10mM HEPES. 50mM MES NaCl, 5mM EDTA, 0.05%P20
pH 7.4 and pH 5.5
Regeneration Buffer
4 M NaCl 10 mM glycine, pH 2
2TYGK
2TY, 2% glucose, 50 µg/mL kanamycin
Autoinduction media
1L ZY media, 2 mL 1 M MgSO4, 20 mL 50x5052, 20 mL
50xM, 200 µL 1000x Metal Mix, 1 mL 50 mg/mL kanamycin
TES buffer
30 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 20% sucrose with
protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete Proteinase Inhibitor
Cocktail, Sigma Aldrich, 11836145001), lysozyme
(15 mg/L culture), and benzonase (1 µL per 10 mL)
5 mM MgSO4
5 mM MgSO4 with protease inhibitor cocktail,
lysozyme (15 mg/L culture), and benzonase (1 µL per 10 mL)
Wash Buffer
PBS, 200 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0 - degassed
Elution Buffer
PBS, 200 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, pH 8.0 – degassed
Tris Buffer
1 mM Tris, 5 mM NaCl in MiliQ, pH 7.5
2.2
Methods
2.2.1
BLI Experiments
In the following experiments, SAX2 (High Precision Streptadavin 2.0) biosensors (Sarto-
rius, 18-5136) were exposed to the Kinetics Buffer (KB) for 10 minutes and incubated
in the dark prior to use. All results were analysed using Octet DataAnalysis software
(Version 12.0.1.2).
To Pick Toxin Coating Concentration
96-well black plates (GR-655209) were filled with KB, biotinylated α-Btx (Invitrogen,
B1601) at 10, 2, 0.4 and 0 µg/mL diluted in KB, HEPES-MES buffer (pH 7.4), Fab
sample at 200 nM and Regeneration Buffer (RB). The plate with the biosensors and the
sample plate were introduced into Octet K2 (ForteBio).
The instrument performed a
coating of the biosensors with the toxin and measured association and dissociation of
the Fab. Parameters for the steps were as follows: Baseline (120 seconds), Loading (120
seconds), Association (180 seconds), Dissociation (300 seconds), Regeneration (5 seconds,
5 cycles).
The Screening
96-well plates were filled with KB, biotinylated α-Btx/α-Ctx/α-Etx at 0.4 µg/mL, HEPES-
MES buffers (pH 7.4 and pH 5.5), 12 Fab samples (200 nM, except CO5 - 400 nM) and
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
14
==PAGE:21==
RB. The plate with the biosensors and the sample plate were introduced into Octet K2 at
25◦C and shake speed 1000 rpm. The instrument performed a coating of the biosensors
with the toxin as described before and measured association (pH 7.4) and dissociation (pH
7.4 and pH 5.5) of the Fab as described before.
Full Kinetic Measurements
Three 96-well plates were filled with KB, biotinylated α-Btx/ α-Ctx/α-Etx at 0.4 µg/mL,
HEPES-MES buffers (pH 7.4 and pH 5.5), 6 Fab samples (3-fold dilutions, 7 concentra-
tions in total) and RB. The regeneration step was adjusted for α-Ctx- and α-Etx-coated
biosensors from 5s 5 cycles to 10s 7 cycles. The dissociation cycle was adjusted for α-Ctx-
and α-Etx-coated biosensors from 300s to 1000s. The plates were introduced into Octet
RED96 (ForteBio). The instrument performed a coating of the biosensors with the toxin
and measured association (pH 7.4) and dissociation (pH 7.4 and pH 5.5) of the Fab.
2.2.2
Expression of scFv and purification of scFv/scFv-complex
Expression
To express scFvs, 5 mL of 2TYGK media was inoculated with 5 µL of glycerol stock of
BL21(DE3) E. coli (either 2555_01_A01 or 2554_01_D11-producing) in 50 mL falcon
tubes. The tubes were incubated overnight at 30 ◦C and shaking at 250 rpm. After 17
hours, 500 mL of autoinduction medium was inoculated with 500 µL in 2 L flasks and
incubated for 24 hours at 30 ◦C and shaking at 200 rpm.
Aﬀinity Chromatography Purification
To purify the scFvs, 500 mL of medium was centrifuged in 1 L containers at 10,000 x g
for 10 minutes at 4 ◦C. The supernatant was discarded and the cells were resuspended in
prechilled 50 mL TES buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail and benzoase. The contain-
ers were kept on ice throughout the entire procedure. The cultures were centrifuged at
5,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 ◦C. The supernatant was collected in a separate flask. The
pellet was resuspended in 50 mL MgSO4 with protease inhibitor cocktail and benzoase and
centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 ◦C. The supernatant was again collected and
the pellet discarded. A final centrifugation was performed on the supernatant at 29,000
x g for 30 minutes at 4 ◦C. Thereafter, the supernatant was taken for purification using
the ÄKTA Start (Cytiva, 29022094). The machine with the HisTrap HP 5 mL column
(Cytiva, 17524802) was equilibrated first with MiliQ water, then with Wash Buffer for 4
column volumes each. Thereafter, the sample was applied to the column at 2 mL/min or
4 mL/min for larger volumes (>200 mL productions). Once loaded, Wash Buffer was let
through for 4 column volumes. Fractions were collected when 20%, 50% and 75% Elution
Buffer gradient was applied. Finally, the column was rinsed with 100% Elution Buffer and
equilibrated back to MiliQ water. Data collected was analysed using UNICORN start 1.3.
The fractions of interest were dialyzed overnight in Tris Buffer, using Spectra/Por3 Dial-
ysis Membrane (3.5 kDa cut-off, Fisher Scientific, 08-670-5A) changing the solution two
times during the process. The volume of the dialysis solution was made to be at least 50x
the volume of the sample.
2.2.3
Size-Exclusion Chromatography Purification
To separate proteins in the sample based on their molecular weight (MW), size exclusion
chromatography (SEC) using NGC Quest 10 Plus Chromatography system was performed
with either HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 pg (Cytiva, 28989333) or Superdex 75 Increase
10/300 GL (Cytiva, 29148721) columns. Data was analysed using ChromLab Software 6.1.
For scFv purification, the dialyzed sample was up-concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15
Centrifugal 10K Filter Device (Sigma Aldrich, UFC901024) prior to being applied to
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
15
==PAGE:22==
HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 pg.
Prior the scFv-toxin complex purification, α-Ctx and α-Btx in solid forms were dissolved
in 1 mM Tris 5 mM NaCl in MiliQ water and added to the sample. The complex was left
to form overnight at 4◦C, then up-concentrated using Merck Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal
Filter Units (Merck, UFC500324). For complex purification, Superdex 75 Increase 10/300
GL was used.
The column was left to equilibrate overnight in 1 mM Tris 5 mM NaCl in MiliQ water.
Thereafter, the sample was applied to the system via the injection port and Tris buffer
was left to run through 3 column volumes at 1 mL/min (HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 pg)
or 0.25 mL/min (Superdex 75 Increase 10/300 GL). Fractions of interest were collected in
volumes of either 0.25 mL, 0.5 mL or 1 mL.
After purification, the fractions were analysed using NanoDrop One (Thermo Fisher), di-
viding the absorbance at 280 nm according to their unit per 1 mg/mL - derived from the
absorbance coeﬀicient at 1 mg/mL - depending on the scFv or complex (tool ProtParam,
Expasy (Gasteiger et al. 2005))
2.2.4
SDS-PAGE
To understand what is present in the sample during and after purifications, gel elec-
trophoresis via SDS-PAGE was performed.
10 µL of sample was mixed with 5 µL of
loading buffer and let to boil at 95 ◦C for 10 minutes. The 4-12% Bis-tris gel (Thermo
Fisher, NP0322BOX) was put into an electrophoresis cell system and filled with MES-SDS
Running Buffer (Thermo Fisher, NP000202). The wells of the gel were filled with 10 µL
Prestained Protein Ladder (Thermo Fisher, 26616) and 12 µL sample. The gel was left to
run for 30 minutes at 200 V. Thereafter, it was washed in deionized water and removed
from the plastic shell. It was left to soak in Coomassie stain solution for 20 minutes and
destaining solution for 20 minutes two times and left to destain overnight.
2.2.5
Crystallography Screen
The screens were performed using the sitting drop method. 96-well AxyGem Crystallog-
raphy Plates (Fisher Scientific, 10882471) were were filled with 200 µL per well of either
MCSG-1 or MCSG-2 Crystal Screens (Anatrace). 100 µL of sample was applied to the
mosquito crystal machine (sptlabetch), which then distributed the combinations of MCSG-
1/MCSG-2 and sample on the plate. The sample concentrations may be found in Table
3.2. The plates were sealed with tape and incubated at 25 ◦C.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
16
==PAGE:23==
3
Results
3.1
Experimental Overview
The following sections guide through the process of examining a pool of 0. cross-reactive
clones, which were 1. selected for analysis based on their binding properties. They were
then used to perform 2. biolayer interferometry experiments, which reveal pH-dependent
binding properties of the selected Fab clones. 3. The expression and purification results
of interesting clones which exhibited pH-dependent binding are also discussed. Finally,
4. the crystallization attempts of the purified clones are disclosed. An overview of the
workflow can be seen in Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: The project plan: 0.
A pre-made pool of clones was made available; 1.
the clones were assessed based on their binding data to α-Ctx and α-Etx; 2. the Fabs
generated by the clones were tested via BLI for their kinetics against α-Btx α-Ctx and
α-Etx at varying pH during dissociation phase - obtaining the information about pH-
sensitivity; 3. clones of interest mass produced scFvs; 4. scFvs of interest were taken for
a crystallographic screen in a complex with a toxin. Two extra paths are indicated, which
began as a result of this project but are not a part of it. They are discussed in Section 5.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
17
==PAGE:24==
3.2
Selection of Cross-Reactive High-Aﬀinity Clones
Prior to this project, a range of cross-reactive clones were produced in vitro through phage
display. Their aﬀinity to α-Ctx was first improved via a technique called light chain shuf-
fling where the parent heavy chain was paired with a repertoire of naive light chains to
improve binding. The cross reactive element was introduced by including a second toxin
in the selection process, namely α-Etx. The outputs of the selections were tested using
monoclonal ELISA at pH 7.4, further clones which showed the highest binding signals
were tested using SPR. Lastly, one particular clone (D11) had its binding characterised
against a third toxin (α-Btx).
However, no data regarding pH-dependent binding of the clones has been collected, as
the primary aim of generating and analysing the collection was to identify cross-reactive
entities. Since the library was constructed without any selection steps for pH-dependency,
we wished to explore whether there were any naturally-occurring pH-dependent clones.
This project presents the experiments which were conducted with the hope of finding pH-
dependent broadly neutralising clones.
Based on the results from ELISA and SPR experiments, 12 Fabs from 11 clones and
their parent were selected to use in this project for initial screening. The selection of the
clones was made via examining the ELISA results of clone aﬀinities to α-Ctx and α-Etx.
The clones which showed high aﬀinity and cross-reactivity to the two toxins were priori-
tised. The names and their heavy and light gene details may be found in Appendix B. To
investigate pH-dependent binding of the clones, BLI was used.
3.3
Biosensor Toxin Coating
Before the selected Fabs could be screened for their kinetic and pH-dependent properties, a
trial experiment was performed to determine the appropriate parameters for coating and
regeneration of the biosensor surface. Since the least data was available about α-Btx...
SPR data helped The following Figure 3.2 represents a raw data output originating from
coating of the high precision streptavidin biosensors (STX2) with biotinylated α-Btx. As
this toxin has not been tested in ELISA experiments described before, one of the most
broadly-neutralizing high-aﬀinity binders was used to examine the toxin coating (D11).
In Figure 3.2 are denoted the different phases a biosensor goes through during a kinetic
experiment; the baselines serve as a starting point comparison, no interactions are ex-
pected during that phase. During the loading phase, the biosensor is coated with α-Btx.
As seen on the figure, different concentrations of toxin produced different loading curves.
Biotinylated α-Btx interacts with the biosensor streptavidin-coated surface and forms a
strong interaction, which establishes a new baseline and at the same time allows binding
of Fab to the sensor. Regeneration steps are necessary to remove unwanted entities
interacting with the sensor, optimally only leaving strongly interacting α-Btx on the sur-
face. A successful regeneration phase can be observed by comparing the baseline and the
curve formed during the regeneration - they should end up at the same level. Following
the functionalisation of the sensor, an association step introduces the sensor tip to a well
containing Fab. For the coating test, the wells all contained a constant concentration of
D11, 200 nM. With successful toxin coating and binding of the Fab, there should be a vis-
ible signal. All three chosen toxin coating concentrations displayed an association curve,
whereas the negative control remained a flat line. During dissociation, the biosensor-
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
18
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.2: Raw data from Octet K2. The STX2 biosensors were coated with α-Btx at 10, 2, 0.4 and 0 µg/mL during the loading phase for
120s. Thereafter, during association phase, the coated biosensor was exposed to a constant concentration of Fab to test whether the coating was
successful. The Fab was left to dissociate during dissociation phase. Furthermore, regeneration steps were performed during different phases to
remove bound molecules from the biosensor.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
19
==PAGE:26==
bound Fabs were left to dissociate in a separate buffer-containing well at pH 7.4. Again,
only the toxin coated sensors produced a signal.
From the preliminary experiment we can draw several conclusions.
Firstly, the toxin
coating of the sensor was successful for all chosen concentrations. This can be seen from
the loading, association and dissociation curves. Secondly, the sensor surface saturated
with α-Btx at 10 and 2 µg/mL, reaching a plateau after 120 seconds. As advised by the
literature, the toxin concentration should be low, but enough to produce a distinguishable
signal during association and dissociation (Shah and Duncan 2014). Preferably, the sensor
surface is not fully saturated to avoid steric hindrances in binding, which would result in
faulty data. As seen in Figure 3.2, the association and dissociation curves are comparable
in relative height according to the baseline, as well as their shape. No obvious difference
in signal quality can be observed between the lowest concentration and the higher concen-
trations. Therefore, 0.4 µg/mL was chosen as the coating concentration for the upcoming
experiments. Thirdly, regeneration of the biosensor surface was successful, with the base-
line returning back to where it originally was. Knowledge of this will ensure that when
testing an array of concentrations with the same biosensor, there will not be interfering
entities originating from previous wells. Finally, the association and dissociation curves
suggest that the Fab is able to bind to α-Btx; this is not given, as the Fab was previously
only tested against α-Ctx and α-Etx, although binding was expected due to the toxins’
homology.
Based on the results of this trial run, the concentration of 0.4 µg/mL was used for biosensor
coating with either α-Btx, α-Ctx or α-Etx. As all the selected toxins are approximately
the same size, share homology and are all biotinylated, it was inferred that the same
coating conditions could be used universally.
3.4
Biolayer Interferometry of Fab
3.4.1
Initial Fab Screening
An initial screening of pH-sensitivity of the preselected Fabs described in Section 3.2 was
carried out on Octet K2. The experimental setup followed the one described in the previ-
ous section, with the biosensors coated with α-Btx. In the association phase, the biosensor
tips were dipped in wells containing the 12 Fabs at a constant concentration. An important
factor introduced into the dissociation phase was a change in the pH at which the Fabs dis-
sociated. Specifically, the association and dissociation phases were performed twice; once,
the association was performed at pH 7.4, followed by dissociation at pH 7.4, second, the
association was performed at pH 7.4, followed by dissociation at pH 5.5. The interest in
only changing the pH of the dissociation step has underlying biological reasons described
in Section 1.4. Explicitly, antigens found in circulation bind to an antibody at the phys-
iological pH, whereas they should bind off (dissociate) at the pH found in endosomes -
approximately 6.0 or lower. As highlighted previously, this would allow the antibody to
get recycled whilst being able to bind another antigen in circulation. Therefore, if antigen
binding to the Fab is shown to be influenced by pH, they could be of interest.
For the initial screen, only α-Btx coated biosensors were utilized. The purpose was solely
to establish whether there are any pH-sensitive clones in the made selection. This was
done at a constant concentration of the different Fabs, which could visualise pH-sensitive
properties, but would not provide solid supporting data. Association and dissociation rates
for singular concentrations were obtained, but no models revealing KD were acquired. An
indication of pH-sensitivity can be observed by examining the off-rate pattern at different
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3: Graphs showcasing association and dissociation trends of the two different
IGLV genes on the clone selection - (A) LV3-21 and (B) LV6-57. Both datasets were
obtained at pH 7.4. Furthermore, the parent (C05) is indicated by a dotted line.
pH. For example, if the dissociation curve is steep at pH 7.4 already, this indicates that the
antigen could easily dissociate in physiological conditions, let alone at lower pH. Clones
of interest would exhibit a more linear pattern at pH 7.4, whereas at pH 5.5, the curve
would turn steep. However, understanding the fold difference between kdis at two different
pH can prove elusive. This is because minor differences, especially in steep curves, could
be missed - despite showing pH-sensitivity. Therefore, full-kinetic screening was to be
performed later for interesting clones.
An examination of the collected data yields the following findings: firstly, there appears
to be a visual indication of pH-sensitivity in clones originating from the same light-chain
variable region (IGVL) gene. Two different IGVL genes were used to generate the clones,
namely, LV3-21 and LV6-57. The parent fell into the latter category. The heavy chain
variable region was the same for all. The comparison between the experiments of LV3-
21 and LV6-57 at pH 7.4 may be found in Figure 3.3. The differences between the two
groups immediately stand out. Where clones with LV3-21 gene show dissociation curves
steep (Figure 3.3A), LV6-57 clones appear to flat-out more steadily (Figure 3.3B). This is
with the exception of the parent, which was showing decreased properties in comparison
to its descendant.
Of more interest are the graphs showing the difference in dissociation curves at differ-
ent pH. So far, only dissociation at pH 7.4 has been examined, however, by looking at
the dissociation of LV6-57 clones at pH 7.4 and 5.5 side-by-side, an interesting pattern
emerges. The visualisation of that is available in Figure 3.4. Namely, A12, D11 and E01
exhibit a similar behaviour, with a predominantly linear curve for pH 7.4 and a steeper
one at pH 5.5, just as expected from a pH-sensitive entity.
As pointed out previously, the initial screen served to examine the selected pool of clones
and identify potential hits in terms of pH-sensitive binding.
A decision was made to
take the LV6-57 clones for further full-kinetic analysis (E01, D11, A12), as well as three
LV3-21 clones, which exhibited improved binding properties compared to the parent (A04,
A01, G09). This was to ensure that, despite the seeming advantage of the LV6-57, no
potential pH-sensitive entity escaped examination. Furthermore, as the clones have only
been screened for α-Btx binding, a toxin they had not been plated for, there could be
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.4: Association (increasing trend) and dissociation (decreasing trend) curves for
(A) A12, (B) D11 and (C) E01 at pH 7.4 and 5.5. The different pH are indicated in
either blue - 7.4 or red - 5.5.
more unpredictable pH-sensitive interactions when testing with the remaining two toxins.
All in all, to ensure full coverage and produce meaningful data, 6 clones in total have been
taken forward for full kinetic measurements.
3.4.2
Kinetic Characterisation
Based on the results obtained from Section 3.4.1, 6 Fabs (D11, A12, E01, A04, A01, G09)
were chosen to proceed for full kinetic analysis. Similar to the experiment before, associa-
tion and dissociation rates were measured, however, this time dilution series of Fabs were
made to obtain KD. In addition, the starting concentration had to be modified depending
on the toxin. This was because the array of Fabs were selected via their high-aﬀinity bind-
ing to α-Ctx and α-Etx, hence, they were expected to bind very well and would provide
a reliable KD measurement starting from lower concentrations of the Fab. In contrast,
α-Btx binding was presumed to be of lower aﬀinity as compared to the other two toxins,
so the starting concentration had to be increased to ensure signal detection. High aﬀinity
of Fabs to α-Ctx and α-Etx also implied longer dissociation times needed as compared to
trials with α-Btx, as well as consideration of longer or more regeneration phases, ensuring
all the Fabs have been removed from the toxins they bind with high aﬀinity.
The obtained raw data was analysed and the association and dissociation curves were
fitted. The resulting analysis is summarized in Table 3.1. Additional graphs showing the
curve fitting process for each clone at the two pH conditions are found in the Appendix
C. The analysis utilised global fits and 1:1 binding ratio, as a single Fab should bind one
toxin.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
22
==PAGE:29==
Clone
KD
(pH 7.4)
kdis
(pH 7.4)
kdis
(pH 5.5)
kdis5.5
kdis7.4
R2
Fit
α-Btx
D11
1.21E-08
6.56E-04
3.22E-03
4.9
0.9994
global
A12
3.24E-08
2.29E-03
6.32E-03
2.8
0.9966
global
E01
7.34E-08
3.62E-03
1.30E-02
3.6
0.9895
global
A04
6.69E-07
3.06E-02
8.30E-02
2.7
0.9964
global
A01
7.02E-07
2.10E-02
8.31E-02
4.0
0.9968
global
G09
3.00E-07
1.67E-02
5.57E-02
3.3
0.9959
global
α-Ctx
D11
1.31E-09
1.04E-04
2.15E-04
2.1
0.9993
global
A12
1.73E-09
1.52E-04
3.84E-04
2.5
0.9991
global
E01
4.78E-09
2.63E-04
9.34E-04
3.6
0.9997
global
A04
2.07E-08
4.81E-04
2.85E-03
6.0
0.9993
global
A01
2.14E-08
4.77E-04
6.75E-03
14.2
0.9993
global
G09
7.28E-09
1.54E-04
8.51E-04
5.5
0.9997
global
α-Etx
D11
8.30E-10
1.36E-04
3.20E-04
2.4
0.9996
global
A12
5.99E-10
1.14E-04
1.84E-04
1.6
0.9994
global
E01
9.96E-10
1.53E-04
3.98E-04
2.6
0.9993
global
A04
4.60E-10
1.08E-04
2.48E-04
2.3
0.999
global
A01
9.06E-10
1.95E-04
1.34E-03
6.9
0.9987
global
G09
6.45E-10
1.35E-04
4.68E-04
3.5
0.9992
global
Table 3.1: Output of the full kinetic analysis of 6 clones versus α-Btx,α-Ctx and α-Etx.
Included are the clone’s name, KD measured at pH 7.4, kdis at pH 7.4 and pH 5.5, fold
difference between the two kdis values, R2 and the model that was used to fit the data.
KD values are now available, elucidating binding aﬀinity of α-Btx to the selected clones.
By examining the first row of Table 3.1, we can confirm our presumption that α-Btx in-
deed bound the selected Fabs with lower aﬀinity. The KD values in its case range from
12 to 700 nM. In contrast, KD values for α-Ctx and α-Etx are significantly lower, in the
range of 0.5 to 20 nM; the Fabs appear to bind α-Etx the best.
Finally, data indicating whether the selected Fabs possess pH-sensitive properties is at
hand. A fold difference between kdis at pH 5.5 and kdis at pH 7.4 is used to assess how
affected by the pH is the dissociation. The larger the fold difference, the more pH-sensitive
behaviour the clone is exhibiting. A review of current literature on the topic can be found
in Section 1.5, with Table 1.1 providing the fold differences and individual dissociation
constants.
Based on the researched literature, a non-modified non-pH-responsive species should in-
herently assume a fold difference of approximately 2, whereas an antibody or an antibody-
based protein engineered to be pH-sensitive can come at a fold difference from 4 anywhere
up to 150 (Igawa, Ishii, et al. 2010; Kroetsch et al. 2018; Bogen et al. 2019; Bonvin et al.
2015). Judging by the obtained data, a few of the selected clones reach above the threshold.
An outstanding clone which reaches the defined parameter is A01, as it shows fold values
of 4 or above, with maximum at 14.2. This happens to be the largest fold value overall
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.5: Plots showing kdis (either pH 7.4 - left point of the horizontal line; or pH
5.5 - right point of the horizontal line, as indicated) and KD (pH 7.4) of selected clones
binding to (A) α-Btx, (B) α-Ctx and (C) α-Etx. The greater the difference between
the two dissociations at different pH, the greater indication of pH-sensitivity. The results
are presented on the same scale for X- (102 range) and Y- axis (103 range) for a more
comprehensive comparison.
in the performed experiments. Interestingly, from the previous preliminary screen, this
clone did not appear to hold as much potential as the clones with the LV6-57 gene.
Overall, it appears that pH-sensitivity is not conserved between the toxins. We can pre-
sume that despite their homology, there are differences in how each Fab interacts with an
individual toxin.
Other interesting clones are D11 (fold 4.9) in the case of α-Btx, and A04 and G09 (fold 6.0
and 5.5) in the case of α-Ctx. In general, there is a trend with α-Etx for the fold values
to be lower than for the other two toxins.
A visual representation of the clones’ pH-sensitivity in the performed experiments may
be found in Figure 3.5. Proceeding from the findings, two interesting clones emerge for
further experiments. First, A01, which reached the threshold qualifying it to be consid-
ered pH-sensitive for all three tested toxins. Knowledge of its secondary structure in a
complex with either toxin could elucidate the underlying pH-sensitivity triggering interac-
tions. Secondly, D11, which fell into the pH-sensitive category for α-Btx but not the other
toxins, all while being cross-reactive, which is another property of interest. Examining and
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
24
==PAGE:31==
comparing the interactions between α-Btx-D11 complex with the α-Ctx-D11 or α-Etx-D11
could bring understanding of what is the triggering factor in inducing pH-sensitivity in
the case of α-Btx-D11 interaction.
For the kinetic measurements, the Fab format was used, whereas for the following crystal-
lographic experiments, scFv format was preferred. This is for several reasons. First, scFvs
are known to aggregate (Martin et al. 2016), which could hinder result interpretation for
the BLI experiments. At the same time, for secondary structure studies, post-translational
modifications (PTMs) obtained during Fab expression in a non-bacterial system, are unde-
sirable since they would disrupt homogenicity of the sample. In consideration that purity
of the sample plays a major role in crystallisation, scFvs were utilised for those studies
instead. Indeed, at the end, with the pH-sensitivity explored, full IgG format would be
used, as it contains the vital Fc fragment needed for IgG recycling, a system we desire
to explore. However, purely for probing the question of pH-sensitive epitope-paratope
binding, formats such as scFv and Fab are suﬀicient.
3.5
Expression and Purification of A01 and D11 scFvs
To obtain enough pure scFv for setting up crystallization screens for secondary structure
analysis, an expression and purification of the two scFvs of interest was performed. The
steps consisted of establishing a bacterial culture of the selected clone, letting it grow and
then harvest the scFvs it expressed through a round of purification steps involving aﬀin-
ity chromatography as well as size exclusion chromatography. Each expression involved
between 1 and 8 L of medium, and numerous expressions were performed to produce ap-
proximately 8 mg of SEC purified A01 and 4 mg of SEC purified D11. The average yield
was 1 mg of pure scFv per liter of culture.
Protein purification was tracked through the steps. A typical aﬀinity chromatography
purification of scFvs and subsequent SDS-PAGE gel may be found in Figure 3.6. Such
chromatograms were nearly identical between A01 and D11 scFv productions, hence, one
example graph plus gel combination is suﬀicient to understand the trend.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.6: (A) Aﬀinity chromatography His-column purification of scFv D11, peaks of
interest are labeled. B The corresponding SDS-PAGE gel, lanes labeled based on the
fraction they originated from. FT: flow-through, non-column-binding species; W: wash,
0% elution buffer, weakly bound species; 20: 20% elution buffer; 50: 50% elution buffer;
75: 75% elution buffer.
From the first round of purification we obtain three peaks of interest (denoted on the
chromatogram): one at 20, one at 50, and third one at 75. The signal intensity on the
chromatogram and the lanes on the gel indicate a large amount of protein in FT and W
fractions. As the 20% and 50% elution buffer gradients are applied, the scFv detaches from
the His-column and it can be examined on the gel lanes. D11 presents itself as a thick
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
26
==PAGE:33==
band at 35-40kDa in all 20% and 50% fractions, the approximate size we are looking for.
There are some contaminating proteins present above and below the main band, primarily
around 25kDa. Furthermore, the 75% fraction contained almost no scFv, but was less
visibly contaminated. As a rule, fractions with minimal contamination and a noticeable
amount of protein were taken for further SEC purification.
The SEC purification was carried out after buffer exchange to a crystallization-friendly
buffer. A larger column was utilised to purify mass-produced scFvs. An example of a SEC
purified sample from D11 can be found in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: SEC purification of scFv D11. (A) the obtained chromatogram with the range
where significant peaks appeared. The first peak at approximately 40 mL retention volume
(VR) was out of the calibration curve range, so its mass in kDa could not be estimated.
Two other peaks covered by collected fractions A1-A2 (VR = 54 mL) and A4-A7 (VR =
63 mL) were obtained. Their mass and retention time are indicated. (B) SDS-PAGE gel
following the SEC purification. Fractions taken from the run are indicated in each lane.
ScFv D11 is present in A4-A7 and can be seen as a thick band at 35-40 kDa.
Each obtained chromatogram was processed via peak integration and had a calibration
curve, specific to the column, applied. For D11, the obtained estimated mass was 31 kDa
(VR = 63 mL), whereas for A01 it was 33.6 kDa (VR = 62 mL). Fractions containing the
scFvs were kept.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
27
==PAGE:34==
3.6
Crystallography Screens
With the scFvs purified and contained in a freezer to prevent degradation, forming of the
scFv-toxin complex could be performed.
3.6.1
Complex Purification
An excess of toxin - 1.5:1 (toxin:scFv) molar ratio was used for D11 and α-Ctx and α-Btx
complexes.
It was assumed that since nM-range aﬀinites were observed for D11, such
excess of toxin should be more than suﬀicient for most D11 to bind to its target. However,
this turned out not to be the case. Figures 3.8 and 3.9 contain the chromatograms and
their according SDS-PAGE gels obtained from the experiments:
Figure 3.8: SEC purification of D11 - α-Ctx complex. (A) The chromatogram obtained
from the complex purification. Visible is one prominent peak at fraction 2-3 (11.1 mL)
with a left side shoulder peak at fraction 1 (10.4 mL). Based on the size, the peaks should
contain D11 and the toxin complex and unbound D11. Furthermore, two smaller peaks
appear at fractions 4 and 5, presumed to contain α-Ctx. (B) The SDS-PAGE gel made
from the fractions indicated on the chromatogram. Thick bands at 35-25 kDa are visible
in lanes 1-3, with the toxin band around 15-10 kDa present in all lanes.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.9: SEC purification of D11 - α-Btx complex. (A) The chromatogram obtained
from the complex purification. Visible are two prominent peaks, one at 10 mL and the
other at 11 mL. Based on the size, the peaks should contain D11 and the toxin in a
complex, as well as unbound D11. Furthermore, two smaller peaks appear at fractions
4 and 5, presumed to contain α-Btx. (B) The SDS-PAGE gel made from the fractions
indicated on the chromatogram. Thick bands at 40-35 kDa are visible in lanes 2-5, with
the toxin band around 15-10 kDa present in all lanes.
From the two trials of generating D11 and just by observation of the peak heights, it
was falsely presumed that the highest peak contained scFv-bound toxin (especially for
D11-α-Ctx complex, Figure 3.8), and the left-hand shoulder peak observed was a dimer.
Additionally, this was the first time the small column was used, so it was not fully known
at what retention volume unbound scFv would elute. However, follow-up analysis of cali-
bration curve fitting and peak integration revealed that the MW did not match up with
what was expected. The two peaks differed for approximately 10 kDa, the approximate
toxin size. Therefore, what was plated for crystallization plates was not what we aimed
for. Regardless, the samples taken for crystallization contained toxin and scFv, as can be
seen on the gels below the SEC chromatograms. It was unknown whether scFvs were left
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
29
==PAGE:36==
unbound due to a lack of toxin or another reason, so prior to performing A01 complex
crystallization attempts, a ratio test with A01 and α-Ctx was in place.
Firstly, 0.03 mg of scFv A01 was run on its own, followed up by molar rations of 1:3
and 1:5 of A01:α-Ctx. An alignment of the obtained chromatograms is available in Figure
3.10.
Figure 3.10: Three chromatograms obtained from molar ratio tests between scFv A01 and
α-Ctx. All the axes are presented on the same scale. (A) scFv A01 only, a singular peak
at 10.85 mL, calculated to be 40.7 kDa; (B) scFv A01 and α-Ctx, 1:3 molar ratio, two
peaks are observable, one at 10.2 mL (50.65 kDa), another at 15.2 mL (9.1 kDa); (C) scFv
A01 and α-Ctx, 1:5 molar ratio. Two peaks are observable, one at 10.2 mL (50.7 kDa),
another at 15.2 mL (9 kDa).
We can see that the single scFv peak appears at 10.8 mL and also contains a small shoul-
der peak towards the right. The peak was persistent with SEC purified scFvs after some
time has passed since purification. On the subsequent chromatograms where α-Ctx was
introduced, the scFv peak, along with its shoulder, shifts to 10.2 mL instead of 10.8 mL.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
30
==PAGE:37==
Furthermore, its calculated MW shifts for 10 kDa, an approximate toxin size. Despite scFv-
toxin incubation of only 2 hours, the complex managed to form for both, ratio 1:3 and 1:5.
Since the ratio 1:3 appeared to work well, and no significant improvement was seen for
ratio 1:5, with the toxin peak only increasing, the ratio 1:3 was taken for A01 experiments.
Following the ratio tests, a final A01-α-Ctx complex purification was carried out. This
time, a larger column was used, as A01-α-Ctx sample was too large for injection. The
experiment proceeded with 1:3 ratio of toxin, as described. Figure 3.11 shows the result
of the subsequent complex SEC purification.
Figure 3.11: SEC purification of A01 - α-Ctx complex. (A) the chromatogram obtained
from the SEC purification. Observed are two peaks, 59 mL (41 kDa) corresponding to
the complex, plus 95 mL (4 kDa) corresponding to the toxin. Since the column was large,
better peak separation was not possible. (B) The corresponding gel, picturing a consistent
thick band at 40-35 kDa, plus toxin at 10-15 kDa in all lanes. From lane 3 on, a secondary
species appears just below the main band, at 35-25 kDa.
scFv-Toxin Complex Chromatogram Analysis
D11 - α-Ctx As seen from Figure 3.8A, one main peak emerges from the chromatogram
at 11.1 mL. There is also a shoulder peak present at 10.4 mL. Through the calibration
curve fitting, they revealed mass of 37.7 kDa and 47.9 kDa, respectively. The two peaks
are believed to be the unbound D11 and D11 - α-Ctx complex. From the SEC purification
we can understand that most of the D11 did not successfully bind to the toxin, and we
were left with primarily unbound D11. From the gel in Figure 3.8B it is apparent that
there is a contaminating species, a band at 35-25 kDa, which becomes more prominent
with each fraction. Fractions 2-3 were taken for crystallographic screens.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
31
==PAGE:38==
D11 - α-Btx Figure 3.9A depicts the chromatogram obtained from D11 - α-Btx com-
plex SEC purification. Much like before, there is one main peak present with a peak on
the side. However, this time the 10 mL (48.6 kDa) peak is more prominent than the 11 mL
(38 kDa) peak. It appears that most of the D11 bound the toxin this time. The fractions
4-7 seem to contain the additional band at 35-23 kDa, just like before. All fractions exhibit
a band at 10-15 kDa, presumed to be the toxin, which got dissociated from the complex
during gel preparation. Additionally, on the chromatogram, the two toxin peaks can be
found at 15 mL (9.8 kDa) and 16.5 mL (5.8 kDa). Fractions 4, 5 and 6 were taken for
crystallographic screens.
A01 - α-Ctx Figure 3.11A reveals the SEC purification of A01 - α-Ctx complex. As
the sample was larger than before, a larger column was used. Hence, the retention vol-
umes cannot be directly compared to the previous two runs. There are two peaks, one
at 59 mL (41 kDa) and another at 95 mL (4 kDa). The two peaks were presumed to be
the bound A01 and the toxin. From the gel below (Figure 3.11B) we can see that again,
an extra band (approx. 35 kDa) gradually appears from fraction 4 on. Examining the
singular complex peak, it is notable that it is not completely symmetrical, with the right
side being more voluminous. Hence, based on the gel, we can conclude that more than one
species are contained within the peak. In reference to the gel, contaminating species tried
to be avoided and primarily pure A01 - α-Ctx were taken for crystallographic screens.
3.6.2
Protein Crystal Hits
Complexes isolated from the described SEC purifications were taken for crystallographic
screenings. This was done through several rounds, a summary of it available in Table 3.2.
Plate
Number
Complex
Setup Date
Conc.
Plated
[mg/mL]
Buffer
Screen
Crystal
Appearance
Submitted
1
D11-α-Ctx
9/11/2021
9.15
MCSG-1
2
D11-α-Ctx
9/11/2021
9.15
MCSG-2
29/11/2021
(F7)
7/12/2021
3
D11-α-Btx
9/11/2021
20.25
MCSG-1
4
D11-α-Btx
9/11/2021
20.25
MCSG-2
5
A01-α-Ctx
3/12/2021
12.5
MCSG-2
6
A01-α-Ctx*
3/12/2021
10
MCSG-2
14/12/2021
(D3)
Pending
7
A01-α-Ctx
10/12/2021
10
MCSG-1
Table 3.2: Overview of the crystallization plates. 7 different plates were tried, with either
MCSG-1 or MCSG-2 buffer sets. D11 was tested in a complex with α-Ctx and α-Btx,
whereas A01 was tested in a complex with α-Ctx only. The plating date, crystal appear-
ance and submission date are given. The concentration at which the complex was plated
is also available. * was identical to the plate 5, but plated with less pure fractions from
the SEC complex purification.
Overall, usable crystals formed in two distinct plates. First, in D11-α-Ctx (MCSG-2) and
the second in A01-α-Ctx (MCSG-2). The singular crystal from the D11 plate was the first
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
32
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.12: Examples of protein crystals obtained. (A), (C): crystals originating from
A01-α-Ctx (MSCG-2, well D3), (B): a protein crystal from D11-α-Ctx (MSCG-2, well
F7)
to form, after almost three weeks. The solution successful in that case was 0.15 M DL-
Malic Acid, pH 7.0 as salt, with 20 % (w/v) PEG 3350 as precipitant. A larger amount of
crystals originated from the A01 plate, and appeared after 11 days of their plating. Their
shapes may be seen in Figure 3.12. The buffer used in that well was 0.2 M Lithium Sulfate
as salt, 0.1 M CAPS: NaOH, pH 10.5 as buffer, and 2 M Ammonium Sulfate as precipitant.
Plates 1-2 contained SEC fractions 2 and 3 (see Figure 3.8), plates 3-4 contained SEC
fractions 4, 5 and 6 (see Figure 3.9), plate 5 contained SEC fractions 1-5, whereas plate 6
contained SEC fractions 6-12 (see Figure 3.11). SEC fractions for plate 7 have not been
pictured, but the fractions taken were similar to ones from plate 5. In some cases, purity
had to be compromised due to poor peak separation and risking not having enough sample
to plate crystallization plates. As minimum concentration was desired to be approximately
10 mg/mL, such sacrifices had to be made.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
33
==PAGE:40==
4
Discussion
4.1
Kinetic Studies
With the presented kinetic study results, we can deep dive into the significance and impli-
cations of the data we obtained. Antibodies that have shown a benefit in lowering levels
of antigen in serum have distinct binding characteristics. Firstly, the binding at pH 7.4
needs to good enough based on their KD. Then, pH-sensitive binding needs to fit into a
real-life scenario, and thirdly, kdis at pH 5.5 needs to allow for meaningful differences in
dissociation to improve unbound IgG concentration in the long run.
Firstly, an examination of binding at 7.4 pH is in place. An analysis of the published
KD values by simply looking at the literature described in Section 1.5 yields an obser-
vation that the current efforts in pH-sensitive antibody engineering reach values in the
nanomolar range, 0.5-5 nM for whole IgGs (Igawa, Ishii, et al. 2010; Kroetsch et al. 2018)
whereas reported values for Fabs are 10-40 nM (Bonvin et al. 2015). Since the Fab format
was used in KD measurements, we can go off the premise that binding within tens of nM
is suﬀicient for potent binding, whereas 10-fold increase in KD is considered non-binding
based on Bonvin et al. (Bonvin et al. 2015). Naturally, comparing the obtained binding
data and data from in vivo studies in particular would require the clones to be in an IgG
format, as the presence of Fc region is necessary for IgG recycling. What the examined
literature means for our data is that primarily the clones binding to α-Ctx and α-Etx
could be considered good binders, while most of the clones binding α-Btx could not. The
exceptions are D11 and A12, which bound to α-Btx with KD of 12 nM and 32 nM, making
them the most cross-reactive clones in our selected panel.
To make sense of an intramuscular envenoming event and how an antibody-based treat-
ment can come into play, distinguishing two phases can be useful. The series of events is
illustrated by Yap et al. on study of toxicokinetics of Naja sumatrana venom in rabbits,
specifically following the major neurotoxin found in it. The first part takes place when
a snake injects its venom and a local concentration of toxins is high. This is followed by
rapid action and distribution of the neurotoxin, causing a exponential increase followed
by fast decrease in its concentration in plasma, as it enters the plasma from the injection
site but is then diffused into the surrounding tissue via circulation. Reportedly, the neu-
rotoxin reaches its maximum concentration in circulation only after half an hour. After
the initial adsorption and distribution phase, the plasma concentration of the neurotoxin
begins to stabilise and decline much slower. This can be attributed to a fraction of tox-
ins in tissue making their way to the circulation and back, reaching equilibrium whilst
being eliminated from the system. In mathematical terms, this can be described by a
two-compartment model, characterised by plasma and tissue compartments both playing
a role in toxin distribution (Yap et al. 2014). Furthermore, elimination half-life of the
neurotoxin was measured to be approximately 9 hours, which highlights the persistence of
snake neurotoxins in the system, whereas the volume of distribution indicates that most
of them are distributed into the peripheral area, so outside of the circulation.
With that in mind, we can evaluate the situation in which our hypothetical pH-dependent
cross-reactive clone would end up in. As it is uncommon for antivenom administration to
occur right after the envenoming, it is more sensible to consider the second phase of the
described events, where an equilibrium is reached and the toxin is already distributed in
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
34
==PAGE:41==
the body, all while being eliminated, with its concentration gradually decreasing over time.
A point worth discussing is that pharmacokinetics described for the neurotoxins differ
from that of IgGs. Essentially, successful IgG-neurotoxin binding depends on the anti-
body’s likelihood of encountering the neurotoxin. If it is primarily present in the tissue,
where IgG’s reach is limited, chances of their encounter are low. The allocation of both
can be described by their volumes of distribution (VD), and the measured VD for the
neurotoxin in the discussed study was approximately 2 L in rabbits, which is more than
10-fold of their circulatory volume (Yap et al. 2014). As mentioned, this implies that most
of the neurotoxin is distributed in the tissue. Since the VD depends on the MW of a
molecule, one can imagine that an IgG will have a harder time diffusing and penetrating
into tissue than a 10 kDa neurotoxin. This causes an IgG to have a low VD - closer to the
circulatory volume (Ovacik and Lin 2018). Literature suggests that formats such as Fab
or F(ab′)2, which have a larger VD than IgGs, primarily due to their smaller size, could
be more appropriate in targeting toxins with a large VD, as they could reach tissue with
more ease than their IgG counterparts (Gutiérrez, León, and Lomonte 2003). However,
this would present a limitation to the IgG recycling mechanism we intended to explore;
IgG-based fragments such as Fab and F(ab′)2 lack the Fc region, and cannot bind to the
FcRn.
Furthermore, in terms of the pH-dependent component of our antibody, time is of essence.
Benefits from having a long-circulating unbound antibody can be enjoyed especially in
events where an antigen is consistently produced, which is not the case with envenoming,
since it is a one-time event. A fine example of that is the study done by Igawa et al. in
vivo on transgenic mice, which revealed that an engineered pH-dependent unbound anti-
body’s concentration was 20-fold higher than that of its non-pH dependent parent after 78
hours and was hence better in neutralising a continuously-produced antigen (Igawa, Ishii,
et al. 2010). However, an examination of the provided data from the study shows that the
difference in the concentrations was insignificant during the first 24 hours, which allows
us to make a case that pH-dependent binding of toxins can be of use, but its advantages
may be limited due to the time-scale we operate with. Without a doubt, in extreme cases
where life or death scenarios are involved, such benefits would be deemed minuscule. This
can be highlighted by the fact that death occurred within 24 hours for one third of the
fatal cases, as reported by a hospital in central India (Patil et al. 2014). In less severe
situations, where long-term effects wish to be countered, pH-dependent antibodies could
still be advantageous. This is particularly meaningful due to the fact that toxins were
shown to have a long elimination half-life. Certainly, comparing human physiology and
values obtained from in vivo animal studies does not allow direct parallels, but gives an
idea of what to expect. Furthermore, just by observing in vivo data generated by one
pH-dependent antibody made for a continuously-produced antigen, we cannot draw any
conclusions on the matter of usefulness of IgG recycling in envenoming events. Instead, in
vivo studies mimicking the envenoming scenario should be performed to understand the
significance of toxicokinetics on the IgG recycling mechanism.
Lastly, the pH-dependence is predominantly related to the dissociation rate constant at
endosomal pH (5.5-6). In this report, a ratio between the kdis at 5.5 and 7.4 was used
to describe pH-dependency. In general terms, the value obtained is considered a good
indicator, however, the values of kdis at pH 5.5 alone should be taken into account as well.
Specifically in the case of strong binders, the kdis values may be still very low, and rela-
tively few IgG’s may manage to release the bound antigen during the limited time available.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
35
==PAGE:42==
Based on the IgG recycling investigations, only 10-15 seconds pass during the whole event
(R. J. Ober et al. 2004). In contrast, our dissociation phase at pH 5.5 was measured for
300 seconds in the case of strong binders to obtain an accurate kdis - as seen in Appendix C
for α-Etx, for example. In simple terms, despite an impressive kdis fold value, most IgGs
would remain antigen-bound as the effective kdis is still low. Therefore, for pH-sensitive
antibodies, a compromise between kdis (and hence aﬀinity) and pH-sensitivity needs to
be obtained, so the pH-dependency makes a difference in free antibody availability all
whilst preserving antigen binding. Based on the analysed literature from before, their kdis
at endosomal pH range is available in Table 1.1, and ranges from 10−3 to 10−2s−1. Of
particular interest is again data from Fabs, which was within the same range, and there
seemed to be no obvious trends between the antibody formats. What we have at hand
from our own data are values ranging from 10−4 to 10−2s−1. Primarily the clones binding
to α-Ctx and α-Etx reached the lower end of the values, indicating that there are still
very few Fabs dissociating from the two toxins. An encouraging finding is that our most
pH-sensitive clone, A01, reaches the defined range for all toxins. Therefore, despite weaker
binding aﬀinity to α-Btx, A01 lives up to most of the predetermined expectations for an
pH-sensitive cross-reactive binder.
With the kinetic aspect examined, we can now turn to investigate underlying structural
properties which may contribute to pH-sensitive properties of the chosen clones.
4.2
Examining pH-Sensitive Epitope-Paratope Binding
4.2.1
LV3-21 versus LV6-57
We can begin the investigation of the pH-sensitive binding of our clones by looking at the
general differences between two groups of selected clones which differ in their light chain
V gene. Similarities within each group would be expected, as they share genetic origins.
First of all, this was visible in the preliminary experiments, with LV6-57 standing out
as potentially more pH-sensitive. The sole reason for that were distinguishable flatter-
looking curves and a visible difference between off-rates at pH 7.4 and pH 5.5 during
α-Btx measurements (see Figure 3.4), but after a more exhaustive kinetic analysis on all
toxins, this turned out to be misleading.
Examining the Table 3.1, there is indeed a trend of higher aﬀinity clones within the
LV6-57 group for α-Btx and α-Ctx. The difference in KD between the two groups is not
as visible for α-Etx. However, this does not translate to the pH-sensitive aspect of the
experiment. The distribution of kdis5.5
kdis7.4 ratio favours LV3-21 clones, with 5 cases of LV3-21
clones shown to be pH-sensitive, whereas only 1 case of a LV6-57 clone reached a 4 fold
difference or more. This leads us to believe that LV3-21 clones are more pH-sensitive
in general, possibly having a genetic predisposition, which can be looked into by CDR
alignment.
4.2.2
CDR Alignment
Understanding whether residues, which are present in the CDR loops of the selected clones,
play a role in binding and pH-dependency, their sequences can be aligned and analysed.
Since the CDR1-3 loops contain the highest degree of variability between clones, and are
sites of antigen binding, any outstanding differences, especially in relation to His, could
be the cause of their underlying pH-(in)sensitivity.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.1: Combined CDR regions of the different clones plus C05 parent. The residues
are coloured based on their chemical properties, with Histidine in bold and orange to
identify it with more ease. Regularly, it would have been green, as it is neutrally charged
at physiological pH. A conserved His residue in all clones is pointed out. Each CDR region
is denoted.
From the data we obtained in Section 3.4.2, Table 3.1, we are able to compare clone-by-
clone differences in binding aﬀinity, pH-dependent binding to different toxins along with
their compiled CDR sequence. This is done with a special focus on the His residue, for
this reason specifically coloured orange on the alignment, as it is said to play a role in
pH-sensitivity (see Section 1.5). Furthermore, no His residues are present on the heavy
chain, diminishing the probability that the heavy chain was involved in the observed pH-
sensitive events.
The following observations can be made:
There is a conserved His in all the CDR regions - circled red on Figure 4.1. Just based off
the fact that the clones’ pH-sensitivity varies, it is an unlikely cause for the exhibited pH-
sensitivity of some clones. At the same time, due to its conservation across the selection,
it is more likely to be one of the key residues in toxin binding. Despite all that, depending
on its position in space, conformations and local environment of this His could still be
influenced in such way to cause pH-sensitivity for one, but not other clones. Overall, a
conclusion cannot be made with the current data.
An interesting comparison can be made between A01 and A04. Both clones exhibit similar
KD profiles across the toxin selection, but with A01 being more pH-sensitive. In fact, an
examination of Figure 4.1 produces an additional His residue in A04, whereas A01 does
not contain it. From what literature suggests, the presence of His residues should induce or
aid pH-sensitive behaviour. However, in the case of A04, no extraordinary fold difference
in kdis at varying pH is observed. This suggests that the extra His in A04 plays little role
in such behaviour. Other differences between the two involve presence of either negatively
or positively charged residues on either clone, which could influence the local environment
and hence pKa of His residues in the clone. However, the extent of such effects cannot be
estimated with the given data.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
37
==PAGE:44==
Due to the complexity of the parameters involved, singular observations do not neces-
sarily translate to one correct answer regarding the reason for pH-dependent binding. In
the end, accepting that multiple factors are involved in the reasons for pH-sensitivity is
necessary. However, one thing can be said for certain: there is no newly-introduced His
residue in the clones which would explain A01’s pH-sensitive binding but not induce it in
others. Therefore, a straightforward answer is not at hand when examining the sequence
alone.
Lastly, it should be considered whether pH-sensitivity had been toxin-mediated.
It is
reasonable to imagine that just as there are pH-sensitive elements on an antigen binding
domain, they could be contained on the antigen itself. In that case, a trend within the toxin
group data could be perhaps observed. However, there are no such indications. In fact,
the only trend visible was that α-Etx binders showed decreased pH-sensitive behaviour.
Furthermore, an examination of the toxin sequences in Appendix A shows that out of all
toxins, only α-Ctx contains a His residue. With that, we can assume that toxin-induced
pH binding is not playing a major role. However, the His residue in α-Ctx could be the
reason why α-Ctx binding with LV3-21 clones was pH-sensitive in 3 out of 3 clones tested
against it. Regardless, it would have to have been something in the structure of LV3-21
clones themselves that is able to bring out the pH-sensitive behaviour, since LV6-57 clones
did not show the same pattern.
Overall, based on the kinetic data and pH-sensitive behaviour of the clones, the focus
of our investigation shifted towards two interesting clones. First, A01, which exhibited
pH-sensitive binding for all three tested α-neurotoxins. Despite its weaker binding aﬀinity
to α-Btx, it was worthwhile testing in further. Second, D11, which was one of the most
cross-reactive clones available and with high binding aﬀinities. Furthermore, it showed pH-
sensitive binding against α-Btx but not others, so understanding the underlying molecular
mechanisms playing part in whether pH-sensitive binding will occur or not could be of
interest. The goal from then on was to attempt crystallizing both clones, preferably in
a complex with α-Ctx for both, and α-Btx for D11. The structures would aid in future
research of understanding pH-sensitive phenomena.
4.3
scFv-Toxin Complex Formation
In hopes of providing a secondary structure for future understanding of pH-sensitive bind-
ing, numerous expressions of scFv A01 and D11 were performed.
As previously highlighted, the clones’ format for BLI experiments was Fab, whereas for
crystallization attempts we chose to use scFvs instead. The decision was made for several
reasons; BLI experiments were done with Fabs to avoid a known issue of scFv aggregation
and faulty data obtained from it, whereas crystallization attempts used scFvs from a bac-
terial system to avoid PTMs associated with mammalian expression, which would disrupt
homogeneity of the sample and hence lower the sample’s purity.
During the process of expression and purification of single scFvs as well as purification
of the complexes, several interesting observations could be made.
Firstly, an additional band at 35-25 kDa seemed to appear on gels during purifications,
which was just below the scFv band (40-35 kDa). This phenomenon occurred for both,
A01 and D11 purifications, so the following discussion looks at cases from both scFvs in-
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
38
==PAGE:45==
terchangeably. At first it was not clear whether the extra band was a species similar to
the MW and shape of our scFv, and was an impurity which could not be separated by SEC.
During D11 complex binding with α-Ctx and α-Btx, an unexpected observation arose.
The chromatogram we obtained contained two peaks, one corresponding to bound and
one to unbound D11. Since the kinetic experiments suggested that D11 bound α-Ctx
better than α-Btx, we expected a significant portion of D11 to be α-Ctx bound. Instead,
it appeared that it bound α-Btx better, as its bound peak was significantly higher (see
Figures 3.8, 3.9 for comparison). Furthermore, despite 1:1.5 molar ratio, and an excess
of toxin visible on the chromatogram, barely any D11-α-Ctx formed. Since the D11 for
α-Ctx and α-Btx trials originated from different batches, and the D11 used for α-Ctx was
older, we speculated that impaired binding could be due to degradation of the sample.
Furthermore, the gel in Figure 3.8 supports the observation that the sample primarily
contained the 35-25 kDa band discussed above.
However, after conducting molar ratio tests on A01 and α-Ctx, another observation was
made. By looking at the shoulder peak seen on A01 scFv Figure 3.10A, we can observe
that it moves along with A01 scFv when a complex between α-Ctx and A01 is formed.
The particular A01 scFv run was made shortly after its purification, and the sample was
first frozen and then thawed back. Regardless of its short existence, the scFv appeared to
degrade quite rapidly. Since the shoulder/degraded peak appeared to move toward a lower
VR (higher MW), we can conclude that it bound toxin as well. Hence, it should still be the
scFv, degraded, but nevertheless capable of toxin binding. A strong possibility is that a
part of the His-tag or alike, with properties unrelated to binding, got degraded. Observing
that the fragment can still bind, scFv degradation does not explain diminished D11-α-Ctx
complex formation, so it is conceivable that the toxin and its variation throughout the
experiments played part.
The examination of D11 trials allows for a closer look at the hypothesis.
Two toxin
peaks appear for both, α-Ctx and α-Btx. We can observe that they come at VR 15 mL
(9.7 kDa) and VR 16.4 (6.1 kDa) for α-Ctx, whereas the values are 15 mL (9.8 kDa) and
16.5 (5.7 kDa) for α-Btx. Since we also conducted ratio tests of A01 on the same column,
with the same α-Ctx batch - leftovers from the D11 complex generation - we can directly
compare the toxin behaviour. Whereas the D11 trials exhibited two toxin peaks, A01 trial
only revealed one peak. At that, it elutes at 15.2 mL (9.1 kDa), which would correspond
to the first peak observed for D11 tests. The 6 kDa species cannot be identified. Since
the column and the α-Ctx batch are the same, only two significant differences between
the trials can be identified. Those are a different clone scFv and the amount of time that
had passed since α-Ctx entered solution. This begs the question whether almost all α-Ctx
shifted to its dimeric form during that time. It is known from the literature that dimeric
α-Ctx can be found in nature, and the same is true for α-Btx (Osipov et al. 2008; Love and
Stroud 1986). Undoubtedly, it would have been valuable to perform a run of α-Ctx only
to see what state the toxin was prior to encountering the scFv. Lastly, the pattern seen
in A01-α-Ctx ratio tests cannot fully explain whether all A01 was α-Ctx bound. There
are two scenarios: 1) the shifted shoulder peak contains unbound A01 plus degraded A01
which got bound; 2) all A01 species, degraded or not, bound to α-Ctx. Regardless, we
have to admit that the amount of variables proves to be too complex to make a solid
conclusion without performing additional experiments.
Observing the gels and the chromatogram in Figure 3.8, we can see that lanes 4 and
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
39
==PAGE:46==
5 contain samples from the 9 kDa and 6 kDa peaks, respectively. Despite being separate
peaks, with good spacial separation between them, the band observed on the gel is still the
same - one between 10 and 15 kDa. This leads us to believe that both peaks contained the
same toxin, and that the higher MW peak was the dimer form. Since the gel performed was
reducing, any such forms would dissipate during the process. Of course, a non-reducing
gel would have had to been performed to strengthen that conclusion. Additionally, the
calculated values through SEC calibration curve fitting versus the value observed on the
gel are different.
This makes sense as they are based on two different principles, and
each protein may perform differently, depending on its shape, charge-to-mass ration, etc.
Furthermore, 6 kDa times two does not necessarily equal 9 kDa, which would have been a
stronger case for a dimer, but this can be attributed to the error of the calibration curve,
which highly depends on proteins it was run with. Nevertheless, it appears to be a solid
case that the two peaks are mono and dimeric forms of the toxins.
Furthermore, a question whether scFvs preferentially bind one form over the other needs
to be addressed. Considering that the clones were obtained through phage display, the
form of the toxin during the selection process may play a role in the actual clone selection.
If the case was that the toxins assumed a primarily dimeric form, then the clones selected
could be biased towards binding it better. Of course, this requires a certain amount of
speculation, as it is not known how quickly the dimeric form would be assumed or whether
it would make a difference in binding.
The calculated peak difference between bound and unbound scFvs obtained from the
SEC complex data in all cases was approximately 10 kDa. Seeing we only had one peak
corresponding to that approximate size (the 9 kDa, presumed dimer), we can make an
assumption that the dimer form was bound to form the complexes. Naturally, this is not
a conclusive observation, as a monomeric form is in reality supposed to be approximately
7.5 kDa, while at the same time, the calculated MW based off SEC is not accurate either.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
40
==PAGE:47==
5
Perspectives
Some of the obtained results have already paved the way for future research and new
knowledge.
After obtaining the kinetic data and finding a promising pH-sensitive clone, A01 and
D11 in their IgG format were sent to Oslo to be tested on a human endothelial cell-based
recycling assay (HERA), developed by the scientists there (Grevys et al. 2018). The assay
will present information on how well they can be recycled through the FcRn pathway, as
the cells used have an over-expressed FcRn receptor. In vitro test of this kind can provide
an insight into whether kinetic tests we performed translate into a cellular environment.
Thus far, information about the production of protein crystals has been presented. How-
ever, the determination of the crystals’ structure is not within the scope of this thesis.
Regardless, efforts on obtaining the secondary structure are on their way. First, the sin-
gular crystal from D11-α-Ctx was sent for X-ray shooting, but the structure revealed that
the crystal was heterogeneous and the resolution was very low. Hence, the conditions in
the well that the crystal formed should be optimised. Second, numerous crystals from
A01-α-Ctx present a more promising trial, as more crystals can be tested at once. They
are scheduled to be sent for X-ray shooting after the submission date of the thesis.
The research into pH-sensitive epitope-paratope binding does not suﬀiciently cover all
aspects of snake envenoming events. Since pharmacokinetics of toxins differ from that
of continuously produced antigens in the body, additional research should be conducted
to understand applicability of pH-sensitive behaviour of antibodies when envenoming oc-
curs.
The obtained array of clones exhibiting various levels of pH-sensitive behaviour
gives opportunity to be utilised in such research, and it could help explore what level of
pH-sensitivity is necessary to see an advantage in their use.
Finally, while two interesting clones were identified, no clones in our selection displayed
cross-reactivity and pH-sensitivity to all three toxins. To see if this can be improved, and
both, cross-reactive and pH-sensitive clones could be generated, further development of
in vitro displays may be in place. This can be done by using specialized libraries or iden-
tification of rare clones which could provide improvements needed to obtain clones with
both properties.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
41
==PAGE:48==
6
Conclusion
Treatment of snake envenoming by developing better antivenoms remains a challenge. Due
to the complexity of each snake’s venom and multiple neutralization targets within it, it
may take years before novel improved treatments are available for snakebite victims. That
is not to say that the efforts have not been made. Broadly-neutralizing antibodies engi-
neered to neutralize an array of toxins within toxin groups hold a promise of using one
antibody mix to treat multiple types of snake bites. An additional way of improving such
antibody-based treatments’ performance is to take advantage of the IgG recycling mech-
anism in the body, which could allow for more antigen-binding events during an IgG’s
lifetime. This can be done by incorporating pH-sensitive binding in the epitope-paratope
region, which would cause the release of antigen for degradation, while an unbound IgG
could re-enter circulation.
The aim of the presented report was to explore pH-sensitive epitope-paratope binding in a
selection of clones, which were produced without any intended pH-sensitivity. Hence, any
pH-sensitive binding observed would be solely due to chance - naturally occurring. The
selected clones came from a cross-reactive selection against α-Ctx and α-Etx obtained
through phage display. To explore further cross-reactivity, a similar toxin, namely α-Btx,
was included in our investigation. The search hoped to assess the clones’ binding to their
toxin targets. The evaluation consisted of kinetic studies using BLI, which revealed the
clones’ KD to the three toxins, as well as provided information about their pH-sensitivity
by incorporating kinetic measurements of kdis at varying pH - that of endosomes and of
physiological pH.
The results of the constructed experiments suggest that the phage display without pH
selection steps produced clones that exhibited pH-sensitive behaviour. The spectrum of
the selected clones had various levels of pH-sensitivity.
In addition, there were differ-
ences in binding aﬀinities for the same clone to different toxins, as well as between similar
clones. This suggests that the contributions between epitope and paratope vary between
each tested clone.
The research revealed one promising clone, A01, which bound α-Ctx and α-Etx with
KD low enough to be considered a good binder, as well as exhibited pH-sensitive be-
haviour towards all three toxins. Furthermore, a strong cross-reactive binder, D11, was
found to bind well with the entire selected array of toxins. It exhibited pH-sensitive be-
haviour towards α-Btx, but none of the other toxins. Both clones are excellent candidates
for further investigations into naturally-occurring pH-sensitivity, which may be unveiled
with the secondary structure models generated from the protein crystals of D11 and A01
complexes made during the project. The crystals will also reveal whether the production
method was successful, more specifically, whether the scFv degradation compromised the
samples’ purity to the extent where an alternative format, such as Fab produced from a
bacterial system and with the His tag removed post-purification, should be used.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
42
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
Chippaux, J P (1998). “Snake-Bites: Appraisal of the Global Situation”. en. In: Bull. World
Health Organ. 76.5, pp. 515–524.
Kasturiratne, Anuradhani et al. (Nov. 2008). “The Global Burden of Snakebite: A Litera-
ture Analysis and Modelling Based on Regional Estimates of Envenoming and Deaths”.
In: PLoS Medicine 5.11. Ed. by Ken Winkel, e218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050218.
Chippaux, Jean Philippe (Aug. 2017). “Snakebite Envenomation Turns Again Into a Ne-
glected Tropical Disease!” In: Journal of Venomous Animals and Toxins including Trop-
ical Diseases 23.1. doi: 10.1186/s40409-017-0127-6.
Harrison, Robert A. et al. (Dec. 2009). “Snake Envenoming: A Disease of Poverty”. In:
PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 3.12. Ed. by Julian White, e569. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pntd.0000569.
Williams, David J (Oct. 2015). “Snake Bite: a Global Failure to Act Costs Thousands of
Lives Each Year”. In: BMJ, h5378. doi: 10.1136/bmj.h5378.
Sasa, Mahmood, Jazmı́n Arias Ortega, and Fabián Bonilla-Murillo (Nov. 2017). “Assessing
Survival of Wild-Caught Snakes in Open Venom Production Systems”. In: Toxicon 138,
pp. 49–52. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2017.08.001.
Landon, John and David S. Smith (Jan. 2003). “Merits of Sheep Antisera for Antivenom
Manufacture”. In: Journal of Toxicology: Toxin Reviews 22.1, pp. 15–22. doi: 10.1081/txr-
120019017.
Silva, Wilmar Dias da and Denise V. Tambourgi (Oct. 2011). “The Humoral Immune
Response Induced by Snake Venom Toxins”. In: Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets
10.5, pp. 343–357. doi: 10.2174/187152811797200623.
León, Guillermo, Mariángela Vargas, et al. (Sept. 2018). “Current Technology for the
Industrial Manufacture of Snake Antivenoms”. In: Toxicon 151, pp. 63–73. doi: 10 .
1016/j.toxicon.2018.06.084.
Casewell, Nicholas R., Timothy N.W. Jackson, et al. (Aug. 2020). “Causes and Con-
sequences of Snake Venom Variation”. In: Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 41.8,
pp. 570–581. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2020.05.006.
Fry, Bryan G. et al. (Jan. 2003). “Effectiveness of Snake Antivenom: Species and Regional
Venom Variation and Its Clinical Impact”. In: Journal of Toxicology: Toxin Reviews 22.1,
pp. 23–34. doi: 10.1081/txr-120019018.
Laustsen, Andreas H., José Marı́a Gutiérrez, et al. (May 2018). “Pros and Cons of Different
Therapeutic Antibody Formats for Recombinant Antivenom Development”. In: Toxicon
146, pp. 151–175. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2018.03.004.
León, Guillermo, Marı́a Herrera, et al. (Dec. 2013). “Pathogenic Mechanisms Underlying
Adverse Reactions Induced by Intravenous Administration of Snake Antivenoms”. In:
Toxicon 76, pp. 63–76. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2013.09.010.
Ferraz, Camila R. et al. (June 2019). “Multifunctional Toxins in Snake Venoms and Ther-
apeutic Implications: From Pain to Hemorrhage and Necrosis”. In: Frontiers in Ecology
and Evolution 7. doi: 10.3389/fevo.2019.00218. url: https://doi.org/10.3389%2Ffevo.
2019.00218.
Slagboom, Julien et al. (Feb. 2017). “Haemotoxic Snake Venoms: Their Functional Activ-
ity, Impact on Snakebite Victims and Pharmaceutical Promise”. In: British Journal of
Haematology 177.6, pp. 947–959. doi: 10.1111/bjh.14591.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
43
==PAGE:50==
Laustsen, Andreas H., Brian Lohse, et al. (Sept. 2015). “Selecting Key Toxins for Focused
Development of Elapid Snake Antivenoms and Inhibitors Guided by a Toxicity Score”.
In: Toxicon 104, pp. 43–45. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.07.334.
Xiao, Huixiang et al. (2017). “Snake Venom PLA2, a Promising Target for Broad-Spectrum
Antivenom Drug Development”. In: BioMed Research International 2017, pp. 1–10. doi:
10.1155/2017/6592820.
Wagstaff, Simon C et al. (June 2006). “Bioinformatics and Multiepitope DNA Immuniza-
tion to Design Rational Snake Antivenom”. In: PLoS Medicine 3.6. Ed. by Ken Winkel,
e184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030184.
Casewell, Nicholas R., Wolfgang Wüster, et al. (Apr. 2013). “Complex Cocktails: The
Evolutionary Novelty of Venoms”. In: Trends in Ecology & Evolution 28.4, pp. 219–229.
doi: 10.1016/j.tree.2012.10.020.
Richard, Gabrielle et al. (July 2013). “In Vivo Neutralization of -Cobratoxin with High-
Aﬀinity Llama Single-Domain Antibodies (VHHs) and a VHH-Fc Antibody”. In: PLoS
ONE 8.7. Ed. by Paulo Lee Ho, e69495. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069495.
Engmark, Mikael et al. (Nov. 2016). “High-Throughput Immuno-Profiling of Mamba (Den-
droaspis) Venom Toxin Epitopes Using High-Density Peptide Microarrays”. In: Scientific
Reports 6.1. doi: 10.1038/srep36629.
Laustsen, Andreas H., Kristoffer H. Johansen, et al. (Feb. 2017). “Recombinant Snakebite
Antivenoms: A Cost-Competitive Solution to a Neglected Tropical Disease?” In: PLOS
Neglected Tropical Diseases 11.2. Ed. by Robert A. Harrison, e0005361. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pntd.0005361.
Chang, C C and C Y Lee (July 1963). “Isolation of Neurotoxins from the Venom of
Bungarus multicinctus and Their Modes of Neuromuscular Blocking Action”. en. In:
Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. Ther. 144, pp. 241–257.
Changeux, J.-P., M. Kasai, and C.-Y. Lee (Nov. 1970). “Use of a Snake Venom Toxin to
Characterize the Cholinergic Receptor Protein”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 67.3, pp. 1241–1247. doi: 10.1073/pnas.67.3.1241.
Lumsden, Natalie G. et al. (Mar. 2005). “Pharmacological Characterisation of a Neuro-
toxin from the Venom of Boiga dendrophila (Mangrove catsnake)”. In: Toxicon 45.3,
pp. 329–334. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2004.11.003.
Pawlak, Joanna et al. (Sept. 2006). “Denmotoxin, a Three-finger Toxin from the Colubrid
Snake Boiga dendrophila (Mangrove Catsnake) with Bird-Specific Activity”. In: Journal
of Biological Chemistry 281.39, pp. 29030–29041. doi: 10.1074/jbc.m605850200.
Pettersen, Eric F. et al. (2004). “UCSF Chimera-A Visualization System for Exploratory
Research and Analysis”. In: Journal of Computational Chemistry 25.13, pp. 1605–1612.
doi: 10.1002/jcc.20084. url: https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.20084.
Betzel, C. et al. (Nov. 1991). “The Refined Crystal Structure of Alpha-Cobratoxin from
Naja naja siamensis at 2.4 ÅResolution.” In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 266.32,
pp. 21530–21536. doi: 10.1016/s0021-9258(18)54671-8.
Lynagh, Timothy et al. (Nov. 2020). “Peptide Inhibitors of the -Cobratoxin–Nicotinic
Acetylcholine Receptor Interaction”. In: Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 63.22, pp. 13709–
13718. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c01202.
Walkinshaw, M. D., W. Saenger, and A. Maelicke (May 1980). “Three-Dimensional Struc-
ture of the ”Long” Neurotoxin from Cobra Venom.” In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 77.5, pp. 2400–2404. doi: 10.1073/pnas.77.5.2400.
Nickitenko, A.V. et al. (Apr. 1993). “Three-Dimensional Structure of Neurotoxin-1 from
Naja naja oxiana Venom at 1.9 ÅResolution”. In: FEBS Letters 320.2, pp. 111–117. doi:
10.1016/0014-5793(93)80073-4. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-5793(93)80073-4.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
44
==PAGE:51==
Samel, Mari et al. (Apr. 2008). “l-Amino Acid Oxidase from Naja naja oxiana Venom”. In:
Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part B: Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
149.4, pp. 572–580. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpb.2007.11.008.
Tan, Kae Yi et al. (Apr. 2015). “Venomics, Lethality and Neutralization of Naja kaouthia
(Monocled Cobra) Venoms from Three Different Geographical Regions of Southeast
Asia”. In: Journal of Proteomics 120, pp. 105–125. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.02.012.
Slowinski, Joseph B. and Wolfgang Wüster (2000). “A New Cobra (Elapidae: Naja) from
Myanmar (Burma)”. In: Herpetologica 56.2, pp. 257–270. issn: 00180831, 19385099.
Mao, Yan-Chiao et al. (June 2017). “Bungarus multicinctus multicinctus Snakebite in
Taiwan”. In: The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 96.6, pp. 1497–
1504. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0005.
Wang, Ching-I Anderson et al. (June 2014). “Isolation and Structural and Pharmacological
Characterization of -Elapitoxin-Dpp2d, an Amidated Three Finger Toxin from Black
Mamba Venom”. In: Biochemistry 53.23, pp. 3758–3766. doi: 10.1021/bi5004475.
Hodgson, Peter S. and Terence M. Davidson (May 1996). “Biology and Treatment of the
Mamba Snakebite”. In: Wilderness & Environmental Medicine 7.2, pp. 133–145. doi:
10.1580/1080-6032(1996)007[0133:batotm]2.3.co;2.
Madeira, Fábio et al. (Apr. 2019). “The EMBL-EBI Search and Sequence Analysis Tools
APIs in 2019”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 47.W1, W636–W641. doi: 10.1093/nar/
gkz268.
Mullard, Asher (May 2021). “FDA Approves 100th Monoclonal Antibody Product”. In:
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 20.7, pp. 491–495. doi: 10.1038/d41573-021-00079-7.
Rodrigo, Gustav, Mats Gruvegård, and James Van Alstine (Sept. 2015). “Antibody Frag-
ments and Their Purification by Protein L Aﬀinity Chromatography”. In: Antibodies 4.3,
pp. 259–277. doi: 10.3390/antib4030259.
Schroeder, Harry W. and Lisa Cavacini (Feb. 2010). “Structure and Function of Im-
munoglobulins”. In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 125.2, S41–S52. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.046.
Sanz, Laura et al. (June 2005). “Antibody Engineering: Facing New Challenges in Cancer
Therapy”. In: 26.6, pp. 641–648. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-7254.2005.00135.x.
Huston, James S. et al. (Jan. 1993). “Medical Applications of Single-Chain Antibodies”.
In: 10.2-3, pp. 195–217. doi: 10.3109/08830189309061696.
Jain, Aviral and Sanjay Jain (2008). “PEGylation: An Approach for Drug Delivery. A
Review”. In: 25.5, pp. 403–447. doi: 10.1615/critrevtherdrugcarriersyst.v25.i5.10.
Palmeira, Patricia et al. (2012). “IgG Placental Transfer in Healthy and Pathological
Pregnancies”. In: Clinical and Developmental Immunology 2012, pp. 1–13. doi: 10.1155/
2012/985646.
Roopenian, Derry C. and Shreeram Akilesh (Aug. 2007). “FcRn: The Neonatal Fc Receptor
Comes of Age”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 7.9, pp. 715–725. doi: 10.1038/nri2155.
Roopenian, Derry C., Gregory J. Christianson, et al. (Apr. 2003). “The MHC Class I-
Like IgG Receptor Controls Perinatal IgG Transport, IgG Homeostasis, and Fate of
IgG-Fc-Coupled Drugs”. In: The Journal of Immunology 170.7, pp. 3528–3533. doi:
10.4049/jimmunol.170.7.3528.
Raghavan, M., Y. Wang, and P. J. Bjorkman (Nov. 1995). “Effects of Receptor Dimeriza-
tion on the Interaction Between the Class I Major Histocompatibility Complex-Related
Fc Receptor and IgG.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 92.24,
pp. 11200–11204. doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.24.11200.
Raghavan, Malini, Vincent R. Bonagura, et al. (Nov. 1995). “Analysis of the pH Depen-
dence of the Neonatal Fc Receptor/Immunoglobulin G Interaction Using Antibody and
Receptor Variants”. In: Biochemistry 34.45, pp. 14649–14657. doi: 10.1021/bi00045a005.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
45
==PAGE:52==
Kim, Jin-Kyoo et al. (Oct. 1994). “Localization of the Site of the Murine IgG1 Molecule
That is Involved in Binding to the Murine Intestinal Fc Receptor”. In: European Journal
of Immunology 24.10, pp. 2429–2434. doi: 10.1002/eji.1830241025.
Raghavan, Malini, Marcus Y. Chen, et al. (July 1994). “Investigation of the Interaction
Between the Class I MHC-Related Fc Receptor and its Immunoglobulin G Ligand”. In:
Immunity 1.4, pp. 303–315. doi: 10.1016/1074-7613(94)90082-5.
Burmeister, Wilhelm P., Andrew H. Huber, and Pamela J. Bjorkman (Nov. 1994). “Crystal
Structure of the Complex of Rat Neonatal Fc Receptor with Fc”. In: Nature 372.6504,
pp. 379–383. doi: 10.1038/372379a0.
Ober, Raimund J. et al. (Feb. 2004). “Visualizing the Site and Dynamics of IgG Salvage
by the MHC Class I-Related Receptor, FcRn”. In: The Journal of Immunology 172.4,
pp. 2021–2029. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.4.2021.
Ober, R. J. et al. (July 2004). “Exocytosis of IgG as mediated by the receptor, FcRn:
An analysis at the Single-Molecule Level”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 101.30, pp. 11076–11081. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0402970101.
Pyzik, Michal et al. (July 2019). “The Neonatal Fc Receptor (FcRn): A Misnomer?” In:
Frontiers in Immunology 10. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01540.
Chan, Andrew C. and Paul J. Carter (May 2010). “Therapeutic Antibodies for Autoim-
munity and Inflammation”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 10.5, pp. 301–316. doi:
10.1038/nri2761.
Hinton, Paul R. et al. (Feb. 2004). “Engineered Human IgG Antibodies with Longer Serum
Half-lives in Primates”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 279.8, pp. 6213–6216. doi:
10.1074/jbc.c300470200.
Zalevsky, Jonathan et al. (Jan. 2010). “Enhanced Antibody Half-Life Improves in vivo
Activity”. In: Nature Biotechnology 28.2, pp. 157–159. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1601.
Presta, Leonard G (Aug. 2008). “Molecular Engineering and Design of Therapeutic Anti-
bodies”. In: Current Opinion in Immunology 20.4, pp. 460–470. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2008.
06.012.
Datta-Mannan, Amita et al. (Jan. 2007). “Monoclonal Antibody Clearance”. In: Journal
of Biological Chemistry 282.3, pp. 1709–1717. doi: 10.1074/jbc.m607161200.
Acqua, William F. Dall’ et al. (Nov. 2002). “Increasing the Aﬀinity of a Human IgG1 for
the Neonatal Fc Receptor: Biological Consequences”. In: The Journal of Immunology
169.9, pp. 5171–5180. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.9.5171.
Igawa, T., S. Ishii, et al. (Oct. 2010). “Antibody Recycling by Engineered pH-Dependent
Antigen Binding Improves the Duration of Antigen Neutralization”. In: Nature Biotech-
nology 28.11, pp. 1203–1207. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1691.
Igawa, T., F. Mimoto, and K. Hattori (Nov. 2014). “pH-Dependent Antigen-Binding An-
tibodies as a Novel Therapeutic Modality”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) -
Proteins and Proteomics 1844.11, pp. 1943–1950. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.08.003.
Kroetsch, Andrew et al. (Dec. 2018). “Engineered pH-Dependent Recycling Antibodies
Enhance Elimination of Staphylococcal enterotoxin B Superantigen in Mice”. In: mAbs
11.2, pp. 411–421. doi: 10.1080/19420862.2018.1545510.
Kulkarni, Mandar V. et al. (Dec. 2010). “Two Independent Histidines, One in Human
Prolactin and One in its Receptor, are Critical for pH-Dependent Receptor Recognition
and Activation”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 285.49, pp. 38524–38533. doi: 10.
1074/jbc.m110.172072.
Ingle, Robert A. (Jan. 2011). “Histidine Biosynthesis”. In: The Arabidopsis Book 9, e0141.
doi: 10.1199/tab.0141.
A., Mrozek, Karolak -Wojciechowska J., and Kieć-Kononowicz K. (Aug. 2003). “Five-
Membered Heterocycles. Part III. Aromaticity of 1, 3-Imidazole in 5n Hetero-Bicyclic
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
46
==PAGE:53==
Molecules”. In: Journal of Molecular Structure 655.3, pp. 397–403. doi: 10.1016/s0022-
2860(03)00282-5.
Liao, Si-Ming et al. (Mar. 2013). “The Multiple Roles of Histidine in Protein Interactions”.
In: Chemistry Central Journal 7.1. doi: 10.1186/1752-153x-7-44.
Rotzschke, O. et al. (Dec. 2002). “A pH-Sensitive Histidine Residue as Control Element
for Ligand Release from HLA-DR Molecules”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 99.26, pp. 16946–16950. doi: 10.1073/pnas.212643999.
Kampmann, Thorsten et al. (Oct. 2006). “The Role of Histidine Residues in Low-pH-
Mediated Viral Membrane Fusion”. In: Structure 14.10, pp. 1481–1487. doi: 10.1016/j.
str.2006.07.011.
Murtaugh, Megan L. et al. (Aug. 2011). “A Combinatorial Histidine Scanning Library
Approach to Engineer Highly pH-Dependent Protein Switches”. In: Protein Science 20.9,
pp. 1619–1631. doi: 10.1002/pro.696.
Ito, Wataru et al. (Aug. 1992). “The His-probe method: Effects of Histidine Residues
Introduced Into the Complementarity-Determining Regions of Antibodies on Antigen-
Antibody Interactions at Different pH Values”. In: FEBS Letters 309.1, pp. 85–88. doi:
10.1016/0014-5793(92)80745-3.
Schröter, Christian et al. (Jan. 2015). “A Generic Approach to Engineer Antibody pH-
Switches Using Combinatorial Histidine Scanning Libraries and Yeast Display”. In: mAbs
7.1, pp. 138–151. doi: 10.4161/19420862.2014.985993.
Strauch, E.-M., S. J. Fleishman, and D. Baker (Dec. 2013). “Computational Design of a
pH-Sensitive IgG Binding Protein”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
111.2, pp. 675–680. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1313605111.
Spassov, Velin Z. and Lisa Yan (Jan. 2013). “pH-Selective Mutagenesis of Protein–Protein
Interfaces: In silico Design of Therapeutic Antibodies with Prolonged Half-Life”. In:
Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 81.4, pp. 704–714. doi: 10.1002/prot.
24230. url: https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.24230.
Sheehan, Jared and Wayne A. Marasco (Feb. 2015). “Phage and Yeast Display”. In: Micro-
biology Spectrum 3.1. Ed. by James E. Crowe Jr., Diana Boraschi, and Rino Rappuoli.
doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.aid-0028-2014.
Clackson, Tim et al. (Aug. 1991). “Making Antibody Fragments Using Phage Display
Libraries”. In: Nature 352.6336, pp. 624–628. doi: 10.1038/352624a0.
Traxlmayr, Michael W. et al. (Aug. 2014). “Construction of pH-Sensitive Her2-Binding
IgG1-Fc by Directed Evolution”. In: Biotechnology Journal 9.8, pp. 1013–1022. doi:
10.1002/biot.201300483.
Bonvin, Pauline et al. (Jan. 2015). “De novo Isolation of Antibodies with pH-Dependent
Binding Properties”. In: mAbs 7.2, pp. 294–302. doi: 10.1080/19420862.2015.1006993.
Alfaleh, Mohamed A. et al. (Aug. 2020). “Phage Display Derived Monoclonal Antibodies:
From Bench to Bedside”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 11. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.
01986.
Valldorf, Bernhard et al. (Mar. 2021). “Antibody Display Technologies: Selecting the
Cream of the Crop”. In: Biological Chemistry 0.0. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2020-0377.
Bogen, Jan P. et al. (Aug. 2019). “Dual Function pH Responsive Bispecific Antibodies for
Tumor Targeting and Antigen Depletion in Plasma”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 10.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01892.
Verzijl, D. et al. (Jan. 2017). “A Novel Label-Free Cell-Based Assay Technology Using
Biolayer Interferometry”. In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics 87, pp. 388–395. doi: 10.
1016/j.bios.2016.08.095.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
47
==PAGE:54==
Concepcion, Joy et al. (Sept. 2009). “Label-Free Detection of Biomolecular Interactions Us-
ing BioLayer Interferometry for Kinetic Characterization”. In: Combinatorial Chemistry
& High Throughput Screening 12.8, pp. 791–800. doi: 10.2174/138620709789104915.
Do, Tri et al. (Aug. 2008). “A Rapid Method for Determining Dynamic Binding Capacity
of Resins for the Purification of Proteins”. In: Protein Expression and Purification 60.2,
pp. 147–150. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2008.04.009.
Petersen, Rejane (Oct. 2017). “Strategies Using Bio-Layer Interferometry Biosensor Tech-
nology for Vaccine Research and Development”. In: Biosensors 7.4, p. 49. doi: 10.3390/
bios7040049.
Dysinger, Mark and Lindsay E. King (May 2012). “Practical Quantitative and Kinetic
Applications of Bio-Layer Interferometry for Toxicokinetic Analysis of a Monoclonal
Antibody Therapeutic”. In: Journal of Immunological Methods 379.1-2, pp. 30–41. doi:
10.1016/j.jim.2012.02.017.
Wartchow, Charles A. et al. (June 2011). “Biosensor-Based Small Molecule Fragment
Screening with Biolayer Interferometry”. In: Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular De-
sign 25.7, pp. 669–676. doi: 10.1007/s10822-011-9439-8.
Abdiche, Yasmina et al. (June 2008). “Determining Kinetics and Aﬀinities of Protein
Interactions Using a Parallel Real-Time Label-Free Biosensor, the Octet”. In: Analytical
Biochemistry 377.2, pp. 209–217. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2008.03.035.
Lad, Latesh et al. (Nov. 2014). “High-Throughput Kinetic Screening of Hybridomas to
Identify High-Aﬀinity Antibodies Using Bio-Layer Interferometry”. In: Journal of Bio-
molecular Screening 20.4, pp. 498–507. doi: 10.1177/1087057114560123.
Kamat, Vishal and Ashique Rafique (Nov. 2017). “Designing Binding Kinetic Assay on
the Bio-Layer Interferometry (BLI) Biosensor to Characterize Antibody-Antigen Inter-
actions”. In: Analytical Biochemistry 536, pp. 16–31. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2017.08.002.
Yang, Danlin et al. (Sept. 2016). “Comparison of Biosensor Platforms in the Evaluation
of High Aﬀinity antibody-antigen binding kinetics”. In: Analytical Biochemistry 508,
pp. 78–96. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2016.06.024.
Keighley, Wilma (June 2011). “The Need for High Throughput Kinetics Early in the Drug
Discovery Process”. In: Drug Discovery World 12, pp. 39–45.
Gaudreault, Jimmy et al. (Nov. 2021). “On the Use of Surface Plasmon Resonance-Based
Biosensors for Advanced Bioprocess Monitoring”. In: Processes 9.11, p. 1996. doi: 10.
3390/pr9111996.
Schuck, Peter and Huaying Zhao (2010). “The Role of Mass Transport Limitation and
Surface Heterogeneity in the Biophysical Characterization of Macromolecular Binding
Processes by SPR Biosensing”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology. Humana Press, pp. 15–
54. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-670-2_2.
Helmerhorst, Erik et al. (Nov. 2012). “Real-Time and Label-Free Bio-Sensing of Molecular
Interactions by Surface Plasmon Resonance: A Laboratory Medicine Perspective”. en.
In: Clin. Biochem. Rev. 33.4, pp. 161–173.
Shah, Naman B. and Thomas M. Duncan (Feb. 2014). “Bio-layer Interferometry for Mea-
suring Kinetics of Protein-protein Interactions and Allosteric Ligand Effects”. In: Jour-
nal of Visualized Experiments 84. doi: 10.3791/51383.
Gasteiger, Elisabeth et al. (2005). “Protein Identification and Analysis Tools on the Ex-
PASy Server”. In: The Proteomics Protocols Handbook. Ed. by John M. Walker. Totowa,
NJ: Humana Press, pp. 571–607. isbn: 978-1-59259-890-8. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-890-0:
571.
Martin, Nicolas et al. (Aug. 2016). “Refolding of Aggregation-Prone ScFv Antibody Frag-
ments Assisted by Hydrophobically Modified Poly(sodium acrylate) Derivatives”. In:
Macromolecular Bioscience 17.2, p. 1600213. doi: 10.1002/mabi.201600213.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
48
==PAGE:55==
Yap, Michelle Khai Khun et al. (June 2014). “Pharmacokinetics of Naja sumatrana (Equa-
torial Spitting Cobra) Venom and Its Major Toxins in Experimentally Envenomed Rab-
bits”. In: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 8.6. Ed. by José Marı́a Gutiérrez, e2890. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0002890.
Ovacik, Meric and Kedan Lin (Aug. 2018). “Tutorial on Monoclonal Antibody Pharma-
cokinetics and Its Considerations in Early Development”. In: Clinical and Translational
Science 11.6, pp. 540–552. doi: 10.1111/cts.12567.
Gutiérrez, José Mar??a, Guillermo León, and Bruno Lomonte (2003). “Pharmacokinetic-
Pharmacodynamic Relationships of Immunoglobulin Therapy for Envenomation”. In:
Clinical Pharmacokinetics 42.8, pp. 721–741. doi: 10.2165/00003088-200342080-00002.
Patil, TusharB et al. (2014). “Predictors of Mortality in Patients of Poisonous Snake Bite:
Experience From a Tertiary Care Hospital in Central India”. In: International Journal
of Critical Illness and Injury Science 4.2, p. 101. doi: 10.4103/2229-5151.134145.
Osipov, Alexey V. et al. (May 2008). “Naturally Occurring Disulfide-bound Dimers of
Three-fingered Toxins”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 283.21, pp. 14571–14580.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.m802085200.
Love, Robert A. and Robert M. Stroud (1986). “The Crystal Structure of α-Bungarotoxin
at 2.5 ÅResolution: Relation to Solution Structure and Binding to Acetylcholine Re-
ceptor”. In: ”Protein Engineering, Design and Selection” 1.1, pp. 37–46. doi: 10.1093/
protein/1.1.37.
Grevys, Algirdas et al. (Feb. 2018). “A Human Endothelial Cell-Based Recycling Assay
for Screening of FcRn Targeted Molecules”. In: Nature Communications 9.1. doi: 10.
1038/s41467-018-03061-x.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
49
==PAGE:56==
A
Toxin Sequences and Alignment
>sp|P01391|3L21_NAJKA Alpha-cobratoxin OS=Naja kaouthia OX=8649 PE=1 SV=1
IRCFITPDITSKDCPNGHVCYTKTWCDAFCSIRGKRVDLGCAATCPTVKTGVDIQC
CSTDNCNPFPTRKRP
>sp|C0HJD7|3L24_DENPO Alpha-elapitoxin-Dpp2d OS=Dendroaspis polylepis polylepis
OX=8620 PE=1 SV=1 RTCNKTFSDQSKICPPGENICYTKTWCDAFCSQRGKRVEL-
GCAA TCPKVKAGVEIKCCSTDNCNKFQFGKPR
>sp|P60615|3L21A_BUNMU Alpha-bungarotoxin OS=Bungarus multicinctus OX=8616
PE=1 SV=1 MKTLLLTLVVVTIVCLDLGYTIVCHTTATSPISAVTCPPGENLCYRK
MWCDAFCSSRGKVVELGCAATCPSKKPYEEVTCCSTDKCNPHPKQRPG
The following are the alignments:
Figure A.1: Local alignment between α-Ctx and α-Etx.
Figure A.2: Local alignment between α-Ctx and α-Btx.
Figure A.3: Local alignment between α-Etx and α-Btx.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
50
==PAGE:57==
B
Clones’ Specifications
Clone
Light V Gene
Heavy V Gene
Fab ELISA:
1 nM α-Ctx
Fab ELISA:
1 nM α-Etx
2555_01_A01
(A01)
IGLV3-21
IGHV1-69D
2626
9280
2551_01_A02
(A02)
IGLV3-21
IGHV1-69D
4495
9443
2555_01_A04
(A04)
IGLV3-21
IGHV1-69D
1909
7245
2551_01_A11
(A11)
IGLV3-21
IGHV1-69D
2990
5005
2551_01_A12
(A12)
IGLV6-57
IGHV1-69D
4205
6560
2551_01_B11
(B11)
IGLV3-21
IGHV1-69D
4330
8049
368_01_C05
(C05)*
IGLV6-57
IGHV1-69D
177
3819
2554_01_D11
(D11)
IGLV6-57
IGHV1-69D
14008
12393
2554_01_E01
(E01)
IGLV6-57
IGHV1-69D
5627
9089
2554_02_F10
(F10)
IGLV3-21
IGHV1-69D
3033
7146
2554_02_F11
(F11)
IGLV3-21
IGHV1-69D
3983
15252
2554_02_G09
(G09)
IGLV3-21
IGHV1-69D
6801
9438
Table B.1: Overview of the clone selection. The clones are named, the parent is denoted
with ”*”. Furthermore, their light V gene and heavy V gene are given. ELISA signals
obtained from experiments in their Fab format versus 1 nM α-Ctx and 1 nM α-Etx are
specified. Data courtesy of Line Ledsgaard Jensen.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
51
==PAGE:58==
C
Kinetic Analysis Curve Fitting
Figure C.1: Analysis of α-Btx titration curves against D11, A12, E01.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure C.3: Analysis of α-Ctx titration curves against D11, A12, E01.
Figure C.2: Analysis of α-Btx titration curves against A04, A01, G09.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure C.4: Analysis of α-Ctx titration curves against A04, A01, G09.
Figure C.5: Analysis of α-Ctx titration curves against D11, A12, E01.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure C.6: Analysis of α-Ctx titration curves against A04, A01, G09.
Discovery of pH-Sensitive Antibodies to α-Neurotoxins
55
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
