==PAGE:1==
Simon Højstrup Aggs, S153435
Impact of electric vehicle flexibility
services and charging infrastructure
rollouts on urban distribution
transformers
A study conducted in collaboration with Radius Elnet
and DTU Elektro
Master’s Thesis, February 2022
==PAGE:2==
Simon Højstrup Aggs, S153435
Impact of electric vehicle flexibility
services and charging infrastructure
rollouts on urban distribution
transformers
A study conducted in collaboration with Radius Elnet
and DTU Elektro
Master’s Thesis, February 2022
==PAGE:3==
Impact of electric vehicle flexibility services and charging infrastructure rollouts
on urban distribution transformers, A study conducted in collaboration with
Radius Elnet and DTU Elektro
Author:
Simon Højstrup Aggs, S153435
Supervisors from Academia:
Peter Bach Andersen - Professor, Senior Researcher
Tim Unterluggauer - Ph.d.-student
Sergey Klyapovskiy - Postdoctoral Researcher
Supervisors from the Industry:
Jimmy Schipper Bjaaland - Senior Strategic Analyst, Radius Elnet A/S
Niels Andersen - Electrical Engineer, Cerius A/S
Department of Electrical Engineering
Center for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
1st of February 2022
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1st edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of Science
in Electrical Engineering at Technical University of Denmark. The
report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Simon Højstrup Aggs, 2022
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is the result of the work conducted by M.Sc. student Simon Højstrup Aggs and is the
product of a collaboration between the Technical University of Denmark and Radius Elnet A/S from
primo September 2021 to primo February 2022.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors from the Technical University of
Denmark, and Jimmy Bjaaland from Radius Elnet & Niels Andersen from Cerius A/S, for excellent
support and guidance throughout the project development.
I hereby declare that this thesis is composed by myself, and the work herein is mine unless stated
otherwise.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Electric vehicles (EV) are becoming increasingly popular as the cost of EV manufacturing and batteries
are reduced [1]. During 2021 the number of EVs in Denmark has more than doubled from 27,700 to
60,400 and they now account for 2.2 % of the total population (2.78 million cars) [2].
The EV
adoption will continue to grow and grid impacts are likely to follow hence requiring extensive planning
and investment [3].
This study will map the thermal impact of 100 % EV adoption on distribution transformers dur-
ing different charging scenarios of normal operation within the municipality of Frederiksberg. High
population density and limited private parking possibilities demand extensive public charging infras-
tructure. Hence it becomes interesting to understand the stress applied to transformers given the
diversity and uncertainty of charging patterns across the types of infrastructure that is needed to
serve demand in an urban setting.
Three types of chargers will be inspected; workplace, public, and private charging with capacities of
22, 22, and 11 kW respectively. Location and distribution of these will be computed according to
EV owners parking possibilities. Furthermore, charging time and demand is quantified through travel
distance and arrival/departure times from The Danish National Travel Survey [4].
A thermal model of different distribution transformers will be presented to determine the normal
operation impacts during different EV charging scenarios. Four scenarios will be tested: uncontrolled,
valley filling with transformer cool down, price-controlled, and worst-case with maximum charging
coincidence to investigate whether degradation due to deterioration of insulation paper is a threat.
A tool that provides a mass evaluation of the above is developed and designed for use in single
municipalities.
Correlations between the coincidence factor and lifetime reduction of distribution
transformers are also investigated.
Results show that 10/0.4 kV transformers in the Southwestern part of Frederiksberg are likely to
endure the increased thermal stress. Only 1 out of 74 transformers experience a significant loss of life
due to high hot spot temperatures.
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
CF Coincidence Factor
CP Charge Point
DSO Distribution System Operator
EV Electrical Vehicle
HH Household
HST Hot spot temperature
LAS Last hour charging scenario (i.e. charging is performed in last available hour of session)
LoL Loss of life
ONAN Oil Natural Air Natural
PRI Price controlled charging scenario
ToU Time of Use
TU The Danish National Travel Survey (interview survey which serves to document the travel pat-
terns of the Danish population)
UNC Uncontrolled charging scenario
VAL Valley filling charging scenario (i.e. flexible load displacement to low consumption periods)
Page of 83
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
α Plug-in rate
∆∆θor Extra top oil temperature rise due to enclosure [K]
∆θ′
or Corrected top oil temperature rise due to enclosure [K]
∆θhr Hot spot top top oil gradient at rated current [K]
∆θor Top oil temperature rise in steady state at rated loss [K]
η Driving efficiency
ρ Range anxiety factor
τo Oil time constant [min]
τw Winding time constant [min]
θa Ambient temperature [◦C]
θo Top oil (in tank) temperature at the load considered [◦C]
θh Winding hotspot temperature [◦C]
ζ SoC (State of Charge)
b Battery capacity [kWh]
C Thermal capacity
di Distance driven [km]
K Load factor (load current/rated current)
L Total ageing over the time period considered [h]
R Ratio of load losses at rated current to no-load losses at rated voltage
SoCi State of Charge when arriving at a charger on day i
V Relative ageing rate
x Exponential power of total losses versus top-oil (in tank) temperature rise (oil exponent) [K]
y Exponential power of current versus winding temperature rise (winding exponent) [K]
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background & motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Literature review of transformer lifetime assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
10
2.1
Applied model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Charging scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Quantification of charger distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Mobility data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
27
3.1
Breakdown mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Modeling of oil and hotspot temperature and loss of life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Validation and correction factor calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Partial conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Results
41
4.1
Impact of charging strategies on the coincidence factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Substations at Frederiksberg
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Partial conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Discussion
53
5.1
Usability of the tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Comparison of coincidence factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
The utilization rate of public and workplace charger
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Findings on hot spot temperature and loss of life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Conclusion
60
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Process oriented conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Page of 83
==PAGE:9==
7
References
63
A Appendix - Assumptions
67
B Appendix - Substation results for FRB
68
C Appendix - Transformer constants
73
D Appendix - Initial problem formulation and time schedule
77
E Appendix - Updated time schedule
81
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
1.1
Background & motivation
The Danish government has committed to the Paris agreement which aims to keep the global average
temperature rise below 2 ◦C by promising to cut CO2 emissions by at least 70% compared to 1990 [5].
The strategy to fulfill this goal includes transitioning from gasoline and diesel-powered vehicles to EVs
(electric vehicles). The government has recently proposed a strategy to reach 775.000 EVs by 2030
[6]while targeting a full stop of sales of gasoline and diesel powered vehicles by 2030 and a complete
phase out by 2050 to become climate neutral. According to business and interest organization for
energy companies, Danish Energy, this might yield in 3.2 million privately owned EVs by 2050 [3].
A full transition to EVs will also benefit locally as noise is greatly reduced and air pollution from
vehicles is eliminated. To enable such a transition municipalities/cities such as Copenhagen, Aarhus
and Frederiksberg are already implementing public charging infrastructure at a fast rate [7]. This
is due to urban municipalities having to install public charging for residents living in apartments.
The municipality of Frederiksberg has publicly announced its mission to become the EV capital of
Denmark with public charging infrastructure available within 250 m of walking distance by 2030 [8].
EVs are also exempted from parking fees and have some dedicated parking spots where conventional
vehicles have to pay according to how much they pollute [8].
These ambitions could lead to mass electric vehicle (EV) adoption which might have consequences for
the distribution grid. Simultaneous charging of EVs could cause congestion or overloading as the grid
was originally not designed for EVs and the new loading profile. Hence large-scale reinvestment might
become essential to maintain the security of supply in the distribution grid [3]. Such plans will have
long-term perspectives due to large investment costs and the long-expected life of grid components.
Distribution transformers (MV/LV) and cables have an expected life of at least 40 years and grid
planning must therefore to some extent predict the demand in a distribution grid with at least a
40 year lead time [9].
However, the lifetime of a component depends significantly on the loading
profile applied as higher continuous temperatures due to the increased loading and hence losses - will
accelerate the degradation process of the electrical insulation material. Hence it is essential to plan
for future load while accounting for loading profiles that might damage grid components.
In addition to the large-scale reinvestments, the congestion issues and cyclic consumption patterns of
the future urban distribution system can be mitigated by introducing market-based flexibility services.
However, these could also lead to loading profiles that unintentionally can cause a rebound effect if
controlled solely by price signals. Furthermore, as consumption is displaced to off-peak hours, load
Page 1 of 83
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
profiles transition from a cyclic to a more continuous profile i.e., increasing the overall utilization of
10/0.4 kV distribution transformers.
1.2
Problem formulation
This project will aim to map thermal degradation and potential reduction of expected life as a result
of higher loading for insulation material in 10/0.4 kV distribution transformers. The study will be
conducted on present-day consumption and future load for different roll-out strategies of EV charging
in the southwestern part of Frederiksberg. The study is divided into two main objectives.
1. Establish future load curves based on EV charging
• quantify load according to driving behavior and understand the impact on the coincidence
factor (CF)
• investigate the CF for different types of destination chargers
• establish potential charging scenarios for flexible units
• find the maximum number of EVs allowed under a substation as a result of load
2. Apply thermal modeling of 10/0.4 kV transformers to estimate hotspot temperature (HST)
• utilize aggregated smart meter data and outdoor temperatures as inputs
• quantify and analyze the impact of transformer enclosures on the thermal response
• evaluate the thermal impact on transformers for different charging control schemes in Fred-
eriksberg
• create an automatized script which can report HST of all substation transformers within a
municipality
Problem delimitation: 10 kV cables are not considered due to the following reasons.
• An initial analysis of loading within the 10 kV grid showed that distribution transformers are
more likely to experience overloading than cables during normal operation.
• Cables are dimensioned to handle accumulated load downstream and to uphold grid reserves
during N-1, i.e. if a feeder fails then a neighboring feeder must be able to handle additional
loading which requires more capacity.
• The cost of cable installations is typically much higher than transformers due to digging work
Page 2 of 83
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
related to cable trenches. Therefore the actual cable price is considered a small margin of the
overall cost, hence enabling large cross-sections to be chosen such as 240 mm2 aluminum which
yields high load-ability.
Page 3 of 83
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.3
Literature review of transformer lifetime assessment
A literature review was conducted on existing work about the degradation of winding insulation in
transformers caused by high temperatures as a result of loading from higher EV charging. Furthermore,
a new model quantifying EV charging demand based on real-world plug-in rates is described as it
considers new aspects of transformer degradation.
Distribution transformers are likely to experience a reduction of lifetime as a result of higher EV pen-
etration as it accelerates the thermal degradation process of winding insulation paper within trans-
formers [10–15]. [14] states that the effect of aggregated uncoordinated charging will coincidence with
peak base load yielding transformer overloading. Transformers are expensive and one of the most
critical components of the electrical infrastructure making it important to optimize operation [16]. To
illustrate the problem, an example of critical failure due to paper deterioration is given in fig. 1. Such
cases are likely to occur more often and for younger components with higher EV penetration.
Figure 1. Failure analysis of a single-phase transformer from 1955 (165/58 kV, 15 MVA) previously operated
by Energinet. Left: top winding has been displaced due to high pressure during an internal short circuit.
Middle: cutout of top winding unveils fault cause as paper insulation surrounding the winding is deteriorated
hence making the transformer prone to experience short circuits between windings. Right: transformer being
disassembled for fault cause analysis. Even though the transformer was located on transmission level, similar
phenomena occur in distribution systems (photos were taken during a field trip).
Qian K. finds that Loss of Life (LoL) is mainly driven by ambient temperatures and loading. Shifting
of EV-load to nighttime might not be a suitable solution as transformer oil does not cool off in time.
Page 4 of 83
==PAGE:14==
1
Introduction
Instead, the study proposes that EV-load is shifted to public charging infrastructure in industrial
or commercial areas, especially during seasonal loading.
Seasonal conditions do also have a large
impact on the LoL of transformers and summer periods tend to be more critical due to higher ambient
temperatures[11].
Pradhan P. recognizes the same problems and suggests using a time of use (ToU) price signal which is
based on the ambient temperature of transformers which yields a high price in peak hours and in the
following hours. If applied correctly it will limit the acceleration of transformer lifetime significantly
[14].
Godina R. inspects distribution transformers close to workplaces and concludes that these might
become overloaded if fast chargers are utilized, presumable due to the simultaneous arrival . Slow
charging modes are recommended for these sites as employees are typically parked there for 8 hours
and hence still being able to reach 100 % state of charge (SoC) [17]. For summary of key points see
tab. 1.
The above studies agree that ambient temperature has a significant impact and Hilshey A. [12] even
finds a high correlation between LoL and warmer climates by comparing Phoenix, Arizona with
Burlington, Vermont. Studies are performed on outdoor transformers and correction factor for con-
version of outdoor to indoor temperature is not described. Studies on indoor transformers can use
standard correction factors however, it is highly recommended to validate them through measurements
as enclosure will increase oil temperature significantly [18, 19].
To quantify the impact in LoL and expected life, three main modeling objectives must be fulfilled
accurately [14];
1. Existing load profiles
2. EV consumption based on real-world driving behavior
3. Thermal response of transformers
However, loading data is mostly generated or averaged instead of using raw loading profiles which
might skew the results when combining it with EV-loading see tab.
1.
Seasonal load do have a
significant impact on the degradation process. This is demonstrated in [11] and [14]. In [14] 50 % EV
penetration during the summer load and temperature resulted in LoL as high as 1.02 years every year
(i.e. approximately 1 year of operation is lost additionally). As the study takes place in Australia, load
is presumed to be highest during the summer due to high consumption of air condition units.
Page 5 of 83
==PAGE:15==
1
Introduction
To satisfy the second objective of estimating future EV load according to travel patterns, some studies
rely on GPS data to track travel distance, arrival and departure times [15] [20]. These studies rely
on small sample sizes which may not represent a larger portion of geographical area. [12] suggests
using large-scale travel surveys as an alternative or to supplement the GPS data. [12] utilizes US
National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) to estimate the driver behavior and evaluate the state of
charge after each trip. This technique is also used in [14] where the EV load is generated through
a Monte Carlo simulation based on surveys conducted on 129.696 households with 4766 hybrid or
electric vehicles NHTS (2017). This method will allow to better describe the tendencies of larger
geographical areas.
For the second objective non of the above LoL studies consider plug-in behavior which is essential for
future charging scenarios such as price responsive charging according to [10]. It is stated that most
studies assume that EVs are plugged in every day or only when needed even though real-world data
suggests otherwise [21]. Even if EV owners have access to home charging, they do not always plugin.
This is even more relevant to consider for users relying on public chargers as parking restrictions or
availability influence the plug-in behavior [22]. A Norwegian analysis of a real-world charging dataset
(6878 sessions registered by 97 EVs), showed that EV owners with a private charge point (CP) have
an average plug-in rate of 4.4 sessions per week while owners depend on shared charger’s plug-in for
1.2 session per week. Hence limiting the potential of flexibility as non-charging idle times are limited
with shared CP. [10] uses similar data from electric nation ([21]) to simulate plug-in behavior and
results show that an average plug-in frequency for EVs with an average battery size (46 kWh) and an
average daily driving distance will plug-in 3.12 times per week. This information is essential when a
price responsive case is considered as not all EVs will be connected resulting in a lower coincidence
factor CF.
[23] does consider the normal plug-in behaviors of uncontrolled private home charging on distribution
grid feeders within the Danish grid (but not LoL). The study concludes that even at 100% EV adoption
the maximum Coincidence Factor (CF) observed at 11 kW charging capacity is at 50%. This is likely
to cause overloading and the grid is expected to handle 30-50% EV adoption.
The main take-ways from studies performed on thermal degradation is that fast charging at work-
places and valley filling (i.e. displacement of load to off-peak hours) are not viable solutions as oil
temperatures will either reach alarming high values or not cool off in time for the next peak load.
Solutions include temperature-dependent price signals and slow charging at work as employees spend
many hours at this destination. Furthermore, the above studies on LoL assume daily plug-in, and
Page 6 of 83
==PAGE:16==
1
Introduction
Studies
Plug-in
behavior
considered
Exsisting
load-data
Transformer
in enclosure
Seasonal
condition
Charging
scenarios
Travel data
Charging
types
Hilshey[12]
No
Average
No
No
uncontrolled,
off-peak & smart
Travel Survey
& GPS
Residential
Pradhan[14]
No
Generated based
on real-world
No
Yes
uncontrolled
Travel Survey
Residential
Qian[11]
No
Average &
scaled seasonally
No
Yes
uncontrolled,
off-peak & smart
Travel Survey
Residential,
workplace,
commercial
& public
Razeghi[26]
No
Average
No
No
uncontrolled
& off-peak
Travel Survey
Residential
Kuss[20]
No
Average
No
No
uncontrolled
GPS
Residential
This
study
Real-world
plug-in
behavior
Real-world
load profiles
Yes
Yes
uncontrolled,
valley filling
w. cool down,
price responsive
and last hour
Travel Survey
Residential,
public,
workplace
Table 1. Overview of similar studies on lifetime assessment of distribution transformers as a result of higher
EV penetration. Contributions made by this study is highlighted.
none of them mention the CF or arrival times making results difficult to compare. Mapping the HST
(hot spot temperature), the number of EVs, and the CF together would yield valuable information
for e.g. distribution system operators (DSO) of how transformers are operated.
In terms of EV charging demand, the number of EVs charging under each substation must be accurate
as the CF primarily depends on it [24]. Agents (i.e. EV owners) might not need to charge as often due
to larger batteries, meaning that price signals will become increasingly important and a higher CF
might be promoted [10] and [24]. The above scenario could also have a positive impact on HV/MV-
substations as EV load might be displaced to low demand periods. However, congestion/overloading
downstream can be promoted as clusters of EVs with simultaneous charging will increase thermal
stresses on components such as cable and transformers[25]. Finally homogeneous compositions of EV
owners might increase the CF due to similarity in behavior [24]. Hence making workplace charging
appropriate to investigate further.
Key aspects of mentioned studies are summarized in tab. 1 and contributions made by this study are
highlighted.
Page 7 of 83
==PAGE:17==
1
Introduction
1.4
Methodology
The literature review revealed that in order to determine the HST for higher EV adoption scenarios,
traveling patterns and trip distances must be derived. Furthermore, the number of EVs expected to
charge downstream of a transformer is essential to estimate the CF correctly as it mainly depends on
it. Charging power will also to some extent have an impact on CF as charging times are shortened by
higher capacity. Hence, the first part (section 2) will describe the utilized EV model (2.1), charging
scenarios dependent on flexible EV load (2.2) and associated inputs (2.3 and 2.4) see fig. 2. Inputs
will be divided into two parts: charging data i.e. distribution of chargers (2.3) and mobility data i.e.
traveling behavior (2.4).
In the second part (section 3), a thermal model will be described and calibrated in order to determine
the HST and degradation. Finally in section 4 the results are presented and discussed.
Figure 2. Flow chart of data derivation and approach of this study. Colors indicate different modules and
numbers refer to report sections/subsections.
The flowchart in fig. 2 displays the necessary rate of generalization vertically (on a geographical level)
in order to determine key inputs. Substation level means that data is available or computed for each
Page 8 of 83
==PAGE:18==
1
Introduction
substation transformer. The two main modules will be referred to as the EV charging model and
thermal model (marked as blue and red respectively).
EV charging model: a model developed by Gonzalez Venegas, F., Petit, M., and Perez, Y. will be
utilized to generate load curves [10]. The model is initialized with four inputs; baseload, scenario,
distribution of customers, and distribution of travel distance.
Based on the number and type of
customers on each substation, the model is modified to generate load curves for the public, home, and
workplace charging for every 10 minutes during 2020. Results are parsed onto the thermal model.
Thermal model: the substation-specific data which include building type, transformer rating, time
constants, etc.
are used to initialize the model.
Load curves, baseload, and temperature are the
variable input that the thermal model uses to compute oil temperature, HST, LoL, etc. For each
substation, a report is generated with KPIs along and a full summary of temperatures for every 10
minutes during 2020.
Page 9 of 83
==PAGE:19==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
2.1
Applied model
A stochastic agent-based model developed by Gonzalez Venegas, F., Petit, M., and Perez, Y [10].
will be used to generate EV curves for the thermal model. The EV model has been developed for
studies on distribution grids and is especially suitable for describing plugin behavior for home, public
and workplace charging. Either a probabilistic or deterministic plugin behavior can be chosen. The
probabilistic behavior is suitable for describing private home charging as users might plugin more often
to optimize charging with respect to electricity prices, battery degradation, or allowing for unexpected
trips. The deterministic approach can present agents who will only charge when necessary (e.g. users
of work/public infrastructure). The inconvenience of parking restrictions, additional walking to and
from the parking spot, and “flat” electricity prices are considered reason enough to only charge if
needed. Finally, the probabilistic approach is calibrated on real-world data enabling realistic plugin
behaviors [10].
Each agent will travel a daily distance driven di imitating commuting to and from work with trips
during the weekend. Every journey will have an arrival and departure time which define the available
charging period. Distance driven, arrival, and departure times are sampled by generating random
values from a distribution function that is based on real-world travel patterns (will be defined in
section2.3, 2.4). The SoC is computed when arriving at a charging location once every day. b is
battery capacity in kWh and η is the actual driving efficiency [kWh/km].
SoCi = SoCi−1 −di · η
b
(1)
To describe the plugin behavior, the SoC at the end of the next trip (di+1·η
b
) is combined with a
range anxiety factor (ρ) resulting seen in the range anxiety safety margin (ζi) in eq. 2. ζi represents
the minimum SoC an agent is willing to accept without charging, even if the battery does not need
charging prior to the next trip. This is different from the required SoC (ζ) which represents the
absolute minimum SoC where the plugin is certain (both for the deterministic and probabilistic
method). If the SoCi becomes smaller than the (ζi), the probability of charging is also certain i.e.
equal to 1. A SoCi higher than (ζi) can be described by

SoCi−ζ
1−ζ
α
, where α is the plugin rate, which
can be controlled (see eq. 3). Hence a higher α will yield a higher probability of plugin.
Page 10 of 83
==PAGE:20==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
ζi = di+1 · η
b
· ρ
(2)
P(plugini) =





1,
if SoCi ≤ζi
1 −

SoCi−ζi
1−ζ
α
,
if SoCi > ζi
(3)
Calibration of plugin behavior, α based on real-world data
Electric nation was an investigation of EVs and hybrid vehicle charging patterns performed in the
UK from 2016 to 2018 [21]. Data was collected for 153621 charging sessions by 601 users with EVs
or hybrid vehicles. [10] utilized these datasets to determine the plugin rate and concluded that less
than 25 % of 50 kWh-battery users were plugging in more than 3 times per week in urban areas. This
is however based on an average driving distance of 22.2 km per day. The average distance driven at
Frederiksberg is 32.7 km. [27] per day hence being closer to the average EV-case of 3.12 plugins per
week resulting in alpha being equal to 1.31.
Defining initial inputs
Initial inputs to the EV-charging module can now be determined.
• The battery capacity of 50 kWh is the average capacity size based on [10]. However, the average
capacity is expected to increase to 70-80 kWh in 2030 as the technology improves [1]. Due to
the study being conducted in an urban environment where the distance traveled is less than in
rural areas, the average battery capacity is assumed to stay at 50 kWh.
• According to [28] driving efficiency of EVs are dependent on the battery size as weight increases
with capacity, η = 0.14 + 0.0009 · b (yielding 0.185 for 50 kWh batteries).
• An average plugin rate of α = 1.31 (probabilistic) is considered for all EVs charging privately
and α = 0 (deterministic) for EVs using public and workplace charging.
• Range anxiety factor of 1.5 and minimum SoC 20 % are also set according to [10] as it is based
on extensive literature review.
• Charging capacities are determined based on [29], which states that the following capacities are
likely to be seen in Denmark: private: 11 kW, workplace: 22 kW and public: 22 kW.
Page 11 of 83
==PAGE:21==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
EV input
Value
Battery capacity
50 kWh
Charging capacity
11, 22 and 22 kW
Range-anxiety (ρ)
1.5
plugin rate (α)
1.31
SoC (ζ)
0.2
Efficiency (η)
0.185
Table 2. Base case input parameters of EV model.
Standard inputs for the EV model can be seen summarized in tab. 2, but mobility data is still needed
to quantify demand, the coincidence of arrival, and the number of EVs charging per substation.
2.2
Charging scenarios
The calibration of the plugin rate on real-world data is essential for estimating the HST. Both an
uncontrolled and controlled scenario will heavily depend on this factor as vehicles that are not plugged
in will not charge, thus entailing a very different CF than in a scenario where all EVs are plugged
in. Therefore, the real impact of flexibility services can be described as a certain number of EVs
(depending on the plugin rate) are waiting for e.g. a price signal to charge.
Flexible charging will most likely be controlled by aggregators who might have different objectives e.g.
to minimize electricity price for customers, grid impact, losses, or CO2 emissions [30]. This means
that several price incentives can be in play yielding load patterns that might be difficult to predict.
However, aggregators are likely react to cheap electricity prices which are uniform within the eastern
and western parts of Denmark, hence increasing the risk of a large-scale synchronization. This is
applicable for price-responsive scenarios. These will be controlled through an optimization function
that solves an objective with respect to e.g. constraints from EV owners and DSOs. Examples of such
scenarios will be presented in this section
Uncontrolled charging
Will describe the natural impact and CF influenced only by the arrival time and plugin rate. This
scenario is important for comparison reasons since public/workplace charging might not be able to
adopt a flexible behavior [22],[31]. Controlled strategies that have the purpose of minimizing grid
impact (thermal or electrical) should at least perform better than the uncontrolled scenario.
Page 12 of 83
==PAGE:22==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Implementation of controlled strategies utilizes an existing module from [25] that allows for price
optimal charging under different signals. This function is extended through this study to simulate
three strategies that might be seen in the future: Valley filling with transformer cool down, price-
controlled charging, and last hour charging with max CF.
Valley filling with transformer cool down
Considers a bilateral agreement where a DSO pays for congestion management provided by an aggre-
gator to accommodate lower electrical peak load (i.e. evenly distribution of EV charging or a lower
CF). This could be due to a grid component not allowing for higher loading under normal circum-
stances (e.g. old current transformers or cable). It could also be used as load reduction during N-1
situations to relieve requirements of grid reserves hence postponing reinforcement and creating social
benefits as described in [30]. Naturally, the DSO would want to displace load during peak hours for
cyclic profiles to the off-peak hours. For residential consumption, this is typical during nighttime
which is referred to as valley filling. The literature review revealed that valley filling by itself can
result in the HST not cooling off sufficiently which can eventually lead to further degradation.[11]
Hence this scenario will consider a constraint of one hour cool down time before morning peak which
can coincide with workplace charging. The timeframe from 22:00 to 6:00 is chosen and the load is
distributed evenly.
Price controlled charging
In this scenario an aggregator controls a fleet of EVs with the objective to minimize the price of
charging for each agent. The price signal is developed to provoke sudden charging to imitate a large
shift in price, hence creating high impact on HST during different hours. Furthermore, the aggregator
is assumed to have knowledge of electricity prices ahead of schedule. Hence it is possible to optimize
without uncertainty. The developed price signal lasts for 3 hours consisting of two low prices and one
very low to imitate the price dropping and increasing again shortly after. It is applied at random
hours within the non-idling period (i.e. where the majority of EVs are connected to the grid) and the
aggregator will respond within this timeframe solving its objective function of minimizing cost. The
aggregator schedules majority of charging sessions within the low-price hour while still managing to
fulfill the constraint of achieving 100% SoC. If an agent has not arrived before the low-price signal
and charging is needed, then forced charging is performed hence resulting in some outliers.
Page 13 of 83
==PAGE:23==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Last-hour controlled charging
Charging is provoked with a max CF during the last hour of availability and could potentially occur
due to two mechanisms.
1. An optimal price signal during the last hour of a potential charging session. The aggregator
might have pended on an optimal price as a result of a low electricity price and tariff. During
the last hour before EVs leave their chargers (between 5:00 and 7:00 in the morning), this price
is achieved hence promoting a max CF.
2. Last call charging session to satisfy EV owners charging demand of having 100% SoC in the
morning. This charging pattern could be realized if an aggregator fails to achieve the optimal
price during the allocated time plugged in, hence forcing max charging during the remaining
time connected to the grid.
The literature review revealed that off-peak charging did not always have the desired effect as high
HST temperatures prior to a peak load could cause higher LoL [11]. Hence the worst case would be
when the load is lowest prior to a peak in base load or potentially before workplace charging during
the morning. Back-to-back charging sessions of private and workplace chargers are introduced for
stations that supply both demands.
The purpose of this scenario is to provoke HST spikes in order to quantify the impact of higher
temperatures before workplace chargers are utilized. To implement such a scenario, a rolling mean
is taken for the baseload. When the load is lowest prior to EV owners unplugging, a charging signal
is given. This scenario is controlled differently than price controlled charging as the price will differ
for every 10 minutes instead of every hour hence allowing for higher CF. Examples illustrating this
behavior is shown later in section 4.
Page 14 of 83
==PAGE:24==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
2.3
Quantification of charger distribution
This section will describe a method on how to distribute chargers across types and substation lo-
cations. Finally the mobility data used to determine trip distances and arrival/departure times is
presented.
Distribution of residents and household types
EV-charging at FRB will depend on different charger types. Type of household (HH), i.e. apartment
or house, and parking possibilities of EV owners are essential to quantify the distribution. The number
of occupants per HH and distribution of HH is described in a migration study of residents performed
by COWI in 2015 see fig. 3 and tab. 3 [32]. By dividing FRB into 7 sections based on main roads,
it becomes clear that area 2 and 4 has the highest amount of detached and terraced houses (accounts
for 10.8 % and 17 % respectively), but apartments are still the dominating type in all areas. From
tab. 3, areas 5 and 7 can be seen to have more than double the population density of areas 1, 2, and
4 as apartments occupy less land per resident and the number of residents per substation is likewise
higher.
Figure 3. Illustration of FRB divided into 7 zones according to migration study performed by COWI (Area
highlighted with red will be considered) [32].
Page 15 of 83
==PAGE:25==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Area
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Residents [N]
8029
13875
15025
12682
18797
22864
13034
Apartment [%]
91.5
87.3
92.5
81.5
97.5
96.5
97.2
Detached house [%]
1.0
8.2
2.0
9.5
0.4
1.4
1.4
Terraced house [%]
1.4
2.6
2.4
7.5
0.1
0.3
0.0
Other [%]
6.0
1.7
2.9
1.4
1.8
1.7
1.4
Area [km2]
1.3
1.6
1.2
1.6
0.7
1.5
0.7
Density [Residents/km2]
5991
8617
12952
7733
26106
15660
18358
Table 3. Distribution of households and number of residents for 7 areas of FRB.
Due to high population density, the grid topology of FRB is mainly meshed with some islanded
grid on a low-voltage (LV) level. A meshed grid means that the LV level is supplied from several
substations which are distributed evenly across the coherent grid. Each meshed area is supplied by
several loops (two radials with an open terminal) to allow for redundancy and even load distribution
across transformers and cables. For this reason, the meshed grid topology is preferred for areas with
high population density. Islanded grids are built the same way as meshed grids, but operated with
open terminals i.e. only one substation supplies a part of the LV grid.
Grid dimension rules of Radius states that meshed grids must be able to maintain supply during
random failures at two radials, yielding high redundancy and low loading during normal operation
[33]. Furthermore, it is difficult to perform accurate calculations on meshed grids as smart meter data
downstream of substations must be aggregated in zones and distributed evenly across e.g. transformers
to give an indication of loading.
For these reasons, only islanded topologies will be investigated. Area 1, 4, 5, 6, and 7 depend on
a meshed grid leaving areas 2 and 3 to rely on an islanded topology.
To ensure the accuracy of
transformer loading, islanded grids in areas 2 and 3 will be considered and referred to as South
western Frederiksberg (SW FRB). The two areas have a total of 28899 residents where 2831 live
in houses and 26007 live in apartments.
In fig. 4 the area can be seen with substations highlighted (red triangles). It is obvious that areas with
houses have fewer substations nearby, compared to apartments in closely populated areas. Substations
in the top left corner supply businesses and large office buildings near Flintholm train station hence
some workplace charging is to be expected. Transformers in the top right corner supply apartments
and small businesses yielding public infrastructure. Finally, the center of SW FRB has a high number
Page 16 of 83
==PAGE:26==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
of detached houses where the dominating charger type will be privately owned.
Figure 4. Satellite photo of areas 2 and 3 or SW FRB with substations highlighted.
Chargers can be divided into two main types “charging destinations” and “destination charging” (see
illustration in fig 5) [27]. Destination charging allows the EV owner to plug in where the car would
naturally be parked. These could be chargers located at home (both shared and private), work, or
leisure activities with the capacity of 11 to 22 kW [29]. Charging destinations are typically located
in areas that require a trip with the main purpose of recharging. These are normally referred to as
curbside chargers and stations which range in the capacity of (11-22 kW and 50-350 kW respectively
[29]). Due to convenience and lower cost (due to additional mileage and less battery deterioration)
[27], destination charging is preferred by owners as a daily charging strategy.
Page 17 of 83
==PAGE:27==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Figure 5. Destination charging and Charging destinations with associated locations [27].
The municipality of FRB is aiming to have curbside chargers within a walking distance of a maximum
of 250 meters [8] soon, hence contributing to the convenience. Curbside charging is assumed to become
almost as convenient as home and home shared, and will most likely be used as destination charging
for residents without privately-owned chargers and good parking conditions at work.
Quick and rapid chargers (capacity of above 50 kW) are considered important for range extension,
but irrelevant for daily use if agents have other charging possibilities. This is primarily because of
the inconvenience, price, and increased battery degradation. Range extensions are expected to cover
approximately 3.61 % [27] of distance traveled in Copenhagen (assumed the same for FRB) and hence
the grid impact will be limited to small areas of the LV grid.
Charging behavior considering parking possibilities
The Danish National Travel Survey (TU) is utilized as it describes traveling patterns throughout the
whole country [4]. It is based on approximately 189,000 interviews and 554,600 trips across 15 years
where 84 % of distance traveled is done by car. Most of these journeys are made in gasoline-powered
vehicles, but it is assumed that electric cars will have the same travel patterns as range anxiety is
considered to become a smaller problem with increasing battery sizes/better infrastructure. Only
distance driven and travel times for the vehicles are considered and hence passenger data is excluded
from the analysis.
It is assumed that agents prefer destination charging at a location with good parking availability.
Therefore, parking possibilities [4] are derived in four categories: home private, home shared, public,
and work with all of them having availability normally or always.
• home private, agents will have access to own garage or private driveway.
Page 18 of 83
==PAGE:28==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Type
Agents [N]
Agents [%]
Private
7919
26
Public
12672
42
Work and live at FRB.
1986
7
Live in FRB. work elsewhere
7570
25
Live elsewhere work in FRB.
2941
-
Total charge in FRB.
25518
-
Total live in FRB.
30147
100
Table 4. Distribution of agents according to parking possibilities in FRB.
• home shared, considers parking on privately owned property (paid/free).
• public considers parking along public roads.
• work considers paid, reserved, or free parking at the workplace.
The distribution of parking possibilities is presented in tab. 4 where agents who does not have access
to private or workplace will be categorized as utilizing public charging. Home shared is merged into
public charging as it will not be considered as flexible as private charging.
The category “work” consists of 1986 agents working in FRB and 7570 agents working outside see
tab. 4. Hence the 7570 agents working outside will be excluded. Residents living in apartments will
not have private charging available and hence they depend on public or workplace charging. 9% have
good parking possibilities at work locations hence this is prioritized and the remaining 57% will charge
publically. Agents living outside the municipality and commuting to work at FRB account for 2941
agents. These will be distributed evenly across designated areas resulting in areas 2 and 3 (SW FRB)
receiving a total of 840 agents.
Page 19 of 83
==PAGE:29==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Figure 6. Distribution of where EV owners will charge based on parking possibilities.
Placement of private, public, and workplace charging
In this section, the number of delivery points under each substation is found. This can be scaled with
a number of residents (found in tab. 3) to get an estimate of the number of EVs. The dataset used,
is created by electricity sellers to indicate the type of customers supplied. It has been modified by
Radius to link customers to specific substations (see overview in tab. 5 [34]). It is considered accurate
at estimating the number of residential delivery points such as apartments and houses. Company
types which might have private parking available are also displayed in tab. 5.
Need and location for workplace charging
It is unsure how workplace charging will be operated in the future. Some companies might offer free
charging or charging at a discounted rate to incentivize EV adoption thereby reducing their CO2
footprint. This might be an attractive way to become CO2 neutral by 2030 for companies with a
sustainable agenda. In this case, work-commuters without home-charging will be likely to take this
option as it is convenient and cost-efficient. If companies offer to charge for payment it is assumed to
follow the market price and hence still being more convenient than charging destinations. Work-place
charging will start as soon as the user plugs in as users are considered to charge when needed hence
allowing less non-idling time.
Companies are assumed to install charging capacity based on the number of parking lots. Hence it is
essential to know whether a company has parking available. Fortunately, this is often correlated with
the size of a company which can be estimated by consumption or available capacity. The approach was
Page 20 of 83
==PAGE:30==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Types of delivery points
Delivery points [N]
Residential
Apartments etc. common consumption
498
Apartments etc. with electric heating
34
Apartments etc. without electric heating
10262
Houses with electric heating
30
Houses with heat pump
26
House, row, etc. houses without electric heating
687
Work-related
Banking and insurance business
140
Construction
41
Retail, in total
193
Wholesale and cold stores
49
Iron and metal industry in general
14
Cultural activities and housekeeping services
63
Food and beverage industry
25
Public administration
50
Postal and telecommunications
103
Restaurant and hotel business
46
Social institutions and associations
77
Health and veterinary services
49
Teaching and research
52
Total
12438
Table 5. Overview of the number of delivery points for SW FRB referred to as business categories.
tested by inspecting satellite images of areas supplied by transformers that solely had work-related
customers. Most of which were found to have large private parking available for employees e.g. 5
transformers in the upper left corner of SW FRB in fig. 4 (large parking house).
Some substations have both residential and work-related customers connected. It is difficult to distin-
guish between consumption for work-related and residential consumers as one work-related consumer
can vary significantly in size. On the contrary residential consumption is predictable as customers have
a standard capacity of up to 25 A for houses and 16 A for apartments [35]. As transformers are di-
mensioned based on customers’ consumption capacity, a large work-related delivery point would result
in less capacity for residential areas. Hence the ratio between residential and work-related customers
can indicate large consumers with potential parking. If 10 % or more delivery points are considered
work-related, chances are that parking is available and EV-load should be considered. This was found
by manual inspection of satellite and street view imagery. It revealed that all substations supplying
more than 10 % work-related customers while supplying residential load (20 out of 74) did all have
some private parking presumable for workplaces. On average approximately 29 private parking lots
were counted under each substation.
Transformers with less than 10 % of work-related customers
could not be guaranteed to have private parking. Hence the pool of EV owners with good parking
Page 21 of 83
==PAGE:31==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Delivery points and Residents of SW FRB
Business Categories (delivery points)
Delivery points for apartments (public charging)
10737
Delivery points for houses (home private charging)
665
Cowi Analysis (number of residents)
Residents in apartments [N]
(public charging)
26007
Residents in houses [N]
(home private)
2831
Residents per delivery point
Residents pr. House acc. to company codes and Cowi
(home private)
4.25
Residents pr. apartment acc. to company codes and Cowi
(public charging)
2.42
Table 6. Overview of data necessary to derive number of residents per substation.
possibilities at work was distributed across these 20 stations yielding a total of 20·29 = 580 EVs being
supplied. Parking lots for stations with more than 90 % work-related customer are difficult to quantify
(indoor parking lots), but it is assumed that the remaining agents charging at work will be distributed
across these stations hence agents are distributed according to transformer sizes on the remaining 11
stations. The complete approach of determining the distribution of chargers is visualized in fig. 7 and
number of EVs can be found in Appendix B.
Page 22 of 83
==PAGE:32==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Location of home and public charging
Figure 7. Determination of EVs charging at each type of substation based on business categories.
Business categories in tab. 6 are used to find the location of delivery points for apartments and home
private charging. 26,007 residents living in apartments are distributed on the 10,737 delivery points
which yields an average of 2.42 residents per apartment. The same is done for houses which results in
4.25 residents per house delivery point. As each delivery point is linked to a substation the load can
easily be distributed according to residents and cars per person [27].
Area
Population
People
/km2
Cars
/Person
Distance
/Car
Distance
Driven/km2
Denmark
5728940
126
0.48
44.97 km
2720 km
Copenhagen
632340
8231
0.22
36 km
65190 km
Frederiksberg
104305
11979
0.29
32.7 km
113597 km
Table 7. Selected data from [27], where Distance Driven/km2 is computed by this study based on the displayed
data..
Page 23 of 83
==PAGE:33==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
2.4
Mobility data
Distribution of distance driven and arrival/departure time will be used to generate random samples
which will imitate real-world behavior.
Driving distance
Driving patterns are quantified in [27] for larger cities and municipalities of Denmark and selected
results are displayed in see tab. 7. The national average of cars per person and distance per car is
significantly larger than for FRB, but due to the high population density, the distance driven for the
urban municipality (distance driven by people per km2) is many times higher. Hence the transition
to EVs will most likely have an impact on the electrical grid.
Figure 8.
Distance driven in FRB derived from TU data [4] (scaled gamma distribution) and lognormal
distribution found by O. Borne [28].
The average distance driven is 32.7 km per car per day in FRB, but the distribution of mileage is
needed to fully understand when an EV owner plugs in. [28] and [17] finds that travel distance for
each trip to and from work is lognormally distributed i.e. short trips are very frequent. [28] has an
average of 19 km per trip (assuming two trips per day) and FRB is similar as residents drive 16.35 km
daily. The distance distribution of FRB is however not lognormally distributed as it fails to describe
short journeys accurately. Therefore, several other distributions have been fitted to the data (normal,
recipinvgauss, johnsonsb, maxwell), and the gamma distribution is selected. In fig. 8 the actual scatter
plot displays density of cars per trip i.e. frequency of cars driving the same distance. To match the
Page 24 of 83
==PAGE:34==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
average driving distance a scaled distribution is applied, and random values are sampled (with a mean
of 16.5). Comparing distance driven to O. Bornes’ analysis, charging events will become less frequent.
This emphasizes the importance of considering scenarios without EVs charging every day.
Distribution of arrival and departure time
Modeling of peak load for the uncontrolled scenario is highly influenced by the simultaneous arrival
as agents plug in shortly after arrival. Departure times are used to decide when an agent unplugs
and hence is used to calculate the possible charging timeframe. Hence a high simultaneous departure
time will not have an impact on the grid making it less essential. For other charging strategies such
as valley filling w. cooling, price, and last hour controlled, these times only influence the timeframe
when charging occurs.
An agent’s first departure during the day from home is sampled together with the last arrival at
home in the [4]. The duration between these timestamps represents the available period of overnight
charging. For the “purpose” work all departures and arrivals are collected no matter the order. To
capture and represent the worst-case, peak arrival and departure times, it is assumed that agents
depart from home and arrive at work or other locations before midday. Other locations include short
stopovers such as leisure activities, errands, shopping, visits, etc. These activities are not described as
agents are assumed to only depend on destination charging with longer stopovers and good parking
possibilities. Departure from work and arrival at home is assumed to be after midday and before
midnight. Distribution is visualized in fig. 9 and 10 and summarized in tab. 8.
Figure 9. Distribution of arrival and departure time for the purpose ”home”.
Page 25 of 83
==PAGE:35==
2
Modeling of EV charging demand and inputs
Departure
Arrival
Weekdays
Mean
Std P
Mean
Std P
Home
8:30
1.65
17:56
2.78
Work
16:16
1.78
8:18
1.16
Weekends
Mean
Std P
Mean
Std P
Home
12:20
2.96
17:44
3.63
Table 8. Arrival and departure times for weekdays and weekends with a standard deviation.
Figure 10.
Distribution of arrival and departure time for the purpose ”work” (assuming that nobody will
work during weekends).
Page 26 of 83
==PAGE:36==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
Grid planners will normally rely on simulations and max oil temperatures (logged at routine checks)
to determine whether a transformer should be replaced or relieved through load distribution. This
is typically done when the new load is connected downstream. However, it has previously not been
possible to determine the continuous temperature due to a lack of loading data for substations. Hence
no accurate prediction could be made on the expected lifetime and deterioration. Smart meters have
recently made this possible, as the temperature can be estimated by the continuous loading data and
outdoor temperature.
In order to establish a standardized loading guide for oil-immersed power transformers, the IEC
standard 60076-7 [18] is used by manufacturers of distribution transformers that Radius utilizes.
The standard provides a method of estimating operating temperature and thermal aging through
mathematical models which are based on nameplate values and empirically derived constants. The
model also utilizes a continuous input of the load factor and ambient temperature to estimate the
oil temperature.
More specifically the model aims to predict the hot spot temperature (HST) at
windings.
Deterioration of the insulating material implies a deterioration of the dielectric strength, which can lead
to a breakdown due to a high local electric field density. Hence an electric arc can appear between the
windings, leading to significant heat dissipation which causes the temperature and pressure to increase
inside the transformer i.e. the component might be permanently damaged or destroyed.
3.1
Breakdown mechanisms
The transformer displayed in fig.
1 in section 1.3 illustrated an example of longterm beakdown
mechanisms. Hot oil in the top part of the transformer had presumably allowed for high HST close to
the top winding. It might have caused the insulation to break down over many year which eventually
caused an internal fault destroying the component. This section will explain this phenomena together
with short-term overloading.
Longterm breakdown mechanisms
Distribution transformers are compact by design which means that each winding is packed close
together. To avoid flashovers between windings due to the high voltage, a paper, and pressboard
insulation material is chosen as it allows for the oil to pass through, hence transferring the heat. The
dissipated heat is associated with two types of losses: no-load and load losses. No-load losses are caused
Page 27 of 83
==PAGE:37==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
by eddy-currents and hysteresis losses from a changing magnetic field of the core. Load losses are
mainly caused by the resistive part of the winding and hence the loading of the transformer becomes
important. Thermal and mechanical forces can be extreme during e.g. short circuits or lightning
strokes and the insulation material must therefore accommodate significant mechanical, electrical and
thermal stress. To enhance the thermal insulation capability, nitrogen-based compounds are added as
it slows the degradation process by neutralizing the production of acid temporarily [18].
The insulation material is mainly composed of cellulose which has three main degradation processes.
Oxidation is caused by oxygen from air ingress and will eventually create water at low temperatures.
Hydrolysis is the degradation process of polymers that is controlled by carboxylic acids dissociated
in water. Carboxylic acid and water are created throughout a transformer’s lifespan and components
are accumulated i.e. these degradation processes are accelerated with time [18]. Pyrolysis is initiated
by high temperatures and can permanently damage the oil or cellulose by cracking it (damaging the
chemical structure/bonds and creating new compounds with different properties) [36, 37]. Pyrolysis
can happen without the presence of oxygen, water, or acid and is normally the main degradation
process [36].
Oxidation, hydrolysis, and pyrolysis can be difficult to quantify in loss of life (LoL) through a single
model, but as each process will depend on the temperature a general model can be derived with the
controlling parameter being temperature, loading, and the transformer’s condition (the content of
oxygen and moisture). A rule of thumb is that the rate of insulation aging is expected to double for
every 6 ◦C rise in insulation HST. [37]
Short-term overloading
An upper limit of 140 ◦C for the HST is recommended in [18] as gas bubbles is likely to form, hence
decreasing the dielectric properties of the oil temporarily. A high level of dissolved gas in a oil-filled
transformer might lead to a flashover and potential failure of the transformer due to strong electric field
conditions. This is especially true between the windings and the leads where the E-field is strongest.
Transformers with 2 % moisture within the winding insulation can endure a HST of 140 ◦C for a period
shorter than its thermal time constant which is typically less than 30 minutes [18]. Furthermore, the
current must not increase above 2 p.u. as the breaking capacity of tap-changers are limited to twice
the rated current according to IEC 60214-1 [38].
Page 28 of 83
==PAGE:38==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
3.2
Modeling of oil and hotspot temperature and loss of life
To estimate the HST, two models can be applied through either an exponential equation solution
or a difference equation solution [18]. Both models will use an input of load current and ambient
temperature, but due to their different mathematical forms, different properties are achieved. The
exponential function is considered appropriate for determining heat transfer parameters while the
difference equation is suitable for e.g. real-time monitoring as the mathematical transformation has
reduced the computational needs. Both approaches include the thermal model heat transfer differential
equation that will determine the HST to the top-oil gradient that is essential to find the actual
HST.
The difference equation solution in subclause 8.2.3 [18] describes the transfer differential equation
through a difference equation based on time varying load factor (K) and time varying ambient tem-
perature θa. The HST (θh) for a given ambient temperature and load factor can be found as the sum
of the oil temperature θo(n) and HST to top oil gradient (dθh) at the load considered see eq. 4
θh(n) = θo(n) + ∆θh(n)
(4)
The actual oil temperature, θo(n) is the sum of the previous oil temperature θo(n−1) and the difference
between previous and current time step eq. 5, Dθo(n).
θo(n) = θo(n−1) + Dθo(n)
(5)
Dθo(n) in eq.
6 is found using Dt which utilizes the time-varying load and ambient temperature
together with the hotspot rise dynamics. The first part of the equation is dependent on the oil time
constant, τo and experimentally derived constant k11. Its purpose is to determine the changing rate
of oil flow around the winding. This is influenced by the load and no-load loss ratio R together with
oil and ambient temperatures θa and θo. x is the exponential power of total losses versus top oil
temperature rise (oil exponent).
Dθo =
Dt
k11τo
1 + K2 · R
1 + R
x
· ∆θor −[θo −θa]

(6)
The hotspot rise coefficient, ∆θh(n) in eq. 4 is found as the difference between top oil in tank and
hotspot temperature at rated current see eq. 7.
Page 29 of 83
==PAGE:39==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
∆θh(n) = ∆θh1(n) −∆θh2(n)
(7)
The first term of the difference equation needed to determine the change in hot spot gradient can
be seen in the eq. 8. τw is the winding time constant which describes the rate of change in winding
temperature. ∆θhr is a hotspot rise above top oil which is derived by e.g. heat run tests and y is the
winding exponent.
D∆θh1 =
Dt
k22 · τw
· [(k21 −1) · ∆θhr · Ky −∆θh1]
(8)
The second term of the difference equation describes additional temperature rises for transformers
with restricted cooling or larger transformers. For small Oil Natural Air Natural (ONAN) cooled
distribution transformers, k21 the first term in brackets will be zero.
D∆θh2 =
Dt
(1/k22) · τo
· [(k21 −1) · ∆θhr · Ky −∆θh2]
(9)
The winding time constant, τw can be found by using eq. 10, where mw is mass of the winding, cw is
specific heat, g is winding-to-oil gradient and Pw is winding loss. Winding loss is directly dependent
on the load applied and can increase rapidly making the paper insulation vulnerable. The rate of oil
flow is described by τo and will depend on thermal capacity C, Oil temp rise, and supplied losses.
Thermal capacity C depends on the specific heat, c for all components within the transformer and
hence it takes time to dissipate heat and reach steady-state see eq. 12. To represent the thermal
transient behavior [18] recommends using a simulation time step of at least half the size of τw. (See
appendix C for transformer-specific calculations).
τw = mw · cw · g
60 · Pw
(10)
τo = C · ∆θo
60 · P
(11)
C = cW · mW + cFE · mFE + cT · mT + ko · co · mo
(12)
Page 30 of 83
==PAGE:40==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
Determination of expected life and relative loss of life
Radius considers oil transformers younger than 60 years to have an expected life of 75 years and older
transformers to live for 100 years [39]. The long-expected life is due to distribution transformers being
lightly loaded. Based on several tests of the HST, IEC estimates that this would give an operating
HST between 62 to 82 ◦C see fig. 11 for non-thermally upgraded paper depending on moisture and
oxygen level. Operation within this range is necessary to achieve the expected life - lower temperatures
will increase lifespan while a higher one will decrease it. It is assumed that transformers have low
oxygen levels and 0.5 % moisture content yielding an operating hot spot temperature of 82 ◦C i.e.
choosing the upper threshold for relative aging. Only when the HST increases to above 82 ◦C will the
LoL be accelerated according to eq. 14. Both the mean HST and LoL should be accounted for when
estimating the real lifetime. The relative aging, V which describes the additional LoL for a certain
time step for thermally upgraded paper is described by eq. 13 and non-thermally by eq. 14.
Figure 11. Expected life for non-thermally upgraded paper and its dependence upon moisture, oxygen, and
temperature [18].
V = e

15000
110+273 −15000
θh+273

(13)
Page 31 of 83
==PAGE:41==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
V = 2
 θh−82
6

(14)
The total ageing over the time period considered, L can be found through the eq. 15.
L =
Z t2
t1
V dt or L ≈
N
X
n=1
Vn · tn
(15)
Transformer type and cooling
Radius utilizes Oil Natural Air Natural (ONAN) cooled distribution transformers i.e. oil is circulated
solely with the help of thermodynamics. Hot oil travels upwards and is forced along the outer cooling
plates which allow for heat transfer before it is pushed back into the winding chamber to cool the
windings again. Hence the cooling plates rely on effectively transferring the heat to the surrounding
air within the transformer building and a confined space will therefore counteract this process. [18]
recommends using a correction factor for ambient temperature depending on the type of enclosure,
but these correction factors are based on many different power transformers under typical loading
conditions and hence the real ambient temperature might deviate. The corrected top oil temperature
rise due to enclosure, ∆θ′
or is described in eq. 16 where ∆θor is top oil rise in steady state at rated
losses and ∆∆θor is corrected top oil temperature rise due to enclosure (hence the parameter which
will be calibrated in the following section).
For the selection of transformer enclosures, Radius follows IEC62271-202 Annex D class 20 for oil-filled
transformers which describes cooling conditions of compact stations (kiosks). It states that natural
cooling must be utilized - if continuous loading at maximum load factor is reached, the station must
be upgraded to a class 10, i.e. mechanical controlled cooling will be applied. The class refers to the
HST increase compared to a similar transformer placed outside.
∆θ′
or = ∆θor + ∆(∆θor)
(16)
This study will consider the normal operation of small distribution transformers and hence normal
cyclic loading limits for loading beyond nameplate value. Winding HST must not exceed 120 ◦C, and
the continuous load must not increase more than 20 ◦C compared to a transformer outside.
Page 32 of 83
==PAGE:42==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
3.3
Validation and correction factor calibration
Figure 12. Left and middle: Station 847 seen from the out- and inside. right: Mounted PT100 measurement
device (10 cm from the top)..
According to grid dimension rules [40] of Frederiksberg, the rated sizes of the utilized transformers
should be either 630, 800 or 1000 kVA. Only 630 kVA is used in residential areas as the short circuit level
might otherwise exceed limits according to technical document [40]. Transformer-specific constants,
load, and outdoor temperature are known, but as transformers are placed in enclosures for protection
means, an increase in the ambient (indoor) temperature is expected. 60076-7 strongly suggest that a
correction factor for this increase is validated by tests. Hence real temperature measurements for brick
buildings and kiosks (made of stainless steel and aluminum) are utilized to find the true correction
factor.
Fig.
13 shows the applied method to find the most accurate buffer temperature considering the
uncertainty regarding transformer-specific constants. First, the thermal model is initialized with a
correction factor of 0 equivalent to assuming an equal ambient and outdoor temperature.
Page 33 of 83
==PAGE:43==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
Figure 13. Flowchart illustrating calibration process.
Oil temperature is then derived for a time step of 5 minutes to capture transient events. Base loading is
averaged hourly and will not represent transient behavior, but the final model with EVs implemented
will, and hence it is essential to validate with small time steps. Furthermore, outdoor temperatures
will be available every 5 minutes creating some transient response.
Temperatures are then tested against real measurements and the uncertainty of +-3 ◦C with an accu-
racy of 95 % is considered acceptable. Temperature estimation during the high loading of transformers
is considered the most important factor to predict, and the ambient temperature buffer will therefore
be calibrated to reach the best accuracy during these events. To perform the simulation accurately
the following inputs are utilized.
• Transformer temperature (validation set) from five different transformers have been recorded
in 2020 Via. a pt100 measurement device placed 10 cm. from the top of the transformer. It
is assumed that oil temperature is measured accurately every 20 minutes. Ambient tempera-
ture and humidity are also logged for each timestamp. The dataset contains faulty and missing
measurements during timeframes of varying sizes.
These samples are discarded through all
datasets during 2020 as there will be no other way to validate the temperature estimated by the
model. The set contains data from October 2020 to October 2021 hence seasonal dependencies
of transformer loading are included.
Page 34 of 83
==PAGE:44==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
• Transformer specific parameters (model input) are calculated based on physical data
for the distribution transformer utilized by Radius today. The data is based on manufacturer-
provided quantities and transformer properties for the following ratings; 630, 800, and 1000 kVA.
All transformers are ONAN cooled.
• Loading (model input) consists of aggregated smart meter measurements downstream, av-
eraged for each hour. Hence the loading is represented by an averaged hourly value, with no
transient fluctuations captured. Electrical losses in the LV-lines between the substation and
smart meter are also not considered, eliminating a small additional load.
• Outdoor temperature (model input) is sampled through an API (Application Programming
Interface) offered by DMI for every 5 minutes. Data is collected from a weather station located
in Ryparken st., Denmark.
Station 847 is selected for the first case study. It is located in a brick building, with a high ceiling
allowing for some cooling. The transformer is produced in 2016 by ABB and the load and no-load losses
are estimated to be somewhat equal to the utilized parameters for transformers from the manufacturer.
Two weekly timeframes with max. loading during 2020 is inspected with one set being in a low-
temperature season and the other in a high (> 10◦C and < 10◦C respectively), to ensure accuracy
during all seasons. It is assumed that tested transformers will have similar properties to the given
constants even though there will be noticeable differences in the time constants.
Figure 14. Response to rising outdoor temperatures during January 2021 (load fluctuations of 0.1 to 0.4 p.u.).
Page 35 of 83
==PAGE:45==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
Figure 15. Response to a higher temperature during October 2020 (load fluctuations of 0.1 to 0.3 p.u.).
In fig.
14 the response to large variations in outdoor temperature is displayed with a correction
factor of 10 which yields the highest accuracy. The model tends to fluctuate more than the measured
values which are acceptable considering that it must represent worst-case/max temperatures. The
model performs within an uncertainty margin of +-2 ◦C during both seasons. In winter (from -5
to 10 ◦C), no overshoot is observed at very low temperatures and some overshoot around 10 ◦C.
This is amplified during summer (10 to 25 ◦C) and some peaks reach more than 2 ◦C due to large
temperature fluctuations. It will most likely be the correction factor or τo which controls the change
in oil temperature as it only overshoots during high outdoor temperatures. It is concluded that the
response to outdoor temperature is accurate enough.
The loading of the transformer impacts the temperature the most, due to K2 in eq. 6. Furthermore,
as the temperature depends on the oil-rise gradient, the correction factor also becomes important.
Two timeframes of one week within the period displayed in fig. 15 and 14above are selected.
Winter: The highest loading observed is during winter as presented in fig. 16. Consequently, the
model is calibrated to estimate the temperature accurately in this timeframe. From hour 0 to 75
outdoor temperatures are stable and calculated values are accurately describing the significant load
fluctuations (from 0.1 p.u. to 0.5 p.u. within two hours). The outdoor temperature starts to fluctuate
Page 36 of 83
==PAGE:46==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
again at hour 100 and the model starts to underestimate indicating wrong calibration or other sources
of error.
Summer: in fig. 17 at hour 28 a load increase of 0.35 p.u. is introduced and the oil temperature
increases which results in a small overshoot with more than 2 ◦C. This might be an indication of a
too-large dθor or correction factor as the offset is somewhat constant between hours 25 and 80. As the
temperature dips at hour 90, the model starts to underestimate once again indicating a wrong dθor,
too small τoil or another source of error.
Sources of error: Even though Radius utilizes the same type of transformers that comply with the
same standards, there will still be a difference in mass e.g. windings, oil, core, etc. i.e. this means that
time constants might deviate and cooling/heating trends must be observed closely to further validate
the model. Wind, solar irradiance, and precipitation will also impact the temperature depending on
the surroundings of e.g. large buildings or trees which could create shadow or shelter (see example in
fig. 12). As these uncertainties are difficult to describe the model is considered accurate enough.
Figure 16. Highest loading during one week in January with low outdoor temperatures.
Page 37 of 83
==PAGE:47==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
Figure 17. Highest loading during one week in June with high outdoor temperatures.
The impact of kiosk is tested through, substations 5661 (kiosk, Sr = 630 kVA) and 7173 (kiosk,
Sr =1000 kVA). Both are considered lightly loaded (below 0.3 p.u.)
and a full validation cannot
be provided. The temperature estimation accuracy during the year and at selected timeframes are
presented in tab. 11 together with uncertainty margins. dθ′
or is known and added with the correction
factor to find the final gradient for oil rise. The correction factor for 7173 is significantly higher than
for 847 and 5661 which could be due to two 1000 kVA transformers installations in the same building.
Furthermore, the station does not meet the requirement of +-3 ◦C. This station setup is rare in urban
environments and for future modeling of single 1000 kVA transformers in kiosks, a correction factor
of 25 (see tab. 11) will be used instead.
Correction factors of transformers with odd rating sizes (630 kVA) are interpolated with a linear
dependency in tab. 11 and results for 847 (brick building) (corr. factor = 10) comes closest to the
category; building w. poor ventilation (8.52). 5661 (kiosk)(corr. factor = 15) is correctly enough
closest to the kiosk category of 17.6. 7173 is out of a realistic range and hence the suggested value of
Page 38 of 83
==PAGE:48==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
Station
Rating
Year of
installation
Building
∆θ′
or
Correction
Factor
847
630 kVA
2016
Brick
45
10
5661
630 kVA
1986
Kiosk
45
20
7173
2x1000 kVA
2012
Kiosk
54
71
Table 9. Calibration conditions during highest loading periods and a full year.
SUMMER
WINTER
YEARLY
Station
Max.
Loading
RMSE
Uncertainty
(captured)
Max.
Loading
RMSE
Uncertainty
(captured)
Max.
Loading
RMSE
Uncertainty
(captured)
847
0.35 p.u.
0.85
+- 2 ◦C(95%)
0.5 p.u.
0.93
+1C
-3 ◦C(98%)
0.5 p.u.
1.42
+2 C
-3 ◦C(95%)
5661
0.14 p.u.
0.51
+1 ◦C
-3 ◦C(97%)
0.2 p.u.
0.75
+1 ◦C
-3 ◦C(97%)
0.2 p.u.
1.18
+2
-3 ◦C (98%)
7173
0.26 p.u.
2.02
+4
-3 ◦C (96%)
0.18 p.u.
0.51
+1 C
-3 ◦C(100%)
0.26 p.u.
2.04
+-4 ◦C (96%)
Table 10. Overview of calibration results.
25 is chosen.
3.4
Partial conclusion
The thermal model is able to predict temperatures within a margin of +-3 ◦C for a 630 kVA transformer
in a brick building and kiosk. To increase the accuracy, a calibration was performed and the model
output was benchmarked towards actual measurements. The calibration was especially focused on the
winter months due to the higher loadings, resulting in some offset during the summer months (model
overshoots). A solution could be to create a summer and winter correction factor to reduce the offset,
but as transformer-specific constants might not fit the real transformer completely, a new parameter
might result in overfitting, hence adding error.
Calibration has only been performed on top oil, but a validation of HST, θh through fiber optic
measurements could further improve the model. Larger transformers will have a higher leakage flux
density and short-circuit level i.e. a higher mass of insulation covering the winding which increases
the difficulty of predicting the HST. Hence validation becomes more important for larger transform-
ers.
Another important aspect is that the model has not been tested at full loading or levels that involve
LoL and uncertainty must therefore be considered. It is anticipated that the calibrated model will
capture worst-case LoL which is the main purpose. Transformer-specific constants are assumed to be
correct.
Page 39 of 83
==PAGE:49==
3
Modeling of transformer hotspot temperature
Building type
250 kVA
500 kVA
630 kVA
750 kVA
800 kVA
1000 kVA
Kiosk
10
15
17.6
20
21
25
Buildings
w. good ventilation
3
4
2.52
5
3.2
6
Buildings
w. poor ventilation
7
8
8.52
9
9.2
10
Underground vaults
w. poor ventilation
11
12
12.52
13
13.2
14
Table 11. overview of recommended correction factors for single transformer buildings depending on type of
building and transformer rating [18].
Trf. input
Value
Sr
630
τo
237.6
τw
21.1
dθor
8
R
7.7
K11, K21, K22
1,1,2
dθhr
22.99
Table 12. Base case input parameters of the thermal model with producers recommended properties for the
transformer.
Page 40 of 83
==PAGE:50==
4
Results
4
Results
The purpose of this case study is to allow comparison of CF with other studies and between each
charging type and scenario. Results which consist of CF, HST, and LoL will be presented for three
different charging types (private, work, and public) with private (flexible) charging undergoing four
scenarios. Initially, a fictive case of 300 EVs utilizing one transformer is created (100 EVs distributed
on each type) to visualize interactions and demonstrate the CF. The analysis is extended to a varying
number of EVs in order to establish a max number of EVs utilizing one transformer based on HST
and LoL. A sensitivity analysis is then performed for one station in order to determine which factors
will have the largest impact on the HST and LoL. Finally, the inputs of sections 1 and 2 are applied to
Frederiksberg and the CF, HST, and LoL are determined for all substation transformers throughout
2020. Inputs for thermal- and EV-model are given in tab. 2 and 12while mobility data is given in tab.
8. Work and public chargers will throughout all scenarios be dependent solely on the arrival times i.e.
only the privately owned chargers will change charging strategy (see tab. 13).
Uncontrolled
Last hour
Valley filling w. cooling
Price controlled
Public
Arrival times
Work
Arrival times
Private
Arrival times
load dependent
Specific charging interval
Random price signal
Table 13. Dependencies of when EVs will charge.
A CF is derived for vehicles of each type of charging. i.e. a CFprivate = 1, means that all EVs with
private charging possibilities are being charged at the same time with full capacity. The factor does
not distinguish between the number of EVs and charging power i.e. some scenarios with lower charging
rates will yield a lower CF even though all EVs are charging simultaneously.
Station 60230 (seen in fig. 18) has a 630 kVA transformer in a brick building supplying the residential
load. The area with private houses (top of figure) is assumed to have its own chargers while apartment
complexes (lower part of figure) utilize public chargers. The maximum transformer baseload observed
in 2020 was 0.45 p.u. while the mean was 0.28 p.u. More than 700 customers are supplied through
this station, and as approximately 10 % of these are classified as businesses, workplace charging is
allocated (businesses are located in the main street with small private parking lots on the side roads).
Hence the transformer is determined to supply private, public, and workplace charging demand.
A case study is performed for 300 EVs evenly distributed across the private, workplace, and public
Page 41 of 83
==PAGE:51==
4
Results
chargers (100 for each case). The number of EVs is equivalent to 1034 residents (
300[EV s]
0.29[EV s/residents] =
1034) which is higher than the original 700 residents.
4.1
Impact of charging strategies on the coincidence factor
Figure 18. Substation 60230 at Gustav Johannsens vej (with public, private and workplace charging).
Uncontrolled charging (UNC)
During the uncontrolled scenario, private and public charging will coincide at arrival times hence
enlarging the peak load during the peak hours. As demonstrated in fig.19 the max CF is estimated
to be 0.14 at 11 kW (private) yielding 154 kW additional peak load to baseload, which is likely to
coincide with the public chargers with a CF of 0.09 at 22 kW resulting in an additional peak load of
198 kW. As the base peak load exceeds 300 kW regularly the addition of 352 kW (198kW+154kW)
would create short-term overloading (1.03 p.u.).
Agents who exclusively depend on workplace charging are assumed to postpone charging during the
weekend. Hence a high peak during the first day of the week is observed, as the accumulated distance
Page 42 of 83
==PAGE:52==
4
Results
driven during weekends gives a high charging probability. Combined with a small standard deviation
of arrival times the coincidence yields a max factor of 0.31 resulting in a max additional peak load
of 682 kW. Loading during the weekends’ peaks during the first half of the day, hence avoiding any
overloading. Load curves can be seen plotted in fig. 19 for the second week of January. This is due
to EVs being initialized with 100 % SoC i.e. the charging demand for workplaces during the first
weekday is non-existing.
Valley filling with cooling (VAL)
The main objective is to maintain a low coincidence factor and thereby reduce the total peak load,
i.e. valley filling is applied on flexible load such as privately owned chargers. The timeframe from
22:00 to 6:00 is chosen for valley filling in residential areas as it does not coincide with other chargers
and still allows for transformer oil to cool off before the morning peak which occurs between 8:00
and 10:00. An aggregator distributes the charging load evenly throughout the night to minimize the
coincidence factor and to introduce a better distribution of the total load. The demand with valley
filling including cooling is demonstrated to smoothen the peak hours equivalent to maximum CF of
0.1 based on these simulations, see fig. 20.
Price-controlled charging (PRI)
The price signal given can be seen every 24 hours, lasting 3 hours at a time. It is applied at random
hours within the non-idling period. If an agent has not arrived before the low-price signal and charging
is needed, then forced charging is performed hence resulting in some outliers (seen outside peaks during
hour 312 in 21). From the simulation a max coincidence factor of 0.45 is achieved which yields a max
load of 495 kW peak.
When the charging coincides with peak-base load some overload is introduced temporarily and oil
temperatures will most likely not reach alarming levels given the short duration.
Last-hour charging (LAS)
The aggregator will try to charge vehicles during the last hour before EVs start to unplug and the
baseload starts to increase. Hence all available EVs will start to charge simultaneously. This results
in a max CF of 0.89 which would create a peak load of 979 kW. As the sudden load increase occurs
during low load hours for other consumers, the base would be close to the mean of 0.28 p.u. (176
kW). Hence the substation could experience 1.83 p.u. which is unacceptable during normal operation.
Furthermore, it leaves little room for cooling time during morning peak hours, see fig. 22.
Page 43 of 83
==PAGE:53==
4
Results
168
192
216
240
264
288
312
Time [hour]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Power [MW]
Pmax
Base Load
uncontrolled_public
uncontrolled_work
uncontrolled_private
Figure 19. Uncontrolled charging strategy plotted for the second week of 2020 (public and private charging
coincides).
168
192
216
240
264
288
312
Time [hour]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Power [MW]
Pmax
Base Load
uncontrolled_public
uncontrolled_work
optimized_private
Figure 20. Valley filling for the second week of 2020 (Consumption is strategically placed in low load periods
with a constant CF and cool-down period prior to morning peak).
Page 44 of 83
==PAGE:54==
4
Results
168
192
216
240
264
288
312
Time [hour]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Power [MW]
Pmax
Base Load
uncontrolled_public
uncontrolled_work
optimized_private
Figure 21. Price signal-controlled charging with hourly peaks at random times.
168
192
216
240
264
288
312
Time [hour]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Power [MW]
Pmax
Base Load
uncontrolled_public
uncontrolled_work
optimized_private
Figure 22. Last-hour charging prior to morning peak of the second week of 2020.
Page 45 of 83
==PAGE:55==
4
Results
A summary of CF can be seen in tab. 14 with each case illustrated during the second week of 2020 in
fig. 19, 20, 21 and 22. HST and LoL are not critical. The next section will test for various numbers
of EVs as the CF depends significantly on this factor.
CF, LoL and HST for 100 EVs
Type
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
Private (11 kW)
0.14
0.10
0.40
0.89
Public (22 kW)
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
Work (22 kW)
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
LoL [days]
0.40
0.35
0.43
0.40
max HST [◦C]
85.26
86.44
86.87
90.05
mean HST [◦C]
36.08
35.46
36.30
36.65
Table 14. max CF, HST, and LoL based on 2020 data simulated for 10 years..
4.2
Sensitivity analysis
The purpose of this section is to quantify how each of the charging strategies and scenarios affects
the HST and LoL. First, the variations in CF according to the number of EVs are presented. This
will enable the link of potential critical HST to a certain CF at a number of EVs yielding valuable
information for grid dimension purposes. The parameters with the highest impact on the HST will be
tested and presented in LoL and HST.
Variations in CF for UNC: The sensitivity of CF and max peak load for 60230 is tested by
changing the number of EVs as it has the main impact. In tab. 15 the CF for private charging
changes significantly between 0 to 150 EVs and stabilizes above 150 EVs as it solely depends on
arrival times. Public and private charging has the same arrival time and differences are caused by the
deterministic and probabilistic plugin behavior and higher charging rates. Workplace charging has a
consistent high coincidence due to accumulated distance driven during the weekend and the arrival
times.
Variations in CF for PRI, VAL, and LAS: VAL and LAS has a stable max CF depending on N
EVs, which can be explained by VAL distributing load effectively while the LAS schedules max EV
simultaneously only limited by the plugin rate. LAS can simply not schedule any more load as there
will always be some EVs not plugged in tab. 15. As the CF stays constant no matter the number of
EVs, it becomes more critical than the other scenarios. PRI reaches the max CF of 0.55 for 10 EVs
Page 46 of 83
==PAGE:56==
4
Results
and reduces to 0.38 at 250 EVs due to average plugin behavior. Be aware that this many EVs are
highly unlikely to depend on one substation - instead a realistic number would be between 10 and 220
EVs in total (see column total in Appendix B).
CF public
CF work
CF private
(Pri, Pub, Wor) [N EVs]
UNC
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
10,10,10
0.24
0.43
0.31
0.14
0.55
0.88
50,50,50
0.12
0.33
0.17
0.11
0.42
0.89
100,100,100
0.09
0.31
0.14
0.10
0.40
0.89
150,150,150
0.08
0.30
0.13
0.10
0.39
0.88
200,200,200
0.08
0.30
0.12
0.10
0.38
0.88
250,250,250
0.07
0.29
0.12
0.10
0.38
0.89
Table 15. Number of EVs for each charger type: Private, Public and Work.
Of the UNC charging strategies, workplace charging has the most significant peak load, but the HST
is needed to determine whether the transformer insulation is affected. Private charging placed prior to
the workplace peak might influence the initial temperature and hence LoL. Furthermore, parameters
will be changed in order to test the sensitivity of the thermal and EV model throughout scenarios.
The base case is still chosen as 60230 with the lowest possible prerequisites for LoL during 2020 (see
tab. 12). I.e. constants of currently used transformers and brick buildings are used for the thermal
model. Inputs for the EV model are set according to section 2.
Computation of HST for 1-year : To quantify how EV charging impacts the LoL, HST is computed
for every 10 minutes during 2020, and based on the above load scenarios the total LoL can be derived.
An extreme case of 150 EVs is selected and in fig. 23, the continuous temperature throughout the
second week of 2020 can be observed. Workplace charging accelerates the temperature to near above-
recommended levels with LAS reaching the max temperatures throughout the week at the morning
hours due to a high CF. However, it is difficult to observe the actual impact over a longer time.
Hence a histogram is presented in fig. 24 showing the distribution of HST. UNC has a large standard
deviation in fig. 24 due to few consistent fluctuations reinforcing the cyclic load profile and cooling
is achieved between peak loads. VAL has the smallest deviation for temperature occurrences which
is due to valley-filling achieving a more continuous profile. However, this profile will still make the
transformer vulnerable to morning peak loads and some extreme temperatures are therefore still seen.
PRI and LAS signals will create extreme fluctuations and that naturally leads to much higher extreme
Page 47 of 83
==PAGE:57==
4
Results
temperatures.
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
Time [Hour]
20
40
60
80
100
120
Temperature [°C]
hs, Uncontrolled
hs, Valley filling
hs, Price controlled
hs, Last hour
Figure 23. Continuous HST for all scenarios during the second week of 2020.
Fig. 25 shows the life decreasing temperature range with 120◦C being unacceptable for normal oper-
ation. Quantifying the LoL, the uncontrolled scenario experiences the least damage followed by the
VAL-controlled scenario. However, LAS experiences temperatures near 140◦C which is critical. How-
ever, these operating patterns are not acceptable during normal operation as grid reserves/redundancy
is significantly reduced and as neighboring stations might experience the same trend there is no chance
of shifting supply to another transformer.
Page 48 of 83
==PAGE:58==
4
Results
Figure 24. histogram of HST for 2020 in UNC, VAL, PRI, and LAS.
Figure 25. Temperature range where LoL is accelerated (above 82 ◦C) of HST in UNC, VAL, PRI, and LAS
for 2020.
Page 49 of 83
==PAGE:59==
4
Results
Base case
LoL [days]
(Private, Public, Work)
[N EVs]
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
(10,10,10)
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.09
(50,50,50)
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.14
(100,100,100)
0.40
0.35
0.43
0.40
(150,150,150)
6.46
7.39
8.91
11.08
(200,200,200)
>365
>365
>365
>365
(250,250,250)
>365
>365
>365
>365
Table 16. LoL in days in 2020 under standard conditions.
max HST
mean HST
(Pri, Pub, Wor)
[N EVs]
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
(10,10,10)
46.35
45.49
45.89
45.54
28.57
28.50
28.54
28.48
(50,50,50)
58.98
59.55
59.64
60.61
31.65
31.30
31.55
31.55
(100,100,100)
85.26
86.44
86.87
90.05
36.08
35.46
36.30
36.65
(150,150,150)
120.39
122.34
123.55
128.45
41.79
40.45
42.16
42.91
(200,200,200)
167.42
170.30
172.10
178.89
48.42
46.41
48.91
50.47
(250,250,250)
205.38
208.65
213.29
208.08
54.46
51.84
55.40
55.98
Table 17. HST max and mean depending on charging scenarios.
Computation of HST for 10 years: One year of HST has been generated, but due to the model
using a probabilistic approach more iterations are necessary to ensure statistical valid data. Hence
the same cases are computed 10 times which is equivalent to 10 years of data (transformer baseload in
2020 is utilized for all computations). The max of each week is taken and averaged for each year giving
an average max. This is then averaged for each of the 10 years. LoL results can be seen in tab. 18.The
transformers will not be able to charge 150 EVs sustainably for two reasons. The first is that normal
operation temperatures above the recommended level of 120 ◦C are identified which is unacceptable.
The second reason is that between 6 and 11 days of yearly LoL will yield a total loss of 450 to 825 days
(with an expected life of 75 years) depending on the scenario at the best considered condition for a
newly installed transformer. Time constants τw and τo are different for every transformer type but will
Page 50 of 83
==PAGE:60==
4
Results
have the largest impact on heating and cooling [41]. Therefore the recommended model developed by
IEC 60076-7 for a broader spectrum of small distribution transformers is tested (with τw = 4min and
τo = 180min). The impact is calculated in LoL and compared to the base case. Case (150,150,150)
can be observed to increase from tab. 16 to 18 significantly and yielding a LoL which is more than 10
times higher for all scenarios. The HST also increases from between 120 to 129 ◦C in tab. 17 to 154
to 159 ◦C i.e. critical temperatures (above 140◦C) are exceeded and substantial deterioration of the
equipment must be expected. However, it is still possible to realize a scenario with (100,100,100) EVs
as neither HST or LoL reaches critical values for any of the scenarios. The max HST is registered to
be at 107 ◦C during LAS.
Finally, the building type for the transformer station is changed yielding worse cooling possibilities
as the correction factor due to enclosure increases from 8.52 (building with poor ventilation) to 17.6
(kiosk) (see eq. 16). For (150,150,150) the LoL is increased at least 3 times and the HST reaches
between 129 and 136 ◦C, hence above recommended and just below critical temperatures.
60076-7, τw = 4, τo = 180
LoL [days]
(Private, Public, Work)
[N EVs]
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
(10,10,10)
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
(50,50,50)
0.16
0.14
0.15
0.14
(100,100,100)
0.71
0.66
0.83
0.81
(150,150,150)
73.93
85.90
98.83
133.71
(200,200,200)
>365
>365
>365
>365
(250,250,250)
>365
>365
>365
>365
Kiosk, ∆∆θor = 17.6
LoL [days]
(Private, Public, Work)
[N EVs]
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
(10,10,10)
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
(50,50,50)
0.21
0.19
0.20
0.19
(100,100,100)
0.66
0.59
0.73
0.68
(150,150,150)
17.24
20.70
25.22
33.04
(200,200,200)
>365
>365
>365
>365
(250,250,250)
>365
>365
>365
>365
Table 18. Number of days with LoL accelerating conditions during 2020.
Page 51 of 83
==PAGE:61==
4
Results
4.3
Substations at Frederiksberg
Results in this section are based on all substations in SW FRB with the mobility and charging inputs
derived in section 2 and input parameters given in tab. 2,12. Due to some substations at FRB having
few customers connected, data can be GDPR restricted, and hence the real substation names are
anonymous i.e. cover names are given. An overview of the results is displayed in appendix B with
LoL, HST, CF, CP, and Load. The simulations have been repeated to gain statistical significance like
the previous results.
From Appendix B column LoL, substations with privately charged EVs can be seen to experience the
largest impact during PRI and VAL which is to be expected. Substation without flexible charging
will not be affected by control strategies and it becomes more likely that a substation only supplying
one type of load (e.g public) becomes overloaded. 1, 2, and 3 in appendix B (substation with highest
HST) does all have a rating of 500 kVA while supplying more than 150 EVs (in total) which makes
them vulnerable. During PRI they all experience HST of between 87 and 112 ◦C which will accelerate
LoL. However, the total LoL is less than 2 days during a year for all scenarios hence eliminating the
risk of serious deterioration of insulation material. The max load reaches between 1.42 and 1.52 p.u.
which might be a more critical problem as other components within the substation could fail.
4.4
Partial conclusion
The sensitivity analysis enabled quantification of LoL with respect to the HST and an insight into how
much a typical transformer at Frederiksberg is able to withstand under various conditions. The case
of 100 EVs distributed on each type of charger will not cause a significant LoL or critical temperature
even under an extreme CF of 0.89 (at 11 kW charging capacity), prior to a workplace peak load with
a CF of 0.31 (at 22 kW charging capacity). Hence the question of how much a transformer could
handle overtime was raised. The case of 150 EVs on each charger type had serious consequences and
a substantial number of days with LoL, for all scenarios when utilizing IEC60067-7 constants or when
placing a transformer within a kiosk.
However, when actually applying real substation data with the expected number of EVs, computed
according to section 1 the HST and LoL were not a problem under standard conditions. The max
load will peak to 1.42 and 1.52 p.u. of the highest loaded transformers and it is therefore essential
to inspect whether neighboring components can maintain the same resilience. Results generated for
this section has been subject to several assumptions which might change with time. Hence the next
section will discuss the usability and realism of this section.
Page 52 of 83
==PAGE:62==
5
Discussion
5
Discussion
In this section, the usability of the developed tool is discussed. The CF is compared to existing studies
to validate results. The transformer impact of max HST and LoL is then compared to studies that
do not consider plugin behavior and contributions of this study are highlighted. Finally, important
assumptions are being discussed and future work outlined.
5.1
Usability of the tool
The developed tool enables grid planners to simulate the max HST and LoL in the Zealand municipal-
ities based on available data from Danish National Travel Survey [4]. Distribution of arrival/departure
times, distance traveled, the purpose of the trip, and parking possibilities enable a good estimation
of the charger type an agent will use. To reach a higher level of detail, the distribution of HH types
is needed. These are available on a municipality level through Statistics Denmark [42]. A migration
study performed by Cowi, quantifying HH type for 7 different areas within FRB has been utilized in
the present studies for better accuracy [32]. Furthermore, the business codes provided by electricity
sellers have been used to indicate the number of delivery points for houses, apartments, and businesses.
It can be difficult to estimate the exact number of residents under each point of delivery and hence it
is preferable to distribute the known number of residents in an area onto these delivery points (4.25
residents per house and 2.42 per apartment for this study).
Significant uncertainty is associated with this approach as it is purely based on assumptions of EV
adoption made based on existing literature and data [4, 10, 27]. Rasmussen P. has in a collaboration
with Radius developed an algorithm which can identify EV-charging from aggregated data on the
substation level in order to determine how many EVs are charging in parts of the LV-grid [43]. This
study resulted in an estimated number of EVs with the allocated charging capacity and behavior, with
inherent uncertainty. If the accuracy of this algorithm is improved, it could potentially be used to
calibrate or feed this model, hence reducing the largest factor of uncertainty.
Calibration on real-world data would make the model even more capable of identifying areas of concern.
These could be large suburbs with detached houses where consumption might increase within the
allocated delivery capacity.
A house owner connected to the LV grid will typically have 25A at
disposal [35], but the grid is typically dimensioned with a low CF without considering EVs. The
consumer can, however, increase consumption through e.g.
a three-phase EV charger installation
without notifying Radius. This could lead to a rise in consumption which might only be detected by
real-time measurements. It will likely happen simultaneously in several areas which makes it essential
Page 53 of 83
==PAGE:63==
5
Discussion
to plan ahead and prevent the problem from happening.
Before an accurate estimation of the number of EVs becomes available, this tool requires some gen-
eralizing assumptions in order to function and the most controversial will be discussed within this
section (see Appendix A for a summary of assumptions). First, the CF is compared to existing studies
to validate results.
5.2
Comparison of coincidence factors
Uncontrolled scenario (UNC) Arrival times at charger determined the uncontrolled CF as opposed
to controlled scenarios that depended on a price signal. Gonzales achieved a normal distribution of
arrival times with a standard deviation of 2 during weekdays [25]. This study has found it to be
larger for home and public charging (std of 2.78) hence reducing the CF. However, workplace charging
had a significantly smaller standard deviation (std of 1.16) hence increasing the CF substantially.
This demonstrates the importance of conducting uncontrolled charging scenarios on local data as grid
planners might use the CF for dimensioning purposes. Hence if not calculated correctly components
might become over-or undersized which might cause congestion or a waste of resources. Quantifying
the CF for different charging strategies and geographical areas is therefore considered useful.
Workplace and public CPs are considered shared facilities and are assumed to be uncontrolled during
all scenarios as studies show a lower non-idling time and predictability than compared to private
charging [10, 22].
ToU price schemes have been studied for workplace CPs, but they can have a
considerable negative impact economically and electrically on the grid [31]. Hence these CPs will
charge EVs at full capacity whenever it gets plugged in.
UNC for private chargers has been found to have similar behavior [10] where the CF was found to
be 0.18 for 100 EVs with an average size battery and plugin rate at 11 kW charging capacity. The
reason why results yield in a lower CF of 0.15 in this research is due to shorter daily driving distance
of 32.7 km vs. 38 km and larger standard deviation of arrival 2.78 compared to the 2 used in [25].
Calearo L. found that a fleet below 30 EVs is likely to have a CF beneath 0.30 and less than 0.25
when considering more than 50 EVs (for 11 kW) [23]. These findings are confirmed in the presented
studies as UNC yields a CF smaller than 0.30 for 20 EVs and 0.17 for 50 EVs. Hence UNC private
charging can be validated. Public charging will follow the same trend with the only difference being
the charging capacity which is also considered realistic. Another study conducted on 22 kW chargers
yielded a CF of approximately 0.14 which is larger than 0.09 found by this study (the difference is
due to std in arrival times) [44].
Page 54 of 83
==PAGE:64==
5
Discussion
UNC charging demand for workplaces yielded a CF of 0.31 for 100 EVs due to the simultaneous arrival
and the assumption of no charging during the weekend. However, the likelihood of agents postponing
charging during a weekend is real as The National Travel Survey [4] suggests that some agents will
only have good parking conditions at work.
The case of substation 60230 with 100 EVs depending on workplace charging is extreme but necessary
to compare grid impacts. A hundred agents depending on workplace charging is equivalent to 345
residents or 7.7 % of the total pool of agents using chargers at work. This would never take place at
one 630 kVA transformer which also supplies 100 EVs at public and private chargers. Instead, this
might only happen at large businesses with more capacity available such as the area of Flintholm train
station (upper left corner in fig. 4). Furthermore, it is reasonable to presume that agents will plan
ahead and charge before the weekend transitioning from an “if-needed” strategy to a more regular
plugin rate. Some of these agents might also utilize public or rapid chargers during the weekend to
provide the needed range extension. However, the concentrated arrival is very likely to cause a high
CF and the worst case has been investigated. To put these results into perspective, the data generated
for FRB should be considered. Here the maximum number of EVs per substation is 99 (only placed
near large businesses with 1000 kVA transformers solely supplying workload) (see appendix B).
Controlled scenarios (VAL, PRI, and LAS)
For a flexible EV load such as private charging, Gonzales states that a maximum CF of 0.66 (6 kW/EV
observed in fig. 10 in [10]) is likely for 100 EVs with an average plugin and 0.44 for 10000 EVs. The
PRI scenario in this study yielded a CF of 0.40 which is much lower given the same plugin behavior.
The difference is mainly due to the designed price signal. Gonzales has presumably based the price
signal on a sine function with a short duration of charge scheduling enabling EVs with small needs to
charge e.g. during the cheapest 10 minutes. This study has considered hourly prices and scheduling
i.e. the aggregator has distributed load evenly throughout an hour yielding a lower CF. Opposingly,
the LAS scenario was developed to provoke the highest load spikes and identify the impact.
By
optimizing in terms of the lowest load period for every 10 minutes the aggregator scheduled charging
simultaneously resulting in a CF of 0.89.
5.3
The utilization rate of public and workplace charger
Agents who charge privately will have their own CP (charge point), but agents using public or work
infrastructure will share. Hence it raises the question, how valid is the assumption that businesses or
municipalities will set up chargers to support the highest CF found in the result section?
Page 55 of 83
==PAGE:65==
5
Discussion
EVs utilizing
Public or Work
Chargers [N]
Public
CF
Work
CF
Public
CP
[N]
Work
CP
[N]
Utilization
rate public
[%]
Utilization
rate work
[%]
10
0.24
0.43
2
4
4.7
2.6
50
0.12
0.33
6
16
10.0
3.5
100
0.09
0.31
9
31
12.9
3.7
150
0.08
0.30
12
45
14.1
3.8
200
0.08
0.30
15
59
15.1
3.9
250
0.07
0.29
18
71
16.4
4.0
Table 19. Needed number of CPs to reach CFs presented in the result section.
This study has considered a non-constrained CF from EVs, charging downstream of a substation
transformer (i.e.
number of CPs is not limited).
It is based on FRB wanting to become the nr.
1 EV city and providing the necessary infrastructure to supply public charging demand. Based on
case studies from the results, the number of CPs needed to generate the presented CF is shown
in tab. 19. The utilization rate is computed by finding the total energy needed per EV per day
(32.7km · 0.185kWh/km = 6.05kWh) and multiplying it with the number of EVs. The total energy
needed per day is distributed evenly on the number of CPs and the time needed to charge this amount
is divided by 24h. Hence the utilization rate displays the average % time a CP is providing energy for
an EV plugged in. A study conducted on the utilization rate of public charging infrastructure (11 kW
capacity) in Amsterdam showed that EVs were connected in 12-18%, but only charging in 4-5% of the
time[45]. This rate is considered low and is likely to increase in the future. However, it confirms that
the number of chargers presented in this study might even be conservatively set, especially considering
22 kW instead of 11 kW. Hence the described CFs are likely to occur.
Workplace charging has recently been regulated to enforce the installation of chargers for every
privately-owned parking lot.[46] By 2025 it is required for non-residential buildings that 1 charger
is put into place for every 20th parking lot (for existing buildings) and 10th parking lot (for a new
building).
The low utilization of work CP is due to the very high CF demonstrated on the first weekday as agents
postponed charging during the weekend. It is more likely that a business will dimension the number
of CPs based on max average CF instead of absolute max. Some agents will be forced to charge
elsewhere or schedule charging during another business day. The extreme CF of 0.31 has been taken
into account as a business can maximum have 99 agents utilizing the chargers. Hence the maximum
number of CPs at a transformer supplying a business is 31 (see tab. 19 and appendix B).
Number of EVs ACES estimates that the number of EVs will be 11.802 by 2030 which is approx-
Page 56 of 83
==PAGE:66==
5
Discussion
imately 39% of the full adoption [44]. For short-term loading analysis and grid reserve studies, 2030
would be an adequate milestone, but transformers have an expected life span of 75 years hence making
it essential to consider operation patterns through full EV adoption. Furthermore, initial screening
confirmed that issues with deterioration of insulation material would not become a great problem
hence the initial analysis was extended from 2030 to 2050.
5.4
Findings on hot spot temperature and loss of life
The max HST did not yield any serious violations considering the base case simulation on SW FRB.
Compared to other analyses conducted on the same matter, this is unexpected especially considering
the maximum EV adoption of 100 %. As described in the literature review, several studies proved
significant LoL on transformers exposed to less EV adoption. Pradhan concluded that a residential
transformer supplying 50 % EV penetration would have an expected life of 1.02 years (due to LoL
of 98.23% annually) [14]. LoL were especially problematic during the summer, presumably due to
hot ambient temperatures and high baseload from e.g. air condition coinciding with EV charging as
the study was conducted in Australia. Hilshey also showed that distribution transformers exposed to
ToU-prices and warmer climates such as Phoenix, AZ could increase temperatures and hence increase
LoL [12].
In contrast, transformers in SW FRB are placed in enclosures, but cooler outdoor temperatures will
improve the cooling conditions. This is especially true during the winter months, which is fortunate as
the base load for residential areas tends to increase in these months. Effective cooling was confirmed
by tests on substation 847 in section 2 (illustrated in fig. 16). The transformer experienced max
loading of above 0.5 p.u. while maintaining a significantly lower oil temperature of 15 ◦C compared
25 ◦C during summer months with less load.
Cooling properties are dependent on the type of enclosures and in section 2 the correction factor for
two building types was determined. The kiosk was classified correctly as a kiosk, while brick buildings
came closest to a building w. poor ventilation see tab. 11. As load data for calibration purposes was
low (under 0.6 p.u.) the model could not be completely validated. Hence the standard correction
factors were used, 8.52 for brick building and 17.6 for kiosks even though the calibration resulted in
10 and 20 respectively. The impact of a higher correction factor (changing from brick building to
kiosk) did not have a critical impact on the HST or LoL for the case of 100 EVs charging at each
type. However, for the case of 150 EVs, the LoL increased more than three times and HST came
close to the critical levels as heat accumulated in the enclosure. Critical levels were also reached with
Page 57 of 83
==PAGE:67==
5
Discussion
constants recommended by IEC (changing τo and τw), but with a more severe impact (LoL is increased
more than 10 times). i.e. it is important to observe old and small transformers in kiosks which might
supply both work and private charging. The combinations of public and private charging are not as
severe.
The impact of charging scenarios has proven to be very dependent on the composition of charger types.
In the fictive case of substation 60230, UNC unexpectedly yielded a lower max HST than VAL which
was due to workplace charging causing LoL. Hence VAL contributed to a slightly higher HST prior to
the morning peak. However, the mean HST is in general lower hence reducing long-term breakdown
mechanisms. The VAL strategy should therefore only be used at substations where workplace charging
is not the main user.
When inspecting real cases at SW FRB, VAL resulted in lower HST fulfilling its original purpose, see
HST/LoL results in appendix B. An example illustrating this is substations 1 and 2 which supplies
approximately the same number of EVs, but with around 33 EVs charging differently (additional
private for 1 and additional public for 2). Substation 1 experiences a significant drop from 166 ◦C in
LAS to 64 ◦C in VAL avoiding critical HST and a 54% LoL (192 days). The same trend is seen for
substation 2, but with less impact and reduction (reduction from 121 ◦C in LAS to 74 ◦C). Taking a
look at UNC the HST is highest for 2 which might seem counter-intuitive when 1 yielded the largest
LoL. This is due to three factors; less private charging (less flexible load), building type with a lower
correction factor, and a lower baseload for substation 2.
It is unlikely that LAS will happen every 24 h hence, LoL becomes somewhat irrelevant. However,
the likelihood of it happening occasionally is real and only one peak event can cause the max HST
and load. Substation 1 experienced a CF of 0.73 for 123 EVs yielding a total load of 2.59 p.u. and an
HST of 166 ◦C. One of the following solutions would reduce max HST for substation 1. Finally, the
max load should be inspected.
1. Acquire a VAL scenario through an aggregator for all EVs charging downstream
2. Add additional substation or distribute the load to nearby substations
3. Upgrade kiosk from class 20 to class 10 with mechanical cooling
4. Change transformer to a 630 kVA with thermally upgraded insulation material
Solutions can be combined to further reduce the thermal load. However, solutions 3-4 will only improve
thermal transformer conditions. As the total peak load yielded 1295 MW (2.59p.u.·500kV A) electrical
congestion problems might occur elsewhere e.g. in the LV grid. In section 2, the short-term loading
Page 58 of 83
==PAGE:68==
5
Discussion
limit in emergencies was found to be 2.0 p.u. and 1.5 p.u. under normal circumstances. These limits
will still be exceeded for solutions 3-4 Hence acquiring long-term market flexibility would be a suitable
solution until the whole area is mature for reinvestment.
Page 59 of 83
==PAGE:69==
6
Conclusion
6
Conclusion
The purpose of this project has been to quantify the thermal impact on distribution transformers in
South Western Frederiksberg for 100 % EV adoption. As many residents live in apartments without
access to private charging they will utilize public or workplace charging infrastructure depending on
parking possibilities. Due to uncertain charging duration and limited flexibility potential for public
and workplace charging, these were considered uncontrollable throughout all scenarios. Hence only
private charging were flexible in controlled scenarios. These were designed to imitate valley filling with
transformer cool down, price responsive and last hour (with max coincidence factor (CF)) charging.
The grid impact of these scenarios will significantly depend on plug-in behavior and a model based on
real-world data was therefore used.
In order to quantify the charging demand and location, three datasets were used: The Danish National
Travel Survey, [4], a migration study [32] and business codes for substations [34]. The energy needs
for each EV, were determined based on the average driving distance and the distance distribution
per trip.
Arrival and departure time determined when charging was started for the uncontrolled
scenario and potential charging time-frame for controlled scenarios. Parking possibilities were used to
determine whether an EV owner without a private charger could potentially charge at work locations
[4]. Finally the dataset containing delivery points for household types, downstream of substations
were used together with a migration study to distribute residents according to each delivery point [34]
[32].
The second part described how to assess lifetime reduction due deterioration of insulation paper caused
by hot spot temperature (HST) as a result of high loading. A model proposed by IEC60076-7 were
implemented in Python using two continuous inputs: aggregated smartmeter data and outdoor tem-
perature measurements. The model was calibrated on real-world measurements of top oil temperatures
during 2020 from three transformers (two 630 kVA and one 1000 kVA). The correction factor of am-
bient temperature for transformer enclosure were found with an uncertainty of +-3 ◦C in more than
95% of the time during 2020 and during the week with highest loading. Kiosks and brick buildings
with a 630 kVA transformer inside were classified as a kiosk and a building with poor ventilation as
the correction factor yielded 10 and 20 respectively. All in all the model is able to predict oil tem-
peratures which can prove to have great value for the Asset Management program where conditional
inspection is prioritized highly (i.e. only inspecting components which are estimated to be in bad
condition).
A script was developed which incorporated the thermal and EV charging demand model with a
Page 60 of 83
==PAGE:70==
6
Conclusion
semi automated approach collecting substation, loading and temperature data automatically. The
tool was applied on SW FRB to determine CF, HST and loss of life (LoL) for every substation
transformer.
Results yielded low LoL throughout all scenarios except LAS which caused extreme LoL on 1 out of
74 substations. However, this was caused by HST which reached a critical level on a single event. The
reason being that the station was supplying too many privately owned EVs (123) causing loads up to
2.59 p.u. at a CF of 0.73 hence exceeding loading limit of 1.5 p.u.
10/0.4 kV transformers in the SW FRB are adequately dimensioned in terms of LoL due to high HST
even with 100 % EV adoption. A fictive case even demonstrated that a typical transformer could
handle up to 300 EVs utilizing workplace, public and private charging infrastructure (100 EVs were
distributed on each type) even when placed in a kiosk or with worst case transformer time constants.
This study found that the max number of EVs likely to charge under a substation transformer would
be 220 hence avoiding thermal degradation of insulation paper.
6.1
Future work
Distribution transformers in SW FRB are not subject to LoL due to high HST under standard con-
ditions. However, EV properties, owner behavior or other areas might yield in very different results
and hence other aspect should be investigated.
• Perform the same analysis for substations in areas where private charging is dominant and where
heat pumps are used to a larger extent.
• Investigate the impact of larger EV batteries. As users travel longer on one charge the plug-in
rate declines and the demand for each charging session is increased. It has been proven that the
CF is not significantly reduced by additional capacity. [10], hence the peak load will stay high,
but for longer duration’s leading to higher HST.
• Combining above factors with a price signal which does not occur every 24h will most likely
cause significant load increase.
• Main station transformers are typically loaded at a higher level and as highly coordinated charg-
ing is likely for above 10,000 EVs the impact might be more significant [10].
• Quantifying flexibility potential for each substation to be used for grid planning purposes.
• Include load sharing strategies of public and workplace chargers.
Page 61 of 83
==PAGE:71==
6
Conclusion
Listed future work has been considered in the development of the script and hence the user only needs
to change input parameters.
6.2
Process oriented conclusion
How will the distribution grid be impacted by flexibility services? This question was raised through
the project; Frederiksberg Urban Smart Electromobility (FUSE).
To answer this question, several associated topics of interest was initially researched to provide answers.
The broad perspective was initially reflected in the problem formulation as seen in Appendix D, as it
had a somewhat vague objective.
After conducting an initial grid study and literature review the scope became clearer. However, the
goal to develop a precise tool which could quantify CF, HST and LoL for several transformers was
ambitious. This becomes clear when inspecting the initial and final time schedule as data collection,
preparation and analysis toke significantly more time than first anticipated.
Reflecting back on time spent for data preparation, more assumptions could have been made e.g. as-
suming that correction factors from IEC60076-7 were adequate or using arrival and departure times of
other studies. This might have allowed for more in-depth studies of single substations or quantification
of the flexibility potential of each substation (which was another research question).
Furthermore, the documentation process has been significant as many parameters play a vital role in
the determination of charging demand. One could say that this field of study has an anthropological
aspect to it as travel behavior becomes directly related to electricity consumption. Describing these
behaviors through statistics in order to quantify grid impacts has been a new, but a very interesting
challenge.
Page 62 of 83
==PAGE:72==
7
References
7
References
[1]
IEA, Global EV Outlook 2020, 2021, https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-
2020.
[2]
Statistics Denmark, Stor stigning i import af elbiler og plugin hybride, 2021, https://www.
dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?cid=33097.
[3]
Dansk Energi, Elbilerne kommer - det er et politisk valg, hvordan vi sikrer, at elnettet bliver klart,
2019, https://www.danskenergi.dk/sites/danskenergi.dk/files/media/dokumenter/
2019-05/Elbilerne_kommer_gor_elnettet_klart_til_elbilerne.pdf.
[4]
Center for transport analytics (DTU Transport), The Danish National Travel Suervey, 2020,
https://www.cta.man.dtu.dk/english/national-travel-survey/access_to_tu-data.
[5]
E. Danish ministry of Climate, Utilities, Climate Programme 2020 Denmark’s Mid-century,
Long-term Low Greenhouse Gas Emission Development Strategy, tech. rep., 2020, https :
//unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/ClimateProgramme2020-Denmarks-LTS-
under-the%20ParisAgreement_December2020_.pdf.
[6]
S. F. o. E. Regeringen, Radikale Venstre, Grøn omstilling af vejtransporten, 2020, https://www.
skm.dk/media/7753/aftaletekst-aftale-om-groen-omstilling-af-vejtransporten.pdf.
[7]
Mads Bregenov-Pedersen, Stor forskel p˚a kommunernes elbil-strategi, 2021, https://fdm.dk/
nyheder/trafik/2021-11-kv21-stor-forskel-paa-kommunernes-elbil-strategi.
[8]
Frederiksberg Kommune, Frederiksberg ELBILBY NR.1 NU OG FREM MOD 2030, tech. rep.,
2019, https://www.frederiksberg.dk/sites/default/files/2019-04/Elbilstrategi.
pdf.
[9]
Dansk Energi, Er elnettet klar til elbilerne?, 2019, https://www.danskenergi.dk/sites/
danskenergi.dk/files/media/dokumenter/2019-05/Er_elnettet_klar_til_elbilerne_
Analyse_af_effekt-og_investeringsbehov_i_eldistributionsnettet.pdf.
[10]
F. Gonzalez Venegas, M. Petit, Y. Perez, “Plug-in behavior of electric vehicles users: Insights
from a large-scale trial and impacts for grid integration studies”, eTransportation 2021, 10,
100131, DOI 10.1016/j.etran.2021.100131.
[11]
K. Qian, C. Zhou, Y. Yuan, “Impacts of high penetration level of fully electric vehicles charging
loads on the thermal ageing of power transformers”, International Journal of Electrical Power
and Energy Systems 2015, 65, 102–112, DOI 10.1016/j.ijepes.2014.09.040.
[12]
A. D. Hilshey, P. D. Hines, P. Rezaei, J. R. Dowds, “Estimating the impact of electric vehicle
smart charging on distribution transformer aging”, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 2013, 4,
905–913, DOI 10.1109/TSG.2012.2217385.
Page 63 of 83
==PAGE:73==
7
References
[13]
J. Dixon, K. Bell, “Electric vehicles: Battery capacity, charger power, access to charging and
the impacts on distribution networks”, eTransportation 2020, 4, DOI 10.1016/j.etran.2020.
100059.
[14]
P. Pradhan, I. Ahmad, D. Habibi, G. Kothapalli, M. A. Masoum, “Reducing the Impacts of
Electric Vehicle Charging on Power Distribution Transformers”, IEEE Access 2020, DOI 10.
1109/ACCESS.2020.3040056.
[15]
Q. Gong, S. Midlam-Mohler, V. Marano, G. Rizzoni, “Study of PEV charging on residential
distribution transformer life”, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 2012, 3, 404–412, DOI 10.
1109/TSG.2011.2163650.
[16]
F. C. Sica, F. G. Guimar˜aes, R. De Oliveira Duarte, A. J. Reis, “A cognitive system for fault
prognosis in power transformers”, Electric Power Systems Research 2015, 127, 109–117, DOI
10.1016/j.epsr.2015.05.014.
[17]
R. Godina, N. G. Paterakis, O. Erdinc, E. M. Rodrigues, J. P. Catalao in 2015 Australasian
Universities Power Engineering Conference: Challenges for Future Grids, AUPEC 2015, Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2015, DOI 10.1109/AUPEC.2015.7324858.
[18]
Krafttransformere-Del 7: Belastningsvejledning for oliefyldte transformere Power transformers-
Part 7: Loading guide for mineral-oil-immersed power transformers, tech. rep., 2018, www.ds.dk.
[19]
A. Mamizadeh, Evaluation and Comparing the Loss of Life for Outdoor and MV/LV Prefabri-
cated Oil Immersed Power Transformer Based on Nonlinear Thermal Models, tech. rep., 2011.
[20]
M. Kuss, T. Markel, W. Kramer, Application of Distribution Transformer Thermal Life Mod-
els to Electrified Vehicle Charging Loads Using Monte-Carlo Method Preprint Application of
Distribution Transformer Thermal Life Models to Electrified Vehicle Charging Loads Using
Monte-Carlo Method, tech. rep., 2010, http://www.osti.gov/bridge.
[21]
WESTERN POWER DISTRIBUTION, Electric Nation Data, 2021, https://www.westernpower.
co.uk/electric-nation-data.
[22]
L. Sørensen, K. B. Lindberg, I. Sartori, I. Andresen, “Analysis of residential EV energy flexibility
potential based on real-world charging reports and smart meter data”, Energy and Buildings
2021, 241, DOI 10.1016/j.enbuild.2021.110923.
[23]
L. Calearo, A. Thingvad, K. Suzuki, M. Marinelli, “Grid Loading Due to EV Charging Profiles
Based on Pseudo-Real Driving Pattern and User Behavior”, IEEE Transactions on Transporta-
tion Electrification 2019, 5, 683–694, DOI 10.1109/TTE.2019.2921854.
Page 64 of 83
==PAGE:74==
7
References
[24]
J. Bollerslev, P. B. Andersen, T. V. Jensen, M. Marinelli, A. Thingvad, L. Calearo, T. Weckesser,
“Coincidence Factors for Domestic EV Charging from Driving and Plug-in Behavior”, IEEE
Transactions on Transportation Electrification 2021, 1–1, DOI 10.1109/tte.2021.3088275.
[25]
F. Gonzalez, M. Petit, Y. Perez, F. G. Venegas, “Impact of non-systematic electric vehicle
charging behaviour on a distribution substation”, 2019, DOI 10.1109/ISGTEurope.2019.
8905710{\"{i}}, https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02283344.
[26]
G. Razeghi, L. Zhang, T. Brown, S. Samuelsen, “Impacts of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles on
a residential transformer using stochastic and empirical analysis”, Journal of Power Sources
2014, 252, 277–285, DOI 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.11.089.
[27]
A. Thingvad, P. B. Andersen, T. Unterluggauer, C. Traeholt, M. Marinelli, Electrification of
Personal Vehicle Travels in Cities-Quantifying the Public Charging Demand, tech. rep., www.
fuse-project.dk;www.acdc-bornholm.eu.
[28]
O. Borne, Vehicle-to-grid and flexibility for electricity systems : from technical solutions to design
of business models. Tech. rep. March, 2019, https://tel.archives- ouvertes.fr/tel-
02101210.
[29]
S. ; Jakobsen, L. ; Flader, P. Andersen, ; Bach, A. ; Thingvad, J. Bollerslev, S˚adan skaber
Danmark grøn infrastruktur til ´en million elbiler Analyse og anbefalinger fra DEA og DTU,
november 2019, tech. rep., 2019, www.tudata.dk.
[30]
B. Biegel, P. Andersen, J. Stoustrup, K. S. Rasmussen, L. H. Hansen, S. Ostberg, P. Cajar,
H. Knudsen in IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe, Vol. 2015-
January, IEEE Computer Society, 2015, DOI 10.1109/ISGTEurope.2014.7028974.
[31]
S. Kucuksari, N. Erdogan in 2021 IEEE Transportation Electrification Conference and Expo,
ITEC 2021, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2021, pp. 783–788, DOI
10.1109/ITEC51675.2021.9490039.
[32]
C. Jensen, Thomas, BEFOLKNING OG BOLIGER I FREDERIKSBERG KOMMUNE, 2015,
https://docplayer.dk/24090592-Befolkning-og-boliger-i-frederiksberg-kommune.
html.
[33]
N. Radius Elnet, Teknisk Forskrift 88 - Planlægning og dimensionering af 0,4-10 kV net (Re-
stricted), tech. rep., 2021.
[34]
Radius Elnet, Danske branchekoder fra el-leverendører korreleret med Netstationsnumre (Re-
stricted), tech. rep., 2021.
[35]
Radius, Tilslutningsbidrag pr. 1 januar 2022, 2022, https://radiuselnet.dk/tilslutningsbidrag/.
Page 65 of 83
==PAGE:75==
7
References
[36]
B. Xu, K. Mou, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Harbin Section, Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Proceedings of 2020 IEEE 5th Information Technology and
Mechatronics Engineering Conference (ITOEC 2020) : June 12-14, 2020, Chongqing, China.
[37]
W. J. McNutt, “Insulation Thermal Life Considerations for Transformer Loading Guides”, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery 1992, 7, 392–401, DOI 10.1109/61.108933.
[38]
Dansk standard, Viklingskoblere-Del 1: Ydeevnekrav og prøvningsmetoder Tap-changers-Part
1: Performance requirements and test methods, tech. rep., 2014.
[39]
Radius Elnet, “AM netstationer modelkalibrering - Dokumentation af beregningsmodel for til-
standstalsberegning af netstationer i Radius Elnet (Restricted)”, 2019.
[40]
Radius Elnet, Teknisk Forskrift 89 - Anlægsguide for 0,4-10 kV net (Restricted), tech. rep.,
2019.
[41]
K. Knezovi´c, M. Marinelli, P. Codani, Y. Perez in Proceedings of the Universities Power Engi-
neering Conference, Vol. 2015-November, IEEE Computer Society, 2015, DOI 10.1109/UPEC.
2015.7339931.
[42]
Danmarks Statistik, BOL101: Boliger efter omr˚ade, beboertype, anvendelse, udlejningsforhold,
ejerforhold og opførelses˚ar, 2022, https://www.statistikbanken.dk/10010.
[43]
P. S. N. Rasmussen, Non-intrusive models for identification of EV charging profiles, tech. rep.,
DTU, 2021.
[44]
M. ; Marinelli, A. ; Thingvad, L. Calearo, Across Continents Electric Vehicles Services Project:
Final Report, tech. rep., Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[45]
R. van den Hoed, J. Helmus, R. de Vries, D. Bardok, EVS27 International Battery, Hybrid
and Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle Symposium Data analysis on the public charge infrastructure
in the city of Amsterdam, tech. rep., www.amsterdam.nl/parkeren- verkeer/amsterdam-
elektrisch/amsterdam-electric/.
[46]
Transport- og Boligministeriet, Bekendtgørelse om forberedelse til og etablering af ladestandere i
forbindelse med bygninger (ladestanderbekendtgørelsen), 2020, https://www.retsinformation.
dk/eli/lta/2020/181.
Page 66 of 83
==PAGE:76==
A
Appendix - Assumptions
A
Appendix - Assumptions
Assumptions made throughout the project Thermal model assumptions
• 0.5 % moisture and low oxygen levels are assumed for expected life time estimation (best case)
• Transformer constants from producer is applicable to all transformers at Frederiksberg
• Derived correction factors for brick buildings and kiosks will be applicable for all buildings at
Frederiksberg
• LV-grid losses are neglectable
• Base load will be the same
Charging assumptions
• Destination charging is prioritized
• The CF will not be limited by a certain number of chargers
• All type of residents will have the same number of cars (no matter type of household)
• Charging location and type utilized by agents depends on parking possibilities
• The average traveling distance will be the same for all days of the week
• Agents will on average travel 32.7 km. no matter their purpose or charging possibilities
• Agents will prioritize private charging
• Agents who only have good parking possibilities will charge at work
• Agents who depend on workplace charging will not charge elsewhere, accumulating energy de-
mand over the weekend
• Agents will depart from home and arrive at work before 12:00
• Agents will arrive at home and depart from work after 12:00 and before 24:00.
• Load sharing will not be in place for charging hubs such as workplace charging
• No constraints in terms of limited charging infrastructure
EV-model assumptions
• EVs will follow the same traveling behavior as gasoline powered vehicles
Page 67 of 83
==PAGE:77==
B
Appendix - Substation results for FRB
• 100 % EV adoption for Frederiksberg
• All EVs will have a 50 kWh battery
Scenario assumptions
• Price control: 1 low and 2 medium price-signal will be given each day
• The DSOs main objective is to minimize peak load by performing valley filling through an
aggregator
• One aggregator or several aggregators with the same objective function will control EVs under
a substation during controlled scenarios
B
Appendix - Substation results for FRB
Page 68 of 83
==PAGE:78==
B
Appendix - Substation results for FRB
Number of Evs
CF Private
Loss of life [days]
Subst.
Sr
Type
Private
Public
Work
Total
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
1
500
kiosk
123
48
0
171
0.14
0.10
0.38
0.73
0.3
0.2
1.3
196.4
2
500
brick
91
82
0
173
0.15
0.10
0.40
0.78
0.7
0.3
1.0
1.9
3
630
brick
0
220
0
220
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
4
630
brick
0
213
0
213
0.81
0.20
0.00
0.81
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
5
500
brick
0
126
29
155
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
6
500
brick
68
15
29
112
0.17
0.11
0.42
0.88
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
7
500
brick
63
68
0
131
0.15
0.11
0.40
0.83
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
8
630
brick
37
174
0
211
0.18
0.11
0.45
0.78
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
9
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
10
630
kiosk
0
125
0
125
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
11
630
brick
0
160
0
160
0.75
0.28
0.00
0.76
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
12
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
13
1000
kiosk
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
14
800
brick
0
0
79
79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
15
500
brick
0
92
29
121
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
16
630
brick
11
123
0
134
0.30
0.14
0.52
0.87
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
17
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
18
800
brick
0
53
0
53
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
19
630
kiosk
0
120
0
120
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
20
630
brick
35
93
30
158
0.21
0.12
0.42
0.86
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
21
630
brick
0
131
0
131
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
22
630
brick
0
131
0
131
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
23
630
kiosk
0
113
0
113
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
24
630
brick
0
104
0
104
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
25
1000
kiosk
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
26
500
brick
38
53
0
91
0.18
0.11
0.41
0.80
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
27
630
brick
5
119
29
153
0.38
0.15
0.57
0.78
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
28
630
kiosk
0
79
29
108
0.77
0.22
0.00
0.81
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
29
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
30
800
kiosk
0
0
79
79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
31
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
32
630
brick
0
99
0
99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
33
630
brick
89
56
0
145
0.14
0.10
0.39
0.84
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
34
630
brick
0
113
0
113
0.74
0.25
0.00
0.81
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
35
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
36
630
brick
0
96
0
96
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
37
630
brick
0
88
0
88
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
38
630
brick
12
59
29
100
0.27
0.13
0.51
0.89
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
39
630
brick
0
89
0
89
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
40
630
brick
0
79
0
79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
41
630
brick
0
92
0
92
0.81
0.31
0.00
0.74
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
42
630
brick
4
47
29
80
0.41
0.15
0.54
0.80
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
43
630
kiosk
0
10
29
39
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
44
500
brick
2
36
0
38
0.52
0.17
0.58
0.80
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
45
630
kiosk
0
60
0
60
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
46
500
brick
0
20
0
20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
47
630
brick
0
15
29
44
0.80
0.25
0.00
0.72
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
48
630
kiosk
33
12
29
74
0.19
0.11
0.42
0.86
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
49
500
brick
0
43
0
43
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
50
630
brick
0
56
29
85
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
51
630
brick
68
61
0
129
0.16
0.11
0.41
0.82
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
52
630
brick
0
33
29
62
0.74
0.26
0.00
0.81
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
53
630
brick
26
36
29
91
0.21
0.11
0.44
0.87
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
54
630
brick
20
12
29
61
0.23
0.14
0.45
0.89
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
55
630
kiosk
0
55
0
55
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
56
600
brick
0
26
0
26
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
57
630
kiosk
0
40
0
40
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
58
630
kiosk
20
12
29
61
0.21
0.12
0.45
0.87
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
59
630
brick
0
72
0
72
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
60
630
brick
0
49
29
78
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
61
630
brick
0
32
29
61
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
62
630
brick
14
79
0
93
0.27
0.13
0.48
0.83
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
63
630
brick
0
13
29
42
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
64
630
kiosk
0
41
0
41
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
65
630
brick
0
48
0
48
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
66
630
kiosk
0
22
0
22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
67
630
brick
21
28
0
49
0.22
0.11
0.44
0.82
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
68
630
kiosk
0
24
0
24
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
69
630
kiosk
4
20
0
24
0.42
0.16
0.60
0.80
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
70
630
brick
29
10
29
68
0.20
0.12
0.45
0.88
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
71
630
brick
0
47
0
47
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
72
630
brick
0
2
29
31
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
73
630
brick
0
17
0
17
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
74
800
brick
0
7
0
7
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Page 69 of 83
==PAGE:79==
B
Appendix - Substation results for FRB
Number of Evs
max HST [◦C]
mean HST [◦C]
Subst.
Sr
Type
Private
Public
Work
Total
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
1
500
kiosk
123
48
0
171
74.5
64.2
112.0
166.3
36.0
35.3
36.6
36.6
2
500
brick
91
82
0
173
87.5
74.3
103.9
120.8
38.5
37.3
38.3
38.1
3
630
brick
0
220
0
220
88.6
88.6
88.6
88.6
32.1
32.1
32.1
32.1
4
630
brick
0
213
0
213
86.5
86.4
86.4
86.4
28.7
28.7
28.7
28.7
5
500
brick
0
126
29
155
85.6
85.6
85.6
85.6
30.9
30.9
30.9
30.9
6
500
brick
68
15
29
112
50.4
50.6
54.9
82.6
25.3
24.9
25.5
25.9
7
500
brick
63
68
0
131
60.8
54.6
64.9
80.3
28.6
28.2
28.7
28.6
8
630
brick
37
174
0
211
75.4
72.4
72.4
72.7
29.2
28.9
29.2
28.9
9
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
72.3
72.3
72.3
72.3
24.5
24.5
24.5
24.5
10
630
kiosk
0
125
0
125
71.8
71.8
71.8
71.8
31.5
31.5
31.5
31.5
11
630
brick
0
160
0
160
67.3
67.2
67.2
67.2
28.6
28.6
28.6
28.6
12
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
66.9
66.9
66.9
66.9
25.5
25.5
25.5
25.5
13
1000
kiosk
0
0
99
99
64.2
64.2
64.2
64.2
22.6
22.6
22.6
22.6
14
800
brick
0
0
79
79
63.9
63.9
63.9
63.9
26.5
26.5
26.5
26.5
15
500
brick
0
92
29
121
63.8
63.8
63.8
63.8
27.2
27.2
27.2
27.2
16
630
brick
11
123
0
134
64.2
63.6
63.7
63.7
29.4
29.2
29.3
29.2
17
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
63.5
63.5
63.5
63.5
21.3
21.3
21.3
21.3
18
800
brick
0
53
0
53
62.6
62.6
62.6
62.6
36.3
36.3
36.3
36.3
19
630
kiosk
0
120
0
120
61.6
61.6
61.6
61.6
29.5
29.5
29.5
29.5
20
630
brick
35
93
30
158
62.0
59.6
60.2
59.7
32.0
31.6
31.7
31.7
21
630
brick
0
131
0
131
59.2
59.2
59.2
59.2
25.2
25.2
25.2
25.2
22
630
brick
0
131
0
131
58.7
58.7
58.7
58.7
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
23
630
kiosk
0
113
0
113
58.6
58.6
58.6
58.6
25.8
25.8
25.8
25.8
24
630
brick
0
104
0
104
56.7
56.7
56.7
56.7
25.5
25.5
25.5
25.5
25
1000
kiosk
0
0
99
99
56.6
56.6
56.6
56.6
22.1
22.1
22.1
22.1
26
500
brick
38
53
0
91
59.4
53.5
60.8
56.2
31.0
30.7
30.9
31.0
27
630
brick
5
119
29
153
55.5
55.4
55.4
55.4
26.8
26.7
26.7
26.7
28
630
kiosk
0
79
29
108
55.3
55.3
55.3
55.3
30.1
30.1
30.1
30.1
29
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
55.0
55.0
55.0
55.0
23.3
23.3
23.3
23.3
30
800
kiosk
0
0
79
79
54.3
54.3
54.3
54.3
23.6
23.6
23.6
23.6
31
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
53.6
53.6
53.6
53.6
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
32
630
brick
0
99
0
99
52.2
52.2
52.2
52.2
25.9
25.9
25.9
25.9
33
630
brick
89
56
0
145
49.5
44.5
52.8
51.3
26.6
26.3
27.0
27.0
34
630
brick
0
113
0
113
51.2
51.2
51.2
51.2
23.8
23.8
23.8
23.8
35
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
50.3
50.3
50.3
50.3
23.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
36
630
brick
0
96
0
96
50.3
50.3
50.3
50.3
22.7
22.7
22.7
22.7
37
630
brick
0
88
0
88
50.2
50.2
50.2
50.2
26.5
26.5
26.5
26.5
38
630
brick
12
59
29
100
49.9
49.3
49.3
49.4
27.5
27.5
27.5
27.5
39
630
brick
0
89
0
89
49.2
49.2
49.2
49.2
25.4
25.4
25.4
25.4
40
630
brick
0
79
0
79
48.6
48.6
48.6
48.6
24.3
24.3
24.3
24.3
41
630
brick
0
92
0
92
48.0
48.0
48.0
48.0
23.8
23.8
23.8
23.8
42
630
brick
4
47
29
80
47.6
47.6
47.6
47.6
27.3
27.3
27.3
27.3
43
630
kiosk
0
10
29
39
47.6
47.6
47.6
47.6
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
44
500
brick
2
36
0
38
47.6
47.4
47.4
47.4
25.0
24.9
24.9
24.9
45
630
kiosk
0
60
0
60
47.4
47.4
47.4
47.4
25.4
25.4
25.4
25.4
46
500
brick
0
20
0
20
46.5
46.5
46.5
46.5
26.6
26.6
26.6
26.6
47
630
brick
0
15
29
44
45.8
45.8
45.8
45.8
23.3
23.3
23.3
23.3
48
630
kiosk
33
12
29
74
44.8
44.9
45.1
45.4
24.9
24.7
24.9
25.0
49
500
brick
0
43
0
43
45.4
45.4
45.4
45.4
24.4
24.4
24.4
24.4
50
630
brick
0
56
29
85
44.8
44.8
44.8
44.8
26.1
26.1
26.1
26.1
51
630
brick
68
61
0
129
48.0
43.6
49.1
44.8
25.6
25.2
25.5
25.4
52
630
brick
0
33
29
62
44.6
44.6
44.6
44.6
23.6
23.6
23.6
23.6
53
630
brick
26
36
29
91
44.8
44.3
44.3
44.6
25.4
25.3
25.4
25.4
54
630
brick
20
12
29
61
44.1
44.1
44.2
44.3
24.1
24.0
24.0
24.0
55
630
kiosk
0
55
0
55
43.6
43.6
43.6
43.6
22.8
22.8
22.8
22.8
56
600
brick
0
26
0
26
43.6
43.6
43.6
43.6
24.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
57
630
kiosk
0
40
0
40
43.5
43.5
43.5
43.5
24.6
24.6
24.6
24.6
58
630
kiosk
20
12
29
61
42.5
42.6
42.6
42.7
23.5
23.4
23.5
23.5
59
630
brick
0
72
0
72
42.7
42.7
42.7
42.7
21.9
21.9
21.9
21.9
60
630
brick
0
49
29
78
42.4
42.4
42.4
42.4
23.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
61
630
brick
0
32
29
61
42.3
42.3
42.3
42.3
23.1
23.1
23.1
23.1
62
630
brick
14
79
0
93
42.5
42.0
42.0
42.1
22.1
22.0
22.1
22.1
63
630
brick
0
13
29
42
41.6
41.6
41.6
41.6
21.2
21.2
21.2
21.2
64
630
kiosk
0
41
0
41
41.2
41.2
41.2
41.2
23.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
65
630
brick
0
48
0
48
41.0
41.0
41.0
41.0
21.0
21.0
21.0
21.0
66
630
kiosk
0
22
0
22
40.6
40.6
40.6
40.6
23.5
23.5
23.5
23.5
67
630
brick
21
28
0
49
41.0
40.3
40.3
40.4
23.3
23.2
23.3
23.2
68
630
kiosk
0
24
0
24
40.1
40.1
40.1
40.1
22.5
22.5
22.5
22.5
69
630
kiosk
4
20
0
24
39.9
39.8
39.8
39.8
22.7
22.7
22.7
22.7
70
630
brick
29
10
29
68
39.6
39.7
39.7
39.7
21.3
21.3
21.4
21.4
71
630
brick
0
47
0
47
39.4
39.4
39.4
39.4
20.9
20.9
20.9
20.9
72
630
brick
0
2
29
31
38.9
38.9
38.9
38.9
20.7
20.7
20.7
20.7
73
630
brick
0
17
0
17
37.8
37.8
37.8
37.8
20.8
20.8
20.8
20.8
74
800
brick
0
7
0
7
36.9
36.9
36.9
36.9
20.2
20.2
20.2
20.2
Page 70 of 83
==PAGE:80==
B
Appendix - Substation results for FRB
Number of Evs
CF
CP
Subst.
Sr
Type
Private
Public
Work
Total
Private
Public
Work
Private
Public
Work
1
500
kiosk
123
48
0
171
0.14
0.13
0.00
17
6
0
2
500
brick
91
82
0
173
0.15
0.12
0.00
13
9
0
3
630
brick
0
220
0
220
0.00
0.09
0.00
0
20
0
4
630
brick
0
213
0
213
0.00
0.10
0.00
0
20
0
5
500
brick
0
126
29
155
0.00
0.10
0.33
0
13
9
6
500
brick
68
15
29
112
0.17
0.22
0.35
11
3
10
7
500
brick
63
68
0
131
0.15
0.12
0.00
9
8
0
8
630
brick
37
174
0
211
0.18
0.10
0.00
6
17
0
9
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.30
0
0
29
10
630
kiosk
0
125
0
125
0.00
0.10
0.00
0
13
0
11
630
brick
0
160
0
160
0.75
0.10
0.00
0
15
0
12
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.31
0
0
30
13
1000
kiosk
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.32
0
0
31
14
800
brick
0
0
79
79
0.00
0.00
0.31
0
0
24
15
500
brick
0
92
29
121
0.00
0.11
0.33
0
10
10
16
630
brick
11
123
0
134
0.30
0.10
0.00
3
13
0
17
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.31
0
0
31
18
800
brick
0
53
0
53
0.00
0.12
0.00
0
6
0
19
630
kiosk
0
120
0
120
0.00
0.10
0.00
0
12
0
20
630
brick
35
93
30
158
0.21
0.11
0.35
7
10
10
21
630
brick
0
131
0
131
0.00
0.10
0.00
0
13
0
22
630
brick
0
131
0
131
0.00
0.10
0.00
0
13
0
23
630
kiosk
0
113
0
113
0.00
0.11
0.00
0
12
0
24
630
brick
0
104
0
104
0.00
0.11
0.00
0
11
0
25
1000
kiosk
0
0
99
99
0.00
0.00
0.30
0
0
29
26
500
brick
38
53
0
91
0.18
0.12
0.00
7
6
0
27
630
brick
5
119
29
153
0.38
0.10
0.34
2
12
10
28
630
kiosk
0
79
29
108
0.00
0.11
0.36
0
9
10
29
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.00
0.00
0.33
0
0
20
30
800
kiosk
0
0
79
79
0.00
0.00
0.31
0
0
24
31
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.00
0.00
0.31
0
0
19
32
630
brick
0
99
0
99
0.00
0.10
0.00
0
10
0
33
630
brick
89
56
0
145
0.14
0.12
0.00
12
7
0
34
630
brick
0
113
0
113
0.00
0.11
0.00
0
12
0
35
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.00
0.00
0.32
0
0
20
36
630
brick
0
96
0
96
0.00
0.11
0.00
0
11
0
37
630
brick
0
88
0
88
0.00
0.11
0.00
0
9
0
38
630
brick
12
59
29
100
0.27
0.12
0.35
3
7
10
39
630
brick
0
89
0
89
0.00
0.11
0.00
0
10
0
40
630
brick
0
79
0
79
0.00
0.12
0.00
0
9
0
41
630
brick
0
92
0
92
0.00
0.11
0.00
0
10
0
42
630
brick
4
47
29
80
0.41
0.14
0.36
2
6
10
43
630
kiosk
0
10
29
39
0.00
0.20
0.33
0
2
10
44
500
brick
2
36
0
38
0.52
0.14
0.00
0
5
0
45
630
kiosk
0
60
0
60
0.00
0.13
0.00
0
8
0
46
500
brick
0
20
0
20
0.00
0.16
0.00
0
3
0
47
630
brick
0
15
29
44
0.00
0.20
0.34
0
3
10
48
630
kiosk
33
12
29
74
0.19
0.20
0.34
6
2
10
49
500
brick
0
43
0
43
0.00
0.14
0.00
0
6
0
50
630
brick
0
56
29
85
0.00
0.12
0.33
0
7
10
51
630
brick
68
61
0
129
0.16
0.12
0.00
11
7
0
52
630
brick
0
33
29
62
0.74
0.13
0.36
0
4
10
53
630
brick
26
36
29
91
0.21
0.14
0.32
5
5
9
54
630
brick
20
12
29
61
0.23
0.23
0.36
5
3
11
55
630
kiosk
0
55
0
55
0.00
0.13
0.00
0
7
0
56
600
brick
0
26
0
26
0.00
0.15
0.00
0
4
0
57
630
kiosk
0
40
0
40
0.00
0.13
0.00
0
5
0
58
630
kiosk
20
12
29
61
0.21
0.21
0.34
4
2
10
59
630
brick
0
72
0
72
0.00
0.11
0.00
0
8
0
60
630
brick
0
49
29
78
0.00
0.13
0.34
0
6
10
61
630
brick
0
32
29
61
0.00
0.15
0.32
0
5
9
62
630
brick
14
79
0
93
0.27
0.11
0.00
4
9
0
63
630
brick
0
13
29
42
0.00
0.19
0.39
0
2
11
64
630
kiosk
0
41
0
41
0.00
0.13
0.00
0
5
0
65
630
brick
0
48
0
48
0.00
0.14
0.00
0
6
0
66
630
kiosk
0
22
0
22
0.00
0.17
0.00
0
4
0
67
630
brick
21
28
0
49
0.22
0.16
0.00
5
4
0
68
630
kiosk
0
24
0
24
0.00
0.15
0.00
0
4
0
69
630
kiosk
4
20
0
24
0.42
0.17
0.00
2
3
0
70
630
brick
29
10
29
68
0.20
0.21
0.33
6
2
10
71
630
brick
0
47
0
47
0.00
0.12
0.00
0
6
0
72
630
brick
0
2
29
31
0.00
0.30
0.32
0
1
9
73
630
brick
0
17
0
17
0.00
0.16
0.00
0
3
0
74
800
brick
0
7
0
7
0.00
0.21
0.00
0
1
0
Page 71 of 83
==PAGE:81==
B
Appendix - Substation results for FRB
Number of Evs
Max load [p.u.]
Subst.
Sr
Type
Private
Public
Work
Total
UNC
VAL
PRI
LAS
1
500
kiosk
123
48
0
171
1.13
1.02
1.65
2.59
2
500
brick
91
82
0
173
1.35
1.14
1.59
2.06
3
630
brick
0
220
0
220
1.38
1.38
1.38
1.38
4
630
brick
0
213
0
213
1.34
1.34
1.34
1.34
5
500
brick
0
126
29
155
1.20
1.20
1.20
1.20
6
500
brick
68
15
29
112
0.77
0.77
0.92
1.52
7
500
brick
63
68
0
131
0.95
0.79
1.15
1.38
8
630
brick
37
174
0
211
1.22
1.17
1.20
1.17
9
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
1.07
1.07
1.07
1.07
10
630
kiosk
0
125
0
125
1.02
1.02
1.02
1.02
11
630
brick
0
160
0
160
1.07
1.07
1.07
1.07
12
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
1.14
1.14
1.14
1.14
13
1000
kiosk
0
0
99
99
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.95
14
800
brick
0
0
79
79
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.03
15
500
brick
0
92
29
121
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
16
630
brick
11
123
0
134
1.02
1.01
1.01
1.01
17
1000
brick
0
0
99
99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
18
800
brick
0
53
0
53
0.78
0.78
0.78
0.78
19
630
kiosk
0
120
0
120
0.87
0.87
0.87
0.87
20
630
brick
35
93
30
158
0.97
0.92
0.98
0.92
21
630
brick
0
131
0
131
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
22
630
brick
0
131
0
131
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.94
23
630
kiosk
0
113
0
113
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
24
630
brick
0
104
0
104
0.86
0.86
0.86
0.86
25
1000
kiosk
0
0
99
99
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
26
500
brick
38
53
0
91
0.96
0.86
0.95
0.93
27
630
brick
5
119
29
153
0.90
0.89
0.89
0.89
28
630
kiosk
0
79
29
108
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.81
29
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
30
800
kiosk
0
0
79
79
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.94
31
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
32
630
brick
0
99
0
99
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.79
33
630
brick
89
56
0
145
0.76
0.60
1.03
1.55
34
630
brick
0
113
0
113
0.78
0.78
0.78
0.78
35
630
kiosk
0
0
62
62
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.91
36
630
brick
0
96
0
96
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.79
37
630
brick
0
88
0
88
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.77
38
630
brick
12
59
29
100
0.74
0.74
0.74
0.74
39
630
brick
0
89
0
89
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
40
630
brick
0
79
0
79
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.73
41
630
brick
0
92
0
92
0.72
0.72
0.72
0.72
42
630
brick
4
47
29
80
0.74
0.74
0.74
0.74
43
630
kiosk
0
10
29
39
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68
44
500
brick
2
36
0
38
0.59
0.58
0.58
0.58
45
630
kiosk
0
60
0
60
0.58
0.58
0.58
0.58
46
500
brick
0
20
0
20
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
47
630
brick
0
15
29
44
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
48
630
kiosk
33
12
29
74
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
49
500
brick
0
43
0
43
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
50
630
brick
0
56
29
85
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
51
630
brick
68
61
0
129
0.73
0.64
0.94
1.17
52
630
brick
0
33
29
62
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
53
630
brick
26
36
29
91
0.67
0.66
0.67
0.66
54
630
brick
20
12
29
61
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68
55
630
kiosk
0
55
0
55
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
56
600
brick
0
26
0
26
0.42
0.42
0.42
0.42
57
630
kiosk
0
40
0
40
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.48
58
630
kiosk
20
12
29
61
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.52
59
630
brick
0
72
0
72
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
60
630
brick
0
49
29
78
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
61
630
brick
0
32
29
61
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
62
630
brick
14
79
0
93
0.61
0.59
0.59
0.59
63
630
brick
0
13
29
42
0.63
0.63
0.63
0.63
64
630
kiosk
0
41
0
41
0.40
0.40
0.40
0.40
65
630
brick
0
48
0
48
0.42
0.42
0.42
0.42
66
630
kiosk
0
22
0
22
0.37
0.37
0.37
0.37
67
630
brick
21
28
0
49
0.49
0.44
0.49
0.46
68
630
kiosk
0
24
0
24
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
69
630
kiosk
4
20
0
24
0.30
0.29
0.30
0.29
70
630
brick
29
10
29
68
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.55
71
630
brick
0
47
0
47
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.41
72
630
brick
0
2
29
31
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
73
630
brick
0
17
0
17
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.24
74
800
brick
0
7
0
7
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
Page 72 of 83
==PAGE:82==
C
Appendix - Transformer constants
C
Appendix - Transformer constants
Determination of input parameters for the mathematical model
x, y, k11, k21 and k22 are determined through table 4 in IEC60076-7 (recommended thermal char-
acteristics for exponential equations) as these are typical for ONAN distribution transformers. The
following values are chosen for a small distribution transformer (no radiator or corrugated tank):
x = 0, 8 y = 1, 6 k11 = 1, top oil thermal constant k21 = 1, HS to top oil constant k22 = 2, HS to top
oil constant
The time constant vary for each transformer size due to the different masses of insulation (oil), core
and coils. Each time constant is calculated based on several parameters given by the producer. (see
table below)
Page 73 of 83
==PAGE:83==
C
Appendix - Transformer constants
LEGEND:
xy
INPUT DATA
xy
CALCULATION
xy
RESULTS
Parameter
Value
Ambient temperature °C
40
top oil temperature rise above ambient temperature K
54.20
average oil temperature rise above ambient temperature K
43.36
oil temperature gradient along windings height K
21.68
HV Winding to oil gradient K
18.78
LV Winding to oil gradient K
18.68
HV average winding temperature rise K
62.14
LV average winding temperature rise K
62.04
Bottom oil temperature rise K
32.52
HV Hot-spot temperature rise K
74.858
LV Hot-spot temperature rise K
74.748
No load losses W
607
Load losses W
7403
C J/kgK
mass of insulation
31.2
1210
mass of core kg
1577.8
468
mass of coils kg
502
890
mass of the tank and fittings kg
410.1
468
mo - mass of oil kg
480.8
1800
C - specific heat for ONAN and ONAF cooling J/kg,K
701.96
1800
K - load factor
1
P - supplied losses at load factor W
8010
to The top oil time constant [min]
237.64
acc E.4 IEC 60076-7
Pw - windings losses W
6620
Mass of the windings kg
502
Winding to oil gradient K
18.78
tw The winding time constant min
21.12
acc E.1 IEC 60076-7
Table 20. 1000 kVA transformer parameters with data supplied from producer.
Page 74 of 83
==PAGE:84==
C
Appendix - Transformer constants
LEGEND:
xy
INPUT DATA
xy
CALCULATION
xy
RESULTS
Parameter
Value
Ambient temperature °C
40
top oil temperature rise above ambient temperature K
48.60
average oil temperature rise above ambient temperature K
38.88
oil temperature gradient along windings height K
19.44
HV Winding to oil gradient K
25.49
LV Winding to oil gradient K
24.79
HV average winding temperature rise K
64.37
LV average winding temperature rise K
63.67
Bottom oil temperature rise K
29.16
HV Hot-spot temperature rise K
76.639
LV Hot-spot temperature rise K
75.869
No load losses W
577
Load losses W
4825
C J/kgK
mass of insulation
33.1
1210
mass of core kg
1536.4
468
mass of coils kg
547.6
890
mass of the tank and fittings kg
342.5
468
mo - mass of oil kg
457
1800
C - specific heat for ONAN and ONAF cooling J/kg,K
707.95
K - load factor
1
P - supplied losses at load factor W
5402
to The top oil time constant [min]
309.61
acc E.4 IEC 60076-7
Pw - windings losses W
4218
Mass of the windings kg
547.6
Winding to oil gradient K
25.49
tw The winding time constant min
49.09
acc E.1 IEC 60076-7
Table 21. 800 kVA transformer parameters with data supplied from producer.
Page 75 of 83
==PAGE:85==
C
Appendix - Transformer constants
LEGEND:
xy
INPUT DATA
xy
CALCULATION
xy
RESULTS
Parameter
Value
Ambient temperature °C
40
top oil temperature rise above ambient temperature K
46.10
average oil temperature rise above ambient temperature K
36.88
oil temperature gradient along windings height K
18.44
HV Winding to oil gradient K
20.9
LV Winding to oil gradient K
19.4
HV average winding temperature rise K
57.78
LV average winding temperature rise K
56.28
Bottom oil temperature rise K
27.66
HV Hot-spot temperature rise K
69.09
LV Hot-spot temperature rise K
67.44
No load losses W
529
Load losses W
4071
C J/kgK
mass of insulation
31
1210
mass of core kg
1250.9
468
mass of coils kg
453.6
890
mass of the tank and fittings kg
281
468
mo - mass of oil kg
391.5
1800
C - specific heat for ONAN and ONAF cooling J/kg,K
715.08
K - load factor
1
P - supplied losses at load factor W
4600
to The top oil time constant [min]
287.61
acc E.4 IEC 60076-7
Pw - windings losses W
3579
Mass of the windings kg
453.6
Winding to oil gradient K
20.9
tw The winding time constant min
39.29
acc E.1 IEC 60076-7
Table 22. 630 kVA transformer parameters with data supplied from producer.
Page 76 of 83
==PAGE:86==
D
Appendix - Initial problem formulation and time schedule
D
Appendix - Initial problem formulation and time schedule
Page 77 of 83
==PAGE:87==
Project Formulation of Master Thesis Fall 2021 
 
Working title for the project  
IMPACT OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE FLEXIBILITY SERVICES AND CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
ROLLOUTS ON URBAN DISTRIBUTION GRIDS. 
 
Names and student numbers for students  
Simon Højstrup Aggs - S153435 
 
Project start and end date  
1/9-2021 to 1/2-2022 
 
Background/motivation 
The impact of mass EV (electric vehicle) integration in established urban distribution grids 
are uncertain and might be challenged by simultaneous loading which can increase peak 
loads. Grid operators can utilize flexibility services to avoid these and provide congestion 
management which can potentially postpone grid reinforcement.  
But these market-based flexibility services might unintentionally cause a rebound effect if 
controlled solely by price signals and hence contributing to the problem. Furthermore, as 
consumption is displaced to off-peak hours, load profiles transition from a cyclic to a more 
continuous profile i.e., increasing the overall utilization of grid components.  
This project will aim to map current and future consumption patterns based on different 
roll-out strategies of EV chargers and simulate the impact on lifespan and capabilities of 
distribution grid components as thermal stress increases. How will this affect the grid 
operation and planning process of the 10 kV distribution grid in urban areas?   
Project description 
The project is divided into four work packages. 
1. Research on the impact of EV integration on the distribution grid with and without 
coordination. Research will also be conducted on thermal modelling of 10/0,4 kV 
transformers and 10 kV ALPEX cables. 
2. Develop and simulate worst case scenarios of Frederiksberg distribution grid based 
on different charger roll-out strategies and assess the N-1 situation. Choose the 
highest loaded radial in the grid for a case study. 
3. Utilize a thermal model of a 10 kV ALPEX cable and a 10/0.4 kV transformer to 
estimate loading capabilities of one radial. Integrate the thermal models for 
vulnerable 10 kV cables and transformers in Frederiksberg. 
4. Assess potential lifetime reduction and short-term loading capabilities of a 
transformer due to increased thermal and electrical stress caused by different 
loading profiles from worst-case scenarios. 
==PAGE:88==
Learning goals 
After the project a student will be able to: 
• Understand how the mechanisms of market-based flexibility services work and how 
they might impact the 10 kV grid. 
• Estimate load profiles of future consumption scenarios (10 kV level) based on 
different distributions of EV chargers, coincidence factors and utilization rates. 
• Understand thermal phenomena caused by higher electrical loading on distribution 
transformers. 
• Explain what influences the reduction of lifespan and properties of a 10/0,4 kV oil 
transformer and 10 kV ALPEX cables under increased loading. 
• Perform N-1 analysis and indicate where reinforcements are necessary to obtain a 
grid reserve. 
• Utilize a thermal model of a 10/0,4 kV transformer and integrate it into a grid model. 
• Simulate worst-case scenarios through PandaPower and assess potential problems 
with operation patterns and 10/0,4 kV transformers. 
• Discuss whether current grid dimensioning of 10/0,4 kV transformer is adequate and 
what the optimal operation pattern in terms of transformer lifetime is. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
Project goal and rough activity time plan 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
E
Appendix - Updated time schedule
E
Appendix - Updated time schedule
Page 81 of 83
==PAGE:91==
ID
Task Name
Start
Finish
Duration
sep 2021
okt 2021
jan 2022
dec 2021
nov 2021
7-11
26-9
3-10
10-10
28-11
19-12
24-10
5-12
12-9
2-1
19-9
31-10
21-11
17-10
5-9
23-1
26-12
16-1
14-11
9-1
12-12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
18d
24-09-2021
01-09-2021
Problem Formulation
43d
11-11-2021
14-09-2021
Data collection and preperation
11d
28-09-2021
14-09-2021
trf specific data for 630,800 and 1000 kVA 
trf. (used today)
7d
01-10-2021
23-09-2021
Real-world top oil temperature 
measurements for substation trf.
3d
29-09-2021
27-09-2021
Historical temperature measurements 
through API (DMI)
11d
11-10-2021
27-09-2021
Aggregated smartmeter data for FRB 
(substation load)
16d
01-11-2021
11-10-2021
TU (parking poss., arr., dep. and distance 
traveled)
11d
11-11-2021
28-10-2021
Buisness codes (delivery points)
4d
11-11-2021
08-11-2021
GIS data (building types, trf size, location 
etc.)
28d
08-10-2021
01-09-2021
Research
32d
16-11-2021
04-10-2021
WP1 – Integration of Thermal Model and 
calibration on real-world data
16d
25-10-2021
04-10-2021
WP1.1 – Comb. aggre. load data and 
outdoor temperature to pred.
11d
08-11-2021
25-10-2021
WP1.2 – Calibrate correction factor and 
test trf Specific constants
7d
16-11-2021
08-11-2021
WP1.3 – Evaluate accuracy and integrate 
thermal model
30d
17-12-2021
08-11-2021
WP2 – Establish future load curves for EV 
charging
16d
29-11-2021
08-11-2021
WP2.1 Prepare inputs (mobility, charging 
and location data)
11d
09-12-2021
25-11-2021
WP2.2 Define scenarios
29d
17-12-2021
09-11-2021
WP2.3 Understand, adapt and integrate EV 
charging model   
75d
28-01-2022
18-10-2021
Report Writing
20d
12-11-2021
18-10-2021
Modeling of hot spot temperature for 
distribution transformers
29d
22-12-2021
12-11-2021
Modeling of EV charging demand and 
inputs
16d
13-01-2022
23-12-2021
Results
16d
24-01-2022
03-01-2022
Discussion
3d
28-01-2022
26-01-2022
Conclusion
16d
01-02-2022
11-01-2022
Review
0d
01-02-2022
01-02-2022
Handin
==PAGE:92==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Center for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
