==PAGE:1==
Surveillance frequency load monitoring
through reply-to-radar allocation
Miklós Kristóf Jásdi
(s192748)
Master of Science
2022
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Surveillance frequency load monitoring
through reply-to-radar allocation
Report written by:
Miklós Kristóf Jásdi
(s192748)
Advisor(s):
Emilien Robert, SESAR iCNS Research Expert at EUROCONTROL
Søren Hansen, Associate Professor at DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
30 August 2021- 30 January 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Miklós Kristóf Jásdi, 2022
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Mode-S radar is one of the most important systems employed by airspace surveil-
lance. This system operates by sending out digital interrogation messages through a ro-
tating antenna, to which aircraft reply using their onboard equipment, the transponder.
The messages are exchanged via distinct frequencies, which are becoming increasingly
loaded as more interrogators are deployed.
EUROCONTROL, the air traﬀic network manager of Europe is tasked with the
oversight of the surveillance frequency, and as such it is interested in optimizing the use
of this scarce resource. An important part of this task is the identification of radars
responsible for the frequency load, which is supported by a purposely-built network of
ground sensors that can intercept Mode-S replies. These replies, however, only contain
partial data on which radar they answer to, making the allocation of replies and thus
the identification of message-emitting radars a non-trivial problem.
To come up with a solution, we first analyze the phenomenon of the frequency load
alongside a short discussion of the Mode-S surveillance’s working principle. Following
that, we assess the results of prior research in this area, most importantly a partial
solution that can assign replies to known-position radars. We identify a major short-
coming, namely that the algorithm cannot account for mobile radars deployed across the
continent, also a potential cause of high radio frequency load. For this reason, we put
the emphasis of our research on the development of a radar localization approach that
can address the above deficiency. We do so by utilizing temporal and spatial patterns
exhibited by the replies, also called ”radar fingerprints”. Based on this information, we
explore various localization methods, out of which we select a grid-based approach that
relies on a set of Mode-S replies and a rotation period estimate to compute the unknown
radar’s position.
We then implement the said algorithm and several performance optimizations, fol-
lowed by the exploration of supplementary period-finding and input data preprocessing
methods. To test their eﬀiciency, we construct an user-customizable radar localization
tool encompassing these methods. Test cases involving one and more known radars are
then carried out, followed by a real-life example of locating an unknown overinterrogat-
ing radar. All of these cases yield position estimation errors in the order of 1-2 nautical
miles. Driven by these promising results, we conclude our research by inserting the radar
localization pipeline into a theoretical automated reply-to-radar allocation system.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The role of Mode-S radars in airspace surveillance . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Mode-S frequency load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
State of the art in frequency oversaturation investigation . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Problem analysis
6
2.1
The data source: the main principles of Mode-S operation
. . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Input data and its features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Reply
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Radar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Geographic reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Prior work - Parameter estimation and reply allocation of known-position
radars
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Data transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Radar parameter estimation and all-call reply allocation
. . . . .
14
2.4.3
Roll-call reply allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Shortcomings of the current allocation algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.1
Finding mobile radars using radar ”fingerprints” . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Methodologies
22
3.1
Radar localization as a machine learning problem . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.1
Supervised learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Unsupervised learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.3
Reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.4
Traditional domain-specific approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
The radar localization algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Computation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Pseudorange equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
Grid-based graphical method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:8==
iv
Contents
3.2.4
Selecting the ”right” pairs of replies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.5
Improving robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.6
Removing false contours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.7
Performance optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Estimation of the rotation period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.1
Autocorrelation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.2
Fourier transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.3
Custom period-shift heatmaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.4
Reply time difference histograms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.5
Selection of the applicable period estimation algorithm . . . . . .
47
3.4
Data filtering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.4.1
Reply spacing-based filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.4.2
Period-based filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4.3
Reply substitution with beam-centered replies . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Results
52
4.1
Testing framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Example test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.1
Localization of one known radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.2
Localization of multiple known radars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.3
Localization of an unknown mobile radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3
Summary of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5
Discussion
69
5.1
Automation of the radar localization pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
Integration into the full reply-to-radar allocation system
. . . . . . . . .
71
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6
Conclusion
74
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
The role of Mode-S radars in airspace
surveillance
Radars are the cornerstone of airspace surveillance and of a functional air traﬀic manage-
ment. They provide vital information to ensure the safe separation of aircraft and the
optimal use of the air transport network’s finite resources. Radars can be separated into
two distinct categories by their role and underlying technology: primary surveillance
radars (PSR) and secondary surveillance radars (SSR).
PSRs follow the lineage of the first radars deployed in World War II - they emit a
beam of energy impulse that is reflected by airborne objects that is in turn captured by
the radar’s large parabolic antenna. The time between the impulse’s transmission and
reception can be measured, and that, combined with the known velocity of electromag-
netic waves, can be used to determine the object’s distance. By using a rotating antenna
and an adequately narrow radar beam, the bearing of the object can also be computed.
What PSRs are lacking, however, is the ability to identify airborne targets. This
demand appeared along with the deployment of the very first radars, and as such, the
initial solutions were developed during WWII to tell friendly aircraft away from unknown
objects. The technology, known as the Identification Friend or Foe (IFF), went through
many iterations before making it into the civilian airspace surveillance systems as the
secondary surveillance radar.
SSR (and IFF) systems rely on a completely different operating principle than the
PSRs introduced above. While still called ”radars”, they do not rely on the electro-
magnetic impulses reflected from airborne targets. Instead, they utilize radio commu-
nications equipment present at the ground station and on board the aircraft. In these
systems, the radars send out ”interrogations” - radio messages through a highly direc-
tional, rotating antenna, that are captured by the on-board radio equipment of the
aircraft - known as the transponder. Upon receiving an interrogation, the transponder
sends a ”reply” message that contains the identification of the aircraft and other data
generated by the aircraft’s avionics.
As a global standard set by International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), SSR
operates on two distinct frequencies: 1030 MHz for the interrogations and 1090 MHz
for the replies. These messages are entirely digital, and adhere to different formats that
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
have emerged in the past few decades. In the very beginning, two civilian modes of
operation were used - Mode-A and Mode-C. Replies of Mode-A, the initial mode used
by civilian systems, contain a 4-octet identification code (often called ”squawk” code)
set on the transponder by the pilot. Mode-C replies contain the pressure altitude of the
aircraft, complementing the slant range distance information measured by the SSR.
With the rapid increase of air traﬀic in the past decades, the shortcomings of SSR
started to manifest. One of the main problems of the SSR is that it interrogates every
aircraft in its radar beam indiscriminately. If many aircraft happen to be in the radar
beam at a time, their replies can overlap, making their processing diﬀicult. In addition
to this problem, the shortage of identification codes (with just 4096 unique options) also
started to pose a bottleneck in the surveillance capacities.
As a result, a new SSR mode, ”Mode-S” was introduced. Mode-S allows the selective
interrogation of the aircraft by introducing a 6 (hexadecimal) -digit identification code
that is uniquely assigned to each airframe by ICAO and the corresponding civil aviation
authority (analogous to the chassis number of a road vehicle). Mode-S also introduces
several new data payloads that replies may contain, such as the callsign, speed, heading,
position, and many other parameters generated by the avionics suite. But perhaps most
importantly, Mode-S also enables the individual, ”selective” interrogation of aircraft
based on their ICAO code (as opposed to interrogating all aircraft in the beam), cutting
down the amount of redundant and unnecessary data transmission [Sun21].
1.2
The Mode-S frequency load
Apart from the increase in traﬀic there is another important challenge that SSR - and
Mode-S technology is facing, stemming from the constant improvement of the ground
components of the surveillance system. To improve reliability, radars are set up with
overlapping coverages as a form of redundancy, leading to aircraft usually flying in the
coverage of several radars at a time. Radar coverage is also a matter of sovereignty:
every country is interested in keeping a complete surveillance coverage of their airspace,
resulting in even larger radar coverage overlaps above border areas.
In addition, the distinct frequencies of the SSR are also used by other systems, such
as the Traﬀic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) and the Multilateration (MLAT),
resulting in even higher frequency congestion. Mode-S transponders - adhering to per-
formance standards developed decades ago - were simply not designed to cope with this
amount of frequency occupancy. In areas of dense radar coverage, aircraft transponders
can be exposed to interrogation rates close to their processing capacity, and additional
disturbances, such as radar tests and military exercises can add enough extra load that
would push these on-board hardware over their limits.
The resulting malfunctions can range from a transponder restarting and becoming
inoperative for a few seconds to stopping completely. This would mean that the equip-
ment would stop sending replies, hindering the radars’ ability to identify the aircraft.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 State of the art in frequency oversaturation investigation
3
Furthermore, the TCAS system, which utilises the same transponder to redirect aircraft
flying on a collision course, would also cease to function, disabling the last line of defense
against mid-air collisions. For these reasons, the operation of adjacent SSR radars must
be coordinated in a way that ensures that these cases of overinterrogation do not occur.
The significance of the above theory lies in the fact that it has been already observed
in real life. The most severe example had happened on June 2014, when various Eu-
ropean Area Control Centres (ACCs), including those of Vienna, Prague, Bratislava,
Karlsruhe, Munich, Warsaw and Budapest reported detection losses, leading to the de-
layed update and disappearance of aircraft on the air traﬀic controllers’ screens. Apart
from the inherent impact on safety, the capacity of these airspace sectors had to be
temporarily reduced, causing delays over the European network.
According to the investigation concluded by European Union Aviation Safety Agency
(EASA), the cause of the incident was an interrogator East-southeast of Prague working
in either a test or unusual operating mode that led to the transmission of an overwhelm-
ing amount of interrogation messages. This, coupled with the already high number of
interrogators in the surrounding Central European area was enough to tip the transpon-
ders of several aircraft over their design limit [Age14].
1.3
State of the art in frequency
oversaturation investigation
As part of the Single European Sky (SES) initiative, aimed to enhance air transportation
interoperability between European states, the European Union has laid down a set of
legal and technical requirements governing the use of the airspace surveillance frequen-
cies. This materialized in the European Commission Regulation (EU) No. 1207/2011,
commonly referred to as the Surveillance Performance and Interoperability Regulation
(SPI IR). Among other clauses, the SPI IR issues a mandate to EUROCONTROL to
develop and enforce the rules governing the use of surveillance frequencies in all member
states. As a part of this mandate, EUROCONTROL is also tasked with the monitoring
of the SSR frequencies and taking countermeasures, should any harmful interference
(such as Mode-S overinterrogation) occur [11].
EUROCONTROL, or in its full name, the European Organisation for the Safety of
Air Navigation is an international organisation responsible for the air traﬀic manage-
ment (ATM) over Europe. One of its main tasks is to coordinate between the civil
aviation authorities, air navigation service providers, civil and military airspace users
and airports to better utilize the limited resources of the European airspace. EURO-
CONTROL is not an EU agency, but an independent organization that also includes
some non-EU members such as Switzerland, Ukraine and Turkey. The EU, however,
being a signatory of EUROCONTROL itself, has delegated most of its regulatory tasks
to EUROCONTROL, making it the network manager of the bloc.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
To comply with its SPI IR mandate, and to make sure that aircraft transponders
are not subject to overinterrogation, EUROCONTROL has a wide range of methods to
monitor the 1030-1090 MHz frequencies in its member states. One of the examples would
be the recording of the incoming interrogations aboard a test aircraft or a ground-based
receiver. Test flights, however, provide results limited to the time and area surrounding
the flight trajectory and are also very expensive to carry out.
Another method would be the deployment of ground-based radio receivers that in-
tercept the 1030 MHz interrogations and the 1090 MHz replies. Given a large enough
network of such relatively cheap sensors, it would be possible to monitor the frequency
occupancy without the temporal and spatial constraints of the mentioned test flights.
This idea has materialized in the European Monitoring of Interrogators and Transpon-
ders or EMIT system, shown in Figure 1.1 [EUR20]. EMIT is a growing network of
over 60 receivers spanning Europe that capture both 1030 MHz interrogations and 1090
MHz replies. Operating 24 hours a day with a near-complete coverage over the conti-
nent, EMIT has the capability to pinpoint areas where an excessive number of replies
are produced, hinting the likely positions of overinterrogating radars on the ground.
Figure 1.1: Mode-S replies captured by EMIT. The white dots denote the receivers.
1.4
Problem statement
However, most radar antennas are directed towards the sky, which leads to the majority
of interrogations missing the nearby ground receivers. Therefore, the reliable intercep-
tion of such messages is diﬀicult, if not impossible. In contrast, the replies coming from
the aircraft can be eﬀiciently captured, as these messages are emitted towards the ground.
The replies, however, do not contain direct information regarding which radar’s inter-
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Problem statement
5
rogation they answer to. Due to these reasons, the identification of overinterrogating
radars usually involves a laborous manual investigation of the replies and the indirect
hints they contain about their sources.
This investigation is made even more challenging by the fact that there are also
many, unknown radars operating in EUROCONTROL’s member states. Mobile radars
deployed on ground vehicles, ships and aircraft are a few of such examples. The po-
sition, number and characteristics of these radar systems are hardly ever disclosed by
their (mostly military) operators, making their identification and correlation to the over-
interrogation phenomena diﬀicult.
Due to the above challenges and the sheer amount of replies to be processed (ranging
in hundreds of thousands per minute), EUROCONTROL is pursuing the development
of an AI-assisted algorithm that could identify overinterrogation incidents in near real
time. This would allow EUROCONTROL to react to these events as they happen, alert
the users of the airspace and contact the operators of the overinterrogating radars.
The development of this system forms the ultimate goal of this thesis project, which
encompasses the following main steps:
• Analysis of the Mode-S technology and current reply-to-radar allocation methods
• Extension of these methods with the localization of unknown mobile radars
• Construction of an automated system that carries out the complete allocation of
replies to known and previously unknown radars.
The following chapters of this report document the efforts aimed at the fulfillment of
the above tasks.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2
Problem analysis
2.1
The data source: the main principles of
Mode-S operation
In order to understand how Mode-S operates and how cases of overinterrogations can
be identified, it is important to delve into the types of Mode-S messages and the way
they are transmitted. As previously discussed, messages can be separated into interro-
gations made by the ground equipment and corresponding replies sent by the aircraft
transmitters. Interrogations have different purposes - ranging from identifying aircraft
to requesting very specific information from their on-board avionics. These purposes
are encoded into so-called ”uplink formats” (UF). Messages have different data struc-
tures and lengths that adhere to these formats. What is common among all of them, is
that they all start with a 5-bit header that denotes their type, making it possible for
the transponder to identify the corresponding data structure and correctly process the
message.
There are 25 different uplink formats, each of which has a corresponding ”downlink
format” (DF) - the data structure that a ground interrogator would expect as a reply.
Replies of different DFs also come in different lengths and structures, and as such, they
also always start with a 5-bit DF header. Figure 2.1 below represents the example of
DF11, alongside the corresponding UF11 structure.
Figure 2.1:
All-call message formats UF11 & DF11 [Bod19b].
The ”PI” parity of the reply contains the radar IC.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 The data source: the main principles of Mode-S operation
7
Figure 2.2: UF4/5 and DF4/5, examples of roll-call formats [Bod19b].
The ”AP” parity of the reply does not contain the radar IC.
The types of messages a radar and aircraft may exchange depends on multiple factors,
the most important of those is, however, inherent to the Mode-S’ operating principle.
In order to realize the selective interrogation that is the primary goal of Mode-S, the
interaction between the radar and the aircraft consists of several phases, in which certain
message formats play a key role. To initiate the selective interrogation, a radar must
acquire the unique identifiers of the aircraft that are within its coverage. Once it has
the knowledge of the aircraft IDs in coverage, it can start addressing these aircraft one-
by-one, by targeting a certain ID. The ”aircraft ID” here is the 24-bit ICAO address
of the aircraft, that is uniquely assigned by the civil aviation authority of registration
according to the rules set by the ICAO.
The messages supporting the acquisition of aircraft are called ”all-call” messages.
These messages are addressed to all aircraft within the radar’s surveillance coverage,
which in turn reply with their 24-bit ICAO addresses (provided that they are not locked
out by the radar). In addition, these messages also contain an IC or ”interrogator code”
field, which lets the transponder identify the radar. All-call interrogations and replies
are represented by UF11 and DF11 that are shown in Figure 2.1.
Once an aircraft
is acquired, the radar begins its selective interrogation. These interrogations and the
corresponding replies are called ”roll-call” messages, examples of which are shown in
Figure 2.2. If the transponder of a certain aircraft receives a roll-call interrogation, it
will only send a reply if the ICAO address in the interrogation message matches its own
ICAO address.
To better understand how all-call and roll-call messages are used, consider the phases
of an aircraft passing through a radar’s coverage, as shown in Figure 2.3.
1 (black) - The example begins with an aircraft that is approaching the radar, but is
not in the radar’s physical line of sight or power budget yet. No interrogations trigger
the transponder, thus no replies are made.
2) (blue) - The aircraft further approaches the radar, the all-call interrogations of
which finally reach the transponder with an adequate power. The interrogations are
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Problem analysis
Figure 2.3: Phases of Mode-S radar - aircraft interaction [Bod19b].
answered by the transponder, but the replies are not processed by the radar, as the
aircraft is still flying outside the radar’s (programmed) surveillance coverage, the green
circle in the figure.
3) (green) - The aircraft enters the radar’s surveillance coverage and continues to
reply to all-calls. The radar processes the aircraft’s reply and adds its ICAO address
to the database of aircraft currently in its coverage. This process is called the aircraft’s
acquisition by the radar. With the aircraft acquired, the radar starts sending selective
(roll-call) interrogations.
4) (red) - As the aircraft gets even closer, it enters the radar’s lockout coverage. In
this phase, the radar adds control information to its roll-call interrogations that instruct
the aircraft transponder not to reply to the radar’s all-calls. Upon receiving such a
roll-call message, the aircraft stops replying to all-calls containing the radar’s IC for 18
seconds. This timer is then reset each time a roll-call message is received.
Once the aircraft leaves the radar lockout coverage, the 18-second timer of its
transponder eventually expires, ending the lockout. This lets the aircraft to reply to
all-calls on that IC again, and be acquired by another radar operating on the same
IC. But why is the interrogation code being brought up so many times, why is it so
important? The reason is the fact that aircraft usually fly in the overlapping coverage
of several radars at a time, not just one. If the aircraft had no means of distinguishing
between different radars, it would lock out upon reaching the coverage of the first radar,
hindering its acquisition by all the other radars in range. [Bod19b]
The IC code lets the aircraft to identify each of the overlapping radars and carry
out the aforementioned acquisition-lockout interaction for multiple radars in parallel.
It is also important to keep in mind, however, that IC codes are by far not unique to
the radars. Old Mode-S transponders are capable of handling 16 different ICs (ranging
from ”II 0” - ”II 15”), while new transponders support 64 codes (”SI” codes ”SI 1” -
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Input data and its features
9
”SI 63” and ”II 0”).
SI codes can be interpreted as II codes by older transponders,
making them backwards-compatible. Compared to these 64 IC possibilities, there are
hundreds of radars in Europe, which means that they cannot be assigned a truly unique
IC. Therefore, the usage of these codes and the corresponding radar coverages must be
coordinated very carefully so that no radars on the same IC would overlap. An example
of this can be seen in Figure 2.4.
The limited number of interrogator codes is a major reason why finding the sources
of overinterrogation is such a daunting task. IC codes are not unique, thus assigning
replies to radars based only on this hint is diﬀicult. Furthermore, while all-call replies
contain the IC, roll-calls - accounting for the majority of the replies - do not.
Figure 2.4: Radar lockout coverages of one certain IC in Europe [Bod19a].
As an additional challenge, we must also consider mobile radars that have a slightly
different way of operation than described above. These radars - often found on ground
vehicles, ships and certain military aircraft - are deployed on-demand without prior note
(during military exercises, for instance), therefore their operation cannot be coordinated
together with the permanent, stationary radars. For this reason, mobile radars have the
interrogator code ”II 0” reserved for their exclusive use. An important feature of these
radars is that they do not use the lockout mechanism, as their ever-changing positions
would make prevention of surveillance coverage overlaps impossible.
2.2
Input data and its features
In order to carry out our research on the reply-to-radar allocation problem, we have to
assess what data we have at our disposal. We can distinguish between two important
entities, namely the reply and the radar.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Problem analysis
2.2.1
Reply
Replies - as described in the prior sections - are individual messages of the aircraft’s
transponder, captured by EMIT. Upon registering a reply, the receiver network and its
backend performs a wide range of data cleaning and augmentation steps to enhance the
usability of the data. For instance, the replies undergo an error checking and correction
phase based on their embedded parity information, ensuring the validity of the data.
As a next step, several data features are added, such as the time of reception and the
aircraft position at reception - some of which are inferred from other replies captured by
EMIT. Before ending up in EMIT’s database, replies captured by individual receivers
are compared against each other and those found to be duplicates are discarded. This
is very important, as aircraft usually fly in the range of multiple EMIT receivers at a
time. Table 2.1 represents the fields of a reply after it has been processed by EMIT.
Table 2.1: Features of a reply.
Feature
Description
reply_id
The unique identifier of the reply.
Manually added to aid
further processing.
time_utc
The reception time of the reply by EMIT, encoded in ISO
8601 format.
timestamp
The reception time of the reply by EMIT, encoded as Unix
time - seconds elapsed since 1970-01-01 00:00.
message
The data content of the reply, encoded as a byte string.
df
Downlink format (DF) of the reply.
IC
Interrogator code of the reply. Undefined for roll-call (non-
DF11) replies.
latitude
The approximate latitude of the aircraft at the time of the
reply, derived from other replies. Delayed by up to a second.
longitude
The approximate longitude of the aircraft at the time of the
reply, derived from other replies. Delayed by up to a second.
altitude_ft
Altitude above the surface of the Earth.
squawk
Mode-A/C SSR transponder code.
signal_strength
The signal strength of the reply at the reception by EMIT.
frequency_offset
Deviation from the 1090 MHz carrier frequency.
receivers
List of the EMIT receiver IDs that intercepted the reply.
2.2.2
Radar
In order to allocate replies, we must determine the features that describe a radar. As
mentioned in the previous chapters, radars use highly-directional, rotating antennas
that (due to their physical construction) possess a certain radiation pattern.
These
characteristics determine which aircraft they are able to interrogate at a certain point
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Input data and its features
11
of time. While the true physical parameters of a radar beam are rather complicated to
describe, it is possible to set up a simplified model we can use in our investigation, as
represented by Figure 2.5.
As shown in the figure, the radar’s radiation pattern can be approximated by a
circular sector that is symmetric to the center of the radar beam. The parameters that
define this circular section - namely the radius and the central angle - correspond to
”real-life” catalog values that are often used to describe radars. The radius is analogous
to the range of the radar - the distance within it is capable (and programmed to) generate
replies. The central angle corresponds to the beam width (BW) of our radar beam model
- a value that is assumed to be constant through the distance from the radar for the sake
of the model’s simplicity.
The actual direction which the radar beam is pointing at can be described by the
angle ϕ. This angle, also called the azimuth of the antenna, is measured clockwise from
the north. In order to determine this angle at any point of time, two extra, radar-specific
parameters must be introduced: the rotational period T and north-pointing time tN.
The rotational period is the time taken by the antenna to complete one full turn, while
the north-pointing time denotes the time instance at which the radar is pointing to the
north (or when its azimuth is zero). Using these parameters, the azimuth can described
as a function of time, as in equation (2.1).
Φ(t, T, tN) = 360◦
T
∗(t −tN)mod360◦
(2.1)
Using the radar’s geographic position, rotational period, north-pointing time and the
beam width it is possible to model the radar beam at any point of time, which in turn
can be used to determine whether a certain reply was produced inside or outside of the
given radar’s beam. Table 2.2 provides a summary of these parameters for clarity.
Figure 2.5: Simplified model of a radar beam and its movement.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Problem analysis
Table 2.2: Features of a radar.
Feature
Description
radar_id
The unique identifier of the radar to aid further
processing.
latitude
The latitude coordinate of the radar’s position.
longitude
The longitude coordinate of the radar’s position.
IC
Interrogator code.
range
The range of the radar.
period (T)
The rotation period of the radar antenna.
north-pointing time (tN)
Point of time at which the radar antenna is point-
ing towards the north, expressed as the number of
seconds elapsed since 1970-01-01 00:00.
beam width (BW)
The beam width of the simplified radar beam
model (usually given in degrees).
2.3
Geographic reference
The data presented above has important features that denote geographic locations on the
Earth. As we expect to heavily utilize this information, we should clarify what kind of
geographic reference system we will be using in our research. The latitude and longitude
coordinates in the presented data entities reflect to points on the WGS 84 ellipsoid
model of the Earth. As our research is limited to the area of Europe, this representation
provides only a slight accuracy improvement over the spherical representation of the
Earth. Therefore, we use the latter, spherical coordinate system as it saves us from the
complicated calculations and extra considerations we would need to take when working
with an ellipsoid model.
We also disregard the altitude information of the radars and replies and treat them
if they all lied on the Earth’s surface. We can apply this simplification as these altitudes
are usually negligible compared to the horizontal distances involved in the research. As
a result of this consideration, we calculate point-to-point distances with the great circle
distance formula. Due to these distances being generally small within our European
area of interest, we can also afford to estimate 3D straight-line distances with the same
formula, to simplify their calculation.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Prior work - Parameter estimation and reply allocation of known-position radars
13
2.4
Prior work - Parameter estimation and
reply allocation of known-position radars
Finding a solution to the radar-to-reply allocation problem poses multiple challenges,
given the limited amount of data at our disposal. These include the following:
• In the case of most fixed Mode-S radars in Europe, only the position is known to
EUROCONTROL. Parameters such as the rotational period, north-pointing time,
range or beam width are either inaccurate or missing for most of these radars.
• There is an unknown number of mobile radars operating all around Europe, at
unknown positions. They could operate for a timespan as short as a few hours,
and can also move considerably fast (for instance, the ones installed on AWACS
aircraft).
• The majority of replies (and interrogations) are roll-calls. Roll-call replies do not
contain the IC, making their allocation even more diﬀicult.
Based on the challenges listed above, it can be stated that the radar-to-reply alloca-
tion is indeed a non-trivial problem. Given its complexity, a likely solution would entail
multiple steps that lead to the allocation of all (or at least the vast majority of) the
replies captured by EMIT, which is the ultimate goal of the research.
Prior to the commencement of this thesis project, EUROCONTROL had already
been developing a solution, based on the radar beam model described in the previous
chapter. It is an algorithm that can estimate the radars’ missing parameters, model
their beams as they rotate over time, then allocate the replies. The algorithm is based
on the assumption that all replies must be generated by a radar, so the best selection
of period, north-pointing time and beam width values is the one that results in every
reply falling into the beam of a radar. This approach, therefore, can be also stated as an
optimization problem, in which we try to allocate the most replies by tuning the radar
parameters T, tN and BW. The main steps of the algorithm are the following:
1. Data transformation
2. (Simultaneous) Radar parameter estimation and all-call reply allocation
3. Roll-call reply allocation
2.4.1
Data transformation
The very first step of the allocation algorithm is to set up radar-reply pairs that should
even be considered for the allocation. Depending on the traﬀic situation, there might
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Problem analysis
be hundreds of thousands of replies being generated over one minute in Europe. Inves-
tigating every reply-radar pair without any preprocessing would be a computationally
expensive task, the majority of which would also be completely useless. Given the physics
of how radars operate, the number of reply-radar pairs can be greatly reduced, saving
valuable runtime. Such options include the filtering of replies based on their distance
from the radar and their IC.
According to the first filter, radar-reply pairs are only considered if they are less than
a distance apart than the given radar’s range. Since the range of most radars are not
precisely known, a range of 300NM, a typical distance for Mode-S radars is used. The
second filter takes the interrogator code of the reply and radar into account. Replies
having a certain IC can only originate from radars operating on the same IC, further
narrowing down the possible number of reply-radar pairs. This filtering, however, works
only with DF11 / all-call replies, the only type of messages that contains the IC.
In parallel to the filtering these reply-radar pairs are also appended with extra data
features that aid the later allocation steps. Such features include the bearing and dis-
tance of the reply from the radar, which can be calculated as both the radar’s and reply’s
positions are known. After the data transformation steps have been applied, we are left
with a filtered dataset of reply-radar pairs possessing the features described by Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Features of reply-radar pairs.
Feature
Description
radar_id
The unique identifier of the radar instance.
reply_id
The unique identifier of the reply instance.
bearing (Ψrep)
Bearing of the reply from the radar (in degrees).
distance
Distance of the reply from the radar (in NM).
timestamp (trep)
The reception time of the reply by EMIT.
status
A number representing whether the given reply has been
allocated to the paired radar.
2.4.2
Radar parameter estimation and all-call reply
allocation
The reply-radar pairs then are taken to the next step of the algorithm, which uses only
DF11 / all-call replies for the radar parameter estimation and actual allocation.
It
consists of several steps as follows:
1. Period and north-pointing time estimation using preliminary beam width values
2. Beam width optimization
3. Period and north-pointing time re-estimation
4. Final reply allocation
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Prior work - Parameter estimation and reply allocation of known-position radars
15
2.4.2.1
Period and north-pointing time estimation
The first set of parameters to be estimated are the rotational period (T) and north-
pointing time (tN). It is done for all radars one by one, by searching a 2-dimensional
parameter grid consisting of the possible T and tN values, and evaluating the number of
replies that would fall onto the beam of the radar, for each set of T and tN values (that
is effectively a regression problem). As the BW at this phase is unknown, a preliminary
value is used to model the radar beam. Based on Figure 2.5, a reply falls into the radar
beam of a radar characterized by T, tN and BW if it satisfies the condition (2.2):
InBeam(T, tN, BW, reply) = if |ψrep −Φ(trep, T, tN)| < BW
2
(2.2)
In which Ψrep is the bearing of the reply from the radar and Φ is the azimuth function
of the radar described by equation (2.1), at the time trep of the reply.
Carrying out this operation on all possible T, tN combinations produces a matrix
the size of the count of possible T values times the count of possible tN values. Each
element equals 1 if the reply falls into the beam, and 0 if it does not, as seen on the left
of Figure 2.6. The reply-specific InBeam matrices are then added together to produce
a T, tN heatmap, seen on the right side of the figure. The maximum of this heatmap
denotes the optimal set of T and tN parameters which lead to the most replies falling
into the radar beam. This operation can also be described as Algorithm 1.
Figure 2.6: Stages of the t, tN parameter estimation.
The major caveat of this algorithm is that the T and tN estimates of a radar are
greatly influenced by the replies that were produced by nearby radars on the same IC.
In order to account for this issue, the heatmap generation is carried out in an ordered
fashion (which we call ”ordered regression”). This means that alongside each radar’s
T-tN heatmap we also generate a quality measure that is equal to the amount of replies
falling into the radar’s beam at its optimal peak value of the T - tN heatmap. Then
among the radars, we select the one with the highest-quality T - tN fit and consider
its parameter estimation complete.
Following that, we discard the reply-radar pairs
allocated to this radar, and repeat the whole parameter estimation step on the reduced
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Problem analysis
Algorithm 1: Period and north-pointing time estimation
Data:
R: Array of radar instances
RRP: Array of reply-radar pair instances
T_cnt: Count of rotational period values to consider
tN_cnt: Count of north-pointing time values to consider
Tpossible: (T_cnt x tN_cnt) matrix of rotational period values to consider
tNpossible: (T_cnt x tN_cnt) matrix of north-pointing time values to consider
BWpre: Preliminary beam width value
reply_cnts: An array of zeros the size of R
Result:
R: Array of radar instances with estimated t and tN values
reply_cnts: An array containing the number of replies at optimum T, tN for
each radar
for each IC in unique ICs of R do
for each radar instance r in R do
if r.IC ̸= IC then
continue;
end
let heatmapr = (T_cnt x tN_cnt) matrix of zeros;
for each radar-reply pair rrp in RRP do
if r.radar_id ̸= rrp.radar_id then
continue;
end
let inbeamrrp = (T_cnt x tN_cnt) matrix;
inbeamrrp = InBeam(Tpossible, tNpossible, BWpre, rrp);
heatmapr = heatmapr + inbeamrrp;
end
let maximum = max(heatmapr);
let maximum_pos = argmax(heatmapr);
r.T = tpossible[maximum_pos];
r.tN = tNpossible[maximum_pos];
reply_cnts[r.radar_id] = maximum;
end
end
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Prior work - Parameter estimation and reply allocation of known-position radars
17
reply dataset. The subsequent parameter estimation yields more accurate results, since
the interfering replies of the most influental radar have been removed. We continue in
this fashion until there are no radars and/or replies left in the dataset.
In order to obtain accurate results and to keep the runtime at an affordable level, we
run the algorithm two times: once on a large, coarser T-tN parameter grid, then on a
smaller, but finer grid centered around the peak of the first pass.
2.4.2.2
Beam width optimization
Testing of the algorithm has revealed that the optimum region of the T, tN heatmap is
smeared over a considerable region, which gives room for some estimation error - as it
is shown on the left hand side of Figure 2.7. The cause of this phenomenon is that we
use a preliminary beam width value instead of the actual one belonging to the radar. If
the reply dataset covers a limited timespan (which usually is the case), and the assumed
beam width is large enough, then the T and tN values have a considerable headroom to
still keep most of the replies in the beam, resulting in the smeared optimum region.
Figure 2.7: Stages of the t, tN parameter estimation.
The right hand side of the same figure shows the so-called ”delta-bearing” plot of
the same dataset. The Y axis represents the delta-bearing, the difference between the
beam center’s azimuth and the bearing of the replies as a function of time. The red line
denotes the beam center, according to the assumption that replies are spread equally
left and right of the beam center. On the figure, this is obviously not true, as the beam
center should always be at zero delta-bearing if the parameter estimation is correct.
This phenomenon proves that the T, tN and BW values are co-dependent and must be
optimized simultaneously.
Due to the tN and T estimation errors, the fitted beam center deviates from the true
center as a linear function of time, as explained by the Dm error function (2.3).
Dm = α ∗trep + β
(2.3)
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Problem analysis
The parameters α and β of this linear function can be found by the means of a simple
linear regression fitted on these replies, then used to correct for the T and tN estimation
errors as described by the formulas (2.4) and (2.5), in which t0 is the time of the first
reply in the dataset.
Topt = T ∗
360◦
360◦+ α ∗T
(2.4)
tNopt = Topt
T
∗tN −
β
360◦∗Topt +
α
360◦∗Topt ∗t0
(2.5)
With the T and tN parameters now accurately determined, the only parameter left
to estimate is the beam width, which is represented by the distance of the two blue lines
on the right hand side of Figure 2.7. Taking a BW value where the number of replies
in the beam is at maximum seems to be promising at first, but it would also likely
overestimate the true width of the beam. This is because interfering replies coming
from other radars would throw this estimation off, even if it is just a few replies far away
from the beam center. For this reason, the measure of reply density per unit beam width
was introduced, as seen in equation (2.6),
reply_density(BW) = nrep_inbeam
BW 0.5
[deg−0.5]
(2.6)
in which nrep_inbeam corresponds to the number of replies falling into the beam given
the selection of BW value. The optimal BW value can be found by calculating this reply
density function for a range of BW values, then selecting the BW value corresponding
to the highest reply density - as illustrated by Figure 2.8. Now as we have the correct
T, tN and BW values for all our radars, we can model their radar beams and allocate
replies accurately, using the InBeam function represented by equation (2.2).
Figure 2.8: Reply density of a radar as a function of beam width.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Shortcomings of the current allocation algorithm
19
2.4.3
Roll-call reply allocation
The remaining step is to allocate the roll-call replies, as we have only accounted for the
all-call replies so far. The major challenge of the roll-call reply allocation is that these
messages do not contain an IC field - therefore we cannot enjoy the luxury of reducing
the number of hundreds of possible radars that might have generated a certain reply. We
can, however, still treat these roll-call replies the same way as described in Section 2.4.1,
to cut the number of radar-reply pairs to consider. Following that, it would be possible
to apply the radar beam model of Figure 2.5 and the InBeam function of equation (2.2)
to determine whether a reply belongs to a radar.
This approach, while being theoretically promising, has not yet been fully explored,
and comes with some problems that - even without empirical results - are easy to foresee.
One such problem is that replies falling into the crossing beams are diﬀicult, if not
impossible to allocate to a single radar.
Still, the likelihood of such phenomena is
relatively low, and two or more allocated radars would still provide more insights to the
EUROCONTROL staff than no allocations at all. Replies falling into just one beam
would also likely outnumber the replies belonging to multiple beams, as the possibility
of an aircraft being scanned by multiple beams at once is low.
2.5
Shortcomings of the current allocation
algorithm
While the presented algorithm has been proven to be successful at allocating replies
to known-position radars, it does not account for one important element of the radar-
to-reply allocation problem - finding mobile radars that operate on the IC ”II 0”. As
mentioned before, the number, position and type of these radars is unknown, making the
allocation of replies to them in the fashion described by Section 2.4 impossible.. If these
radars were not taken into consideration during the allocation, their replies would most
likely be allocated to other, known radars, or not allocated at all. Therefore, finding the
parameters of the mobile radars is important for the success of the entire project.
2.5.1
Finding mobile radars using radar ”fingerprints”
While we do not have direct information on these radars, the replies captured by EMIT
exhibit temporal and spatial patterns that serve as hints about their presence. One of
such hints is that the replies are clustered around the geographical position of the radars,
producing the ”radar circles” shown in Figure 2.9. The reason for this well-pronounced
circular shape is the range, surveillance coverage and lockout map of the radar. It is
important to mention that these ”radar circles” are only visible if there is enough traﬀic
flying past the radar during the observation and the radar is located well within the
EMIT sensors’ coverage.
==PAGE:28==
20
2 Problem analysis
Figure 2.9: An illustration of the ”radar circles” of mobile radars.
Another very obvious fingerprint can be observed if one inspects the data in the
temporal domain. If we take the replies of just one aircraft - which is possible as replies
contain a reference to its unique ICAO24 code (as described in Section 2.2.1) - and
plot their quantity as a function of time, we can see a temporal pattern explained by
Figure 2.10.
In this simple case, the aircraft is ”scanned” by the radar beam for a
brief period, which is repeated after the radar antenna has made a complete turn. This
explains the spacing of the reply ”peaks” in the plot. The radar, which of course has a
non-zero beam width, may send multiple interrogations during a single scan, resulting
in multiple replies being sent by the aircraft. This phenomenon is represented by the
horizontal extent of the reply ”peaks” in the plot.
A third fingerprint is the so-called interrogation spacing, the time difference between
the consecutive interrogations made by a radar. This spacing depends on the setting of
the individual radar, and while it is not truly unique, we expect it to be different for
most of the radars we encounter in a small area. As replies are caused by interrogations,
the interrogation pattern is also echoed in the reply dataset, as seen in the histogram of
Figure 2.11. This histogram represents the occurrences of different reply spacings that
separate the consecutive replies of a particular aircraft.
Figure 2.10: Number of an aircraft’s replies and its correlation to the radar’s rotation.
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Key findings
21
Figure 2.11: Interrogation (reply) spacing.
The fingerprints above are the most obvious patterns one can look at when trying
to discover mobile radars on the map, which fuels the assumption that these radars
can indeed be found just by utilizing the reply dataset. In order to successfully locate
these radars, the mentioned fingerprints must likely be complemented with deeper re-
lationships, the methodologies of which will be described in the next section. Before
continuing, let us summarize what we have learnt so far about Mode-S and the past
reply-to-radar allocation efforts:
2.6
Key findings
• Radars use directional, rotating antennas to interrogate aircraft and to capture
their replies
• Due to the radars’ direction towards the sky, ground sensors can only capture the
replies with a high reliability
• The main types of replies are all-calls and roll-calls
• All-call replies contain the radar IC, roll-calls do not
• ICs are not unique - they only help to narrow down the possible radars of origin
• An algorithm has been developed that can estimate the radar beams and allocate
replies, based on known radar positions and a reply dataset
• This algorithm is not applicable to mobile radars, the number and positions of
which are unknown
• Temporal and spatial patterns (”radar fingerprints”) exhibited by the replies hint
the positions of these mobile radars
• Once we locate the unknown radars, we can have a more complete and accurate
reply-to-radar allocation
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3
Methodologies
3.1
Radar localization as a machine learning
problem
The task of extracting temporal and spatial patterns from data is a typical problem
within the realm of machine learning. For this reason it is worth checking whether the
radar localization problem can be transformed into a machine learning task and solved
by using one or more well-established methods in the field. There are three major fields
of machine learning, as follows:
• Supervised learning
• Unsupervised learning
• Reinforcement learning
3.1.1
Supervised learning
The radar localization - in theory - could be posed as a supervised learning problem, or
more specifically a classification problem. In this setting, radars would correspond to
individual classes, and each reply (observation) would be assigned one of these classes.
The problem with this approach is that a supervised machine learning model requires a
training set to learn the mapping function between observations and classes. Unfortu-
nately, we do not possess such a dataset - which would be a set of replies that already
have class labels. We could assemble one by manually inspecting a set of replies, but
then it would be nearly impossible to assemble a large enough dataset. Furthermore,
the accuracy of this supervised model would be limited to the accuracy of this manual
investigation and the quality of how this training set represents the actual data the
algorithm may later encounter.
3.1.2
Unsupervised learning
The fact that we have no class label information - and not even a known number of classes
- might direct us towards the domain of unsupervised learning. A clustering method could
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Radar localization as a machine learning problem
23
be devised to identify the ”radar circles” of Figure 2.9, using a similarity measure like
the replies’ geographic distance. Such a primitive similarity measure, however, would
likely fail as radar coverage overlaps can result in replies that are close to each other
(thus have a high similarity), yet belong to different radars. In addition, replies located
at the opposite sides of the radar coverage would have a low similarity score, even if
they belonged to the same radar. Therefore, finding an adequate similarity measure is
not trivial, which questions the applicability of clustering in this domain.
3.1.3
Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning would be the most cutting-edge approach above the other two.
It models a problem with an agent that makes observations and carries out actions in
an environment, while trying to maximize a pre-defined reward function. The actions
of the agent are guided by the so-called policy function, which the agent learns by
assessing the total reward gained as a result of its actions. We could model our radars
as agents (thus building a multi-agent system), the actions of which involve the changing
of their T, tN and BW parameters. The quality of the allocation resulting from these
radar beam parameters could be used as a reward function. While this approach is
promising, it is also not trivial to implement, due to the many open questions regarding
the choice of the reinforcement learning algorithm, the representation of the environment,
the determination of the agent’s policy function and the design of the reward function.
3.1.4
Traditional domain-specific approach
It is also very well possible that this problem does not require such a complex ma-
chine learning approach, and could be solved using a ”traditional” algorithm that takes
advantage of domain-specific assumptions on how radars and replies work. Such an ap-
proach would be generally favoured over machine learning models, as it would require
no training and perhaps not even hyperparameter tuning. Therefore, we put emphasis
on developing this approach first, and consider the machine learning options only if the
performance of the traditional approach proves to be insuﬀicient.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Methodologies
3.2
The radar localization algorithm
Using geometric relationships between the radars and the replies, the position of a yet
unknown radar can be determined if we have an estimate of its rotation period (based
on the fingerprints of Figure 2.10). Take the example of Figure 3.1, which presents the
case of two replies R1 and R2, the positions and reception times of which are known.
Let us also assume that they were captured within a single antenna turn.
Figure 3.1: Mathematical basis of the ”circle-drawer” algorithm.
Using the times t1 and t2 of the replies and our assumed T value, we can set up
the relation represented by equation (3.1), in which α is the angle at which the R1R2
line segment can be seen from the radar’s position P. The time difference of the replies
relates to the period the same way as angle α relates to a full revolution of the antenna
(note that t2 −t1 is always non-negative, as radars always rotate clockwise).
t2 −t1
T
=
α
360◦
(3.1)
Rearranging the equation yields equation (3.2), so that α can be computed:
α = t2 −t1
T
∗360◦
(3.2)
Knowing angle α, however, does not tell us the exact position P of the radar - there
are still an infinite number of possible P points from which the line segment R1R2 can
be seen at angle α. As a consequence of the inscribed angle theorem, these possible
radar locations all lie on a circular arc, given that the size of angle α or ̸ R1PR2 is fixed,
and it is subtended by the line segment R1R2.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 The radar localization algorithm
25
It is possible to derive the center point C and radius r of this circle from the known
positions of R1 and R2 and the previously computed value of α. As another consequence
of the inscribed angle theorem, we know that the central angle ̸ R1CR2 has twice the
magnitude of ̸ R1PR2, that is 2α. As C is the center and R1, R2 lie on the circumference
of the same circle, △CR1R2 is an isosceles triangle with a vertex angle ̸ R1CR2. This
angle is halved by the line laid over the circle center and the midpoint M of the line
segment R1R2.
As we know that ̸ R1CM = α and ̸ CMR1 = 90◦, we only need to compute the
length of the line segment MC to determine the position of C. We can do so by using
basic trigonometry, as in equation (3.3).
tan(α) =
R1M

CM

(3.3)
Rearranging the equation brings us to equation (3.4):
CM
 =
R1M

tan(α) =
1
2
R1R2

tan(α)
(3.4)
Due to the fact that radars always rotate clockwise, we can also determine the bearing
of point C from M, as shown by equation (3.5):
bear(M, C) = bear(R1, R2) + 90◦
(3.5)
By knowing the distance and bearing of the circle center C from M, we can also
obtain its position. Following that, we can calculate the circle radius as well, according
to equation (3.6):
r =
R1C
 =
R2C

(3.6)
By knowing C and r, it is possible to calculate the equation of the circular arc that
includes the radar’s likely position. This, however, is not a full solution, as we still do
not have the exact position of the radar. To determine that, we can take advantage of
the fact that we do not have only two, but hundreds of unique pairs of replies, based
on which we can draw multiple, unique circular arcs, as shown in Figure 3.1. As all of
these circular arcs denote the possible positions of the radar, the most likely position P
must be wherever the most of these arcs intersect, as shown in Figure 3.2.
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Methodologies
Figure 3.2: Circular arcs drawn over multiple pairs of replies.
3.2.1
Computation
While the theory might seem simple, the actual computation of the likely radar position
is not a trivial problem.
Some of the challenges that should be considered are the
following:
1. The aircraft positions have a considerable inaccuracy due to their delayed update
once per second
2. The period estimate, the most important input data of this method may also have
some inaccuracy - resulting in the generation of less accurate circles
3. The solution might be affected by replies belonging to other radars, resulting in
the generation of irrelevant circles
These challenges prove that the computation of the circle intersections is a manifold
task, towards which multiple good approaches may exist. Furthermore, it is very likely
that a solution would include some additional steps, such as the prior estimation of the
rotation period and reply preprocessing. To find the intersections of the circular arcs
themselves, two algorithms were considered, which will be covered in the next sections.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 The radar localization algorithm
27
3.2.2
Pseudorange equations
The first option, linearized pseudorange equations are inspired by the operating princi-
ple of the Global Positioning System (GPS). In loose terms, a GPS receiver estimates
its user’s position by measuring its distance or so-called pseudorange from orbital satel-
lites. These satellites transmit their own position alongside a timestamp of the data
transmission, which is intercepted by the receiver. Upon the reception of the message,
the receiver compares the timestamp to its own internal clock in order to calculate its
distance to the satellite. Each of these pseudoranges places the possible position of the
receiver on the surface of a sphere centered around a satellite.
The receiver can be
found at the intersection of these spheres, three of which (and the known surface of the
Earth) must be known in order to find one solution. This visualization of the solution
is analogous to the circle drawer method devised for our radar localization.
The key advantage of this method is that there are eﬀicient and scalable algorithms
available to solve it, such as an iterative method that solves the linearized system of
the above equations using matrix operations. The major disadvantage of this method,
however, is that a multitude of very inaccurate pseudorange measurements would have
a large effect on the radar position estimate. This is something that we would expect,
as we cannot completely filter our input replies to only include those belonging to our
radar of interest.
3.2.3
Grid-based graphical method
Another method is to find the intersection of the circular arcs using a grid-based ap-
proach. We do so by laying a grid of a selected resolution grid_res over our geographic
area of interest, and evaluate whether each of its cells lie on the circular arc in question.
We can repeat this process for all the circular arcs we have and count the total number
of arcs passing through each grid cell. The grid cell with the highest number of crossings
would denote the position of the radar. This procedure can be expressed by the pseu-
docode of Algorithm 2, where calculate_circle(T, R1, R2) is a function returning the
circle radius and center corresponding to the replies R1 and R2, based on the method
shown by Figure 3.1. Cell_on_circlular_arc(r, C, G[x, y], R1, R2) is a function that
determines whether a cell G[x, y] at grid position x, y lies on the circular arc defined by
r, C and the pair of replies R1 and R2.
Perhaps it is more intuitive to interpret the result visually, as shown in Figure 3.3. If
we assign each grid cell the number of circular arcs passing through it, we would be left
with a 2D heatmap, the maximum of which represents the most likely position of the
radar. In the figure, no intersections are marked with white, while the higher numbers
of intersecting arcs are marked with a gradually darker shade of gray.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Methodologies
Algorithm 2: Grid-based radar localization
Data:
RP: A list of pairs of replies;
n, e, s, w: The boundaries of the search area;
grid_res: The grid resolution of the user’s choice;
Result:
HM: Circle heatmap with a peak denoting the likely radar position;
P: Calculated radar position in [x, y] grid coordinates;
let G = 2D matrix of the grid cells spanning between n, e, s, w, with a resolution
of grid_res;
for each pair of replies R1, R2 in RP do
let r, C = calculate_circle(T, R1, R2) ;
let HMR1,R2 = a matrix the same size as HM, with elements initialized to 0;
for each horizontal grid position x in G do
for each vertical grid position y in G do
HMR1,R2[x, y] = cell_on_circular_arc(r, C, G[x, y], R1, R2) ;
end
end
HM += HMR1,R2;
end
let P = argmax(HM);
Figure 3.3: Multiple circles evaluated over a grid, producing a heatmap.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 The radar localization algorithm
29
The cell_on_circular_arc function works by calculating distances between the cell
corners denoted as GxyNW, GxyNE, GxySE and GxySW, and the center of the circle C,
and comparing them against the radius r of the circle, as shown in Figure 3.4. If all the
four corners are within the circle’s radius, the circle does not cross through the grid cell.
The same happens if all the four corners are outside the circle’s radius. Otherwise, the
circle intersects the grid cell. The operation can be also written as equation (3.7).
cell_on_circular_arc(r, C, G[x, y], R1, R2) =







0,
if |CGxyNW| < r ∧|CGxyNE| < r ∧|CGxySE| < r ∧|CGxySW| < r
0,
if |CGxyNW| > r ∧|CGxyNE| > r ∧|CGxySE| > r ∧|CGxySW| > r
1,
otherwise
(3.7)
This explains how circles are drawn over the grid. However, we do not work with
circles, but circular arcs. Therefore, we not only have to determine whether a grid cell
lies a certain radius away from the circle’s center point C, but also if it lies in the ”gap”
between replies R1 and R2. But what does ”between” mean? It is not as trivial as it
first seems. To determine it, we investigate the relation between the bearings of replies
R1, R2 and the grid cell center GxyC from the circle center C, as shown in Figure 3.5.
In the figure, the two cases of a grid cell lying over the circular arc’s gap are presented.
They differ in the way the bearings of R1 and R2 delimit the missing arc from the circle.
Despite the fact that radars always rotate clockwise, this gap cannot always be defined as
the collection of points for which the relation bear(C, R1) < bear(C, GxyC) < bear(C, R2)
stands. This is due to the fact that the bearing can take a value from 0° (north) to 360°
(itself not included), and the missing arc may be located over the northern bearing (as
seen on the right hand side of the figure). Based on these findings, the cell_in_gap
function in equation (3.8) tells if the grid cell falls on the missing arc (gap).
Figure 3.4: Determination of whether a cell lies on an arc.
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Methodologies
Figure 3.5: Cases of a grid cell not lying on the circular arc.
cell_in_gap(C, G[x, y], R1, R2) =













1,
if bear(C, R1) < bear(C, GxyC) < bear(C, R2)
1,
if [bear(C, R2) > bear(C, R1)]∧
[bear(C, R1) < bear(C, GxyC) ∨bear(C, GxyC) < bear(C, R2)]
0,
otherwise
(3.8)
Using the above function, we can extend the cell_on_circular_arc function as in
equation Algorithm 2:
cell_on_circular_arc(r, C, G[x, y], R1, R2) =













0,
if |CGxyNW| < r ∧|CGxyNE| < r ∧|CGxySE| < r ∧|CGxySW| < r
0,
if |CGxyNW| > r ∧|CGxyNE| > r ∧|CGxySE| > r ∧|CGxySW| > r
0,
if cell_in_gap(C, Gxy, R1, R2) = 1
1,
otherwise
(3.9)
So far, we have cleared the basic operation of the grid-based approach, which serves as
a mathematically sound and interpretable procedure for locating mobile radars. While
it returned promising results during testing, some disadvantages were also uncovered.
These include a reduced accuracy in some edge cases and a high computational cost
in general. To address these issues, multiple optimizations were devised, which will be
covered in the next few sections.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 The radar localization algorithm
31
3.2.4
Selecting the ”right” pairs of replies
If we drew a circle for every possible pair of replies we have in the dataset, we would
generate a vast amount of inaccurate and redundant circles. For this reason, we avoid
pairs of replies
1. coming from the same aircraft
2. that are closer than 50 NM to each other
3. coming from an aircraft pair that has already been considered
4. that have a time difference larger than T/2
The first point is fairly easy to explain. As the aircraft position is only updated once
per second in the replies, it is very likely that aircraft replies in the same scan would
have the same apparent positions. The replies positioned at the same location would
lead to an inscribed angle α = 0, which would hinder the computation of the circular
arcs laid down in Section 3.2.
The second point is an extension of the first one. If two aircraft fly too close to each
other, their replies will define a very small α angle. This, coupled with the inaccuracies
in the reply position data and the estimated radar rotation period would lead to very
large and inaccurate circular arcs. To avoid this phenomenon, we do not consider pairs
of replies that are closer than 50 NM to each other.
The third point inhibits the creation of many similar, redundant circular arcs. As
we usually work with short (minute-long) datasets, the movements of the aircraft are
negligible compared the distances involved in the circle calculation. For this reason, it
does not make sense to pair replies from the same two aircraft more than once. This
would only lead to several pairs of almost identical reply positions, resulting in many,
almost completely overlapping circular arcs. Of course, this would come at a higher
computational cost, something we avoid by having this restriction.
The last restriction limits the time difference that can be present between a pair of
replies. If we take two replies with a very long time difference spanning multiple rotation
periods, the error of the assumed rotation period adds up and becomes increasingly more
significant in the calculation of angle α, covered in equation (3.2). The time difference
limit of T/2 addresses this problem, while still enabling the largest, and most favorable
α = 180◦angle between the replies.
The addition of these restrictions or ”filters” resulted in the first working version
of the algorithm that we could call a baseline.
As a first test, we extracted a data
set comprising replies in the area of Kecskemét, Hungary, where a known radar with a
period T ≈5.7s is located. We filtered this dataset to contain 100 replies that have the
same IC as the radar. Figure 3.6 represents the results of the algorithm applied on this
dataset, consisting of 368 circles converging near the true position of the radar.
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Methodologies
Figure 3.6: A heatmap and a subset of the constituent circular arcs.
3.2.5
Improving robustness
One of the algorithm’s disadvantages manifest when we use a high grid resolution. In
this case, the grid cells become smaller, reducing the likelihood of the circular arcs
intersecting within a single cell. This would result in a few, lower peaks in the heatmap,
instead of one well pronounced optimum.
As a solution, each time when we draw one circular arc and produce a partial heatmap
(denoted HMR1,R2 in Algorithm 2), we convolve it with a 2D Gaussian before adding it
to the final heatmap. This way, the accuracy gain of the higher grid resolution remains,
as the grid cells lying on the arcs will still be given the highest values. The 2D Gaussian
convolution will, however, also assign some likelihood to the surrounding cells, that
declines with the cell’s distance from the arc.
This convolution can be separated into two 1D Gaussian convolutions over the x
axis and y axis of the grid, the kernels of which are characterized by the (discrete
approximation of the) Gaussian probability density function with a µ = 0 mean, and a
user-tunable σ variance parameter, as shown in equation (3.10).
Nx(0, σ)
(3.10)
The result of this operation is illustrated by Figure 3.7. On the left image which does
not have the mentioned smoothing, multiple peaks are visible because the contours are
too thin and do not intersect in a single point. Convolving the circular arcs with a Gaus-
sian results in a better pronounced peak, to which nearby, but not exactly intersecting
arcs also contribute.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 The radar localization algorithm
33
Figure 3.7: A heatmap generated without and with Gaussian smoothing.
3.2.6
Removing false contours
The initial tests have also uncovered another anomaly: ”fake” heatmap peaks appearing
near the positions of the replies, based on which the circular arcs are drawn. The cause
is that one particular reply R1 may be paired with many other replies R2, R3, ..., Rn,
resulting in a lot of distinct arcs on the grid. These arcs, however, would all contain the
reply R1 itself, generating a false peak in the surrounding grid cells.
As a countermeasure, we remove a ”padding distance” dp = 50NM length of the arc
right next to the reply, by modifying the previously introduced cell_in_gap function.
This function uses the reply bearings from the circle center, and as such, we have to
transform our padding distance dp into the padding angle β, the value of which is
computed as equation (3.11).
This computed padding angle is subtracted from the
bearing of R1 and added to the bearing of R2, while paying attention to the fact that a
valid bearing value must be smaller than 360° - as shown in Figure 3.8. Based on these
findings, we update our cell_in_gap function with the one presented by Algorithm 3.
β(r) = dp
r
(3.11)
Figure 3.8: Circular arc with the extra gap left around the replies.
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Methodologies
Algorithm 3: cell_in_gap(C, r, G[x, y], R1, R2)
Data:
C: Circle center;
r: Circle radius;
G[x, y]: Grid cell at grid position x, y;
R1, R2: Pair of replies;
Result:
in_gap: Boolean, which is 1 if the grid cell is in the gap, 0 otherwise;
let in_gap = 0;
let beta = dp r;
let pad_bear_R1 = (bear(C, R1) - beta) mod 360°;
let pad_bear_R2 = (bear(C, R2) + beta) mod 360°;
let GxyC = center of grid cell at grid position x, y;
let bear_GxyC = bear(C, GxyC);
if pad_bear_R1 < bear_GxyC and bear_GxyC < pad_bear_R2 then
in_gap = 1;
else if pad_bear_R2 < pad_bear_R1 then
if pad_bear_R2 < bear_GxyC then
in_gap = 1;
else if bear_GxyC < pad_bear_R1 then
in_gap = 1;
end
end
Figure 3.9: Original heatmap and a smoothed one with the fake peaks removed.
Applying this correction changes the heatmap in a way presented by Figure 3.9. The
peak at the radar’s position is more pronounced, while the peaks around the replies are
reduced, resulting in a higher overall contrast.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 The radar localization algorithm
35
3.2.7
Performance optimizations
The above optimizations have considerably improved the reliability and accuracy of the
algorithm, but there is still one important issue to take care of: performance.
The
algorithm carries out a lot of useless computations and does so in a very ineﬀicient
manner. The number of these operations could be greatly reduced by adding a few
modifications that will be explained in detail in the following few sections.
3.2.7.1
Bounding frame
One striking issue is that no matter how big of a circular arc is drawn on the grid, all of
the cells are checked for a possible intersection. We cannot afford this, especially as the
number of cells to be checked increases as a quadratic function of the grid resolution,
resulting in a quadratic time complexity. In order to greatly cut down the number of
required cell-specific computations, we consider only a small subset of the grid cells that
are likely to contain the arc. This subset of cells is designated as the bounding frame
visible in Figure 3.10.
While the edges of this bounding frame might seem trivial to compute due its planar
representation in the figure, we must not forget that the circular arc is evaluated over
a grid defined by the coordinates of the Earth sphere. To make sure that every point
of the arc is contained within this bounding frame, we must consider an important
characteristic of this sphere, namely that the distance covered by a degree of longitude
increases from the poles towards the equator.
Due to this consideration and the fact that Europe is located on the northern hemi-
sphere, the longitudes delimiting the width of the outer box must be measured at the
extreme north, while the longitudes delimiting the width of the inner box must be mea-
sured at the extreme south. We can find the main points defining these limits, by using
their distances and bearings from the circle center and the great circle destination for-
Figure 3.10: The bounding frame and its main defining points.
==PAGE:44==
36
3 Methodologies
mula, as in equation (3.12), then use the resulting latitude / longitude coordinates to
set the boundaries of the bounding frame in equation (3.13).
Bout,NW = destination(C, r ∗
√
2, 315◦)
Bout,S = destination(C, r, 180◦)
Bin,N = destination(C, r
√
2, 0◦)
Bin,SE = destination(C, r, 225◦)
(3.12)
latout,N = Bout,NW.lat
latout,S = Bout,S.lat
lonout,E = C.lon + (C.lon −Bout,NW.lon)
lonout,W = Bout,NW.lon
latin,N = Bin,N.lat
latin,S = C.lat −(Bin,N.lat −C.lat)
lonin,E = Bin,SE.lon
lonin,W = C.lon −(Bin,SE.lon −C.lon)
(3.13)
3.2.7.2
Vectorized computation
Using the bounding frame, we can select a small area of the grid in which the circular arc
should be drawn, drastically reducing the number of useless cell-specific computations
and thus the runtime. The algorithm, however, suffers from another, additional source
of ineﬀiciency, which stems from how the grid cells are processed and represented in the
memory.
In Algorithm 2, one can see several for loops iterating through the cells of the grid,
one-by-one. Once per each iteration, a cell’s information is accessed from the memory,
which is then followed by the creation of several intermediate variables that get discarded
by the end of the iteration. This frequent movement of small chunks of data in and out of
the memory poses a serious performance bottleneck. Therefore, it would make sense to
replace the most performance-heavy parts of the code with vector and matrix operations,
something that the majority of recent computational hardware support.
These parts are mainly the cell_on_circular_arc function defined in equation (3.9)
and the cell_in_gap function (Algorithm 3).
The vectorized cell_in_gap function,
called cell_in_gap_vec is represented by Algorithm 4. The function arranges the grid
cell centers into an 1D array, on which vectorized operations are carried out. A vec-
torized bearing function (bear_vec) computes the cell center bearings from the circle
center C, that are compared against the reply bearings. These comparisons are carried
out as vectorized boolean operations, resulting in a much faster execution.
The cell_on_circlular_arc_vec function also uses a similar approach, presented by
Algorithm 5. It assembles an (N x 4) matrix of cell corners, in which each row contains
==PAGE:45==
3.2 The radar localization algorithm
37
Algorithm 4: cell_in_gap_vec(C, r, Gc, R1, R2)
Data:
C: Circle center;
r: Circle radius;
GC: 1D array of grid cell centers;
R1, R2: Pair of replies;
Result:
in_gap: Array of booleans the length of G, the elements of which are 1 if the
corresponding grid cell is in the gap, 0 otherwise;
initialize elements of in_gap to 0;
let beta = dp / r;
let pad_bear_R1 = (bear(C, R1) - beta) mod 360°;
let pad_bear_R2 = (bear(C, R2) + beta) mod 360°;
let bear_Gc = bear_vec(C, GC);
in_gap = (pad_bear_R1 < bear_GC & bear_GC < pad_bear_R2) |
[pad_bear_R2 < pad_bear_R1 & (pad_bear_R2 < bear_GC | bear_GC <
pad_bear_R1) ]
the four corners of one out of N grid cells. The distances of these corners from the center
point C of the circle can be computed using a vectorized distance function, and compared
against the radius r, using broadcasting. The result is within_rcorners, a matrix of the
size (N x 4) containing booleans denoting whether a grid cell corner is within the circle
radius.
Via a row-wise summation, the counts of corners within the circle radius are com-
puted for each grid cell, resulting in the N-long vector of cnt_within_r. An element
in this vector having the value between 0 and 4 means that at least one of its corners
are within the radius, while the other corners are outside, meaning that the cell lies on
the arc. This comparison can be also carried out as a vectorized operation, resulting in
the N-long vector of on_circular_arc. This vector is then compared to the result of the
cell_in_gap function to output the final result.
As we have the optimized cell_on_circular_arc_vec function, we can include it into
the main algorithm, as presented in Algorithm 6. Perhaps the most apparent change is
that instead of the former nested for loop, there is just one loop that iterates through
the pairs of replies. For each reply pair, the radius r and center C is calculated for
the corresponding circle, by the function calculate_circle. Following that, an empty
partial heatmap HMR1,R2 is initialized for the grid circle to be drawn. Based on the
findings of Section 3.2.7.1, a bounding frame is computed, which is used to filter the
grid cells of interest into Gmask. Instead of the nested for loop, the previously defined
cell_on_circular_arc function processes this Gmask cell array in a vectorized manner, to
determine whether the cells fall onto the arc. Based on its results, the partial heatmap
is drawn and added to the final heatmap.
==PAGE:46==
38
3 Methodologies
Algorithm 5: cell_on_circular_arc_vec(r, C, G, R1, R2)
Data:
C: Circle center;
r: Circle radius;
G: Array of grid cells;
R1, R2: Pair of replies;
Result:
on_circular_arc: Array of booleans the length of G, the elements of which are
1 if the corresponding grid cell is on the circular arc, 0 otherwise;
initialize elements of on_circular_arc to 0;
let Gcorners = an array of grid cell corners;
let dcorners = great_circle_vec(C, Gcorners);
let within_rcorners = dcorners < r;
let cnt_within_r =
PN
j within_rcorners,ij;
let on_circular_arc = 0<cnt_within_r & cnt_within_r<4;
let GC = an array of grid cell centers;
let in_gap = cell_in_gap_vec(C, r, Gc, R1, R2);
let on_circular_arc = on_circular_arc | !in_gap;
3.2.7.3
Multiple-step execution
Another method of performance improvement is to run the radar localization algorithm
in two steps, in which
• The first pass runs through the entire search area, using a low-resolution grid
• The second pass runs through a smaller area, using a higher-resolution grid cen-
tered around the result of the first pass.
In other words, the first pass would return just a very vague estimate of the radar’s
position, that would be used to narrow down the search area for a more restricted, but
higher-resolution search. As compared to just one iteration using a high-resolution grid,
this approach would return results of comparable accuracy, yet significantly reduce the
runtime of the algorithm.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 The radar localization algorithm
39
Algorithm 6: Grid-based radar localization, using performance optimizations
Data:
RP: A list of pairs of replies;
n, e, s, w: The boundaries of the search area;
grid_res: The grid resolution of the user’s choice;
Result:
HM: Circle heatmap with a peak denoting the likely radar position;
P: Calculated radar position in [x, y] grid coordinates;
let G = 2D matrix of the grid cells spanning between n, e, s, w, with a resolution
of grid_res;
for each pair of replies R1, R2 in RP do
let r, C = calculate_circle(T, R1, R2) ;
HMR1,R2 = a matrix the size of HM, with elements initialized to 0;
let latout,N, lonout,E, latout,S, lonout,W, latin,N, lonin,E, latin,S, lonin,W = The
latitudes and longitudes delimiting the circle’s bounding frame;
let Gmask = an array of grid cells inside the circle’s bounding frame;
let cell_on_arc = an array of booleans marking whether each cell of Gmask
is on the segment;
cells_on_arc = cell_on_circular_arc_vec(r,C,Gmask,R1,R2);
for each index i, cell Gmask_xy in Gmask do
if cells_on_arc[i] then
let [x, y] = The grid position of cell Gmask_xy;
HMR1,R2[x, y] = 1;
end
end
HM += HMR1,R2[x, y];
end
let P = argmax(HM);
==PAGE:48==
40
3 Methodologies
3.2.7.4
Performance gains
To visualize the performance benefits the aforementioned optimizations can achieve, con-
sider Table 3.1. The algorithm was run on excerpts of the previously shown Kecskemét
dataset, containing 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 and 1000 replies. Due to the restrictions
mentioned in Section 3.2.4, these replies resulted in 368, 1269, 2187, 3107, 3846 and
5818 circular arcs being drawn in the grid. The segments were drawn using the original
algorithm, and its gradually optimized versions. The first optimized version adds the
bounding frame, followed by the addition of vectorized computation. The fully opti-
mized version also includes the two-step approach. Every experiment was conducted
using a grid resolution of 0.05◦, while the two-step solution was performed on a coarse
1◦-resolution grid, followed by a more precise 0.05◦-resolution grid with linear dimensions
5 times smaller than those of the original search area.
As expected, the runtime of the algorithms grow as a near-linear function of the
number of circles drawn.
The optimizations, however, bring a much greater variety.
The computation of cells only inside the bounding frame reduces the runtime to about
1/4 of the original algorithm, which is further sped up by an order of magnitude if
vectorization is used. The multi-step approach seemingly incurs a constant performance
penalty that diminishes when a greater number of circles is computed.
This latter
optimization results only in slight performance improvements compared to the other
optimizations.
Table 3.1: Performance gains resulting from the optimizations.
Nreplies
Ncircles
Original
+Bnd. frame
+Vector.
+Multi-step
100
368
177.37s
42.76s
2.20s
2.25s
200
1269
657.58s
160.17s
6.69s
2.87s
300
2187
1196.25s
315.95s
11.70s
5.60s
400
3107
1661.98s
448.87s
15.98s
13.22s
500
3846
2081.97s
561.67s
20.06s
16.50s
1000
5818
2818.89s
997.23s
29.69s
24.47s
Looking at the results, we can consider the performance optimizations successful,
as their combined application leads to a performance gain measurable in two orders of
magnitude.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Estimation of the rotation period
41
3.3
Estimation of the rotation period
As discussed in Section 3.2, the circle drawer algorithm requires a rotation period esti-
mate to find the position of the radar. To approximate the period of the yet unknown
radar, we turn towards the temporal patterns in the data described in Section 2.5.1. As
shown in Figure 2.10, if we investigate the replies of a single aircraft, we can discover
temporal clusters and gaps of replies that correspond to how the aircraft is scanned by
the rotating radar beam. If the aircraft is flying within the coverage of one radar, these
reply clusters are likely to be spaced at one rotation period away from each other, which
would make our task trivial. Unfortunately, in contrast to this scenario, real-life data
poses additional challenges, such as:
1. Aircraft very likely fly in the coverage of multiple mobile radars at a time, thus
their replies may exhibit multiple different periodicities
2. The effects of different radars vary per aircraft, given the latter’s position in the
search area
In order to search for periodicities, we must obtain a function that represents the
number of replies captured as a function of time, which is not directly available in
our dataset. As the emissions of replies are discrete-time events, we cannot define this
function in continuous time. Instead, we can bin the replies into small time intervals
that cover the timeframe of the dataset. This would result in a histogram, which we call
the ”temporal reply density function” or TRDF. Using a reasonably small bin size, we
can use this function to find radar rotation periods with a high accuracy.
This function, however, cannot be generated for the entire dataset at once, as aircraft
at different positions are scanned at different times by the same radars. This means that
there is a relative phase shift between the periodic scans of different aircraft. Due to this
phenomenon a TRDF generated from all the replies would not exhibit the periodicities
of the radars, but very likely just some noise. Therefore, the TRDF must be generated
and investigated on a per-aircraft basis.
3.3.1
Autocorrelation
Autocorrelation measures the Pearson correlation between a signal and the delayed copies
of itself (also called lags). If a signal is periodic, then its autocorrelation function will
produce high responses for lags corresponding to the signal’s period. This property of
the autocorrelation function could be utilized to find the rotation period of the radar. If
supplied with a high-enough resolution TRDF of an aircraft, the autocorrelation function
can detect these periodicities with a high accuracy, as shown in Figure 3.11.
In the figure, aircraft-specific TRDFs are shown, that were generated from an one-
minute-long reply dataset covering the surroundings of two radars: Koševac, Serbia and
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Methodologies
Figure 3.11: Temporal reply density and corresponding autocorrelation functions.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Estimation of the rotation period
43
Písek, Czech Republic. The two radars have rotation periods of T≈4s and T≈5s respec-
tively. In each row, the TRDF (left) and the corresponding autocorrelation function
(right) of one certain aircraft are visible. Depending on the position of the aircraft in
the search area, the period of a certain radar might be overrepresented in the autocorrel-
ogram. This is the case for the top row, in which the aircraft was flying in the coverage
of Koševac, and outside the coverage of the Písek radar. The aircraft below was flying
in the coverage of Písek, and outside Koševac’s coverage. The bottom aircraft was flying
in the coverage of both radars, resulting in the periodicities of both radars appearing in
the autocorrelogram.
To make sure that all radars and the corresponding periodicities are considered, we
could compute the autocorrelation of all the aircraft-specific TRDFs in our dataset, then
take its average. This results in the average autocorrelation shown in Figure 3.12. The
added advantage of the average autocorrelation function is that it reduces the noise in
the autocorrelogram - in this example, the T≈4s and T≈5s are clearly visible. The
disadvantage of this approach is also apparent: the lags corresponding to the multiples
of radar periods also produce high correlations. For instance, due to this reason, we
cannot be sure if the peak at T≈8s corresponds to the period of a third radar, or just a
multiple of the Koševac radar’s period.
Figure 3.12: Average autocorrelation for all aircraft in the dataset.
3.3.2
Fourier transform
The Fourier transform decomposes a continuous signal into the superposition of sinusoid
functions. The result is a complex-valued function, the magnitude and phase of which
denotes the amplitudes and phase shifts of these sinusoids, respectively. These charac-
teristics led to the Fourier transform’s widespread application in signal processing. The
Fourier transform also has a fast implementation to work with discrete and finite sig-
nals, such as digital samples of real-life signals. These characteristics make the Fourier
transform a promising candidate for our period finding task.
==PAGE:52==
44
3 Methodologies
As with the autocorrelation, we would run the Fourier transform on aircraft-specific
TRDFs, to extract the main frequencies, which we would expect to be the inverses of
the radar rotational periods. However, due to the characteristics of the temporal reply
density function, the usefulness of the resulting spectogram are questionable. In many
cases, aircraft produce just one reply per radar scan, which show up as a series of Dirac
delta functions, also called a Dirac comb.
An inherent property of the Dirac comb
function is that its Fourier transform is also a Dirac comb function, as shown by the
example of Figure 3.13. Finding a single ”main frequency” is therefore not possible with
this method.
Figure 3.13: A simulated TRDF with a period of T=10s and its frequency spectrum.
3.3.3
Custom period-shift heatmaps
Continuing in the track of Dirac comb functions, an alternative way of finding the
rotational period was devised.
This method relies on the generation of a simulated
Dirac comb defined by its period T and its phase shift s.
This Dirac comb is then
multiplied elementwise with the TRDF of the aircraft, then the result is summed into a
scalar value. This value will be higher if the period and the phase shift of the simulated
Dirac comb matches with those of the TRDF. In order to find the radar period, we can
carry out this operation for all possible values of T and s. The results can be visualized
in the T-s heatmap as shown in Figure 3.14.
The generated heatmap, however, only represents the periodicities found in the
replies of one aircraft.
In order to take the replies of all aircraft into account, this
T-s heatmap must be computed as many times as many aircraft exist in the dataset,
then summed elementwise. In the resulting aggregate heatmap we would expect the
peaks to appear at scattered shift and just a few distinct period values - the rotation
periods of the radars we are looking for. We then take the columnwise sum of these
heatmaps, and expect high responses at T values corresponding to the radar periods, as
seen in the examples of Figure 3.15.
The figures show the T-s heatmaps generated from the Koševac-Písek dataset also
presented in Section 3.3.1. The heatmap and its columnwise sum below was generated
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Estimation of the rotation period
45
Figure 3.14: Generation of a T-s heatmap value from a Dirac comb
and the aircraft TRDF.
Figure 3.15: Aggregate T-s heatmaps for all aircraft,
with different corrections applied.
==PAGE:54==
46
3 Methodologies
by the process mentioned above, but for some reason we cannot see the periods of the
Koševac (T≈4s) and the Písek radars (T≈5s). Also, there is a very apparent tendency
in the columnwise sums, as they drastically decline with an increase of T. For these
reasons, we apply some corrections to the heatmaps to make the radar periods stand
out.
In order to remove the apparent tendency of the columnwise heatmap sums, we must
understand what might be causing it. The reason behind this phenomenon is that a Dirac
comb with two times of the radar period has twice the probability of lining up with the
TRDF of the aircraft, and producing a high response in the heatmap. Generalizing this
further, the heatmap response will be a linearly increasing function of the Dirac comb’s
period.
To correct for this phenomenon, we divide the heatmap responses by T, as
shown in the middle image.
Now the horizontal tendency is removed, but the two radar periods at 4s and 5s
are still not visible. Due to the limited timespan and finite resolution of the TRDFs
used, as well as the ranges of possible shift and period values, some Dirac combs might
still with TRDFs in a way that it produces high responses. This results in a low-level
noise scattered around large areas of the heatmap, leading to a reduced contrast. To
counterbalance this issue, we apply an elementwise square operation on the heatmap, to
make the highest responses (located at the right T and s values) stand out. The effects
of this correction are visible on the right side.
Now the radar periods do stand out, but also do their multiples. This is likely a
result of the tendency correction mentioned before, and there does not seem to be a
trivial correction for it. Finding the ”right” peaks automatically in these elementwise
sums is not as trivial as it seems to us, human viewers, and would likely involve some
complicated peak-finding algorithm. This, coupled with the fact that these heatmaps
are very expensive to compute, led to our decision not to further progress with it.
3.3.4
Reply time difference histograms
The fourth method uses a different approach to aggregate the replies and determine the
radars’ rotation periods. For each aircraft, it computes the time difference ∆t between
every pair of replies belonging to the same aircraft, then plots every such time difference
in the dataset into a histogram. An example of this histogram is visible in Figure 3.16.
The advantage of this approach is that the time differences are always measured
relative to a reply, which eliminates the different phase shifts that are found between
the aircraft-specific TRDFs. As a result, the histogram contains peaks that correspond
to the actual radars’ periods and its multiples, without any phase shift. To extract the
periods from this histogram, we can calculate an autocorrelogram, visible on the right.
While the autocorrelogram correctly represents the true radar periods at T=4s and
T=5s, it also produces high responses for apparent, non-radar-originated periodicities.
This marks the main disadvantage of this method for which we refrain from using it.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Estimation of the rotation period
47
Figure 3.16: Time difference histogram and its autocorrelation function.
3.3.5
Selection of the applicable period estimation
algorithm
In the previous sections, we have discussed four different methods that could be used
to find the period of unknown radars, based on the temporal patterns exhibited by the
replies. These methods were:
• An autocorrelation-based solution
• Fourier transform
• Custom period-shift heatmaps
• Reply time difference histograms
As our ultimate goal is a fully-automated radar localization solution, we must select
one of the above approaches as the period estimation element. We have seen that the
methods presented above can yield period estimates with varying degrees of reliabil-
ity. For instance, we had no success with the Fourier transform, and our period-shift
heatmaps provided ambiguous results at a high computational cost. The reply time
difference histograms seem to be interpretable to us humans, but less so to algorithms.
In contrast, the autocorrelation-based method provides well-defined period estimates
with minimal noise and ambiguity, while it is also relatively fast to compute. That is
why settled for the latter solution to extract the periods of unknown radars from reply
datasets.
==PAGE:56==
48
3 Methodologies
3.4
Data filtering
The circle drawer algorithm relies heavily on the assumption that the pair of replies the
individual circles are based on are generated by the same radar. Otherwise the geometric
relations described in Section 3.2 will not stand. In real-life scenarios, however, no matter
how we select our search area, it will almost always contain replies from multiple radars,
as radar coverages are tightly positioned next to each other. This can especially be the
case with mobile radars, the coverages of which can greatly overlap. Therefore, to obtain
the best results and to cut the number of non-relevant circular arcs to draw, we must
apply some data filtering.
3.4.1
Reply spacing-based filtering
One option to filter the replies to those of just one radar is based on the reply (interro-
gation) spacing as presented in Figure 2.11. As mentioned before, interrogation spacing
is a radar-specific setting, which we expect to be different per each radar (however, it is
not designed to be unique). If we measure the time difference between the consecutive
replies of each aircraft, and create a histogram of all of these time differences, we obtain
a reply spacing histogram as seen in Figure 3.17. This histogram would likely have high
occurrences of spacings that correspond to the radars’ true interrogation spacings.
In a simple case, we expect a radar to have one constant reply spacing, that is usually
a few milliseconds long. However, interrogations can have a reply probability instruction
coded into them, which would cause the transponder to respond to only a certain fraction
of these interrogations. In addition, due to external disturbances, replies could also get
lost before EMIT could intercept them. This would result in apparent reply spacings
that are the integer multiples of the radar’s setting.
Figure 3.17: Filtering of replies based on reply spacing.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Data filtering
49
Under the assumption that the most occurring reply spacing in the histogram must
be the radar’s original setting, we can filter the replies based on it. For each reply, we
measure the time difference of the preceding and the succeeding reply, and investigate
whether any of the two corresponds to the assumed radar reply spacing or its multiples.
If they do, then the replies are kept, and if they do not, the replies are discarded, as
they must likely come from another radar.
The effectiveness of this method, however, is hindered by multiple corner cases that
characterize the operation of many radars. For instance, the reply spacing is not always
a precise value, but something that is subject to some jitter. Furthermore, some radars
use an alternating reply spacing. In these cases the filtering algorithm would still likely
keep replies belonging to just one radar, but it would also discard a large portion that
actually belong to the same radar.
3.4.2
Period-based filtering
A radar-specific subset of the replies can be also obtained if we filter based on the periodic
patterns exhibited by the replies of one certain aircraft. As mentioned in Section 2.5.1,
this is caused by the aircraft being scanned by the radar once every rotation. As the radar
beam has a nonzero width, this scan also takes a certain amount of time to complete,
which is proportional to the beam width. This phenomenon is illustrated by Figure 3.18,
in which the dashed lines mark the edges of the radar beam.
If we plotted the replies of the aircraft as a function of time, we would observe a
pattern as shown in Figure 3.19.
Each of the vertical lines represent a reply, while
the dashed lines represent the times the aircraft was in the center of the radar beam.
The gray areas mark the timespans when the aircraft was being scanned by the radar.
We call the length of this timesmap t_scan. The individual scans are spaced a radar
rotation period T away from each other. Each of this aircraft-specific reply datasets
include some degree of phase shift s, which we define as the time difference between the
beginning of the dataset and the center of the first radar scan. There are also replies
that are not generated by the radar in question, thus do not exhibit the same periodicity.
These replies are marked with a shade of gray.
Figure 3.18: A radar scanning an aircraft.
==PAGE:58==
50
3 Methodologies
These out-of-beam replies are not relevant for finding our radar, therefore we should
discard them. Our problem is, that we do not know the mentioned scan time tscan nor
the phase shift s. To determine tscan, we can use the relation described by equation
(3.14). Since we also do not possess the beam width, we use an estimated value of
BW = 10◦, a beam width that is on the wider end of possible BW range, but is still
narrow enough to filter out most of the non-radar originated replies.
tscan
T
= BW
360◦
tscan = BW
360◦∗T
(3.14)
Finding the phase shift s requires a more convoluted solution represented by Fig-
ure 3.20. To achieve it, we try to align the beam centers (shown as dotted lines) with
the replies that we have. The quality of the beam centers’ alignment to a certain reply
can be represented as the time difference between the reply and the closest beam center.
This beam center might be before or after the reply, the time differences of which are
denoted as d1 and d2.
Figure 3.19: Replies of an aircraft as a function of time.
Figure 3.20: Time difference of a reply from the scan (beam) centers.
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Data filtering
51
Therefore, the distance between the reply and the closest beam center can be written
as min(d1, d2).
In order to find the best shift value, we try to minimize this time
difference for all aircraft replies, which can be described as equation (3.15):
s = argmin
s
X
i
min[d1(T, s)i, d2(T, s)i]
s = argmin
s
X
i
min[trep,i −s mod T, T −(trep,i −s mod T)]
(3.15)
where trep,i is the time of the i-th reply. A solution for this expression can be found
by evaluating it for a possible range of 0 < s < T values.
Once the shift value is
obtained, we can determine whether each of the replies were emitted during the scan
using equation (3.16) and filter the replies accordingly.
in_scan(T, s, trep,i) =



1,
if min[trep,i −s mod T, T −(trep,i −s mod T)] < tscan/2
0,
otherwise
(3.16)
3.4.3
Reply substitution with beam-centered replies
The circle drawer algorithm possesses a considerable caveat that we have skipped over
in our discussion so far. The estimation of angle alpha (as described in Section 3.2),
thus the generation of the circle becomes inaccurate, if the two replies are taken from
different positions inside a wide beam. In this case, the relationship (3.2) between the
time difference of the replies and angle alpha will not stand. To counter this problem,
we can re-use our concepts from Section 3.4.2.
As we have a knowledge of the exact scan times of the aircraft (defined by period
T and phase shift s), we can substitute our replies in a scan with a beam-centered
theoretical reply, as shown in Figure 3.21. We can do so for every scan of every aircraft,
leaving us with just one reply per scan. This would result in less but much more accurate
circular arcs being drawn.
Figure 3.21: Beam-centered replies in each scan.
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In the previous chapter we have discussed the theoretical basis of locating mobile radars.
We have covered the circle drawing algorithm which carries out the localization, and
several data filtering and radar period finding approaches which supply input data of
the necessary quality for the tool. These modules can be chained together into a pipeline
that would clean the input dataset, find the radar period, estimate the radar’s position
and allocate replies to it.
In order to test the eﬀiciency of these modules, each of them was implemented as a
Python function. Python is a high-level interpreted language that offers a wide range
of compiled libraries, many of which can utilize high-performance computing hardware.
The high-level abstraction combined with the performance of the compiled libraries
makes Python a very popular language for rapid prototyping of data science applications,
such as our radar localization tool. In our example, we use the Pandas library for data
I/O and formatting tasks, such as handling the .csv and .xlsx files, the formats in which
our input data is usually present. We work with Numpy to represent the data arrays
in the memory and to carry out all our computations, such as the grid and geodetic
calculations of the circle drawer algorithm. Additional libraries are also used for smaller
tasks, such as Statsmodels to calculate autocorrelations and Matplotlib to visualize the
results.
4.1
Testing framework
As discussed in the previous sections, the mentioned data formatting, filtering, period
finding, radar localization and reply allocation modules require several types of input
data and user-given parameters to operate. In addition, the choice and order of these
modules is not trivial, as some steps, such as those carrying out data filtering can be
applied multiple times or left out entirely from the radar localization workflow. For this
reason, the graphical user interface pictured in Figure 4.1 was created.
The GUI can control the mentioned modules and lets the user to assemble a radar
localization / reply allocation pipeline consisting of the modules of their choice. The
program features self-contained modules that correspond to the algorithms discussed in
Chapter 3. All of these modules take inputs and produce outputs that adhere to the
data formats described in Section 2.2. In order not to get lost within the various data
files, the tool uses a ”workspace” directory, where the modules save their output.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Testing framework
53
Figure 4.1: The radar localization GUI and an open workspace in Windows Explorer.
This workspace-based approach means that the application does not have to contain
any state (such as a filtered dataset or half-allocated replies). On the contrary, the
output of individual modules is always saved in the file system. This lets the user to
flexibly feed the output of one module to another, and also to suspend and continue the
work later if they desire. Prior to showing some examples of how this GUI can be used
to create a radar localization pipeline, we should take a deeper look at the individual
modules the GUI offers. As seen in Figure 4.1, the controls of these modules are grouped
in frames, which are called
1. Data preparation and workspace settings
2. Data filtering
3. Radar - EMIT - reply coverage
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Results
4. Rotation period search
5. Radar localization
6. Radar-reply allocation & parameter search
The first module lets the user to set a workspace folder, in which the residual files
of the program modules are saved. It also offers the option to transform EMIT reply
datasets and Eurocontrol radar database files into .csv files that correspond to the reply
and radar data formats described in Section 2.2. Following these transformations, the
datasets are ready to be processed by the other modules of the program.
The second, ”Data filtering” module offers a few filtering options one would use when
working with a dataset freshly downloaded from EMIT. These include the reply spacing-
based filtering tool covered in Section 3.4.1 and an area-based filtering option that would
restrict the replies to an user-defined search area, defined by the northern/southern
latitudes and western/eastern longitudes.
The third, ”Radar - EMIT - reply coverage” module is just an auxiliary tool to be
used in conjunction with the Radar-reply allocation & parameter search module, and
its use will be covered with that of the latter module.
The ”rotation period search” module returns the most prevalent periodicity that can
be found in an user-supplied reply dataset. It uses the average autocorrelation-based
period finding approach covered in Section 3.3.1 to determine the likely radar rotation
periods present in the reply data.
The most complicated module is the radar localization tool, which embodies the
grid-based circle drawing algorithm described by Section 3.2.3. The user here has the
option to specify an input reply dataset, and several options governing the algorithm’s
behaviour. The latter include the estimated rotation period of the radar to be found, the
grid resolution (in degrees), and the sigma parameter of the Gaussian smoothing kernel
specified in equation (3.10). To improve runtime, there is also a subsampling option,
which reduces the number of replies in the dataset to an user-specified value of N.
These samples are not selected at random, but picked equidistantly from the input array
of replies, to make the results reproducible. There is also the possibility to substitute
the replies in the dataset with beam-centered replies, as explained in Section 3.4.3.
By default, the radar localization module outputs only the most likely latitude and
longitude coordinates of the radar, which can be supplemented by other data outputs at
the cost of considerably increased runtime. These include the plots of the final heatmap
and / or the individual circular arcs. In addition, the newly located radar can be saved
as an individual radar .csv instance, or be appended to an existing .csv radar database
- all of which adhere to the radar entity formatting set in Section 2.2.
The last module, ”Radar-reply allocation & parameter search” contains the iterative
reply allocation and radar parameter search algorithm discussed in Section 2.4. It takes
an user-specified radar and reply dataset (and also the program’s internal EMIT receiver
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Example test cases
55
database) as an input, and returns their modified copies appended with the allocation
information as an output. As additional options, it is also possible to write the corre-
sponding plots into the workspace, and to output allocated and unallocated replies into
separate data files.
The operation of this last module can be optimized if the input data is pre-processed
by the auxiliary ”Radar - EMIT - reply coverage” module mentioned before. The role
of the latter tool is to verify whether a radar lies within the range of any EMIT receiver,
and if there are any replies in that radar’s vicinity. If this is not the case, then there
is no point in taking the radar into consideration when allocating replies. Given user-
specified radar and reply datasets, and the program’s internal EMIT receiver database,
this module can flag out-of-range radars that should not be considered by the radar-reply
allocation module, saving some computational resources.
4.2
Example test cases
With the testing framework developed, we can finally start creating workflows that find
radars and allocate replies, using the aforementioned modules. To validate our results,
we run our tests on reply datasets that were generated by known radars. This way we
can measure the position estimation error, the difference between the estimated and
true position of the radar. Once we have found a particular radar position, we could try
running the reply allocation and parameter estimation algorithm on it to see whether
it returns valid T, tN and BW values, and whether the established beam model of the
newly found radar can truly account for the replies in the surrounding area.
4.2.1
Localization of one known radar
We begin with an example workflow of finding one radar, a relatively easy scenario. In
this test case, we try to locate the radar of Kecskemét Airport, Hungary, the parameters
and interrogation code of which are known. We begin by downloading an one-minute-
long dataset from EMIT, consisting of 8818 all-call replies containing the Kecskemét
radar’s IC. The positions of the replies can be seen on the left side of Figure 4.2. As
visible, the replies are mainly scattered in two circular clusters around Austria and
Hungary, with some outliers being as far as the Iberian peninsula. The ”circles” of replies
indicate the presence of two radars, one of which should be the radar of Kecskemét.
To make our job easier, we filter down the dataset to only include the reply cluster in
the east, by keeping only the replies that fall within a box defined by 43◦< latitude < 51◦
and 13◦< longitude < 25◦. Following that, we check whether it is possible to filter the
data based on interrogation spacing, as seen in Figure 4.3. The most replies seem to
have a spacing of around 7 milliseconds and its multiples, while a considerable number
of replies are spaced at 6 milliseconds from each other. There are also a few replies with
a spacing that do not correspond to either of the 7 ms and 6 ms peaks, likely caused by
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Results
measurement inaccuracies and other interfering radars. As we have already filtered our
data to contain mostly the cluster of replies surrounding our suspected radar, we expect
the majority of replies to exhibit a spacing characteristic to that radar. Therefore, we
discard every reply that does not exhibit a reply spacing of 7 ms and its multiples, as
seen in the bottom histogram of Figure 4.3.
Following these filtering steps, we are left with the replies displayed on the right
hand side of Figure 4.2. Note the absence of replies above western Hungary and most
of Austria. These replies, which are visible in the unfiltered dataset, likely belong to
the radar in the west, and were discarded by the reply-spacing-based filtering algorithm.
Now as we are left with an array of 2309 replies that likely come from the Hungarian
radar, we can proceed to find the radar’s period.
We can simply do so by entering our filtered dataset into the period search module,
which yields the average TRDF autocorrelogram represented by Figure 4.4, with a very
apparent rotation period of T = 5.67s and its multiple at about 11.3s. As we have a
filtered dataset and a known rotation period, we can now locate the radar using the circle
drawing algorithm. As our default settings, we use a grid resolution of 0.05◦, a σ of 1
and take a sample of 1000 replies to draw the circular arcs. For the sake of this example,
we generate a heatmap using these replies, and another one using their beam-centered
substitutes, resulting in the left and right side plots of Figure 4.5, respectively.
The obtained results are almost identical, with a slightly more concentrated peak in
the reply-centered approach. The reply-centered heatmap has also produced a smaller
position estimation error of 1.53 NM, while the first approach resulted in a considerably
higher, 3.18 NM difference from the radar’s true position. However, it is also important
to mention that both of these results approach the limits posed by the 0.05◦grid res-
olution. In this case, the longer sides of a grid cell (parallel to the Earth’s meridians)
would be about 3 NM long, as one degree of latitude has an arc length of approximately
60 NM.
Figure 4.2: The Kecskemét dataset before and after data filtering.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Example test cases
57
Figure 4.3: The Kecskemét dataset’s reply spacing histogram before and after
filtering.
Figure 4.4: The Kecskemét dataset’s average TRDF autocorrelogram.
Figure 4.5: Heatmaps of the Kecskemét dataset without and with beam-centering.
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Results
By increasing the grid resolution and varying the smoothing parameter σ, the position
estimation error could be further decreased. For instance, a test run using the same set of
replies, but a grid resolution of 0.01◦and a σ value of 10 (to counteract the phenomenon
covered in Section 3.2.5) yielded an estimation error of just 0.86 NM. This accuracy
increase came with a high computational cost: the five times higher resolution resulted
in 25 times more cells and an impractically long runtime of several minutes. Even higher
grid resolutions did not result in further accuracy improvements. This is likely due to
other error components present in the calculation, such as a slight error in the period
estimation resulting in circular arcs of the wrong sizes, inaccurate aircraft position data
due to their one-second delay, and the effects of our simplified Earth representation.
4.2.2
Localization of multiple known radars
The previous test case showed a very simple case when mainly the replies of a single radar
occupy the search area. To pose a more diﬀicult challenge to our algorithm this time,
we try to work in a search area that includes multiple radars with overlapping coverages.
This way, we simulate two closely located mobile radars which would have largely over-
lapping clusters of replies, to test whether our solution can distinguish between multiple
radars in such a situation.
For this use case, we download a different dataset containing two known radars
with overlapping coverages, situated in Písek, Czech Republic and Koševac, Serbia. The
dataset, spanning a minute, contains 16715 all-call replies from the entire Europe. There-
fore the first step is to pre-filter it to contain our search area of the two mentioned radars,
easily identifiable by their ”radar circles” drawn by the corresponding replies. The search
area this time is a box defined by 40◦< latitude < 55◦and 7◦< longitude < 26◦and
contains 9535 replies. This transformation is visualized by Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: The Písek-Koševac dataset before and after filtering to the search area.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Example test cases
59
We could continue to filter the data to the replies of just one radar, by using the reply
spacing-based approach. Based on the reply spacing histogram shown in Figure 4.7 this
could be only possible, if one radar had a spacing of 8 ms, while the other had 9 ms. In
real use cases, however, this might not always be the case. Some radars interrogate with
an alternating spacing, and in other cases, the spacings of different radars may overlap,
hindering the use of this filtering method.
For this reason we do without the reply
spacing-based filtering for now, as later we will see that our circle-drawing algorithm
can still find the right solutions, given some alternative data transformation methods.
Figure 4.7: The reply spacing histogram of the Písek-Koševac dataset.
Instead, we continue straight with the period finding algorithm, which returns the
expected periods T ≈4s of Koševac and T ≈5s Písek in the average TRDF autocorrelo-
gram shown in Figure 4.8. Since the 4.95s period (likely belonging to the Písek radar) is
more pronounced, we use it as an input for our first radar localization run. We run the
circle-drawing algorithm on a 0.05◦-resolution grid and a sample of 1000 replies filtered
and beam-centered according to the T=4.95s estimated period. The result, which has a
3.21 NM position estimation error, is shown by Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.8: The estimated period of the Písek radar.
==PAGE:68==
60
4 Results
Figure 4.9: The circle heatmap with a peak close to the Písek radar.
Is it possible to improve this result? As we see in the heatmap, there are many replies
centered around Serbia and the eastern part of Poland, which do not seem to belong to
the Písek radar. These replies negatively influence the circle drawing algorithm, thus
they should be removed. To achieve this we run the radar-reply allocation module using
the vague radar position that we have just estimated, and separate the replies into a
dataset that belongs to the Písek radar and a dataset that contains the rest of the replies.
The estimated parameters of the radar are shown in Figure 4.10, in which the plots
clockwise from the top left are the T - tN heatmap, the antenna direction ”sawtooth”
plot, the reply density - beamwidth function and the delta bearing function. The first
plot shows very distinct peaks at T = 4.95s and tN values which are spaced one period
away from each other, indicating a very good parameter fit. The sawtooth plot shows
that a major portion of the replies did not get allocated, as they are outside the simulated
radar beam. The reply density function indicates an optimum beam width of BW ≈5◦,
which is also verified by the delta bearing plot in the bottom right.
This reply allocation is perhaps better visualized on a map, as seen on the left side
of Figure 4.11. Here the allocated replies are shown as green Xs. Based on these replies,
we attempt a second run of the circle drawer algorithm with the same settings as before,
resulting in the circle heatmap visible on the right. While this heatmap does not have
a much different appearance than the first one, the resulting position estimation error
is only 1.67 NM, a considerable improvement from the 3.21 NM error of the first run.
Now we should check whether we can find the other radar in Serbia. We start by
taking the ”leftover” replies (shown as red Xs in Figure 4.11, which were not allocated
to the Písek radar, to get rid of that radar’s influence in the following computations. We
run our period finding algorithm on this dataset, to verify that the period of T = 3.95s
indicated in Figure 4.8 is correct. The output of this step in Figure 4.12 indeed shows
an unquestionable period of T = 3.95s, with the period of the Písek radar now gone.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Example test cases
61
Figure 4.10: The estimated parameters of the Písek radar.
Figure 4.11: Replies allocated to the Písek radar, and the new circle heatmap.
Green ”X”s denote the allocated replies, and red ”X”s the unallocated ones.
==PAGE:70==
62
4 Results
Figure 4.12: The estimated period of the Koševac radar.
Now as we have a set of replies and a period estimate that likely belong to the
Koševac radar, we use our circle drawer algorithm to find its position. We use the same
parameters as in the previous runs, namely the subsampling to N = 1000 replies, the
grid resolution of 0.05◦, and the sigma value of 1. This results in the heatmap visible in
Figure 4.13 and a position estimation error of 1.90 NM.
We can also try to improve the estimation accuracy for this radar in the same way as
we did for the Czech radar. It is, however, already close to the resolution that the grid
allows, therefore, it is very well possible that no improvements will follow. Nonetheless,
it is interesting to see if the reply allocation and parameter estimation algorithm can
provide valid parameters for this radar. The results of this algorithm are represented by
Figure 4.14. The radar parameters are well pronounced, just as in the case of the Písek
Figure 4.13: The circle heatmap with a peak close to the Koševac radar.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Example test cases
63
radar, hinting a very accurate position estimate. This time, the sawtooth and delta
bearing plots indicate that the majority of replies have been allocated to this radar,
which is expected, as we already removed the Czech radar’s replies from the dataset.
Figure 4.14: The estimated parameters of the Koševac radar.
We can also visualize the replies allocated to the Koševac radar on the map, as
shown in the left of Figure 4.15, in which the allocated replies are shown as green Xs.
Running the circle drawer algorithm on these replies and the default parameters yields
the heatmap visible on the right. As expected, the estimation error did not improve,
but stayed at 1.95 NM, which is almost the same as the 1.90 NM error of the first run.
Now with the second radar have been found, we should summarize the findings of
this test case. We have managed to locate the radars at Písek and Koševac using a
dataset of overlapping replies. We have done so with a level of accuracy close to what is
allowed by the grid resolution. In addition, we have also found a consistent set of radar
parameters, further supported by the allocated replies exhibiting the all-call ”reply rings”
on the map, a characteristic of civilian radars.
==PAGE:72==
64
4 Results
Figure 4.15: Replies allocated to the Koševac radar, and the new circle heatmap.
Green ”X”s denote the allocated replies, and red ”X”s the unallocated ones.
4.2.3
Localization of an unknown mobile radar
The test cases discussed in the previous sections were just ”toy problems”, something
we already knew the solutions for, as the radars we tried to locate are stationary radars
at known positions.
Therefore, it would be interesting to prove the algorithm’s use
in a real-life scenario involving a truly unknown mobile radar. One of such scenarios
happened on the 11th of November 2021, when EMIT picked a high number of Mode-S
replies close the northern tip of Jutland, Denmark, shown in Figure 4.16. Based on the
position of these replies, the corresponding radar could have been either on the Danish
or Swedish mainland, the island of Læsø or a nearby ship. And as such, the question
is whether our algorithm is capable of giving an estimate of this radar’s position that is
accurate enough to unambiguously pinpoint its likely operator.
What we already know is that this overinterrogation event occurred on the inter-
rogator code ”II 0”, indicating the presence of a mobile radar in the area. Therefore,
we download a minute-long dataset containing 114819 II 0 all-call replies from all of
Europe, and filter it to a box-shaped search area, the boundaries of which are defined as
54◦< latitude < 61◦and 5◦< longitude < 18◦. We also carry out a reply spacing-based
filtering, as we expect one major source of interrogations in the area. This expectation is
proven to be correct by the reply spacing histogram of Figure 4.17, in which one distinct
spacing at about 9 ms is visible, likely belonging to the overinterrogation source. These
filtering operations reduce the number of replies to just 4613.
We continue by finding the rotation period of the unknown radar, using the average
TRDF autocorrelogram shown in Figure 4.18. A period of T = 2.00s is clearly visible.
We input the filtered dataset and this period estimate into our circle drawer algorithm,
alongside the subsampling to N = 1000 replies, grid resolution of 0.05◦, sigma of 1 and
the reply centering turned on. This results in the heatmap at the top of Figure 4.19.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Example test cases
65
Figure 4.16: High reply densities close to North Jutland (shown in shades of red).
Figure 4.17: Reply spacings of the Scandinavian dataset before and after filtering.
The peak’s position in the middle of the Kattegat gives us a very strong hint that
the source of the overinterrogation is located on a ship. To verify this assumption, we
can use online ship tracking services such as VesselFinder, and check whether there
are any radar-equipped ships close to the heatmap’s peak. As shown in the bottom
plot of Figure 4.19 this is very much the case, as the Dutch warship HNLMS Karel
Doorman was passing just 2 NM away from the pinpointed location during the dataset’s
timeframe. The ship, which features a helicopter landing deck and a mission control
center, is known to house an air surveillance radar on its mast, making it the most likely
suspect of overinterrogation [Nav22].
Using the known position of the radar and our reply dataset, we could also try to
infer the characteristics of this radar, using the radar-reply allocation module of our
==PAGE:74==
66
4 Results
Figure 4.18: The estimated period of the unknown radar.
Figure 4.19: The circle heatmap and the located shipborne radar in VesselFinder.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Example test cases
67
program. This attempt yields the plots represented by Figure 4.20. The period/north-
pointing time heatmap shows very distinct peaks with the height of over 1400 replies in
the beam. This suggests that our radar position estimate was right, as in other case these
peaks would be much less pronounced. The sawtooth, reply density and the antenna
direction sawtooth plots, however, show some problems with the reply allocation. As
it is apparent in the delta-bearing plot, the radar must either have a very wide radar
beam (a characteristic of military radars), or unsuppressed sidelobes that increase the
apparent width of the main beam. Our tN, T and BW finding algorithm only searches
up to a beamwidth of BW = 12◦, that is why replies with ∆BW > 6◦are marked as
out-of-beam.
As a result, many replies do not get allocated to the radar, even though they seem to
correspond to the radar’s rotation in the sawtooth plot. This shows an inherent limita-
tion of our iterative radar parameter search and reply allocation algorithm. Despite these
mistakes, we can consider this test case as an overall success, as the overinterrogation’s
source has been found with a great accuracy.
Figure 4.20: The estimated parameters of the shipborne radar.
==PAGE:76==
68
4 Results
4.3
Summary of the results
To clarify the findings of the previous sections we have shown three different test cases,
the results of which are summarized by Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Summary of test cases and achieved accuracies.
#
Dataset / search area
Accuracy
1
Replies surrounding the known radar of Kecskemét
1.53 NM
2
Replies surrounding the two known radars of Písek and Koševac
1.67 NM
& 1.90 NM
3
Replies surrounding an unknown radar near Denmark
2 NM
• In test case #1, we have proven the performance of our radar localization pipeline
in a very simple test scenario, in which most of the replies belong to the suspected
radar.
• In test case #2, We have proven that our data preprocessing and period finding
tools can distinguish between the overlapping replies of multiple radars and find
their positions accurately.
• In test case #3, we have used our filtering modules to distinguish the replies coming
from an unknown overinterrogation source. We have located the source with a level
of accuracy that enabled us to identify it as a moving shipborne radar.
• We have also found out that the accuracy of these results is limited by several
factors, such as:
- Grid resolution
- Inaccuracies in the period estimation
- Aircraft position data delayed by up to one second
- The effects of our simplified geographic reference system
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Automation of the radar localization
pipeline
In the previous chapter, we have presented three different test cases in which we tried
to find one or multiple radars in a search area. The results of these cases show that the
assembly of a pipeline from our data filtering, period finding, radar localization and reply
allocation modules is not trivial, especially if there are multiple radars in our search area.
This conflicts with our ultimate goal, namely the creation of an automated system that
can find unknown mobile radars with minimal or no human intervention.
To represent the open questions that must be solved to achieve this goal, the flowchart
of Figure 5.1 was created, which depicts the likely structure of such an automated
radar localization pipeline. This pipeline, as in all our test cases, would start with the
acquisition of a dataset that contains the replies of the interrogator code in question.
This step would be followed by the identification of spatial reply clusters on the map
of Europe (as in Figure 2.9), something that we have always done manually so far.
This is due to the nature of the reply data: variations in traﬀic density, the effects of
radar-dependent interrogation settings and the unknown number of clusters makes the
selection of an adequate clustering algorithm and its parameters challenging. Therefore,
this step still requires significant amount of research to be automated.
As the next step, we would select one of these reply clusters, and set our search area
to contain only the replies of that cluster. This would be followed by the reply spacing-
based filtering, to further filter the dataset down to those of just one radar. However, we
have seen that the reply spacing-based filtering is not always a viable solution, making
the applicability of this step in an automated pipeline questionable. After this step
the rather self-explanatory period finding, radar localization and reply allocation steps
would follow.
At this point we could refine the radar position estimate by re-running the circle
drawer algorithm on the replies that we have just allocated. This, however, has not
always improved the accuracy in our test cases, and as such, the applicability of this
step must be considered. Regardless of this choice, we now have a radar instance with
known parameters that we can export, and a partition of replies based on their allocation
status. Using the unallocated replies we can continue to find other, yet uncovered radars.
==PAGE:78==
70
5 Discussion
Figure 5.1: Flowchart of the suggested radar localization pipeline.
The number of individual radar localization iterations - the loop’s exit condition - is
also yet to be decided. It is a value that should be set dynamically, as different clusters
of replies may contain different number of radars to be located. One solution would be
to keep the loop running as long as there is a certain number of yet unallocated replies.
How this threshold value should be set, however, is also an open question.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Integration into the full reply-to-radar allocation system
71
Once no enough replies are left in the given cluster to carry out another radar finding
iteration, the pipeline would move towards the next cluster of replies. Eventually, it
would finish processing all the identified clusters and stop, leaving an array of newly
found radar instances added to our database of known radars.
5.2
Integration into the full reply-to-radar
allocation system
With the likely mobile radar localization pipeline discussed, the only remaining thing to
clarify is how it would be integrated into the full reply-to-radar allocation system, the
devised structure of which can be seen in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Flowchart of the full reply-to-radar allocation system.
The system would begin its operation by downloading all replies that are intercepted
by EMIT over Europe, including all-calls of every IC and also roll-calls. This operation
would be followed by a loop that iterates through every IC. In each iteration, this full
dataset would be filtered to contain only the all-calls of the IC in question, which in
turn would be fed into our radar localization pipeline (highlighted with thick contours)
presented in the previous section. With all the radar positions on this IC known, the
==PAGE:80==
72
5 Discussion
system would allocate the IC-specific all-call replies, using the iterative algorithm of
Section 2.4. The loop would then continue to repeat this operation for all ICs.
After all the all-call replies have been allocated and all the radar beams have been
modelled, the only remaining task is the allocation of roll-call replies. As in the data
transformation step in Section 2.4, this subroutine would also generate possible pairs of
radars and replies, and check whether a reply would fall into the radar beams that we
have just modelled. This last step, however, still requires some development to ensure
that it could run using a reasonable amount of computational resources.
The allocation of the roll-call replies marks the end of the series of computations
that estimate the radar parameters and allocate the replies. Once these steps are all
complete, the modified radar instances and the replies alongside their allocation statuses
would be saved, leading to the program’s termination.
5.3
Future work
With the structure of the complete reply-to-radar allocation algorithm envisioned in the
above chapters, we should reflect on the future tasks that have to be carried out in order
to build EUROCONTROL’s near-real-time surveillance frequency monitoring system.
These tasks include:
1. Testing the full reply-to-radar allocation algorithm
2. Further performance optimizations
3. Deployment
Once we have addressed all the open questions of the above sections and built a full-
scale prototype, we could move towards benchmarking the allocation performance of the
algorithm, using a set of performance indicators. One of the most obvious performance
measures would be the percentage of all the replies that are allocated, which reflects on
how well the modeled radar beams account for the replies generated over Europe. Beams
of nearby radars are also likely to overlap from time to time as they rotate, and as such,
replies caught in their intersection would likely be assigned to multiple radars. Therefore,
it would be also advantageous to measure the percentage of replies that get allocated
to one, two or more radars, as the end goal is to find truly overinterrogating radars and
the least number of false-positive suspects. These tests should be run many times, on
datasets that cover the widest possible range of traﬀic phenomena and overinterrogation
scenarios.
If the allocation performance of the algorithm is deemed suﬀicient, we should work
further to optimize its computational performance. EUROCONTROL’s end goal is to
have a system that can carry out the frequency monitoring near real-time, preferably
once every minute. Based on the performance benchmarks of Table 3.1, the current
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Future work
73
incomplete Python implementation would require far more time to run, although this
disadvantage can also be partially attributed to the lower-end testing hardware than the
one we would expect for the deployment. Regardless of the hardware, there is still room
for optimizing the algorithm itself, such as implementing a greater degree of parallelism
both in the radar-reply allocation and the radar localization algorithms.
As soon as the allocation performance, resource usage and runtime of the algorithm
is brought to the desired level, the prototype would be turned into a requirements
specification. This would effectively be a blueprint of the application that would be
deployed into EUROCONTROL’s infrastructure, considering additional issues such as
interfacing with EMIT’s API, selection of the underlying hardware and security matters.
The deployed algorithm would also likely be implemented in a different technology than
Python, such as C++, to further improve its computational eﬀiciency.
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
As a conclusion of this thesis project, let’s reiterate its goal and the results we have
delivered. The end goal of this research was the development of a near-real-time system
that can monitor the Mode S surveillance frequency and pinpoint radars responsible for
the possible overinterrogation of aircraft transponders.
At the beginning of the project we had an algorithm that could allocate Mode S
replies to known-position radars, and as such, find the possible sources of overinterro-
gation. This solution, however, is just a partial solution, as it cannot allocate replies
to mobile radars, the positions of which are unknown. Therefore, we have devised the
”circle drawing algorithm” a grid-based graphical radar localization approach based on
spatial and temporal patterns, or so-called radar ”fingerprints” in the reply dataset. Af-
ter having developed the mathematical concept of the said localization algorithm, we
have turned towards the implementation, which returned promising results upon the ini-
tial tests conducted on test datasets with known radars. Several reliability issues were
identified, such as the algorithm’s sensitivity to replies coming from different radars,
which we tackled with some improvements to the algorithm itself and the development
of different period finding and data preprocessing methods that enhance the quality of
the input data.
We have also optimized and tested the performance of this radar localization algo-
rithm, which resulted in a runtime in the range of few seconds. Considering the per-
formance we have measured coupled with suﬀiciently high-performance hardware, we
believe that the algorithm could indeed form a part of a near-real-time reply-to-radar
monitoring application. These developments were followed by the testing of the circle
drawing algorithm and related data preprocessing methods, using a graphical user inter-
face built for the purpose. We measured the accuracy of our approach using datasets
containing one and multiple known radars, both in which we managed to minimize the
position estimation error to a range of just 1-2 nautical miles. We have also investigated
a ”real-life” case involving an unknown source of overinterrogation, in which we have
successfully managed to track the source down to the radar of a moving ship.
Following the testing, we have investigated how we could fully automate this radar
localization pipeline and include it into a near-real-time reply-to-radar allocation appli-
cation. However, due to the short amount of time available for this thesis project, the
actual implementation of the full system remains to be completed. Nevertheless, in the
light of the test results, we can conclude that our algorithm would be an useful and
feasible complement to the radar-to-reply allocation framework.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[11]
“COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) No 1207/2011 of
22 November 2011 laying down requirements for the performance and the
interoperability of surveillance for the single European sky.” In: OJ L 305
(2011), page 35.
[Age14]
European Union Aviation Safety Agency. Annual safety review 2014. 2014.
url: https://www.easa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/dfu/203807_
EASA_SAFETY_REVIEW_2014.pdf (visited on January 25, 2022).
[Bod19a]
Jérôme Bodart. Mode S Interrogator Code Allocation Status - Cycle 30 -
Surveillance/MICA Workshop. 2019. url: https://www.icao.int/MID/
Documents/2019/MICA/MICA-MID%20-%20WP%2010a%20-%20MICA%20Status%
20-%20Cycle%2030.pdf (visited on January 25, 2022).
[Bod19b]
Jérôme Bodart. Mode S Surveillance Principle - Surveillance/MICA Work-
shop. 2019. url: https://www.icao.int/MID/Documents/2019/MICA/
MICA-MID%20-%20WP%2002%20-%20Mode%20S%20Surveillance%20Principle.
pdf (visited on January 25, 2022).
[EUR20]
EUROCONTROL. Guidelines on the Assessment of Ground-based Surveil-
lance Interrogations. 2020. url: https://www.eurocontrol.int/sites/
default/files/2020-09/eurocontrol-guidelines-assessment-ground-
based - surveillance - interrogations - ed - 2 - 0 . pdf (visited on Jan-
uary 25, 2022).
[Nav22]
Royal Netherlands Navy. Joint logistic Support Ship (JSS). 2022. url: https:
//www.defensie.nl/organisatie/marine/materieel/schepen/joint-
logistic-support-ship-jss (visited on January 25, 2022).
[Sun21]
Junzi Sun. The 1090 Megahertz Riddle: A Guide to Decoding Mode S and
ADS-B Signals. 2nd edition. TU Delft OPEN Publishing, 2021. isbn: 978-94-
6366-402-8. doi: 10.34641/mg.11.
==PAGE:84==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
