==PAGE:1==
Technical University of
Denmark
M.Sc. Thesis: Multi-agent Coordination via Plan
Recognition
Daniel Greve Lauritsen (s164398)
February 13, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Summary (English)
This report is predominately a theoretical survey report about plan and goal recognition. The
objective of this report is to introduce the concept of plan and goal recognition, introduce uniform
terminology to help diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent problems within the ﬁeld of research, as well
as detail how plan and goal recognition has seen improvements since its inception. Speciﬁcally,
the report will greatly focus on Landmarks, that is to say the report will introduce, deﬁne and
describe landmarks; how they can be generated, what diﬀerent types of landmarks exists, how
can landmarks be used, prominent works in which landmarks were used, and how they this all
relates back to plan and goal recognition.
Additionally the report will relate all of these elements back to the concept of multi-agent col-
laboration, speciﬁcally in the MASokoban domain. Throughout the report, references to this
domain and problem will be made, to create a ﬂow between the introduced theories and to jus-
tify why certain theories are mentioned and discussed but not deeply deﬁned and explored.
The report will end with a design document, in which a design for combining the discussed the-
ories is provided, such that the combination of these theories could be used to create a working
MASokoban solver.
Page i
==PAGE:3==
Resume (Dansk)
Dette er primært en teoretisk undersøgelse rapport omhandlende plan og mål genkendelse. For-
målet med denne rapport er at introducerer koncepterne i plan og mål genkendelse, såvel som
at introducerer generelt anvendelig terminologi indenfor, området som kan hjælpe med at diﬀer-
entierer mellem forskellige problemer indenfor forskningsområdet. Rapporten vil også gennemgå
diverse publiceserede teorier som forbedre resultaterne indenfor forskningsområdet.
Speciﬁkt så vil rapport primært fokuserer på Landmarks, dvs. rapporten vil introducerer land-
marks, deﬁnerer og beskrive landmarks, beskrive hvordan landmarks kan blive genereret, hvilke
slags landmarks der ﬁndes, og hvordan alt dette relaterer tilbage til plan og mål genkendelse.
Derudover vil rapporten også relaterer alle disse elementer til multi-agent samarbejde, speciﬁkt
i MASokoban domænet. Løbende igennem rapporten, så vil der blive refereret tilbage til dette
domæne, i et forsøg på at skabe en rød tråd i rapporten, såvel som for at begrænse dybden
hvorved diverse emner vil blive diskuteret og forklaret.
Rapporten vil afslutte med et design dokument, hvori der diskuteres hvordan de introducerede
teorier kan sammensættes til en sammenhængende løsning, som så kan løse problemer indenfor
MASokoban domænet.
Page ii
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was written as part of the fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.
in Computer Science and Engineering at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark, under the supervision of Thomas Bolander of
DTU Compute.
The thesis started on 23/08-2021 and concluded on 13/02-2022.
The thesis amounts to 30 ECTS points.
Page iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Resume (Dansk)
ii
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Preliminary Theory
3
2.1
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Plan Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Why Plan Recognition? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Plan Recognition Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Plan Library
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Plan Recognition Paradigms
11
3.1
Shared Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Implicit Plan Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Plan Recognition As Planning (PRaP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
==PAGE:6==
3.3
Explicit Plan Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Multi-Agent Plan Recogntion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.1
Counter Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Improving Plan Recognition
17
4.1
Landmarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.1
Landmark Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.2
Generating Landmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.3
Landmarks in Plan Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Multi-Agent Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.1
Multi-Agent Collaboration using Plan Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.2
Landmarks in Counterplanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Goal Recognition Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.1
Active Goal Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Domain Independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Designing a solution for MASokoban
37
5.1
Plan Recognition for Conﬂict Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Planning Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Evaluation of the Theory Presented for use in MASokoban
39
7
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
42
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The idea of human-level recognition has long been a dream within Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
A
nursing robot that can read a person’s emotions from their facial expressions or voice and respond
accordingly, or a car that can realise if another vehicle intends to stop or if a collision is imminent
should the car keep driving, or a warehouse robot that can independently realise what work it
should do based on the work all the other robots are doing.
In psychology, such a level of recognition is known as theory of mind; the ability to recognise
the plans, goals, emotions and general mental state of another, by means of "putting yourself in
their shoes". To a human, the idea of considering "how would I behave, if I were them?" or "if I
were them, what would I do?" is entirely natural and many people can do so subconsciously, at
least to a limited extent.
To give an example, if you see a person look directly at a coﬀee machine for a second or two,
you will naturally deduce that they might want coﬀee. If you see a person walking towards said
coﬀee machine while they are looking at it, you will immediately realise that they are planning
to get some coﬀee. If you see a person waiting by a coﬀee machine with empty hands, you will
realise that they are waiting for coﬀee, however, if they are standing there while drinking coﬀee
you will instead assume they are waiting for a colleague.
In Artiﬁcial Intelligence, this speciﬁc type of behavioural recognition is known as Plan and
Goal recognition; the ability to recognise the goal(s) of other agents, as well as their plan for
how to obtain that goal. To properly perform such recognition, the AI must perform Activity
Recognition, that is, the AI must perceive and recognise an activity being performed by another
agent, in order for the AI to recognise that agent’s plans and goals.
The purpose of this paper is to deﬁne, highlight and discuss Plan and Goal Recognition as a
Page 1
==PAGE:8==
Introduction
whole, as well as discuss important discoveries in the ﬁeld and discuss more recent developments
on how to perform such recognition. Finally, these theories will be discussed as to their use in
Multi Agent Coordination, i.e. in the completion of tasks which require multiple acting agents.
Speciﬁcally the idea is to create a system in which multiple independent agents can cooperate with
all other agents present, purely by recognising the plans and goals of the other agents present,
i.e. the idea is to create a system in which agents can cooperate without communication.
To limit the scope of this paper, a Multi-Agent variant of the Pathﬁnding domain Sokoban will be
used to provide examples and explanations in the design and implementation chapter, although
the ideas discussed should be usable in any plan recognition domain. The multi-agent variant of
Sokoban involves multiple teams of agents who can push blocks around. Each team is noted by
a colour unique to that team. A team may only push blocks of the same colour or of a neutral
colour which any team may interact with. A level is only beat when all teams have achieved
their goals, meaning that each team must ensure their own blocks do not prevent other teams
from achieving their goals.
The paper will predominately explore the use of landmarks in planning and plan recognition.
This is done due to landmarks being the current state of the art in many planning solutions and
because of how well they can be translated to work in plan and goal recognition.
The paper is structured as follows:
In chapter 2 the preliminary theory will be discussed. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce
the basic, ground level theory of plan recognition that is needed to understand the rest of this
paper. It will introduce the terminology used in the report and it will introduce what types
of recognition problems exists and what the diﬀerences and similarities between the diﬀerent
problems are.
In chapter 3 the core theory will be discussed; what are the current paradigms in plan and goal
recognition, what general approaches are used in plan and goal recognition, what were the initial
solutions in each paradigm, i.e. what solution created the paradigm that other solutions follow,
etc.
In chapter 4 improvements to plan and goal recognition will be discussed. What is the state of
the art in plan and goal recognition, how were the initial solutions in the diﬀerent paradigms
improved, how do the improvements overlap to create even bigger improvements?
In chapter 5 the main program will be designed and discussed; how were the implementations
implemented to ﬁt a multi-agent variant of Sokoban?
In chapter 6 the test results of the program will be discussed; how well did the implementa-
tion perform? Are landmarks useful in MASokoban or in Multi-Agent Collaboration based on
Landmarks?
Page 2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Preliminary Theory
It is important to understand preliminary theory before we delve into deeper discussion - for
that, we need to deﬁne the terminology used in this report and to limit the scope of the sur-
vey. Speciﬁcally, the this report will build upon the terms and deﬁnitions found in the book,
"Introduction to Symbolic Plan and Goal Recognition"[1], as the book aims to create uniform
terminology for the distinctions in approach seen in the ﬁeld of plan and goal recognition, which
will be useful for the purposes of this survey. Furthermore a few core concepts will be discussed,
such that the founding principles are known when more complex theories are discussed.
2.1
Terminology
The aforementioned terminology[1] will be quickly recounted, such that it can be used going
forward.
Actor
An actor in this context is an agent who is performing observable actions. For instance,
a football player is an actor, because we can see when they are performing certain actions, such
as running, standing, signalling, diving, shooting, etc.
Observer
An observer in this context is an entity which observes actors and attempts to make
reasoning about them; it is the entity that is attempting to perform plan and goal recognition.
Note that the observer can itself be an actor, however, it need not be an actor.
Page 3
==PAGE:10==
Preliminary Theory
Types of Recognition Problems
Recognition problems will be deﬁned as at least one of
the three following recognition problem areas: Activity Recognition, Goal Recognition, & Plan
Recognition.
• Activity Recognition concerns the recognition problem of recognising an activity; it is
the problem of observation and interpreting the raw observed data in a meaningful man-
ner.
For instance, observing that a person and a ball are moving alongside each other, and
recognising that the person is kicking the ball forward in a speciﬁc general direction.
As such, activity recognition can be seen as providing the input for Goal and Plan recog-
nition, both of which deal with recognition on higher levels of abstraction.
• Goal Recognition concerns the recognition of an actors goals based on the given obser-
vations; it is the problem of realising what an actor is ultimately trying to achieve with its
actions.
For instance, activity recognition realises that a person is moving a ball in a general direc-
tion, but goal recognition aims to recognise why the person is moving the ball in the ﬁrst
place, e.g. the goal might be "score a goal".
Therefore, goal recognition can be seen as the ﬁnal state of any plan, either partial or
complete, that an actor is performing. This must hold as any plan without a goal is simply
a sequence of random actions without a purpose.
• Plan Recognition concerns the recognition of an actors intended method of achieving a
goal; it is the problem of realising why an actor is performing its current action, and which
action the actor is likely to perform next and/or which unobserved action the actor has
likely performed to get to its current point in the plan.
For instance, if a person moving a ball has the objective of scoring a goal, then one plan
to achieve this goal might be to pass the ball to an uncontested player on the same team.
Another plan might be to dash directly towards the goal using the shortest, most direct
route possible.
To surmise, one could argue that any plan recognition problem relies on ﬁrst solving the activity
recognition problem, as observed actions are needed to recognise the goal being pursued; and the
pursued goal must be recognised in order for the recogniser to recognise the complete plan.
Similarly, any goal recognition problem relies on ﬁrst solving the activity recognition problem.
Note that only the results of activity recognition are required as input; it is therefore not necessary
to describe the speciﬁcs of activity recognition when detailing a goal or plan recognition solution,
as describing the required inputs will suﬃce.[1]
Page 4
==PAGE:11==
Preliminary Theory
Types of Plan Recognition
To recognise the plan of an actor, an observer must itself be
capable of planning, as it would otherwise be unable to infer anything from its observations.
There are two primary types of plan recognition in this context; Explicit Plan Recognition and
Implicit Plan Recognition. These two forms of plan recognition will be detailed and compared
in their respective sections of the report, but for now know that Explicit Plan Recognition
deals with plan recognition problems in which the domain model includes knowledge of how a
goal is reached, whereas in Implicit Plan Recognition this information is not given and must
be constructed as part of the plan recognition process. For instance, assume the domain is a
cookbook.
If the goal is to serve chicken salad for dinner, then in explicit plan recognition one would deﬁne
every possible combination of foods available and store these in some Plan Library, which can
be traversed to ﬁgure out how to prepare that speciﬁc type of meal. As such, in explicit plan
recognition, the path to the goal can be deﬁned as a series of actions, which are deﬁned with
action schemes, that are chosen by navigating the plan library.
This idea is seen in Figure 2.1, where the goal of "Serve(ChickenSalad)" is achieved by performing
the actions whose eﬀects provide the needed preconditions for "Serve(ChickenSalad)". This way
of choosing an action is repeated recursively until all preconditions for all actions in the plan are
satisﬁed. This only works because all actions have predeﬁned eﬀects and preconditions, that are
known to the observer. In implicit plan recognition, no such plan library exists and so one must
navigate using a series of states rather than a series of actions, with the intent of constructing a
plan library.
Page 5
==PAGE:12==
Preliminary Theory
Figure 2.1: Action Schema diagram showing how to follow a recipe in a cookbook using only
actions with preconditions and eﬀects. The eﬀects are shown as AddList & DeleteList.
Page 6
==PAGE:13==
Preliminary Theory
2.2
Plan Recognition
Since Plan recognition is a subject which will be extensively covered in this report, it is important
that it is clearly understood why plan recognition is of particular interest, and how this problem
is formally deﬁned.
2.2.1
Why Plan Recognition?
To start, the reason why plan recognition will be covered more than goal recognition, is due to
an interesting discovery made with the AUTOGRAPH algorithm[3].
As was stated in "Types of Recognition Problems" under Terminology, the goal recognition
problem must be solved as part of any plan recognition solution, in order for that plan to be
complete. AUTOGRAPH is one of the ﬁrst formal algorithms that took this one step further;
that the goal recognition problem can be solved, in a domain independent manner, using a plan
recognition solution.
Essentially, this was done by removing the need for a plan library and instead relying on pred-
icates, by forming a hypothesis from any conjunction of literals. It was also discovered that
Landmarks are an incredibly helpful tool in navigating such a search-space. Landmarks will
be discussed further in Landmarks, but for now know that a landmark (for a given state) is,
informally, a subset of facts or actions such that each valid plan contains at least one action in
the landmark; that is, a landmark is a subset of facts or actions that must be satisﬁed for every
plan that achieves any goal in the chosen subset of goals.
To explain action landmarks, imagine making a pizza.
If the goal is to make a pizza then
"BakePizzaBread" and "MakePizzaSauce" are two actions that must be performed, regardless
of the type of pizza in question. No pizza can be made without those two core ingredients,
therefore those two ingredients are landmarks for all types of pizza. However, if the goal is to
make a cheese pizza, then "AddCheese" is also a landmark action, since all pizzas with cheese
requires the adding of those three core ingredients, whereas things like ham and chilli are not
universally required ingredients for all types of cheese pizza. Note that this means that more
landmarks exists when making cheese pizza, as opposed to making any type of pizza.
By reducing the size of the subset of goals, more unique landmarks will naturally appear; for
instance, if you are making a Hawaii pizza, then you are making a cheese pizza, which is a form
of pizza, but now pineapple and ham are also required ingredients, and are therefore landmarks.
This is the case even though pineapple as a pizza ingredient is so rare that basically only Hawaii
pizzas uses this particular ingredient. The higher the number of required ingredients for the
subset of goals is, the more landmarks appear. In essence, landmarks can be seen as gauging the
uniqueness of a given subset of goals, when compared to the set of all goals combined.
Page 7
==PAGE:14==
Preliminary Theory
Fact landmarks function in much the same way, but rather than ensuring a certain action is
performed, fact landmarks ensure that a certain variable exists or that a certain condition is
true, e.g. "Contains(Pineapple)" or "!HasCheese".
In AUTOGRAPH, landmarks were used to inform the probability of a plans validity. The idea
here being that any predicate that occurs in all plans that reach a goal must be an important
stepping stone in reaching any goal, and therefore a plan containing multiple landmarks should
be better than any plan that avoids such landmarks, as a landmark avoiding plan would be
avoiding a critical part of reaching its goal.
Again, if a cheese pizza contains pineapple then it is probably a Hawaii pizza, but if a pizza has
no more landmarks than "HasBread, HasSauce, HasCheese" then guessing the correct type of
pizza becomes diﬃcult. As a result of that logic, if the goal is to make a pizza, regardless of
type, then any plan to make a pizza that does not satisfy "HasBread, HasSauce" is probably
a terrible plan for making a pizza, as those plans are missing ingredients that are essential for
making pizza. Conversely, the plan that contains the highest number of essential ingredients, i.e.
the most landmarks, must be the most valid plan available.
For now it is suﬃcient to recognise that we now know that a goal recognition problem can be
solved by any plan recognition problem, as long as the goal is generated by the planner, rather
than being deﬁned in some preexisting plan library.
We therefore now know that the plan recognition problem is a far more interesting problem to
ﬁnd solutions for than the goal recognition problem, as the solutions for the plan recognition
problem can be used or transformed to solve the goal recognition problem.
Goal recognition problem will still be discussed if they provide interesting solutions, but generally
speaking plan recognition problems will be discussed ﬁrst and foremost.
2.2.2
Plan Recognition Deﬁnition
Based on the terminology seen in Terminology, the formal deﬁnition for a plan recognition task
can be given informally as follows[1]:
Inputs: A sequence of observed actions O and a set of possible goals G, where an observed
action is an action which was performed by an actor that the observer saw being performed,
and possible goals being the set of goals in the environment that could be achieved by an actor;
for instance if the goal is to clean the house, then "CleanKitchen" and "CleanLivingRoom" are
subgoals of the goal "CleanHouse", which are then (sub)goals the actor could be pursuing.
Output: A plan pg for achieving (not necessarily optimally) a goal, g ∈G, that best satisﬁes all
the observations in O. The notation for this is pg |= O.
The formal deﬁnition is obviously dependent on the speciﬁcs of the currently unspeciﬁed terms
Page 8
==PAGE:15==
Preliminary Theory
and deﬁnitions. Additionally, a problem is only a plan recognition problem if it constructs a
model of the plan being followed beyond the actions already executed by the actor; that is, the
observer must be capable of predicting which future actions might be taken by the actor.
Page 9
==PAGE:16==
Preliminary Theory
2.3
Plan Library
Also known as an "action hierarchy", the purpose of a plan library is to create a hierarchical
ordering between actions to formulate the plan recognition problem as a minimal graph cover-
ing problem.[2] The best way to convey this idea is to provide a visual example, which can be
seen in Figure 2.2. The idea is to generalise actions to higher level actions, such as generalising
"PrepareScrambledEggs" to "PrepareBreakfast", which can then itself be generalised to "Pre-
pareMeal". This generalisation allows for increased abstraction and allows for polymorphism and
inheritance in the problems. For instance, you might only need to perform the actions "GetEggs"
and "GetMilk" if you are performing the "PrepareScrambledEggs" action, but no matter what
kind of meal you are preparing, you must always go to the kitchen.
Figure 2.2: Plan Library detailing how similar actions can be generalised to some higher level
action.
This concept can also be conveyed in more precise mathematical notation, as seen in the original
paper by Kautz et al.[2]
Page 10
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Plan Recognition Paradigms
As was previously mentioned in Terminology there are two primary representation of knowledge
in plan recognition: Implicit and Explicit. Additionally, not all plan recognition problems are
cooperative. Instead, some plan recognition problems focus on counterplanning, where the goal
is for the observer to recognise the actor’s plan, such that the observer might best obstruct the
actor’s goal by foiling the plan.
In this chapter these diﬀerent paradigms will be discussed; how are they formally deﬁned, how
are they formally represented, what are they useful for, which should be used when, etc. Po-
tential further improvements to the discussed paradigms will be discussed in Improving Plan
Recognition, though that chapter will be mostly theoretical and focus on combining existing
solutions.
Regardless of the type of planning problem, there are some shared assumptions and some shared
deﬁnitions.
3.1
Shared Assumptions
Most of all plan recognition problem will have four shared assumptions. These are deﬁned in the
book, but will be recited here for thoroughness:[1]
1. Model-based recognition. The recogniser has a model of the observable actions the
actor can perform.
2. Observer perspective recognition. Recognition is based on the observer’s model of the
domain. In other words, the algorithms used only consider what the actor is doing and
why.
Page 11
==PAGE:18==
Plan Recognition Paradigms
3. Structural recognition. This hearkens back to the deﬁnition in Plan Recognition Def-
inition, i.e. that the observer must construct a model of the plan being followed beyond
the actor’s already executed actions.
4. Preﬁx recognition. The recogniser must be able to recognise the plan before it is com-
pleted, meaning they must work on proper preﬁxes of a complete plan execution trace.
This is also known as incremental recognition or online recognition.
3.2
Implicit Plan Recognition
This type of planning problem relies on the idea of STRIPS planning problems, which are deﬁned
as follows:
Deﬁnition 1. A strips planning problem is a tuple P = (F, I, A, G) where F is a set of ﬂuents,
I ⊆F is the initial state, A is a set of actions a with preconditions, add, and delete lists Pre(a),
Add(a), and Del(a), which are subsets of F, and G ⊆F is the goal state.
This deﬁnition provides the needed components to deﬁne a STRIPS planning domain as Pd =
(F, I, A). This means that the domain can be extended with a goal G and get a strips planning
problem Pd[G] = (F, I, A, G). This is useful for deﬁning the implicit planning problem based on
STRIPS, which makes it possible to detach the implicit plan recognition problem from the idea
of a plan library. The implicit plan recognition problem, based on STRIPS, can be deﬁned as
follows:
Deﬁnition 2. The representation of the domain is a tuple T = (Pd, G, O), where Pd is the a plan-
ning domain, G is the sequence of goals the actor can choose to achieve, and O = [o1, o2, . . . , om]
such that oi ∈O is an ordered sequence of observed actions with resulting literals, such that
oi = (αi, φi) where αi ∈A and φi is a property in F, that the observer has observed the actor
perform so far.
There is no information given as to how any particular goal is achieved, such as how to combine
actions to achieve speciﬁc outcomes; that information must be reconstructed, e.g. via planning,
using the provided information.
For instance, o1 = (move(lab, corridor), handsEmpty) means that the ﬁrst observation is that
the actor from from the lab to the corridor, and that the property "handsEmpty" was observed
in the resulting state. The interpretation of this is that "the ﬁrst thing I saw was an actor
leaving the lab with empty hands." If only an action is observed, i.e. no observed properties,
then φi = ∅. If properties were observed without an action, then αi = null.
Page 12
==PAGE:19==
Plan Recognition Paradigms
The sequence of observed actions need not be complete at initialisation and may indeed start oﬀ
empty, as the sequence will naturally grow as the actor performs actions.
Because of this, knowledge in an implicit planning problem commonly makes use of a state space,
i.e. searching is done by keeping track of the state of the search space. Ordinarily the goal here
is to create a plan library to follow, but this is not strictly necessary if we use plan recognition
as planning, which converts the plan recognition problem into a planning problem.[4]
3.2.1
Plan Recognition As Planning (PRaP)
The main idea here, as discovered by Ramirez and Geﬀner,[4] is that goal recognition is planning
in reverse; planning is the problem of formulating a plan to reach a speciﬁed goal from a given
initial state, whereas goal recognition is the problem of seeing a plan in action and then deter-
mining which goal that plan is trying to achieve. This overlap allows transformation from goal
recognition problems to planning problems, which means that existing oﬀ-the-shelf planners can
be used to solve the goal recognition problem, as long as a valid transformation is used.
Speciﬁcally, given a plan recognition problem T, then for each goal G ∈G two searches must be
performed to ﬁnd two action sequences which reach G; π which satisﬁes the observation sequence
O and ¯π which does not. Formally, this can be deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 3. An action sequence π = a1, a2, . . . , an satisﬁes the observation sequence O =
o1, o2, . . . , om if ai = oi for i = 1, ..., m. An action sequence which does not satisfy the observation
sequence is denoted as ¯π.
The idea is to use STRIPS planning to perform this transformation and execute the two searches.
Note that that all algorithms in this report that use implicit representation will assume that the
actor is pursuing only a single plan to achieve at single goal at a time. In other words it is
assumed that the actor cannot pursue two independent goals simultaneously, such as making
pizza while making soup, or repairing a car while cleaning the garage.
Page 13
==PAGE:20==
Plan Recognition Paradigms
3.3
Explicit Plan Recognition
In this type of plan recognition problem, the representation is given in much the same way as
in implicit plan recognition, except now the plan library is predeﬁned. Because of the fact that
each goal has a predeﬁned method of reaching said goal, explicit planning problems have the
beneﬁt of being able to use decomposition of high level actions into lower level ones and ordering
constraints over them. For this reason, explicit planning problem typically make use of an action
space rather than a state space, as is the case in implicit planning. Essentially, since the plan
library has already been predeﬁned, the only thing that is needed to navigate between states is
to know the performed actions, as the planning library serves as a sort of road-map for which
sequence of actions will result in which state.
As such search problems in explicit problems need only keep track of performed actions, as these
can be used to navigate through the predeﬁned planning library, meaning that by playing out the
sequence of actions the desired goal will be reached. This, however, requires three assumptions[1],
that essentially amount to: "It is assumed that actions can be decomposed and that no observed
action is made without some goal in mind."
Explicit plan recognition is mentioned here because it is a big subject within plan recognition,
but it will not be discussed to the same extent as implicit plan recognition, as implicit plan
recognition is more applicable in path-ﬁnding domains such as MASokoban. The reason for this
is that pre-deﬁning every possible route for a path-ﬁnding problem generally means that the
problem has already been solved and the most optimal solution will then be chosen from the list
of predeﬁned solutions.
This approach might not be particularly applicable to a domain with essentially random levels
or an inﬁnite number of possible levels; rather a far more useful solution is one that can navigate
when given only an initial state and a list of possible actions and a list of actors.
Page 14
==PAGE:21==
Plan Recognition Paradigms
3.4
Multi-Agent Plan Recogntion
This is an extension of the single agent plan recognition problem, where there now are multiple
actors and observers; it is common in Multi Agent Plan Recognition (MAPR) that each actor is
also an observer.[7]
The extension is a simple transformation: Given a set of actors A = α1, α2, . . . , αn then each
actor α ∈A has a set of observations Oα = o1, o2, . . . , om, exactly as in the single agent plan
recognition problem.[12] Therefore, the set of observations O is now a matrix of observations:
O =
o1,1
o1,2
. . .
o1,m
o2,1
o2,2
. . .
o2,m
...
...
...
...
on,1
on,2
. . .
on,m
This same transformation can be applied to any plan recognition variant, such as PRaP. Note
that in some domains it is possible that each agent needs to make its own plan independent of
every other agent, and that, depending on the size of the domain-knowledge, this may cause an
exponential blow-up in the size of the generated plans.
In MASokoban this is thankfully not necessarily the case. If every agent needs to store the state
of the level, then each agent will generally need to store the exact location of every box and
every agent; if every agent stores a copy of this information, then there will be an exponential
blow-up in space used, however, in MASokoban it is generally seen as good practise to store
this information only once in some "Environment" class, that all agents can then access and
plan around, precisely to avoid needless duplication of information. In other domains where
every agent must store a unique permutation of the state, such monolithic approach to memory
optimisation cannot be used.
This means that when requiring multi agent plan recognition, either one should simplify the
problem with strict assumptions,[8] or one should look to improve the plan recognition process
suﬃciently such that the blow-up is manageable, such as by any of the improvements seen in
Improving Plan Recognition; a combination of both is, however, preferable.
3.4.1
Counter Planning
Counterplanning is a case of adversarial multi-agent plan recognition, in which the aim is for the
observer to obstruct or prevent actors from achieving their goals. As such the goal is to ﬁgure
out what actions to prevent or for the actor to delay, to obstruct the actor’s attempt at satisfying
its goal.
For instance, if one wishes to be adversarial in cooking, observing that an actor is mixing egg
Page 15
==PAGE:22==
Plan Recognition Paradigms
and milk in a bowl, and from that observed action recognising that the actor is likely making
scrambled eggs, the most eﬃcient way for the observer to prevent said goal might be for the
observer to steal the actor’s frying pan and then hide it somewhere in the house.
The formal deﬁnition for this is very dense,[9] as it attempts to deﬁne the concept in a domain
independent manner. Given a STRIPS planning task, a seeking agent, who aims to complete
the given goal (as in single agent planning) and a preventing agent, whose goal is to hinder or
prevent the seeking agent from completing its task:
Deﬁnition 4. A seeking agent Φ is an agent that has an associated planning task ΠΦ =
(FΦ, AΦ, IΦ, GΦ) and pursues its goal GΦ by following its plan πΦ computed from ΠΦ.
A preventing agent α is an agent that has an associated planning task Πα = (Fα, Aα, Iα, Gα),
where Gα is the set of goals needed to prevent the seeking agent from achieving its goals. Initially,
Gα = ∅, but Gα will increase in size as the seeking agent makes more of its plans known by
performing actions.
The exact relation between the two planning tasks is domain dependant, but here it is assumed
that all of φ’s model is known by α, except for its goal Gφ. Additionally, α knows a set of
potential goals, Gφ ⊂Fφ which φ could be trying to achieve.
The two agents form a counterplanning task, in which the task of the preventing agent is for-
malised based on the task of the seeking agent:
Deﬁnition 5. A counterplanning task is deﬁned by a tuple CP = (ΠΦ, Πα, GΦ, OΦ) where ΠΦ
is the planning task of the seeking agent Φ, Πα is the planning task for the preventing agent α,
GΦ is the set of sets of goals that Φ can potentially pursue, and OΦ = (o1, o2, ..., om) is a set of
observartions by α of the execution of a plan πΦ = (o1, o2, ..., om, am+1, am+2, ..., ak) that solves
ΠΦ.
Note that it is assumed that Φ generates a plan πΦ that solves its planning task ΠΦ prior to the
counterplanning taking place, and that this plan (including its corresponding goals) are unknown
to α. The counterplanning task can then be used to create a counterplan, after some time step
m of the execution of πΦ:
Deﬁnition 6. Given Φ agent plan πΦ = (am+1, am+2, ..., ak), a plan πα = (a1, a2, ..., an) is a
valid counterplan for πΦ = (am+1, am+2, ..., ak) if the joint execution of πα and πΦ does not allow
Φ to achieve the goals in GΦ.
This deﬁnition of counterplanning will be explored further in Landmarks in Counterplanning as
the results help show why landmarks are a powerful tool in planning and plan recognition. For
now note that counterplanning is complicated endeavour that is highly relevant to plan and goal
recognition, as these approaches are what allows for meaningful counterplanning to occur.
Page 16
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Improving Plan Recognition
The purpose of this chapter is to show ways to improve plan recognition. There is an exhaustive
list in the introductory book,[1] but these improvements mentioned here are either not in the
book or are mentioned only oﬀ-handedly.
4.1
Landmarks
At the time of writing, landmarks are seemingly the state of the art in plan and goal recognition,
given how often they appear in scientiﬁc papers concerning plan and goal recognition. Through-
out this chapter, you will see multitudes of ways in which landmarks can be used on their own
or in combination with other solutions to great eﬀect. The reason why landmarks work is rather
intuitive, and can be inferred based only on the deﬁnition of what a landmark is: A landmark
is something that must occur to achieve a desired outcome. In planning, this could be seen as
an action that must be performed, or a fact that must at some point be true, to achieve a given
goal or sub-goal, for every sub-goal in the set of goals.[13] Formally, this is:
Deﬁnition 7. Given a planning task (A, I, G), a fact L is a landmark if for all P = (a1, a2, . . . , an) ∈
A∗, G ⊆Result(I, P) : L ∈Result(I(a1, a2, ..., ai)) for some 0 ≤i ≤n, where:
Result(s, {a}) =



(s ∪add(a))\del(a)
pre(a) ⊆s
undefined
otherwise
Where A and I and G are as in the deﬁnition of a STRIPS planning problem which was deﬁned
in Implicit Plan Recognition.
For instance, in the plan library example in Figure 2.2, no matter what you plan to cook, you
Page 17
==PAGE:24==
Improving Plan Recognition
have to go to the kitchen, and you have to go shopping to buy the required ingredients, and
buying ingredients requires money. So "GoToKitchen", "GoShopping", and "GetMoney" are
all landmark actions for all plans that involve "PrepareMeal", assuming the ingredients are not
already in the kitchen. However, if a smaller set of goals, such as "PrepareBreakfast" is provided,
then landmarks unique to breakfasts might appear, such as "PrepareCoﬀee" or similar.
Landmarks were introduced by Hoﬀmann, Porteous and Sebastia[13] and serve as a way to relax
a planning problem, by using the landmarks to guide the planning process. The idea is that
since landmarks are necessary to achieve a set of goals, any solution that does not contain a
landmark can be discarded and the validity of the solution increases with the number of satisﬁed
landmarks.
A valid plan must satisfy all landmarks, but in plan recognition the observer should be able to
recognise a potential plan before all landmarks for that plan’s goal(s) are satisﬁed.
For instance, in the Plan Library for Figure 2.2, if an observer observes an actor entering a
kitchen while carrying ingredients, most likely the actor intends to prepare a meal. The speciﬁc
meal can then be guessed based on the landmark ingredients for that meal, e.g. all bread requires
dough, but not all meals requires bread, cheese and tomato sauce; so the observer can guess,
from seeing the actor entering the kitchen while carrying dough, cheese and tomato sauce, that
the actor is likely planning to prepare a pizza.
It is conceivable that a problem exists where landmarks cannot be formed, because the set of all
goals shares no facts or actions. In these cases, however, it is usually possible to split the set of
goals into subsets of goals. For instance, if the goal is "PrepareFood" then the only landmark
available is "GoToKitchen", which is not useful information for making food. However, if "Pre-
pareFood" is split into "PrepareDinner", "PrepareBreakfast", and "PrepareLunch", then each
of these subgoals will create new landmarks unique to them; in this case, the time of day might
be a landmark.
The subgoals can then be split further, perhaps "PrepareDinner" becomes "MakePizza", "Pre-
pareDrinks", and "CleanDiningTable", at which point "MakePizzaBread" and "MakePizza-
Sauce" become landmarks for "MakePizza"; "MakePizza" might then be further split into "Make-
HawaiiPizza", and "MakeVegetarianPizza". This splitting process can continue until every there
is a singleton set for each subgoal, if need be.
Since achieving every subgoal will usually result in achieving the overall goal, then this process
will also allow landmarks to solve the overall problem.
4.1.1
Landmark Types
There are multiple types of landmarks, each with their own deﬁnitions, e.g. some landmarks
have ordering between them; for instance "GoShopping" can be abstracted as "SpendMoney"
Page 18
==PAGE:25==
Improving Plan Recognition
which requires "GetMoney" to be performed; as such "GetMoney" has a higher ordering than
"GoShopping", as "GetMoney" is a prerequisite action to "GoShopping" and therefore must
occur ﬁrst.
Informally the diﬀerent types are known as "Fact Landmark"[13], "Action Landmark"[19], "Tem-
poral Landmark"[20] and "Ordered Landmark"[13]. The name of the landmark type refers to
what the landmark govers; e.g. Fact landmarks are concerned with determining if some fact is
achieved in a state across all goals. Formally, Fact Landmarks are deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 8. Fact Landmark: Given a planning task Π = (F, A, I, G), a formula LΠ ⊂F is
a fact landmark of Π iﬀLΠ is true in some state along all valid plans executions that achieve G
from I.
Another type of landmark that will appear in this report is the "Disjunctive Action Landmark",
which is a disjunctive landmark over actions[21], which deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 9. Disjunctive Action Landmark: Given a planning task Π = (F, A, I, G), a
disjunctive action landmark is a set of actions L ⊆A such that every label path from initial state
i to a goal state contains an action from L. The cost of a landmark L is cost(L) = mina∈Lcost(a)
Action landmarks are similar to disjunctive action landmark, except it is not required that every
label path from i to goal state g contains an action from L; rather it must simply be the case that
at least one such path exists. Note that it is possible to use actions to form a Fact Landmark,
as long as the actions have deﬁned preconditions and postcondiditons.
Given that these two types of landmarks are the only types of landmark used in all of the
references in this report, these are the only types of landmarks which will bed deﬁned at this
time.
4.1.2
Generating Landmarks
Typically, landmarks are determined by a human who manually assigns them to speciﬁc actions.
However, landmarks can be generated using delete-relaxation, since the problem of generating
landmarks otherwise is PSPACE-hard.[13] Bonet and Castillo made an algorithm for generating
landmarks for the complete planning problem,[16] that is based on using a hitting set heuristic,
much like the LM-Cut heuristic[18] which their solution is compared to. The LM-Cut heuristic
is considered state-of-the-art in landmark planning and landmark generation,[14] with only the
incremental LM-Cut heuristic potentially surpassing it.[15]
So a lot of concepts have to be explained before algorithmic landmark generation can be un-
derstood. First, what is the LM-Cut heuristic? How does it work, why does it work, how does
it compare to other heuristics? Second, how and why are hitting sets used and why are they
Page 19
==PAGE:26==
Improving Plan Recognition
relevant for landmark generation? Third, what is the landmark generation algorithm proposed
by Bonet et al. and how does it compare to LM-Cut?
LM-Cut
To understand the heuristic, a lot of theory needs to be covered. As mentioned,
generating landmarks is PSPACE-hard.
As such, the problem must be relaxed, such that a
polynomial time solution becomes possible. Speciﬁcally, delete-relaxation will be used to relax
the problem, such that an admissible landmark heuristic can compute a set of landmarks in
polynomial time. As formally proven by Helmert et al. relaxation-based landmarks have the
following set of relations:[14]
1. Landmark heuristics dominate additive hmax heuristics.
2. Additive hmax heuristics dominate Landmark heuristics.
3. Additive critical path heuristics with m ≥2 strictly dominate landmark heuristics and
hmax heuristics.
4. Merge-and-shrink abstractions strictly dominate landmark heuristics and hmax heuristics.
5. Pattern database abstractions are incomparable with landmark heuristics and additive
hmax heuristics.
In other words, Helmert et al. proved that it is possible to transform any hmax heuristic into
a landmark heuristic, and vice versa.
This is shown by combining point 1 and 2.
This, as
mentioned, requires the use of delete-relaxation, which means that it is time to formally introduce
delete-free STRIPS planning:
Deﬁnition 10. A delete-free STRIPS planning task Π+ = {F, I, A, G} is derived from the
actual planning task Π = {F, I, A, G}, by ignoring all delete eﬀects of the operators; that is, each
action a is replaced by a new a a+ that has the same preconditions, add eﬀects and costs as a
and del(a+) = ∅.
Note here that an Action in this case is functionally similar to an Operator, that is a =
{pre(a), add(a), del(a), cost(a)}, i.e. a delete free action is a+ = {pre(a+), add(a+), ∅, cost(a+)}.
This deﬁnition is then further reduced to the normal form of delete-free STRIPS planning, such
that transformation between landmark heuristics and hmax heuristics becomes possible. The
normal form of delete-free STRIPS planning is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 11. A delete-free STRIPS planning task Π+ = {F, I, A, G} (in set representation)
is in normal form if:
Page 20
==PAGE:27==
Improving Plan Recognition
1. I consists of exactly one element i: I = {i}
2. G consists of exactly one element g: G = {g}
3. Every action has at least one precondition.
The normal form of delete-free STRIPS planning allows the use of precondition choice functions
(pcf) and justiﬁcation graphs. The quick summary is that a graph is generated where all nodes,
which represent actions taken, is generated such that the depth of the graph is equal to the
number of actions taken to reach a desired state from the initial state. By performing edge-cutting
on this graph, it turns out that any cut edges in this justiﬁcation graph must be disjunctive action
landmarks for the justiﬁcation graph, and by extension for the original problem.[18]
This is given because a cut in a justiﬁcation graph is deﬁned as follows: A cut in a justiﬁcation
graph is a subset C of the graph’s edges such that all paths from i to g contain an edge from C.
Since the cuts are landmarks for the justiﬁcation graph, which is the simpliﬁed form of the
problem where some preconditions, speciﬁcally the preconditions not picked by pcf, are ignored,
then the chosen cuts must also be landmarks in the original problem.
Formally, a pcf is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 12. A precondition choice function (pcf) P : A →F for a delete-free STRIPS
task Π+ = {F, {i}, A, {g}} in normal form maps each action to one of its preconditions (i.e.
P(a) ∈pre(a) for all a ∈A)
A justiﬁcation graph in this context is formally deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 13. Let P be a pcf for {F, {i}, A, {g}}. The justiﬁcation graph for P is the directed,
edge-labeled graph J = {F, E}, where the vertices are the variables from F, and E contains an
edge {pre(a+), add(a+), ∅, cost(a+)} for each a ∈A, α ∈add(a) where α is the action being
performed to reach the connected vertex.
The reason these cuts are so useful, is because the set of all landmarks that can be generated by
creating cuts in the justiﬁcation graph form a perfect hitting set, thus yielding a perfect heuristic
for delete-free planning tasks.[14]
LM-Cut Heuristic
So how is the theory used? The idea is to compute cuts and choose pcfs
in a goal-oriented way, which also incidentally creates a (non-uniform) cost partitioning. The
heuristic is admissible[14] and works as follows:
The computation of a single cut can be performed in O(||Π||), which is the same asymptotic
time it takes to compute a single hmax estimate. The overall runtime of the procedure is then
bounded by O(|A| · ||Π||).[14]
Page 21
==PAGE:28==
Improving Plan Recognition
Algorithm 1 LM-Cut Heuristic
1: hLM-Cut(I) ←0
2: while True do
3:
Compute hmax values of the variables from F.
4:
Terminate if hmax(g) = 0.
5:
Let P be a pcf that chooses preconditions with maximal hmax value.
6:
Compute the justiﬁcation graph for P.
7:
Compute a cut which generates cost(L) > 0 for the corresponding landmark L as follows:
• The goal zone Fg of the justiﬁcation graph consists of all nodes that have a path to g
where all edges are labelled with zero-cost actions.
• The cut contains all edges {v, α, v′} such that v ̸∈Fg, v′ ∈Fg and v can be reached
from i without traversing a node in Fg.
8:
hLM-Cut(I) ←hLM-Cut(I) + cost(L)
9:
cost(α) ←cost(α) −cost(L) for all α ∈L
▷α being the action performed
Complete Landmark Generation Algorithm
The theory for Complete Landmark Gener-
ation is very novel and relies heavily on utilising set theory on the deﬁnitions of hitting sets and
Minimum Hitting Sets to form complete collections. The proof is rather dense, so a citation to
the original work is left here instead.[16] The idea is to use the proofs from the original paper
about LM-Cut[14] to form the basis for a complete algorithm that generates landmarks. As a
quick reminder, a complete algorithm is an algorithm where, if at least one solution exists, the
algorithm is guaranteed to ﬁnd a solution in a ﬁnite amount of time.
Note that although this work is based on the theory presented in LM-Cut, the work does not
extend LM-Cut, but rather the work ﬁnds a new way to compute landmarks in linear time and in
a complete manner. The solution currently has one glaring weakness when compared to LM-Cut:
LM-Cut computes h+, but the Complete Algorithm does not guarantee this is the case.
The algorithm is mentioned here due to the interesting prospects of future work, however it will
not be detailed further here as LM-Cut is still preferred in plan recognition. In plan recognition
it will be assumed that the actor follows an optimal plan, which is a plan that the Complete
Algorithm is not guaranteed to create.
Distributed LM-Cut
Note that it is possible to perform a distributed version of the LM-
Cut heuristic for use in multi-agent planning,[11] where landmarks are generated for the global
planning problem, which the individual agents then use. However, this requires constant and
plentiful communication between participating agents, such that landmarks are correctly shared
and assigned, and such that all problem speciﬁc knowledge is shared globally across all agents.
Page 22
==PAGE:29==
Improving Plan Recognition
As such, distributed LM-Cut is not useful in plan recognition, where communication should be
kept to an absolute minimum; preferably, communication should not be needed at all. Therefore,
LM-Cut is the preferable landmark generation method for the purposes plan recognition.
It is not known if plan recognition could be used to replace this communication, but it seems
unlikely given the complexity of the information that must be conveyed. That is to say, how
would one design a multi-agent plan recogniser in which each agent recognises which global
landmarks it should pursue and which global landmarks other agents are working on and their
plan for doing so, when that information must be constructed based on the combination of each
individual agent’s local knowledge of the level and domain?
More precisely this is the problem of each individual Actor in the domain solving the global
problem based purely on local information. As such this would be something of a distributed
algorithm problem, and although such problems have been solved eﬃciently, both with teams
and without,[24] to the best of my knowledge this has not been done using zero communication.
Such a solution is one in which a global plan is formulated using recognised plans from multiple
actors, that may or may not act either independently or in a team or even in multiple teams,
which would ostensibly require each observer to recreate a full plan for each of its observed ac-
tors, such that each observer can create its own version of the global plan, which lines up with
the other perceptions of the global plan of which the observer is unaware, that the observer will
then attempt to complete.
Although this idea of online global planning from distributed local information using plan recog-
nition is interesting, it is well outside the scope of this report. Instead, a far more useful approach
is to generate the landmarks for the level in question only once and then giving each actor the
set of generated landmarks. Once each actor knows the landmarks involved in solving the level,
plan recognition would then be used to avoid conﬂicts between actors, by allowing each actor to
recognise when its own solution would conﬂict with another actor’s plan. This idea is discussed
further in Plan Recognition for Conﬂict Resolution.
Furthermore, according to the article, distributed LM-Cut does not work particularly well in the
MASokoban domain, because the projected heuristic estimate is the same, or even better, than
the global estimate. As such its use with regards to solving problems in the MASokoban domain,
but where cooperation is done on the basis of plan recognition, appears limited.
4.1.3
Landmarks in Plan Recognition
Landmarks were originally intended for use in planning problems; their use in plan recognition is
therefore largely incidental as goal recognition is planning in reverse meaning that plan recogni-
tion can be deﬁned through planning.[4] Therefore, any landmark-based search method used in
Page 23
==PAGE:30==
Improving Plan Recognition
planning can be used in plan recognition, especially since both can be deﬁned through STRIPS
planning.[17] Landmark-based heuristics can be incredibly useful, as seen with the Landmark
Cut Heuristic. Indeed, when combined with Automated Planning, it provides a powerful tool for
plan recognition.
Landmarks in Automated Planning
It is possible to combine automated planning with
fact landmarks to perform goal recognition, using two distinct heuristics. Both increases the
accuracy and orders of magnitudes faster than most other goal recognition heuristics.[17] The
two heuristics are the Landmark-Based Uniqueness Heuristic huniq, and the Landmark-Based
Goal Completion Heuristic hgc.
They are deﬁned as follows.
First is the goal completeness
heuristic:
Deﬁnition 14. hgc(G, ALG, LG) =
 P
g∈G
|ALg∈ALG|
|Lg∈LG|
|G|

, where ALg is the number of achieved
landmarks from observations of every sub-goal g of the candidate goal G in ALG, and Lg repre-
sents the number of necessary landmarks to achieve every sub-goal g of G in LG
In words: The heuristic hgc(G) estimates the completion of a goal G by calculating the ratio
between the sum of the percentage of completion for every sub-goal g ∈G, i.e. P
g∈G
|ALg∈ALG|
|Lg∈LG| ,
and the number of sub-goals in G. As such it works by checking the percentage completion of
all sub-goals compared to the total number of sub-goals.
Note that the set of achieved landmarks, as well as the set of landmarks, will at worst be as large
as the number of performed action in the domain, but will most likely be substantially smaller,
as an action is only a landmark if all sub-goals in G require that action to be executed. This is
where the speed increase over regular goal completion comes from, as the set of achieved goals
is simply stored, after being determined to be an achieved landmark, in a map for constant time
access for later use; full implementation details can be seen in the original paper.[17]
Uniqueness is slightly more complex, as it requires two equations. The reason for this is that this
heuristic aims to utilise a powerful intuition: that there must be landmarks that are "common
fact" which are less useful for recognising a speciﬁc goal than landmarks that are "unique".
So rather than looking at completion rate, all sub-goals are considered individually and are
prioritised based on how unique the discovered landmarks for that particular sub-goal are.
For instance, assume the cooking example: it is given that all meals must be prepared in the
kitchen; going to the kitchen is therefore a landmark action, since it is vital to all types of
cooking. But that landmark says nothing about what meal is being prepared, only that a meal
is being prepared. It is therefore not particularly useful for identifying the exact goal.
Meanwhile, observing that the actor is baking bread and making tomato sauce and shredding
cheese are all highly informative landmarks for making any kind of pizza; so those landmarks
Page 24
==PAGE:31==
Improving Plan Recognition
should help point the observer towards the conclusion that the actor is preparing a pizza.
The speciﬁc type of pizza must then be deﬁned by an even more unique action; e.g. if the actor
is getting a pineapple, then the actor is probably going for the goal PrepareHawaiiPizza, since
few other pizzas require that ingredient, but pineapple is a landmark for making that particular
category of pizza. This intuition is what the uniqueness heuristic is aiming to utilise.
First the landmark uniqueness must be computed:
Deﬁnition 15. Luniq(L, LG) =

1
P
L∈LG |{L|L∈L}|

, where L is a chosen landmark and LG is
the set of landmarks for goals.
The computed value is then stored in Yuv ←Luniq(L, LG)
In words: Given a landmark L, ﬁgure out the percentage of occurrences of said landmark across
all landmarks across all sub-goals.
Intuitively, for any landmark L that occurs only for a single goal within a set of candidate goals,
the maximum uniqueness value is 1, i.e. "100% unique". So the uniqueness is given as some
value Yuv = [0, 1], where 0 is only output if a non-existent landmark was input, which shouldn’t
ever be the case.
The computed value Yuv is then used to compute the heuristic:
Deﬁnition 16. huniq(G, ALG, LG, Yuv) =
 P
AL∈ALG Yuv(AL)
P
L∈LG Yuv(L)

, where all variables are deﬁned
as in Deﬁnition 14.
huniq provides a slightly more accurate and slightly faster solution than hgc, but both outperform
Ramirez and Geﬀner[4], in both categories, by a substantial margin.[17]
Page 25
==PAGE:32==
Improving Plan Recognition
4.2
Multi-Agent Improvements
Although many of the theories discussed in this chapter either work in or are related to Multi-
Agent planning and plan recognition, this chapter focuses on the improvements that exclusively
deal with such problems. As such the chapter is relatively short, as most works use multi-agent
solutions, but without it being the primary focus; for instance, Active Goal Recognition is a type
of multi-agent collaboration as the observer becomes an active participant in the environment,
but that work is less about making multi-agent collaboration work, than it is about letting the
observer interact with the environment.
4.2.1
Multi-Agent Collaboration using Plan Recognition
In the 2017 work by Freedman and Zilberstein,[10] collaboration between agents is facilitated
using plan recognition; the work discusses how the observer can recognise the actor’s plan, adopt
it for itself and then move to satisfy the plan’s goals. The cost of the estimated plan is then
compared to the cost of the plan, assuming the observer intervenes and assists; if this cost is
lower than the original, the observer will assist, otherwise it will refrain from assisting.
The observer will also refrain from acting, if its intervention would conﬂict with the plans of the
actor, e.g. if the observer must block the only way into a tunnel to help pull a box to its goal,
the observer will not help until the pulling of the box no longer prevents the actor from entering
the tunnel.
The work goes into details for how to use Poisson distribution and similar statistical analysis to
estimate the actor’s intended plan. The work talks about wanting to use landmarks in the future,
but a landmark-based solution was not included in the paper. In theory, landmarks could be
used to perform hypothesis elimination, in a manner similar to what is described in Active Goal
Recognition, to guide the observer’s plan for how to interact with the actor and to remove the
need for statistical analysis. Landmarks could also be used to determine which plan the observer
should follow to achieve the goal, i.e. the observer could use existing landmarks to guide its own
plan for helping the actor.
If landmarks were used in such a way, then obviously the exact set of possible plans, with likely-
hood percentages, of the actor cannot be computed and instead a single plan is selected as being
"most likely". For the purposes of MASokoban, where the recognition should be used only to
inform the observer of how to best interact with the actor, this should be suﬃcient, as the
observer can only ever act on one plan regardless.
Page 26
==PAGE:33==
Improving Plan Recognition
4.2.2
Landmarks in Counterplanning
This is an extension of the theory introduced in Counter Planning, but now fact landmarks are
used to help inform the counterplanning problem.[9] Essentially, the idea is "if I want to prevent
your plan, then I do not need to know everything you can do. I simply need to know what you
must do." The objective is then to create a plan that denies as many landmarks as possible, as
this will, by extension, prevent as many necessary actions or facts as possible. For example, say
you want to cook dinner.
If I wanted to prevent you from cooking dinner, with one action, I could either lock the front door,
or remove a cooking pot from the house, or remove a knife, or something similar. Alternatively,
I could simply shut oﬀall power in the house, by tampering with the breaker. With just one
action, I prevented you from using any electrical kitchen appliance, i.e. I’ve prevented you from
boiling water, using the oven, using the microwave, using the stove, etc. Power is needed for
those appliances to function, so without power no plan involving those appliances can succeed.
Furthermore, it is hard to plan around my action of cutting the power.
I don’t have to care about any alternative plan you could perform, such as buying new pots
in the store or entering the house via the back door, because regardless of what you do, you
probably still need to use an electrical kitchen appliance, so you will probably need power. You
can turn the power back on, but then I can just turn it back oﬀagain. Thus, if I prevent you
from using electricity, I can prevent you from cooking a large variety of potential dinners.
This work is based on automated planning, which is the task of choosing and organising a se-
quence of actions such that, when applied to a given initial state I, it results in a goal state G.
Landmarks in this context are denoted as LΠφ, i.e. a landmark for the seeking agent’s planning
task. Recalling the deﬁnitions from Counter Planning, the algorithm for solving a counterplan-
ning task from the perspective of α then works as follows:
Page 27
==PAGE:34==
Improving Plan Recognition
Algorithm 2 Domain-Independent Counterplanning
Inputs: Πφ, Πα, Gφ, Oφ
1: Tφ ←RecogniseGoals(Fφ, Aφ, Iφ, Gφ, Oφ)
2: Iφ ←Update(Aφ, Iφ, Oφ)
3: LΠφ ←Fφ
4: G′
φ ←goal(argmaxt∈Tφprobability(t))
5: πα ←∅
6: for g ∈G′
φ do
7:
LΠφ ←LΠφ ∩ExtractLandmarks(Fφ, Aφ, Iφ, g)
8: if LΠφ ̸= ∅then
9:
LΠφ,Πα ←ExtractCPLandmarks(Πφ, Πα, LΠφ) ▷Extract Counterplanning Landmarks
10:
if LΠφ,Πα ̸= ∅then
11:
Gα ←SelectGoal(Πφ, Πα, LΠφ,Πα)
▷SelectGoal() is deﬁned in Algorithm 3
12:
Iα ←Update(Iα, Aα, Oφ)
13:
πα ←Planner(Πα = (Fα, Aα, Iα, Gα))
14: return πα
Where LΠφ,Πα is the counterplanning landmark set of both agents. A counterplanning landmark
deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 17. Given the set of landmarks from Πφ, LΠφ, a landmark li ∈LΠφ is a counter-
planning landmark for α if ∃a ∈Aα with li ∈effects(a). If li is a positive literal, li should be
in del(a). If li is a negative literal, li should be in add(a).
Thereby, all fact landmarks that comply with the condition in Deﬁnition 17 are added to the
counterplanning landmarks set of both agents, LΠφ,Πα. This is ExtractCPLandmarks. In other
words, a counterplanning landmark is a landmark that the seeking agent can use to achieve the
eﬀects of one of the preventing agents actions; it is a landmark that seeking agent must achieve,
that the preventing agent can also achieve. That means it is a landmark the preventing agent
can potentially prevent the seeking agent from achieving.
ExtractLandmarks will return the set of common landmarks among all the most probable sets
of goals, LΠφ, i.e. the set of landmarks that all the most probable sets of goals have in common.
SelectGoal() is deﬁned in Algorithm 3:
Page 28
==PAGE:35==
Improving Plan Recognition
Algorithm 3 Select Goal
Inputs: Πφ, Πα, LΠφ,Πα
1: FCL ←∅
▷FCL is "First Counterplanning Landmark"
2: FCLCost ←0
3: for li ∈LΠφ,Πα do
4:
πφ ←Planner(Πφ = (Fφ, Aφ, Iφ, li))
5:
πα ←Planner(Πα = (Fα, Aα, Iα, ¬li))
6:
if c(πφ) ≥c(πα) V c(πφ) < FCLCost then
7:
FCLCost ←c(πφ)
8:
FCL ←¬li
9: return FCL
FCL is the First Counterplanning Landmark and is the result of a temporal problem. Speciﬁcally,
the preventing agent should not pursue a plan to prevent the seeking agent from achieving a goal,
if the preventing agent cannot stop the seeking agent before the goal is completed. By extension,
the preventing agent should not seek a counterplanning landmark that the seeking agent can
reach ﬁrst. FCL is the ﬁrst counterplanning landmark that α can avoid before φ can achieve it.
This is useful, because by the deﬁnition of landmarks, all landmarks present must be satisﬁed
before the goal can be achieved. Therefore, if any one landmark becomes impossible to satisfy,
the goal can no longer be achieved. As such the problem is reduced to the problem of ﬁnding
only one counterplanning landmark that can be reached before the competitor can get to it. Do
that and the plan has been countered.
Because of this temporal requirement, the faster one can discover the opponents intentions, the
better, as that leaves more time to reach the landmarks, which means that satisfying the FCL
becomes harder for the opponent.
In this manner, counterplanning could be used to inform a cooperating observer of what not to
do. The counterplanning landmarks must be untouched at the timestep where the seeking agent
expects to fulﬁll that counterplanning landmark; the set of counterplanning landmarks must all
be possible, or a high-level conﬂict will occur.
The usefulness of this approach will depend on the domain in question. In domains where high-
level plans can span a very large number of timesteps, this might be very important. In domains
where low-level conﬂicts, such as collisions or occupying the same space at the same time, are
the dominant concern, it seems less useful.
In MASokoban, high-level plans are not necessarily complex. "This box will go to this position
at this time" or "this box should be handed oﬀto another agent for eﬃciency".
However,
counterplanning can still identify where the observer must absolutely not be and at what time
Page 29
==PAGE:36==
Improving Plan Recognition
they musn’t be there.
However, given that most such conﬂicts can be avoided by avoiding
collisions and by using expanded domain deﬁnitions, such as introducing the concept of "tunnels",
using counterplanning in cooperative MASokoban seems like overkill, though it could seemingly
work.
Where counterplanning could become useful, however, is when two teams must interact. Assume
a blue actor cannot put its blue box onto the goal, because it must go through a tunnel, where a
red box is blocking the tunnel. The red box is already standing on its goal. In counterplanning,
the box being in the position of the red goal would appear as a counterplanning landmark, and
so the red agent would know to move the red box away momentarily.
Page 30
==PAGE:37==
Improving Plan Recognition
4.3
Goal Recognition Design
The improvements in this section are not all universally applicable, as some of them require
altering the deﬁnitions of the domain; for instance, in Active Goal Recognition the observer is
allowed to interact with the environment and therefore becomes an active participant of the
domain.
The core idea is to use automated planning, or in its most basic form classical planning such as
STRIPS planning, to alter the domain in ways that help relax the problem.[5]
4.3.1
Active Goal Recognition
Active Goal Recognition intends to provide the observer with the ability to interact with the world
in an online fashion, using (non-disjunctive) fact landmarks.[6] In MASokoban, every actor is
also an observer, meaning that all observers have the ability to interact with the world. As such
this work is highly relevant for the design of any potential solution in MASokoban that relies on
plan recognition.
Note that this work is only about the recognition of a plan, in a domain where the observer
may then itself make a plan to interact with the domain in some manner; it is not inherently a
competitive or cooperative solution, and should be seen as preliminary work that provides the
necessary tools to make counterplanning or cooperative planning work in a multi-agent setting,
where such competition or cooperation must be based on a type of plan recognition where the
observer is itself an actor.
As mentioned, this work relies on fact landmarks. Speciﬁcally, such landmarks are used to elimi-
nate hypotheses of actor goals, and by extension actor plans. Additionally, this work also makes
use of the idea of landmarks in automated planning, much like the work described in Landmarks
in Plan Recognition. To this end, the work relies on the concept of partially observable planning
problem with sensing actions (PPOS),[22] which are a STRIPS-like language where actions can
have conditional eﬀects. It is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 18. A PPOS problem is a tuple (F, A, Ω, I, G), where F is a set of ﬂuents, A is the
set of actions that can be performed, Ωis the set of sensing actions (actions used to uncover the
truth value of a positive literal L ∈F), I is the initial state deﬁned as a set of clauses over F,
and G is the goal condition as determined by a conjunction of atoms over F.
Note that sensing actions are deﬁned based on whether the setting is oﬄine or online; in an oﬄine
setting, sensing actions provide information about the state without immediately changing it,
thereby contingent planning yields a contingent plan that is also a conditional plan. In an online
setting, the sensing action is immediately performed and the state is immediately altered, yielding
Page 31
==PAGE:38==
Improving Plan Recognition
only a contingent plan. Regardless, sensing actions are used to learn about a literal in the world,
without necessarily altering the world in the process; for instance "checkIfBlocked(corridor)"
allows the observer to sense if the corridor is blocked, meaning the observer checks if movement
through the corridor is possible.
This is the same as performing the action "move(corridor,entrance)" just to determine if the
action failed or not, but without actually moving through the corridor. The action, "move",
moves the observer and, in this speciﬁc example, also speciﬁcally moves it through the tunnel,
meaning that the action alters the world.
The sensing action does not make the observer perform a visible action; the check can be per-
formed while the observer is standing still, eﬀectively performing a No-Op while conﬁrming the
state of a given literal, and therefore the sensing action does not make the observer alter the
world.
The sensing actions are used to inform the observer plan, τ, i.e. the plan the observer will follow
to interact with the world. The reason this is a contingent plan, is that the plans of the actor
are not known, but rather they are assumed or estimated.
The above is used to formulate an active goal recognition plan, i.e. a goal recognition plan in
which the observer may form plans to interact with the world. The deﬁnition is a bit dense, but
goes as follows:
Deﬁnition 19. An active goal recognition problem is a tuple Pa = (Σ, I, G, τ) where Σ = (F, AA∪
AO ∪ΩO); that is the ﬂuents and the actions comprising world-altering actions of the actor, AA,
the world-altering actions of the observer, AO, and the sensing actions of the observer, ΩO; and
the initial state I = (IA, IO), i.e. the initial state of the actor, IA, and the initial state of the
observer, IO, comprising two sets of clauses over F; and ﬁnally, τ, which is the contingent plan
corresponding to the observer plan. τ may initially be null, and can be generated on the ﬂy in an
online manner.
Essentially, an active goal recognition problem is, by the deﬁnitions in Terminology, a plan
recognition problem, based on STRIPS planning, where both observer and actor may form plans
independently of one another and are treated as separate entities in the problem deﬁnition.
Note that the execution of the observer plan τ, in whole or in part, yields a sequence of ob-
servations, O, as deﬁned in plan recognition in Implicit Plan Recognition. In other words the
execution of τ will reduce the active goal recognition problem to the standard plan recognition
problem.
This is handy because now future deﬁnitions can always be linked directly back to the standard
plan recognition problem, meaning that the other deﬁnitions in this section can be made slightly
less dense and complicated. For instance, the solution to an active goal recognition problem can
Page 32
==PAGE:39==
Improving Plan Recognition
be deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 20. A solution to an active goal recognition problem Pa is a set of hypotheses G′ ⊆G
where for each hypothesis G ∈G′ there exists a plan π ∈Π∗(G) that satisﬁes the sequence of
observations O resulting from the (partial) execution of the observer plan τ, where Π∗(G) is the
set of possible plans for achieving hypothesis G.
Using this, the observer plan τ can be computed as follows: GenerateObserverPlan(Pa) works
Algorithm 4 Compute Observer Plan
Require: An active goal recognition problem Pa
1: τ ←GenerateObserverPlan(Pa)
2: O ←ExecuteObserverPlan(τ)
3: G′ ←RecogniseGoal((ΣA, IA, G, O))
4: RETURN: G’
by using fact landmarks to generate τ on the ﬂy comprising a single test (and the actions nec-
essary to execute that test). This is done by construction a PPOS problem whose solution is
τ. The PPOS problem is constructed using fact landmarks. Let LG be the set of landmarks for
some goal G ∈G given a classical planning problem (F, A, I, G). The observer’s set of sensing
actions, ΩO, is assumed to be augmented with sensing actions ω inΩO that encapsulate simple
tests (C, ω′) where Pre(ω) = Pre(ω′) V C and Obs(ω) is the test outcome, µ.
Given Pa, µ refutes a hypothesis G ∈G if ¬µ is a landmark for G and no plan for G exists that
satisﬁes the concatenation of observation (∅, µ) to the observation sequence O.
Similarly, given Pa, µ conﬁrms a hypothesis G ∈G if µ is a landmark for G (i.e. µ ∈L). This
is given, since if µ is made true at some point along all plans in Π∗(G), then µ is a landmark by
deﬁnition.
This can be further reduced to the following: If µ is a landmark for a hypothesis Gi ∈G, but
not for a hypothesis Gj ∈G (i.e. µ ∈LGi
V µ /∈LGj), then µ weakly eliminates Gj.
That is quite the mouthful, but the idea is to generate landmarks for PPOS, and then eliminate
hypotheses from G. By eliminating hypotheses, the number of possible plans the actor could
be following is greatly reduced, as the potential goals the actor could possibly be pursuing
is pruned. This goes back to the idea that any plan must satisfy its landmarks, and that if
landmarks are fulﬁlled that do not satisfy a given goal, then the actor is not using an optimal
solution for completing that goal. This is identical in principle to the Landmark Uniqueness
Heuristic introduced in Deﬁnition 15.
This allows for the generation of PPOS using landmarks. The rest of Compute Observer Plan
is simply about the execution of the generated observer plan τ, followed by the goal recognition
Page 33
==PAGE:40==
Improving Plan Recognition
of the resulting sequence of observed actions. Thus line 3 can be implemented using any goal
recognition solution.
As for the use of this theory in MASokoban, it is clear that the extensions needed to make the
planning problem into a PPOS would be entirely doable. However, there is a big caveat with
this, namely that disjunctive landmarks are not considered in active goal recognition. Indeed,
given the idea of weak hypothesis elimination, it would appear that use of disjunct landmarks
is ill-advised, as it would prevent this weak elimination from working correctly.
Given that
landmarks cannot be meaningfully predeﬁned in MASokoban, as each level would have its own
unique set of landmarks, we are forced to rely on Generating Landmarks, through LM-Cut.
However, LM-Cut generates disjunctive action landmarks, and although action landmarks could
be re-purposed to function like fact landmarks, it is a requirement from LM-Cut that the pro-
duced landmarks are disjunctive. Therefore the theory provided in active goal recognition cannot
be used one-to-one without added computational complexity from the lack of weak hypothesis
elimination. However, the theory can still be used to inform another similar solution.
Note that the cited paper refers to Landmarks in Counterplanning as a way to perform com-
petitive active goal recognition, meaning that the work can be used in conjunction with coun-
terplanning. Therefore, counterplanning should still be examined on its own, to see if it is more
appropriate for facilitating collaboration in MASokoban.
Similarly, the paper references Freedman and Zilberstein’s work,[10] which is brieﬂy discussed in
Multi-Agent Collaboration using Plan Recognition.
4.4
Domain Independence
This is less of a direct, intended improvement, than it is an incidental eﬀect from the combination
of the theories described thus far. As was mentioned in Why Plan Recognition?, AUTOGRAPH
can be used to solve a goal recognition problem in a domain independent manner, by making use
of plan recognition; rather than using some predeﬁned plan library, one can solve goal recognition
by using conjunctions of literals.
Another way to solve goal recognition, is to solve plan recognition, as was mention in that same
section of this report as well as in the deﬁnition of plan recognition under Terminology. So we
can say for certain that goal recognition can be solved independent of the domain, either by
using literals or by relying on domain independent plan recognition.
Plan Recognition can also be solved in a domain independent manner.
Plan Recognition as
Planning, as introduced by Ramirez and Geﬀner, makes use of the fact that a goal recognition
problem can be viewed as a transformed planning problem. This works by making a plan recog-
nition algorithm that calls the chosen planning algorithm as some black-box method. Therefore,
Page 34
==PAGE:41==
Improving Plan Recognition
the plan recognition itself is domain independent, even though it may rely on a domain speciﬁc
planner.
If, however, a domain-independent planner is used, the plan recognition is completely domain
independent, as well as the "black box" used during plan recognition. As it happens, planning
can be done in a pseudo domain independent manner, using landmarks. Speciﬁcally, planning is
done based on landmarks, which are highly domain speciﬁc, as by the deﬁnitions in Landmarks.
However, once generated, the planner does not need to know any more information than which
landmarks to satisfy and which search heuristic to use, if any.
The planner only cares that it receives a set of landmarks to satisfy as part of the plan description;
i.e. as an extension of the STRIPS plan. If a domain independent search heuristic is used, or
indeed no heuristic, then the planner itself is domain independent, as the landmarks are used as
a set of black-box generated requirements.
As mentioned in Generating Landmarks, it is possible to generate landmarks via an algorithm.
The approach for generating landmarks in this manner is domain dependent, as the actions
with their preconditions and postconditions must be predeﬁned; as such LM-Cut is not domain
independent. However, note that the entire plan recognition and plan process so far can be made
domain independent by pushing the domain speciﬁcations down into the landmark generation;
speciﬁcally the need for provided action schemas.
This would ensure that the rest of the process remains domain independent. Indeed, although
LM-Cut relies on domain speciﬁc knowledge, most of the algorithm is agnostic to the domain
itself; the only part that is speciﬁc to the domain in question are the necessity for providing
preconditions and postconditions.
From an engineering perspective this means that an oﬀ-the-shelf solution could potentially be
made, by essentially creating a stack of the mentioned domain independent works, that would
ensure the planner and the plan recognition elements are domain independent. The landmarks
would then be generated based on a set of action schemas that are created by the user in a
text-ﬁle, which is then run through a parser such that the schemas can be stored for use by the
implemented LM-Cut heuristic.
The implemented LM-Cut heuristic would then use these user-input action schemas to generate
landmarks for solving the input goals from the input initial state. The rest of the planner and plan
recognition would then run without needing to be reconﬁgured, as that entire stack of theories
and solutions consists of purely domain independent solutions. A parser would preferably be
used, such that the action schemas could be written without needing to know the speciﬁcs of the
programming language used for the software solution.
The software solution would not work for all domains, but would presumably work for any do-
Page 35
==PAGE:42==
Improving Plan Recognition
main with known action schemas and where disjunctive landmarks can be used; e.g. recall that in
Active Goal Recognition disjunctive landmarks may not be considered. In domains where such
concerns do not exist, the software could then, in theory, be reused across any such domains
without needing additional changes; i.e. it would serve as an oﬀ-the-shelf solution. Note that
this might require extensive work to accomplish, depending on how the program should handle
multiple agents. There would presumably be diﬀerences in the objectives of the plan recogniser,
depending on whether it is a cooperative, competitive, active, or passive observer.
Note, however, that the existence of teams of actors would not further complicate the imple-
mentation of the plan recogniser, if one bases the planner on the Multi Agent Plan Recognition
solution[7], where the goal is to predict the plans and goals of the team based on the observed
actions of the team’s actors. In this work it was discovered that this problem is the same as
regular team-less plan recognition, if the number of teams is zero, and that it is the same as
regular multi agent plan recognition if the number of agents on any given team is one.
Although this work is interesting, currently the testing of the extents of domain independence
of such a solution is beyond the scope of this project, as that would require creating a multitude
of domains and discovering the exact limits of this combination of theories. The possibility of
domain independence will not be tested in this report, due to not wanting to expand the scope
beyond what is reasonably achievable within the deadline.
Page 36
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Designing a solution for MASokoban
In this chapter the speciﬁcs of how the theory discussed so far can be combined into a potential
solution for MASokoban will be discussed.
5.1
Plan Recognition for Conﬂict Resolution
Under distributed LM-Cut in Generating Landmarks, it was stated that plan recognition could
be used as a method of conﬂict resolution.
Using plan recognition in such a manner, then
presumably all actors would follow their plan until progress is impossible due to conﬂicts halting
the plan. From there, if a solution exists then it must be that case that at least one actor can
act without generating conﬂict, as all other agents must recognise that they must act after the
non-halting actor. If no actor can follow its plan without conﬂict, then presumably no solution
exists, since no actor can avoid permanently halting another agent.
This concept of plan recognition for cooperation is more thoroughly explained in Active Goal
Recognition, even more so in the original paper used as a reference in that section. The algorithm
can be used to generate the observer’s plan for engaging with other actors, which will be used
to inform the observer’s best means of cooperation with the observed actors. Given that all
actors in MASokoban will serve as observers, all actors will be able to observe each other and to
recognise each others plans.
However, if the intention is to impede an agent, counterplanning must be used, as described in
Landmarks in Counterplanning. Given that this behaviour is not desirable in MASokoban, where
cooperation is key, counterplanning will at best be used to ﬁgure out how to most eﬃciently assist
the other actors; for instance, counterplanning can be used to ﬁgure what will impede the other
Page 37
==PAGE:44==
Designing a solution for MASokoban
actor’s plans and by refraining from following that plan, the actors can avoid potential conﬂicts
such as collisions.
But as was discussed in that section, it seems like overkill for use in cooperative MASokoban. The
ideal solution would seem to be extending Multi-Agent Collaboration using Plan Recognition to
work with landmarks, since the primary concern in MASokoban would be to avoid conﬂicts and
let each actor solve its own problems; this would not necessarily guarantee the globally optimal
solution, but it would theoretically provide solutions for any level where direct cooperation, such
as the oﬀ-handing of boxes, is required to succeed. Given that such levels would require a box
to pass through the space where the agent moving it is standing, no such level could exist.
The question is how this would work when collaboration must occur across teams.
In such
scenarios a blue actor cannot complete its goal unless a red actor moves away its box to let the
blue actor pass, even if the red box is currently in its goal position. This would presumably still
be a low level collision, but it would certainly be detected by counterplanning with landmarks.
It is currently unknown if Freedman and Zilberstein’s solution could handle this scenario, but
it seems given that counterplanning would handle it correctly, if counterplanning landmarks are
avoided by the preventing agent, here the observer, rather than satisﬁed.
5.2
Planning Algorithm
Since implicit planning is used, the choice of planning algorithm is rather important. Unfor-
tunately, as was mentioned in Generating Landmarks under LM-Cut, Landmark heuristics are
incomparable to pattern database abstractions, which is usually seen as the most eﬃcient plan-
ning heuristic for solving Sokoban.[23] As such other planning solutions will be employed.
In general, a planning heuristic must be capable of solving the single agent Sokoban problem, and
must be able to be queried by the plan recogniser, such that plans can be eﬃciently computed
for fast plan recognition.
Given its prevalence in the cited works and its reliance on landmarks, LAMA[19] seems to be a
good candidate for a planning heuristic.
Page 38
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 6
Evaluation of the Theory Presented
for use in MASokoban
Although the program has not yet successfully run on my machine, certain things can be eval-
uated based on the tests from the cited articles. In most landmark-based articles where either
the Sokoban domain or the MASokoban domain appeared in testing, these domains always fared
among the worst domain solutions, both when compared for the same solution across domains
and when compared in the same domain across solutions. The articles rarely commented on why.
However, it can be assumed this is due to the way Sokoban works:
1. Every level in Sokoban is unique, meaning no landmarks can be reused between levels.
2. In Sokoban, the optimal local solutions rarely act as the global solutions, but still sometimes
do.
3. Levels in Sokoban can have a very large number of permutations, meaning that the accuracy
and optimality of generated landmarks, as well as the time to generate landmarks, can be
less than ideal.
4. Levels in Sokoban can vary wildly in terms of challenges presented.
For instance if a
landmark only contains information on "stand here at this time, holding box A25" then
this information might be useful in a "tunnel", but not useful in an open map with no
obstacles.
5. Cooperation must occur between all agents, even across teams that have access to diﬀerent
actions; for instance only red agents can move red boxes. This must still be accounted
Page 39
==PAGE:46==
Evaluation of the Theory Presented for use in MASokoban
for when solving a level, meaning a system must be in place to facilitate this method of
cooperation.
These problems are not necessarily unique to Sokoban, but Sokoban might well be one of the
only domains in which all these problems are present. Sokoban is also a notoriously challenging
domain to create an eﬀective planner for.[23]
Given this, although the solution might have worked had I had more time to work on it, it seems
unlikely that the solution would have faired particularly well within MASokoban; although it
is unknown if this expectation is overly pessimistic or not, as Artiﬁcial Intelligence is usually a
more experimental science than a deductive science.
It would be interesting to dedicate an entire research project to implementing the theories de-
scribed in this report into one big solution, that is then tested across multiple domains and
against multiple other solutions, if only to see the merits and the extend of the domain indepen-
dence of said solution.
Presumably it would require its own project of a scale similar to this project, given the complex-
ity of the theories presented and the potential challenges involved in implementing them into a
program and making it all work in multiple domains.
Page 40
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
There appears to be a lot of promise in the use of landmarks, both in planning problems and
in plan recognition problems. This is both by extension, via plan recognition as planning, and
without, as landmarks appear even in counterplanning and in active goal recognition.
Furthermore a landmark based solution, when combined with a domain independent search
heuristic, would seemingly be able to create a mostly domain independent planner and domain
independent plan recogniser, where the only requirements are that landmarks may be disjunct
and that actions have known preconditions and eﬀects.
It is currently unknown how well landmarks work for use in multi-agent collaboration, speciﬁcally
in the MASokoban domain. It seems it would be possible to make such a solution work, although
how well this would compare to other potential solutions is currently unknown. Presumably
it would not be the best solution available, but it would be an oﬀ-the-shelf solution that is
mostly plan independent and could therefore be reused in a domain better suited for such a
heavily landmark-based solution. As such the solution still has merit, at the very least from an
engineering perspective.
Finally the use of plan recognition for cooperative multi-agent solutions is, at the time of writing,
still a very novel concept that warrants further testing, due to the potential beneﬁts of a decen-
tralised, domain independent, cooperative solution, where the agents involved act not based on
a predeﬁned plan, but based on which goals they observe other actors are currently trying to
achieve.
Page 41
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1] Mirsky, Reuth; Keren, Sarah; Geib, Christopher;
Introduction to Symbolic Plan and Goal Recognition, 2021,
https://public.ccsds.org/Pubs/735x1b1.pdf
[2] Kautz, Henry A.; Allen, James F.;
GENERALIZED PLAN RECOGNITION, 1986,
https://www.aaai.org/Papers/AAAI/1986/AAAI86-006.pdf
[3] Pattison, David; Long, Derek;
Domain Independent Goal Recognition, 2010,
https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/32917/1/domain_independent_goal_
recognition.pdf
[4] Ramirez, Miquel; Geﬀner, Hector;
Plan recognition as planning, 2009,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220812446_Plan_Recognition_as_
Planning
[5] Keren, Sarah; Gal, Avigdor; Karpas, Erez;
Goal Recognition Design, 2014,
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICAPS/ICAPS14/paper/view/7814/8023
[6] Shvo, Maayan; McIlraith, Sheila;
Active Goal Recognition, 2020,
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/6551
[7] Banerjee, Bikramjit; Kraemer, Landon; Lyle, Jeremy;
Multi-Agent Plan Recognition: Formalization and Algorithms, 2010,
https://sites.usm.edu/banerjee/papers/MAPR_AAAI2010.pdf
Page 42
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[8] Argenta, Chris; Doyle, Jon;
Multi-Agent Plan Recognition as Planning (MAPRAP), 2016,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/301721491_Multi-Agent_Plan_
Recognition_as_Planning_MAPRAP
[9] Pozenco, Alberto; E-Martín, Yolanda; Fernández, Susana; Borrajo, Daniel;
Counterplanning using Goal Recognition and Landmarks, 2018,
https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2018/0668.pdf
[10] Freedman, Richard G.; Zilberstein, Shlomo;
Integration of Planning with Recognition for Responsive Interaction Using Classical Planners,
2017, https://aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI17/paper/view/14983
[11] Stolba, Michal; Fiser, Daniel; Komenda, Antonín;
Admissible Landmark Heuristic for Multi-Agent Planning, 2015,
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Antonin-Komenda/publication/
282075034_Admissible_Landmark_Heuristic_for_Multi-Agent_Planning/links/
56026f4508aecb0ce881ba79/Admissible-Landmark-Heuristic-for-Multi-Agent-Planning.
pdf
[12] Brafman, Ronen; Domshlak, Carmel;
From One to Many: Planning for Loosely Coupled Multi-Agent Systems, 2008,
https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2018/0668.pdf
[13] Hoﬀman, J, Porteous, Julie; Sebastia, Laura;
Ordered Landmarks in Planning, 2004,
https://www.aaai.org/Papers/JAIR/Vol22/JAIR-2208.pdf
[14] Helmert, Malte; Domshlak, Carmel;
Landmarks, Critical Paths and Abstractions: What’s the Diﬀerence Anyway?, 2009,
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICAPS/ICAPS09/paper/view/735/1107
[15] Pommerening, Florian; Helmert, Malte;
Optimal Planning for Delete-Free Tasks with Incremental LM-Cut, 2012,
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICAPS/ICAPS12/paper/view/4695/4751
[16] Bonet, Blai; Castillo, Julio;
A Complete Algorithm for Generating Landmarks, 2011,
https://bonetblai.github.io/reports/ICAPS11-landmarks.pdf
[17] Pereira, Ramon; Oren, Nir; Meneguzzi, Felipe;
Landmark-Based Heuristics for Goal Recognition, 2017,
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11021
Page 43
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[18] Helmert, Malte; Röger, Gabriele;
Planning and Optimization C20. Landmarks: Cut Landmarks & LM-cut Heuristic, 2016,
https://ai.dmi.unibas.ch/_files/teaching/hs16/po/slides/po-c20.pdf
[19] Richter, Silvia; Westphal, Matthias;
The LAMA Planner: Guiding Cost-Based Anytime Planning with Landmarks, 2010,
https://www.jair.org/index.php/jair/article/view/10667/25496
[20] Karpas, E; Wang, D; Williams, B.C.; Haslum, P.;
Temporal landmarks: What must happen, and when, 2015,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283751100_Temporal_landmarks_What_
must_happen_and_when
[21] Richter, Silvia; Helmert, Malte; Westphal, Matthis;
Landmarks Revisited, 2008,
https://www.aaai.org/Papers/AAAI/2008/AAAI08-155.pdf
[22] Bonet, Blai; Geﬀner, Hector;
Planning under Partial Observability by Classical Replanning: Theory and Experiments, 2011,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220812263_Planning_under_Partial_
Observability_by_Classical_Replanning_Theory_and_Experiments
[23] Pereira, André G.; Ritt, Marcus; Buriol, Luciana S.;
Optimal Sokoban solving using pattern databases with speciﬁc domain knowledge, 2015,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370215000867
[24] Soumela, Jukka; Hirvonen Juho;
Distributed Algorithms 2020, 2021,
https://jukkasuomela.fi/da2020/
Page 44
