==PAGE:1==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
1
SUSTAINABLE
AFFORDABLE
HOUSING
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
==PAGE:2==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
2
Acknowledgements 	
Thanks to my dad and my dear friend, Nina. Thanks to Per 
Sieverts Nielsen for supervision and an inspirational course on 
sustainable indicators. 
==PAGE:3==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
3
GRADUATE THESIS
THE TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK (DTU)
Student 		
Nanna-Rose Reinewald K. Broch
	
	
Architectural Engineering 
	
	
DTU Building Department
Student ID	
s123764
Supervisor	
Per Sieverts Nielsen
	
	
Senior Researcher 
	
	
DTU Management 
Hand in date	
22/2-2022
Credits	 	
35 ECTS
No. pages	
114
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
- AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL 
FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
==PAGE:4==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
4
==PAGE:5==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
	
ABSTRACT	
	
	
	
6
	
DANSK RESUME	 	
	
	
7
	
NAVIGATION	
	
	
	
8
	
Glosary	 	
	
	
	
8
	
Abbreviations	
	
	
	
8
	
Reading and print		
	
	
9
	
CLARIFICATION OF CONCEPTS	
	
10
1	
INTRODUCTION	
	
	
	
12
1.1	
Problem context	 	
	
	
16
1.1.1	
The global sustainable agenda	
	
16
1.1.2	
Measuring sustainable progress	
	
16
1.1.3	
A sustainable challenge: Urbanization & 
	
un-affordability	
	
	
	
17
1.2 	
Problem framing	 	
	
	
18
1.3	
Research questions	
	
	
19
2	
METHODOLOGY	
	
	
	
18
2.1	
Scope	
	
	
	
	
24
2.1.1	
Thesis context	
	
	
	
24
2.1.2	
Why a case study?	
	
	
25
2.1.3	
Working proces	
	
	
	
25
2.2	
Research Design	 	
	
	
26
2.3	
Literature search	 	
	
	
28
2.4 	
Theoretical synthesis	
	
	
30	
	
2.4.1 	
Main concepts of SAH	
	
	
30
2.4.2	
Sub concepts of SAH 	
	
	
30
2.5	
Case analysis 	
	
	
	
32
2.5.1	
Good practice reporting	
	
	
32
2.5.2	
Good practice indicators	
	
	
33
2.5.3	
Indicator assessment	
	
	
34
3	
THEORY	 	
	
	
	
36
3.1 	
Sustainability as theoretical concept	
40
3.1.1	
Components of sustainability	
	
40
3.1.2	
Social-economic intersection	
	
40
3.2	
Sustainable affordable housing	
	
41
3.2.1	
Housing and indicators	
	
	
41
3.2.2	
Affordable housing and equity	
	
41
3.2.3	
Indicators on SAH: Journal articles	 	
42
3.2.4	
Indicators on SAH: Organisational tools	
44
3.3 	
Theoretical synthesis	
	
	
46
3.3.1 	
Essential concepts of SAH	 	
	
46
3.3.2 	
Figure: Context of SAH	
	
	
48
3.3.3 	
Figure: Concepts of SAH	
	
	
48
4	
CASE STUDY	
	
	
	
50
4.1 	
Case context
4.1.1	
Reports on housing and sustainability in DK	 54
4.1.2 	
Prior assessments on affordable housing
	
in the City of Copenhagen	 	
	
56
4.2	
Selecting indicators	
	
	
58
4.2.1 	
Indicator selection criteria	 	
	
58
4.2.2	
Potential indicators 	
	
	
59
4.2.3 
Evaluation and final selection  
 
61
4.3	
Framework description	
	
	
62
4.3.1	
Vision and scope	 	
	
	
62
4.3.2	
Framework type	 	
	
	
63
4.4	
Indicator assessment	
	
	
64
4.4.1 	
Description 	
	
	
	
64
4.4.2 	
Summerization of results	 	
	
66
4.4.3	
Index A - Pendling		
	
	
68
4.4.4	
Index B - Low income groups	
	
71
4.4.5	
Index C1 - Housing costs vs income	 	
76
4.4.6	
Index C2 - Tenure neutrality	
	
80
4.4.7	
Index D1 - Housing provision for low 
	
income groups	
	
	
	
84
4.4.8	
Index D2 - Tenures	
	
	
88
4.4.9	
Index E1 - Small apartments	
	
90
4.4.10	
Index E2 - Housing occupancy	
	
92
4.4.11	
Index F - Crime and safety 	
	
94
5	
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION	
	
100
5.1 	
Indicator results	 	
	
	
102
5.1.1	
Housing stock and housing layout	
	
102
5.1.2	
Mobility, community, comfort and health	
104
5.1.3	
Low income groups and housing	
	
105
5.1.4	
Environmental costs	
	
	
105
5.1.5	
Concluding remarks on results	
	
106
5.2 	
Indicator assessment methodology	 	
108
5.3 	
SAH and urban planning	
	
 	
109
5.4	
Conclusion	
	
	
	
110
REFERENCES	
	
	
	
	
114
==PAGE:6==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
6
ABSTRACT
The City of Copenhagen has formulated goals for hous-
ing affordability in context of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG's) presented by the United Nations. However, no 
indicator assesment tool has been developed for measuring 
whether progress is being made towards ensuring sustain-
able affordable housing (SAH). An indicator assessment tool 
is a recognized method for both scientific inquiry and policy 
development within measuring progress towards sustainable 
development. Therefore, the research objective of this thesis 
is to develop an indicator assessment tool for SAH to the 
case of the City of Copenhagen. Furthermore, an assessment 
is made of whether the City of Copenhagen is progressing to-
wards sustainability. This is done by completing the following 
investigations: 
The terminologies presented in academic research on the 
subject of sustainability and its components are presented. 
Hereby, affordable housing is positioned as a sectoral aspect 
of urban sustainable development. From the theoretical field 
the thesis presents the theoretical concepts essential to SAH. 
They are: Location Affordability, Housing Quality, Environmen-
tal Housing Costs, and Housing Satisfaction. 
Concluding a theoretical synthesis, SAH is characterized by 
reflecting the diversity of a population in both housing stock, 
housing quality, and housing costs, it is connected by good 
quality transport to good quality communities and has a 
physical standard, that supports human comfort and health. 
Furthermore, it should be contextualized to its environmental 
costs and the satisfaction of relevant target groups.
The essential concepts of SAH are then applied in a trend 
analysis of the City of Copenhagen. Theory presented by Ma-
claren (1996) and Garett & Lataweic (2015) is applied to select 
and prioritize indicators. Applying these criteria results in the 
following indicators for the assessment of SAH in the City of 
Copenhagen: 
'Pendling distance', 'Working versus dwelling citizens', 'People 
at risk of poverty', 'Homelessness’, ‘Allocations’, 'Price-to-in-
come ratio', 'Price-to-rent ratio', 'Social housing rent-to-in-
come ratio', 'Consumption versus income', 'Housing expenses 
versus income', 'Provision of housing for low income groups', 
'Occupancy length', 'Occupancy status', 'Tenures' 'Small apart-
ments', and 'Crime and safety versus housing prices’.
The indicator assessment results are than analysed to assess 
whether progress is made towards ensuring SAH in the CIty 
of Copenhagen. The results show that 9/18 indicators show 
movement away from sustainability, 8/18 indicators show 
progress towards sustainability, 1/18 indicators show a stag-
nant development, and 1/18 indicators is inconclusive due to 
data insufficience. 
On this basis it is discussed how the indicator assessment 
results can guide the formulation of urban sustainable de-
velopment goals in the City of Copenhagen. From the limited 
indicator results it is concluded, that housing in the City of 
Copenhagen is connected by good quality transport to good 
quality communities and has a physical standard, that sup-
ports human comfort and health. Furthermore, the satisfac-
tion of its tenants on safety is increasing.
However, housing in the City of Copenhagen is not reflect-
ing the diversity of the population by income in the housing 
stock, housing layout, and housing costs. None of the indica-
tors are contextualized to the environmental costs of housing 
which should be prioritized in future studies to improve the 
tool.
In conclusion, the indicator assessment provides a limited 
insight in the concepts that affects SAH. Therefore, further 
assessment is needed to guide the formulation of future sus-
tainable goals for the City of Copenhagen. Nevertheless, the 
developed indicator assessment tool provides a methodologi-
cal basis for discussing how the concepts of SAH are inter-
dependent. Furthermore, it elucidates that trade-offs must 
be made between affordability and the physical quality of the 
built environment.  
==PAGE:7==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
7
DANSK RESUME
Københavns Kommune har formuleret mål for at sikre 
betalelige boliger i kontekst af de globale bæredygtigheds-
mål (Sustinable Development Goals/SDG's) præsenteret af 
de Forenede Nationer. Imidlertid findes der ikke et bæredyg-
tighedsværktøj (Indicator Assessment Tool) til at vurdere, om 
hvorvidt udviklingen indenfor betalelige boliger er bæredygtig 
i Københavns Kommune. Et bæredygtighedsværktøj er en 
anerkendt metode til videnskabelig undersøgelse og politisk 
målsætning. Derfor er formålet med dette speciale at udvikle 
et bæredygtighedsværktøj for bæredygtige, betalelige boli-
ger (sustainable affordable housing/SAH) samt foretage en 
undersøgelse af, om hvorvidt Københavns Kommune udvikler 
sig i en mere bæredygtig retning indenfor emnet. Dette gør 
specialet gennem følgende undersøgelser:
Terminologier præsenteret i akademisk forskning indefor 
emnet bæredygtighed og dets komponenter præsenteres. 
Herigennem positioneres begrebet 'betalelige boliger' i kon-
tekst af bæredygtig urban udvikling. Fra det samlede teore-
tiske felt præsenterer afhandlingen de teoretiske koncepter, 
som er essentiale for at vurdere om boliger er billige og 
bæredygtige. Koncepterne er: 'Beliggenhed', 'Boligkvalitet', 
'Klimaomkostninger', og 'Boligtilfredshed'. 
På baggrund af en teoretisk synthese kan bæredygtige, 
betalelige boliger karakteriseres på følgende måde: 
Bæredygtige, betalelige boliger er karakteriseret ved at de 
reflekterer diversiteten af en befolkning i både boligmasse, 
-kvalitet og -omkostninger. De er forbundet af transport i god 
kvalitet til nabolag i god kvalitet og har en fysisk standard 
som understøtter menneskelig komfort og sundhed. Deru-
dover skal boligens betalelighed altid kontekstualiseres til kli-
maomkostninger og tilfredsheden hos relevante målgrupper.
De essentielle teoretiske koncepter for bæredygtige, betale-
lige boliger anvendes hernæst i en trendanalyse af Køben-
havns Kommune. Indikatorer udvælges og prioriteres i over-
ensstemmelse med teori præsenteret af Maclaren (1996) og 
Garett & Lataweic (2015). Efter at have anvendt denne teori er 
de endelige indikatorer som følger: 
'Pendling distance', 'Erhvervstilknyttede versus beboere', 'Folk i 
risiko for fattigdom', 'Hjemløse’, ‘Bolighenvisninger’, 'Pris-til-in-
dkomst ratio', 'Pris-til-husleje ratio', 'Almene boliger husle-
je-til-indkomst ratio', 'Forbrug versus indkomst, 'Boligudgifter 
versus indkomst', 'Boliger til lavindkomstgrypper', 'Opholdstid 
i boliger, 'Belægningsstatus', 'Ejerformer', 'Små lejligheder', og 
'Kriminalitet og tryghed versus boligpriser’.
Hernæst analyseres vurderingsværktøjets resultater til at 
vurdere om hvorvidt udviklingen for betalelige boliger går i 
en bæredygtig retning i Københavns Kommune. Resultaterne 
viser, at 9/18 indikatorer viser ubæredygtige tendenser, 8/18 
indikatorer viser bæredygtige tendenser, 1/18 indikatorer viser 
en stillestående udvikling og 1/18 indikatorer peger på behovet 
for bedre dataindsamling. 
På baggrund af dette diskuterer specialet, hvordan bæredyg-
tighedsvurderingsværktøjets resultater kan guide fremtidige 
bæredygtige urbane mål for Københavns Kommune. Fra de 
begrænsede resultater konkluderes det, at boliger i Køben-
havns Kommune er forbundet af transport i god kvalitet til 
nabolag i god kvalitet og har en fysisk standard som under-
støtter komfort og sundhed. Derudover stiger beboertilfred-
sheden i forhold til generel tryghed.
Imidlertid reflekterer boligerne i Københavns Kommune ikke 
diversiteten af befolkningen efter indkomst i hverken bolig-
massen, boligplanløsninger eller boligpriser. Ingen af indika-
torerne medregner klimaomkostninger, hvilket derfor skal 
prioriteres i fremtidige studier til at optimere værktøjet.
Herfra kan det konkluderes at bæredygtighedsvurdingsværk-
tøjet giver et indblik i nogle af de områder som influerer 
bæredygtige, betalelige boliger. Yderligere vurderinger er nød-
vendige for at vejlede Københavns Kommune i at formulere 
fremtidige mål for bæredygtige, betalelige boliger. Ikke desto 
mindre kan det udviklede bæredygtighedsvurdingsværktøj 
være en metodisk basis for at diskutere hvordan urbane plan-
lægningsaspekter er indbyrdes afhængige.
Derudover belyser værktøjet at det er nødvendigt at foretage 
afvejninger mellem betalelighed og den fysiske kvalitet af det 
byggede miljø.
==PAGE:8==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
8
AHD	
Affordable Housing Database
BBR	
The Danish Building and Housing Register
	
(Bygning- og Boligregisteret)
BC	
Brundtland Commission
BPST	
The Danish Housing and Planning Agency
	
(Bolig- og Planstyrelsen)
BR	
Brundtland Report
CPH	
Copenhagen
EC	
European Commission
EP	
European Parliament
EU 	
European Union
SILC	
Statistics on Income and Living Conditions
GDP	
Gross Domestic Product 
NSA	
Neighborhood Assessment Tool
OECD	
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
	
Development
SAH	
Sustainable Affordable Housing
SDG 	
Sustainable Development Goal
UDHR	
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UN 	
United Nations
WSO	
World Summit Outcome
WCED	
The World Commission on Environment and 
	
Development
QoL	
Quality of life
Av.	
Average
App.	
Approximately
Excl.	
Exclusive
Incl.	
Inclusive
No.	
Number of
GLOSARY
ABBREVIATIONS
NAVIGATION
==PAGE:9==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
9
Tables in appendixes are continued across a two page 
spread. Layout and in text references to figures and tables 
are designed for a two page spread. Therefore, the report has 
a layout which is best read in A4, portrait, two page spread, 
printed on both sides.
READING AND PRINT
==PAGE:10==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
10
Housing
Housing is defined as living spaces; a rigid casing that enclos-
es and protects a space where people live. Housing is often 
categorized by household type (eg. house, flat or detached) 
use (eg, vacancy or full-year), or by tenure status (eg. renter or 
owner) (Peiser, 2015).
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)
A Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is an analysis completed on 
the whole life cycle of a system or product that is the object 
of study. It covers a broad range of life cycle impacts from 
which it attempts to perform a quantitative assessment on 
sustainability. The focus of LCA has mainly been on the envi-
ronmental impacts and has demonstrated to be an import-
ant assessment tool in the environmental regulation in many 
parts of the world (Hauschild, 2018).
Social housing (DK) 
In Danish ‘Almene Boliger’. A type of non-profit housing where 
the rent is only cost-related. Social housing organs are gov-
erned by democratic resident organizations (Lejerbo, 2021).
Sustainability
The Brundtland Commission defines sustainable development 
as: “[...] the development that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs.” (WCED, 1987, §3.27). 
Sustainable development
According to Maclaren (1996) the meanings of ‘sustainable 
urban development’ and ‘urban sustainability’ are two close 
terms often used interchangeably in literature. They should be 
distinguished by that ‘sustainability’ describes an ideal set of 
conditions that persists over time, whereas the word ‘devel-
opment’ implies a process by which an ideal is sought to be 
accomplished: sustainability (Ibid.).
CLARIFICATION OF CONCEPTS
Sustainable indicator 
A sustainable indicator is used to measure or evaluate a 
particular characteristic of interest. A combination of several 
indicators can constitute a sustainable indicator framework or 
tool (Gudmundsson, 2016).
According to Gudmundsson et al. (2016) the terminology for 
sustainable indicator components are presented as follows: 
Indicator
An indicator is a variable or a combination of variables which 
is selected to represent a certain issue of interest
Parameter (Variable)
A parameter is a measurable value. Indicators are by defini-
tion variables. However, not all variables are indicators, unless 
they are selected to represent a certain issue of interest
Unit (Measurement scale)
A unit is the way in which an indicator or variable is mea-
sured. Units are often categorised as: Nominal, ordinal, 
interval, or ratio. They can be scientific units or customized to 
specific contexts
Value 
A value is the magnitude of a parameter or indicator. It is rep-
resented by a number, figure, symbol, etc. 
Index (Composite Indicator/Aggregate)
Indexes combines multiple indicators or parameters
(Ibid., 2016, pp. 140-141).
==PAGE:11==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
11
Sustinable indicator 'tool' versus 'framework'
An 'indicator assessment tool' and 'sustainable indicator 
framework' refers to a combination of indicators that evaluate 
a particular characteristic of interest (Gudmundsson, 2016). 
Often ‘tool’ is used in a practice oriented context and ‘frame-
work’ in a theoretical context (Garett and Lataweic, 2015).
Sustainable reporting
The act of reporting assessments on progress towards or 
away from sustainability (MacLaren, 1996). 
Quality of life (QoL)
A broad concept which adresses an individual’s perception of 
their personal situation in both physical, social, mental and 
spiritual dimensions. The definition on QoL from the World 
Health Organisation (WHO) Quality of Life Group (1997) is: 
“Individuals’ perception of their position in life in the context 
of the culture and value systems in which they live and in 
relation to their goals, expectations, standards and concerns” 
(Ibid., p. 1).
'Wellbeing' versus 'comfort'
Wellbeing is a term used in psychologically or spiritually 
oriented perspectives related to the concepts of happiness, 
positive experiences or ideas, life satisfaction, pleasure, 
and prosperity. It covers aspects such as awareness of the 
physical condition, stress reduction and self-responsibility. 
The strategies for achieving well-being help people reach new 
ways of understanding and controlling their lives, both in an 
individual and a collective scope.
Comfort is a synonym of ‘well-being’, but often used as a 
more holistic sense representing relief, ease and transcen-
dence. It is closely aassociated with the nature of nursing 
care (Pinto et al., 2016).
==PAGE:12==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
12
INTRODUCTION
1 
1 2 3 4 5
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:13==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
13
This chapter presents the problem context and framing and the research objectives and 
questions. This is done in order to contextualise the problem field, and the specific focus 
and relevance of the report. 
Additionally, a clarification of concepts is presented, along with a walk through of the 
report structuce and the report proces. This is done in order to make the report logic and 
structure transperent and understandable to the reader.
Problem context 
blabla
Urban trends
This section presents theory on urban sustainable development in brief, describing the 
main trends and challenges for cities in relation to socioeconomic aspects of housing. 
Furthermore definitions on essential aspects are presented. This section is included to give 
the reader a contextual understanding of the importance of assessing sustainability in the 
context of housing. Furthermore, this section is used for analyzing the quality of the exist-
ing frameworks on sustainability of housing, and how a new one can be constructed.
INTRODUCTION
1
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:14==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
14
1 2 3 4 5 
Photo: Åboulevarden, Copenhagen NV. January 2019. 
Source: Private.
==PAGE:15==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
15
Chapter 1. 'Introduction' presents the problem context, the 
problem framing and the research questions. This is done in 
order to contextualise the focus and relevance of the thesis. 
CHAPTER CONTENT
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:16==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
16
THE GLOBAL SUSTAINABLE AGENDA
Origin of the term 'sustainability'
In the late nineteenth century the idea of sustainable devel-
opment emerged in the observation of an ecological crisis as 
the result of rapid industrializa­tion and urbanization world-
wide (Shirazi & Keivani, 2019). The Brundtland Report ‘Our 
Common Future’ from 1987, completed by The World Com-
mission on Environment and Development (WCED) was a po-
litical turning point that caused sustainable development to 
become mainstream globally (Shirazi & Keivani, 2019; Wheeler, 
2013). The purpose of the the Brundtland Report was to pro-
pose long term strategies for achieving sustainable develop-
ment in order for the international community to formulate 
goals and their means for achievement to deal effectively 
with environmental concerns caused by industrialization and 
urbanization such as ecological degradation, social inequality, 
and economic injustice (WCED, 1987).
Global goals for sustainable development
In 2015 the UN presents 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDG’s) in the report ‘Transforming our world: the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development A/RES/70/1’ (UN, 2015). 
The SDGs constitutes goals and targets for achieving global 
sustainable development in relation to social, environmental, 
cultural, and political parameters. The SDGs are guided by the 
principles of the UN Charter, grounded in the Universal Decla-
ration of Human Rights (UDHR) and builds upon the outcomes 
and learnings from the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
and the World Summit Outcome (WSO) from 2005. The SDG’s 
are divided into 169 targets which elaborate on different 
objectives for achievements on sustainable development. 
Target and goals combined intends to stimulate political and 
governmental action from 2015-2030 in areas considered of 
critical importance for humanity and the planet by the UN 
Member States (UN, 2015). In the revised UN-report ‘Report of 
the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Sustainable Develop-
ment Goal Indicators’ sustainable indicators supplement each 
SDG-target to assist the measurement of progress towards 
sustainability (UN, 2016). Nations around the world - including 
Denmark - has committed to fulfill the SDG’s by 2030. The 
SDG’s should be viewed as guidelines for governments and 
always be adapted to a local or national context (Rambøll & 
DAC, 2019). 
1.1.1
PROBLEM CONTEXT
1.1
1 2 3 4 5 
Sustainable reporting: a method to measure progress
Sustainable indicators are the backbone for monitoring prog-
ress towards sustainability in sustainable reporting (Garrett 
and Latawiec, 2015). Maclaren (1996) defines urban sustain-
ability reporting as: 
“a tool for informing local government, as well as individuals, 
businesses, and other organizations, about the progress that 
they are making towards achieving urban sustainability” (Ibid., 
p. 184). 
A sustainability framework is determined by certain goals for 
sustainable development from which a combined analysis of 
the indicators assesses a sustainable performance. Such a 
framework assess the effectiveness of actions and policies 
at moving systems towards a more sustainable state. Sus-
tainable indicators can either clarify goals, describe trends, 
analyse conditions, analyse project development, or evaluate 
alternative strategies towards sustainability (MacLaren, 1996). 
Challlenges with sustainable reporting
Sustainable indicators reflect what is considered essential in 
sustainable development since it is the primary tool inform-
ing governments and businesses to assess their sustainable 
development (Maclaren, 1996). However, different political 
sectors present different points of view about sustainabili-
ty in relation to social, environmental, cultural, and political 
issues, and in different locations. Rigorous data collecting and 
analysis causes an ambiguity of the sustainable development 
comprehension and definition. Consequently, this results 
in different measuring methods making it a challeging to 
progress towards a collective definition of sustainability (de 
Azevedo & Silva, 2010).
According to Tanguay et al. (2010) sustainable development 
should not be redefined when adapted to a particular context. 
Instead, it should be consistent with that of the Brundland 
Report (1987) by reflecting the economic, social and environ-
mental components as well as the overlaps between them. 
The objectives of the framework should reflect both specific 
factors for the local context and the need to homogenize the 
indicators to allow for comparison. Additionally, it is not suffi-
cient to base a framework on previously established objec-
tives and selection criteria (Tanguay et al., 2010). An indicator 
assessment tool is a recognized method for both scientific 
inquiry and policy development within measuring progress 
towards sustainable development (Ibid.; Maclaren, 1996).
MEASURING SUSTAINABLE PROGRESS
1.1.2
==PAGE:17==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
17
INTRODUCTION
Urban growth and sustainability
The rapid rate of urbanizational growth is one of the most 
dominant trends of the 20th century. More than half of the 
world’s population is urban dwellers (Hopwood & Mellor, 
2006). Cities Climate Leadership Group (2019) estimates that 
another 2.5 billion people will live in urban areas by 2025. 
Cities and urban areas contain the greatest concentrations of 
economic and residential activities, and such areas are where 
most emissions, waste, and pollution are produced. Cities are 
also where the highest share of consumption occurs (Camag-
ni, 2017) and where the sharpest contrasts are found between 
rich and poor (Yeganeh et al., 2018). This makes cities an ideal 
melting pot for testing sustainable solutions (Hopwood & 
Mellor, 2006) as well as withholding a big potential for pro-
gressing on the sustainability agenda. Many cities have taken 
up the ambition of working towards sustainability (Shirazi & 
Keivani, 2019).
A result of urban growth: unaffordability of housing
The rapid urbanization increases housing affordability 
challenges in both developed and developing countries. An 
increasing share of low income earners cannot afford to buy 
or rent housing in the central cities (Chan & Adabre, 2019). 
Hence, lower income citizens have to move to less central 
areas in urban commuting zones or areas with less adequate 
housing (Turk, 2021).
The process of citizens being priced out of an area is known 
as gentrification (Yeganeh et al., 2018). The term refers to the 
process of replacement of an existing population by wealthier 
people than the existing one (Glass, 1964). Gentrification is 
recognized to be a widespread phenomenon in large cities all 
over the world including: London, San Francisco, New York, 
Toronto, Sydney, in urban centers in Southern and Eastern 
Europe as well as in major centers in Asia and Latin Ameri-
ca (Larsen & Hansen, 2008). Factors discussed in literature 
that can cause gentrification are various. Some examples 
are urban climate adaption also known as ‘greening’, building 
renovation and transformation, social mix policies, real estate 
competition, capital investment, and a growing gap between 
the supply and demand of housing (Hansen & Larsen, 2008).
Adequate and affordable housing central to sustainability
UN recognizes the right to adequate and affordable hous-
ing as an essential aspect of sustainable development. SGD 
11 deal with different aspects of the sustainability of cities 
including: Housing, transport, urban spaces, natural disasters, 
A SUSTAINABLE CHALLENGE: URBANIZATION & UN-AFFORDABILITY
1.1.3
and cultural heritage. It states: “Make cities inclusive, safe, 
resilient and sustainable.” (UN, 2015, p. 21). The first target in 
SDG 11 states: "By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, 
safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade 
slums." (Ibid., p. 21). For a complete list of all targets and indi-
cators included in SDG 11 see Appendix A, p. 8.
Un-affordability of housing in the City of Copenhagen
The rapid urbanization has also contributed to increasing 
housing affordability challenges in the City of Copenhagen in 
Denmark (Turk, 2021). In Denmark, the Danish State provides 
the general guidelines for urban planning. The municipalities 
are the smallest governmental entities and they have the 
responsibility to translate the national guidelines and visions 
into physical urban planning through municipal and local 
plans (KK, 2021). Hence, municipal and local urban policies 
can regulate the spatial distribution of housing and their ten-
ures through urban planning measures (Turk, 2021). 
In the most recent municipal plan presented by the City of 
Copenhagen in 2019 the municipality recognizes the lack of 
affordable housing as a central problem in their urban plan-
ning policy (KK, 2019.a). The City of Copenhagen state, that it 
aims to: “[...] create mixed and diverse residential areas with 
housing for all Copenhageners” (Ibid., p. 53). In the report ‘The 
City of Copenhagen’s action plan for the sustainable devel-
opment goals’ from 2018 the City of Copenhagen presents 
visions for sustainable development in context of the UN 
sustainable agenda (KK, 2018.a). Here, the City of Copenhagen 
states: "Housing must be available to everyone and for every-
one. More housing is not enough; equally important is that the 
city has housing for all price levels" (Ibid., p. 30).
 
Reports have been developed to measure whether the City of 
Copenhagen progresses towards providing more affordable 
housing eg. the reports: 'Demography, housing needs and 
price development in the City of Copenhagen, analysis with 
focus on current and future developments' (CE, 2018) and 
'Analysis of accessibility in the housing market in Copenhagen' 
(KK, 2018.b). However, none of the reports position affordable 
housing in context of the sustainable agenda nor present 
the methodology of a sustainable indicator assessment tool. 
Therefore, the research objective of this thesis is to develop 
an indicator assessment tool for sustainable affordable hous-
ing (SAH) to the case of the City of Copenhagen.
==PAGE:18==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
18
In context of the UN sustainable agenda the City of Copenha-
gen has set goals for reaching sustainable development. One 
sustainable goal is to ensure affordable housing in order to 
create diverse residential areas with housing for all Copenha-
geners (KK, 2019.a). The City of Copenhagen wants to progress 
towards a more sustainable and equal city by ensuring that 
housing is available to everyone and for everyone (KK, 2018.a).  
The City of Copenhagen has formulated sustainable goals 
for housing affordability, but no indicator assesment tool 
has been developed for measuring whether progress is being 
made towards ensuring sustainable affordable housing (SAH). 
An indicator assessment tool is a recognized method for both  
scientific inquiry and policy development within measuring 
progress towards sustainable development. Therefore, the 
research objective of this thesis is to develop an indicator 
assessment tool for SAH to the case of the City of Copenha-
gen. From a case analysis an assessment is made on whether 
progress is being made towards ensuring SAH. Finally, it is 
discussed how the indicator assessment tool can guide the 
formulation of urban sustainable development goals in the 
City of Copenhagen and in general.
PROBLEM FRAMING
1.2
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:19==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
19
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
1.3
In order to meet the research objective the following ques-
tions are answered. They are divided in three parts following 
the chronological structure of this thesis:
Theory
1. How does the theoretical field of sustainable affordable 
housing (SAH) define the essential concepts of SAH?
Case Study
2. How can the essential concepts from the theoretical field 
of SAH be applied as an indicator assessment tool to assess 
SAH in the City of Copenhagen? 
3. Would it be possible to conclude whether progress is being 
made towards ensuring SAH in the City of Copenhagen and 
how?
Discussion
4. How can the indicator assessment tool on SAH in the City 
of Copenhagen guide the formulation of urban sustainable 
development goals in the City of Copenhagen and in general? 
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:20==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
20
1 2 3 4 5
METHODOLOGY
2 
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:21==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
21
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:22==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
22
Photo: Bellahøj Houses, Copenhagen. January 2022. 
Source: Private.
1 2 3 4 5
==PAGE:23==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
23
CHAPTER CONTENT
This chapter presents the methodological approach of the 
thesis:
Section 2.1 'Scope' presents the thesis context in terms of 
philosofy of science, personal sensemaking and bias, the field 
of study context, and relevant prior study activities. Finally, 
the thesis working proces is described in brief. 
Section 2.2 'Research design' presents the research design of 
the thesis in order to guide the reader through the structure 
of the report.
Section 2.3 'Theory' describes the methodology of the litera-
ture search.
Section 2.4 ‘Theoretical sythesis’ describes how the essential 
concepts of SAH are synthesized from the collected theory. 
Section 2.4 ‘Case study’ presents the methodology of the cat-
egorisation and selection of indicators. It presents theory on 
good practice reporting and describes how data is processed 
in the indicator assessment.  
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:24==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
24
Philosofy of science 
This thesis is written in accordance with the social construc-
tivistic philosophy of science. Social constructivism is the be-
lief that no objective reality exists since the reality is socially 
constructed (Egholm, 2014). As a consequence problems are 
'wicked' and neither definitive nor objective solutions exist to 
problems (Rittel & Webber, 1973). The thesis is operating in the 
social constructivism in the sense that it applies theory based 
on empirical generalisations in a real-life context in a case 
study on the City of Copenhagen. This underpins the social 
constructivist belief that one can only obtain context-depen-
dent knowledge, since no objective reality can be grasped 
(Egholm, 2014).
Personal sensemaking and bias
The sensemaking of the studied phenomenon in this thesis 
has been continous in an iterative process until the finalisa-
tion. After three years of architectural practice and five years 
of engineering student practice my tacit knowledge have 
influenced my percieving of the study context and where to 
look for answers. It has been influenced by my own expec-
tations, my previous studies and professional and personal 
experiences. All factors have influenced the thesis scope and 
chosen literature (Wengenvorth, 2004). As a result, aspects of 
housing aligned with my prior studies have been investigated 
rather than others. For example physical aspects of housing 
have been prioritized over economic ones. 
Field of study context
This thesis is written at the Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU). I am a student from the DTU Building Department,  
Architectural Engineering, and the thesis is written under 
DTU Management, Department of Technology, Management 
and Economics, with Per Sieverts Nielsen as supervisor. He 
is specialised in Energy Economics and System Analysis at 
the Sustainability Division. Therefore, the thesis is focused on 
sustainable development in an urban context with a specific 
focus on the build environment. It views sustainability from 
a system perspective and investigates the framed problem 
through a broad synthesis including multidisciplinary re-
search. 
2.1
SCOPE
The thesis context and scope originates from the natural 
and engineering science tradition which involves deductive 
systems where empirical generalisations are hierarchically 
ordered according to theories or models (Wengenvorth, 2004). 
However, a combined inductive and deductive methodology 
has been present in completing the thesis. The selection, 
processing and relation of theory and empiri has been con-
stant and dialectical throughout the working proces (Boolsen, 
2019). Hence, the theoretical body is developed in an analyti-
cal movement between induction and deduction, empiricism 
and theory. The data is qualitatively analyzed for causes and 
relations and applied both as a starting point for the applied 
theory and in relation with it (Ibid.). 
The working proces is illustrated in Figure 2.1.A. The circles to 
the right visualize the iterative movements within each chap-
ter. The arrows between the chapters illustrate how knowl-
edge is obtained when working on each part and how they 
inform each other. Essentially, the iterative proces scarpens 
the problem definition and research questions over time.
Prior study activities relevant to the thesis
Literature review
The report 'Academic literature search on urban develop-
ment in Copenhagen' was completed as a special course at 
DTU Management in 2020 under the same supervisor as on 
this thesis, Per Sieverts Nielsen. The methodology applied for 
the literature review (Okoli, 2019) has inspired the literature 
search methodology in this thesis. Furthermore, the prior 
search of literature within a simular research field have made 
the literature search less time consuming. The full report can 
be found as in Appendix G.1 p. 88.
Geographical analysis of construction projects in CPH
The report 'Geographical analysis of construction projects in 
the City of Copenhagen 2000-2020' was completed at the 
DTU course '30530 Geographic information systems' in 2020. 
The report was not developed as a preliminary study for this 
project. However, some aspects of applying GIS in urban plan-
ning and the potential of geographical representation of data 
from the Danish Building and Housing Register (BBR)are dis-
cussed in Section 5.1 Discussion (p. 104). Therefore, the report 
is included for further reading (See Appendix G.2 p. 110).
THESIS CONTEXT  
2.1.1
1 2 3 4 5
==PAGE:25==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
25
CHAPTER
ACTIVITY
Problem definition and research questions #1
Theory
1. Theory search, reading, and selection
2. Search for existing tools to measure SAH
Theoretical 
synthesis
3. Quality assessment of existing tools
4. Essential concepts for SAH based on theoretical field
5. Selection of indicators based on theory on reporting and indicators
Case 
study
6. Data collection
7. Selection of indicators based on data availability and reliability
8. Data processesing and results
Problem definition and research questions #2
Methodology
Discussion
Conclusion, introduction, abstract etc.
According to Bent Flyvbjerg (2019) a case study gives a con-
text dependent knowledge which is a necessity to scientific 
research. It is important due to its relation to real situations 
and its complex detailing. Adversely, if research has a great 
distance to the studied subject or object and lacks concrete 
feedback this can result in an ineffective learning process. 
This can lead to an academic dead end where the research's 
utility becomes unclear and untested. The case study is an 
effective research method to avoid this tendency (Ibid.). 
In context of this thesis the strength of the case study is that 
it fosters a nuanced understanding of the studied phenome-
non within its real-life context. As argued by Flyvbjerg (2019) a 
strategic selection of a case can increase generalizability. An 
analysis of a case on sustainability measurement can address 
some broader aspects of the challenges in setting goals for 
urban sustainable development. Additionally, it is relevant to 
analyse a smaller govermental context of sustainable goals in 
order to understand and discuss the appliance and relevance 
of indicator assessment tools in general. 
WHY A CASE STUDY?
2.1.2
WORKING PROCES
2.1.3
The thesis is limited by a time frame of app. 980 working 
hours (35 ECTS). The thesis working proces has evolved 
chronologically as visualised in Figure 2.1.A. 
As visible in the diagram all included activities have been 
completed in an iterative working proces. The thesis started 
out with a focus on a quality assessment of existing tools 
for assessing SAH. The quality assessment was completed in 
the search for an indicator assessment tool suited for a case 
study on the City of Copenhagen (Activities 2. and 3.). How-
ever, with the progression of the thesis the growing knowl-
edge on the subject of SAH and the indicator assesment 
tool methodology reveiled that the tool should be developed 
specifically for the City the Copenhagen (Activity 4. and 5.). 
TIME
iteration
iteration
iteration
FIGURE 2.1.A - Thesis writing working proces. Time is illustrated vertically with an arrow progressing downwards. Each box 
represents a working fase in chapters (Eg. theory, theoretical analysis, etc.) which is worked on chronologically. To the right, 
iteration circles illustrates how working on one chapter informs the other chapters over time. 'Activity' describes the activities 
completed within each chapter.
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:26==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
26
The research design of the thesis is structured around three 
main parts: 'Theory', 'Case study' and 'Discussion'. The parts 
and their sections can be decribed in the following way:
Theory
Included theory presents essential definitions on sustainable 
development, sustainable affordable housing (SAH) and sus-
tainable reporting in the following order:
3.1 Sustainability and its components
Sustainability and its components must be defined as a 
contextual basis in order to position SAH and describe the 
scope of the final indicator assessment tool for the City of 
Copenhagen. The term 'affordable' is closely tied to the term 
'equitability' and socio-economic aspects of sustainability. 
Therefore, theory is included on these subjects in relation to 
sustainable reporting. 
3.2 Sustainable affordable housing (SAH)
Theory on SAH is included to position SAH in relation to urban 
sustainable development. Existing indicator assessment tools 
on SAH are presented in order to position SAH in relation 
to sustainable reporting. Firstly, this includes four journal 
articles that presents system criteria and indicators on SAH. 
Secondly, this includes organisational tools on housing from 
EU and OECD.
In conclusion, section 3.1 and 3.2 seeks to answer the follow-
ing work questions:
 
A. What is the international sustainable agenda defined by the 
UN?
B. How does academic research define the term sustainability 
and its components? 
C. How does academic research define 'affordability' and 'af-
fordable housing' in relation to sustainability?
D. What existing indicator assessment tools present indicators 
to measure and assess sustainable affordable housing (SAH)?
3.3 Theoretical synthesis
All theory on SAH is combined to complete a theoretical syn-
thesis. The concepts essential to SAH are described and rep-
resented  in a diagram. Hence, this section seeks to answer 
the following research question: 
1. How does the theoretical field of sustainable affordable 
housing (SAH) define the essential concepts of SAH?
2.2 RESEARCH DESIGN
==PAGE:27==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
27
Discussion
In the discussion the indicator results and the framework 
scope are discussed in order to answer the final research 
question:
4. How can the indicator assessment tool on SAH in the City 
of Copenhagen guide the formulation of urban sustainable 
development goals in the City of Copenhagen?
Case study
In the case study the indicator assessment tool on SAH for 
the City of Copenhagen is created and an indicator assess-
ment is completed:
4.1 Creating indicator assessment tool for SAH in the City of 
Copenhagen
An indicator assessment tool on SAH for the City of Copen-
hagen is created by applying the methodology of sustain-
able reporting and indicators. Firstly, the vision, scope of the 
framework is defined. Secondly, all indicators on SAH are 
categorised and selected based on theory. Hence, the section 
seeks to answer the following research question: 
2. How can the essential concepts from the theoretical field 
of SAH be applied as an indicator assessment tool to assess 
SAH in the City of Copenhagen? 
4.2 Indicator assessment 
The case analysis presents 9 indexes consisting of 18 indica-
tors that assess SAH in the City of Copenhagen from 2000-
2021. 
In combination, the indicator results answer the following 
research question:
3. Would it be possible to conclude whether progress is being 
made towards ensuring SAH in the City of Copenhagen and 
how?
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:28==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
28
The literature search is inspired by the methodological ap-
proach of a literature review described by Okoli (2015) 'Eight-
Step Guide to Conducting a Systematic Literature Review 
Work' which is a methodology guide that synthesizes studies 
(ibid.). Since a full literature review is not custom in a thesis 
at DTU only the preliminary steps of a review are included in 
the literature search. This includes: ‘Purpose’ and ‘Practical 
Screen’ (ibid., p. 883, 1.4). Following Okoli's (2015) structure, 
the literature search can be described in the following way:
Purpose
The literature search is intended to provide a contextual 
overview of the specific research area in question both to the 
reader and writer of this thesis. Hence, the purpose is to bring 
a relevant research question into focus. Finally, the purpose 
is to answer the specific research questions presented in 
Section 1.3 on p. 19. 
Practical Screen
The practical screen includes describing the selection and 
exclusion of literature. The following criteria is applied in ac-
cordance with Arlene Fink’s (2015) guide to practical screening 
(ibid., pp. 55-56): 
Content
The included literature is limited to that which is relevant to 
the research questions. Firstly, this includes literature on the 
methodology of 'Sustainable Indicator Frameworks' or 'Indi-
cator Assessment Tools'. Indicator assessment tools allow a 
systematic approach to the assessment of sustainability.
2.3 LITERATURE SEARCH
Secondly, literature is included that describes 'sustainability' 
and its components. The literature should be contextualised 
by a common definition of sustainability. As argued by Tan-
guay et al. (2010) literature that is founded in the Brundtland 
Report (1987) is chosen.
Thirdly, literature is included that describes 'affordability' of 
housing, 'equitability' in context of housing, or 'socio-eco-
nomic' aspects of housing all in context of sustainable urban 
development.
Figure 2.3.A visualises the literature search divided by content 
and subject. The chronological order illustrates how one 
subject informs another. 'Sustainability as a theoretical term 
is hence the theoretical basis for 'Sustainable housing' and so 
forth.  
Language
Only Danish and English written studies is included due to my 
language skills.
Research type and field
The thesis includes conferences papers, journal articles, and 
reports. The literature search is completed through the da-
tabase DTU Findit which is an open Library Services Platform 
available to DTU staff and students (Findit, 2021). 
The scope of the thesis is not limited to include research 
within a specific field of study. However, research that covers 
broad synthesis within technical or architectural fields of 
knowledge is prioritized.
1 2 3 4 5 6
==PAGE:29==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
29
Grey Literature
'Grey literature' is literature not peer-reviewed (Okoli, 2015). 
Some grey literature is included in the case analysis. This 
includes reports developed for local policy purposes (eg. KK, 
2019.a). However, the grey literature is applied to guide the 
contextualisation of the indicator assessment tool and as 
selection criteria for relevance and comparability. Hence, it is 
not included anywhere as a theoretical foundation.
Authors
The thesis is not restricted to include literature by specific 
authors. However, MacLaren (1996), Gudmundson et al. (2011) 
and Okoli (2015) are introduced by the thesis supervisor. 
Furthermore, the work of MacLaren (1996) is mentioned in 
several papers as a good methodological basis for sustainable 
reporting (eg. Garrett and Latawiec, 2015; Tanguay et al., 2010).
Additionally, literature presented in the DTU course '42274 
Sustainable Development Indicators and Sustainable Urban 
Development' from 2019/2020 (DTU, 2022) can be considered 
a knowledge basis for the thesis scope and literature search.
METHODOLOGY
Date of publication and duration of data collection: 
Most current research is prioritized above older research. 
However, this does not apply to the case of MacLaren (1996).
 
Geographical scope - Global, national, or local: 
According to several of the included papers (eg. Tanguay et al., 
2015; Chan & Adabre, 2019) limited studies exist on indicator 
assessment tools for housing sustainability in general Fur-
thermore, tools assessing socio-economic aspects of housing 
and 'equitability' are even more scarce (ibid.). Therefore, 
literature with both global, national, and local geographical 
scopes are included in the search. However, literature with a 
focus on EU member states is prioritised for comparability. 
This is due to the political criteria for obtaining membership 
in EU eg. institutional stability, democracy, human rights, pro-
tection of minorities, etc. (EU, 2022). 
FIGURE 2.3.A - Relation between the thesis literature search and work questions. 
The figure visualizes how the literature search is completed within different research subjects (middle) and concepts (right) in 
order to answer the work questions (left).
Indicator assessment tool’s on SAH
‘Sustainable housing’ and ‘affordable housing’
Sustainable reporting and indicators
'Sustainability' as a theoretical term
‘Equitability’ as a sustainable dimension
Political context and origin
Definitions on sustainability
Components and 'dimensions'
Sustainable measurements and standardization
Theory versus practice, indicator tool appliance 
Challenges with defining social aspects
Equitability versus equality 
Intersecting social and economic dimensions 
Positioning ‘housing’ in urban SD context
‘Affordable housing’ in urban SD context
Tools to measure and asses SAH
Danish reports on housing
Reports on SAH in DK or the City of CPH
RESEARCH SUBJECT
WORK QUESTION
A. What is the interna-
tional sustainable agenda 
defined by UN?
B. How does academic 
research define the term 
sustainability and its 
components? 
C. How does academic 
research define 'afford-
ability' and 'affordable 
housing' in relation to 
sustainability?
D. What existing Indi-
cator assessment tool’s 
presents indicators to 
measure and assess 
sustainable affordable 
housing?
RESEARCH CONCEPTS
==PAGE:30==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
30
2.4 THEORETICAL SYNTHESIS
System criteria in journal articles
Main concepts are conceptualised from the collected theoret-
ical field. The system criteria for SAH identified by Chan and 
Adabre (2019) is applied as a base for defining the main con-
cepts. Hereafter, the system criteria presented in the journal 
articles Chan & Adabre (2019), Cooper et al. (2019), Mulliner & 
Maliene (2016; 2013), and Nuuter et al. (2015) are combined to 
describe each concept. Finally, the theory presented in sec-
tion '3.1 Sustainbility as a theoretical concept' and '3.3 Sus-
tainable housing' is included to describe each main concept 
of SAH more elaborate.
Indicators in journal articles
All existing indicators on SAH presented in the journal articles 
Chan & Adabre (2019), Nuuter et al. (2015), Mulliner et al. 
(2016) and Cooper et al. (2019) are listed within each main 
concept. Sub concepts for SAH are derrived by categorising 
the indicators by common traits in the following way: 
Comparing and categorising indicators
Some indicators measure the same aspects of SAH, but are 
named differently. Therefore, the Grounded Theory 'Open 
Coding' (Boolsen, 2020) is applied to create simular names for 
each indicator based on phenomena characteristics. For all 
open coding translations of indicators in journal articles, see 
Appendix F.2 p. 72. Likewise, some indicators are comparable, 
but have different scopes, concists of different indicator com-
ponents or focus on different dimensions of sustainability. 
Therefore, all indicators are categorised by indicator assess-
ment in the following way:
‘Component’ according to definitions Gudmundsson et al. 
(2016), ‘Dimensions’ according to definitions by Azevedo & 
Silva (2010) and Du et al. (2019), and ‘Scope’ according to defi-
nitions by Mittal et al. (2019). Furthermore, the indicators are 
categorised according to their framework source for naviga-
tional purposes. For the full list of indicators see Appendix B 
pp. 10-13. The Grounded Theory coding applied to categorise 
indicators can be described in the following way:
2.4.1
MAIN CONCEPTS OF SAH
2.4.2
SUB CONCEPTS OF SAH
1 2 3 4 5 6
==PAGE:31==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
31
METHODOLOGY
Grounded Theory Coding
Grounded Theory (GT) introduces the methodological prin-
ciples of systematic research coding. The coding allows for 
theoretical subjects to be destilled from the complete re-
search field and the development of new theory (Okoli, 2015).
The GT-coding techinques 'Open' and 'Selective' coding are 
described by Boolsen (2019) in the following way:
Open Coding
Open Coding describes the procedure of capturing the core 
information in the collected theory and establishing catego-
ries of phenomena characteristics from it.
Selective Coding 
Selective Coding refers to the procedure of selecting different 
interdependent relations that is specially important to the 
problem in question (ibid., pp. 309-335, 5).
The GT-procedures 'Open Coding' and 'Selective Coding' are 
applied to categorize and order the included theory under 
each main concept of SAH and synthesise sub concepts. 
Categories of phenomena characteristics are established from 
the presented indicators by selecting different interdependent 
relations.
==PAGE:32==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
32
7) Collect data and analyse results
Collect and process data, and assess whether progress is 
being made towards achieving sustainability.
8) Present sustainable report
Describe each sustainable indicator, why it is important, 
historical trends or changes. Present an evaluation of whether 
the development is moving towards or away from sustainabil-
ity.
9) Assess Indicator Performance
Determine whether the indicators are performing adequate-
ly in measuring what they were meant to measure (Ibid., pp. 
188-199).
Maclaren's (1996) '9 steps in good sustainable reporting' (Ibid., 
pp.188-199) are applied as guidelines for selecting the appro-
priate indicators from the full list of SAH indicators and to 
define the scope of the final indicator assessment tool for the 
City of Copenhagen. They are described in the following way:
1) Vision 
Define the urban sustainability goals for which the sustain-
able indicator are needed.
2) Scope
Define the audience and the purpose of the sustainable in-
dicator both the format of presentation, the amount, and the 
temporal and spatial bounds. 
3) Appropriateness of framework
Choose an approprindicator assessment toole framework 
amongst the following frameworks: 
Domain-Based is based on the three dimensions of sustain-
ability and identifies indicators for each. 
Goal-Based has indicators based on sustainability goals for a 
unit either for each or a combinations of goals.
Sectoral has indicators for a sector over which local govern-
ments typically are responsible, eg. housing or transportation. 
Issue-Based is based on key issues in a community, eg. edu-
cation.
Causal includes the notion of cause and effect relationships. 
Combination combines two or more of the other types. 
4) Indicator selection criteria 
Examinate the selection criteria according to their scientif-
ic validity, responsiveness to change, relavance to potential 
users, data accurancy and accessability, comparability with 
indicators developed in other relevant jurisdictions, cost-ef-
fectiveness, attractiveness to the media, and unambiguous-
ness. 
5) Identify potential indicators
Include experts to identify potential indicators or by refering 
to sustainability reports produced by other jurisdictions.
6) Evaluate and select final set
Assesses each of the potential sustainable indicators against 
the ‘Selection criteria’ and the ‘Appropriateness of framework’.
2.5.1
GOOD PRACTICE REPORTING
CASE ANALYSIS
2.5
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:33==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
33
THEORY
MacLaren's (1996) description of good practice sustainable 
indicators is also applied as guideline for selecting indicators 
and scoping the indicator assessment tool for the CIty of Co-
penhagen. They can be descriped as:
Integrating
Sustainable indicators must expose linkages amongst differ-
ent dimensions of sustainability. 
Forward-looking
Sustainable indicators must measure progress towards 
achieving sustainability. 
Distributional
Sustainable indicators must measure both intergenerational 
and intragenerational equity, hence take into account the dis-
tributive effects within a population or geographic region.
Based on multidisciplinary input
Since sustainability is such a “[…] value-laden and con-
text-sensitive concept” (Ibid., p. 187) it makes sense to seek 
input on sustinable indicators from a broad range of stake-
holders (Ibid., pp. 186-187).
2.5.3
GOOD PRACTICE INDICATORS
Garrett and Latawiec (2015) key characteristics of good prac-
tice sustainable indicators are also applied as guidelines for 
selecting the appropriate indicators. They are:
Simple
Sustainable indicators should be simple for communicational 
purposes, but be used in combinations that capture complex 
and holistic information about a system. 
Measurable
Sustainable indicators should be quantifiable. 
Feasible
Sustainable indicators should be able to be collected within 
the capacity of the organizations or individuals involved in the 
creation.
Flexible
It should be possible to develop sustainable indicators if new 
data becomes available. 
Dynamic
Sustainable indicators should capture changes over time to 
capture trends, non-linearities and causal processes within 
a system in order to assess intergenerational aspects of sus-
tainability such as well being. 
User-inspired
Sustainable indicator properties should align with the goals 
of its users, that should be concerned with progress towards 
sustainability (Ibid, p. 18).
Futhermore, sustainable indicators should always be trans-
parent on assumptions and assisted by adequate contextual-
ization and methodology since they only provide an indication 
of conditions or problems (Ibid.).
==PAGE:34==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
34
A case analysis is completed on the City of Copenhagen 
based on the final list of selected indicators. The case anal-
ysis contains an indicator assessment presenting 9 indexes 
consisting of 18 indicators. Each indicator is presented with 
the minimum requirements for presenting indicators accord-
ing to MacLaren (1996). This includes the aim, context and 
parameters, results and indexing. The aim should describe 
the meaning of each indicator. The context and parameters 
should cover why the indicator is important and link it to 
historical trends or changes. The results and indexing should 
provide an evaluation of whether the indicator is showing 
movement towards or away from sustainability (Ibid.).
Data selection
The data selected based on validity and availability. Hence, 
open data sources recognized by Danish govermental institu-
tions are selected. This includes Statistics Denmark, Finance 
Denmark, The Danish Housing and Planning Agency (BPST), 
and reports published by the City of Copenhagen. 
Data processing
All data is processed in Microsoft Excel. Calculations for each 
indicator are specified in the noted appendixes. 
Data models
Each indicator should assess whether trends are moving away 
from or towards sustainability. Hence, mathematical linear 
trend models are applied.
According to Brockhoff et al. (2018) linear regression is a rec-
ognized and simple model for engineering applications. Linear 
regression is the method of finding the most approriate linear 
model given some input variables (Ibid.). 
Most indicators in this thesis are expressed in the relation be-
tween indexes or ratios over time. Hence, the input (x) is time 
and the output (y) is the index or ratio. The linear regression 
is y=ax+b where a is the slope coefficient and b is where y 
equals zero. Microsoft Excel can calculate linear regression 
with the command:
linest([known_ys], [known_xs], [const], [stats])
Applying a dataset of known input (eg. x=time) and output 
(eg. y=ratio) the best model can be calculated from linear 
regression. 
2.5.1
INDICATOR ASSESSMENT
When applying linear regression for modelling trends it is nec-
essary to assess the quality of the regression. The correla-
tion coefficient (R2) measures the degree of linear relation 
between x and y. The correlation imply that the model might 
fail to detect non-linear relationships. Hence, it quantifies the 
strength of the linear relation between the two (Brockhoff et 
al., 2018). Microsoft Excel can calculate the correlation coeffi-
cient with the command:
RSQ([known_ys], [known_xs]) 
Results linkages
The linkages amongst the presented indicator results also are 
presented in an summerization in order to assess integrative 
aspects of sustainability (MacLaren, 1996). Additionally, the 
linkages between the indicators are discussed in Section 5.1 
p. 104. As argued by MacLaren (1996) the discussion includes 
some recommendations for improving the collection of data. 
1 2 3 4 5 6
==PAGE:35==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
35
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:36==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
36
1 2 3 4 5 
3 THEORY
==PAGE:37==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
37
THEORY
==PAGE:38==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
38
1 2 3 4 5 
Photo: Bispebjerg, Copenhagen. Maj 2021. 
Source: Private.
==PAGE:39==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
39
This chapter presents the theoretical terms and concepts rel-
evant for describing how affordable housing is positioned in 
context of sustainability. The theory is applied to define the 
essential concepts of SAH and to scope the indicator assess-
ment tool for the CIty of Copenhagen.
Section 3.1 'Sustainability as theoretical concept’ presents 
theory on the theoretical components of sustainability. This is 
done in order to position affordable housing in relation to the 
term 'equitability'. 
Section 3.2 'Theory on sustainable affordable housing' pres-
ents theory on sustainable housing and links the terms 'af-
fordable housing' and 'equitability'. Furthermore, it presents 
four journal articles that present indicator assessment tools 
on SAH. Additionally, organisational tools by EU and OECD 
presenting indicators on housing are presented.
Section 3.4 'Theoretical synthesis' synthesize theory from 3.2 
and 3.3 to define the essential concepts of SAH. The section 
seeks to define the system criteria for a theoretical indicator 
assessment tool on SAH in a non-specified context based on 
the collected theory.
CHAPTER CONTENT
THEORY
==PAGE:40==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
40
COMPONENTS OF SUSTAINABILITY
The Brundtland Report highlights the three fundamental 
components of sustainable development as: Environmental 
protection, economic growth, and social equity (Shah, 2008). 
Today, most indicator assessment tools for sustainable de-
velopment are structured around this tripartite categorization 
(Shirazi & Keivani, 2019; Atanda, 2019). Du et al. (2020) defines 
the three intersecting dimensions as:
Livability
The term ‘Livability’ covers the intersection between the 
environment with the social dimensions of sustainability. It 
is concerned with the intertwining of human activity and the 
diversity of urban life or can refer to the concept of Quality of 
Life (QoL) (Tanguay, 2010).
Viability 
The term ‘Viability’ covers the intersection of the economic 
and environmental dimensions. It is concerned with natural 
resources and the maintenance of economic growth. Sus-
tainable development is focused on preserving productive 
capacity and utility.
Equitability
Equitability covers the intersection of the economic and 
social dimensions of sustainability and is concerned with the 
balances between economic and social aspects (Du et al., 
2020, p. 2). 
Figure 3.1.A illustrates the dimensions of sustainability.
3.1.1
SUSTAINABILITY AS THEORETICAL CONCEPT
3.1
FIGURE 3.1.A: Main dimensions of sustainability and their rela-
tions visualized with overlapping circles. Note: Reprinted from 
‘Measuring the sustainability of cities: An analysis of the use 
of local indicators’, by Tanguay et al., 2010, Elsevier, p. 408. 
ECONOMIC
ENVIRONMENTAL
LIVABLE
VIABLE
EQUITABLE
SUSTAINABILITY
SOCIAL
1 2 3 4 5 
Equitability as sustainable dimension
Demsey et al. (2011) and Hopwood et al. (2005) argue that 
the concept 'equitability' is embedded within the UN defini-
tion of sustainable development in its focus on: “[…] meeting 
the needs of present as well as future generations” (WCED, 
1987, 43) and in the assurance that sustainable development 
should secure: “[…] that those poor get their fair share of the 
resources required to sustain that [economic] growth” (WCED, 
1987, §3) (Dempsey et al., 2011, p.).
Equity deals with the active measures to affect outcomes to 
achieving fairness (Wiles and Kobayashi, 2009). According to 
Demsey et al. (2011) the concept ‘equitability’ has its foun-
dation in different interpretations of ‘fairness’ and ‘justice’. 
It deals with the distribution of resources and equality of 
condition (ibid.). Demsey et al. (2011) relates the concept ‘eq-
uitability’ to the practice of inclusion by stating, that: “[…] an 
equitable society is one in which there are no ‘exclusionary’ 
or discriminatory practices hindering individuals from partic-
ipating economically, socially and politically in society” (Ibid., 
p. 192). Racism and ageism is an example of social exclusion 
and areas of deprivation an example of geographical exclusion 
(ibid.). 
Giddings et al. (2002) define equitability in context of sustain-
able development as constituting the following five principles 
in combination:
(i) Futurity: Inter-generational equity
Giving regard for the needs of future generations
(ii) Social justice: Intra-generational equity
Social justice covering all present humans regardless of class, 
gender, race, etc.
(iii) Transfrontier responsibility: Geographical equity
Where people live and their access to resources
(iv) Procedural equity: People treated openly and fairly
How people are able to shape their futures
(v) Inter-species equity: Importance of biodiversity
Recognizing the importance of biodiversity and ecosystem 
integrity (Giddings et al., 2002, p. 194).
3.1.3
SOCIAL-ECONOMIC INTERSECTION
==PAGE:41==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
41
THEORY
Equitability and affordable housing
Shama & Motlak (2019) recognizes sustainable housing as 
having multiple functions within both physical and social 
systems in areas as affordability, social and cultural equity, 
economics, health, and neighborhood environment. Dempsey 
et al. (2011) highlights access to decent housing both in phys-
ical form and in governmental provision as a meaure of social 
equity. 
According to Stone (2006) ‘affordable housing’ are relating 
social and economic aspects of housing. If wanting to assess 
whether housing is affordable one should always ask the fol-
lowing questions: “Affordable to whom? On what standard of 
affordability? For how long?” and “[...] meeting what physical 
standard?” (ibid., p. 153).
According to Mulliner et al. (2013) comparisons of housing ex-
penditure and household income is the most common way to 
define affordable housing. However, the definition has been 
subjected to criticism by several authors since it excludes 
housing quality (ibid.). 
Linkages between housing and communities
Sustainable housing and comminuties are interdependent. 
Dempsey et al. (2011) and Mulliner et al. (2011) argue, that the 
‘sustainability of a community’ is fundamental to the concept 
of social equity. According to Mulliner et al. (2013) sustainable 
communities are defined as: ‘‘places where people want to 
live and work, now and in the future’’ and “[...] they should be 
active, inclusive and safe, well run, environmentally sensitive, 
well designed and built, well connected, thriving, well served 
and fair for everyone” (p. 271). According to Dempsey et al. 
(2011) various theorists suggest that a sustainable community 
requires long-term residents in order to be sustainable. 
3.2.1
HOUSING AND INDICATORS
Housing: a sectoral aspect of urban sustainability
In context of sustainable reporting ‘housing’ is viewed as a 
sectoral issue within sustainable development (Maclaren, 
1996). According to Winston & Pareja-Eastaway (2008) and 
Mittal et al. (2019) housing is an essential component of both 
QoL and sustainable development. Housing is linked to a vast 
number of sustainability issues. It is often divided in assess-
ment by ‘geographical scope’ and ‘building life cycle phase’ 
(Winston & Pareja-Eastaway, 2008). According to Winston & 
Pareja-Eastaway (2008) the geographical scope is both re-
ferring to governmental entities, eg. national or regional, and 
whether housing is assessed as a single housing unit or in 
spatial distribution, eg. at community or household level. 
Challlenges with the quality of housing indicators
According to Winston & Pareja-Eastaway (2008) both OECD 
and EU are acknowledged internationally for developing sus-
tainable indicators on housing, but more attention needs to 
be paid to the measurement of progress in social indicators. 
According to Borges et al. (2020) the planning for sustainable 
urban development is increasingly carried out through the 
use of Neighborhood Assesment Tools (NSA’s). NSA’s provide 
guidance on how to work towards sustainable urban devel-
opment through specific indicators. According to Borges et al. 
(2020) NSA’s are based in a “[...] rationalist planning paradigm 
and technocratic view on sustainability” (p. 1) which risk fore-
closing the debate on what sustainable development should 
mean for its local context. According to Pedro et al. (2019) 
and Szibbo (2016) the biggest challenges of NSA’s are a lack of 
consensus on sustainability concepts, an incoherent distri-
bution of criteria between the frameworks and the need to 
widen the scope by considering more socio-economic factors 
to include the equity pillar of sustainability.
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
3.2
3.2.2
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND EQUITY
==PAGE:42==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
42
1 2 3 4 5 
Included studies
Chan & Adabre (2019), Cooper et al. (2019), Mulliner et al. 
(2016) and Nuuter et al. (2015) all present indicator assess-
ment tools on SAH. All studies analyze, categorize, aggregate, 
and weight existing indicators on sustainability of housing 
with a specific focus on affordability or the combination of 
social and economic aspects of housing. The studies and their 
conclusions are described in brief:
Mulliner et al. (2016; 2013) 
Mulliner et al. (2013) and Mulliner et al. (2016) propose an 
assessment method of housing affordability that: “[...] draws 
closer links with sustainability by considering economic, so-
cial and environmental criteria that impact on a household’s 
quality of life” (Ibid., p. 164). Both studies present the same 
and following indicators as essential for assessing SAH: 
•  House prices in relation to income
•  Rental costs in relation to income
•  Interest rates and mortgage availability 
•  Availability of private and social rented accommodation 
•  Availability of affordable homeownership products 
•  Safety (Crime) 
•  Access to employment 
•  Access to public transport services 
•  Access to good quality schools 
•  Access to shops 
•  Access to health services 
•  Access to child care 
•  Access to leisure 
•  Access to open green public space 
•  Quality of housing in area 
•  Energy efficiency of housing in area 
•  Waste management in area (Mulliner et al., 2016, p. 149)
According to Mulliner et al. (2016) the relation between hous-
ing costs and income is the principal determinant of housing 
affordability. Furthermore, households should be able to af-
ford the ongoing costs of owning housing. Affordable hous-
ing should be diverse and sufficient in range and reflect the 
social mix of the population. Households located in areas with 
high crime levels may have extra costs on security and safety 
measures and negative effects on health why low crime 
levels are essential. Longer commuting distances to jobs will 
have negative impacts on both income and the environment. 
Therefore, assess to jobs and public transport are essential. 
3.2.3
INDICATORS ON SAH: JOURNAL ARTICLES
Assess to a good quality education is also essential since it 
affects an individual’s future prospects and QoL. For home 
buyers the presence of shops and leisure enhances the 
attractiveness of a housing location. Access to child care is 
important due to commuting costs and the side effects of 
a parents’ ability to go out to work. Access to open green 
space where people can participate in activities that support 
a physically healthy lifestyle is important. Such facilities may 
also contribute to increased social interaction and cohe-
sion in the neighborhood. Finaly, housing must meet certain 
quality standards which should be adabted to the governental 
housing context. Making improvements to the energy effi-
ciency of housing can provide ongoing economic benefits for 
households and waste should be minimised to protect the 
environment (Ibid.; Mulliner & Maleine, 2011). For a full list of 
all indicators see Appendix F.1 p. 72.
Cooper et al. 2019
Cooper et al. (2019) present a framework for the assessment 
of housing affordability at city level in the UK. The aim of the 
paper is to identify KPI’s to: “[...] manage asset management 
sustainably in a built environment context” (Ibid., p. 508). 
Cooper et al. (2019) present the following five categories as 
essential for assessing SAH: 
•  Comfort (eg. heating, crowding, noise, security)
•  Running cost (eg. bills, taxes)
•  Adaptability (eg. layout, potential for adaptation)
•  Maintenance costs (eg. repairs, Life Cycle Analysis (LCA))
•  Community (eg. length of tenancy) (Ibid., p. 518)
For a full list of all indicators see Appendix F.1 p. 72.
Nuuter et al. (2015)
Nuuter et al. (2015) presents a framework to assess the sus-
tainability of the Estonian housing market. The study presents 
the following six categories as essential for assessing SAH: 
•  General economics (eg. GDP per capita, Inflation rate)
•  Housing stock (eg. share of social housing)
•  Housing affordability (eg. housing price to income)
•  Population and social conditions (eg. income distribution)
•  Housing quality (eg. crowding rates, size)
•  Environmental quality (eg. health care index, noise, pollu-
tion) (Ibid., p. 645).
For a full list of all indicators see Appendix F.1 p. 72.
==PAGE:43==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
43
THEORY
Chan & Adabre (2019)
Chan & Adabre (2019) completes a classification of the limited 
studies on 'critical success criteria' for performance measure-
ment of sustainable affordable housing projects. They include 
studies on built asset management and studies on the man-
agerial aspects of planning and construction of new housing. 
Chan & Adabre (2019) defines critical success criteria as: 
“the set of principles or standards through which judgement 
[on progress towards sustainability] can be made whereas 
critical success factors are the set of circumstances, facts or 
influences which affect/contribute to the results or critical 
success criteria” (p. 113). In conclusion, the study results in 
the following six categories of indicators which are consid-
ered essential criteria for SAH:
Household Satisfaction includes indicators on the housing 
end users' satisfaction with the functionality, maintainability 
and safety performance of the housing facility. Functional-
ity correlates with the housing facility's fitness for purpose. 
Additionally, residential satisfaction is closely tied to the 
satisfaction with neighborhood safety and quality.
Stakeholder Satisfaction includes indicators on the satisfac-
tion of manegial aspects of housing planning and construc-
tion. An indicator example is: 'reduced occurrence of dispute 
and litigation'.
Housing Operating Cost includes indicators on reduced life-
cycle cost and the environmental performance of the housing 
facility. Energy efficient housing uses minimum energy with-
out impacting residents' health. Improving energy efficiency of 
housing minimizes environmental effects while also reducing 
energy associated costs.
Time Measurement is an important measure of affordable 
housing. Examples on indicators are 'time spent by low-in-
come earners waiting before being allocated' or 'take-up rate 
of housing'.
Location Affordability Cost includes indicators on public sec-
tor expenditures on housing management, housing prices or 
rental costs in relation to income, commuting cost from the 
location of housing to essential facilities. SAH should measure 
'location affordability', that is taking into consideration both 
costs of housing, and transportation or accessibility.
Quality Related includes indicators on quality performance 
measures of the housing facility. Quality can be achieved by 
meeting both quality related to materials, equipment and 
technology and perceptional quality related to human expec-
experience and QoL (ibid., pp. 119-121).
For a full list of all indicators under each category see Appen-
dix F.1 p. 72.
==PAGE:44==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
44
1 2 3 4 5 
3.2.4
INDICATORS ON SAH: ORGANISATIONAL TOOLS
OECD indicators on sustainable housing
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment (OECD) is recognized by EU and UN as an essen-
tial stakeholder in measuring sustainability and well being 
(EU, 2014). OECD is an international organisation that works 
with governments, policy makers, and citizens to establish 
evidence based on international standards to a wide range 
of social, economic, and environmental challenges (OECD, 
2021.a). OECD frameworks that assess the sustainability of 
housing includes the ‘Affordable Housing Database’ (AHD) and 
‘Better Life Index’ (BLI):
Better Life Index (BLI)
The OECD BLI evaluates well being and social progress within 
11 key aspects of sustainability. This includes: Housing, jobs, 
education, environment, civic engagement, health and life 
satisfaction, and income. Each aspect is evaluated based on 
several statistical indicators (EU, 2014). OECD presents three 
indicators on housing to measure the sustainability of well 
being within housing. The indicators are listed in Appendix F.3 
p. 84.
Affordable Housing Database (AHD)
The OECD AHD measures the access to good quality afford-
able housing in OECD countries and the EU member states. It 
has the purpose to strengthen the knowledge base for policy 
evaluation (OECD, 2021.c). OECD presents three sets of indica-
tors to measure the sustainability of housing affordability. The 
indicators are listed in Appendix F.3 p. 84.
According to SAH Winston & Pareja-Eastaway (2008) EU and 
OECD are recognized in literature for their development of 
indicators on SAH. They present the following tools that 
adresses housing as a specific issue within sustainable devel-
opment:
European Union indicators on sustainable housing
An EU intiative for better statistical reporting on inequali-
ties of wealth and income in the EU member states is the 
‘European Union Statistics on Income and Living Conditions’ 
(EU-SILC, 2018). 
EU-SILC
The EU-SILC is a household-oriented statistical database. It 
aims at collecting cross-sectional and multidimensional data 
on income, poverty, social exclusion, and living conditions. It 
covers aspects such as housing, labour, health, demography, 
education, and deprivation. The data is used by EU to analyse 
multidimensional phenomena of poverty and social exclusion 
(EU, 2018). ‘Housing’ is included under the categories ‘Poverty’ 
and ‘Social exclusion’. All EU-SILC indicators on housing are 
listed in Appendix F.3 p. 84.
QoL-indicators
The ‘Quality-of-Life(QoL)-indicators’ is an online publication 
with statistics on measures of QoL in the EU member states. 
The publication presents nine categories of statistical data. 
According to the EU (2021.a) QoL is often constrained by 
material conditions since economic resources provide the 
means for shaping an individual’s well-being. Therefore, ma-
terial living conditions such as housing provide a framework 
to measure the potential of households to achieve well-being 
(Eurostat, 2021.a). All QoL-indicators on housing are listed in 
Appendix F.3 p. 84.
Other Eurostat indicators on housing
The project ‘The European economy since the start of the 
millennium — a statistical portrait’ shows how the EU mem-
ber states have evolved through statistical data in an eco-
nomic perspective since 2000. One chapter informs about 
the main developments in household income and spendings. 
It has five specific indicators on housing. The indicators are 
listed in Appendix F.3 p. 84.
==PAGE:45==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
45
==PAGE:46==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
46
I) Location Affordability
‘Location Affordability’ assess equality of condition as the 
access to resources specific to a dwelling location. This is an 
example of what Giddings et al. (2002) define as ‘Geograph-
ical Equity’. Location affordability answers the question of: 
“Equitable in what geographical context?” and "Affordable 
to whom?" as considered essential to housing affordability 
by Stone (2006). Grouping indicators by common traits the 
following sub categories I-IV within location affordability are 
found:
I.I) Mobility & Community 
Housing is only affordable if it is connected to a sustainable 
community (Demsey et al., 2011; Mulliner et al., 2016). Indi-
cators in 'Mobility & Community' measure the access to and 
the quality of the community linked to the dwelling location. 
Access can be measured in either distance, time or monetary 
value (Mulliner et al, 2013;2016). Examples of indicators are: 
‘Access to and quality of public green space’ and ‘Congestion 
levels’. The most essential local amenities that should be 
considered when assessing SAH are: Education, child care, 
public green space, health care, jobs, and transportation 
(Mulliner & Maleine, 2011). 
I.II) General economics
The global and national economic situation have an essential 
impact on the monetary costs linked a dwelling (Nuuter et 
al., 2015). Hence, SAH should be contextualised to its eco-
nomic conditions. Examples of indicators are: ‘Inflation Rate’, 
'Housing prices', and ‘Mortgage Availability’.
I.III) Population 
‘Population’ includes all indicators assessing population char-
acterics which is essential to understand the social context 
of measurement (Nuuter et al., 2015). It specifies on what 
measures 'inclusiveness' is assessed in the population, eg. 
income, gender, etnicity, etc. (Demsey et al, 2011). An example 
of an indicator is ‘Inequality of Income Distribution’.
I.IV) Housing costs and income relation
'Housing costs and income relation' is the principal category 
of indicators assessing housing affordability (Mulliner et al., 
2016). Indicator examples are: ‘Housing Price to Income’ or 
'Profitability of housing ownership'. 
Main categories
The Critical System Criteria (CSC) for SAH identified by Chan 
and Adabre (2019) is applied as a base for defining the main 
concepts of SAH. The concepts are alterated in the following 
way:
Satisfaction
Firstly, ‘Stakeholder Satisfaction’ is joined with ‘Tenant Satis-
faction’ into the category ‘Satisfaction’. As argued by Shama 
and Motlak (2019) a challenge is the varying contextualization 
of indicators guided by the addressed life cycle phase. Hence, 
the category 'Satisfaction' reflects the satisfaction of the rele-
vant target group depending on the assessed life cycle phase. 
Location affordability
Secondly, according to Chan & Adabre (2019) 'location afford-
ability' considers both costs associated with housing and 
accessibility. Since time can be considered a measure of both 
cost and acces to housing (eg. waiting time on housing lists) 
time measurement’ is included under 'location affordability'.
Environmental costs
Thirdly, 'Housing Operating Cost' is named 'Environmen-
tal Costs'. Indicators in this category focus on the reduced 
lifecycle cost and the environmental performance of housing. 
Therefore, all phases of the building life cycle should be in-
cluded in the name and not just the operational phase. 
The resulting main categories are then:  ‘Location Affordabili-
ty’, ‘Environmental Cost’, 'Satisfaction’ and ‘Housing Quality’.
Sub categories
All indicators presented in the journal articles Chan & Adabre 
(2019), Nuuter et al. (2015), Mulliner et al. (2016; 2013) and 
Cooper et al. (2019) are categorized under each main concept 
described above. The same applies to indicators presented 
in the organisational tools from EU and OECD. Sub concepts 
within each main concept is derrived by grouping indicators 
according common traits. For a full list of all indicators see 
Appendix B p. 10.
Including all presented theory the essential concepts of SAH 
are decribed in the following way: 
THEORETICAL SYNTHESIS
3.3
3.3.1
ESSENTIAL CONCEPTS OF SAH
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:47==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
47
I.V Housing stock
In order for housing to reflect the needs of the population it 
must be diverse and sufficient in range (Mulliner et al., 2016). 
Hence, indicators in the category 'Housing stock' describes 
the availability and distribution of different types of accom-
modation. An example of an indicator is 'Social Rental Stock'.
II) Environmental Cost
‘Environmental Cost’ assess the life cycle costs of a dwelling 
over time. The associated costs can both be a measure of 
environmental and economic viability (Demsey et al., 2011). 
‘Environmental Cost’ ask the question of: “Affordable for how 
long?” as asked by (Stone, 2006). It assesses system integrity 
of a dwelling over time, what Giddings et al. (2002) describe 
as ‘Interspecies equity’ and ‘Inter-generational equity’. Exam-
ples of indicators are: ‘Carbon capture and storage’ or ‘Biodi-
versity protection’, and ‘Energy efficiency of house’. 
III) Quality
‘Quality’ assess the equality of housing conditions on the 
standard of living and adequacy of housing. It covers layout, 
materials, equipment and technology that affects human 
experience and QoL (Chan and Adabre, 2019). Hence, it seeks 
to answer the question of: “Affordable at what standard?” as 
asked by Stone (2006). It has the following sub categories 
I-II:
III.I) Layout
'Layout’ includes indicators assessing the physical layout of 
space. It assesses housing quality on the effeciency and fit-
ness of space. Examples of indicators are: ‘Flexibility (Adapt-
ability)’ and ‘Size of dwelling’.
III.II) Comfort and Health
‘Comfort & Health’ includes indicators that assess factors 
influencing human psychological and/or physical well being 
and health. Examples of indicators are: ‘Air infiltration’, and 
‘Crime rates’.
IV) Satisfaction
‘Satisfaction’ assesses the experience or perception of peo-
ples position in relation to housing (Chan & Adabre, 2019). 
Satisfaction is recognized as an essential measure of QoL by 
EU (2016). Indicators in this category reflects the satisfaction 
of the relevant target group which depends on the assessed 
life cycle phase (Shama and Motlak, 2019). 
IV.I) Tenants
‘Tenants’ includes indicators assessing tenant satisfaction 
with all other concepts described, eg. satisfaction with 'hous-
ing expenses' or satisfaction with 'accces to jobs'.
IV.II) Other
‘Other’ includes other relevant groups satisfaction depending 
on the assessed context. Eg. if planning or construction as-
pects of housing is included the satisfaction of collaborating 
stakeholders could be assessed (Chan & Adabre, 2019). 
THEORY
==PAGE:48==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
48
Figure 3.3.C visualises the essential concepts to cover when 
assessing SAH. In other words, it describes the system crite-
ria for an indicator assessment tool. The combined indicators 
should seek to cover all aspects.
In conclusion, SAH can be characterized in the following way:
Sustainable affordable housing (SAH) is characterized by re-
flecting the diversity of a population in an geographical area 
both in types of housing accommodation and housing costs. 
SAH are connected to good quality transport and communi-
ties, have a physical standard that supports human comfort 
and health and have an effecient layout of space. Further-
more, SAH should be contextualised to its environment costs 
and the satisfaction of relevant target groups.
3.3.3
FIGURE: CONCEPTS OF SAH
1 2 3 4 5 
MATERIAL  
EXSTRACTION
CONSTRUCTION
DESIGN
PLANNING 
USE
MAINTANANCE
MATERIAL
PRODUCTION
SECOND LIFE
DEMOLITION
END-OF-LIFE
FIGURE 3.3.B - BUILDING LIFE CYCLE PHASES
The typical life cycle phases of a building are: Material extraction, construction, design, management and planning, use, mainte-
nance, and end-of life (demolition or second life) (Winston & Pareja-Eastaway, 2008).
Source: Adapted from ‘Introduction to LCA on buildings’, by Energistyrelsen (2015), Elsevier, p. 5, Figur 2: ‘Typical phases of a 
building life cycle: Product phase, building construction phase, use phase, end-of-life and second life'. 
HOUSEHOLD
NEIGHBORHOOD
CITY OR MUNICIPAL
REGIONAL OR NATIONAL
FIGURE 3.3.A - GEOGRAPHICAL ASSESSMENT LEVELS
The typical geographical assessment levels of a building are: Household, neighborhood, city or municipal, regional or national. 
Source: Visualised interpretation of the geographical assessment levels defined by Winston & Pareja-Eastaway, 2008.
Figure 3.3.A and Figure 3.3.B visualises the context which 
must be defined when creating an indicator assessment tool 
on SAH. This includes the geographical assessment levels 
and the included life cycle phases of a building (Winston & 
Pareja-Eastaway, 2008).
3.3.2
FIGURE: CONTEXT OF SAH
==PAGE:49==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
49
I.III POPULATION
I.II GENERAL 
ECONOMICS
§
I. LOCATION AFFORDABILITY
I.V HOUSING STOCK
I.I MOBILITY &
COMMUNITY
I.IV HOUSING COSTS 
& INCOME RELATION
€
IV. SATISFACTION
IV.I TENANTS
IV.II OTHER
II. ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS
III. QUALITY
III.II COMFORT & HEALTH
III.I LAYOUT
THEORY
FIGURE 3.3.C - ESSENTIAL CONCEPTS OF SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
The essential concepts to cover when assessing sustainable affordable housing (SAH) in an indicator assessment tool. 
==PAGE:50==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
50
4 CASE STUDY
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:51==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
51
CASE STUDY
==PAGE:52==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
52
1 2 3 4 5 
Photo: Sankt Hans Torv, Copenhagen. January 2018. 
Source: Private.
==PAGE:53==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
53
This chapter presents a case study on sustainable affordable 
housing in the City of Copenhagen.
Section 4.1 'Case Context' presents a contextualisation of 
the selected urban area. As argued by MacLaren (1996) and 
Garrett and Latawiec (2015) in order to make the indicator 
assessment tool on SAH for the City of Copenhagen compa-
rable and relevant it must be in line with the current practice 
and build upon on prior research. Therefore, reports ordered 
by the City of Copenhagen for urban planning perspectives on 
the subject of housing affordability are presented. Additional-
ly, the urban planning goals and visions on SAH in City of Co-
penhagen are presented. Finally, the existing reports assess-
ing SAH in a Danish context applying the SDG's are presented 
for comparability and relevance. 
Section 4.2 'Selecting indicators' presents the indicator 
selection for the assessment of SAH in the City of Copenha-
gen. MacLaren’s (1996) steps for good practice sustainable 
reporting are applied for the selection proces. Initially, the 
selection process concludes in a potential list of indicators 
for assessment. Finally, the potential indicators are evaluated 
and selected for a final list.
Section 4.3 'Framework description' describes the final 
framework scope based on the included indicators.
Section 4.4 'Indicator Assessment' present the indicators on 
SAH and their results.
CHAPTER CONTENT
CASE STUDY
==PAGE:54==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
54
4.1.1
REPORTS ON HOUSING & SUSTAINABILITY IN A DANISH CONTEXT
Reports on housing in the City of Copenhagen
Visions and political goals and guidelines for urban planning 
are presented in municipal plan proposals. The most recent 
municipal plan for the City of Copenhagen is from 2019 (KK, 
2019.a). 
Sustainability goals on housing affordability are presented in 
context of the global SGD's in the report ‘The Capital of Sus-
tainable Development’ (KK, 2018.a). 
‘The Capital of Sustainable Development’ (2018) 
The publication ‘The Capital of Sustainable Development 
- The City of Copenhagen’s Action Plan for the SDGs’ (KK, 
2018.b) presents the City of Copenhagen’s contribution to the 
realization of the SDGs and a plan for the strategies towards 
reaching sustainable development. Aspects of housing are 
assessed in context of SDG 10 and SDG 11.
In Goal 10 the City of Copenhagen describes how they aim 
at creating a more equal society by ensuring citizens having 
access to housing. The City of Copenhagen states: "In our 
efforts to create a more equal society, ensuring citizens have 
access to housing is particularly important. One of the City of 
Copenhagen’s priorities is to ensure that there are homes in 
all price ranges so that Copenhagen does not turn into a city 
exclusively for the wealthy" (KK, 2018.a, p. 30).
In Goal 11 it is described how the city aims at creating a more 
equal and diverse society by ensuring citizens having access 
to affordable housing. A main priority is to work together with 
social housing associations. This collaboration is essential to 
find effective solutions to housing challenges eg. the con-
struction of new housing for low-to-middle income citizens 
(KK, 2018.a). The City of Copenhagen states: "With more 
Copenhageners also come more different Copenhageners. 
With greater diversity, however, people may form into groups 
or be left behind. Copenhageners should not all be alike, but 
they should all have equal opportunities, and the sense of 
solidarity that exists in our city is one of its cornerstones." 
[...] "Housing must be available to everyone and for everyone. 
More housing is not enough; equally important is that the city 
has housing for all price levels" (Ibid., p. 30).
For all sustainable visions and measures for Goal 10 and Goal 
11 presented in the report see Appendix F.2 pp. 80-81.
‘The City of Copenhagen Municipal Plan’ (2019) 
In the City of Copenhagen Municipal Plan (2019) the City of 
Copenhagen presents goals for urban development. The goals 
are similar to the ones presented in the sustainability report 
from 2018 (KK, 2018.a). 
For all goals presented in the City of Copenhagen Municipal 
Plan 2019 within housing see Appendix F.2 pp. 82-83. The 
goals and most central visions on housing are presented in 
Table 4.1.A. 
1 2 3 4 5 
CASE CONTEXT
4.1
TABLE 4.1.A: SELECTED GOALS AND VISIONS ON HOUSING
THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN MUNICIPAL PLAN 2019
All goals on housing
•  
To create space for 100,000 new Copenhageners before 
2031
•  
Social housing should constitute 20% of the existing 
housing mass and 25% of the new build housing mass
•  
Create 12,000 student housing before 2031
•  
To create 1,800 new housing units for citizens with spe-
cial needs before 2031
Selected visions on housing
•  
To create mixed and diverse residential areas with hous-
ing for all Copenhageners
•  
Take initiative to secure student housing guarantee in 
collaboration with the surrounding municipalities
•  
To secure variation in housing size and types in the dif-
ferent city parts also in new development housing
•  
Institutions and facilities should be located in and near 
the residential areas, and new urban areas should re-
ceive the right service expansion in step with the demo-
graphic development
•  
The quality of the city's buildings should be worthy of 
preservation and buildings be maintained
Source: KK, 2019.a, p. 53
==PAGE:55==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
55
Danish reports on housing 
The reports ‘Our Goals’ (2030-panelet, 2020) and ‘Baseline for 
the Global SGDs in Denmark’ (Rambøl & DAC, 2019) provide 
insights on data accessability and housing policy priorities on 
a national level.
‘Our Goals’ (2020)
The report ‘Our Goals’ (In Danish ‘Vores Mål’) from 2020 pres-
ents 197 proposals for Danish measurements for the global 
SGDs. The measurements supplement the UN indicators. The 
aim is to measure the status for reaching sustainable devel-
opment in Denmark (2030-panelet, 2020). For a complete list 
of indicators presented in context of housing see Appendix F.2 
pp. 74-77.
‘Baseline for the Global SGDs in Denmark’ (2019)
The report ‘Baseline for the Global SGD’s in Denmark, Goal 11: 
Sustainable Cities and Communities’ (2019) presents Danish 
indicators for the SDG 11. The aim is to develop a methodology 
for establishing baselines for the remaining 16 SDGs in Den-
mark. The project description states that: “[…] Denmark has 
no slums or unsuitable housing conditions to any significant 
extent [...]” (Ibid., p. 28). Therefore, the indicators included 
focus on housing costs and on marginalized or disadvantaged 
groups in the residential market (Rambøll & DAC, 2019). For 
the complete list of indicators presented in the report on see 
Appendix F.2 p. 78.
CASE STUDY
Reports from OECD on housing in Copenhagen
The OECD presents the project ‘How well is the life in your 
region?’ as an approach to measuring well being at regional 
levels. The most recent report on Denmark is from 2016. It 
measures different dimensions on well being by comparing 
the cities: Esbjerg, Odense, Aalborg, Aarhus and Copenhagen. 
The report presents the following indicators: 
•  ‘Housing Cost’
•  ‘Proportion of tenant occupied housing’
•  ‘Rooms per person’
•  ‘Square metres per person’
 
Copenhagen is assessed within the boundaries of the Mu-
nicipal Region to include the commuting zone. Three out of 
four indicators assess the Copenhagen performance except 
‘Square metres per person’ which is excluded due to data 
limitations (OECD, 2016). 
In the project ‘Regions and Cities at a Glance 2018’ the OECD 
assesses the sustainability of the Copenhagen housing. The 
indicator presented is: ‘Rooms per person’ (OECD, 2018). 
The OECD ‘Regional Well Being Database’ explores the well 
being of regions within the OECD countries. Copenhagen per-
formance within ‘Housing’ is assessed through the indicator 
‘Rooms per person’. It presents the same data as the report 
from 2016 (OECD, 2021.d). For all OECD indicators assessing 
housing in the Surrounding area of Copenhagen see Appendix 
F.2 p. 79.
==PAGE:56==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
56
4.1.2
PRIOR ASSESSMENTS ON HOUSING AFFORDABILITY IN COPENHAGEN
The report ‘Housing demand and housing prices’ by Copenha-
gen Economics (2018) analyse the driving factors on the City 
of Copenhagen housing market from 2000-2018. The report 
was ordered by the City of Copenhagen for urban planning 
perspectives and strategies prior to the 2019 municipal plan 
(Ibid.). 
In the report ‘Analysis of the availability of the housing market 
in Copenhagen’ (2018) the Finance Administration in the City 
of Copenhagen analyses the availability of housing in the City 
of Copenhagen. The report was also preparatory to the Co-
penhagen Municipal Plan (KK, 2018.b).
In short, the reports presents the following housing trends 
and cause and effect relations for housing affordability the 
City of Copenhagen:
Trend: Demographic pressure 
The demographic pressure is rising in the City of Copenha-
gen due to newcomers and migration both international and 
national. The provision of housing has been low in comparison 
to the demographic pressure. The underlining factors for the 
demographic pressure are: Education, employment growth, 
and preferences for closeness to social networks and ‘livabili-
ty’. Furthermore, an increased focus on providing housing and 
better communities for families with children have caused 
more to stay (CE, 2018).
Trend: Lack of small housing units
The housing prices have been growing for the past 25 years 
except for the years 2006-2012 due to the finansial crisis. 
One of the main drivers for the high price growth is the limit-
ed amount of small housing units. There has been a growth in 
the amount of single and young student dwellers in the city. 
Apart from the direct price effect caused by the high demand 
and limited provision the smaller housing units also cause 
a ‘spill-over’ effect on other types of housing. This is often 
caused by new homeowners buying a small unit, paid for from 
outside capital. A capital gain is then obtained by selling the 
dwelling which is taken to the purchase of a larger one. This 
accumulation of capital gains causes the price development 
on the small units to capitalize on the price on the larger 
ones (CE, 2018; KK, 2018.b).
Parental purchase has also been growing, because the income 
levels in high income groups have been rising. This combined 
with low interest rates has caused addiotional rising prices on 
bigger housing from 2000 and onwards (CE, 2018). Figure 4.1.A 
visualizes the mechanisms of the typical housing career in the 
City of Copenhagen.
SMALL FLATS
MEDIUM APARTMENTS
BIG APARTMENTS & FAMILY HOUSES
OTHER OWNERSHIP MODELS
ACCESS TO MARKET
EG. SOCIAL HOUSING
PARENTAL 
PURCHASE
OTHER MARKETS
FIGURE 4.1.A - HOUSING CAREER ILLUSTRATION
The figure visualizes the housing career in the City of Copenhagen described by Copenhagen Economics (2018, p. 43). Students 
or newly employed are entering the housing owner market either from the purchase of small units or through parental purchas-
es. Since the amount of housing are limited and the amount of singles and students have been increasing, this has contributed 
to rising housing prices in the City of Copenhagen. 
Source: Intertreped depiction of Copenhagen Economics (2018) 'Boligbehov og boligprisudvikling i Københavns Kommune', Figure: 
'Boligkarriere illustration', p. 43.
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:57==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
57
Trend: Increasing housing costs
In general it is not more expensive to live in an average 
owner-occupied home in the City of Copenhagen in 2017 
compared to 2000. The housing burden for the average Co-
penhagener is slightly lower in 2017 than in 2000. Housing 
costs including repayments on loans have increased be-
tween 2000-2017. Therefore, is has become more difficult for 
families without wealth assets to buy housing in the City of 
Copenhagen (KK, 2018.b).
Trend: Shortage in rental housing
According to Copenhagen Economics (2018) other types 
of housing ownership eg. public housing have had a price 
relieving effect. However, a majority of private rental housing 
takes place through closed systems often through friends or 
owner acquaintances. In addition to rent increases, there is a 
tendency for private rental housing converted into cooperative 
housing. Moreover, older rental homes are being renovated or 
transformed which contributes to rising prices (KK, 2018.b).
Trend: Longer waiting lists for social housing
The waiting lists for social housing have become longer. How-
ever, low income and vulnerable citizens can be assigned a 
housing via a public housing allocation. This helps to increase 
accessibility for special groups and contribute to a socially 
diverse city (KK, 2018.b).
Trend: Large housing development
A historical number of housing was constructed in the City of 
Copenhagen in 2017 mostly private rent and owner-occiupied 
housing. This trend is expected to be supplemented by social 
housing which is under development due to a specification in 
the local plan stating that 25% social housing should be build 
in all new development plots (KK, 2018.b).
Large areas are available for development for new hous-
ing. However, the planned development plots are not built 
immediately. One explanation for this development is that 
the City of Copenhagen is characterized by a number of large 
landowners. The land owners can sell the housing at a higher 
price if they become available over a number of years rather 
than being offered on the same time (KK, 2018.b).
CASE STUDY
==PAGE:58==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
58
C. Cost-effective
Time limitation is an essential component of developing 
indicators. Therefore, data availability and the estimated data 
processing time is included as selection criteria. A qualitative 
assessment is made on whether the combination of indica-
tors are realistic within the time frame of the report writing. 
Also, the complexity of the assessment method is included, 
eg. how many indicator components (definitions by Gud-
mundsson et al., 2016) one indicator contains.
D. Based on accurate and accessible data
Indicators are included if data is collected from data sourc-
es recognised by the Danish Goverment. This includes data 
provided by govermental institutions or Statistics Denmark 
which is the central authority for Statistics Denmark. Fur-
thermore, sources that have free and public online access are 
prioritized.
E. Relevant and understandable to target group
Since the Indicator assessment tool should align with the 
goals of its users (Garrett and Latawiec, 2015) political goals 
and priorities in the City of Copenhagen goals within housing 
affordability are included as selection criteria. This includes 
the goals and measures presented in the reports ‘Capital of 
sustainable Development’ (2018) and ‘The City of Copenhagen 
Municipal Plan’ (2019). 
Additionally, the indicators are presented in an easy under-
standable language for communicational purposes. Calcula-
tions and data-tables are placed in appendixes. 
F. Representative of a broad range of conditions
As argued by Tanguay et al. (2010) an Indicator assessment 
tool should be consistent with the definitions of the Brundt-
land Report (1987) by reflecting the economic, social and 
environmental components as well as the overlaps between 
them. Hence, the final list of indicators are sought to cover all 
sustainable dimensions and their intersections and the SAH 
concepts (pp. 50-51). 
For a list of all indicators and their catgorisations see Appen-
dix B.
MacLaren's (1996) indicator selection criteria are applied as 
guidelines for selecting the appropriate indicators from the 
full list of SAH indicators:
A. Validity
First and foremost, indicators are sought to be both scientifi-
cally valid, responsive to change, and unambiguous within the 
defined scope. Indicators presented by Chan & Adabre (2019), 
Cooper et al. (2019), Nuuter et al. (2015), and Mulliner et al. 
(2016; 2013) are considered valid. The indicator assessment 
tools have a clearly defined sustainability context and meth-
odology (Tanguay et al., 2010). The indicator assessment tools 
are based on multidisciplinary input, expose linkages across 
different dimensions of sustainability, are foreward looking, 
and consider distributional effects. All factors are essential to 
the validity of good practice sustainable indicators (MacLaren, 
1996).
According to Winston & Pareja-Eastaway (2008) OECD and EU 
are recognized in scholary literature for housing indicators, 
but controversy exist in literature on the quality (Ibid.). There-
fore, they are not included as a validity criteria. However, de-
scriptions of indicators presented by EU and OECD are includ-
ed for the indicators also presented in the journal articles.
According to Borges et al. (2020), Pedro et al. (2019) and. 
Szibbo (2016) NSA’s needs to be further developed to be 
sufficient tools, as they are guided by a "rationalist planning 
paradigm and technocratic view on sustainability" (Borges 
et al., 2020, p. 1) and lack of consensus on the sustainability 
definition and concepts (ibid.). Therefore, NSA's in the context 
of this study are not considered.
B. Comparable
The indicators need to be comparable with indicators devel-
oped in other relevant jurisdictions. To make the framework 
comparable it must be in line with the current practice, and 
build upon on prior research. Indicators contained in the 
reports 2020-panelet (2020), Rambøll & DAC (2019) or OECD 
(2016; 2018) are considered comparable, since the sustainable 
indicators are selected based on feedback from a broad range 
of stakeholders (Maclaren, 1996) and uses the SDG's as a 
common sustainability reference in a Danish context.
4.2.1
INDICATOR SELECTION CRITERIA 
1 2 3 4 5 
SELECTING INDICATORS
4.2
==PAGE:59==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
59
CASE STUDY
4.2.2
POTENTIAL INDICATORS
The potential indicators are identified by applying the selec-
tion criteria A, B, C, and E. Inclusion and exclusion points are 
given according to the following system:
A. Valid
Indicators included in one of the references Chan & Adabre 
(2019), Cooper et al. (2019), Nuuter et al. (2015), and Mulliner 
et al. (2016; 2013) are assigned an inclusion point for validity.
B. Comparable
Indicators already assessed in one of the reports 2020-pan-
elet (2020), Rambøll & DAC (2019) or OECD (2016; 2018) are 
given an inclusion point for comparability. If none, an exclu-
sion point is given. 
C. Processing
Indicators with a complex assessment process either due to 
the scientific complexity or data availability are given an ex-
clusion point. Indicators with a simple assessment proces are 
given an inclusion point.
E. Relevant
Indicators relevant to the municipal goals formulated by the 
City of Copenhagen in either of the two reports ‘Capital of 
sustainable Development’ (2018) or ‘The City of Copenhagen 
Municipal Plan’ (2019) are given an inclusion point for rele-
vance. Since the City of Copenhagen does not present indica-
tors on SAH, but visions and goals, a qualitative assessment 
is made on whether indicators are relevant.
Selection criteria 'D. Based on accurate and accessible data' 
is not applied in the first selection round, due to the time 
limitation of having to research all potential indicators. Sec-
tion criteria 'F. Representative of a broad range of conditions' 
is applied as the last step in combining all indicators for the 
final list.
Table 4.2.A on p. 60 presents the potential list of indica-
tors after applying selection criteria A, B, C, and E. The table 
only includes indicators with one or none exclusion criteria 
and two or more inclusion criteria. The potential indicators 
presented are suggestive. This implies, that the concrete 
indicators presented eg. 'Assess to and quality of transport 
services' should be adapted to relevant local conditions and 
available data in the final list. Furthermore, the selection cri-
teria should be considered guiding not obsolete. 
==PAGE:60==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
60
1 2 3 4 5 
TABLE 4.2.A: POTENTIAL INDICATORS AFTER APPLYING SELECTION CRITERIA A, B, C, & E
NO.
INDICATORS DIVIDED BY CONCEPTS OF HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
INCLUSION
EXCLUSION
I.
Location Affordability
I.I
Mobility & Community
1
Access to and quality of transport services
B, E
C
2
Access and quality of employment
B, E
C
3
Access to and quality of open green public space
B, E
C
4
Commuting Cost
B, E
-
5
Traffic index (Congestion)
A, E
B
I.II
General Economics
-
I.III
Population
8
Inequality of income distribution
A, E
B
9
Population in or at risk of poverty
A, B, E
-
10
Unemployment/employment rate
B, E
-
I.IV
Income Price Relation
11
Housing cost overburden
B, E
-
12
Housing price to income (Affordability Index)
A, B, E
-
13
Housing rent to income (Profitability of Housing Index)
A, E
B
14
Household expendicure
A, E
B
15
Real adjusted gross disposable income of household
A, B, E
-
I.V
Housing Stock
16
Private ownership rate (shortage of rental housing)
A, E
B
17
Social Rental Stock
B
B
II
Environmental Cost
18
Eco-Performance (LCA)
B, E
C
19
Waste Management
B, E
C
20
Electricity costs
A, E
B
21
Heating costs
A, E
B
III
Housing Quality
III.I
 Layout
22
Average household size
A, E
-
23
Overcrowding rate
B
B
III.II
Comfort & Health 
24
Crime rates
A, B, D
-
25
Disability design
B, E
C
26
Noise
A, E
B
27
Pollution, grime
B, E
-
28
Vernacular architecture
B, E
-
IV
Satisfaction 
IV.I
Tenants
29
Satisfaction with safety
A, B, E
-
Note: Main categories of SAH marked dark grey and sub categories light grey.
==PAGE:61==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
61
CASE STUDY
4.2.3
EVALUATION & FINAL SELECTION
In order to select a final set of indicators Maclaren’s (1996) 
selection criteria 'D. Based on accurate and accessible data' 
and 'F. Representative of a broad range of conditions' are 
applied. The resulting indicators within each SAH concept are 
the following:
I. Location Affordability/ I.I Mobility & Communities
As evident from from indicators 1-5 in Table 4.2.A most stud-
ies prioritize assess to and the quality of transport, employ-
ment and green space. However, no data was found on the 
access to green space in the City of Copenhagen. Therefore, a 
combination of indicator 1 and 2 is chosen: 'Index A Pendling' 
aims to asses 'the access to and quality of employment and 
transport' through the indicators (A.1) 'Pendling distance' and 
(A.2) 'Working vs. dwelling citizens'.
I. Location Affordability/ I.II General economics
As visible in Table 4.2.A no indicators are included in this 
category after applying the selection criteria. However, the 
indicator 'Housing prices' is assessed in relation to income in 
the 'income price relation' category. 
I. Location Affordability/ I.III Population
‘Population’ contains indicators on the socio-demographic 
measures of which 'inclusiveness' is assessed. In this indi-
cator tool the population is assessed on income, 'socio-eco-
nomic group by employment' and 'family types'. 
As visible in table 4.2.A the indicator 'Risk of Poverty' has 
most inclusion criteria. It is selected long with inequality of 
income distribution in 'Index B: Low income groups' contain-
ing the indicators: (B.1) People in risk of poverty, (B.2) Home-
lessness, and (B.3) Allocations. 
I. Location Affordability/ I.IV Income Price Relation
The City of Copenhagen's vision to create housing that is 
affordable to all is considered relevant to all indicators in the 
‘Income Price relation’ category in Tabel 4.2.A. Hence, all indi-
cators are assigned inclusion criteria E. Combining indicators 
11-15 in tabel 4.2.A the following indexes are created:
Index C1 'Housing costs and income' including the indicators: 
(C1.1) Housing price-to-income, (C1.2) Housing price-to-rent, 
and (C1.3) Social housing-rent-to-income
Index C2 'Tenure neutrality' with indicators (C2.1) Av. con-
sumption vs. median income and (C2.2) Housing expenses vs 
income.
I. Location Affordability/ I.V Housing stock
The provision of housing for low income groups in the housing 
stock is assessed in the following indexes: Index D1 'housing 
for low income groups' including the indicators: (D1.1) social 
housing, (D1.2) student housing. Furthermore, the tenure 
distribution is assessed in Index D2 including indicators (D2.1) 
Private ownership rate and (D2.2) Tenure types. 
II. Environment Cost
Environmental costs associated with housing expenses is 
assessed in Index C2 'Tenure neutrality' on electricity, main-
tanance, and heating. However, the indicator only assesses 
expenses and not consumption.
III. Housing Quality / III.I Layout
Different people have different needs and preferences for 
space needed for living. Therefore, the indicator 'Area per 
person' is not included (Table 4.2.A indicator 22). Instead, the 
provision of small apartments is assessed (Index E1) since the 
lack of small housing is one of the main drivers for the high 
price growth in the City of Copenhagen (KK, 2018.a; CE, 2019). 
It is important to assess whether space for living are fitting 
peoples living conditions since the City of Copenhagen is in 
shortage of housing (CE, 2018). Therefore, occupancy length 
and status is included (Index E2).
III. Housing Quality / III.I Comfort & Health
Indicators are included on crime since this is the indicator 
with most inclusion criteria. 
IV. Satisfaction / IV.I Tenant Satisfaction
Feeling of safety is included in combination with an assess-
ment of crime as this is the only indicator with the category 
Satisfaction after applying the selection criteria.
The final list of indexes within each category of SAH and their 
components are presented on p. 64. 
Appendix C pp. 14-15 presents the potential and final list of 
indicators. 
==PAGE:62==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
62
4.3.1
VISION & SCOPE 
1 2 3 4 5 
FRAMEWORK DESCRIPTION
4.3
Goal
The goal of the indicator assessment tool is to assess wheth-
er progress is being made towards sustainable development 
for affordable housing in the City of Copenhagen from 2000-
2021. 
The assessment of affordability focus on the population in the 
City of Copenhagen. This includes both people connected to 
the city by employment and/or by dwelling location.
Target group
The main target group is scholars interested in the sustain-
able indicator assessment methodology within housing and 
urban planning. The secondary target group is employees 
working in the governental institution the City of Copenhagen 
(Københavns Kommune) involved in urban planning. 
Spatial bounds
The spatial bound of the tool is the municipality border of the 
City of Copenhagen. However, boundries of the Capital Region 
and the City District of Copenhagen is included in some in-
dicators either due to unavailable data or the assessment of 
distributional effects and moving patterns. The spatial bounds 
of the City of Copenhagen, the City District of Copenhagen 
and the Capital Region are visible in Figure 4.4.A, 4.4.B, and 
4.4.C on p. 65. For a full list of all geographical divisions by 
municipalities see Appendix D pp. 16-17.
Timely bound
The framework needs to be dynamic to capture changes over 
time in order to assess intergenerational aspects of sus-
tainability (MacLaren, 1996). Hence, the assessment is made 
from 2000 to 2021. Since the global financial crisis between 
2007-2009 caused a subsequent dive in the economy and the 
housing prices in Denmark (Dam et al., 2011) data is sought to 
cover both sides. Hence, the selected period is 2000-2021. 
Assessment type
Within each indicator the City of Copenhagen is compared 
to its own development up until the most recent year of 
available data. The essential concepts of SAH described at pp. 
46-47 are applied to assess whether urban trends are moving 
away or towards sustainability. Hence, the assessment type 
is primarily trend spotting (MacLaren, 1996). Four years of 
continous data is selected as the minimum amount of data 
points in a row to conclude on a trend.
Results
Each indicator is assessed on a three point scale of its rela-
tion to sustainable development: Towards (+); Away from (-) 
or Stagnant (0). If data is insufficient the indicator is assigned 
(x). None of the indicators are weighted. Instead the results 
are discussed in Section 4.1 pp. 102-107.
Geographical assessment level
The assessment focuses on the geographical scales: ‘National 
or Regional' (Denmark, The Capital Region), 'Municipal’ (The 
City of Copenhagen), and ‘Community’ (Copenhagen by city 
parts). Household level is not included, since data is not avail-
able on housing costs at household level. See Figure 4.3.A for 
the geographical assessment levels.
Building life Cycle Phases 
The assessment focuses on the building life cycle phases: 
'Use, Maintanance' and 'Construction, Design, Planning'. See 
Figure 4.3.B for the included building life cycle phases.
HOUSEHOLD
COMMUNITY
MUNICIPAL (CITY)
REGIONAL OR NATIONAL
FIGURE 4.3.A - INCLUDED GEOGRAPHICAL ASSESSMENT LEVELS
The included geographical assessment levels in the indicator assessment tool on SAH for the City of Copenhagen are: Communi-
ty, Municipal (City), and Regional or National.
==PAGE:63==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
63
CASE STUDY
FRAMEWORK TYPE
4.3.2
The indicator assessment tool is a 'Combination Framework' 
as it combines several different types of frameworks present-
ed by Maclaren (1996):
Domain based
The framework is partly domain-based because it seeks to 
integrate all dimensions of sustainability. Embedded in the 
term 'affordability' is the link between social and econom-
ic aspects of sustainable development also known as the 
equitable dimension (Stone, 2006; Du et al., 2020). Therefore, 
social and economic aspects are more well defined than en-
vironmental aspects. Hence, the framework does not assess 
inter-genetational equity or inter-species equity. However, it 
seeks to assess intra-generational equity, geographical equity 
and procedural equity as according to definitions by Giddings 
et al. (2002) (see p. 40).
Sector based
The framework is partly sectoral since indicators are con-
cerned with housing as a specific sector of governance. 
MATERIAL  
EXSTRACTION
CONSTRUCTION
DESIGN
PLANNING 
USE
MAINTANANCE
MATERIAL
PRODUCTION
SECOND LIFE
DEMOLITION
END-OF-LIFE
FIGURE 4.3.B - INCLUDED BUILDING LIFE CYCLE PHASES
Included phases of the building life cycle in the indicator assessment tool on SAH for the City of Copenhagen are: 'Use, main-
tanance' and 'construction, design, planning'. 
Goal- and issue-based
The framework is partly goal-based since it takes into ac-
count the City of Copenhagen sustainability visions within 
housing presented in the following reports: ‘Copenhagen 
Municipal Plan’ (KK, 2019.a) and ‘The Capital of Sustain-
able Development’ (KK, 2018.a). In this context it should be 
stressed that the framework is not developed to report on 
the specific goals presented by the City of Copenhagen on 
housing. Rather, it is developed to contextualise the City of 
Copenhagen's vision of creating an equal and diverse city by 
ensuring sustainable affordable housing. 
The framework is partly issue-based since assess to afford-
able and adequate housing is a specific sustainability issue 
central to the UN SDG 11 (UN, 2015, Appendix A).
==PAGE:64==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
64
1 2 3 4 5 
INDICATOR ASSESSMENT
4.4
This section presents an indicator assessment on SAH in 
the City of Copenhagen. It contains 9 indexes consisting of 
18 indicators. Each indicator is presented with the minimum 
requirements according to Maclaren (1996, p. 199): 
•	
Aim: A description of the indicator and its aim towards 
sustainability
•	
Context and parameters: A description of the indicator 
context, why it is important, its components, and basic 
assumptions
•	
Data collection: A description of the collected data
•	
Results: Presents the results
•	
Indexing: A contextualization of trends over time for the 
indicator and an assessment of whether it is developing 
towards sustainability (+), away from sustainability (-), is 
stagnant (0) or has unsufficient data (x)
Table 4.4.A presents a list of all indexes and the final scores. 
4.4.1
DESCRIPTION
TABLE 4.4.A: TOTAL INDEXES AND SCORES ON SAH IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2000-2021
INDEX
NO.
INDICATOR
SCORE
SAH CONCEPTS
Index A - Pendling
A.1
Pendling distance 
(+)
Mobility & 
Community
A.2
Working vs. dwelling citizens
(+)
Index B - Low income groups
B.1
Risk of poverty
(-)
Population
B.2
Homelessness 
(+)
B.3
Allocations
(x)
Index C1 - Housing costs and 
income
C1.1
Price-to-income ratio 
(-)
Income Price Relation,
Population, 
Environmental Costs, 
General economics
C1.2
Price-to-rent ratio 
(+)
C1.3
Social housing rent-to-income
(-)
Index C2 - Tenure neutrality
C2.1
Consumption vs median income 
(+)
C2.2
Housing overburden rate
(-)
Index D1 - Housing provision 
for low income groups
D1.1
New build social housing
(-)
Housing Stock
D1.1
Student housing vs students
(0)
Index D2 - Tenures
(-)
Index E1 - Small apartments
(-)
Layout
Index E2 - Occupancy
E2.1
Occupancy length
(-)
E2.2
Occupancy status 
(-)
Index F - Crime and safety versus 
housing prices
F.1
Crime
(+)
Comfort & Health, 
Satisfaction
F.2
Safety
(+)
Total scores
Progress towards sustainability (7/18)
Movement away from sustainability (8/18)
Stagnant development (1/18)
Insufficient data (1/18)
(+) = 38.9 %
(-) = 44.4 %
(0) = 5.6 %
(x) = 5.6 %
==PAGE:65==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
65
BISPEBJERG
NØRREBRO
NORDHAVN
ØSTERBRO
BRØNSHØJ
VANLØSE
VALBY
VESTERBRO
INNER
CPH
AMAGER
EAST
AMAGER WEST
FIGURE 4.4.B: THE MUNICIPAL REGION BY MUNICIPALITIES
Geographical divisions of the Municpal Region: The City of 
Copenhagen (blue), The surrounding area of Copenhagen 
(light grey), and The City District of Copenhagen (dark grey 
and blue), the District North Zealand (white). 
Source: Kortforsyningen, 2022.
FIGURE 4.4.A: DENMARK & THE MUNICIPAL REGION
A map of Denmark (grey) and the Municpal Region (blue).
Source: Kortforsyningen, 2022.
FIGURE 4.4.C - THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN BY CITY PARTS
Geographical divisions of the City of Copenhagen by city 
parts.
Source: Kortforsyningen, 2022.
CASE STUDY
N
4 KM
==PAGE:66==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
66
4.4.2
SUMMERIZATION OF RESULTS
In summerization, the main results and scores for each indi-
cator on SAH in the City of Copenhagen are the following:
Index A - Pendling
Indicator A.1: The results on pendling distance indicate that 
more people pendle <10 km from 2012-2019 and less people 
pendle >10-30 km from 2006-2019. No linear trend can be 
found for people who pendle >30 km. Indicator A.1 is assigned 
score (+).
Indicator A.2: The share of people both dwelling and working 
in the City of Copenhagen is increasing. The share of in-pend-
lers is decreasing. Indicator A.2 is assigned score (+). 
Index B - Low income groups
Indicator B.1: The results on people at risk of poverty indi-
cate that the economic segregation is increasing over time. 
Furthermore, the income gap between the City of Copenha-
gen and the rest of Denmark is widening. Additionally, the 
trend results indicate a potential moving pattern of people on 
monetary welfare support from the City District of Copenha-
gen to the Surrounding District of Copenhagen. Indicator B.1 is 
assigned score (-). 
Indicator B.2: The results on homelessness show that the 
share of homeless people out of the total population is de-
creasing from 2013-2019. Indicator B.2 is assigned score (+). 
Indicator B.3: The results on allocations in the Municipal Re-
gion indicate that the share of people out of the toal popu-
lation being offered allocations is constant from 2015-2020. 
However, no data exist on either the requirements for being 
offered allocation housing by the municipal nor the utilization. 
Indicator B.3 is assigned score (x) for insufficient data.
Index C1 - Housing costs and income
Indicator C1.1: The results indicate that the price-to-income 
ratio is increasing from 2009-2019. Indicator C1.1 is assigned 
score (-). 
Indicator C1.2: The collected data on the housing price-to-
rent development from 2015-2021 indicates that the prof-
itability of housing ownership is decreasing for the private 
rental market. Indicator C1.2 is assigned score (+).
1 2 3 4 5 
Indicator C1.3: The collected data on the social housing rent-
to-income ratio shows a decrease for the 5. (median), 4. and 
3 deciles. The social housing rent-to-income ratio is increas-
ing for the 1. and 2 deciles. Since social housing is aimed at 
providing affordable housing to the lowest income groups 
indicator C1.3 is assigned score (-). 
Index C2 - Tenure neutrality 
Indicator C2.1: The results indicate that a bigger share of the 
median income is disposable over time if assuming a Munici-
pal Region average consumption. Hence, the purchasing pow-
er of households is increasing and indicator C2.1 scores (+). 
Indicator C2.2: The results show that the share of housing ex-
penses out the total average consumption is increasing over 
time. The housing overburden rate at 40 % will be reached in 
the near future. Indicator C2.2 is assigned score (-).
Index D1 - Housing provision for low income groups
Indicator D1.1: The results indicate that the share of new build 
social housing units out of all new build housing decreases 
from 2013-2021. Indicator D1.1 is assigned score (-).
Indicator D1.2: The results indicate that there has been an 
increase in student housing compared to the number of stu-
dents from 2016-2021. However, it would take over 100 years 
before 50% of all students could be offered student housing 
with the current development. Index D1.2 scores (0).
Index D2 - Tenures
The results on tenures indicates that the share of the 
non-profit tenures is more or less constant with a minor 
decrease (0.1% per year 2010-2021). The share of only-profit 
tenures is increasing with 1.0% per year from 2016-2021. Indi-
cator D2 is assigned score (-).
Index E1 - Small apartments
The results for small apartments indicate that the share of 
small apartments out of all apartments are decreasing from 
2010-2021. If comparing the number of singles in City of 
Copenhagen to the amount of small apartments the gap is 
widening from 2017-2021. Indicator E1.1 is assigned score (-).
==PAGE:67==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
67
Index E2 - Occupancy 
Indicator E2.1: The share of housing occupied below five 
years is increasing 0.3 % per year from 2016-2020. Hence, the 
results for housing occupancy length indicatesthat the living 
conditions in an increasing amount of housing does not fit the 
tenants' living conditions. Indicator E2.1 is assigned score (-).
Indicator E2.2:The results for occupancy status show that the 
share of unoccupied housing is increasing 0.2 % per year from 
2016-2021. This indicates that the share of housing either 
unavailable or unattractive to tenants are increasing. Indicator 
D1.2 is assigned score (-). 
Index F - Crime and safety versus housing prices
Indicator F.1: The trend results on crime in the City of Copen-
hagen indicate that crime is decreasing in all city parts. The 
trend results further indicates that the more the housing pric-
es increase so does the crime. Indicator F.1 is assigned score 
(+). 
Indicator F.2: The trend results on people feeling unsafe 
indicate that the share of the population feeling unsafe is 
decreasing between 2018-2021. The trend results further indi-
cates that the more the housing prices increase so does the 
share feeling safe. Indicator F.2 scores (+). 
CASE STUDY
Overall assessment of SAH 
In conclusion the City of Copenhagen scores:
•  7/18 (+) which accounts for 38.9 % of all indicators
•  8/18 (-) which accounts for 44.4 % of all indicators
•  1/13 (0) which accounts for 5.6 % of all indicators
•  1/13 (x) which accounts for 5.6 % of all indicators
The results for each indicator is presented in depth on the 
following pages. All calculation and datasets are available in 
the according appendixes. 
Figure 4.4.A visualises all indicator scores in a spider diagram. 
A.1 Pendling distance
A.2 Working vs dwelling
citizens
B.1 People at risk of
poverty
B.2 Homelessness
B.3 Allocations
C1.1 Price-to-income
ratio
C1.2 Price-to-rent ratio
C1.3 Social housing rent-
to-income ratio
C2.1 Consumption vs
income
C2.2 Housing overburden
rate
D1.1 New build social
housing
D1.2 Student housing vs
students
D2 Tenures
E1 Small apartments
E2.1 Occupancy length
E.2.2 Occupancy status
F.1 Crime
F.2 Safety
(0)
(+)
(-)
Sustainable score 
Insufficient data
FIGURE 4.4.D
SUMMERIZATION OF SUSTAINABLE SCORES ON SAH FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2000-2021
==PAGE:68==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
68
4.4.3
INDEX A - PENDLING
Aim
Index A assesses whether the pendling distance and the share 
of people both working and dwelling in the City of Copenha-
gen increases or decreases over time. If the pendling distance 
decrease and the share of people both working and dwelling 
increase this indicates progress towards sustainability.
Context and parameters
A sustainable community is one where people dwell close 
to local amenties such as job opportunities (Mulliner et al., 
2016). Pendling shorter distances to work is associated with 
lower costs eg. time spend on pendling, monetary cost of 
transport, or emmited emmisions (Chan & Adabre, 2019). 
Additionally, more people working and residing in the same 
area contributes to better neighborhood livability and social 
coherence (Mulliner and Maleine, 2011). 
Indicator A.1 - 'Pendling distance' assess the relation between 
the population in the City of Copenhagen and their pendling 
distances to work from their dwelling. Hence, if more peo-
ple have to pendle shorter distances to work over time this 
indicates increasing affordability of housing and progress 
towards sustainability. 10 km is assumed a distance that can 
be reached by bike in the City of Copenhagen.
Indicator A.2 'Working vs. dwelling citizens' assess how big a 
share of the residents in the City of Copenhagen that has a 
job within the city borders. If the share increase this indicates 
better neighborhood livability and social coherence in the City 
of Copenhagen. 
In-pendlers and out-pendlers are also assessed to contextu-
alise the results. In-pendlers are people living in other munic-
ipalities working inside the CIty of Copenhagen. Out-pendlers 
are the population living the City of Copenhagen, but working 
in other municipalities. If the amount of in-pendlers increase 
this can indicate that the quality of 'mobility and communi-
ty' aspects (eg. assess to schools and open green space) are 
increasing in the surrounding area relative to the City of Co-
penhagen. In-pendlers can also be an indication of people not 
affording housing in the City of Copenhagen why they com-
mute from other areas to their job. If the amount of out-pen-
dlers increase this can indicate that the 'access to and quality 
of jobs' are decreasing in the City of Copenhagen relative to 
the surrounding areas. Out-pendlers can also be an indication 
of people living in the city to enjoy the benefits specific to it 
eg. cultural activities, but working elsewhere. 
Data collection
Indicator A.1 - Pendling distance
Data is available through DST in the period 2008-2019 on no. 
people by pendling length in eight intervals per year in the 
City of Copenhagen. Therefore, 2008 is set as base year. The 
intervals include: No pendling, 5 km, >5-10 km, >10-20 km, 
>20-30, >30-40 km,>40-50 km, and >50 km. 
The data only includes the population in the CIty of Copenha-
gen who are employed, why the total number of pendlers are 
lower than the actual number of residents. Since the City of 
Copenhagen is app. 10 km across and is a bikeable distance 
intervals below 10 km are joined. Intervals >10-30 km are 
joined and intervals >30 km.
Indicator A.2 - Working vs dwelling citizens
Data on the relation between working and residing citizens in 
the City of Copenhagen is available from 2008-2019 through 
Statistics Denmark on out-pendlers, in-pendlers and the pop-
ulation both working and dwelling in the City of Copenhagen. 
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:69==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
69
TABLE 4.4.B: RESULTS INDICATOR A.1 - PENDLING DISTANCE IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AVERAGE 2008-2019 [NO.]
A.1 
Pendling 
Distance
Pendling <10 Km 
247,009
Pendling 10-30 Km
71,853
Pendling >30
52,207
Total population
564,242
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
Pendlers <10 Km/Pop
TREND A: 2008-2012
-0.5
0.81
TREND B: 2012-2019
0.3
0.94
Pendlers 10-30 Km/Pop.
TREND E: 2016-2019
-0.2
0.96
RELATION [:]
FIGURE 4.4.E 
PENDLING <10 KM/TOTAL POPULATION IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2008-2019
0.4
0.41
0.42
0.43
0.44
0.45
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
TREND A
TREND B
TIME [YEAR]
Note: For full data table and calculations see Appendix E.1 pp. 18-23.
Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. AFSTA3: Employed by work area, socio economic status, sex and pendling distance. 
Available at www.statistikbanken.dk
CASE STUDY
Results
Detailed data and calculations for Index A can be found in 
Appendix E.1, pp. 18-23. 
Indicator A.1 - Pendling distance
Assessing the results in Table 4.4.B and Figure 4.4.E the share 
of the population commuting <10 km is decreasing with 0.5% 
per year from 2008-2012 according to the linear model in 
'Trend A'. However, the most current linear model for 'Trend B' 
shows an increase of 0.3 % per year from 2012-2019. 
Assessing the results for the population pendling between 
10-30 km (Appendix E.1, Figure E.1.2, Trend E) the most cur-
rent linear model shows that the share is decreasing 0.2 % 
per year from 2016-2019. 
The most current linear model for pendlers commuting 
>30 km (Appendix E.1, Figure 3.1.3, Trend H) shows that the 
trend is flat. However, the correlation coefficient is 0.35 why 
the model is very uncertain. In fact, if compared to a linear 
model for the full period from 2008-2019 the linear trend is 
decreasing with 0.1 % per year (R2=0.47). This correlation is 
better, but still not precise enough to make a conclusion on a 
trend for pendlers travelling over 30 km (Appendix E.1, Figure 
3.1.4, Trend I).
==PAGE:70==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
70
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Note: For full data table and calculations see Appendix E.1 pp. 18-23.
Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. PEND100. RAS310. PEND101. Available at statistikbanken.dk
TABLE 4.4.C: RESULTS INDICATOR A - PENDLING DISTANCE IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AVERAGE 2008-2019 [NO.]
A.2 
Working vs 
dwelling
Working and dwelling
191,281
Out-pendlers
117,419
In-pendlers
179,789
Total population
565,423
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
Working and dwelling
TREND A: 2008-2019
-0.3
0.96
Out-pendlers
TREND B: 2012-2019
0.3
0.96
In-pendlers
TREND C: 2010-2019
0.1
0.87
TIME [YEAR]
RELATION [:]
Dwelling and working
Outpendlers
Inpendlers
TREND A
TREND B
TREND C
FIGURE 4.4.F
POPULATION BY WORKING AND DWELLING RELATION/TOTAL POPULATION IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2008-2019
Indicator A.2 - Working vs dwelling citizens
Assessesing the results in Table 4.4.C and Figure 4.4.F the 
share of people both working and living in the City of Co-
penhagen (blue line) is increasing with 0.4 % per year from 
2012-2019 according to the linear model for 'Trend A'. The 
share of out-pendlers is also increasing according to the 
linear model for 'Trend B' from 2010-2019 with 0.1 % per year 
(yellow line). According to the linear model for 'Trend C' the 
share of in-pendlers are decreasing with 0.3 % per year from 
2008-2019 (grey line). 
Indexing
Based on the results on pendling distances progress is made 
towards sustainability since more people pendle <10 km from 
2012-2019 and less people pendle >10-30 km from 2006-
2019. Indicator A.1 is assigned score (+).
 
Based on the results on the population both working and 
dwelling in the City of Copenhagen progress is made towards 
sustainability since the share increases. In conclusion, Indi-
cator A.2 is assigned index score (+). 
The results indicates that the share of out-pendlers increase 
and the share of in-pendlers decrease. More data is need-
ed to interpret the results for in-pendlers and out-pendlers 
since the factors motivating the in- and out-pendling pat-
terns are speculative.
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:71==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
71
4.4.4
INDEX B - LOW INCOME GROUPS
Aim
Index B assesses the development of low income groups in 
the City of Copenhagen. The aim of the indicator is to assess 
whether the share of financially vulnerable citizens increase 
over time.
Context and parameters
Low income groups are at risk of exclusion from the hous-
ing market and/or living under unsatisfactory conditions 
(EU-SILC, 2020.e). 'Low income groups' is assessed in three 
indicators: (B.1) The specific Danish groups that are at risk of 
poverty according to the EU definition, (B.2) People who are 
homeless, and (B.3) Offered allocations:
Indicator B.1 - Risk of Poverty
According to EU (2020) 'people at risk of poverty' are those 
living in a household with an equivalized disposable income 
below 60% of the national median equivalised disposable 
income after social transfers (EU-SILC, 2020.e). Therfore, indi-
cator B.1 assesses whether the share of the population below 
this poverty limit increase or decrease over time. 
It should be noted, that in Denmark 60 % of the national 
median equivalised disposable income is not an indication 
of people being extremely poor eg. not affording food or 
permanent shelter (Rambøll & DAC, 2019). However, it can be 
considered an indication of the development for economic 
segregation across the population. In order to contextualise 
the development within the City of Copenhagen it is com-
pared to the poverty development in Denmark.
The specific Danish socio-economic groups that are at risk 
of poverty is specified. It is also analysed whether the share 
of these groups increase or decrease over time in the City of 
Copenhagen. 
Since the proces of gentrification can force people with less 
financial ressources to move out of an area (Dempsey et al., 
2011) the results are compared to the Surrounding Area of Co-
penhagen for possible moving patterns. Therefore, a decrease 
in the share of groups in risk of poverty in the CIty of Copen-
hagen is not necessarily an indication of social mobility within 
the population, but rather people moving out of the city to 
the surrounding areas. 
B.2 - Homeless population
Homelessness is a direct measure of whether people are 
excluded from the housing market. In Denmark, homeless 
people include rough sleepers and people living in temporary 
accommodation (VIVE, 2019). Indicator B.3 assesses whether 
the share of homeless people decrease or increase over time.
B.3 - Allocations
The share of housing allocations is assessed on two pa-
rameters: the amount of people offered allocations from an 
external waiting list and offered Municipal allocations. The 
no. people on the external waiting list is an estimate of the 
demand of social housing from all types of citizens, since 
anyone can be listed. The offered Municipal allocations reflect 
the provision of housing for vulnerable citizens (Transport- og 
Boligministeriet, 2018). However, currently no data is available 
on the criteria for being allocated by the municipal. Addition-
ally, it should be noted that the Danish Municipalities do not 
necessarily allocate people to social housing units (Ibid.). 
The number of allocations on the external waiting list is as-
sessed as the relative demand of social housing for the total 
population. The number of allocations from the Municipal is 
assessed as the relative demand of social housing for vulner-
able citizens.
Data collection
Indicator B.1 - Risk of Poverty
Data on income is available through Statistics Denmark from 
2000-2019. Data on the no. people by socio-economic status 
is available from 2000-2019 though Statistics Denmark for the 
City District of Copenhagen and for the Surrounding area of 
Copenhagen.
Indicator B.3 - Homeless population
Data is available through VIVE (2019) in 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, 
2017, 2019 (every second year) on the total number of home-
less people in the City of Copenhagen. 
Indicator B2.2 - Allocations 
Data is available for offered housing allocations per year by 
type of allocation through Landsbyggefonden (2021) from 
2014-2020 for the Municipal Region. The following allocations 
types are included: External waiting list, Municipal allocations, 
Total allocations. See Appendix E.2, Table E.2.D for excluded 
allocation types.
CASE STUDY
==PAGE:72==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
72
1 2 3 4 5 
Results
Detailed data and calculations for Index B can be found in 
Appendix E.2 pp. 24-33.
Indicator B1.1: Risk of poverty
According to the linear model for 'Trend A' (Table 4.4.D and 
Figure 4.4.G) an increasing share of the total population in 
the City of Copenhagen is at risk of poverty according to the 
EU definition. If compared to the linear model for 'Trend B' 
for the entire population in Denmark the models have sim-
ilar trends. However, the trend in the City of Copenhagen is 
increasing 0.02 % more per year than for Denmark. Hence, 
the economic segregation is increasing over time and the gap 
between the City of Copenhagen and the rest of Denmark 
widening. 
TABLE 4.4.D: RESULTS INDICATOR B.1 - RISK OF POVERTY
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AVERAGE 2000-2019 [NO.]
B.1 
EU defini-
tion: 'Risk 
of poverty'
People at 'risk of poverty' in Denmark
638,932
638932
Total population in Denmark
5,369,175
People at 'risk of poverty' in the City of CPH 
117,593
Total population in the City of Copenhagen
518,030
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
People at risk of poverty in the City of CPH
TREND A: 2000-2019
0.24
0.84
People at risk of poverty in Denmark
TREND B: 2000-2019
0.22
0.94
Note: For full data table and calculations see Appendix E.2 pp. 24-25. 
Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. FOR12P: Population in low income families by income level, municipality and time. 
SOGN10: Population 1st of January after parish. FOLK1A: Population the 1st in quantile after area, sex, age and civil status.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
SHARE OF TOTAL POPULATION [%]
FIGURE 4.4.G
SHARE OF POPULATION WITH A DISPOSABLE INCOME BELOW 60% OF THE NATIONAL MEDIAN DISPOSABLE INCOME
TIME [YEAR]
Denmark
The City of Copenhagen
TREND A
TREND B
Data on the socio-economic composition of low income 
families in Denmark shows that the five groups accounting 
for the biggest share of people earning below the EU poverty 
limit are: 'Others Un-employed', 'Students', 'People on wel-
fare support (Kontanthjælp)', 'Temporarily un-employed', and 
'Un-employed' (See Appendix E.2, Figure E.2.B). Additionally, 
according to numbers on the socio-economic groups that has 
the lowest income in the City of Copenhagen are the same 
groups in the same order (See Appendix E.2, Figure E.2.C). 
However, students are not assessed in this indicator. Instead, 
students are assessed in indicator D2 on pp. 84-86. On this 
basis, the four socio-economic groups that are considered in 
highest risk of poverty in the City of Copenhagen are: 'Others 
Un-employed', 'Assistance Recipents (Kontanthjælp)', 'Tempo-
rarily un-employed', and 'Un-employed'.
==PAGE:73==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
73
CASE STUDY
Assessing the linear model for 'Trend A' (Table 4.4.E and Fig-
ure 4.4.H) the share of low income groups in the City District 
of Copenhagen is decreasing 0.1 % per year. According to the 
linear model for 'Trend B' the share of low income groups in 
the surrounding area of Copenhagen is increasing over time. 
This could indicate gentrification. However, both trends have 
a correlation coeffient that indicates a high level of uncertain-
ty. If looking at the composition of low income groups (See 
appendix E.2, Figure E.2.E and Figure E.2.F) the models could 
indicate a moving pattern of people on monetary welfare sup-
port from the City District of Copenhagen to the surrounding 
area of Copenhagen. Nevertheless, no clear conclusion can be 
made on possible moving pattern based on this data.
Note: For full data table and calculations see Appendix E.2 pp. 28-29.
Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. FOR12P, INDKP104, FU06, IFOR11P. Available at www.statistikbanken.dk. Landsbyggefon-
den (2021) Huslejestatistik 2015, Huslejestatistik 2017, Huslejestatistik 2018, Huslejestatistik 2019. Available at www.lbf.dk. VIVE 
(2019) Hjemløshed i Danmark 2019, National kortlægning, Viden til Velfærd, Det nationale Analyse og Forskningscenter til Velfærd. 
Available at www.vive.dk.
TABLE 4.4.E: RESULTS INDICATOR B.1 - RISK OF POVERTY 
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2000-2019 [NO.]
B.2
Danish 
groups 
in risk of 
poverty
City District of 
Copenhagen
Low income groups
154,882
Total population
571,962
Surrounding area of 
Copenhagen
Low income groups
79,536
Total population
414,874
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2010-2019
-0.09
0.67
TREND B: 2010-2019
0.11
0.64
RELATION [:]
FIGURE 4.4.H
GROUPS IN RISK OF POVERTY OF OUT TOTAL POPULATION
TIME [YEAR]
0.05
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.13
0.15
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
City District of Copenhagen
Surrounding area of Copenhagen
TREND A
TREND B
==PAGE:74==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
74
1 2 3 4 5 
TIME [YEAR]
FIGURE 4.4.I
HOMELESS PEOPLE IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2009-2019
1400
1450
1500
1550
1600
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
HOMELESS PEOPLE [NO.]
TABLE 4.4.F: RESULTS INDICATOR B.2 - HOMELESS POPULATION IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2000-2019 [NO.]
B.2
Homeless 
population
Homeless population
1,511
Total population
571,962
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
EXTRAPOLATION [Y]
TREND: 2013-2019
-0.02
0.99
y=0 => x=16.5
Note: Data is only available every second year (2009-2019). See Appendix E.2 p. 32. Data source(s): FOLK1A: Population the 1st in 
quantile after area, sex, age and civil status. Data on homelessness is obtained through VIVE (2019): Hjemløshed i Danmark 2019, 
National kortlægning. Viden til Velfærd. Det nationale Analyse og Forskningscenter til Velfærd. Available at www.vive.dk
Indicator B.2: Homelessness
As visible in Table 4.4.F and Figure 4.4.I the share of homeless 
people decrease by 0.02 % in the City of Copenhagen from 
2013-2019 according to the linear model 'Trend A' (See Appen-
dix E.2, Figure E.2.G). 
==PAGE:75==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
75
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Indicator B.3: Allocations
Assessing the results in Table 4.4.G and Figure 4.4.J the share 
of all types of offered allocations in relation to the total 
population (total offered allocations, offered allocations from 
the external waiting list and offered municipal allocations) is 
constant from 2015-2020 according to the linear model for 
Trend A, B and C. 
CASE STUDY
RELATION [:]
FIGURE 4.4.J
OFFERED ALLOCATIONS BY TYPE/TOTAL POPULATION IN THE MUNICIPAL REGION 2014-2020
TIME [YEAR]
TABLE 4.4.G: RESULTS INDICATOR B.3 - HOUSING ALLOCATIONS IN THE MUNICIPAL REGION
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2000-2019 [NO.]
B.3
Housing 
allocations
in the 
Municipal 
Region
Total allocations
20,561
Municipal allocations
6,477
External wait. list
8,065
Total population
571,962
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2015-2020
Total offered allocations
0.0
0.62
TREND B: 2015-2020
Offered allocations external wait. list
0.0
0.62
TREND C: 2015-2020
Offered municipal allocations
0.0
0.68
TREND A
TREND B
TREND C
Offered allocations external waiting list
Offered Municipal allocations
Total offered allocations
Note: See Appendix E.2 p. 33 for further details. Data source(s): Landsbyggefonden, 2021. Anvisninger i den almene boligsektor 
2020, 2021:1; 2019, 2020:1; 2018, 2019:1; 2017, 2018:1; 2015, 2016:1; 2014, 2015:1. Landsbyggefonden, LBF, Analyser, Statistikker og 
analyser, Temastatistikker. Available at www.lbf.dk. Data on population: Statistics Denmark, 2021. FOLK1A. 
Indexing
Since the economic segregation is increasing over time and 
the gap between the City of Copenhagen and the rest of Den-
mark widening indicator B.1 is assigned a index score (-). The 
share of people in risk of poverty are decreasing in the City 
District of Copenhagen and increasing in the surrounding area 
of Copenhagen. This could indicate gentrification, but more 
data is needed to conclude on a moving pattern.
There has been a decrease in the share of homeless people 
from 2009-2019 why indicator B.2 is assigned index score (+). 
The share of offered allocations out of the total population 
is constant from 2015-2020. However, no data is available on 
the utilization or the number of people on the waiting lists. 
Hence, indicator B.3 is assigned score (x) for insufficient data.
==PAGE:76==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
76
4.4.5
INDEX C1 - HOUSING COSTS VERSUS INCOME
Aim
Index C1 assesses how the prices on owner occupied and 
rental housing have developed over time and compares it 
to the income development by deciles in the City of Co-
penhagen. The aim of the indicator is to assess whether the 
financial burden of dwelling increases or decreases over time 
in the City of Copenhagen. Additionally, it aims to asses the 
profitability of house ownership.
Context and parameters
According to OECD (2021) assessing housing prices should 
both include ratios of price-to-rent and price-to-income. 
The price-to-income ratio is the price index in relation to the 
income index. The price-to-rent ratio is the price index divid-
ed by the rent index. It can be considered a measure of the 
profitability of house ownership for rental (OECD, 2021). 
The ratio development over time is an indication of whether 
development is moving away or towards housing affordability. 
If the price-to-income ratio is increasing it is an indication 
that housing becomes less affordable. If the price-to-rent 
ratio is increasing it is an indication that housing profitability 
is rising (OECD, 2021.c). 
The income development is assessed in deciles in equivalent 
disposable income. Divided by deciles is ranking the popu-
lation according to the size of their income into ten equal 
groups (DST, 2017.b). The equivalized disposable income is the 
income amount after taxes and expenditures weighted using 
an equivalent scale making it possible to compare income 
across family types (DST, 2017.a). 
According to Statistics Denmark (2017.b) the average income 
within the decile groups should largely coincide with the 
adjacent deciles. However, this does not apply in the first and 
tenth decile. Few people with very low or very high incomes 
can affect the average income in these deciles significant-
ly (Ibid.). For the housing-to-income ratio the income in ten 
deciles is included for contextualisation. The median income 
(5. decile) is the only decile compared to housing prices since 
the housing price as an average. 
The housing rent-to-income for private rental housing and 
social housing is assessed. If the rent-to-income ratio is 
increasing this indicates an increasing financial burden over 
time. The rent for social housing is particularly interesting 
since it is intended to be affordable to the lower income 
deciles (Lejerbo, 2019).  
Data collection
Owner-occupied housing prices 
Data on owner-occupied housing prices is available through 
Finance Danmark from 2000 to 2021 in the City of Co-
penhagen. Data is included for Single Family Housing and 
Owner-Occupied Apartments both measured in cost per 
squaremeter as a yearly average. Only housing prices within 
the regular market is included.
Rental housing prices
Data on rental housing prices is available through the Danish 
Housing and Planning Agency (BPST) from 2015 to 2021 in the 
City of Copenhagen. Hence, 2015 is set as base year. Data is 
included for Private Rental Flats, Social Housing, and Private 
Rental Housing (ex. flats) all measured in cost per squareme-
ter (DKK/m2) as a yearly average based on four quantiles.
Income levels
Data on income is available through Statistics Denmark from 
2000-2019 in ten deciles in equivalent disposable income in 
the City of Copenhagen.
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:77==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
77
1.0
1.3
1.5
1.8
2.0 2.3 2.5 2.8 3.0
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
1. decile
2. decile
3. decile
4. decile
5. decile (median)
6. decile
7. decile
8. decile
9. decile
10. decile
Results
Detailed data and calculations for Indicator C1 can be found 
in Appendix E.3 pp. 34-45.
Indicator C1.1 - Price-to-income ratio
Assessing the results for the price-to-income ratio visible in 
Tabel 4.4.5.A and Figure 4.4.K there is a clear correlation be-
tween the financial crisis 2008 and a decline in the ratio from 
2006-2012 for all deciles accept the 1st decile. Furthermore, 
the 1st decile fluctuates significantly as described by Sta-
titics Denmark (2017.b). This may be caused by large variatons 
in the income levels for students and self-employed (See 
Appendix E.3 - Diagram E.3.H, orange and yellow line) and the 
number of students in the City District of Copenhagen which 
is increasing substantially from 2000-2019 (See Appendix E.3 
Diagram E.3.I, red line). 
RATIO [:]
TIME [YEAR]
Note: Housing price-to-income ratio is based on prices for owner occupied housing. For full data table and calculations see 
Appendix E.3 pp. 36-37.
Data source(s): (Income) Statistics Denmark, 2021. Statistikbanken. INDKP105. Available at: www.statistikbanken.dk. 
(Housing prices) Finans Danmark, 2021. Boligstatistik, BM010, København. Available at: www.rkr.statistikbank.dk
FIGURE 4.4.K
HOUSING PRICE-TO-INCOME RATIO BY DECILES IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
TREND A
CASE STUDY
Assessing the linear model for 'Trend A' (Red line, 5. decile) in 
Figure 4.4.K the housing price-to-income ratio is increasing by 
7.2 % per year from 2009-2019. If assessing the housing price-
to-income ratio 2011-2019 the trend is increasing 8.6 % per 
year (See Appendix E.3, Diagram E.3.B). Both trends indicate 
growing un-affordability of housing: the gap between the me-
dian disposable income and the average housing price (owner 
occupied apartments) is increasing over time. 
For deciles 2.-10. the trend is showing an increasing gap be-
tween income and housing prices from 2009-2019. For the 1st 
decile the trend is increasing from 2012-2019. 
The ratio for all deciles peak in 2018. From 2018-2019 the ratio 
is decreasing. However, assessing the housing price index 
as visible in Appendix E.3 Figure E.3.C the housing prices in-
crease again from 2019-2021. This could indicate a continous 
increase in the housing price-to-income ratio from 2019-2021. 
TABLE 4.4.H: RESULTS INDICATOR C1.2 - HOUSING PRICE-TO-RENT RATIO IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2000-2021 [DKK/M2]
CONDITIONS
AV. 2000-2021 [DKK/Y]
C1.1
Housing 
price-to-
income 
Owner occupied apartments price
27,007
Income 1. decile
47,257
Single family houses price
25,552
Income median
170,295
Income 10. decile
479,489
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2009-2021
Median income (red)
7.2
0.91
==PAGE:78==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
78
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
1 2 3 4 5 
Indicator C1.2 - Price-to-rent ratio
Assessing the price-to-rent ratio (Table 4.4.I and Figure 4.4.L) 
based on the price index for for owner occupied apartments 
from 2015-2021 the ratio for social housing is increasing with 
6.6 % per year according to the linear model (R2=0.94). This 
is indicating a growing gap between social housing and the 
housing prices for the private market. The trend is confirming, 
that the social housing is less profitable than the owner oc-
cupied housing market. This is the intention of social housing.
Assesing the price-to-rent ratio for 'Private rental housing' 
(Figure 4.4.L Trend B) the ratio is increasing with 1.6% per year 
according to the linear model from 2015-2021, which also 
indicates less profitability of housing. However, it should be 
noted that the linear trend is uncertain (R2=0.43).
FIGURE 4.4.L
HOUSING PRICE-TO-RENT RATIO IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2015-2021
RATIO [:]
TREND A
TREND B
Note: Based on the housing prices for owner occupied flats. For further details see Appendix E.3 p. 40.
Data source: (Housing rent) BPST, 2021. Bolig og planstyrelsen. Boligstatistik. Huslejestatistik. (Housing prices) Finans Danmark, 
2021. Boligstatistik, BM010, København. Available at: www.rkr.statistikbank.dk
TIME [YEAR]
Social Housing
Private Rental Housing
Indicator C1.3 - Social housing rent-to-income
Assessing the results in Table 4.4.J and Figure 4.4.M the linear 
model for 'Trend A' (purple) the social housing rent-to-income 
ratio for 1st decile is increasing from 2015-2020 with 1.1 % per 
year. According to the linear model for 'Trend B' (brown) the 
social housing rent-to-income ratio for 2. decile is increasing 
from 2015-2020 with 2.2 % per year.  The linear trends for 3rd 
and 4th deciles both indicates a decrease in the socioal hous-
ing rent-to-income (green and blue line). The social housing 
rent-to-income is also decreasing for the median income (See 
Appendix E.3 Figure E.3.E). 
If assessing the rent-to-income ratio for the private rental 
housing the ratio is increasing for the median income (Appen-
dix E.3 - Figures E.3.D and E.3.E). 
TABLE 4.4.I: RESULTS INDICATOR C1.2 - HOUSING PRICE-TO-RENT RATIO IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2015-2021 [DKK/M2]
C1.2
Housing 
price-to-
rent 
Owner occupied apartment price
39,273
Private rental housing rent
1,065
Social housing rent
894
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2015-2021
Social housing
6.6
0.94
TREND B: 2015-2021
Private rental housing
1.6
0.43
==PAGE:79==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
79
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Note: For further details see Appendix E.3 pp. 38-39.
Data source: (Housing rent) BPST, 2021. Bolig og planstyrelsen. Boligstatistik. Huslejestatistik. (Income) Statistics Denmark, 2021. 
IFOR32. Available at statistikbanken.dk
RATIO [:]
FIGURE 4.4.M
SOCIAL HOUSING RENT-TO-INCOME RATIO IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN FOR THE FOUR LOWER DECILES 2015-2020
TIME [YEAR]
CASE STUDY
1. decile
2. decile
3. decile
4. decile
TREND A
TREND B
TREND C
TREND D
TABLE 4.4.J: RESULTS INDICATOR C1.3 - SOCIAL HOUSING RENT-TO-INCOME RATIO IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. INCOME 2015-2020 [DKK/Y]
AV. RENT 2015-2020 [DKK/M2]
C1.3
Housing 
rent-to-
income 
ratio
1. decile
50,864
Social housing
888
2. decile
118,423
3. decile
149,175
4. decile
177,858
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2015-2020
1. decile
1.1
0.24
TREND B: 2015-2020
2. decile
2.2
0.81
TREND C: 2015-2020
3. decile
-2.0
0.93
TREND D: 2015-2020
4. decile
-4.6
0.97
Indexing
In conclusion, the collected data on housing prices and in-
come by deciles shows movement away from sustinability in 
the price-to-income ratio for the median income (5. decile). In 
conclusion, indicator C1.1 is assigned score (-).
The collected data on the housing price-to-rent development 
from 2015-2021 indicates that the profitability of housing 
ownership is decreasing for the private rental market. Hence, 
indicator C1.2 is assigned score (+).
Data on the rent-to-income ratio for the private rental marked 
shows an increase for the median income. This indicates, that 
the financial burden of rental housing is increasing.
The collected data on the social housing rent-to-income ratio 
shows a decrease for the median income, the 4th, and the 3rd 
decile. However, the rent-to-income ratio is increasing for the 
1st and 2nd deciles. Since social housing is aimed at providing 
affordable housing to the lowest income groups indicator C1.3 
is assigned score (-). 
==PAGE:80==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
80
4.4.6
INDICATOR C2 - TENURE NEUTRALITY
Aim
Indicator C2 assesses the relation between household dis-
posable income and household expenditures in the City of 
Copenhagen from 2000-2020. The aim of the indicator is to 
assess whether the purchasing power of households are in-
creasing or decreasing over time. 
Context and parameters
The relationship between household income and housing 
expenses is also called tenure neutrality (Eurofound, 2016). 
According to Eurostat (2020) tenure neutrality reflects the 
purchasing power of households and their ability to invest in 
goods and services or save for the future. 
Indicator C2 focuses on how big a percentage of the house-
hold’s income in the CIty of Copenhagen is spend on housing 
expenses and if there is an overall trend when assessing the 
correlation between the two parameters. If the economic 
margin of households is increasing over time this indicates 
development towards housing affordability. Relation 1:1 
between av. consumption and median disposable income is 
'tenure neutrality'. 
According to EU (2019) household expenditure is the amount 
of consumption made by households to meet their everyday 
needs. This includes food, clothing, rent, energy, transport, 
durable goods, health costs, leisure, and miscellaneous 
services. According to EU-SILC (2021.c) housing expenses 
includes: Mortgage repayment or rent, insurance and service 
charges eg. sewage removal, regular maintenance, repairs 
and other charges. The housing expenses should not exceed 
40% of the total consumption. This limit is called the 'hous-
ing overburden rate'. Therefore, two different parameters are 
included to assess tenure neutrality: 
•  Indicator C2.1: The total average consumption per person 
related to median income  
•  Indicator C2.2: The housing overburden rate
Data collection
Total average consumption
Data on consumption is only available on regional levels. 
Therefore, The Municipal Region is selected as geographical 
area. Data is available from 2007-2019 in money spend per av-
erage household. According to DST (2021) the average number 
of people per household in the Municipal Region is 2.1 person 
from 2007-2020. All data on income levels are measured per 
person. Hence, the average consumption is divided by 2.1 for 
comparison.
Housing expenses
Following the expenses available in the total consumption 
list in Statistics Denmark the following is related directly to 
housing costs: Rent, Rental value of housing, Maintenance, 
Water supply, and Electricity. Data is available from 2007-2019 
in the Municipal Region. 
Income
Data on income is assessed in ten deciles in equivalent dis-
posable income from 2007-2019. Available data from Statis-
tics Denmark from 2000-2019 for the City of Copenhagen.
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:81==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
81
Results
Detailed data and calculations for Indicator C2 can be found 
in Appendix E.4 pp. 46-49.
C2.1 Consumption versus income
Assessing the results in Table 4.4.K and Figure 4.4.N accord-
ing to the linear model for 'Trend B' the relation between the 
median income and the av. consumption is decreasing from 
2013-2019 with 2.1% per year (R2=0.81). Hence, a bigger share 
of the income is disposable over time for the population in 
the City of Copenhagen if assuming a Municipal Region aver-
age consumption. The relation between the median income 
and the av. consumption has already reached 'tenure neutrali-
ty' (relation 1:1) in 2007. 
FIGURE 4.4.N 
MEDIAN INCOME IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN/AVERAGE CONSUMPTION IN THE MUNICIPALITY REGION 2007-2019
RELATION [:]
TIME [YEAR]
Note: For further details see Appendix E.4 pp. 46-47. Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. IIFOR32: Average Equivalent 
Disposable Income by Decile and Municipality. FU07: Consumption by consumption group, region and price unit. Available at: 
statistikbanken.dk. 
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
TREND A
CASE STUDY
TABLE 4.4.K: RESULTS INDICATOR C2.1 - CONSUMPTION VERSUS INCOME 
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2007-2019 [DKK/PERS]
C2.1
Consump-
tion versus 
income
Median income
The City of Copenhagen
184,846
Average consumption
The Municipal Region
159,499
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2013-2020
-2.1
0.81
==PAGE:82==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
82
C2.2 Housing overburden rate
When assessing the housing related exspenses in Table 4.4.L 
and Figure 4.4.O the share of housing expenses out the total 
av. consumption is increasing over time. According to linear 
model for 'Trend B' (blue) the housing expenses/av. consump-
tion increases with 0.5% per year. This is mainly caused by the 
calculated rental value (orange line, Trend D, Figure 4.4.P) if 
assessing the housing expenses by type. Explorating the mod-
el the housing overburden rate will be reached in 2028('). 
Indexing 
Based on the results on the relation between the average 
consumption in the Municipal Region and median income in 
the City of Copenhagen progress is moving towards more sus-
tainability: The purchasing power of households is increasing. 
This gives score (+).
Based on the results on the housing overburden rate in the 
Municipal Region it will be reached in the near future. There-
fore, indicator C2.2 is assigned score (-).
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:83==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
83
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
0
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
FIGURE 4.4.P
HOUSING EXPENSES BY TYPE/AVERAGE CONSUMPTION IN THE MUNICIPALITY REGION 2007-2020
RELATION [:]
TIME [YEAR]
Note: For further details see Appendix E.4 pp. 48-49. Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. IIFOR32: Average Equivalent 
Disposable Income by Decile and Municipality. FU07: Consumption by consumption group, region and price unit. Available at: 
statistikbanken.dk. 
FIGURE 4.4.O 
HOUSING EXPENSES/AVERAGE CONSUMPTION IN THE MUNICIPALITY REGION 2007-2019
RELATION [:]
TIME [YEAR]
CASE STUDY
TREND B
TABLE 4.4.L: RESULTS INDICATOR C2.2 - HOUSING OVERBURDEN RATE
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2007-2020 [DKK/HOUSEHOLD]
C2.2
Housing 
overbur-
den rate
Av. consumption
335,471
Calculated rental value
32,446
Actual rent
40,523
Electricity, gas, other
4,983
Water supply
9,470
Maintenance
22,331
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
EXTRAPOLATION [Y]
TREND B: 2007-2019
Expenses vs. consumption
0.5 
0.87
y=0.4 => x=21.0(')
TREND C: 2007-2021
Calculated rental value
0.6
0.94
TREND D: 2015-2021
Actual rent
0.4
0.48
TREND E: 2010-2020
Electricity, gas, other
-0.1
0.62
TREND F: 2007-2020
Water supply
0.0
0.23
TREND G: 2007-2020
Maintenance
-0.1
0.55
Actual rent
Calculated rental value
Housing maintenance
Water supply and other services
Electricity, gas and other fuels
TREND C
TREND D
TREND E
TREND F
TREND G
HOUSING OVERBURDEN RATE (40%)
==PAGE:84==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
84
4.4.7
INDEX D1 - HOUSING PROVISION FOR LOW INCOME GROUPS
Aim
Index D1 assesses the share of new build social housing out 
of all new build housing and the provision of student housing 
compared to the number of students in the City of Copenha-
gen from 2006-2021. The aim is to assess the housing provi-
sion for low income groups. 
Context and parameters
In a Danish context social housing includes student housing, 
elderly housing, and family housing (BPST, 2021). Social hous-
ing is characterized by being owned by non-profit housing 
associations and are typically assigned via waiting lists (Lejer-
bo, 2019). Therefore, the typical rent in social housing is lower 
than the rest of the market (KK, 2018.a).
No data was found for the share of social housing units in 
the existing housing stock. Therefore, the provision of social 
housing is assessed as the number of new build social hous-
ing units out of the total new build housing units. Addition-
ally, the City of Copenhagen has introduced a change in the 
Municipal Plan from 2015 (KK, 2015) stating that 25% of new 
build housing should be social housing.
In Statistics Denmark (2021, IFOR32) students are categorised 
as a socio-economic group by income. According to Indicator 
B.1 students are one out of the five lowest income groups 
in the CIty of Copenhagen and in Denmark. Therefore, the 
relation between students and student housing is assessed. 
Additionally, students moving to the City of Copenhagen is 
considered a housing trend (See Appendix E.3, Diagram E.3.I) 
that also contributes to unaffordability of housing (CE, 2018).
It should be noted that students may aquire other types of 
housing than student housing. Since different sizes of stu-
dents units are available (1-6 rooms) it is assumed that one 
room equals one student. Hence, a 2-room student housing 
unit equals two students etc. 
Data collection
New build social housing
Data is available through Statistics Denmark from 2006-2021 
for all new build housing units in quantiles both submitted 
and comitted in the City of Copenhagen. The amount of sub-
mitted housing is not corrected for delays in the data sheet. 
Data  specific to social housing is available through BPST from 
2000-2021 for all new build social housing both submitted 
and comitted in the City of Copenhagen. 
Student housing
Data is available through Statistics Denmark from 2000-2021 
for the population in the CIty of Copenhagen by employment 
type where 'students' is a category. Data on student housing 
out of the total housing in the City of Copenhagen is available 
from 2010-2020.
Results 
Detailed data and calculations for Index D1 can be found in 
Appendix E.5 pp. 50-53.
Indicator D1.1 - New build social housing
As visible in Table 4.4.M and Figure 4.4.Q large variations 
exists for submitted new build housing when compared year 
to year. Therefore, the trend analysis is completed for the 
accumulated submitted new build housing. 
As visible in Figure 4.4.R the linear model for 'Trend A' shows 
that the share of new build housing increases with 1.8 % per 
year between 2006-2013. The model for 'Trend B' shows a 
decrease of 1.2 % per year from 2013-2020. 
According to Statistics Denmark (DST, 2021, BYGV33) the 
numbers on total new build housing are higher in 2017 and 
2018 than noted. Therefore, the share of new build social 
housing is potentially decreasing more than 1.2 % per year 
from 2013-2020. 
If comparing the submitted social housing with the commit-
ed social housing a delay of four years can be derrived (See 
appendix E.5 Figure E.5.A and E.5.B pp. 50-51). The data on 
commited social housing hence predicts a continous decrease 
four years from 2019.
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:85==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
85
0
2000
4000
6000
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
TIME [YEAR]
NEW BUILD HOUSING UNITS [NO./Y]
FIGURE 4.4.Q 
SUBMITTED NEW BUILD HOUSING (TOTAL) AND SUBMITTED NEW BUILD SOCIAL HOUSING IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
TIME [YEAR]
RELATION [:]
FIGURE 4.4.R 
RELATION BETWEEN SUBMITTED TOTAL NEW BUILD HOUSING & SUBMITTED SOCIAL HOUSING IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
Note: For full data table and calculations see Appendix E.5 pp. 50-51.
Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. BYGV33. Available at www.statistikbanken.dk. Bolig- og Planstyrelsen (BPST), 2021. Nye 
Almene Boliger. Statistik. Available at: www.boligstat.dk. 
TREND A
TREND B
Submitted new build housing
Submitted new build social housing
CASE STUDY
TABLE 4.4.M: RESULTS INDICATOR D1.1 - NEW BUILD SOCIAL HOUSING IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2006-2020 [NO./Y]
TOTAL BUILD 2006-2020
D1.1
New build 
social 
housing
Submitted new build social housing
331
5,293
Submitted new build total housing
3,293
52,684
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2006-2013
1.8
0.98
TREND B: 2013-2020
-1.2
0.96
==PAGE:86==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
86
Indicator D1.2 Student housing 
As visible in Table 4.4.N and Figure 4.4.S the linear mod-
els shows that the relation between student housing and 
students are decreasing from 2010-2016 with 0.6 % per year 
(Trend A) and increasing from 2016-2021 with 0.3% (Trend B). 
If 'Trend B' is extrapolated 50% of all students would be pro-
vided with student housing in year 2142('). 
If looking at Figure E.5.C in Appendix E.5 p. 52 this develop-
ment is most likely caused by the number of students flatten-
ing.
Indexing
The results on the share of new build housing out of the 
total new build housing shows an increase of 1.8 % per year 
between 2006-2013 and decrease of 1.2 % per year from 2013-
2020. This indicates movement towards housing affordabil-
ity from 2006-2013 and the opposite from 2013-2020. Since 
2013-2020 is the must current indicator D1.1 is assigned index 
score (-). 
There has been an increase in the relation between student 
housing and students frin 2016-2021, but since it would take 
a very long time to cover the demand D1.2 is assigned index 
score (0). It should be noted that the City of Copenhagen 
goal on providing 12,000 new student units before 2031 will 
be reached in year 2033 if assuming one student equals one 
room (See Appendix E.5 - Figure E.5.D p. 53).
1 2 3 4 5 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
TABLE 4.4.N: RESULTS INDICATOR D1.2 - PROVISION OF STUDENT HOUSING IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
STUD. [NO.]
STUD. HOUSING [NO.]
D1.3 
Student 
housing 
provision
Average 2010-2016
72699
9129
Average 2016-2021
82996
9971
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
EXTRAPOLATION [Y]
TREND A: Student housing/students 2010-2016
-0.6
0.98
TREND B: Student housing/students 2016-2021
0.3
0.84
y=0.5 => x=2142(')
TIME [YEAR]
RELATION [:]
Note: For full data table and calculations see Appendix E.5 pp. 52-53.
Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. Statistikbanken. BOL102. RAS209. Available at: www.statistikbanken.dk. 
TREND A
TREND B
FIGURE 4.4.S
STUDENTS/STUDENT HOUSING IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2010-2021
==PAGE:87==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
87
CASE STUDY
==PAGE:88==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
88
1 2 3 4 5 
4.4.8
INDEX D2 - TENURES 
Aim
Index D2 assesses the development of housing tenures in 
the City of Copenhagen from 2010-2020. It assesses how the 
distribution of tenure types have changed over time. It aims 
to assess whether there share of non-profit and only-profit 
tenures increase or decrease. 
Context and parameters
Tenure is the condition under which land or buildings are held 
or occupied (Nuuter et al., 2015). According to OECD (2022) 
the housing tenure distribution can describe how wealth in 
build assets shifts between public authority, the private mar-
ket, and private individuals. 
Social housing organisation tenures have a non-profit agenda 
(Lejerbo, 2021). An increase in non-profit tenures is consid-
ered an indication of more affordability of housing. 
Private company tenures consider housing as an economic 
investment (Nuuter et al., 2015). Hence, housing owned by 
private companies are at risk of economic speculation with 
capital gain as the goal. On this basis, an increase in housing 
owned by private companies is considered movement away 
from housing affordability.
Data collection. 
Data is available through Statistics Denmark from 2010-2021 
on the private onwership rate for: Owner occupied, Tenant 
occupied, and Not specified housing. 
Furthermore, the following data can be found for tenure types 
in Danish Statics from 2010-2021: 'Private individuals (inc I/S)', 
'Social housing companies', 'A/S, ApS and other companies', 
'Private cooperative housing associations', and 'Public author-
ity'. 
Results
Detailed data and calculations for Indicator D2 can be found 
in Appendix E.6 pp. 54-55.
Looking at the results in Table 4.4.O and Figure 4.4.T the share 
of housing owned by social housing organisations is more 
or less constant on 20 % of the total housing mass with a 
decrease of 0.1 % per year from 2010-2021 (grey line, Trend C). 
Assessing the share of private company tenures (yellow line, 
Trend D) the share increases with 0.6% per year from 2010-
2021 according to the linear model. If the private company 
tenure share is assessed from 2016-2021 the share increase 
with 1.0 % per year according to the linear model (Appendix 
E.6, Figure E.6.B, p. 55).
Indexing 
The results on tenure types indicates that the share of the 
non-profit tenures is more or less constant with a minor de-
crease (0.1% per year 2010-2021). The share of private compa-
ny tenures is increasing. This indicates that a growing part of 
the housing mass in the City of Copenhagen is considered an 
economic good. Furthermore, the share of housing owned by 
private companies is the only tenure type which is increasing. 
This happens at the expense of all other tenure types, but 
primarily Private Housing Cooperatives which decrease with 
0.3% per year according to Trend A (purple line). Indicator D2.2 
is assigned score (-). 
==PAGE:89==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
89
TABLE 4.4.O: RESULTS ON INDEX D2 - TENURES
INDEX
CONDITIONS
AV. 2010-2021 [NO.]
D.2 Ten-
ures
Private housing cooperatives
95,521
Private individuals (incl. I/S)
81,183
Social housing organisations
58,914
Private companies, Aps, A/S
33,551
Other or not registered
20,371
Public authority
3,258
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2010-2021
Private housing cooperatives
-0.3
0.80
TREND B: 2010-2021
Private individuals (incl. I/S)
0.0
0.50
TREND C: 2010-2021
Social Housing Organisations
-0.1
0.63
TREND D: 2010-2021
Private companies, Aps, A/S
0.6
0.63
TREND E: 2010-2021
Other or not registered
-0.1
0.93
TREND F: 2010-2021
Public authority
-0.1
0.82
TIME [YEAR]
FIGURE 4.4.T
HOUSING BY TYPE OF TENURE/TOTAL HOUSING IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2010-2021
RELATION [:]
CASE STUDY
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
TREND A
TREND B
TREND C
TREND D
TREND E
TREND F
Private individuals (incl. I/S)
Social housing organisations
Private companies, A/S, ApS
Private housing cooperatives
Public authority
Other or not registered
Note: For full data table and calculations see Appendix E.6 pp. 54-55.
Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. Statistikbanken. BOL102. Boliger efter beboertype, område, ejerforhold og tid. Available 
at: www.statistikbanken.dk. 
==PAGE:90==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
90
4.4.9
INDEX E1 - SMALL APARTMENTS
Aim
Index E assesses the share of small apartments out of all 
apartments and compares it to the share of singles in the 
City of Copenhagen. The aim is to asses whether the share of 
small apartments increase or decrease over time.
Context and parameters
According to CE (2018) one of the main drivers for the high 
housing price growth in the City of Copenhagne is the limited 
amount of small housing units. For people who do not have 
capital assets or gains from the sale of another unit the 
smallest apartments are the cheapest entry to the owner-oc-
cupied housing market. Therefore, it is essential to analyse 
the provision of the smallest housing units.
Firstly, the provision of small housing is assessed by number 
of rooms and area. Both measures are included since the 
floor plan may vary across housing types. 
The demand on small apartments is simplified as the pop-
ulation categorised as the family type 'Single'. It should be 
noted that the number of singles is a very rough estimate of 
the demand: this comparison includes the assumption that 
singles prefer living reclusively and the smallest housing units 
on the market.
Data collection
Apartments by size
Data is available through Statistics Denmark from 2010-2021 
for apartments by number of rooms and area in the CIty of 
Copenhagen. Hence, 2010 is set as base year. The available 
intervals are: (area) <50 m2, 50-74 m2, 75-99 m2, 100-124 m2, 
>100 m2, (rooms) 1-room, 2-room, 3-room, 4-room, 5-room, 
and ≥6-room. Only data for the housing type 'apartment' is 
included. 
Population by family type
Data is available through Statistics Denmarkin from 2000-
2021 for the family types: Singles, Married, Couples (exl. mar-
ried), and Other family constellations. 
Results
Detailed data and calculations for Index E1 can be found in 
Appendix E.7 pp. 56-61.
Assessing the results in Table 4.4.P and Figure 4.4.U the linear 
models for 'Trend B' and 'Tend H' indicate the share of 2-room 
(green) and 50-74 m2 apartments (yellow) is both decreasing 
0.3 % per year from 2010-2021 in the City of Copenhagen. 
According to the linear model for 'Trend A' (orange) the share 
of ≤50 m2 flats are more or less constant from 2017-2021 
(+0.02% per year). The model for 'Trend G' (red) indicates that 
the share of 1-room increase with 0.1% per year from 2018-
2021.
If compared to all apartments by size all other types are 
increasing according to the linear trends except for ≥150 m2 
and ≥6-rooms which are more or less contant (See Appendix 
E.7 Table Figure E.8.A and E.8.B). 50-74 m2 and 2-room apart-
ments accounts for the biggest share of all apartments (app. 
45-40 % of the market on average from 2010-2021).
The share of singles out of family types are decreasing over 
time with 0.6% per year (See Appendix E.7 Figure E.8.C, p. 69). 
However, comparing the number of singles to the number 
of small apartments over time as visible in Figure 4.4.V the 
coverage decrease from 2017-2021 by 0.8 % per year. This is 
properly caused by the constant share of singles from 2017 
and onwards (See Appendix E.7, Figure E.8.C, blue line). This 
indicates that more singles will have to buy bigger housing, 
move to another municipality or live in other family constel-
lations.
Indexing
Since the share of small apartments is decreasing for 3/4 of 
the smallest apartment types by room and area on the mar-
ket indicator E1 is assigned score (-). 
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:91==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
91
TABLE 4.4.P: RESULTS INDEX E1 - SMALL APARTMENTS IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2010-2021
INDEX
CONDITIONS
AV. HOUSING [NO.]
CONDITIONS
AV. POPULATION [NO.]
E1 Small 
apart-
ments
<50 m2
24860
Singles
152768
50-74 m2
116664
Total population
292726
Total flats by m2
261582
1-room
30763
2-rooms
108504
Total flats by room
307585
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
<50 m2
TREND A: 2017-2021
-0.02
0.91
50-74 m2
TREND B: 2010-2021
-0.35
0.93
1-room
TREND G: 2018-2021
0.14
0.95
2-rooms
TREND H: 2010-2021
-0.29
1.00
Small apartments/Singles
TREND M: 2010-2017
1.08
0.99
TREND N: 2017-2021
-0.8
0.96
Note: See Appendix E.7 pp. 56-61 for further details. Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. Statistikbanken. BOL101: BOL101: 
Dwellings by region, type of resident, use, tenure, ownership and year of construction. RAS209: Population by area, education, 
socio-economic status, age and sex.. FAM100N: Households and families. Available at: www.statistikbanken.dk.
TIME [YEAR]
FIGURE 4.4.U
SMALL APARTMENTS/TOTAL APARTMENTS IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2010-2021
RELATION [:]
TIME [YEAR]
FIGURE 4.4.V
SMALL APARTMENTS/SINGLES IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2010-2021
RELATION [:]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
 50 m2
 1-room
50-74 m2
2-room
TREND H: 2010-2021
TREND B: 2010-2021
TREND G: 2018-2021
TREND A: 2017-2021
CASE STUDY
0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
1.05
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
TREND M
TREND N
==PAGE:92==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
92
4.4.10 NIDEX E2 - HOUSING OCCUPANCY
Aim
Indicator E2 assesses the average time of housing occupancy 
and the share on un-occupied housing in the City of Copen-
hagen over time. The aim of the indicator is to assess whether 
the housing conditions fit the tenants' living conditions or if 
housing for other reasons is unused.
Context and parameters
According to EU (2020.b) the time tenants occiupies a dwell-
ing is an indication of whether the housing conditions fit the 
tenants' needs. Hence, the proportion of the population that 
has changed dwelling within the last five years is an indica-
tion of unmatching housing conditions. According to Dempsey 
et al. (2011) various theorists suggest that a sustainable 
community requires long-term residents in order to be sus-
tainable due to community coherence. Therefore, if the share 
of tenants living less than five years in the same dwelling 
increase this indicates movement away from sustainability.
In Denmark landlords can provide a time-limited rental of 
housing for a two year period. They can do so if they can doc-
ument an adequate reason, eg. if they are stationed or wish 
to transform or renovate their housing (Lejeloven.dk, 2021). 
Therefore, both housing occupancy in intervals >2-5 years 
and 0-2 years are assessed. If the share of housing occupied 
below two years is increasing this can be an indication of an 
increasing amount of time-limited rental. 
In Denmark, housing is registered as unoccupied if it has no 
person registered at the address (EU, 2010). The vacancy may 
be due to demolition or the housing being for sale or rent, or 
lying empty and unused (EU, 2020.b). 
The share of unoccupied housing is considered an estimate of 
whether housing is either unavailable or unattractive to ten-
ants. Since the City of Copenhagen suffer from housing short-
age (CE, 2018) if the share of unoccupied housing increases 
this is indicates movement away from sustainability.
Data collection
Data is available through Statistics Denmark on the length 
of housing occuancy from 2010-2020 in the following inter-
vals: Under 1 year, 1-2 years, 2-3 years, 3-5 years, 5-10 years, 
10-15 years, 15-20 years, 20-30 years, 30-40 years, 40 year or 
more, and Unregistered. Data on occupancy status is avail-
able through Statistics Denmark on the share of un-occupied 
and occupied housing from 2010-2021. It should be noted 
that data included on housing occupancy length and status is 
updated by homeowners in The Building and Housing Regis-
ter (BBR). This can cause off-sets in data time of registration 
(Statistics Denmark, 2021, BOL103).
Results 
Detailed data and calculations for Indicator E2 can be found 
in Appendix E.8 pp. 62-63.
D2.1 Occupancy length
Assessing Figure 4.4.W the occupancy length from 2010-2020 
in the City of Copenhagen housing occupied under five years 
is increasing with 0.3 % per year from 2016-2020 according to 
the linear model for 'Trend A'. Comparing the numbers from 
2016-2020 for housing occupied between 0-2 years and >2-5 
years the correlation is 0.95. Hence, the rule of time-limited 
rental does not seem to influence the results.
D2.2 Occupancy status
Assessing Figure 4.4.X the share of unoccupied housing in-
creases with 0.2 % per year from 2016-2020 according to the 
linear model for 'Trend D'.
Indexing
The share of housing occupied below five years is increasing 
0.3 % per year from 2016-2020. Hence, the results for housing 
occupancy length indicates that the living conditions in an 
increasing amount of housing does not fit the tenants' living 
conditions for longer than five years. In conclusion, indicator 
E2.1 is assigned score (-).
The results for occupancy status show that the share of un-
occupied housing is increasing 0.2 % per year from 2016-2021. 
This indicates that the share of housing either unavailable or 
unattractive to tenants are increasing. Hence, indicator D1.2 is 
assigned score (-). 
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:93==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
93
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
CASE STUDY
TABLE 4.4.Q: RESULTS INDEX E2 - HOUSING OCCUPANCY LENGTH & STATUS
INDICATOR
CONDITIONS
AV. 2010-2020 [NO.]
E2.1 Oc-
cupancy 
length
Housing occupied 0-5 years
24,520
Housing occupied >2-5 years
10,515
Housing occupied 0-2 years
13,237
Total vacated housing
34,829
E2.2 Oc-
cupancy 
status
Un-occupied housing
15,072
Total housing by occupancy status
307,870
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y [%]
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2016-2020
Housing occupied 0-5 years
0.3
0.82
TREND B: 2016-2020
Housing occupied >2-5 years
0.2
0.87
TREND C: 2016-2020
Housing occupied 0-2 years
0.1
0.73
Correlation between 0-5 years and >2-5 years
0.95
TREND D: 2016-2020
Unoccupied housing
0.2
0.87
FIGURE 4.4.W
RELATION BETWEEN HOUSING BY OCCUPANCY LENGTH AND TOTAL HOUSING IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
TIME [YEAR]
Note: See Appendix E.8 pp. 62-63 for further details. Data source(s): Statistics Denmark, 2021. Statistikbanken. BOL101: Dwell-
ings by region, type of resident, use, tenure, ownership and year of construction. FLYBOT: Vacated homes by area, rooms, length 
of stay before moving out and time. 
TREND A
TREND B
TREND C
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
FIGURE 4.4.X
RELATION BETWEEN UNOCCUPIED HOUSING & TOTAL HOUSING IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
TREND D
TIME [YEAR]
RELATION [:]
RELATION [:]
==PAGE:94==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
94
4.4.11 INDEX F - CRIME AND SAFETY
Aim
Index F assesses whether the share of people feeling un-
safe and the no. reported crimes per 1000 inhabitants have 
increased or decreased over time in the City of Copenhagen. 
Additionally, safety and crime are contextualized to the hous-
ing price development in the city parts in the City of Copen-
hagen by postnumber.  
Context and parameters
The city parts in the City of Copenhagen by postnumbers are: 
Inner City, Christianshavn, Vesterbro, Østerbro, Inner nørrebro, 
Outer Nørrebro, Amager East, Amager West, Bispebjerg, Kon-
gens Enghave, Valby, Brønshøj, and Vanløse. No specifications 
are yet available for the city part Nordhavn. 
Crime is assessed as the number of reported crime per 1000 
inhabitants. Only crime towards civilians are included. This 
includes eg. physical assaults, theft, and buglary.
Safety is assessed as the subjective feeling of safety of the 
population. Hence, the parameter is expressed as the share 
of the population responding in a survey whether they feel 
unsafe or safe in their neighborhood. 
Safety and crime is compared to the housing prices by city 
parts to assess whether there is a correlation between the 
parameters. Low levels of crime and high levels of safety are 
asssociated with good neighborhood livability (Mulliner et al., 
2016) and has an infuence on citizens' mental health (Eu-
rostat, 2017). 
Data collection 
Data on crime and safety by city part in the City of Copenha-
gen is available through 'The Safety Survey' produced by the 
City of Copenhagen in 2009 and all years between 2014-2021. 
On average 4000 number of people have responded (0.6 % of 
the population in 2022). Data on housing prices by city dis-
tricts are available through Finans Danmark (2021) from year 
2000-2021.
Results
Detailed data and calculations for Index F can be found in 
Appendix E.9 pp. 64-71.
Indicator F.1 - Reported crime
Assessing Figure 4.4.Y the average number of reported crimes 
per 1000 inhabitants is decreasing in the City of Copenha-
gen from 2016-2020 according to the linear model (Trend A). 
However, most recent data from 2021 indicates, that crime 
levels are increasing from 2020-2021. If assessing each city 
part isolated (See Appendix E.9, Figure E.9.F, p. 70) the report-
ed crime decrease for all city parts according to the linear 
models in selected years between 2009-2020. However, for 
all city parts the crime rates increase from 2020-2021. But no 
conclusion can be made on a trend. It should be noted that 
various yearly intevals were apply to describe the trends for 
each city part. 
Comparing the city parts to each other (Table 4.4.R) shows a 
positive correlation (0.74) between housing prices and crime. 
In other words, the higher prices the higher crime. Figure 
4.4.Z visualises the results on the correlation between hous-
ing prices and reported crime (Trend B).
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:95==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
95
TABLE 4.4.R: RESULTS INDICATOR F.1 - AVERAGE CRIME AND HOUSING PRICES IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2009-2021
INDICATOR
POSTNUMBER
CITY PART
AV. CRIME [NO.]  
AV. HOUSING PRICE [DKK]
F.1 Crime 
vs. housing 
prices
2700 Brønshøj
Brønshøj
30
25757
2300 CPH S
Amager West, East
63
33745
2400 CPH NV
Bispebjerg
34
29678
2100 CPH Ø
Østerbro
33
40923
2450 CPH SV
Kongens Enghave
38
35007
2720 Vanløse
Vanløse
30
29483
2200 CPH N
Inner, Outer Nørrebro
85
37786
2500 Valby
Valby
37
30739
1500-1799 CPH V
Vesterbro
123
41530
1000-1499 CPH K
Inner City, Christianshavn
334
45997
Average correlation (av. housing prices, av. crime)
0.74
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2016-2021
-10.6 [NO.]
0.73
TREND B: 2009-2021
0.012 [CRIME/DKK]
0.54
Note: No data is available from 2008-2013. For full data table, calculations and graphs see Appendix E.9 pp. 66-71.
Data source(s): The City of Copenhagen, 2021. Københavns Kommunes Tryghedsundersøgelse 2015; 2016; 2017; 2018; 2019; 2020; 
2021. All available at www.tryghedundersogelsen.kk.dk.
HOUSING PRICE [DKK/M2]
FIGURE 4.4.Z
AVERAGE REPORTED CRIME PER 1000 INHABITANTS/HOUSING PRICE BY CITY PART IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2009-2021
REPORTED CRIME PER 1000 INHABITANTS [NO.]
CPH K
CPH V
CPH Ø
CPH N
CPH S
CPH NV
CPH SV
Valby
Brønshøj
Vanløse
0
50
100
150 200 250
300 350
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
TREND B
TIME [YEAR]
FIGURE 4.4.Y
AVERAGE REPORTED CRIME PER 1000 INHABITANTS IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
AVERAGE [NO.]
0
100 200 300 400
2009
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
TREND A
CASE STUDY
==PAGE:96==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
96
Indicator F.2 - People feeling unsafe
The linear model on 'Trend A' from 2018-2020 in Figure 4.4.Æ 
shows a decrease of 1.3 % per year in the share of people 
feeling unsafe in the City of Copenhagen. If assessing each 
city part isolated (See Appendix E.9, Figure E.9.G, p. 71) the 
share of people feeling unsafe decrease for Outer Nørrebro, 
Valby, Inner City, and Østerbro. The share of people feeling 
unsafe is increasing for people living in Brønshøj, Kongens En-
ghave, Amager east, and Vanløse. No trends can be found for 
either Bispebjerg, Inner Nørrebro and Amager West. It should 
be noted that various yearly intevals were apply to describe 
trend for each city part. 
Comparing the city parts to each other (Table 4.4.S) the av-
erage correlation between housing prices and people feeling 
unsafe in the City of Copenhagen shows a negative correla-
tion. In other words, the higher prices the lower share of 
people feeling unsafe. Figure 4.4.Ø visualises the results on 
the correlation between housing prices and the share of the 
population feeling unsafe (Trend B).
Indexing
The reported crime is decreasing in the City of Copenhagen 
on average. Hence, the indicator is assigned score (+). How-
ever, it should be noted that the most recent data from 2021 
shows an increase in reported crime.
A clear negative correlation is found between housing prices 
and crime: The more the housing prices increase the more 
crime is reported. 
The share of people feeling unsafe in the City of Copenhagen 
is decreasing on average. The indicator is assigned score (+). 
A clear positive correlation is found between housing afford-
ability and people feeling unsafe. Hence, the share of people 
feeling unsafe decrease with housing prices. 
1 2 3 4 5 
==PAGE:97==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
97
Note: No data is available from 2008-2013. For full data table, calculations and graphs see Appendix E.9 pp. 68-70.
Data source(s): The Copenhagen Municipality, 2021. Københavns Kommunes Tryghedsundersøgelse 2015; 2016; 2017; 2018; 2019; 
2020; 2021. All available at www.tryghedundersogelsen.kk.dk.
TABLE 4.4.S: AVERAGE PEOPLE FEELING UNSAFE  AND HOUSING PRICES IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2009-2021
INDICATOR
POSTNUMBER
CITY PART
AV. PEOPLE FEELING UNSAFE [%] 
AV. HOUSING PRICE [DKK]
F.2 Safety 
versus hous-
ing prices
2720 Vanløse
Vanløse
6.1
29483
2700 Brønshøj
Brønshøj
13
25757
2400 CPH NV
Bispebjerg
16.9
29678
1000-1499 CPH K
Inner City, Christianshavn
6.3
45997
2450 CPH SV
Kongens Enghave
7.5
35007
2100 CPH Ø
Østerbro
4.4
40923
1500-1799 CPH V
Vesterbro
6.8
41530
2200 CPH N
Inner, Outer Nørrebro
11.9
37786
2300 CPH S
Amager West, East
6.8
33745
2500 Valby
Valby
9.8
30739
Average correlation (av. housing prices, av. people feeling unsafe)
 -0.57
LINEAR TRENDS
TREND/Y 
CORRELATION [R2]
TREND A: 2018-2021
-1.26 [%]
0.70
TREND B: 2009-2021
-0.0003 [PRC./DKK]
0.32
CPH K
CPH V
CPH Ø
CPH N
CPH S
CPH NV
CPH NV
Valby
Brønshøj
Vanløse
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
HOUSING PRICE [DKK/M2]
FIGURE 4.4.Ø
POPULATION FEELING UNSAFE/HOUSING PRICE BY CITY PART IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 2009-2021
POPULATION FEELING UNSAFE [%]
TREND B
TIME [YEAR]
FIGURE 4.4.Æ
POPULATION FEELING UNSAFE/TOTAL POPULATION IN THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN
SHARE [%]
0.0
4.0
8.0
12.0
2009
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
TREND A
CASE STUDY
==PAGE:98==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
98
& CONCLUSION
1 2 3 4 5
5 DISCUSSION  
==PAGE:99==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
99
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
==PAGE:100==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
100
1 2 3 4 5
Photo: The National Bank, Copenhagen. December, 2019. 
Source: Private.
==PAGE:101==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
101
CHAPTER CONTENT
This chapter presents a discussion on this thesis: 
Section 5.1 'Indicator results' discuss the indicator results. 
Section 5.2 'Indicator assessment methodology' discuss the 
applied indicator assessment methodology.
Section 5.3 'SAH and urban planning' discusses some per-
spectival aspects of indicator asessment tools on SAH in 
relation to urban planning and sustainable goals in general.
Section 5.3 presents the thesis conclusion. 
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
==PAGE:102==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
102
Housing expenses and housing loans
The results in indicator C2.2 show that housing expenses are 
acounting for an increasing share of the total average con-
sumption. According to the linear trend on p. 82 the housing 
overburden rate of 40% will be reached in 2028. According to 
the EU definition (EU-SILC, 2021.c) this means, that the finan-
cial capacity for households to invest in goods and services is 
reaching a critical level in a very short number of years.
The increasing housing burden is primarily caused by the cal-
culated rental value and the actual rent which both increases 
over time. Presenting numbers on the actual housing expens-
es spend by housing owners is complex, since it depends on 
several aspects. It depends on the loan type, whether the 
interest rates are fixed or flexible, and how long the repay-
ment is running. However, the calculated rental value of 5.4 % 
of the public estimated housing price (DST, 2017.c) acts as an 
indicator for the actual housing expenses that housing owners 
pay even though the value itself is fictive. According to the 
calculated rented value housing owners pay an increasing 
amount of housing expenses over time.
With the growing housing-price-to-income ratio obtaining a 
housing loan has also been inaccessible to an increasing part 
of the population. The debt factor is the relation between 
the loan amount and the loaners yearly income before taxes 
minus debts. When obtaining a housing loan in Denmark in 
growth areas such as Copenhagen the debt factor has been 
at relation 3.5 since 2016 (Finanstilsynet, 2016). Hence, with a 
flat relation and an increasing gap between income and hous-
ing prices, it has become harder to obtain a loan. Additionally, 
the amount of debt per person in Denmark has also increased 
from 2015-2020 (Statistics Denmark, FORMUE7, 2021) making 
it even harder to obtain a housing loan.
When comparing the results on price-to-income ratio (Indi-
cator C1.1) and housing expenses and consumption (Indicator 
C2.1) it can be argued, that the results are interdependent. 
When the price-to-income ratio increases it is implicit, that 
a bigger share of our consumption is spend on housing if the 
consumption-to-income ratio is either constant or decreasing 
over time. Hence, it can be argued that price-to-income and 
housing overburden rate should not have individual sustain-
ability scores to avoid double connotation.
Housing prices versus income
At the center of the indicator results on SAH in the City of 
Copenhagen is the increasing price-to-income ratio (indicator 
C1.1): Less people can afford to buy housing over time. This in-
dicates an increasing need for initiaives to establish more af-
fordable housing if the City of Copenhagen wants to succeed 
on its goal to be affordable to everyone (KK, 2018).
The results on people at risk of poverty show that the eco-
nomic segregation across the population both in the City of 
Copenhagen and in Denmark is increasing over time. This es-
sentially means, that the City of Copenhagen needs to create 
not just a bigger share of affordable housing, but an increased 
share of affordable housing to low-income groups over time if 
it has to reflect the diversity of the population. 
Additionally, the results in Indicator D3.2 show that a growing 
share of the housing mass is owned by private companies. As 
a result, the share of housing with a non-profit profile is de-
creasing. This makes it harder for the municipality to regulate 
land since it is increasingly conditioned by free market terms.
5.1.1
HOUSING STOCK & HOUSING LAYOUT
1 2 3 4 5
5.1 INDICATOR RESULTS
==PAGE:103==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
103
Social housing
According to the results in indicator D1.1 the share of new 
build social housing out of all new build housing peaked in 
2013 at a 18.1 % share and has been decreasing from 2013-
2021. Hence, the planning law which was introduced in 2015 
in the City of Copenhagen local plan, which gives the possi-
bility to require a minimum share of public housing of 25% in 
new build housing (KK, 2015) seems to have had a decreasing 
effect on share of new build social housing. The reasons for 
the development can not be derrived from the data included 
in the indicator. However, a possible explaination is that the 
negotiations completed with developers for the new con-
struction plots has ended on agreements at a much lower 
percentage share of social housing than 25%. 
Student housing and small apartments
The results in indicator D1.2 show that the share of students 
out of the total population has been decreasing from 2017 
and onwards. It is possible, that this puts a damper on the 
parental purchase and the need for smaller housing units 
which both are identified as drivers for growing housing pric-
es (CE, 2018; KK, 2018.a). However, since the share of singles 
in the City of Copenhagen increases over time as (Indicator 
E.1) and the fact that the small apartments are the cheapest 
entry to the housing market (CE, 2018) the provision of small 
housing units are still key to providing affordable housing. 
Students are the main immigrating population group and 
also a low income group (Indicator B.1). Hence, strategies on 
student housing are essential in counteracting un-affordabil-
ity in the City of Copenhagen. The results in indicator D1.2 
show that it would take more than 100 years before half of 
the students could be offered student housing. This indicates 
that the current development is more or less stagnant. How-
ever the City of Copenhagen has stressed the importance of 
the collaboration with the surrounding municipal why future 
studies could focus on the provision of student housing here.
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
Housing size
The results for housing size (Indicator E.1) show that the 
share of small apartments are decreasing over time. 
The minimum requirement on new build housing was 
changed in 2019 from 95 m2 on average for all new build 
housing and a minimum for 75 m2 for a single unit to only ac-
count for 50% of the total new build housing (KK, 2019). It is 
too soon to conclude on the effect of this change in the local 
plan. As we have seen in the data on new build social hous-
ing (Indicator D1.1) the comparison between submitted and 
comitted housing shows a delay of four years (Appendix E.5, 
pp. 50-51). Possibly, we will be seeing an increase in smaller 
apartments 4-5 years from 2019 and onwards. However, no 
conclusion can currently be made on whether the change in 
the local plan have had an effect.
According to Copenhagen Economics (2018) another explana-
tion for the decreasing amount of small apartements can be 
the merging of smaller units into bigger ones. If looking at the 
share of the family types in the City of Copenhagen (Appendix 
E.8, Figure E.8.C, p. 66) the share of 'Other family constella-
tions' are increasing from 2010-2019. This could indicate, that 
the population is increasingly finding alternative ways to live 
together as a result of housing shortage. 
As recognized by Cooper et al. (2019) the flexibility of housing 
or the potential for adaptation is an important part of assess-
ing the quality of housing. If data was available on merging 
transformations it would elucidate how much of the de-
crease in small units that is caused by merging transforma-
tion and what is caused by the sizing of new build housing. 
Additionally, the data would provide insights on what part of 
the housing mass that potentially can be reversed back into 
smaller units and fit different life stages of its inhabitants 
over time. 
 
==PAGE:104==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
104
Pendling and affordability
The quality of and access to transport have as big impact on 
the affordability of housing (Mulliner and Maleine, 2011). The 
less commuting time and distance to the central business 
district make the housing prices increase (Bruckner, 2011). 
Hence, investments in better transport to cheaper housing 
areas is an alternative strategy to improving affordability.
Indicator A.1 assesses the pendling distance over time. The re-
sults show that the average pendling distance is decreasing in 
the City of Copenhagen. However, the indicator would reflect 
affordability of housing better if it included data on commut-
ing time, costs and transport modes. This would provide an 
insigt in the efficiency of transport combied with the environ-
mental effects. 
An example of alternative models to compensate for com-
muting costs of living far away from your job location is cur-
rently presented in the Municipality of Høje Taastrup west of 
Copenhagen. Here, people can get a refund of transport costs 
if they are recieving monetary welfare support and have to 
pendle more than 24 km (Høje Taastrup Kommune, 2022). 
Quality of the build environment and housing prices
The access to and quality of the surrounding community have 
an impact on the affordability of housing. Currently data on 
housing prices is only available as averages at city part level 
by postnumbers. When assessing an geographical area at 
this size it is difficult to conclude on the correlation between 
prices and the quality of the environment. 
Index F is an example of an assessment on the correlation 
between safety and crime versus housing prices. Overall, the 
results show the following correlation: the higher prices the 
more people feel safe and the higher prices the more crime. 
An example of the results on city part level is the result for 
Vanløse. They show, that the least people feel unsafe com-
pared to housing price (Figure 4.4.Ø, p. 97). Hence, an indica-
tor that assesses the relation between the quality of the build 
environment and housing prices can provide an insight on the 
trade-offs made based on your dwelling location. 
This is an example of how peoples' access to ressources can 
be assessed based on their dwelling location. If the housing 
prices decrease the urban trade-offs are most likely made 
in either increasing levels of heavy traffic, grime, pollution, 
distance to the city center, lower quality of schools and day 
care, etc. 
5.1.2
MOBILITY, COMMUNITY & HOUSING COMFORT AND HEALTH
1 2 3 4 5
It is difficult to compare data on housing prices at city part 
level and expose linkages to housing quality such as eg. 
grime, noise and view to green. Modelling tools such as GIS 
(Geographical Information Systems) provides the means for 
comparing both the quality of a neighborhood and mobility 
aspects with housing prices eg. access to schools, day care 
and cultural activities, pollution and noise levels simultane-
ously. However, in Denmark data on housing prices are not 
available on a household level at a systematic level due to 
personal data legislations. Furthermore, the proces of format-
ing the current Danish building data registered in BBR into GIS 
software is a challenge. Still GIS holds a potential for future 
urban planning. It is already increasingly used in eg. urban 
flooding assessments (Broch, N. R., 2019; see Appendix G.2). 
==PAGE:105==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
105
The allocation system is essential in providing housing for the 
most vulnerable citizens (Transport og boligministeriet, 2018). 
However, as assessed in indicator B.3 the data on allocations 
needs to be more transparent. Currently the requirements 
for admission of the Municipal allocation list and the actual 
utilization rate of all allocated housing are non-transperent. 
This makes it hard to assess both the demand and provision 
of housing to vulnerable groups. Furthermore, the fact that 
the utilization degree is not included in the data makes it 
difficult to assess whether housing is affordable and suitable 
to vulnerable groups. 
The City of Copenhagen has disadvantaged people as a cen-
tral aspect of their sustainability goals within social inclusion, 
eg. with its focus on people with disabilities (KK, 2019.a, p. 
53). Therefore, it would be beneficial for the City of Copenha-
gen to provide better data on Municipal allocations. Currently 
data is only available at regional levels. If presenting data on a 
municipal level it would be possible to analyse potential mov-
ing patterns and geographical displacements as well. 
According to numbers on the socio-economic groups that has 
the lowest income levels in the City of Copenhagen (Ap-
pendix E.2, Diagram E.2.C) efterløn, førtidspensionister and 
folkepentionister are the next groups in line of low income 
groups. Since elderly housing is a specific type of housing in 
the Danish housing stock it could be interesting to look at the 
provision and demand of elderly housing in future studies. 
Additionally, the share of elderly people will continue to grow 
according to population projections by Statistics Denmark 
(DST, 2022). 
5.1.3
LOW INCOME GROUPS AND HOUSING
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
The created indicator assessment tool for the City of Copen-
hagen seeks to be domain-based and integrate all dimensions 
of sustainability. However, social and economic aspects of 
sustainability are more well defined than environmental as-
pects. In order to assess inter-species equity and recognizing 
the importance of ecosystem integrity the framework should 
be contextualised to environmental aspects of sustainable 
development (Giddings et al., 2002).
Some included indicators currently embed environmental 
aspects. Indicator A.1 'Pendling distance' embeds a focus on 
reducing longer transport distances. This can be related to 
the reducement of transport emissions. 
Indicator C2.2 'Housing expenses' includes measures on costs 
spend on water, electricity and heating. It would be benefitial 
to contextualise the results to the actual consumption. 
An example of housing affordability conflicting with environ-
mental costs is durability. Durable buildings last for a long 
time, but the construction costs are high. Hence, the housing 
that can last for 100 years is more environmentally sustain-
able, but the price higher due to the construction costs.
On the other hand, when building housing at high quality with 
durable materials there is a minor need for maintanance or 
renovation over time. Since renovation also can cause housing 
prices to increase considering affordability over a longer time-
span must be considered.
5.1.4
ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS
==PAGE:106==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
106
5.1.5
CONCLUDING REMARKS ON RESULTS
Index scores
Overall the combined indicator assessment shows movement 
away from sustainability on SAH in the City of Copenhagen in 
44.4 % of the indicators and progress towards sustainability in 
38.9% of the indicators. 
The results show that the relation between the income index 
and housing price index are increasing (Indicator C1.1) and 
the economic segregation across the population is increasing 
(Indicator B.1). Hence, the preconditions for creating equal 
conditions for people's access to ressources based on income 
is moving away from sustainability (Demsey et al., 2011). A 
bigger share of the population can not obtain housing at a 
certain standard. Hence, affordability of housing is decreasing 
for low income groups.
The indicator assessment is focused on the City of Copen-
hagen as a governmental entity. Therefore, it makes sense to 
categorise the indicators to reflect govermental responsibility 
areas. Hereby, the index scores would reflect the urban plan-
ning aspects that are of direct influence by the municipality. 
When formulating sustainable goals the scoring would better 
reflect the effect of urban planning initiatives.
Success 'criteria' versus success 'factors'
Chan & Adabre (2019) defines the 'critical success criteria' as 
the set of principles through which judgement on progress 
towards sustainability can be made. As visible in Diagram 6.1.A 
(top grey box) indicators included in 'Population', 'General eco-
nomics' and 'Housing Costs & Income Relation' can be seen 
as conditionary indicators or critital success criteria. These 
indicators describe housing affordability isolated from other 
aspects of sustainable housing. In the case of the City of 
Copenhagen the critical succes criteria can not be influenced 
directly.
Chan and Adabre (2019) defines 'critical success factors' as 
the set of influences which affect the criteria. Hence, physical 
planning indicators (middle grey box) can be seen as factors 
contributing to the overall criteria of housing affordability. In 
the case of the City of Copenhagen, the critical success fac-
tors can be directly influenced by the municipality. 
The contextual indicators (bottom grey box) are also contrib-
uting to the overall criteria of sustainability, but not directly 
affecting affordability. Hence, they are named contextual 
indicators.
1 2 3 4 5
In conclusion, the critical success criteria (the demographic 
composition of the population, the general economic condi-
tions and the relation between housings costs and income) 
describe affordable housing. Contextualising the critical suc-
ces criteria to the critical success factors (the acces to good 
quality transport and communities, a well planned housing 
stock, housing at a quality that supports comfort and health, 
with low environmental costs and high satisfaction) describes 
sustainable affordable housing. 
Combined assessment
If the City of Copenhagen is assigned scores in the critical 
success factor indicators which they can directly influence 
the resulting scores are the following:
The results show movement away from sustainability on 
the provision of social housing, student housing, and small 
apartments, housing occupancy status and occupancy length. 
The results on housing allocations shows a stagnant develop-
ment and the need for better data. The results show progress 
towards sustainability on crime, safety, pendling, and home-
lessness. 
The final indicator assessment in this thesis provides in-
sights to some of the aspects that affects SAH in the City 
of Copenhagen. From the limited indicator results it can be 
concluded that housing in the City of Copenhagen is connect-
ed by good quality transport to good quality communities and 
has a physical standard that supports human comfort and 
health. Furthermore, the satisfaction of its tenants on safety 
is increasing.
However, housing in the City of Copenhagen is not reflect-
ing the diversity of the population by income in the housing 
stock, housing layout, and housing costs. None of the indica-
tors are contextualized to the environmental costs of housing.
==PAGE:107==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
107
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
CRITICAL SUCCESS CRITERIA
CRITICAL SUCCES FACTORS: CONTEXTUAL INDICATORS
POPULATION
GENERAL 
ECONOMICS
§
LOCATION AFFORDABILITY
HOUSING STOCK
MOBILITY &
COMMUNITY
HOUSING COSTS 
& INCOME RELATION
€
SATISFACTION
TENANTS
OTHER
ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS
QUALITY
COMFORT & HEALTH
LAYOUT
FIGURE 5.1.A - ESSENTIAL CONCEPTS OF SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING DIVIDED BY CRITERIA AND FACTORS
The essential concepts to cover when assessing SAH when creating an indicator assessment tool. The concepts are divided by 
critical succes criteria which describes affordable housing: (Population, General Economics, Housing costs and income relation) 
and by critical succes factors which in combination with the criteria describes sustainable affordable housing: (Mobility and 
community, Housing Stock, Housing quality by Layout and Comfort and health, Environmental Costs, and Satisfaction of Tenants 
and Other). 'Urban planning indicators' (middle) can be influenced directly by a municipal governmental entity in Denmark.
CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS: URBAN PLANNING INDICATORS 
==PAGE:108==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
108
1 2 3 4 5
Selection criteria: Relevance
Indicators relevant to the municipal goals formulated by the 
City of Copenhagen in either of the two reports ‘Capital of 
sustainable Development’ (2018) and ‘The City of Copenha-
gen Municipal Plan’ (2019) are given an inclusion point for 
relevance. Since the City of Copenhagen does not present 
indicators on SAH, but rather visions and goals, a qualitative 
assessment is made on whether indicators are relevant when 
completing the selection. Hence, most indicators are catego-
rised as 'relevant' because the City of Copenhagen presents 
unspecific visions for affordable housing. 
In order to formulate better goals for housing affordability it is 
essential to specify the specific composition of the popu-
lation which housing is created for and within what spatial 
boundary SAH should be provided. Only then can goals be 
specified on how the housing market should reflect diversity 
and where.  
Future studies on SAH on the City of Copenhagen
When assessing the type of framework that is presented 
in this thesis it is partly domain-based, sectoral- and goal-
based. Hence, the only type of framework that it is not ac-
cording to MacLaren (1996) is a cause and effect framework. 
Hence, future studies should be focused adressing cause 
and effect relations between the different concepts of SAH. 
This analysis could be linked to the historical trends of urban 
planning initiatives in the City of Copenhagen. 
The journal articles Nuuter et al. (2015), Cooper et al. (2019), 
Mulliner et al. (2016) and Chan & Adabre (2019) applies the 
methodology 'multi-criteria decision making' (MCDM) to ag-
gregate and weight indicators on SAH. Hence, future studies 
could be focused on how the MCDM method could be applied 
to urban planning aspects of housing affordability in the City 
of Copenhagen. The method could provide the basis for dis-
cussing prioritization of urban planning aspects.
Trendlines
Four continous data points were chosen as the minimum to 
conclude on a trend in this indicator assessment. However, 
if more data points were selected several indicators would 
not have sufficient data to complete a trend analysis. Eg. the 
housing overburden rate in Indicator C2.2 (p. 83) no trend 
could be concluded for the development for the actuall rent 
nor for the share of people feeling safe in Indicator F.2 (p. 97). 
Some spotted trends within one indicator have different se-
lected periods of assessments eg. indicator E1 on small apart-
ments (p. 90): Housing by number of rooms have a trend for 
the full period for to parameters, four years for one parameter 
and five years for one parameter. It could be argued, that it 
would be more scientifically precise to conclude on the same 
period for all parameters. However, the reason for chosing this 
model was to limit the uncertainty expressed in the correla-
tion coefficient R2 of the models. Alternatively, future studies 
could provide more sophisicated models than linear ones if 
they are a better fit with lower uncertainty levels.
Selection criteria: Processing time and data availability
The existing tools on SAH all present different sustainable 
system criteria. This is caused by the multiplicity of sus-
tainable domains prioritized and the different geographical 
assessment levels. As a result the tools present different 
definitions of SAH. Literature presenting different definitions 
on sustinability is a common problem recognized by literature 
in the standization of indicators (de Azevedo & Silva, 2010; 
Tanguay et al., 2010). 
The essential concepts of SAH presented on Figure 5.1.A p. 107 
is a theoretical synthesis of the four journal articles Nuuter et 
al. (2015), Cooper et al. (2019), Mulliner et al. (2016) and Chan 
& Adabre (2019). It seeks to present a consistent theoretical 
basis for SAH. 
Applying the theoretical basis for SAH is a challenge in prac-
tice. The constraints of accessibility of data ends up being the 
most dominant selection criteria. Therefore, the geographical 
assessment level is the biggest challenge in case of the stan-
dization completed in this thesis.
This also explains why the concrete indicator definitions 
presented by OECD and EU are essential even though the tool 
system criteria are not included for validity: EU and OECD are 
the only ones presenting examples on how to calculate indi-
cators. Even though several studies argue that the method-
ology applied in the EU and OECD tools has deficient meth-
odology (Winston & Pareja-Eastaway, 2008) they are currently 
still presenting the most rigoruos data on national levels on 
sustainable affordable housing measures. 
5.2 INDICATOR ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:109==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
109
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
Challenges of prioritization in urban planning
The challenge of assessing SAH is that it is linked to a 
vast number of urban planning aspects: The quality of its 
local community, the access to and quality of transport, 
the housing stock composition, the demographics of the 
population, the comfort and health of its users, the econo-
my, and the satisfaction of its users, owners, and creaters. 
Hence, it does not make sense to assess affordable housing 
only by comparing housing costs and income. It is in the in-
terrelation with other aspects of sustainable urban develop-
ment that an assessment can be made on whether progress 
is made towards sustainability. Housing can be affordable, 
but not sustainable. Eg. affordable housing, that does not 
have access to a good community or does not have a good 
construction quality is unsustainable.
The more attractive an urban area is the higher the housing 
prices are (Bruckner, 2011). Hence, supporting better com-
munities and better quality housing with lower environmen-
tal costs makes housing less affordable. This is why making 
housing more sustainable is a matter of prioritization. 
An example of urban problem shifting in Copenhagen
Problem shifting is the process where solutions that solve a 
targeted problem create another problem somewhere else 
in the systems of processes (Hauschild, 2018). 
A concrete example of urban problem shifting in the City of 
Copenhagen is the greeening of Sønder Bouldevard: 
An open green space was created to replace a heavy traffic 
road at Sønder Bouldevard from 2004-2006. The space 
is daily used by up to 2,200 people and annually 36,000 
citizens receive a health benefit from using the facilities. 
Additionally, the local shops have been thriving. However, 
property prices in the area as a whole have risen by 351 
million DKK from 2006-2020 (Danske Arkitektvirksomheder, 
2020). Hence, the value creation for the City of Copenhagen 
(eg. in taxes and branding value) and for housing owners has 
been immense. But the affordability of the area has been 
reduced due to gentrification. In fact, the housing prices in 
Vesterbro has increased most aggressively here compared 
to all other city parts in Copenhagen (Broch, 2020, see Ap-
pendix G.2, p. 123).
The City of Copenhagen: An inclusive city?
If the City of Copenhagen wants to make an inclusive city 
that offers housing that reflects the diversity of the pop-
ulation (KK, 2019.a) it must consider the fact that livability 
projects, eg. like the greening of Sønder Bouldevard, creates 
problem shifting in the form of un-affordability. Therefore, 
creating more attractive urban spaces can make the city 
more exclusive due to gentrification. 
The question of whether the City of Copenhagen is progress-
ing towards more 'inclusiveness' in the form of more SAH 
is really a question of how well the city makes trade offs 
between the quality of the build environment, the livability 
of its communities, the environmental costs - while making 
housing prices increase as little as possible. Alternatively, 
models that may circumvent the current market rules can 
help redeem the current growing economic inequality of 
housing eg. social housing. However, the City of Copenhagen 
must define what it means to become 'a city for all' in order 
to measure whether progress is made towards sustainability. 
Geographical equity
Gentrification is not recognized as an un-sustainable trend 
by the UN and EU. According to the UN SDG 11 people should 
have the right to obtain adequate and affordable housing if 
cities or nations seeks to create sustainable cities (UN, 2016, 
p. 21). However, SDG 11 does not specify anything about geo-
graphical equity which describes where people live and their 
access to resources (Giddings et al., 2002).
If affordable and adequate housing should be assessible to 
all within national borders in the case of Copenhagen most 
people can find both adequate and affordable housing in the 
surroundning area of Copenhagen. 
However, the City of Copenhagen has formulated sustain-
able goals which applies to the urban development within its 
municipal borders. Therefore, gentrification can be defined as 
an unsustainable trend if looking at the City of Copenhagen 
isolated as a geographical entity.
This examplifies how a smaller govermental context of 
sustainable goals can be applied to discuss the relevance of 
indicator assessment tools in general: The appliance of the 
indicator assessment tool on the case of the City of Copen-
hagen highlights the importance of the distributional effects 
when assessing SAH. When asseing SAH the two most intrin-
sic conditions that must be defined are: the spatial limits for 
the assessment and the socio-economic composition of the 
population that housing are provided for. 
5.3 SAH AND URBAN PLANNING 
==PAGE:110==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
110
The thesis concludes that the following concepts are essen-
tial to cover when assessing sustainable affordable housing 
(SAH) according to the theoretical field: Location affordability, 
housing quality, environmental costs, and satisfaction. 'Loca-
tion affordability' assesses the access to resources specific to 
a dwelling location. It includes indicators on population char-
acteristics, general economic conditions, the quality of and 
access to communities, the availability and distribution of the 
housing stock, and the relation between housing costs and 
income. 'Environmental costs' assesses the system integrity in 
environmental and economic viability of a dwelling over time. 
'Housing quality' assesses the standard of living and adequacy 
of housing. 'Satisfaction' assesses the satisfaction of relevant 
target groupsdetermined by the assessed life cycle phase eg. 
users, builders or owners.
In conclusion SAH as a whole is characterized by reflecting 
the diversity of a population in both housing stock, housing 
quality, and housing costs. SAH is well connected by good 
quality transport to good quality communities and has a 
physical standard, that supports human comfort and health. 
Furthermore, it should be contextualized to its environmental 
costs and the satisfaction of relevant target groups.
The developed indicator assessment tool on SAH can be ap-
plied to the case of the City of Copenhagen by a reduction of 
convergent indicators in existing tools, that are completed in 
accordance with good practice reporting (eg. Maclaren, 1996; 
Garrett and Latawiec, 2015). The thesis has argued that the 
final selection of indicators should combine indicators that 
are: Valid, comparable, cost-effective, based on accurate and 
accessable data, relevant, understandable to its target group, 
and representative of a broad range of conditions.
Applying these criteria the combined indicator assessment 
on SAH in the City of Copenhagen consists of 9 indexes and 
18 indicators. 44.4 % of the indicators shows movement away 
from sustainability, 38.9% progress towards sustainability, 
5.6% a stagnant development, and 5.6% data insuficience.
The results showing movement away from sustainability are: 
'new build social housing', 'small apartments', 'occupancy 
length and status', 'tenures', 'price-to-income ratio', 'housing 
overburden rate', 'the social housing rent-to-income ratio', and 
'people in risk of poverty'. The results show progress towards 
sustainability on 'crime and safety', 'pendling distance', 'work-
ing vs. dwelling citizens', 'homelessness' and 'consumption vs. 
income'. 
5.4 CONCLUSION
The results on housing allocations shows the need for better 
data and the results on the provision of student housing 
shows a stagnant development.
From the indicator results it can be concluded that a growing 
amount of people cannot afford to buy and rent housing and 
an increasing amount of peoples consumption is spend on 
housing expenses. Furthermore, the share of people in risk of 
poverty is increasing. These criteria indicate that un-afford-
ability of housing is increasing in the City of Copenhagen.
Housing in the City of Copenhagen is connected by good 
quality transport to good quality communities and has a 
physical standard that supports human comfort and health. 
Furthermore, the satisfaction of its tenants on safety is in-
creasing. However, housing in the City of Copenhagen is not 
reflecting the diversity of the population by income in the 
housing stock, housing layout, and housing costs. None of the 
indicators are contextualized to the environmental costs of 
housing. 
The indicator assessment provides a limited insight in the 
concepts that affects SAH. Therefore, further assessments 
are needed to guide the formulation of future sustainable 
goals for the City of Copenhagen. Nevertheless, the developed 
indicator assessment tool provides a methodological basis 
for discussing how the concepts of SAH are interdependent. 
Furthermore, it elucidate that trade-offs must be made in 
order to prioritize sustainable goals on affordable housing and 
reduce problem shifting in urban planning. 
Future studies on SAH in the City of Copenhagen should fo-
cus on assessing the cause and effect relations between the 
essential concepts of SAH and concrete urban planning initia-
tives. A primary focus should also be to include indicators on 
environmental costs of housing. Finally, future studies should 
focus on the aggregation and weighting of indicators on SAH. 
This could provide a basis for discussing the prioritization of 
urban planning aspects in relation to affordable housing. 
Finally, it can be concluded that the presented local tool 
highlights the importance of considering the distributional 
effects and geographical equity when formulating goals on 
sustainability: the spatial limits for the assessment and the 
ideal composition of the population that housing is provided 
for must be defined in order to assess sustainable affordable 
housing.
1 2 3 4 5
==PAGE:111==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
111
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
==PAGE:112==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
112
REFERENCES
1 2 3 4 5
==PAGE:113==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
113
REFERENCES
==PAGE:114==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
114
1 2 3 4 5
Lejerbo, 2021
Lejerbo, 2021. Boligsøgende. Hvad er en almen bolig. Avail-
able at https://www.lejerbo.dk/boligsoegende/spoerg-
smaal-og-svar/hvad-er-en-almen-bolig [Assessed 17.02.22].
BPST, 2021
BPST, 2021. Bolig- og Planstyrelsen. Statistik. Available at 
https://www.boligstat.dk/ [Assessed 22.10.21].
Danske Arkitektvirksomheder, 2020
Danske Arkitektvirksomheder. (2020). Arkitektur med værdi. 
Cases. Sønder Bouldevard. Available at https://www.danske-
ark.dk/content/sonder-boulevard [Accessed 18.02.22].
DST, 2022
Statistics Denmark. (2022). Forside. Find statistik. Nyheder, 
analyser og publikationer. Nyt fra Danmarks Statistik. Mar-
kant flere ældre i fremtiden. Available at https://www.dst.dk/
da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?cid=26827 
[Accessed 21.02.22].
DST, 2017.a
Danmarks Statistik. Juli 2017. Ækvivaleret disponibel ind-
komst. Available at https://www.dst.dk/Site/Dst/SingleFiles/
GetArchiveFile.aspx?fi=8722154520&fo=0&ext=velfaerd [Ac-
cessed 20.09.21].
DST, 2017.b
Danmarks Statistik. September 2017. Privatøkonomi og 
Velfærd. Decilgrupper og decilgrænser. Available at https://
www.dst.dk/Site/Dst/SingleFiles/GetArchiveFile.aspx?fi=ar-
bejde-loen-og-indkomst&fo=deciler--pdf&ext={2} [Accessed 
15.09.21].
DST, 2017.c
Danmarks Statistik. Juli 2017. Privatøkonomi og Velfærd. Leje-
værdi af egen bolig. Available at https://www.dst.dk/Site/Dst/
SingleFiles/GetArchiveFile.aspx?fi=3431754515&fo=0&ext=vel-
faerd [Accessed 08.02.22].
DTU, 2022
Technical university of Denmark. 2021. Kursusbasen. 
42274 Sustainable Development Indicators and Sustain-
able Urban Development. Available at https://kurser.dtu.
dk/course/2019-2020/42274?menulanguage=en [Accessed 
17.02.22].
REFERENCES
LINKS
DTU, 2021
Technical University of Denmark. About DTU Findit. Avail-
able at https://findit.dtu.dk/en/about/introduction [Accessed 
17.02.22]
EC, 2021.a
European Commission. (2021). International Cooperation and 
Development. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/internation-
al-partnerships/sustainable-development-goals_en [Accessed 
22.09.21].
EU, 2022
European Union. 2022. European Commission. European 
Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations. Enlarge-
ment. Glossary. Accession criteria. Available at https://ec.eu-
ropa.eu/neighbourhood-enlargement/enlargement-policy/
glossary/accession-criteria_en [Accessed 17.02.22].
EU, 2021
European Union. (EU, 201) About. Countries. Member States. 
Denmark. https://europa.eu/european-union/about-eu/coun-
tries/member-countries/denmark_da [Accessed 21.10.20].
Eurostat, 2021.a
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. Quality of life indica-
tors. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-ex-
plained/index.php?title=Quality_of_life_indicators [Accessed 
22.09.21]
Eurostat, 2021.b
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. Access to microdata. 
European Union Statistics on Income and Living Conditions. 
Methodology. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statis-
tics-explained/index.php?title=EU_statistics_on_income_and_
living_conditions_(EU-SILC)_methodology [Accessed 18.09.21].
Eurostat, 2021.c
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. European Economy. 
A Statistical Portrait - Data 2000-2019. Available at https://
ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/digpub/european_economy/  
[Accessed 21.09.21].
==PAGE:115==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
115
REFERENCES
Eurostat, 2021.d
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. Regions and cities. My 
Region. Hovedstaden (DK01). Available at
 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/RCI/myregion/#?reg=D-
K01&ind=18-2_nama_10r_2gdp [Accessed 21.10.21].
EU-SILC, 2021.a 
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. EU statistics on in-
come and living conditions (EU-SILC). Methodology. Housing 
conditions. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statis-
tics-explained/index.php?title=EU_statistics_on_income_and_
living_conditions_(EU-SILC)_methodology_-_housing_condi-
tions [Accessed 18.09.21].
EU-SILC, 2021.b
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. EU statistics on in-
come and living conditions (EU-SILC). Methodology. Housing 
deprivation. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statis-
tics-explained/index.php?title=EU_statistics_on_income_and_
living_conditions_(EU-SILC)_methodology_-_housing_depriva-
tion  [Accessed 18.09.21].
EU-SILC, 2021.c
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. EU statistics on in-
come and living conditions (EU-SILC). Methodology. Economic 
Strain Linked to Dwelling. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=EU_statistics_
on_income_and_living_conditions_(EU-SILC)_methodology_-_
economic_strain_linked_to_dwelling  [Accessed 18.09.20].
EU-SILC, 2021.d
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. EU statistics on 
income and living conditions (EU-SILC). Methodology. Envi-
ronment of the dwelling. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=EU_statistics_
on_income_and_living_conditions_(EU-SILC)_methodology_-_
environment_of_the_dwelling  [Accessed 18.09.20].
EU-SILC, 2021.e
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. EU statistics on 
income and living conditions (EU-SILC). Methodology. 2012 
Housing Conditions. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php?title=EU_statistics_on_in-
come_and_living_conditions_(EU-SILC)_methodology_-_2012_
housing_conditions [Accessed 18.09.21].
EU-SILC, 2021.e
European Commission, 2021. Eurostat. EU statistics on 
income and living conditions (EU-SILC). People at risk of pov-
erty. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-ex-
plained/index.php?title=People_at_risk_of_poverty_or_social_
exclusion [Assessed 24.11.21].
Finans Danmark, 2021
Finans Danmark. (2021). Boligstatistik. Boligmarkedsstatistik-
ken. Boligstatistik, BM010, København. Available at: www.rkr.
statistikbank.dk [Accessed 21.02.22].
Finanstilsynet, 2016
Finanstilsynet. Nyheder og presse. Pressemedelelser. 2016. 
Vejledning om kreditvurdering ved belåning af boliger i 
vækstområder mv. Available at https://www.finanstilsynet.
dk/nyheder-og-presse/pressemeddelelser/2016/presse-
medddelelse-vejledning-om-forsigtighed-i-kreditvuder-
ing-ved-belaaning-010216 [Accessed 21.02.22].
Høje Taastrup Kommune, 2022
Høje Taastrup Kommune. (2022). Forside. Ledighed og job. 
Dagpenge. Befordringsgodtgørelse. Available at https://www.
htk.dk/Ledighed-og-job/Dagpenge/Befordringsgodtgoerelse 
[Accessed 21.02.22].
IFHP, 2021
International Federation of Housing and Planning. The Social 
City Index. https://www.ifhp.org/social-cities-index [Accessed 
21.10.21].
KK, 2022
Københavns Kommune. (2022). Politik. Politikker og indsatser.
Bolig, byggeri og byliv. Byplanlægning. Available at https://
www.kk.dk/politik/politikker-og-indsatser/bolig-byggeri-og-
byliv/byplanlaegning [Accessed 21.02.22]
KK, 2020.a
The City of Copenhagen. 2020. Copenhagen welcomes the UN 
SDG’S. Available at  https://international.kk.dk/artikel/copen-
hagen-welcomes-un-sdgs [Accessed 23.09.21].
KK, 2021.d
Københavns Kommune. Specialboliger. Available at https://
www.kk.dk/specialboliger [Accessed 23.09.21]
==PAGE:116==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
116
1 2 3 4 5
Kortforsyningen, 2022
Kortforsyningen, 2021. Administrative grænser, Regionsgræns-
er, Kommunegrænser, Opstillingskredse. Available at sdfekort.
dk/spatialmap [Assessed 10.02.22].
Lejeloven.dk, 2022
Lejeloven. Udlejer. Regler for tidsbegrænset leje. Available at 
https://www.lejeloven.dk/udlejer/tidsbegraensning [Accessed 
22.02.2022].
OECD, 2022
OECD. Affordable Housing Database. HM1.3 Housing Tenures. 
Available at https://www.oecd.org/els/family/HM1-3-Housing-
tenures.pdf [Accessed 21.02.2022].
OECD, 2021.a
Housing prices (indicator). doi: 10.1787/63008438-en. Available 
at www.data.oecd.org/price/housing-prices.htm [Accessed on 
15.09.21].
OECD, 2021.b
Homeless population. OECD Affordable Housing Database (in-
dicator). Available at www.oecd.org/els/family/HC3-1-Home-
less-population.pdf [Accessed on 15.09.21].
OECD, 2021.a
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment. About. Available at http://www.oecd.org/about/  [Ac-
cessed 18.09.21].
OECD, 2021.b 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment. Better Life Index. Housing. Available at http://www.
oecdbetterlifeindex.org/topics/housing/ [Accessed 18.09.21].
OECD, 2021.c
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment. Affordable Housing Database. Available at https://www.
oecd.org/social/affordable-housing-database/  [Accessed 
18.09.21].
OECD, 2020.d
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment. Regional Well Being. Copenhagen. Housing. https://www.
oecdregionalwellbeing.org/DK01.html [Accessed 21.10.21].
OECD, 2018
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment. Regions and Cities at a Glance 2018 – Denmark. 
Available at https://www.oecd.org/regional/DENMARK-Re-
gions-and-Cities-2018.pdf [Accessed 21.10.21].
WHO, 2020
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment. World Health Organisation, 2020, Millennium Develop-
ment Goals (MDGs). Available at https://www.who.int/topics/
millennium_development_goals/en/ [Accessed 17.09.21].
WUC, 2020
World Urban Campaign. News. ‘IFHP: Show Me the Numbers 
for Social Cities. https://www.worldurbancampaign.org/ifhp-
show-me-numbers-social-cities [Accessed 21.10.21].
UN, 2020
The United Nations. Member States. Denmark. https://sustain-
abledevelopment.un.org/memberstates/denmark [Accessed 
21.10.21].
==PAGE:117==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
117
REFERENCES
JOURNAL ARTICLES
Atanda, 2019
Atanda, Jubril Olakitan. (2019). Developing a social sustain-
ability assessment framework. Sustainable Cities and Society 
44 (2019) pp. 237–252. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scs.2018.09.023.
Abdullahi & Pradhan, 2017
Abdullahi, Saleh and Pradhan, Biswajeet. (2017). Sustainable 
Urban Development. In Pradhan, B. (ed.). Spatial Modeling and 
Assessment of Urban Form. Springer International Publishing 
AG. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-54217-1_2.
Arrow et al., 2012
Arrow, K. J., Dasgupta, P., & Goulder, L. H., et al. (2012). Sus-
tainability and the measurement of wealth. Environment 
and Development Economics, 17(03), 317–353. DOI:10.1017/ 
S1355770X12000137.
Borges et al., 2020
Borges, L. A., Hammami, F., and Wangel, J. (2020). Reviewing 
Neighborhood Sustainability Assessment Tools through Criti-
cal Heritage Studies. Sustainability 2020, 12, 1605. doi:10.3390/
su12041605. Available at https://www.mdpi.com/2071-
1050/12/4/1605/htm [Accessed 08.02.22].
Boyer et al., 2016
Boyer, R., Peterson, N., Arora, P. and Caldwell, K. (2016). Five 
Approaches to Social Sustainability and an Integrated Way 
Forward. Sustainability, 8(9), p. 878. Available at: https://doi.
org/10.3390/su8090878 [Accessed 25.09.21].
Camagni, 2017
Camagni, Roberto. (2017). Sustainable Urban Development: 
Definition and Reasons for a Research Programme. In Capello, 
R. (ed.). Seminal Studies in Regional and Urban Economics. 
Springer International Publishing AG. DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-
57807-1_13.
Chan & Adabre, 2019
Chan, Albert P.C. & Adabre, Michael Atafo. (2019). Bridging the 
gap between sustainable housing and affordable housing: The 
required critical success criteria (CSC). Elsevier Ltd. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.01.029.
Cooper et al., 2019 
Cooper, Justine; Lee, Angela & Jones, Keith. (2019). Sustainable 
built asset management performance indicators and attri-
butes, A UK social housing case study example. International 
Journal of Building Pathology and Adaptation. Vol. 38 No. 3, 
2020 pp. 508-522. Emerald Publishing Limited. DOI 10.1108/
IJBPA-08-2019-0069.
de Azevedo & Silva, 2010
de Azevedo, Maciel Silva & Silva, Rêgo. (2010). Definition of In-
dicators for Sustainable Social Housing: in Search of a Model. 
Int. Journal for Housing Science, Vol.34, No.2. pp. 79-92.
Dempsey et al., 2011
Dempsey, Nicola; Bramley, Glen; Power, Sinéad & Brown, Caro-
line. (2011). The Social Dimension of Sustainable Development: 
Defining Urban Social Sustainability. Sustainable Development. 
Sust. Dev. 19, 289–300 (2011). Published online 26 May 2009 
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/
sd.417.
Du et al., 2020
Du, Mengbing, Zhao, Mengxue & Fu, Yang. (2020). Revisit-
ing urban sustainability from access to jobs: Assessment of 
economic gain versus loss of social equity. Environmental 
Impact Assessment Review 85/106456. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eiar.2020.106456
Giddings et al., 2002
Giddings, Bob; Hopwood, Bill & O’Brien, Geoff. (2002). Environ-
ment, economy and society: Fitting them together into sus-
tainable development. Sustainable Development. Sust. Dev. 10, 
187–196 (2002). Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.
interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/sd.199. 
Haqi, 2016
Haqi, Faruq Ibnul. (2016). Sustainable Urban Development and 
Social Sustainability in the Urban Context. EMARA Indone-
sian Journal of Architecture. Vol 2 No 1. ISSN 2460-7878. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.29080/eija.v2i1.15.
==PAGE:118==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
118
1 2 3 4 5
Larsen & Hansen, 2008
Larsen, H. G., & Lund Hansen, A. (2008). Gentrification-Gen-
tle or Traumatic? Urban Renewal Policies and Socioeconomic 
Transformations in Copenhagen. Urban Studies, 45(12), 2429-
2448. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098008097101 .
Lee & Jung, 2019
Lee, K. & Jung, H. (2019). Dynamic semantic network analysis 
for identifying the concept and scope of social sustainability. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 233, pp.1510–1524. Available 
at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.390  [Accessed 
25.09.20].
Helmich, 2017
Hellmich, Simon Niklas. (2017). What is Socioeconom-
ics? An Overview of Theories, Methods, and Themes in 
the Field. Forum for Social Economics. 46:1, 3-25, DOI: 
10.1080/07360932.2014.999696.
Hopwood & Mellor, 2007
Hopwood, Bill & Mellor, Mary. (2007). Visioning the Sustain-
able City. Capitalism Nature Socialism. 18:4, 75-89. DOI: 
10.1080/10455750701705096.
Maclaren, 1996
Virginia W. Maclaren. (1996). Urban Sustainability Reporting. 
Journal of the American Planning Associndicator assessment 
toolion, 62:2, 184-202, DOI: 10.1080/01944369608975684 
Mulliner et al., 2013
Mulliner, E.; Smallbone, K.; Maliene, V. (2013). An assessment 
of sustainable housing affordability using a multiple criteria 
decision making method. Omega, 2013, 41, 270–279. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2012.05.002 
Mulliner et al., 2016
Mulliner, E.; Malys, N.; Maliene, V. (2016). Comparative analysis 
of MCDM methods for the assessment of sustainable housing 
affordability. Omega, 2016, 59, 146–156. Available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.omega.2015.05.013.
Nuuter et al., 2015
Nuuter, Tiina; Lill, Irene; Tupenaite, Laura. (2015). Comparison 
of housing market sustainability in European countries based 
on multiple criteria assessment. Elsevier Ltd. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.09.022 [Accessed 02.11.21].
Peiser, 2015
Peiser, Richard. (2015). Real Estate Development. International 
Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, 2nd edition, 
Volume 20, pp. 12-19. Elsevier. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-08-097086-8.74034-7.
Pinto et al., 2016
Pinto, Sara; Fumincelli, Laís; Mazzo, Alessandra; Caldei-
ra, Sílvia & Martins, José Carlos. (2016). Review. Comfort, 
well-being and quality of life: Discussion of the differenc-
es and similarities among the concepts. Porto Biomedical 
Journal. 2017;2(1):6–12. Elsevier. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
pbj.2016.11.003. 
Pullen et al., 2010; 
Pullen, Stephen; Arman, Michael; Zillante, George; Zuo, Jian; 
Chileshe, Nicholas & Wilson, Lou. (2010). Developing an As-
sessment Framework for Affordable and Sustainable Housing. 
Institute for Sustainable Systems and Technologies University 
of South Australia. Australasian Journal of Construction Eco-
nomics and Building 10. 48-64. DOI: 10.5130/ajceb.v10i1/2.1587.
Rittel & Webber, 1973
Rittel, H. W. J.; Webber, M. M. 1973, Dilemmas in a General 
Theory of Planning, Policy Sciences, Volume 4, Issue 2, s. 155-
169.
Shirazi and Keivani, 2017
Shirazi M. and Keivani, R. (2017). Critical reflections on the 
theory and practice of social sustainability in the built envi-
ronment: A meta-analysis. Local Environment 22(12): 1526–
1545. https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2017.1379476 .
Szibbo, 2016
Nicola Szibbo (2016) Lessons for LEED® for Neighborhood 
Development, Social Equity, and Affordable Housing, Journal 
of the American Planning Associndicator assessment toolion, 
82:1, 37-49, DOI: 10.1080/01944363.2015.1110709.
Tanguay et al., 2010
Tanguay, Georges A.; Rajaonson, Juste; Lefebvre, Jean-Fran-
cois & Lanoie, Paul. (2010). Measuring the sustainability of 
cities: An analysis of the use of local indicators. Ecological 
Indicators 10 (2010) pp. 407–418. Elsevier Ltd. doi:10.1016/j.
ecolind.2009.07.013. 
==PAGE:119==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
119
REFERENCES
Tupernaite et al., 2017
Tupenaite, Laura; Lill, Irene; Geipele, Ineta; & Naimaviciene, 
Jurga. (2017). Ranking of Sustainability Indicators for Assess-
ment of the New Housing Development Projects: Case of the 
Baltic States. Resources, 2017, 6, 55; doi:10.3390/resourc-
es6040055.
Tupernaite et al., 2018
Tupenaite, Laura; Kaklauskas, Arturas; Lill, Irene; Geipele, 
Ineta; Naimaviciene, Jurga; Kanapeckiene, Loreta & Kauskale, 
Linda. 2018. Sustainability Assessment of the New Residen-
tial Projects in the Baltic States: A Multiple Criteria Approach. 
Sustainability, 2018, 10, 1387; doi:10.3390/su10051387.
Turk, 2021
Suheyla Turk. (2021). Affordable housing production for low 
income groups by land use zoning plans in harbor areas of 
Copenhagen, Urban, Planning and Transport Research, 9:1, 
233-256, DOI: 10.1080/21650020.2021.1914150. 
Wengenroth, 2004
Wengenroth, U. (2004). Managing Engineering complexity: A 
Historical Perspective, Munich Center for the History of Sci-
ence and Technology. Available at: http://esd.mit.edu/sympo-
sium/pdfs/papers/wengenroth.pdf [Accessed 11-05-2015].
Wiles and Kobayashi, 2009
Wiles, J. and Kobayashi, A. (2009). Equity. International En-
cyclopedia of Human Geography. pp. 580-585. Elsevier. DOI: 
10.1016/B978-008044910-4.00944-5
Winston & Pareja-Eastaway, 2008
Pareja-Eastaway, M. and Winston, E. (2008). Dimensions of 
housing and urban sustainability. Journal of Housing and the 
Built Environment 19(1): 1–5. DOI: 10.1007/s11205-007-9165-8
Winston, 2007
Winston, N. (2007). From boom to bust? An assessment of the 
impact of sustainable development policies on housing in the 
Republic of Ireland. Local Environment, 12(1), 57–71.
Yeganeh et al., 2018
Yeganeh, A.J.; Hall, R.P.; Pearce, A.R. & Hankey, S. (2018). A 
social equity analysis of the US public transportation system 
based on job accessibility. J. Transp. Land Use 11, 1039–1056. 
DOI: 10.5198/jtlu.2018.1370. 
CONFERENCE PAPERS
Shama & Motlak, 2019
Shama, Zaineb Salman and Motlak, Jamal Baqir. 2019. Indi-
cators for Sustainable Housing. IOP Conf. Series: Materials 
Science and Engineering 518 (2019) 022009 doi:10.1088/1757-
899X/518/2/022009.
Mulliner & Maliene, 2011
Mulliner, Emma & Maliene, Vida. (2011). Criteria for sustainable 
Housing Affordability. Vilnius Gediminas Technical University, 
2011. Environmental Engineering, The 8th International Confer-
ence May 19–20, 2011, Vilnius, Lithuania. ISSN 2029-7092.
==PAGE:120==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
120
1 2 3 4 5
BOOKS AND BOOK CHAPTERS
Boolsen, 2019
Boolsen, M. W. (2019) Grounded theory. In: Brinkmann, S. & 
Tanggaard, L. (eds.). Kvalitative metoder: en grundbog. Hans 
Reitzels Forlag. ISBN: 9788741252551. 
Brockhoff et al., 2018
Per B. Brockhoff, Jan K. Møller, Elisabeth W. Andersen Peder 
Bacher, Lasse E. Christiansen. (2018). Introduction to Statis-
tics at DTU, 2018 Fall. Available at https://02402.compute.dtu.
dk/enotes/book-IntroStatistics [Accessed 18.02.22].
Brueckner, 2011
Brueckner, Jan K. (2011). Lectures on Urban Economics. The 
MIT Press Cambridge. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Clark, 2004 
Clark, Eric. (2004). The Order and Simplicity of Gentrification: 
A Political Challenge. In: Lees, Loretta; Slater, Tom; & Wyly, 
Elvin (eds.). The Gentrification Reader. Routledge. pp. 24-30. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203392089_chapter_16. 
Egholm, 2014
Egholm, L. (2014). Videnskabsteori. Perspektiver på or-
ganisationer og samfund. Hans Reitzels Forlag. ISBN: 
9788741256566.
Flyvbjerg, 2019
Flyvbjerg, Bent. (2019). Fem misforståelser om casestudiet. In: 
Brinkmann, S. & Tanggaard, L. (eds.) Kvalitative metoder: en 
grundbog. Hans Reitzels Forlag. ISBN: 9788741252551. 
Whitehead, 2011
Whitehead, M. (2011). The sustainable city: An obituary? On 
the future for and prospects of sustainable urbanism. In: 
Flint, J. and Raco, M. (eds). The Future of Sustainable Cities: 
Critical Reflections. Bristol: Policy Press, pp. 29–46.
Garett & Latawiec, 2015
Garrett, Rachael and Latawiec, Agnieszka E. (2015). What 
Are Sustainability Indicators For? In: Latawiec, Agnieszka E. 
& Agol, Dorice (eds.). Sustainable Indicators In Practice. De 
Gruyter. pp. 1-11. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110450507.
Gudmundsson et al., 2016
Gudmundsson, H.; Hall, R.P.; Marsden, G., and Zietsman, J. 
2016. Sustainable Transportation. Indicators, Frameworks, and 
Performance Management. Springer.
Glass, 1964
Glass, Ruth. (1964). London: Aspects of Change, Report num-
ber 3. Centre for Urban Studies. MacGibbon & Kee. 
Shah, 2008
Shah, M.M. (2008). Sustainable Development. In Jørgensen, S. 
and Fath, B. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Ecology. Elsevier. pp. 3443-
3446. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-008045405-4.00633-9
Shirazi and Keivani, 2019
Shirazi, M. and Keivani, R. (2019). Urban Social Sustainability. 
Theory, Policy and Practice. 1st edition. Routledge.
Wheeler, 2013
Wheeler, Stephen M. (2013). Planning for Sustainability: Cre-
ating Livable, Equitable and Ecological Communities. London: 
Routledge.
==PAGE:121==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
121
REFERENCES
2030-Panelet, 2020
2030-Panelet. (2020). Vores Mål. Gør verdens mål til vores 
mål. 197 danske målepunkter for en mere bæredygtig verden. 
Available at https://www.voresmaal.dk/ [Accessed 22.09.21].
BC, 1987
The Brundtland Commission. (1987). Report of the World 
Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common 
Future. United Nations. Available at https://www.are.admin.ch/
are/en/home/sustainable- development/international-cooper-
ation/2030agenda/un-_-milestones-in-sustainable-develop-
ment/1987-- brundtland-report.html [Accessed 22-09-21]. 
C40, 2019
The C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs of Denmark, Department for Green Diplomacy. 2020. 
Meeting in the Council for Development Policy 10 June. Agen-
da item 2. Presentation Programme for Committee. 10 October 
2019. Available at https://um.dk/~/media/um/english-site/doc-
uments/danida/about-danida/danida%20transparency/docu-
ments/council%20for%20development%20policy/2020/02%20
c40.pdf?la=en [Accessed 02.10.21].
Copenhagen Economics, 2018
Copenhagen Economics. (2018). Demografi, Boligbehov og 
Prisudvikling i Københavns Kommune, Analyse med fokus 
på den nuværende og fremtidige udvikling. Københavns 
Kommune. 12. otober 2018. Available at https://www.copen-
hageneconomics.com/dyn/resources/Publication/publica-
tionPDF/0/480/1551181589/demografi-boligbehov-og-bolig-
prisudvikling-i-koebenhavns-kommune-221118.pdf [Accessed 
08.02.22].
Eurofound, 2016
Eurofound. (2016). Inadequate housing in Europe: Costs and 
consequences. Publications Office of the European Union, 
Luxembourg. Available at https://www.eurofound.europa.eu/
da/publications/report/2016/quality-of-life-social-policies/
inadequate-housing-in-europe-costs-and-consequences 
[Accessed 19.10.20]. 
REPORTS
Eurostat, 2017
Eurostat. (2017). Final report of the expert group on quality of 
life indicators. 2017 edition. European Union. Publications Of-
fice of the European Union. Luxembourg. Available at https://
ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/7870049/7960327/KS-FT-
17-004-EN-N.pdf/f29171db-e1a9-4af6-9e96-730e7e11e02f 
[Accessed 22.09.20].
EU, 2009
Council of the European Union. (2009). 2009 Review of the 
EU Sustainable Development Strategy - Presidency Re-
port. Available at https://register.consilium.europa.eu/doc/
srv?l=EN&f=ST%2016818%202009%20INIT [Accessed 25.09.21].
EU, 2017
Atkinson, Manthony B.; Guio, Anne-Cathrine and Marlier, Eric. 
Monitoring social inclusion in Europe. 2017 edition. European 
Union. Publications Office of the European Union, 2017. Lux-
embourg. doi:10 2785/60152. Available at https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/documents/3217494/8031566/KS-05-14-075-EN-N.
pdf/c3a33007-6cf2-4d86-9b9e-d39fd3e5420c [Accessed 
22.09.21].
EU, 2010
European Union. (2010). Housing Statistics in the European 
Union 2010. The Hague: Ministry of the Interior and King-
dom Relations. Edited by Kees Dol and Marietta Haffner. OTB 
Research Institute for the Built Environment, Delft University 
of Technology. Available at http://www.iut.nu/wp-content/
uploads/2017/07/Housing-Affordability-Housing-Statistics.pdf 
[Accessed 21.02.22].
KK, 2019.a
The City of Copenhagen. (2019). Københavns Kommuneplan 
2019. Verdensby med ansvar. Available at https://kp19.kk.dk/
sites/kp19.kk.dk/files/kommuneplan_19_endelig_07.pdf  [Ac-
cessed 23.09.21].
KK, 2019.b 
The City of Copenhagen. (2019). Analyse af almene boliger i 
København. Center for Byudvikling, Økonomiforvaltningen. 
Available at https://kp19.kk.dk/artikel/analyse-af-almene-boli-
ger [Accessed 09.11.21].
==PAGE:122==
S123764 MASTER THESIS DTU FEBRUARY 2022
122
KK, 2018.a
The City of Copenhagen. (2018). The Capital of Stainable 
Development. The City of Copenhagen’s Action Plan for the 
Sustainable Development Goals. The City of Copenhagen 
Department of Finance. Available at https://international.
kk.dk/sites/international.kk.dk/files/the_capital_of_sustain-
able_development_sustainable_development_goals_2018.pdf 
[Accessed 25.09.21].
KK, 2018.b 
The City of Copenhagen. 2018. Analyse af tilgængeligheden på 
boligmarkedet i København. Økonomiforvaltningen. Available 
at https://planinfo.erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/sites/default/files/
media/ publikation/analyse_af_tilgaengeligheden_paa_boli-
gmarkedet_i_koebenhavn_koebenhavns_kommune_2018.pdf 
[Accessed 29-11-19] 
KK, 2014 
The City of Copenhagen. (2014). Analyse af bosætning i Køben-
havn 2014. Available at https:// forsoegspuljen.almennet.dk/
media/560352/analyse-af-bosaetning-i-koebenhavn-web.pdf  
[Accessed 28-11-19] 
McGuinn et al., 2020
McGuinn, Jennifer; Fries-Tersch, Elena; Jones, Matthew.; 
Crepaldi, Chiara; Masso, Märt; Kadarik, Ingel; Samek, Lodovi-
ci Manuela; Drufuca, Serena; Gancheva, Mariya; and Geny, 
Brittni. (2020). Social sustainability. Study for the Committee 
on Employment and Social Affairs. Policy Department for 
Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies. European 
Parliament. Luxembourg.
OECD, 2016
OECD. (2016). Well-being in Danish Cities. OECD Publishing. 
Paris. DOI:https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264265240-en. Avail-
able at http://www.oecd.org/denmark/bytopic/regionalruralan-
durbandevelopment/ [Accessed 21.10.21].
OECD, 2012
OECD. (2012). Redefining “Urban”: A New Way to Mea-
sure Metropolitan Areas. Available at http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/9789264174108-en [Accessed 21.10.21].
Rambøll & DAC, 2019
Rambøll Management Consulting and The Danish Architec-
ture Centre. (2019). Baseline for the Global Goals in Den-
mark-Baseline report. Goal 11: Sustainable Cities and Com-
munities. Available at https://ramboll.com/-/media/files/rm/
baseline-for-sdgs.pdf?la=en [Accessed 22.09.21]. 
UN, 2015 
United Nations. (2015). Transforming Our World, The 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. A/RES/70/1. Available at 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformin-
gourworld [Accessed 22.09.21] 
UN, 2016 
United Nations, Economic and Social Council. (2016). Report 
of the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Sustainable De-
velopment Goal Indicators. E/CN.3/2016/2/Rev.1. Available at 
http://ggim.un.org/knowledgebase/Attachment1333.aspx?At-
tachmentType=1 [Accessed 22.09.21].
VIVE, 2019
Lars Benjaminsen. (2019). Hjemløshed i Danmark 2019. 
National kortlægning. VIVE. Viden til Velfærd. Det Natio-
nale Forsknings- og Analysecenter for Velfærd. e-ISBN: 
978-87-7119-686-3. Available at https://www.vive.dk/media/
pure/14218/3352843 [Accessed 21.02.22].
WHO, 1997
World Health Organization. (1997). WHOQOL: Measuring 
Quality of Life. World Health Organization, Division of Mental 
Health and Prevention of Substance Abuse. Geneva. Available 
at https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/63482/
WHO_MSA_MNH_PSF_97.4.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y [Ac-
cessed 06.10.21].
==PAGE:123==
SUSTAINABLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING - AN INDICATOR ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR THE CITY OF COPENHAGEN 
123
