==PAGE:1==
Multi-agent Abduction Based on Doxastic Temporal Logic
Models
Author
Malte Sølvsten Velin <s200611>
Supervisor
Thomas Bolander
February 13, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The project explores multi-agent abductive reasoning using doxastic temporal logic models as a
computationally advantageous alternative to keeping track of everything that is epistemically and
doxastically possible. Doxastic temporal logic models represent the chronological evolution of
doxastic epistemic plausibility models as events occur. Plausibility orders are used in conjunction
with a prioritized update operation to prune the forest of possibilities as events unfold, while
abductive reasoning is used to unprune it if and when the model becomes inconsistent with the
observed.
Based on current literature, we deﬁne multi-agent abductive reasoning in the context of
doxastic temporal logic models. Along the way, we reﬁne, elaborate on, and extend, existing
theory, and contribute a novel abduction heuristic that leverages higher-order beliefs of agents.
We then suggest algorithms for eﬃciently maintaining, pruning, and unpruning, models and
provide an implementation based on these. The implementation supports the full language of
doxastic temporal logic models, update mechanisms, and a subset of abduction heuristics, and
is used to benchmark abductive reasoning, under each of the supported heuristics, against the
traditional update mechanism.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Background and theoretical work
4
2.1
Plausibility models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Event models and product update
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Propositional dynamic logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Doxastic temporal models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Degenerate models, surprise, and abduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5.1
Belief maximization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
Experiments and results
34
3.1
Design and implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.1
Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.2
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.1.3
Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.1.4
Shortcomings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Conclusion and future work
45
1
==PAGE:4==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Intelligent agents model their environment and adjust these models given new information. The
multi-agent setting is concerned with shared interactive environments aﬀectable by agents. When
one agents’ actions impact a shared state of the world it potentially causes a revision of other
agents’ knowledge and belief. Broadly speaking, the distinction between knowledge and belief
is that agents can only know facts while belief may be false. Hence belief may change under
new information. First order knowledge and belief pertain to the environment, second order to
other agents belief and knowledge about it, third order to other agents belief and knowledge
about other agents belief and knowledge about it, and so on ad inﬁnitum. False belief implies
the possibility of surprising observations, which in turn motivates the search for an explanation.
The process of searching for the most likely explanation of a surprising observation is called
abductive reasoning and was deﬁned as a concept in logic by American logician Charles Sanders
Peirce. An agent makes a surprising observation when the environment observed after an event
occurs is inconsistent with the agents beliefs. E.g., an agent may falsely believe that the grass
on the front lawn is dry, step outside, and be surprised when observing that it is wet. One way
to search for an explanation is to resolve inconsistencies by considering alternate trajectories of
events and examining their impact. E.g., continuing the example, the agent may consider other
courses of events that lead up to the lawn being wet, such as those where it has rained or where
the sprinkler has been running.
Abductive reasoning is studied extensively because it is a core intellectual component in
solving, e.g, equipment or software failure, medical diagnosis, and scientiﬁc discovery [1]. Much
work has gone into specifying exactly what it means for an explanation to be best, typically by
establishing probabilistic or logical criteria of comparison, or by leveraging logic programming
[1–4].
Our main motivation for modelling abductive reasoning is not philosophical but rather reduc-
ing computational complexity. By generating the most plausible temporal trajectories (of events)
explaining an observation it suﬃces, in the best case, for the agent to model only a subforest of
the forest containing all the histories made up of sequences of events. Hence, in our case, false
belief is because of an incomplete model and revision of it is in the form of abduction.
To our knowledge, the approach closest to ours is that of [1] and [5], in which the authors
study abductive reasoning in a dynamic epistemic logic framework with plausibility orders (both
concepts are introduced in due time). The key diﬀerences are that we consider scenarios involving
multiple agents, including their knowledge and beliefs about each other, and the temporal setting
of events.
2
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 2
is based on current literature and introduces models capable of representing higher
order knowledge and beliefs in multi-agent scenarios, as well as the language and semantics
to reason about them. These are gradually build on to deﬁne logic capable of modelling and
reasoning about the stepwise evolution of belief-change as events unfold, both from an objective
perspective and that of an agent engaged in abductive reasoning.
Chapter 3
is concerned implementing and evaluating the performance of abduction.
This
includes designing algorithms to eﬃciently compute and extend partial models, decide on suit-
able data and accelerator structures for representation, proﬁle performance bottlenecks, and
ultimately produce benchmarks using the implementation.
Chapter 4
summarizes the results of the project, identiﬁes some limitations and open prob-
lems, and suggests possible next steps to either extend and improve the project or pursue related
lines of research.
3
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 2
Background and theoretical work
Belief revision as a ﬁeld is the study of change in belief caused by an agent accepting new
information, possibly inconsistent with her a priori beliefs. The AGM1 approach presented in
the seminal paper [6] sits at the core of classical belief revision. Here, an agents belief is modelled
by a set of propositional formulas closed under entailment, called the belief set, and belief revision
is an operation mapping a belief set and a propositional formula, called the information, to a new,
closed belief set. The AGM authors present a number of so-called postulates that characterize
any sensible belief revision. These require, among other things, that the information is accepted
by the agent after revision, i.e. included in the new belief set, that the revised belief set is
consistent under the new information, and that the changes made to the old belief set should be
minimal. The ﬁrst postulate, called the Success postulate, implies that the incoming information
is more credible than any a priori beliefs of the agent. In AGM theory an agents belief is static
in the sense that it pertains to her factual belief about an unchanging world; belief sets before
and after revision describe beliefs about to the same environment. Moreover, the belief change
of AGM traditionally only concerns ontic (factual) belief change in the single agent setting and
excludes higher-order beliefs.
Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) is a branch of modal logic that studies knowledge and belief
change. It borrows key concepts from AGM but supports revision of higher-order beliefs as well as
multiple-agent environments. Also, in contrast to AGM, DEL takes into consideration the causal
relationship between new information and the event that brings it about. Consequently, belief
change in DEL can be both static, as in AGM, or dynamic. The distinction in literature between
the two is that static belief captures belief revision about an unchanging environment while
dynamic belief captures belief revision about a changing environment that changes alongside
agents beliefs [7]. The notion of an environment that contains higher-order beliefs is key because,
to verify higher-order belief, it is necessary to check that lower level beliefs hold. To better
understand the distinction between static and dynamic belief consider the following example.
Example 1. Suppose that a formula φ holds but an agent i does not believe that φ holds.
Furthermore suppose that the following doxastic Moore sentence [8, p. 543] “φ but agent i does
not believe that φ” is announced. In a dynamic belief revision agent i accepts φ and, hence,
comes to believe that φ which in turn makes the announced sentence false.
The change is
dynamic in the sense that the environment changed alongside the belief change brought about
by the announcement.
The sentence being false after the agent learns implies that dynamic
belief revision does not satisfy the Success postulate of AGM. Conversely, should the postulate
1Named after the ﬁrst initial of its authors surnames.
4
==PAGE:7==
be enforced it would require i to acquire false beliefs.
In static belief revision the environment cannot change, so agent i must change her beliefs
after the announcement about the environment before the announcement. I.e., after revision she
thinks that φ held just before the announcement but not after. Hence the sentence still holds
after static revision and, consequently, the Success postulate of AGM is satisﬁed.
Intuitively, dynamic belief revision happens when an agent receives information that impacts
the present situation, and is contrasted by static belief revision which occurs when information
pertains only to a snapshot in time. This begs the discussion about reliability of information,
speciﬁcally what kinds of information becomes outdated (think stale data in a cache) and at what
rate. DEL models a priori beliefs of agents using a version of Kripke models called plausibility
models [7]. Static belief revision is conditional belief2 on the (static) models while dynamic belief
revision changes the models. Plausibility models extend epistemic models, whose main concept
is that agents may be unable to tell which of several possible worlds is the actual one. E.g. after
hidden coin ﬂip an agent cannot distinguish between the world where the coin lands heads and
the one where it lands tails. Indeed these worlds may even be indistinguishable from the world
where the coin ﬂip did not happen. Indistinguishable worlds in plausibility models are ordered
by plausibility. In the context of a hidden coin ﬂip, if the agent thinks the coin is biased towards
heads then she should ﬁnd the world where the coin lands heads strictly more plausible than the
one where it lands tails.
The following sections build on plausibility models to introduce logic for reasoning about
knowledge, belief, and belief change, in a multi-agent setting. We rely on plausibility models
to represent static environments including not only ontic facts but also belief and knowledge of
arbitrary order. To handle dynamic belief revision we introduce event models (actions) along with
a mechanism to update plausibility models by them. Finally, we present a temporal extension
to plausibility models called doxastic temporal (logic) models, on which we deﬁne abductive
reasoning.
2.1
Plausibility models
Plausibility models represent environments by encoding ﬁrst- and higher-order knowledge and
current beliefs of agents in static scenarios using plausibility orders. Our deﬁnition of plausi-
bility models follows the one from [7], omitting the superﬂuous epistemic relation and dropping
“epistemic” in epistemic plausibility models.
Deﬁnition 1 (Plausibility models). Given a set of propositions P and agents A, a Multi-pointed
plausibility model is a tuple M =
 W, (⪯i)i∈A , V, Wd

where
• W is a set of possible worlds.
• The plausibility relation ⪯i is a set of mutually disjoint well-preorders covering W. A
preorder is a binary relation that is reﬂexive and transitive. A well-preorder is a preorder
in which every non-empty subset has minimal elements.
• V : W →P(P) is a valuation.
• Wd ⊆W is the set of designated worlds, containing the actual world.
2Johan Van Benthem describes conditional beliefs as static pre-encodings of later belief revision or information
update [9]
5
==PAGE:8==
W is called the domain of M, written domain (M). If w1 ⪯i w2 then agent i considers w1
at least as plausible as w2. The epistemic (or knowledge) relation is expressed in terms of the
plausibility relation: ∼i := ⪯i ∪⪰i, where w1 and w2 are epistemically indistinguishable to
agent i iﬀw1 ∼i w2. Note that this makes ∼i an equivalence relation. Agent i’s information
cell at a given world w ∈W, denoted w(i) and given by w(i) := {w′ ∈W | w ∼i w′}, captures
everything i knows at world w. Recovering the knowledge relation from the plausibility relation
makes sense because relating distinguishable worlds by plausibility is meaningless: an agent will
never consider two epistemically distinguishable worlds epistemically possible at the same time
and, as such, if the agent learns that either one is the actual world then she will know which.
In that case she knows which is the actual world so it does not make sense for her to order the
two by plausibility3. Intuitively, ∼i encodes agent i’s uncertainty, e.g. if the actual world is w1
and w1 ∼i w2, then agent i also considers it possible that w2 is the actual world. Conversely, ⪯i
encodes agent i’s current a priori (conditional) belief about the world. E.g. given information
that the actual world is one of two, epistemically indistinguishable worlds, an agent will believe
that the most plausible of the two is the actual. If they are equiplausible, w1 ⪯i w2 and w2 ⪯i w1
(written w1 ≃i w2), then the agent will remain agnostic. The motivation for ⪯i as a family of
well-preorders is qualitative rather than quantitative. Though, technically, a well-preorder can
be expressed by assigning ordinal numbers to the possible worlds it covers, such ordinals does not
ﬁgure into the dynamic belief revision. Instead, the minimality restriction (that every non-empty
subset has minimal elements) ﬁnds qualitative justiﬁcation in that it guarantees the existence of
at least one most plausible world. These worlds captures all the agents beliefs. In particular, i’s
beliefs at w are exactly the truths in the ⪯i-minimal states of w(i). The ⪯i-minimal elements
of a subset S ⊆W are simply those that are at least as plausible to i as all other elements
in S, formally {w ∈S | ∀w′ ∈S. w ⪯i w′}. Hence the minimality restriction implies reﬂexivity
and connectivity within well-preorders. This combined with the property that well-preorders are
disjoint means that agents are decided as to the relative plausibility of any pair of worlds in any
of their information cells. The transitivity condition makes sense qualitatively, by itself, for the
consistency of rational agents beliefs. E.g. say an agent i ﬁnds it more plausible that the outcome
of a hidden coin ﬂip is heads than tails, but more plausible that nothing happened than that
the outcome is heads. That is, nothing ⪯i heads and heads ⪯i tails. By transitivity the agent
also ﬁnds it more plausible that nothing happened than the outcome is tails: nothing ⪯i tails.
Without transitivity, the agent may very well ﬁnd the scenario in which the coin lands tails more
plausible than the one where nothing happened: tails ⪯i nothing, which is highly irrational
given nothing ⪯i heads and heads ⪯i tails.
The following example describes a simple, multi-agent doxastic situation in natural language
and shows the corresponding plausibility model.
Example 2. An absentminded husband h does not know if his phone is charging on the night-
stand n or if he forgot it at work f, but believes the latter is the case because he already looked
for it around the house without success. His slightly less distracted wife w knows that the phone
is on the nightstand because she saw it there. The following plausibility model M captures the
situation:
w1 : n
w2 : f
h
3Note that in the context of planning this is not strictly true because the models are used to deliberate about
the future. In particular, planning distinguishes between plan time and run time uncertainty, where the latter
describes indistinguishability during planning and the former describes it while executing. For example, an agent
may not know the outcome of an event, say a coin ﬂip, before it happens, this is plan time uncertainty, but if
the coin ﬂip is not hidden there is no run time uncertainty as to whether the result is heads or tails. For an
introduction to epistemic planning see [10].
6
==PAGE:9==
In general, possible worlds are represented by solid dots and labelled with their name and the
propositions that are true in them. Designated worlds are circled. Solid arrows represent plau-
sibility relations, going from less to more plausible worlds, and are labelled with the agents they
belong to. Reﬂexive and transitive arrows are implied. In M, the actual world is w1 and, in it,
n holds, i.e. the phone is on the nightstand. In w2 the husband forgot his phone at work so f is
true. The husband h considers w2 possible and, in fact, most plausible. Conversely, the wife w
does not consider w2 possible and consequently knows w1 is the actual world.
To reason about the models we deﬁne an epistemic, doxastic language and its interpretation:
Deﬁnition 2 (Language). The language L(P), where P is deﬁned as above and p ∈P, is given
by BNF
φ ::= p | ¬φ | φ ∧φ | Biφ | Kiφ | Cφ.
Biφ reads as “agent i believes φ”, Kiφ as “agent i knows φ”, and Cφ as “it is common knowledge
that φ”.
Deﬁnition 3 (Semantics). Given plausibility model M and formulas φ, ψ ∈L(P), then for all
w ∈W
M, w ⊨p
iﬀp ∈V (w)
M, w ⊨¬φ
iﬀM, w ⊭φ
M, w ⊨φ ∧ψ
iﬀM, w ⊨φ and M, w ⊨ψ
M, w ⊨Biφ
iﬀM, w′ ⊨φ for all ⪯i-minimal worlds w′ of W where w′ ∼i w
M, w ⊨Kiφ
iﬀM, w′ ⊨φ for all w′ ∈W where w′ ∼i w
M, w ⊨Cφ
iﬀM, w′ ⊨φ for all w′ ∈W where (w, w′) ∈(∪i∈A ∼i)+
M ⊨φ
iﬀM, w ⊨φ for all w ∈Wd.
Recall that the set of ⪯i-minimal worlds within each ∼i-equivalence class of W (information
cell) is non-empty because ⪯i is a set of mutually disjoint well-preorders covering W. Hence
there is never a situation where an agent believes anything. A common knowledge formula Cφ
holds at w in M if and only if φ holds at any world w′ related to w by the transitive closure of
all agents’ epistemic relations. Intuitively, common knowledge of φ means that everybody knows
φ, and everybody knows that everybody knows φ, and so on ad inﬁnitum. In example 2 we have
M ⊨¬(Khn ∨Khf), the husband does not know where his phone is, M ⊨Kwn, the wife knows
that the phone is on the nightstand, and M ⊨Bhf, the husband thinks he forgot the phone at
work.
The left out conditional belief operator, usually written Bφ
i ψ for “agent i believes ψ conditional
on φ”, can be seen as static belief revision under the interpretation: “after learning φ, i believes
ψ was the case in the situation before the learning”.
2.2
Event models and product update
The previous section introduces logic capable of representing and reasoning about static multi-
agent scenarios. This section adds event models that encode transformations to the static envi-
ronment, a mechanism to compute the transformation of a plausibility model by an event model,
and an operator that provides interpretation on the transformations.
7
==PAGE:10==
Following the setting in [7] and [11] event models are plausibility frames (plausibility models
without valuations) extended with mappings from the possible worlds, now called possible events,
to pre- and post-conditions. Preconditions encode the properties of any world in which a given
event can occur and postconditions encode the factual consequences of the event. Since the paper
by Baltag and Smets and Dégremonts thesis concerns the nature of purely doxastic change, say
learning from observing or communicating, both omit postconditions in their deﬁnitions. The
notion is hardly novel, though, for an example in DEL see [10].
Deﬁnition 4 (Event models). An event model is a tuple E =
 E, (⪯i)i∈A , pre, post, Ed

where
• E is a set of possible events.
• ⪯i is a plausibility relation.
• pre(e), e ∈E, is the precondition for e, a formula.
• post(e), e ∈E, is the postcondition for e, a conjunction of literals.
• Ed ⊆E is the set of designated events and contains the actual event.
Thus events can have epistemic, doxastic, and ontic preconditions but only ontic eﬀects (or
postconditions). However, an event occurring may transform the relational structure of a model
and with it the knowledge and beliefs of agents.
Example 3. Consider the situation from example 2 and suppose the wife leaves the house right
before the phone rings. The husband hears the phone ringing but the wife does not. This is
captured by the event model E:
skip : ⟨⊤, ⊤⟩
rings : ⟨n, ⊤⟩
w
In the actual event, rings, the phone rings on the nightstand and the husband hearing it knows
this. Conversely, the wife does not hear the phone ring and has no reason to believe that it
did. Though she does not know that it did not. The skip event is a special event often included
whenever an agent, in this case the wife, is uncertain whether an event happened or not. skip
represents the case where nothing happened, an empty time step if you will, and hence it is
applicable in any state and has no eﬀect.
The encoding of a plausibility model after some event occurs is called the product update of
the model with the event (or action) and, again, we lean on a deﬁnition from [7], this time the
Action-Priority Update, extended to support ontic change. The update operator is given by the
following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 5 (Product update). The product update of a plausibility model with an event model
is the plausibility model
M ⊗E =
 W ′, (⪯′
i)i∈A , V ′, W ′
d

.
Where
• W ′ = {(w, e) ∈W × E | M, w ⊨pre(e)}.
• ⪯′
i = {((w, e), (w′, e′)) ∈W ′ × W ′ | (w ∼i w′ and e ⪯i e′ and e′ i e) or
(e ⪯i e′ and e′ ⪯i e and w ⪯i w′)}
.
• V ′((w, e)) = {p ∈P | p is a conjunct of post(e) or
(p ∈V (w) and ¬p is not a conjunct of post(e))}
.
8
==PAGE:11==
• W ′
d = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | w ∈Wd and e ∈Ed}.
The worlds in the updated model M⊗E are the elements (w, e) of the Cartesian product W×E
where the world w satisﬁes the precondition of the event e. We call (w, e) the out-world based on
in-world w and event e. Intuitively, out-worlds represent the in-worlds after the event happened.
The updated valuation respects the original except for positive and negative conjuncts of the
events postcondition, which are added and removed, respectively. The new designated worlds
are the old designated worlds in which a designated event occurred. The plausibility relation
is non-trivial. Baltag and Smets calls product update action-priority product update because
the plausibility relation of the plausibility model only carries over in case of equiplausible events
(actions in terms of Baltag and Smets). For two worlds, say (w, e) and (w′, e′), in the updated
model, agent i considers (w, e) at least as plausible as (w′, e′) if
• w and w′ are indistinguishable to agent i in the original model and agent i considers e
strictly more plausible than e′ in the event model. Or,
• agent i considers e and e′ equiplausible in the event model and w′ at least as plausible as
w in the original model
Note ﬁrst that the two cases are disjoint. In the ﬁrst, e must be strictly more plausible than e′
and in the second they must be equiplausible. It follows from the ﬁrst case that i ﬁnds (w, e)
strictly more plausible than (w′, e′) in the updated model, regardless of which world i considers
most plausible in the original model. In the second case, the agent ﬁnds the two events equally
plausible and so lets the plausibility relation from the original model carry over. From this we
make the following observations
• Only worlds that are part of the same information cell (of an agent) in the original model
can be related (for that agent) in the updated model.
• Plausibility relations of events take priority over plausibility relations in the original model,
as implied by the name, and ties are broken by respecting the order of the original model.
The ﬁrst observation makes sense: if an agent can distinguish between two possible worlds,
say one where a coin shows heads on a table and one where it shows tails, and then some
indistinguishable event occurs, say the coin is covered and secretly ﬂipped, then it is reasonable
to assume that the agent can still distinguish between the worlds where the coin was showing
heads before possibly getting ﬂipped and the one where it was showing tails. Of course this
implies that agents have perfect-recall.
The second observation shows that product update
adheres to AGM by prioritizing new information over old beliefs while minimizing changes to the
old belief. The updated relation is essentially an anti-lexicographic preorder on indistinguishable
pairs. Baltag and Smets generalize maximal-Spohn belief revision, though Spohn himself does
not support the idea [12] challenging, among other things, the intuition that new information is
always better than old. Baltag and Smets stance is that plausibility relations of events encode
changes of agents belief and, hence, should have the capacity to do exactly that, including the
reversal of original plausibility orders.
Under this interpretation, at the time of the update,
beliefs about the event are presently held by the agent while beliefs about the world are not.
But how natural is it really for events to take priority in the update?
Example 4. Suppose an agent i correctly believes φ, captured by the following model M
w1 : φ
w2
i
.
9
==PAGE:12==
We consider three events. In the ﬁrst, E1, the agent is told that φ is the case by some trustworthy
source
e1 : ⟨φ, ⊤⟩
e2 : ⟨¬φ, ⊤⟩
i
.
Here updating simply reaﬃrms the belief, formally M ⊗E1
(w1, e1) : φ
(w2, e2)
i
.
In the second and third event the agent is lied to. In this case there are two possible models E2
and E3, representing a successful and unsuccessful lie, respectively,
e3 : ⟨φ, ⊤⟩
e4 : ⟨¬φ, ⊤⟩
i
e5 : ⟨φ, ⊤⟩
e6 : ⟨¬φ, ⊤⟩
i
,
Since agents’ beliefs are qualitative, repeated conﬁrmation that φ is the case, e.g. M⊗E1⊗E1⊗...,
does not further cement agent i’s belief. In this case it becomes the responsibility of the modeller
to select the unsuccessful lie. Conversely, should the agent be unsucessfully lied to a number of
times, say n −1, she may be inclined to believe the n-th lie. To represent this we need to update
with the successful lie. Finally, should the agent be lied to and told the truth the same number
of times, the rational response of may be to fall back on her original belief.
A natural alternative to consider is the generalization of minimal-Spohn revision, or conser-
vative revision as Spohn calls it, where only the most plausible events (the least disbelieved in
terms of Spohn) take priority after the update
(w, e) ⪯i (w′, e′) iﬀ(e is most plausible and e ⪯i e′ and w ∼i w′) or (w′ ⪯i w and e ∼i e′).
But the challenge illustrated above remains and the problem is now at the other end of the
spectrum. Any event is minimally reliable: the change of beliefs encoded by an event model is
“reversed” as soon as the worlds where the most plausible events occurred is not contained in the
agents’ information cells at any of the designated worlds.
In both approaches it would seem that (strict) belief change fails to suﬃciently account for
the context in which it occurs. One could approach a ﬁner granularity of context-awareness in
updates by introducing a quantitative notion of belief, like ordinals on new information based
on credibility.
We leave the discussion open and consider instead an update of our running example.
Example 5. Consider the product update of the plausibility model from example 2 by the event
model of example 3 given by M ⊗E
(w1, rings) : n
(w1, skip) : n
(w2, skip) : f
w
h
After the update, both agents know that the phone is on the nightstand. The husband knows
that the actual world is the one in which the phone rings, but the wife considers it most plausible
that it is not. Neither of them considers it possible that the phone is forgotten at work anymore,
but the wife thinks that the husband considers it most plausible that the phone is at work. Note
that there is no world in which the phone rings at work because E represents exactly the case
where it rings on the nightstand, which can be inferred from the domain of applicability of the
rings event pre(rings) = n.
10
==PAGE:13==
By the deﬁnition of product update, related out-worlds must be based on related in-worlds.
Since it only makes sense to reason about worlds considered possible by the agents, we can
safely remove non-possible worlds from the models after an update. This can be achieved by
constructing connected components using breadth-ﬁrst search from designated worlds and re-
moving worlds that are not part of any component. Whether pruning provides a computational
advantage depends on the model and the queried formulas. E.g. if the model is connected then
pruning incurs the overhead of search without reducing model size.
Since we base our deﬁnition of product update on Baltag and Smets’ deﬁnition from [7] we
have assumed that relations in the updated model are well-preorders, because otherwise their
product update would not be correctly typed. It remains an assumption, however, because we
have not been able to uncover proof of the property for action-priority update of plausibility
models in the literature (for proof of this property in DEL please see [13]). Below we show that
well-preorders are preserved through the product update.
Lemma 1 (Product update preserves transitivity). Given plausibility model M and event model
E. If the relations in ⪯i are transitive in both models then so are the relations in ⪯′
i in M ⊗E.
Proof. Assume the antecedent holds but the consequent does not. Then there exists i ∈A, w1, w2, w3 ∈
W, and e1, e2, e3 ∈E s.t. (w1, e1) ⪯i (w2, e2), (w2, e2) ⪯i (w3, e3), but (w1, e1) i (w3, e3). Then
by the deﬁnition of product update neither of the following holds:
1. w1 ∼i w3 and e1 ⪯i e3 and e3 i e1.
2. e1 ⪯i e3 and e3 ⪯i e1 and w1 ⪯i w3.
Since the relations in ⪯i are transitive (w1, e1) ⪯i (w2, e2) and (w2, e2) ⪯i (w3, e3) implies
e1 ⪯i e3 and w1 ∼i w3. But then, since (1) is false, we must have e3 ⪯i e1. Hence, since (2) is
also false, w1 i w3 must be true. Consequently we must have either w1 i w2 or w2 i w3, or
both. Therefore, to have (w1, e1) ⪯i (w2, e2) and (w2, e2) ⪯i (w3, e3), exactly one of the following
cases holds:
3. (w1 ∼i w2 and e1 ⪯i e2 and e2 i e1) and (w2 ∼i w3 and e2 ⪯i e3 and e3 i e2).
4. (w1 i w2 and w2 ⪯i w1 and e1 ⪯i e2 and e2 i e1) and (w2 ⪯i w3 and e2 ⪯i e3 and
e3 ⪯i e2).
5. (w1 ⪯i w2 and e1 ⪯i e2 and e2 ⪯i e1) and (w2 i w3 and w3 ⪯i w2 and e2 ⪯i e3 and
e3 i e2).
It suﬃces to show that each case leads to a contradiction. First recall e3 ⪯i e1 holds. In (3) we
have e1 ⪯i e2 so by transitivity also e3 ⪯i e2, which is a contradiction. In (4) we have e2 ⪯i e3,
so by transitivity also e2 ⪯i e1, again a contradiction. Finally in (5) we have e1 ⪯i e2 and by
transitivity also e3 ⪯i e2, also a contradiction. Thus all cases arrives at a contradiction.
■
Lemma 2 (Product update preserves reﬂexivity). Given plausibility model M and event model
E. If the relations in ⪯i are reﬂexive in both models then so are the relations in ⪯′
i in M ⊗E.
Proof. Pick arbitrary (w, e) ∈W ′. By the antecedent of the lemma we have w ⪯i w and e ⪯i e
and it follows directly from the deﬁnition of ⪯′
i that (w, e) ⪯′
i (w, e).
■
Lemma 3 (Product update preserves well-preorders). Given plausibility model M and event
model E. If ⪯i is a set of mutually disjoint well-preorders covering the domain of both models
then ⪯′
i is a set of mutually disjoint well-preorders covering the domain of M ⊗E.
11
==PAGE:14==
Proof. Lemma 1 and 2 establishes that ⪯′
i is transitive and reﬂexive. Thus it suﬃces to show
that:
1. The information cells of i in M ⊗E partitions W ′.
2. All non-empty subsets of information cells of i has minimal elements.
For (1) it suﬃces to show that ∼′
i is an equivalence relation. Since we know ⪯′
i is transitive and
reﬂexive, we must show that it is also symmetric, which follows directly from its deﬁnition.
For (2) pick arbitrary (w1, e1) ∈W ′. Then (w1, e1)(i) ⊆w1(i)×e1(i) and ⪯i is a well-preorder
on w1(i) and e1(i). Then consider S ⊆(w1, e1)(i) s.t. S ̸= ∅. We need to show that there exists
(w2, e2) ∈S that is minimal. Let A := {e | (w, e) ∈S} and let min(A) denote the ⪯i-minimal
elements of A. We know that min(A) is non-empty because A ⊆e1(i), A ̸= ∅, and ⪯i is a
well-preorder on e1(i). Now let B := {w | (w, e) ∈S and e ∈min(A)}. Finally, pick (w2, e2)
s.t. (w2, e2) ∈S, w2 ∈min(B), and e2 ∈min(A) (by symmetric argument to that for min(A),
we know that min(B) is non-empty). Now consider arbitrary (w3, e3) ∈S. We need to show
that (w2, e2) ⪯′
i (w3, e3). Suppose for contradiction that (w2, e2) ′
i (w3, e3). Then both of the
following statements are false:
1. w2 ∼i w3 and e2 ⪯i w3 and e3 i e2.
2. e2 ⪯i w3 and e3 ⪯i e2 and w2 ⪯i w3.
Since w2 and w3 are members of S we know that w2 ∼i w3. Similarly, since e2 ∈min(A) and
e3 ∈A, we know that e2 ⪯i e3. Because (3) is false we must have e3 ⪯i e2 and then e3 ∈min(A)
by transitivity and, consequently, w3 ∈B. But since (4) is also false we must have w2 i w3, a
contradiction since w2 ∈min(B) by deﬁnition.
■
To reason about the now dynamic scenarios, the “static” language L(P) is extended to a
dynamic one by adding the event modality ⟨E, e⟩, read as “after e occurs”. Formally we have
φ ::= p | ¬φ | φ ∧φ | Biφ | Kiφ | Cφ | ⟨E, e⟩φ.
The semantics of ⟨e⟩is
M, w ⊨⟨E, e⟩φ iﬀM, w ⊨pre(e) and M ⊗E, (w, e) ⊨φ.
The truth condition states that the event e must be applicable at w in M and φ must be satisﬁed
at w after e occurs. For brevity we shall omit the event model and simply write ⟨e⟩whenever it is
clear which model e belongs to. Product update and the event modality are dynamic operators
in the sense that they capture the evolution of the environment under interaction.
To model settings that support abductive reasoning we turn to doxastic temporal models,
but since their language relies on a subset of Propositional Dynamic Logic (PDL) we introduce
this ﬁrst, in the following section.
2.3
Propositional dynamic logic
This section is distilled from [14] and introduces propositional dynamic logic needed to deﬁne
the language of doxastic temporal models, which are the topic of the next section.
Propositional dynamic logic (PDL) is based on modal logic and extends classical propositional
logic to express propositional properties of computer programs. State transitions result from
executing atomic programs, which can be interpreted as simple statements in a programming
12
==PAGE:15==
language. Given states x and y, the transition xRπy ((x, y) ∈Rπ) means that from state x there
exists a possible execution of program π that leads to y. ⟨π⟩and [π] shares semantics with the
possibility and necessity modalities, typically denoted ♦and □, respectively. I.e. the formula
⟨π⟩φ holds in x if φ holds in some state y and xRπy, and [π]φ holds in x if φ holds in all states
y where xRπy.
Syntax
Given a countable set of atomic formulas Φ, which are propositional variables, and a
countable set of atomic programs Π, the language L(Φ, Π) is given by the following BNF
φ ::= p | ⊤| ⊥| ¬φ | φ ∧φ | [π] φ
π ::= a | π; π | π ∪π | π∗| φ?
where p ∈Φ and a ∈Π. In terms of expressivity of formulas this suﬃces since negation and
conjunction constitutes a functionally complete set of logical connectives and ⟨π⟩φ ≡¬ [π] ¬φ.
Programs can be interpreted as abstractions of possibly nondeterministic programs where
• π1; π2 sequentially executes π1 followed by π2.
• π1 ∪π2 nondeterministically executes π1 or π2.
• π∗repeatedly executes π a nondeterministically many (yet ﬁnite) amount of times.
• φ? blocks if φ does not hold. That is, if φ is true then execution is continued and otherwise
it is halted.
Under this interpretation a loop containing a branch
while φ do
if ψ then π1 else π2
becomes (φ?; ψ?; π1 ∪¬ψ?; π2)∗; ¬φ?. The contents in the ﬁrst parenthesis checks the loop condi-
tion φ and, if it holds, checks the branch condition ψ and executes the appropriate branch, either
π1 or π2. This is repeatedly executed until φ is false, because of ∗and ¬φ?, respectively. Because
∗denotes repeated execution nondeterministically many times, ¬φ? is necessary to ensure that
the loop runs until the loop condition becomes false.
Semantics
A PDL model is a tuple M = (W, (Ra)a∈Π , V ) where
• W is a set of possible states.
• Ra is a binary relation and an interpretation for the atomic program a.
• V : Φ →P (W) is a valuation.
R and V is extended to complex programs and formulas inductively
Rπ1;π2 = Rπ1 ◦Rπ2
(composition of relations.)
Rπ1∪π2 = Rπ1 ∪Rπ2
(union of relations.)
Rπ∗= R∗
π
(reﬂexive-transitive closure.)
Rp? = {(x, x) | x ∈V (p)}
V (⊤) = W
V (⊥) = ∅
V (¬φ) = W \ V (φ)
V (φ ∧ψ) = V (φ) ∩V (ψ)
V ([π] φ) = {x ∈W | xRπy implies y ∈V (φ)} .
13
==PAGE:16==
The semantics of complex formulas can also be written using semantic entailment, which is
notationally closer to deﬁnition 3
M, x ⊨⊤
M, x ⊭⊥
M, x ⊨p
iﬀx ∈V (p)
M, x ⊨¬φ
iﬀM, x ⊭φ
M, x ⊨φ ∧ψ
iﬀM, x ⊨φ and M, x ⊨ψ
M, x ⊨[π] φ
iﬀxRπy implies M, y ⊨φ for all y.
As usual, a formula φ is satisﬁable if M, x ⊨φ for some state x of some model M, and φ is valid
if M, x ⊨φ in all states in all models.
Example 6. Let V ar = {p, q, r} be a set of ﬁrst order natural number variables and consider
the model M =
 W,

Rr←r·p, Rq←q−1
	
, V

where W contains a state for every assignment of
the variables in V ar. Each state satisﬁes some unique assignment of variables, so if x ∈W
corresponds to p = q = r = 42 then {x} = V (p = 42) ∩V (q = 42) ∩V (r = 42). The relations
are given by
Rr←r·p = {(x, y) | x ∈V (r = n ∧p = n′) and y ∈V (r = n′ ∧p = n′) for some n, n′ ∈N}
Rq←q−1 = {(x, y) | x ∈V (q = n) and y ∈V (q = n −1) for some n ∈N} ,
On this model we can deﬁne a program π that computes the positive power function
π
def
= (q > 0?; r ←r · p; q ←q −1)∗; ¬q > 0?.
And check that executing π from a state x where r = 1, p = n, and q = n′ results in a state
where r = nn′
M, x ⊨¬(r = 1 ∧p = n ∧q = n′) ∨[π] r = nn′.
Though W is (countably) inﬁnite we illustrate the ﬁrst three transitions (omitting all others) in
a run of π from x (assuming x ∈V (q > 1)):
x
y
z
. . .
r ←r · p
q ←q −1
r ←r · p
We establish the convention of drawing transitions with dashed lines because later, in DoTL
models, we need to distinguish transitions from plausibility relations drawn with solid lines.
Finally, we show four widely known validities originally listed without proof in [14]. The
validities are useful to us because they simplify implementation of doxastic temporal models (see
section 2.4 and chapter 3).
Lemma 4. The following are validities in PDL
• [π1; π2] φ ≡[π1] [π2] φ.
14
==PAGE:17==
• [π1 ∪π2] φ ≡[π1] φ ∧[π2] φ.
• ⟨π1; π2⟩φ ≡⟨π1⟩⟨π2⟩φ.
• ⟨π1 ∪π2⟩φ ≡⟨π1⟩φ ∨⟨π2⟩φ.
Proof. The ﬁrst two are derived from the deﬁnition of R and V
V ([π1; π2] φ) = {x ∈W | x (Rπ1 ◦Rπ2) z implies z ∈V (φ)}
= {x ∈W | xRπ1yRπ2z implies z ∈V (φ)}
= {x ∈W | xRπ1y implies y ∈V ([π2] φ)}
= V ([π1] [π2] φ)
and
V ([π1 ∪π2] φ) = {x ∈W | xRπ1∪π2y implies y ∈V (φ)}
= {x ∈W | x (Rπ1 ∪Rπ2) y implies y ∈V (φ)}
= {x ∈W | xRπ1y implies y ∈V (φ)} ∩{x ∈W | xRπ2y implies y ∈V (φ)}
= V ([π1] φ) ∩V ([π2] φ)
= V ([π1] φ ∧[π2] φ).
The duals then easily follows
V (⟨π1; π2⟩) = V (¬ [π1; π2] ¬φ)
= V (¬ [π1] [π2] ¬φ)
= V (¬ [π1] ¬¬ [π2] ¬φ)
= V (¬ [π1] ¬⟨π2⟩φ)
= V (⟨π1⟩⟨π2⟩φ)
and
V (⟨π1 ∪π2⟩) = V (¬ [π1 ∪π2] ¬φ)
= V (¬ ([π1] ¬φ ∧[π2] ¬φ))
= V (¬ [π1] ¬φ ∨¬ [π2] ¬φ)
= V (⟨π1⟩φ ∨⟨π2⟩φ)
■
Validities pertaining to ∗and ? are omitted because they are not included in the language of
doxastic temporal models.
2.4
Doxastic temporal models
Using plausibility and event models, product update, and the dynamic language deﬁned in the
previous sections it is possible to model epistemic and doxastic change in an interactive envi-
ronment but, unfortunately, impossible to model a surprising observation and subsequent search
for an explanation. To gain the necessary expressivity we turn to doxastic temporal models.
They encode temporal perspectives on the environment, representing time as all possible histo-
ries where the knowledge and belief of agents evolve as events unfold. For this part, we follow
the deﬁnitions from [11] and [15].
15
==PAGE:18==
Deﬁnition 6 (Doxastic Temporal Logic (DoTL) models). A DoTL model is a plausibility model
D =
 H, (⪯i)i∈A , V, Hd

over Σ where
• Σ is an alphabet of events.
• Σ∗is the set of all possible ﬁnite sequences of events over Σ.
• H ⊆Σ∗is closed under non-empty preﬁxes.
• ⪯i is a plausibility relation on H.
• V : H →P(P) is a valuation.
• Hd ⊆H is the designated histories.
Note that the deﬁnition borrows from epistemic temporal logic (ETL) structures and consis-
tent with those Σ can be any set [16], though we call it’s elements events. The elements of H
are called histories and, intuitively, provide all possible trajectories of an agent’s belief.
The language of DoTL models extends the event modality to complex relations using {∗, ?}-
free PDL, i.e., without repeated execution
φ ::= p | ¬φ | φ ∧φ | Biφ | Kiφ | Cφ | ⟨π⟩φ
π ::= e | π; π | π ∪π | π−1
where e ∈Σ. The semantics for the extended modality is
D, h ⊨⟨π⟩φ iﬀthere exists some h′ s.t. hRπh′ implies D, h′ ⊨φ,
where
Re = {(h, he) | he ∈H}
Rπ1;π2 = Rπ1 ◦Rπ2
Rπ1∪π2 = Rπ1 ∪Rπ2
Rπ−1 = (Rπ)−1 .
In the ﬁrst interpretation, he denotes the concatenation of h ∈H with e ∈Σ, and is the history
h after event e occurs. The second and third interpretations are identical to that of complex
programs in PDL, and the fourth is the inverse relation. Though π contains events (atomic
transitions) we will often abuse notation and use h to refer to the transitions in h, worlds
excluded. I.e., without loss of generality, if h = (w; e1; ...; en) then ⟨h⟩φ should be understood as
⟨(e1; ...; en)⟩φ.
Before pressing on with the rather involved product update of DoTL models, to gain intuition,
we brieﬂy consider a DoTL model D describing a scenario involving two agents, i and j, in which
an agent j secretly ﬂips a coin that initially shows heads, represented by the proposition h, with
the outcome that it lands and shows tails:
w : h
(w; flip1) : ¬h
(w; flip2) : h
(w; skip) : h
flip1
flip2
skip
i
i
16
==PAGE:19==
As usual, transitive and reﬂexive arrows are omitted. For simplicity the names of nodes (the
histories) are usually implied by the labels on the path upwards to the root, yielding the following
model:
w : h
¬h
h
h
flip1
flip2
skip
i
i
There are four histories: w, (w; flip1), (w; flip2), and (w; skip), describing, respectively, the
situation before the coin ﬂip, the course of events in which the outcome is tails, the one in which
it is heads, and the one in which the coin ﬂip did not happen. Agent i thinks the coin is fair (the
outcomes of the coin ﬂip are equiplausible) but ﬁnds it more plausible that nothing happened.
At the actual history i believes that nothing happened and j believes the coin was ﬂipped with
outcome tails: D, (w; flip1) ⊨Bi⟨skip−1⟩⊤∧Bj⟨flip1−1⟩⊤. Moreover, i is uncertain while j is
not: D, (w; flip1) ⊨¬Ki⟨skip−1⟩⊤∧Kj⟨flip1−1⟩⊤.
Section 2.1 gave some intuition for the omitted conditional belief operator Bφ
i ψ. For com-
pleteness we do the same for DoTL models and consider two cases. Firstly, formulas on the
form D ⊨B⟨h−1⊤⟩
i
φ correspond to questions about agents beliefs in particular scenarios: if the
course of events is h, then agent i believes φ to be the case. By contrast, formulas on the form
D ⊨Bφ
i ⟨h−1⟩⊤correspond to explanations: if the formula holds then agent i believes h best
explains φ. In the coin ﬂip example, at the actual history, agent i can explain the coin show-
ing tails by j having ﬂipped it with that outcome: D, (w; flip1) ⊨B¬h
i
⟨flip1−1⟩⊤(though not
implied by the formula, this is the only viable explanation encoded by the model).
With that in place we digress and deﬁne the maximal histories and frontier of a DoTL model,
followed by the product update of a DoTL model by an event model.
Deﬁnition 7 (Maximal histories and frontier of a DoTL model). The set of maximal histories
of a DoTL model D is given by
Hmax = {h ∈H | ∄h′ ∈H. |h′| > |h|} .
Where |h| denotes the number of events in h, that is, |(w,e1, ..., en)| = n. The frontier of D is
the plausibility model constrained to the set of maximal histories. It is given by frontier (D) =

Hmax,
 ⪯i ↾H2
max

i∈A , V ↾Hmax, Hd ∩Hmax

.
Both concepts are intuitively simple and easy to visualize. We reuse the DoTL model of the
secret coin ﬂip from above and mark its frontier in blue:
w : h
¬h
h
h
flip1
flip2
skip
i
i
17
==PAGE:20==
Now suppose the coin is revealed:
w : h
¬h
h
h
¬h
flip1
flip2
skip
i
i
reveal
Since only one course of events satisfy the coin showing tails, the frontier restricts the model to
just the actual history.
Deﬁnition 8 (Inclusive product update). The product update of a DoTL model D with an event
model E updates the frontier of D with E. Formally, let frontier (D)⊗E =
 H′, (⪯′
i)i∈A , V ′, H′
d

.
The inclusive product update of D with E is given by
D ⊗∪E =
 H ∪H′, (⪯i ∪⪯′
i)i∈A , V ∪V ′, Hd ∪H′
d

,
over Σ ∪E.
A DoTL model can be generated from an initial plausibility model by a sequence of inclusive
product updates.
Deﬁnition 9 (Induced DoTL model). Given a plausibility model M =
 W, (⪯i)i∈A , V, Wd

and
a sequence of event models ⃗E = E1, ..., En where Ej =

Ej, (⪯j
i)i∈A, prej, postj, Ejd

. The DoTL
model induced by M and ⃗E is given by D =
 H, (⪯i)i∈A , V ′, Hd

over Σ where
• Σ is the set of possible worlds given by W ∪Sn
j=1 Ej.
• H is the set of histories consisting of all sequences (w; e1; ...; em), w ∈W, 0 ≤m ≤n,
where ej ∈Ej and M ⊗∪E1 ⊗∪... ⊗∪Ej−1, (w; e1, ..., ej−1) ⊨prej(ej) for all 0 ≤j ≤m.
• ⪯i= Sn
j=1 ⪯M⊗∪E1⊗∪...⊗∪Ej
i
.
• The valuation V ′(h) =

p ∈P | M ⊗∪E1 ⊗∪... ⊗∪E|h|−1, h ⊨p
	
.
• Hd is the set of designated histories

(w; e1; ...; ej) ∈H | w ∈Wd and ej ∈Ejd for all j ≤n
	
.
The inclusive update is used in the deﬁnition without loss of generality as, technically, any
update operator of the same type could be employed.
This is relevant because we consider
models induced by a variant of the inclusive update in 2.5. We say the DoTL model induced
by M for the DoTL model induced by M and the empty sequence of events. This “conversion”
from plausibility to DoTL model is implied when a plausibility model appears as ﬁrst term in
a sequence updates where a DoTL model is expected. The DoTL model D induced by M and
E1, ..., En is equivalent to the DoTL model induced by M and then updated by the sequence in
order: D = M ⊗∪E1 ⊗∪... ⊗∪En. Our deﬁnition deviates from the recursive deﬁnition given
in [11] by explicitly including W in Σ and expressing the induced plausibility relation in terms
18
==PAGE:21==
of separate product updates similar to [9]. Clarifying the latter, ⪯i is the union of plausibility
relations of all models on the form M ⊗∪E1 ⊗∪... ⊗∪Ej, for j ≤m.
The following example explains the intuition behind the deﬁnitions introduced in the section
so far.
Example 7. We return to the familiar models M and E from example 2 and 3, respectively.
The induced DoTL model D for M and ⃗E = E is
w1 : n
w2 : f
n
n
f
h
rings
skip
skip
w
h
By deﬁnition D = M⊗∪E. I.e. the (inclusive) update of the DoTL model induced by M (and the
empty sequence) with E. Maximal histories are leaves on the lowest level: (w1; rings), (w1; skip),
and (w2; skip). The frontier of D is obtained by constraining the model to exactly these:
(w1; rings) : n
(w1; skip) : n
(w2; skip) : f
w
h
It is no coincidence that the frontier is identical (modulo separators in node names) to the
product update from example 5 as it represents the current scenario. Continuing the example,
suppose the husband picks up the phone, calls the wife, and tells her how he found the phone.
This is represented by the following event model E′
tell : ⟨Kh
 n ∧⟨rings−1⟩⊤

, ¬n⟩
The precondition formula narrows down the domain of applicability to exactly the worlds where
the husband knows the phone rang on the nightstand: n holds and there is a transition from
w1 to rings in all worlds indistinguishable to him from the designated one. Since the husband
announces the actual course of events to his wife over the phone, all uncertainty is removed. To
compute the inclusive product update of D with E′ we update the frontier of D with E′, yielding
(w1; rings; tell) :
Combining this with D in accordance with deﬁnition 8 produces the model D ⊗∪E′
w1 : n
w2 : f
n
n
f
h
rings
tell
skip
skip
h
w
19
==PAGE:22==
Intuitively, the DoTL model induced by a plausibility model and a sequence of n events represents
all temporal trajectories in which any number of the n events happen in order. The maximal
histories represent the trajectories ending at time step n, after the entire sequence happened.
From these an inclusive update computes the next maximal histories, representing the trajectories
ending at the next time step, n+1. It is natural to consider the update case where no designated
histories are added to the model. This happens when none of the designated worlds satisﬁes
the preconditions of a designated event. Strictly speaking, under inclusive updates such a model
implies a modelling mistake because the operator considers all pairs of possible worlds and events.
By contrast, in section 2.5, we present an update operator that prunes the state-space based on
plausibility to model surprising events that an agents did not consider possible.
Formulas satisﬁed in a DoTL model must be satisﬁed at all maximal-length designated his-
tories. Formally
D ⊨φ iﬀD, h ⊨φ for all h ∈Hd ∩Hmax.
This means that agents are aware of temporal relations between events. So though an agent may
not be able to distinguish between histories they do know the number of time steps separating
any pair of events. Zero for simultaneous events, one for successive events and so on.
Lastly, we deﬁne the most plausible histories for an agent and characterize a surprising
occurrence (or event).
The deﬁnition and notation is adapted from [15], although we drop
the restriction that most plausible histories be maximal because the deﬁnitions of abduction
types (see section 2.5) only makes sense without it.
Deﬁnition 10 (Most plausible histories). Let D≤n denote the DoTL model D restricted to the
histories of at most length n, that is, D≤n = D ↾{h ∈H | |h| ≤n}. The most plausible histories
for an agent i are the histories h satisfying
D≤|h| ⊨bBi⟨h−1⟩⊤.
Where bBiφ ≡¬Bi¬φ is the dual to the belief operator. Semantically, i believes that φ is the
case at a history h implies that φ holds universally quantiﬁed over all ⪯i-minimal histories in the
agents information cell at h. The dual implies that φ holds existentially quantiﬁed over the same
set. Graphically, ⟨h−1⟩⊤holds at histories where there is a path up the tree to the root following
exactly the edges in h−1 in order. Since such a path exists only at h, h is most plausible for an
agent i if it is ⪯i-minimal in the information cell of every same-length designated history. When
considering only the maximal-length most plausible histories the model is unrestricted and the
deﬁnition simpliﬁes to D ⊨bBi⟨h−1⟩⊤.
Relating the deﬁnition to example 7 we use red and blue to highlight information cells (blocks)
and most plausible histories (paths) for the husband and wife, respectively:
w1 : n
w2 : f
n
n
f
h
rings
skip
skip
h
w
At the ﬁrst time step (the initial situation) the husband’s information cell at the designated his-
tory, w1, is {w1, w2} and the wife’s is {w1}, indicating that the husband is more uncertain at this
20
==PAGE:23==
stage. At the second time step, however, the wife is more uncertain as indicated by the husband’s
information cell, {(w1; rings)}, being a proper subset of the wife’s, {(w1; rings); (w1; skip)}. The
most plausible history for the husband at the ﬁrst time step is {w2} while the most plausible
history for the wife is {w1}. At the second time step, the most plausible history, for the husband
and wife respectively, are (w1; rings) and (w1; skip). With the graphical understanding of most
plausible histories in place, we deﬁne a surprising event:
Deﬁnition 11 (Surprising event). Given histories h, h′ ∈H where h = (e1, ..., en) and h′ =
(e1, ..., en−1), if h is a most plausible history for an agent i and h′ is not, then the event en is
called a surprise to agent i in h.
Continuing in the context of example 7 and with the same coloring semantics as above, after
the ﬁnal update, (w1; rings; tell) is a most plausible history to both agents and (w1; rings) is a
most plausible history only to the husband:
w1 : n
w2 : f
n
n
f
tell
tell
h
rings
rings
skip
skip
h
w
Consequently tell is a surprise to the wife in (w1; rings; tell): she did not consider it most
plausible that the phone rang prior to the husband telling her that it did.
We conclude the section with a more comprehensive and possibly familiar example.
Example 8. Consider The Battle of Wits scene from the 1987 cult ﬁlm The Princess Bride. In
this particular scene the tertiary antagonist Vizzini, played by Wallace Shawn, has kidnapped
the princess and holds a knife to her neck. In order to free her, the protagonist Westley, played
by Cary Elwes, challenges Vizzini to a battle of wits, ultimately tricking Vizzini into drinking
poison.
The scene plays out like this. Vizzini ﬁlls two goblets with wine, Wesley shows him a vial
of odorless, tasteless, deadly poison, takes the goblets and turns his back. A moment later he
turns, shows Vizzini the empty vial , and rotates the goblets around the table putting one glass
in front of himself and one in front of Vizzini. Westley then asks Vizzini where the poison is
and declares the battle of wits begun. Vizzini reasons back-and-forth out loud, trying to deduce
which goblet to drink from. Ultimately, he tricks Westley into looking away and secretly switches
the cups. Westley proceeds to drink without hesitation which convinces Vizzini that his goblet
is not laced. Vizzini drinks, gloats, and much to his own surprise dies. Westley then frees the
princess and reveals that both cups were laced and that he has spent the last few years building
up an immunity to the poison.
Vizzini ultimately meets his demise because of a logical fallacy. He only considered it possible
that a single goblet could be laced with poison, not both. If he spends his ﬁnal moments engaged
in abductive reasoning, he might come to believe the actual history of events, that both cups
were poisoned, or that he chose the wrong one.
21
==PAGE:24==
w0 : f
Figure 2.1: Initial model M for the battle of wits, reﬂexive arrows are omitted.
Figure 2.1 shows the initial model M with reﬂexive arrows omitted.
The domain of M
consists of one world w0, the actual, in which there is no poison in the goblet in front of Vizzini
¬pv as well as the one in front of Westley ¬pw and the vial of poison is full f. There are two
agents, Vizzini and Westley, so A = {v, w}. Figure 2.2 lists, in chronological order, the ﬁve
actions taken by the agents as the scene plays out.
Figure 2.3 shows the DoTL model induced by the full sequence of unrestricted updates,
M ⊗∪PoisonCups ⊗∪Reveal ⊗∪Switch ⊗∪RaiseCup ⊗∪Drink. The poisoned event is a
surprise to Vizzini in (w0; both; reveal; switch3; raise1; poisoned).
2.5
Degenerate models, surprise, and abduction
Given the deﬁnitions so far, the history that a surprising event occurs in is still considered
possible by the deﬁnition of epistemic indistinguishability. Hence the actual mismatch between
an event occurring and what an agent considered possible, as well as the search for a best
explanation from observation to conclusion, remains to be modelled. To achieve this, we model
the subjective perspective of the agent and update based on the plausibility relation. Because
of epistemic indistinguishability, a model constructed from the subjective view of an agent i,
called the associated subjective model of agent i, may not have a single designated history. The
subjective view of an agent of a model is obtained by closing the set of designated worlds, events,
or histories, under the indistinguishability relation of that agent. Because of this, designated
histories may be distinguishable for agents whose subjective view is not modelled and, if so, the
notion of most plausible histories given by deﬁnition 10 is not meaningful for those agents. The
deﬁnitions of this section are distilled from [15].
The inclusive update of a DoTL model with an event model restricted to a subset of its
frontier is called the restricted inclusive update.
Deﬁnition 12 (Restricted inclusive update). Given a DoTL model D over Σ, an event model
E, and a subset of frontier histories I. The inclusive update of D with E restricted to I is given
by
D ⊗I
∪E = D ∪(frontier (D ↾I) ⊗E) ,
over Σ ∪E, where all h ∈Hmax \ I are marked and D ↾I is D restricted to the histories in I.
To gain intuition we revisit the setting from example 8 and consider the restricted model (for
the ﬁrst three time steps) given by D ⊗{w0}
∪
PoisonCups ⊗{(w0;both),(w0;laceV )}
∪
Reveal:
22
==PAGE:25==
skip : ⟨⊤, ⊤⟩
both : ⟨f, pv ∧pw ∧¬f⟩
laceV :
⟨f, pv ∧¬f⟩
laceW :
⟨f, pw ∧¬f⟩
v
v
v
v
v
v
(a) PoisonCups:
Westley
applies
the
poison.
Since Westley does the mixing with his back
turned, he can distinguish between all possible
worlds but Vizzini, on the other hand, cannot.
Vizzini ﬁnds it most plausible that exactly one
goblet has been poisoned.
reveal : ⟨¬f, ⊤⟩
(b) Reveal:Westley reveals that the vial is empty.
skip : ⟨⊤, ⊤⟩
switch3 : ⟨(pv ∧pw) ∨(¬pv ∨¬pw), ⊤⟩
switch1 :
⟨pv ∧¬pw,
¬pv ∧pw⟩
switch2 :
⟨¬pv ∧pw,
pv ∧¬pw⟩
w
w
w
v
v
v
(c) Switch: Vizzini secretly switches the cups and,
of course, is aware of this. Equiplausibility be-
tween switch events for Vizzini encodes that
switching cups does not help him distinguish or
order worlds (by plausibility) where the switch
is enacted. Conversely, Westley is unaware and
considers it most plausible that nothing hap-
pened.
raise1 :
⟨Bw(pw ∧pv),
⊤⟩
raise2 :
⟨Bw(¬pw ∧pv), ⊤⟩
raise3 :
⟨Bw(pw ∧¬pv),
⊤⟩
v
v
v
w
w
w
(d) RaiseCup:
Westley calmly raises the goblet
in front of him to his lips.
This in conjunc-
tion with Vizzini assuming exactly one cup is
poisoned, Vizzini ﬁnds it most plausible that
Westley thinks that only Vizzini is drinking
poison. Between the remaining events, Vizzini
ﬁnds it more plausible that Westley thinks
both cups are poisoned because that, at least,
kills Vizzini and saves the princess.
Since
Westley is immune he raises the goblet calmly
in any case and, as was the case for Vizzini in
Switch, raising the goblet does not change the
convictions of Westley nor help him distinguish
worlds.
poisoned : ⟨pv, ⊤⟩
(e) Drink: Both drink and Vizzini realizes his cup
is poisoned.
Figure 2.2: Event models for the battle of wits. Reﬂexive and transitive arrows are omitted.
23
==PAGE:26==
w0 : f
pv, pw
pv
pw
f
pv, pw
pv
pw
pv, pw
pv, pw
pv
pw
pw
pv
pv, pw
pv, pw
pv
pw
pw
pv
pv, pw
pv, pw
pv
pv
both
laceV
laceW
skip
v
v
v
v
reveal
reveal
reveal
v
v
v
skip
switch3
skip
switch1
skip
switch2
w
v
w
w
v
v
raise1
raise1
raise2
raise3
raise2
raise3
w
v
v
w
w
v
poisoned
poisoned
poisoned
poisoned
w
v
Figure 2.3: Complete DoTL model of the battle of wits scene.
24
==PAGE:27==
w0 : f
pv, pw
pv
pw
f
pv, pw
pv
pw
both
laceV
laceW
skip
v
v
v
v
reveal
reveal
reveal
v
v
v
The red nodes are marked histories and the pruned part of the model, i.e. the part belonging
only to the unrestricted model, is gray.
A restricted (inclusive) update returns a degenerate model if no designated histories are
added. E.g., the model D ⊗{w0}
∪
PoisonCups ⊗{(w0;both),(w0;laceV )}
∪
Reveal ⊗{(w0;laceV ;reveal)}
∪
E
is degenerate for any E because the only designated history in the frontier is excluded in the
third update. Degenerate models are overpruned to the extent that they cannot explain the
actual course of events. Recall that a most plausible history h is one satisfying D ⊨bBi⟨h−1⟩⊤.
The most plausible update is a restricted inclusive update from the subjective view of an agent
i, where histories are restricted to those of maximal length that are most plausible to i, closed
under more plausible histories for other agents.
Deﬁnition 13 (Most plausible update). Given a DoTL model D over Σ, an event model E, and
an agent i. Let
• min⪯: A →P(H) be a function that maps an agent to the set of maximal histories
considered most plausible by her in D
min⪯(i) =
n
h ∈H | D ⊨bBi⟨h−1⟩⊤
o
.
• close⪯: P(H) →P(H) be a function that close a subset of histories under more plausible,
maximal histories of other agents in D
close⪯(H′) = {h ∈H | h ⪯h′ for some h′ ∈H′} ,
where ⪯=
 S
i∈A ⪯i
+ is the transitive closure of plausibility relations in D.
The most plausible update for agent i of D with E is then given by
D ⊗i
∪E = D ⊗
close⪯(min⪯(i))
∪
E.
close⪯(min⪯(i)) is the set of most plausible, maximal-length histories for i in D closed under
more plausible histories of other agents. Closing this way enables agent i to keep track of her
perspective on other agents, i.e. her higher-order beliefs, through the update.
Intuitively, histories marked following a most plausible update represent temporal trajectories
disregarded by the agent in favor of more plausible alternatives. A degenerate model returned
25
==PAGE:28==
from a most plausible update of a DoTL model with an event model, where both are associated
subjective models of an agent i, represents a surprising observation for i because none of the
added histories are consistent with the observed.
The following example revisits the Battle of Wits scene from the subjective view of Vizzini
to illustrate the concept.
Example 9. Figure 2.4 shows the associated subjective model of Vizzini in the Battle of Wits
scene (see example 8) of the DoTL model induced by the initial model (ﬁgure 2.1), the sequence of
events (ﬁgure 2.2), and most plausible update for Vizzini: D = M ⊗v
∪PoisonCups⊗v
∪Reveal⊗v
∪
Switch⊗v
∪Raisecup⊗v
∪Drink. Red nodes are marked. Grey nodes, transitions, and plausibility
relations, are not part of D but of the unrestricted model (see ﬁgure 2.3), and shows the histories
not yet considered by Vizzini. Most plausible histories for Vizzini are encased in dashed red
boxes and more plausible histories for Westley are encased in dashed blue boxes. So at each
level, the set of encased histories are exactly those returned by close⪯(min⪯(v)) in the most
plausible update that expands them.
Assuming w0 is the situation at time step zero, at time step four, Vizzini believes that
Westley’s cup is the only one poisoned and that Westley thinks Vizzini’s cup is the only one
poisoned.
After updating with Drink the model becomes degenerate because no designated
histories were added. Indeed, the only history added is (w0; laceV ; reveal; skip; raise2; poisoned)
which Vizzini knows is not the case because he switched cups. To ﬁgure out what really happened
Vizzini must do abduction, which is the topic of the remainder of this chapter.
To recover from false belief scenarios like the one in example 9 the agent must engage in
abductive reasoning by expanding marked histories till an explanation is found. Expanding a
single history is called a single abduction step.
Deﬁnition 14 (Abducted model and single abduction step). Let ⊗i∪H′
∪
denote the most plausible
update that also updates the histories in H′. That is, ⊗i∪H′
∪
= ⊗
close⪯(min⪯(i))∪H′
∪
. An abducted
model is a model of the form
D = M ⊗i∪H1
∪
E1 ⊗i∪H2
∪
... ⊗i∪Hn
∪
En.
Given an abducted model D, abduction wrt. H′
1, ..., H′
n is the model
D′ = M ⊗i∪H1∪H′
1
∪
E1 ⊗i∪H2∪H′
2
∪
... ⊗i∪Hn∪H′
n
∪
En,
where histories in Sn
i=1 H′
i are marked in D and unmarked in D′. A single abduction step is an
abduction wrt. H′
1, ..., H′
n where H′
i = {h} for some i and marked history h, and H′
j = ∅for all
j ̸= i.
To illustrate deﬁnition 14 we take oﬀset in the model D shown in ﬁgure 2.4 and constrain it
to histories of length three. That is D≤3 = M ⊗v
∪PoisonCups ⊗v
∪Reveal:
26
==PAGE:29==
w0 : f
pv, pw
pv
pw
f
pv, pw
pv
pw
pv, pw
pv, pw
pv
pw
pw
pv
pv, pw
pv, pw
pv
pw
pw
pv
pv, pw
pv, pw
pv
pv
both
laceV
laceW
skip
v
v
v
v
reveal
reveal
reveal
v
v
v
skip
switch3
skip
switch1
skip
switch2
w
v
w
w
v
v
raise1
raise1
raise2
raise3
raise2
raise3
w
v
v
w
w
v
poisoned
poisoned
poisoned
poisoned
w
v
Figure 2.4: Degenerate model D of the battle of wits scene, constructed from most plausible updates
from the perspective of Vizzini.
Marked nodes are red.
Grey nodes, transitions, and
plausibility relations belong to the unrestricted model only and correspond to the histories
that Vizzini does not consider possible.
The dashed red boxes contains most plausible
histories for Vizzini and dashed blue boxes contains more plausible histories for Westley.
27
==PAGE:30==
w0 : f
pv, pw
pv
pw
f
pv, pw
pv
pw
both
laceV
laceW
skip
v
v
v
v
reveal
reveal
reveal
v
v
v
Now D≤3 is an abducted model with H1 = H2 = ∅. An abduction step on D≤3 wrt. ∅, {(w0; both)}
is the abducted model D′
≤3 = M ⊗v∪∅
∪
PoisonCups ⊗v∪{(w0;both)}
∪
Reveal:
w0 : f
pv, pw
pv
pw
f
pv, pw
pv
pw
both
laceV
laceW
skip
v
v
v
v
reveal
reveal
reveal
v
v
v
By deﬁnition, a single abduction step picks and explores a marked history h and its most plausible
descendants. A descendant is not expanded if it is only most plausible within the subtree rooted
at h, i.e., it is less plausible than a history outside the subtree. In that case it is marked and
can be chosen for expansion at a later abduction step. In case of multiple marked histories, the
choice of which to expand becomes crucial because it may impact the most plausible conclusion
reached by the agent, from the observation. There are three obvious heuristics for choosing the
order of expansion, each corresponding to an abduction type
Chronological minimization [17] expands the most plausible, maximal-length, marked histories.
Inverse chronological minimization expands the most plausible, minimal-length, marked histo-
ries.
Uniform expansion expands all most plausible marked histories.
Where the most plausible marked history is necessarily one that is most plausible between marked
histories because, in a model constructed from most plausible updates, a marked history is
28
==PAGE:31==
by deﬁnition not most plausible between all histories.
Agents current knowledge and beliefs
are encoded by formulas satisﬁed at the designated leaf histories in the agents non-degenerate
associated subjective model. So to ﬁnd an explanation, at least one branch through a marked
history must be added to the model without it becoming degenerate.
Chronological minimization explores the search space depth-ﬁrst from the longest histories: if
an explanation is not found in one abduction step, the following step expands a maximal-length
marked descendant of the history expanded in the previous step, and so on. The heuristic is
greedy because the agent prioritizes unconsidered histories that potentially requires the least
overhead, in terms of updates, to support an explanation.
By contrast, inverse chronological minimization explores the search space breadth-ﬁrst from
the shortest histories.
Here the agent obtains the broadest foundation of knowledge before
choosing which of the unconsidered histories to consider. Synchronizing unconsidered histories
achieves this because unsynchronized histories are incomparable with respect to plausibility.
Intuitively, the agent considers the eﬀect of the earliest unconsidered events, then the next, and
so on. At each depth the update is applied in order of most plausible, so when an explanation is
found by expanding some marked most plausible history, any remaining such histories reside at
the same depth or lower in the forest.
Finally, in uniform expansion the search is agnostic: the agent explores what happens in
all most plausible, unconsidered histories, one time step at a time. Though a middle ground
between chronological minimization and its inverse, this approach lacks both the computational
advantage of the former and basis of comparison of the second. Before revisiting this discussion
under the light of an example, we consider the notion of knowledge and belief in restricted models
and their unrestricted counterparts.
Restricted inclusive updates, such as most plausible update, renders belief and knowledge
relations defeasible (or validly disputable) because the actual history may be marked. We seman-
tically distinguish between defeasible and indefeasible knowledge and belief using i-accessibility.
A history h ∈H is i-accessible above a history h′ ∈H if h ∼i h′
pre for some preﬁx h′
pre of h′.
D, h ⊨Bd
i φ
iﬀh ∼i h′ implies D, h′ ⊨φ for all most plausible histories h′
D, h ⊨Kd
i φ
iﬀh ∼i h′ implies D, h′ ⊨φ for all h′
D, h ⊨Biφ
iﬀD, h ⊨Bd
i φ and there are no i-accessible, marked histories above h
D, h ⊨Kiφ
iﬀD, h ⊨Kd
i φ and there are no i-accessible, marked histories above h,
where superscript d denotes defeasible knowledge and belief.
Defeasible knowledge implies incomplete information. Speciﬁcally, information is absent be-
cause the model is incomplete and so agents are potentially unaware of their own uncertainties.
This is contrasted by imperfect information in which the agent knows what they do not know.
This is captured by the negative introspection axiom in standard schema 5 epistemic logic:
¬Kiφ →Ki¬Kiφ. Unpruning the models, e.g. by abduction, makes incomplete information im-
perfect. The distinction between incomplete and imperfect is particularly clear in the context of
events. If a hidden coin ﬂip only happens in the pruned part of a model, the agents are unaware
that the coin ﬂip is possible. By contrast, in the corresponding unpruned model, the agents know
that secretly ﬂipping the coin is a possibility.
The concept of knowledge is deﬁned relative to complete models and imperfect information.
By contrast, defeasible knowledge is deﬁned relative to incomplete models and incomplete in-
formation. In that sense, it can be argued that defeasible knowledge is not strictly knowledge.
We stick to the term and operator, however, because the two has identical semantics for their
distinct notion of information.
29
==PAGE:32==
Lemma 5. Indefeasible knowledge (or belief) in a restricted update implies knowledge (or belief)
in the unrestricted update.
Proof. Given arbitrary DoTL model D, event model E, and history h, we want to show that
D ⊗I
∪E, h ⊨Biφ =⇒D ⊗∪E, h ⊨Biφ.
Assume D ⊗I
∪E, h ⊨Biφ and D ⊗∪E, h ⊭Biφ. Then there exists some most plausible history
h′ ∈domain (D ⊗∪E) s.t. D ⊗∪E, h′ ⊭φ and h′ ∼i h.
Furthermore, since the restricted
model is a submodel the unrestricted model, we must have h′ /∈domain
 D ⊗I
∪E

.
Let hi
denote the i-length preﬁx of history h, e.g. h1 = (w). Both restricted and unrestricted updates
extend maximum-length histories only and pairs of extended histories can, by deﬁnition, only
be epistemically indistinguishable if the pair of unextended histories are. Therefore hi ∼i h′
i for
1 ≤i ≤|h| in D ⊗∪E. Moreover, h′
i must be marked in D ⊗I
∪E for some i < |h′|. But then that
h′
i is an i-accessible (through hi) marked history above h which contradicts the antecedent.
■
So if knowledge (or belief) is indisputable in the pruned model it will remain so in the complete
model.
The following example picks up from example 9 and demonstrates how Vizzini can use ab-
duction to explain the poisoned event.
Example 10. Recall the setting from example 9 and ﬁgure 2.4 showing the degenerate associated
subjective model of Vizzini in the Battle of Wits scene. To ﬁgure out what really happened Vizzini
must do abduction. With chronological minimization he expands (w0; laceW; reveal; switch2; raise3)
and come to defeasibly know and believe that Westley poisoned exactly his own cup, did not
think the switch happened, and despite of this still raised his cup calmly. Uniform expansion
ﬁnds the same explanation. Conversely, expansion by inverse chronological minimization cause
Vizzini to expand the actual history, (w0; both; reveal; switch3; raise1; poisoned), and come to
defeasibly know and believe that both cups were poisoned.
The explanation abductively inferred under chronological minimization and uniform expan-
sion is questionable: why would Vizzini’s best explanation to being poisoned be that Westley
thought he was poisoning only himself? Surely, upon realizing he was mistaken, Vizzini should
think that Westley probably fooled him and search for an explanation supporting it. Under in-
verse chronological minimization he does exactly this: after synchronizing unconsidered histories
Vizzini ﬁnds (w0; both; reveal; switch3; raise1) more plausible than (w0; laceW; reveal; switch2; raise3).
It is apparent from the example that the abduction types introduced so far are extreme:
either the agent always reconsiders her most recent assumptions (chronological minimization)
or all of them (inverse chronological minimization). Our motivation for doing abduction is to
minimize computational complexity and to model the behavior of intelligent agents engaging in
abductive reasoning. From a computational perspective, when marked histories are equally likely
to produce an explanation when expanded, the greedy choice of chronological minimization is
superior. From the conceptual perspective, however, it is diﬃcult to reason about when an agent
should do chronological minimization over its inverse. Indeed, it is hard to imagine a rational
agent engaged in abductive reasoning that, as a rule, always either questions the most recent
assumptions or becomes extremely contemplative and, starting from the earliest assumptions,
considers all possible courses of events. Because plausibility relations are qualitative there is no
way to decide if a history is marked because the agent ﬁnds it highly implausible or just a little
less plausible than the alternative. And it is easy to come up with scenarios in which an agent
would prefer one abduction type for the ﬁrst abduction step, another for the second, and so on.
From the conceptual perspective, it does seem that there is no clear choice between the three
abduction types.
30
==PAGE:33==
In the worst case the entire unrestricted model is searched before an explanation is found.
Then, from a computational perspective, any type of abduction is supposedly slower than action-
priority update because the latter constructs the same model from fewer update operations. In
the best case the agent can infer an explanation after a single abduction step. Here, assuming
unexpanded nodes have the same out-degree, chronological minimization does the least amount
of work.
Ultimately, all three fail to provide an intuitive justiﬁcation to the order in which marked
histories are expanded and, as such, cannot describe how rational agents generally engage in
abductive reasoning.
In approaching this goal, it would be helpful to have a mechanism to
compare all marked histories, synchronized or not, based on plausibility. It is nearby to consider
Spohn’s idea of specifying the credibility of new information and incorporating it into the update
[12]. But then the amount of belief after an update must be quantitatively expressed in terms of
amount of belief in the input-histories and events, which is incompatible with the foundation on
which our work is built. Indeed [7] rejects such a quantitative approach because, aside from the
inevitable increase in complexity of both computation and logic system, the surveyed literature
fails to provide clear intuitive justiﬁcation of the arithmetical formulas used in dynamic belief
revision. Given the information encoded by DoTL models, in the single agent scenario, agents
have no means to compare marked histories that diﬀer in length based on plausibility. In a
multi-agent scenario, however, it is possible for agents to rank histories based on the beliefs of
other agents. In fact, in the multi-agent setting, one would expect rational agents to take their
higher-order beliefs into consideration when doing abduction. This gives rise to a, to us novel,
abduction type called belief maximization, in which the most plausible, marked histories that
are believed by the highest number of other agents are expanded. Intuitively, this amounts to a
surprised agent guiding her search for an explanation by what she thinks other agents believe.
Deﬁning belief maximization, including specifying exactly when an agent thinks some history is
most believed by other agents, is the topic of the following section.
2.5.1
Belief maximization
Belief maximization is an abduction heuristic in which the order of expansion is based on the
agents’ higher-order beliefs about other agents. In particular, a marked history chosen for ex-
pansion is most plausible for the agent doing the abduction and for the highest number of other
agents. Since abduction is typically performed from the subjective view of an agent i, what his-
tories other agents ﬁnds most plausible is an estimate from the perspective of i. Consequently,
deﬁnition 10’s notion of most plausible histories is not directly applicable. Instead we employ an
indicator function of agent and history pairs to decide whether the agent is perceived by agent
i to support the history. More precisely, given a pair h, j the function should return 1 exactly
when agent j is perceived by agent i to support h as a most plausible history. Otherwise it
should return zero.
Deﬁnition 15 (Belief maximization). Let H′ ⊆H be the set of marked histories that are
most plausible to an agent i. Given an indicator function believesi : H × A →{0, 1}, in belief
maximization, agent i expands histories h ∈H′ satisfying
X
j∈A
believesi(h, j) ≥
X
j∈A
believesi(h′, j)
for all h′ ∈H′,
ﬁrst.
A simple proposal for believesi is to require that it returns 1 iﬀh is most plausible to agent
31
==PAGE:34==
j locally in j’s information cell at h:
believesi(h, j) =
(
1
if D ↾marked(h(j)) ⊨bBj⟨h−1⟩⊤,
0
otherwise.
Where marked(H) = {h ∈H | h is marked }. This means, assuming D is the subjective view of
agent i, that i thinks that agent j believes h is most plausible. Note that though the PDL-based
semantics of the extended event modality still applies in the constrained model and, with it,
the deﬁnition of most plausible histories, the graphical intuition for most plausible histories is
lost because shorter length histories cannot belong to the information cell of a longer length
history. To keep the graphical intuition we could without loss of generality, but at the cost of
increased notational complexity, constrain the model to the histories in marked(h(j)) and all
their preﬁxes.
Doing abduction on the model in ﬁgure 2.4 from example 9, belief maximization cause Vizzini
to do inverse chronological minimization in the ﬁrst three abduction steps. The fourth step ex-
pands either (w0; both; reveal; switch3) or (w0; laceW; reveal; switch2; raise3) because both are
indistinguishable, to Westley, from a more plausible history. If the former is chosen, the next step
expands its child because it is strictly more plausible than (w0; laceW; reveal; switch2; raise3).
If ties are broken with equal probability, guiding the search by belief maximization reaches the
correct explanation in fewer steps than inverse chronological minimization with probability 0.5
and the wrong explanation in more steps than chronological minimization. Thus, in our example,
it sits computationally between the two.
From the tie it seems that context is important when basing search for explanation on higher-
order beliefs. In a cooperative setting agents presumably does not act deceitfully and, therefore,
it makes sense to choose the marked history to expand based on what most agents ﬁnd most
plausible. In an adversarial scenario this strategy is challenged by the fact that agents may act to
instill false belief in the others, e.g. by bluﬃng or secretly manipulating ontic facts. In that case
it is nearby to consider ﬁltering perceived beliefs of other agents by what the agent performing
the abduction knows about the actual history. This can be done by borrowing from the concept
of distributed knowledge [18] in epistemic logic, in which pooled knowledge of a group of agents
is captured by the intersection of their knowledge relations. We achieve a similar notion by
restricting the model to the intersection of i and j’s information cells at h:
believesi(h, j) =
(
1
if D ↾marked (h(j) ∩h(i)) ⊨bBj⟨h−1⟩⊤,
0
otherwise.
In that case the interpretation of believesi(h, j) = 1 is that agent j ﬁnds h most plausible given
i’s knowledge. The converse is of course implied by believesi(h, j) = 0. This comes at a decrease
in granularity of information because agent i is unable to distinguish between histories that she
thinks j supports and histories that she thinks j would support given her information.
Under this variant, in the setting of example 9, Vizzini does not account for Westley’s un-
certainty after switching cups and therefore have beliefv(h, w) = 1 for all marked most plausible
histories h. As such she may justiﬁably expand marked histories uniformly at random.
The ﬁrst proposal does not handle belief of other agents known to be false by the agent
doing abduction. The second proposal ﬁlters away false belief and, with it, information that may
help the agent separate candidate explanations. The question is then how, in the general case,
information carried by such false belief supports one candidate history over another.
One idea is restricting the model to {h} closed under histories that are more plausible to j
32
==PAGE:35==
and logically inconsistent on the propositional level:
believesi(h, j) =
(
1
if D ↾marked (closej (h)) ⊨bBj⟨h−1⟩⊤,
0
otherwise.
Where
closej(h) = {h} ∪{h′ ∈H | h′ ⪯j h and V (h′) ̸= V (h)} .
Histories not contained in the right operand of the union are either distinguishable to j from all
histories in h(i) or logically equivalent on the propositional level to a less plausible history. In
the latter case this can be because of, e.g., diﬀerent order of events, say a coin ﬂip followed by a
skip event and vice versa, or because of inconsequential events, like swapping cups when both are
poisoned (see ﬁgure 2.2). Note that if two doxastically or epistemically equivalent scenarios are
epistemically indistinguishable to an agent they must also be ontically equivalent. Since exclusion
is based on equivalence of propositional formulas only, the ability to separate ontically equivalent
histories based on belief or knowledge is lost. The intuition for closing i’s information cell at h
this way is that support for an impossible explanation to a scenario should support a possible
explanation to an ontically identical scenario.
The implication is that plausibility relations
between such scenarios are assumed weaker than ones between ontically diﬀerent scenarios. This
assumption is challenged, of course, by the fact that plausibility relations can very well be based
on higher-order beliefs because preconditions are general formulas.
With this heuristic, to explain the surprising observation in the model shown in ﬁgure 2.4
(example 9), Vizzini expands the same histories as inverse chronological minimization in all steps.
In particular, the fourth step expands (w0; both; reveal; switch3) because
believesv((w0; both; reveal; switch3), w) > believesv((w0; laceW; reveal; switch2; raise3), w).
Where the inequality holds because (w0; both; reveal; skip) /∈closew((w0; both; reveal; switch3))
and (w0; laceW; reveal; skip; raise3) ∈closew((w0; laceW; reveal; switch2; raise3)).
In this section we have deﬁned an abstract, novel abduction type that leverages higher-
order beliefs in the multi-agent setting. To concretize it, we propose three ways that a rational
agent doing abduction can use her beliefs about other agents beliefs to pick between candidate
histories that are incomparable with respect to her own plausibility relation. Each proposal is
considered both intuitively and under the light of the running example, and seeks to improve on
the shortcomings of the previous. The remainder of this thesis is concerned with assessing the
relative performance of abduction.
33
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3
Experiments and results
This chapter provides an overview of the design and implementation, including a brief demon-
stration of using the latter, and presents benchmarks comparing action-priority update and
abduction using chronological minimization, its inverse, and uniform expansion.
3.1
Design and implementation
The goal for design and implementation is to provide a readable, extendable, and eﬃcient im-
plementation of DoTL models, their language, and abduction. To achieve the ﬁrst, the design
follows the theoretical structures of the previous chapter closely, diverging only to avoid perfor-
mance bottlenecks. For eﬃciency, ﬂexibility, and extendability, the implementation is written in
the C++ programming language using, whenever possible, the standard library.
3.1.1
Representation
DoTL and event models are objects containing histories and events, respectively, as well as
plausibility relations. Since early proﬁling identiﬁed maintaining relations and checking for the
existence of edges between histories as performance bottlenecks, relations are represented by
adjacency lists, implemented using hash maps, and the containers of adjacent histories are guar-
anteed be in sorted order when a lookup is performed. This makes the ﬁrst edge existence query
proportional to the cost of sorting the vector of adjacent histories, and every subsequent query
logarithmic in the number of adjacent histories. Alternatives that provide faster edge lookups,
such as matrix representations, are either space-ineﬃcient, which is particularly undesirable be-
cause relations are dynamically sized, or time-ineﬃcient in other important operations like listing
adjacent histories. To maintain a space-eﬃcient representation in accelerator structures, histories
and events are represented by natural numbers indicating their placement in H or E. This is
advantageous to using pointers because, like relations, the size of H increases with updates and,
as such, H may be subject to reallocations. Moreover, since |H| is monotonically increasing with
updates, the order of histories is preserved. To closely follow the language of DoTL models de-
ﬁned in section 2.4, formulas are represented by tagged unions using the variant class template
from the Boost library. Because of this, the implementation of the valuation function of DoTL
models closely follows the presented semantics, including leveraging the PDL validities shown in
section 2.3.
34
==PAGE:37==
3.1.2
Algorithms
Algorithms for action priority update, inclusive update, and restricted inclusive update, follows
directly from their respective deﬁnitions with little room for clever algorithmic optimizations
in the operations themselves. Instead, their runtime depends on the choice of data structures
for model representation and the eﬃciency of the valuation algorithm. In subjective models,
however, belief and knowledge formulas in preconditions are problematic due to defeasibility
of knowledge and beliefs. In particular, defeasible knowledge and/or beliefs may, by nature,
change. Consequently, histories brought about by events with defeasible knowledge or belief in
their preconditions may very well not belong to the unrestricted model. We can of course allow
indefeasible knowledge and belief formulas as preconditions, but then any histories h that only
defeasibly satisﬁes the preconditions of event e may later satisfy them indefeasibly and, hence,
we must store every such (h, e), check in each abduction step to see if the preconditions are now
satisﬁed indefeasibly and, if so, add (h, e) and expand its subtree. Moreover, since the operation
may itself cause defeasible belief or knowledge to become indefeasible, it must be applied in
a ﬁxed-point iteration. Though of course entirely possible, we assume that preconditions does
not contain knowledge or belief operators. Under this assumption, eﬃcient implementation of
valuation is straight forward. We therefore turn our attention to the algorithms for computing
most plausible update, a single abduction step, and picking marked histories according to the
implemented abduction heuristics.
Most plausible update
A most plausible update D ⊗i
∪E is an inclusive update restricted
to close⪯(min⪯(i)), that is, the set of most plausible histories to i closed under more plausible
histories of other agents.
Computing the most plausible update eﬃciently is contingent on
eﬃciently computing this set. To come up with an algorithm we note the following observations:
• A sequence of most plausible updates and abduction steps are performed on and maintains
an associated subjective models of some agent, say i.
• In such models, the set of designated histories is closed under the indistinguishability
relation of i and it follows that either all or none of the histories of an information cell are
designated.
• Finally a most plausible history is, by deﬁnition, at least as plausible, and thereby also
indistinguishable from, all designated histories at the same level.
It follows from the observations that a most plausible history must also be designated and, if one
exists, then all same-length designated belong to the same information cell.
Algorithm 1 shows the pseudocode for computing D ⊗i
∪E. The loop in lines 5–9 computes
min⪯(i) and leverages the observation that if all designated histories of maximal length belong to
the same information cell (line 3) then the most plausible histories are the ⪯i-minimal elements
of that cell (of which there is at least one because ⪯i is a plausibility relation). The loop in
lines 10–14 computes close⪯(min⪯(i)). The transitive closure of plausibility relations ⪯can be
maintained by adding a dummy agent, whose plausibility relation is ⪯, to the initial situation
and each event model.
The computational and spatial overhead of this is negligible overall
because initial models and event models are small relative to the DoTL models induced by
them. An additional agent, even one with fewer, larger well-preorders, adds a constant overhead.
Information cells of the agent whose subjective view is modelled can be computed on demand
using, e.g., breadth-ﬁrst search or maintained in a disjoint-set data structure.
35
==PAGE:38==
Algorithm 1 Most plausible update
1: procedure MostPlausibleUpdate(D, i, E)
2:
I ←∅
3:
if ∃hd ∈Hd ∩Hmax and |hd(i)| = |Hd ∩Hmax| then
4:
mini ←∅
5:
for h ∈hd(i) do
6:
if ∀h′ ∈hd(i). h ⪯i h′ then
7:
mini ←mini ∪{h}
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
for h ∈Hmax do
11:
if ∃h′ ∈mini. h ⪯h′ then
12:
I ←I ∪{h}
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
end if
16:
return D ⊗I
∪E
17: end procedure
Abduction step
Algorithm 2 shows the pseudocode for computing, roughly, a single abduction
step on D wrt. h. We say roughly because all most plausible histories between the descendants
of h, closed under more plausible histories of other agents, are expanded. This may, strictly
following deﬁnition 14, require multiple abduction steps. That happens exactly when none of
the same-length descendants of h are most plausible to i.
By deﬁnition, the shortest-length
such descendants should be marked rather than expanded in the abduction step, and there is no
guarantee that the next abduction step expands these ﬁrst. Indeed, this is only guaranteed under
chronological minimization. Before the ﬁrst iteration of the while loop in lines 5–27, current is
the singleton set containing only h of length l. After the i-th iteration current contains the most
plausible among the l + i length descendants of h. Lines 6–7 expands the non-marked histories
in current. The loop in lines 14–18 computes the most plausible histories among the resulting
children and the loop in lines 19–25 closes this set under children more plausible to other agents,
stores the result in current, and marks non-maximal length histories in children \ current.
Leveraging the same observations as algorithm 1, line 12 ensures that inner loops only run when
there is a most plausible history for i between the children.
Abduction heuristics
An abduction heuristic is a function that returns a marked history. In
the cases of chronological minimization, its inverse, and uniform expansion, the history is most
plausible between the marked histories and, as established, such histories are always designated.
Consequently, the three abduction types can be generalized in three steps:
1. Partition the set of designated, marked histories by length.
2. Order the partitions according to abduction type.
3. Search the partitions in order and return the ﬁrst most plausible history encountered.
Chronological minimization sorts the partitions descending by history length, its inverse as-
cending by history length, and uniform expansion shuﬄes the partitions uniformly at random.
Simplifying further, we note that sorting a set of histories by length partitions it in place, so for
36
==PAGE:39==
Algorithm 2 Abduction step
Require: h is marked in abducted model D induced by the sequence of events {E0, ..., En}.
1: procedure AbductionStep(D, i, {E0, ..., En} , h)
2:
Unmark(h)
3:
l ←|h|
4:
current ←{h}
5:
while current ̸= ∅and l ≤n do
6:
D ←D ∪(D≤l ⊗∪El)
7:
D ←D ↾H \ {(h, e) ∈H | h is marked}
8:
children ←{(h, e) ∈H | h ∈current}
9:
current ←∅
10:
l ←l + 1
11:
H′
d ←{h ∈Hd | |h| = l}
12:
if ∃hd ∈H′
d and |hd(i)| = |H′
d| and children ∩Hd(i) ̸= ∅then
13:
mini ←∅
14:
for h ∈hd(i) ∩children do
15:
if ∀h′ ∈hd(i) ∩children. h ⪯i h′ then
16:
mini ←mini ∪{h}
17:
end if
18:
end for
19:
for h ∈children do
20:
if ∃h′ ∈mini. h ⪯h′ then
21:
current ←current ∪{h}
22:
else if l ≤n then
23:
Mark(h)
24:
end if
25:
end for
26:
end if
27:
end while
28:
return D
chronological minimization and its inverse it is faster to skip the ﬁrst step and sort the set of
marked, designated histories directly. Algorithm 3 shows the pseudocode for the three functions.
To perform the third step, all three call auxiliary function, FindFirstMostPlausible, shown
in algorithm 4. Before each iteration of the while loop in lines 3–14 of algorithm 4, i contains the
index of the beginning of the partition to be searched. Inside the loop lines 4–6 locates the end
of the partition and, if the partition contains a most plausible history, it is found and returned
in lines 9–10. Like algorithms 1 and 2, the actual search is only performed when we are certain
it will succeed. In particular, if h is a most plausible history to i then all designated histories of
length |h| is contained in h(i). Moreover, ⪯i is a well-preorder on h(i) so any non-empty subset
of h(i), which is exactly any non-empty subset of designated histories of length |h|, including the
partition, contains minimal elements.
Finally, we note that the version of uniform expansion presented here is not entirely accurate.
In particular, the algorithm does not guarantee that most plausible histories marked before the
call to UniformExpansion are returned by subsequent calls before most plausible histories
marked after the call. Though easily achieved for a small spatial overhead, and keeping the same
(amortized) running time (e.g. using a stack), the modiﬁcation complicates the pseudocode and
is therefore omitted. In addition, an argument could also be made that the agnosticity encoded
37
==PAGE:40==
by uniform expansion is more accurately captured by the algorithms presented here.
Algorithm 3 Abduction heuristics
1: procedure ChronologicalMinimization(D, i)
2:
M ←{h ∈Hd | h is marked }
3:
sort histories in M descending by length
4:
return FirstMostPlausibleMarked(M, i)
1: procedure InverseChronologicalMinimization(D, i)
2:
M ←{h ∈Hd | h is marked }
3:
sort histories in M ascending by length
4:
return FirstMostPlausibleMarked(M, i)
1: procedure Uniform Expansion(D, i)
2:
M ←{h ∈Hd | h is marked }
3:
Let {A1, ..., An} partition M by history length
4:
Randomly shuﬄe {A1, ..., An}
5:
Sort M by partition index
▷That is, if h ∈Ai and h′ ∈Aj, i < j, then h comes before
h′ in M.
6:
return FirstMostPlausibleMarked(M, i)
Algorithm 4 Find ﬁrst most plausible
1: procedure FindFirstMostPlausible(D, M, i)
2:
i ←0
3:
while i ≤n do
4:
j ←i
5:
while j ≤n and |hj| = |hi| do
6:
j ←j + 1
7:
end while
8:
if |hi(i)| = | {h ∈Hd | |h| = |hi|} | then
9:
if ∃h ∈{hi, ..., hj−1} . (∀h′ ∈{hi, ..., hj−1} . h ⪯i h′) then
10:
return h
11:
end if
12:
end if
13:
i ←j
14:
end while
15:
return failure
3.1.3
Usage
The source code resides in the code.zip archive submitted alongside this report. Compilation
requires CMake version 3.20 or above and C++20, which is the most recent stable release at
the time of writing. To compile and run the binary ﬁrst extract the ﬁles from code.zip, then
navigate to the code directory and issue the following commands:
code $ cd build
build $ cmake ..
-- The C compiler identification is GNU 11.2.1
-- The CXX compiler identification is GNU 11.2.1
38
==PAGE:41==
-- Detecting C compiler ABI info
-- Detecting C compiler ABI info - done
-- Check for working C compiler: /usr/bin/cc - skipped
-- Detecting C compile features
-- Detecting C compile features - done
-- Detecting CXX compiler ABI info
-- Detecting CXX compiler ABI info - done
-- Check for working CXX compiler: /usr/bin/c++ - skipped
-- Detecting CXX compile features
-- Detecting CXX compile features - done
-- Configuring done
-- Generating done
-- Build files have been written to: /home/msv/test/build
build $ make
[ 25%] Building CXX object CMakeFiles/abduction.dir/src/benchmarks.cpp.o
[ 50%] Building CXX object CMakeFiles/abduction.dir/src/main.cpp.o
[ 75%] Building CXX object CMakeFiles/abduction.dir/src/model.cpp.o
[100%] Linking CXX executable bin/abduction
[100%] Built target abduction
build $ ./bin/abduction
Usage: ./bin/abduction [-tbh]
-t
tests abduction and valuate, generating
.dot files for the models used. These
can be compiled to pdf using:
$ dot -Tps <name.dot> -o <name.pdf>
-b
generates benchmarks.
-h
displays this message.
The instructions for test option -t informs that running the tests also outputs the models
used in them. These are encoded in DOT language1, a graph description language that compiles
to, among other formats, PDF. To generate and compile these issue:
build $ ./bin/abduction -t
testing abduction...
testing valuate...
Everything ok. Models can be compiled to pdf by running $ dot -Tps <name.dot> -o <name.pdf>
build $ for i in *.dot; do dot -Tps $i -o ${i%.dot}.pdf; done
build $ ls *.pdf
flipflip_APU.pdf
flipfliplift_ABDUCTED.pdf
flipfliplift_APU.pdf
flipfliplift_MPU.pdf
Figure 3.1 shows models flipfliplift_MPU.dot and flipfliplift_ABDUCTED compiled to
PDF. Plausibility relations are drawn in various colors to avoid confusion as to which label
belongs to which edge. The initial scenario, event models, and update sequence, is explained in
section 3.2. To generate the benchmarks run:
build $ ./bin/abduction -b
generating benchmarks for most plausible update and abduction with chronological minimization
showing results for 22 operations averaged across 10 executions.
cycle 1 ran in 1.69134e-317 ms.
cycle 2 ran in 6.95291e-311 ms.
cycle 3 ran in 0.3 ms.
...
1Please refer to https://graphviz.org/doc/info/lang.html for the grammar and https://graphviz.org/
download/ for instructions on how to install the latest compiler.
39
==PAGE:42==
(a) flipfliplift_MPU.pdf.
(b) flipfliplift_ABDUCTED.pdf.
Figure 3.1: Two of the models used in, and output by running, automated tests of formula evaluation,
most plausible update, and abduction. (a) shows a degenerate model before an abduction
step and (b) shows the model after a single abduction step expands the marked history.
As indicated by the excerpt of the output the results are averaged across 10 executions.
This is the same number used when generating the benchmarks presented in section 3.2. The
number is supplied as the second template parameter to the Benchmark struct template and easily
adjusted in main.cpp, should one wish to use the benchmark functionality to assess performance
of refactors and/or extensions. In fact, main.cpp is an excellent starting point for a user to
familiarize themselves with the implementation, as it demonstrates how to instantiate and output
DoTL and event models, apply update operations including abduction, instantiate and display
formulas, and evaluate truth of formulas in models.
3.1.4
Shortcomings
The implementation has three obvious shortcomings. First, due to time constraints, the belief
maximization abduction heuristic is not implemented in any of its incarnations. Second, hav-
ing a single class supporting subjective and objective perspectives is necessarily suboptimal for
updating either, because they beneﬁt from diﬀerent history and relation representations and ac-
celerator structures. E.g., optimizing most plausible update using an accelerator structure to list
same-length designated histories impose a spatial overhead on the objective perspective. Third,
40
==PAGE:43==
the implementation is primarily manually tested: the only automated tests included are those
executed when running the program with the -t option (though generating benchmarks does
have the side eﬀect of exercising almost the entire codebase).
3.2
Results
To assess the relative performance of abduction using the implemented heuristics we revisit
a variation of the secret coin ﬂip scenario.
The initial situation and events presented below
are exactly those used in the implementation to generate the results. In fact, the experiment
that produced the second timing benchmark (more on this below) is reproduced by running the
program with the -b option. All experiments were conducted on a laptop with an Intel Core
i7-7500U CPU and 16 GB RAM.
The initial situation contains three agents, A = {0, 1, 2}, and has a coin showing tails, which is
common knowledge to all agents:
M =
w : t
Beginning with agent 0, she and agent 1 takes turns secretly ﬂipping the coin a total of 14 times.
A single coinﬂip is captured by the following event
Flip(i)i∈{0,1} =
skip : ⟨⊤, ⊤⟩
flipt : ⟨¬t, t⟩
fliph : ⟨t, ¬t⟩
1 −i, 2
1 −i, 2
1 −i, 2
Coin ﬂips always cause the coin to turn, the outcome is private to the acting agent, and everybody
else thinks that nothing happened. Finally, the coin is revealed to show tails:
Reveal =
lift : ⟨t, ⊤⟩
The subjective model for agent 1 induced by most plausible update of the initial model by the
sequence of events is degenerate: agent 1 thinks that the coin was exclusively ﬂipped by her seven
times and hence shows heads. To her surprise it is revealed to show tails, there are no designated
leaf histories in the model, and all marked histories are designated and brought about by agent
0 ﬂipping the coin. As a result, a single abduction step with respect to any marked history h
ﬁnds an explanation in which agent 0 ﬂips the coin exactly once. Though the actual models are
too large to include here, the two shown in ﬁgure 3.1 captures a small scale version of the same
scenario, two coin ﬂips instead of 14, before and after the ﬁrst abduction step, respectively.
Figure 3.2 compares the cost of ﬁnding an explanation using most plausible update and
abduction, from the perspective of agent 1, and action priority update. The left and right plots
show number of generated histories and runtime in ms., respectively, versus update operations
performed. A single operation is either a most plausible update, an action-priority update, or
a single abduction step. On both graphs, action-priority update grows exponentially between
1 and 14 and, unsurprisingly, the number of histories in the model is exactly 2operations+1 −1
because each unrestricted update with Flip(i) doubles the number of frontier histories. Updating
with Reveal adds only |Hmax|
2
new histories and, as a result, the model size in terms of histories
41
==PAGE:44==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
100
101
102
103
104
105
Operations
Histories
Most plausible update (chronological minimization)
Most plausible update (inverse chronological minimization)
Most plausible update (uniform expansion)
Action priority update
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Operations
Runtime in ms.
Figure 3.2: Coin ﬂip benchmarks comparing most plausible update using the three implemented ab-
duction types, and action priority update. The left and right plots measure the number of
update operations performed (including single abductions steps) versus histories generated
and runtime, respectively.
grows much less drastically from operation 14 to 15. Unfortunately, the impact on runtime is
less pronounced, indicating that the performance bottleneck in computing action-priority update
is identifying, rather than computing and allocating, out-histories. This is consistent with the
observed runtime because out-histories computed in the 14th operation are in-histories in the
15th.
After the 15th operation, the model returned by most plausible update is degenerate and
an explanation is found, as expected, in a single abduction step regardless of abduction type.
Chronological minimization achieves this while unpruning only three histories, uniform expansion
(randomly) unprunes 138, while inverse chronological minimization unprunes 570 histories, which
is almost twice the amount of histories in the degenerate model. This is reﬂected in the runtime
where chronological minimization returns almost instantly, uniform expansion returns in half
the time spent on the previous operations combined, and inverse chronological minimization
increases the total runtime by close to a factor four.
Though promising, these results only attest to the eﬃciency of abduction when an expla-
nation is found in the ﬁrst abduction step. For this to happen there must exist at least one
marked, designated history that when expanded by most plausible update produces an expla-
nation. Moreover, that history must be picked ﬁrst by the abduction heuristic. For abduction
to be eﬃcient in scenarios without this property, it must remain computationally feasible over
consecutive abduction steps. This is not at all given because the number of histories is mono-
tonically increasing with each update operation and, with it, the amount of computation done in
42
==PAGE:45==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
100
101
102
103
104
Operations
Histories
Most plausible update (chronological minimization)
Most plausible update (inverse chronological minimization)
Most plausible update (uniform expansion)
Action priority update
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Operations
Runtime in ms.
Figure 3.3: Variation of the coin ﬂip benchmarks in which the third agent secretly marks the coin
between the 5th and 6th coin ﬂip. The right graph shows the benchmark generated using
the -b option (see section 3.1.3).
abduction steps, at best, remains the same and, at worst, increases. This is because abduction
steps maintain plausibility relations and iterate over information cells.
Our second experiment modiﬁes the above scenario slightly to ensure that ﬁnding an expla-
nation requires multiple abduction steps. In the same initial situation, agent 0 and 1 takes turns
ﬂipping the coin 12 times. Between the 5th and 6th ﬂip, agent 2 secretly marks the coin. The
marking action looks like this:
Mark =
mark : ⟨⊤, m⟩
skip : ⟨⊤, ⊤⟩
0, 1
Finally, Reveal is modiﬁed to also reveal the mark:
Reveal′ =
lift′ : ⟨t ∧m, ⊤⟩
Figure 3.3 shows the benchmarks for this scenario. Most plausible updates are, again, from the
subjective perspective of agent 1. The subjective model returned by the 14th most plausible
update is degenerate and ﬁnding an explanation requires at least two abduction steps: one
expanding a history brought about by agent 0 ﬂipping the coin and one expanding a descendant
or ancestor history brought about by agent 2 marking the coin. The latter is necessarily a history
of length six, so chronological minimization and its inverse picks all shorter and longer length
marked most plausible histories, respectively, before it. However, the amount of such histories is
43
==PAGE:46==
initially, and remains for a while, relatively small because abduction steps expand descendants
using most plausible update. Chronological minimization and its inverse ﬁnds an explanation
in eight abduction steps while uniform expansion gets lucky and ﬁnds one in three.
Again,
chronological minimization unprunes the least adding 120 histories, chronological minimization
the most adding 816, and uniform expansion sits in the middle adding 252. Interestingly, the ﬁve
additional abduction steps computed by chronological minimization over uniform expansion does
not seem to signiﬁcantly impact how much faster it is. In the previous experiment, chronological
minimization adds 46 times fewer histories than uniform expansion and ﬁnds an explanation
roughly 1.5 times faster. In the current experiment it adds 2.1 times fewer histories but is still
roughly 1.3 times faster at ﬁnding an explanation.
Moreover, chronological minimization in
both experiments return in around a tenth of a second, so a signiﬁcant portion of its runtime
can presumably be attributed to outside tasks such as allocating and maintaining the benchmark
instance, in which case the actual speedup is higher. To be certain, though, we have to benchmark
on models induced by signiﬁcantly longer sequences of events.
In both experiments runtime correlates with model domain size rather than number of single
abduction steps performed. The performance of the abduction step and abduction heuristic al-
gorithms depends on the size of the agents information cells and the uncertainty of other agents,
rather than the total number of histories. Hence, even in models that are large in terms of
histories, computation of consecutive abductions steps should be fast as long as the information
cells containing most plausible histories for the agent doing abduction remain relatively small.
Worst case, though, there is exactly one information cell for each history length. Ultimately, in
domains exhibiting the same properties as those presented here, abduction using either of the
three heuristics provides a signiﬁcant computational advantage over action priority update in
ﬁnding an explanation, but makes no guarantee that it is the right one. Chronological mini-
mization is the fastest abduction heuristic in both scenarios because it has the lowest cost per
abduction step, but based on the results it should be outperformed by its inverse in scenarios
where must-expand histories, such as those brought about by the mark event, are short.
44
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Conclusion and future work
In this project we explore how multi-agent abductive reasoning can be formalized in the context
of doxastic temporal logic models, how these can be pruned to save computational resources,
and the capabilities of abduction to eﬃciently unprune them when necessary.
To this end we explain, discuss, and elaborate on, theory from current literature, in some
cases extending, reﬁning, or ﬁxing, deﬁnitions. We give proofs of key properties and contribute
a novel abduction heuristic that directly leverages the beliefs of other agents to help decide the
order in which temporal trajectories are unpruned.
In addition, we suggest algorithms for eﬃciently computing the most plausible update, a
single abduction step, and three of the four abduction heuristics, And implement these along-
side the full language of doxastic temporal logic models. To aid in future work on this topic,
the implementation expose functionality for testing, benchmarking abduction heuristics, and to
output models for visualization.
To assess theory and implementation we provide benchmarks for the implemented update
operations and abduction types, indicating that abduction using either heuristic is highly useful
for ﬁnding explanations in domains exhibiting properties similar to ours, such as multiple expla-
nations and well-preorders that remain small through consecutive abduction steps, relative to
the total number of same-length histories.
Our work may be extended and improved in several ways. To gain conﬁdence in our ﬁndings
we should benchmark on larger models with longer sequences of abduction steps. Moreover, to
identify exactly which domain properties favor or disfavor our approach, we should come up with,
analyze, and benchmark on, several distinct scenarios, especially in terms of beliefs of agents.
Additionally, we have yet to implement belief maximization and examine how capable, if at
all, abduction using it is at ﬁnding a conceptually sound explanation. Indeed, the current results
attest only to the advantage of using abductive reasoning to ﬁnd some explanation fast, rather
than its ability eﬃciently ﬁnd the same explanation as a rational agent would under the same
circumstances.
We also do not focus on single agent abduction heuristics. Here it makes sense to consider
the surprising event. In its simplest form, the agent considers marked histories where the pre-
conditions of the event is satisﬁed. More ambitiously, the agent can consider events that renders
the surprise impossible via postconditions or requires preconditions that the surprise does not
satisfy. Then agents doing abduction can consider histories where such events has not happened.
Then we identify the open problem of restricted update of pruned models when knowledge
and belief formulas are allowed as preconditions. In such models knowledge and beliefs may be,
and likely is, defeasible. As argued in section 3.1.2, updating when such preconditions are only
45
==PAGE:48==
defeasibly satisﬁed means that restricted models are no longer guaranteed to be submodels of
their unrestricted counterparts. Instead we suggest delaying such updates until, if at all, the
precondition holds indefeasibly. At a glance, this approach seems consistent with the semantics,
however, ensuring that it actually is and implementing it is left as future work.
Throughout the course of the project, multiple new lines of research have emerged. One
explores planning in the context of abduction using DoTL models. Though the subset of PDL
embedded in the language is a step in this direction, there is at least one substantial obstacle. By
the current deﬁnition, a most plausible history is indistinguishable from all designated histories.
Consequently, most plausible update and abduction cannot be used to compute plans containing
plan-time uncertainty. Speciﬁcally, if a model contains distinguishable designated histories then
most a plausible update does not expand anything. To make matter worse, the current deﬁnition
of a single abduction step would, upon adding a distinguishable designated child node, prune all
longer-length histories from the model.
Another angle explores the capacity of the models to support advanced abduction heuristics.
It would be interesting to model trust between agents, so if some agent reveals a bluﬀthen the
other agents will trust her less after the update. This would, at least, allow us to deﬁne an
additional indicator function for belief maximization where the perceived beliefs of some agents
count for more than others.
This problem relates directly to the open discussion about the
limitations of the qualitative nature of plausibility relations in section 2.2.
Finally, another possible direction is to consider how partial models can be constructed using
attention, or focused awareness, instead of plausibility. Like plausibility, attention manages com-
putational limitations by discarding available information. Similar to our approach, awareness
can replace most plausible and pruning can then be based on what is most relevant to the task at
hand. A diﬀerent way to prune based on attention is to maintain a set of propositions that the
agent pays attention to, and then join histories that are diﬀerent only wrt. propositions outside
this set, say via a common child, in an awareness reduction step.
46
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1] Angel Nepomuceno-Fernández, Fernando Soler-Toscano, and Fernando Velazquez-Quesada.
An epistemic and dynamic approach to abductive reasoning: selecting the best explanation.
Logic Journal of IGPL, 21:943–961, 11 2013. 2
[2] David Poole. Probabilistic horn abduction and bayesian networks. Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
64:81–129, 11 1993. 2
[3] Didier Dubois, Angelo Gilio, and Gabriele Kern-Isberner. Probabilistic abduction without
priors. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 47, 01 2006. 2
[4] Marc Denecker and Antonis Kakas. Abduction in logic programming. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 2407:402–436, 01 2002. 2
[5] Angel Nepomuceno-Fernández, Fernando Soler-Toscano, and Fernando Velazquez-Quesada.
An epistemic and dynamic approach to abductive reasoning: selecting the best explanation.
Logic Journal of IGPL, 21:943–961, 11 2013. 2
[6] Carlos Alchourrón, Peter Gärdenfors, and David Makinson. On the logic of theory change:
Partial meet contraction and revision functions. J. Symb. Log., 50:510–530, 06 1985. 4
[7] Alexandru Baltag and Sonja Smets.
A qualitative theory of dynamic interactive belief
revision. Investigative Ophthalmology Visual Science - INVEST OPHTHALMOL VISUAL
SCI, 3, 01 2008. 4, 5, 8, 11, 31
[8] George Edward Moore. A reply to my critics. In Paul Arthur Schilpp, editor, The Philosophy
of G. E. Moore. Open Court, 1942. 4
[9] Johan Benthem. Dynamic logic for belief revision. Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics,
17:129–155, 01 2007. 5, 19
[10] Thomas Bolander. A gentle introduction to epistemic planning: The del approach. Electronic
Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, 243, 03 2017. 6, 8
[11] C.M.L. Dégremont.
The temporal mind : observations on the logic of belief change in
interactive systems. PhD thesis, 09 2010. 8, 15, 18
[12] Wolfgang Spohn. Ordinal conditional functions: A dynamic theory of epistemic states. 01
1988. 9, 31
[13] Alexandru Baltag, Lawrence S. Moss, and Slawomir Solecki. The logic of public announce-
ments, common knowledge, and private suspicions. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on
Theoretical Aspects of Rationality and Knowledge, TARK ’98, page 43–56, San Francisco,
CA, USA, 1998. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. 11
47
==PAGE:50==
[14] M. Fischer and R. Ladner. Propositional dynamic logic of regular programs. J. Comput.
Syst. Sci., 18:194–211, 1979. 12, 14
[15] Thomas Bolander. Multi-agent abduction using doxastic temporal models. MAFTEC Work-
shop, 12 2018. 15, 20, 22
[16] Johan Benthem, Jelle Gerbrandy, and Eric Pacuit. Merging frameworks for interaction: Del
and etl. pages 72–81, 01 2007. 16
[17] John Bell. Chronological minimization and explanation. In Working papers of Common
Sense ’98; the fourth symposium on logical formalizations of common sense reasoning.,
1998. 28
[18] Ronald Fagin, Joseph Y. Halpern, Moshe Y. Vardi, and Yoram Moses. Reasoning about
Knowledge. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1995. 32
48
