==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
EXPLORING THE USEFULNESS OF VIRTUAL REALITY
IN ENTREPRENEURIAL EDUCATION
Can Virtual Reality facilitate teaching ethical decision making in an entrepreneurial
context?
Thesis Writer: Daniel Bahrin(s190185) - DTU Compute
Thesis Supervisor: Prof. Carina Lomberg - DTU Technology Entrepreneurship
January 2022
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
i
Abstract
There is no doubt that these days technology has become a norm and a big part
of our daily lives and the society. In this context, the educational institutions and
teaching communities have searched in recent years for means that will incorporate
some of the rapidly advancing technologies into their everyday practices, in order to
enhance their own teaching capabilities as well as delivering knowledge through a
more interactive way of teaching. On this matter, one of the candidate technologies
that has started to get traction in recent years in the realm of EdTech (education &
technology) is Virtual Reality, as affordable VR powered by mobile technologies is
opening a new world of opportunities that can transform the ways in which we learn
and engage with others.
On the account of the recent progresses in the field of VR, this thesis conducted
an exploratory literature review to gain insights into existing studies on Virtual Re-
ality and it’s application as an educational tool, and used those studies to validate
the viability of using Virtual Reality for behaviour & consequence simulation when
teaching ethical decision making in entrepreneuriala education. The identified 61 re-
search papers, media articles and studies that focused on VR in education and VR
in ethical decision making, served as a backbone for uncovering several gaps in the
application of VR in higher education. The identified gaps point toward unexplored
regions of VR application and design for education, entrepreneurship, and ethical
decision making, which can motivate future work in the field, as this paper seeks to
inspire and inform researchers, faculty staff, entrepreneurs and decision makers about
the ways in which VR might support them in the decision making process.
The paper concludes with suggesting several research paths for moving the Virtual
Reality and Ethical Decision Making theories in an educational setting forward, as
well as proposing a theoretical VR entrepreneurship educational system to serve for
enhancing the education of young entrepreneurs.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Acknowledgements
[Daniel Bahrin (s190185)], [MSc. Computer Science and Engineering, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science - DTU Compute], [Thesis Writer]
[Carina Lomberg], [Associate Professor, Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship -
DTU Entrepreneurship], [Thesis Supervisor]
I would like to thank professor Carina Lomberg for giving me the opportunity to
collaborate in writing this paper, especially as the subject of this thesis is in the
niche field of ethics with which i did not have previous interactions. Furthermore, i
would like to thank her for her academic contributions and involvement in teaching
entrepreneurship courses to students, as I strongly believe that every person should
have a bit of entrepreneurial knowledge and finance awareness before venturing into
starting a business.
[Technical University of Denmark (DTU)], [Place of study]
I would like to thank the professors that I interacted with in the last 2 years during
my master’s studies, as they provided me with the necessary knowledge in my chosen
domain, and for their promptness when I was in doubt during their classes. In the
same manner, I wish to thank the university for providing me and other students
with constant opportunities and activities to keep us engaged academically, as with-
out these activities, many of us would become social distanced.
[My family]
I would like to thank my family for supporting me in this journey, and for under-
standing that this education is something that I really wanted to do. Furthermore, I
wish to thank them for the silence that they held during my preparations for exams,
and for the mess that I always left behind when I was working from home together
with my university colleagues.
==PAGE:5==
iii
Approval
This thesis has been prepared across a period of four months in collaboration with
the Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship-DTU Entrepreneurship at the Technical
University of Denmark-DTU, in fulfilment for the degree Master of Science and En-
gineering, MSc. Computer Science and Engineering.
I hereby declare that all the information found in this document has been obtained
and presented in accordance with the academic rules of ethical conduct. In this con-
text, I declare that I have fully cited and referenced all materials used in this paper
that have not originated from my personal work.
Kongens Lyngby, January 31, 2022
Daniel Bahrin (s190185)
==PAGE:6==
Copyright
EXPLORING THE USEFULNESS OF VIRTUAL REALITY IN
ENTREPRENEURIAL EDUCATION
Can Virtual Reality facilitate teaching ethical decision making in an entrepreneurial
context?
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must
include the customary bibliographic citation, including au-
thor attribution, report title, etc.
Thesis Base Template:
Laursen’s XeLaTeX Thesis Template, DTU Compute 2021
Published by:
Technical University of Denmark - DTU, Department for
Applied Mathematics & Computer Science - DTU Compute
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Copyright . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Establishing Context and Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review and Related Work
5
2.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Related Work and Literature Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Literature Findings and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Virtual Reality in Education: Present and Future
17
4
Entrepreneurship, Ethical decision making and Virtual Reality:
Situational Analysis
25
5
Ethical Scenario Testing and Results
31
6
Implementation in Entrepreneurship: Theoretical System
37
6.1
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Platform Functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Client Functionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Usability Examples in Entrepreneurship Education . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Discussion and Recommendations
43
7.1
Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2
Research agenda and recommendations for future development
. . . .
47
7.3
Limitations and Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
Articles only
61
Misc only
67
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Wadhera[Wad16] said in 2016 that in education,’’the information age is over’’. By
that he meant that informal and formal learning moved from an industrial revolution
model of education where a teacher transmitted information to students via a ‘one size
fits all’ mentality; to something he calls ‘’the Experience Age’’, in which the multitude
of interconnected mobile devices, gaming and social networking software have led to
sharing and experiencing new points of view by means of technology. As a result
of this technological shift, according to Delialioglu[Del12], a widespread problem in
education is that traditional methods of lecture-based education leads to demotivated
students . As such, educators face major challenges as students are passive and disen-
gaged [CC13] and may struggle to see the relevance of what they are learning [Gee09].
This is because students often find classroom-based learning to be irrelevant as there
is a disconnect between content learned in textbooks and authentic practice in the
”real-world”. Gee[Gee04] describes this in his paper as education lacking ‘situated’
learning. As an example, he argues that correctly implemented situated learning, al-
lows students to learn terms while seeing the broader applicability, instead of simply
memorizing facts isolated from context. On the same note, we need to acknowledge
that in today’s technologically advanced workforce, skills such as creativity, empathy,
critical thinking and technological literacy are one of the most demanded for landing
a job, but unfortunately, these are also the most diﬀicult to teach using a traditional
educational manner [SH13].
To aid with these challenges, the rapid growing area of Virtual Reality (VR) and
Augmented Reality (AR) promises to add quality to educational settings, as the
technology can be used as an immersive hands-on tool for learning, that can play a
unique role and may have strong influence on education and training. This technol-
ogy is shown to have increased educational reach in the form of e-learning, through
the use of a variety of online platforms available [NA13], but also by offering diverse
learning experiences that have been shown to impact learning processes in different
ways [DL10][Pso13].
Furthermore, there is evidence that shows that VR and AR positively impact the
educational experience of students, increases confidence, increases the level of commit-
ment and interest [GF15], provides opportunities for self-learning [YT13], enhances
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
collaborative learning [GF15], improves satisfaction and increases motivation in stu-
dents [ref], as pointed out in the referenced papers. The insights drawn from these
papers, suggest that VR has a lot of potential in education, despite having several
challenges, such as technical problems related to VR operation [SP16], the relatively
new development of VR and the student’s lack of skills, experiences, and tools re-
quired to operate VR [AA16b].
1.1
Establishing Context and Problem Statement
Taking this educational potential into account, we shift the focus to the topic of this
thesis, which aims to take the VR technology and the benefits that come with it, and
verify its potential value in entrepreneurial education, as well as educational ethical
decision making.
The context of entrepreneurship often generates situations where the involved par-
ties are dealing with decisions that can have a high emotional impact on the decision
maker. This comes to be because often in these types of scenarios, most entrepreneurs
are closely tied to or are fully dependent on their investors or board members for their
business to have success. Such a scenario leads to ethical decisions that have to be
made, which sometimes go against the decision maker’s principles and their moral
values. This is not to say that all made decisions are ethical decisions, but merely
that the ones that involve ethics or moral values, may have the strongest impact on
the decision maker because of the possible consequences that might occur.
Of course, this only comes to be true when the decision maker is aware of the impact
that his decision will have on other people, the environment or even on a his/her own
personal level. However, there are several questions that remain to be asked; how do
you educate a person to make ethical decisions when the scenario in which these are
taken are dependant on so many variables? For many years educational programs
have dealt with ethics, but should ethics teaching be via standalone modules or em-
bedded in ethics discussion within curricula? Can ethics be taught properly?
Even though published research has indicated that ethics education improves ethical
attitude, there are others that have shown a negative relationship[CB06]. Cragg[Cra97]
argued that ethics cannot be taught, and a study conducted by Bishop[Bis92] further
supported this assertion.Bishop[Bis92] concluded, that “another interesting criticism
of ethics is that as long as we have laws that dictate what is permissible; we do not
need courses in ethics”. On the same subject, Pamental[Pam91] found that” there are
serious flaws in the very foundation of the business ethics course and the ethical the-
ory itself ”because most of what is provided in business ethics texts does not involve
ethical dilemmas and many educators place too much emphasis on ethical situations
dealing with policy[Pam91].
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Establishing Context and Problem Statement
3
To solve the approach some of the mentioned negatives, throughout this paper I
explore the possibility of introducing the use of Virtual Reality in the context of en-
trepreneurial education and educational ethical decision making. By using VR, we
believe that we can create a simulation where the decision maker can practice and
see the results of his/her actions before they would happen in real life. The use of
such a system would offer a three-dimensional possibility of presenting information
in an educational setting, as opposed to the traditional one-dimension. Through its
use, the system aims to shift the learning process from passive to active, allowing
the decision maker to interact with selected content and weight their knowledge and
decision-making skills in safe conditions, in order to come up with the best decision.
To summarize the above stated, this paper is governed by two research questions
that form the basis for all the containing chapters as follows :
• What is the potential of using Virtual Reality in entrepreneurial education?
• How could we use Virtual Reality to enhance ethical decision making in educa-
tional courses?
The purpose of these research questions is to identify if the current state of Virtual
Reality technology brings any value to be used as an educational tool in entrepreneur-
ship education, and also see VR’s potential in enhancing ethical decision making in
entrepreneurial education.
In order to validate and enable the usage of VR in an educational-entrepreneurial
context, devices such as Oculus Quest 2/ HTC Vive 2 Pro or the likes are considered
as means to deliver the VR experience. When analyzing this approach, studies have
shown that authentic experiences using immersive technologies such as Virtual Real-
ity or Augmented Reality have increased learner motivation to master the material
and have positively impacted student learning outcomes and retention[BB13]. Fur-
thermore, it was shown in research that VR-based dilemmas are more emotionally
arousing than those presented as text [PC14]. As such, this combination of interactiv-
ity and engagement aims to trigger emotions as the decision makers sees the results
of their actions (ethically/morally good or bad), which in turn can lead to a better
decision making, while also enhancing their ability to make similar decisions in the
future or totally redo their core concept of their businesses to adjust it to be in line
with their moral values.
Even more, one could say that the impact of seeing their result in Virtual Real-
ity, gives the decision maker the possibility to be in a position where most people will
tend to favor the moral correct choice as it provides a sense of accomplishment and
the feeling of being a good person, as opposed to siding with their investors/board
members in an entrepreneurial context. Overall, VR seems promising and could bring
serious opportunities in the way entrepreneurial education is taught, a subject further
discussed in the 4th chapter.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review and
Related Work
Given that in general the education is getting more complex with the constant ad-
dition of new materials and subjects to learn because of the increasing research and
discoveries in different domains, it is vital for government institutions to identify and
take into consideration what are the technologies that can bring major improvements
to the global education systems, and what value can the professors and the students
get from using some of the modern disruptive technologies such Virtual Reality for
teaching and learning.
In the search for existing systematic reviews and studies on VR in an educational
context and VR ethics/VR entrepreneurship, the DTU Findit, ACM Digital Library,
Science Direct, ResearchGate, Google Scholar and Scopus digital libraries combined,
returned 3659 peer-reviewed articles published between 2010–2021, which included
search terms ‘‘virtual reality’’ and ‘‘education’’ in their titles and were linked to edu-
cation, training, teaching, or learning. The most popular application domains covered
in these systematic reviews were medicine (78%), social science (15%), neuroscience
(11%), and psychology (11%). Due to the novelty of immersive HMDs, the inclusion
of conference papers was necessary, as the majority of innovative research and de-
velopment using VR HMDs was being documented in conference papers instead of
journal articles.
Upon removing duplicates and further filtering the search results by using specific
keywords and by reading the abstracts of these studies for whether the immersion
aspect was also included in them, I ultimately found 36 potentially relevant articles
as seen in the next figure, of which 8 were deemed to be the most relevant for this
work.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Literature Review and Related Work
Figure 2.1: Search Results.
2.1
Methodology
The methods used for identifying the relevant literature are adapted from Arksey
and O’Malley’s five-stage framework [AO19], and as such are comprised of: identify
research question, identify relevant studies, selection of studies, charting the data,
summarizing and reporting the results.
Papers were included if they met the following criteria:
(1) the paper had to be published in a peer-reviewed conference or journals
(2) the primary language used to write the paper was English
(3) the full text was available through DTU Find IT, ACM Digital Library or other
reliable sources. For the papers that were relevant but could not be obtained through
DTU/ACM Digital Library using the student account, the other mentioned databases
were manually queried.
(4) the publish date had to be greater than 1 January 2010.
(5) the papers had to be focused on Virtual Reality and Education.
On the same manner, papers were excluded if they met the following criteria:
(1) the full text was not available.
(2) the text was in a different language than English.
(3) the paper was not an article, or it was presented as light work, such as work in
progress papers, posters, extended abstracts.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Methodology
7
(4) the paper was published before 1 January 2010.
Furthermore, besides the initial search tools that the digital libraries offer when
conducting a search, advanced features of their search engines were used in order
to filter all of the virtual reality + education initial results, by applying specific key-
words such as vr application, headset, glasses, goggles, immersive, immersion, HMD,
head mounted display, oculus, vive, samsung gear, google cardboard, playstation vr,
playstation virtual reality, pimax, google daydream, samsung odyssey. These key-
words were used to make severeal aditional searches and were selected to ensure that
the searches would return papers that dealt with newer and more immersive VR tech-
nologies such as HMDs. At the end of this stage, 53 papers where found relevant
by the search engines, and these papers will be part of the final manual selection
(reading) process.
The final process concluded with the selection of 36 relevant papers, out of which
10 were deemed to be the most influential in terms of this paper’s outcome, as they
approached VR and education from different angles and with different purposes in
mind. Furthermore, in order to explore the current use of virtual reality in educa-
tion, I have also analyzed 5 systematic literature reviews (i.e., Jensen & Konradsen,
2018; Merchant, Goetz, Cifuentes, Keeney-Kennicutt, & Davis, 2014; Kavanagh, S.,
Luxton-Reilly, A., Wuensche, B., & Plimmer, B. 2017; Radianti, Jaziar et al.2020;
Suh, Ayoung and Jane Prophet. 2018; ). These studies include articles from 1999 to
2018, identified through extensive literature searches. The aforementioned relevant
papers are as follows :
1. Concannon, B.J., Esmail, S., Roduta Roberts, M. (2019) [CR19]
Head-Mounted Display Virtual Reality in Post-secondary Education and Skill
Training. Frontiers in Education, 4, art. no. 80,.
DOI:10.3389/feduc.2019.00080
2. Jensen, L., Konradsen, F. (2018) [JK18]
A review of the use of virtual reality head-mounted displays in education and
training (2018) Education and Information Technologies, 23 (4), pp. 1515-1529.
DOI: 10.1007/s10639-017-9676-0
3. Merchant, Zahira et al. (2014) [MZ14]
Effectiveness of virtual reality-based instruction on students’ learning outcomes
in K-12 and higher education: A meta-analysis.” Comput. Educ. 70: 29-40.
DOI:10.1016/j.compedu.2013.07.033
4. Kavanagh, S., Luxton-Reilly, A., Wuensche, B., & Plimmer, B. (2017) [KP17]
A systematic review of Virtual Reality in education. Themes in Science and
Technology Education,10(2), 85–119,.
5. Papanastasiou, George & Drigas, et. al. (2019) [PG19]
Virtual and augmented reality effects on K-12, higher and tertiary education
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Literature Review and Related Work
students’ twenty-first century skills. Virtual Reality, Volume 23.
DOI: 10.1007/s10055-018-0363-2
6. Suh, Ayoung and Jane Prophet. (2018) [PAS18]
The state of immersive technology research: A literature analysis.
Comput.
Hum. Behav. 86: 77-90.
DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2018.04.019
7. Chavez, Bayron & Bayona, Sussy. (2018) [BB18]
Virtual Reality in the Learning Process. Trends and Advances in Information
Systems and Technologies (pp.1345-1356)
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-77712-2_129.
8. Hu-Au, Elliot & Lee, Joey. (2018) [HL18]
Virtual reality in education: a tool for learning in the experience age. Interna-
tional Journal of Innovation in Education. 4.
DOI: 10.1504/IJIIE.2017.10012691.
9. Radianti, Jaziar et al. (2020) [RJ20]
A systematic review of immersive virtual reality applications for higher educa-
tion: Design elements, lessons learned, and research agenda.” Comput. Educ.
147: 103778
DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103778
10. Akcayir, M. and Akcayir, G. (2016) [AA16a]
Advantages and challenges associated with augmented reality for education: A
systematic review of the literature.Educational Research Review, 20, 1-11.
DOI: 10.1016/j.edurev.2016.11.002
2.2
Related Work and Literature Analysis
In the 36 final reviewed articles, I could identify more than 5 application domains,
indicating that there is an interest in the use of immersive VR technologies in many
different fields, especially in engineering, military, healthcare and computer science
sectors. However, this acknowledgement must be taken with a grain of salt, as most
articles did not discuss experiences with or lessons learned from implementing VR in
real university scenarios or courses. In fact, the majority of papers reported on the
development process or explored potential uses of VR-based learning.
In some areas, VR seemed to be mature enough to be used for teaching procedu-
ral, practical knowledge and declarative knowledge. Examples included military ap-
plication, surgery, nursing, and astronomy.
In these cases, more professional VR
applications were used and were proven to be appropriate for learning in higher ed-
ucation. However, the majority of articles indicated that VR for education is still in
its experimental stages when it comes to prototyping and testing with students.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Related Work and Literature Analysis
9
This is because basic interaction is the only design element used, and appears in all
types of VR learning content. As such, several authors of the 36 papers highlight
two different levels of user interactions: first - interactions that occur inside the VR
environment and second - interactions with the hardware, such as the usage of sensors
in the headset or other physical objects that connect users with the VR objects.
Further analysing their content, many of the papers claim to have created VR for
specific purposes in a realistic environment and the element ‘‘realistic surrounding’’
or ”immersive environment” was found in almost all learning contents.
However,
the terminology of realism is still not uniform, as some papers understood realistic
surroundings to be a high-fidelity VR environment with complex and high-quality
graphics, while for others it could also mean ‘‘realistic enough’’, in that the user can
recognize the environments or the objects, without the creation of objects with real-
world details. On the same note of immersion and realistic environment, high end
HMDs such as Oculus Rift or HTC Vive were the most commonly used immersive
VR technologies. Many of these high-end VR systems used various supporting tools,
such as controllers, touchpads, and haptic feedback.
Even with the use of such high-end HMD’s in VR applications for higher educa-
tion, the majority of authors did not mention explicit learning theories or learning
outcomes as their theoretical foundation upon the students interacting with a VR sys-
tem. As such, the articles mostly highlighted the underlying theories of educational
VR design, but did not report on the technical development and its implications in
detail. As a result, it was also hard to extract any design elements from these papers,
as the evaluation focused mainly on usability, while also being limited on defining
the outcome of VR usage in education and any lessons learned or explicit learning
theories that can be enforced by its usage. This can also be seen as another indicator
of the VR maturity level, which still remains a barrier for its adoption in regular
teaching activities.
Nevertheless, there were several notable articles that actually measured or evaluated
how much the students’ knowledge or skills progressed after the use of immersive VR
(Farra[FSU18] and Zhang and Gao [ZG17] ), while also several articles in the literature
provided design elements for using VR in education. As such, Bujdosó et al.[BNS17]
suggested MaxWhere as a VR collaborative arena (ViRCA) for encouraging interac-
tions with other students. In this example, it is possible to assign tasks to others,
generate new content, and work in shared documents. In the same manner, Zizza et
al.[ZN18] suggested the VRLE platform, involving one instructor and a group of stu-
dents, to improve social competencies and social interaction. The users interact with
the environment, as well as with instructors and peers, using virtual hands and voices.
Even more, Hickman and Akdere[AH18] reported a conceptual work that describes
a possible VR platform for improving intercultural leadership, which included design
elements such as passive observation, immediate feedback, and realistic surroundings.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Literature Review and Related Work
As mentioned before, the reviewed articles span across different VR application do-
mains, and look at VR and its usage in education from different angles. That being
said, the most notable findings that help answer the question of ”usefullness of VR
in education” are drawn from the recent work of Wang et al.[WPW18], Chavez and
Bayona[BB18], Suh and Prophet[PAS18], and Jensen and Konradsen[JK18].
(1) Suh & Prophet (2018) discussed the state of immersive VR research in their
systematic study, and in particular, named current research trends, major theoretical
foundations, and research methods used in previous immersive technology research.
Regarding research trends, Suh and Prophet[PAS18] found four popular domains that
use immersive technologies: education, entertainment, healthcare, and marketing.
Furthermore, they also identified two main research interest areas.First, studies that
examine the user experience and the effects of unique system features of immer-
sive technology(such as VR, AR, MR). Second, the research explores how the use
of immersive technologies enhances user performance through learning and teaching
effectiveness, task performance, and pain management.
With respect to the theoretical foundations employed in existing immersive tech-
nology studies, these authors further identified the flow theory, conceptual blending
theory, cognitive load theory, constructive learning theory, experiential theory, mo-
tivation theory, presence theory, situated cognitive theory, media richness theory,
stimulus–organism–response model, and the technology acceptance model. In terms
of the research method, experiments, surveys, and multi-method approaches were
frequently used. Suh and Prophet[PAS18] provided the following classification frame-
work for immersive technology use:
• Stimuli aspect (i.e., sensory, perceptual, and content),
• Organism aspect (i.e., cognitive and affective reactions),
• Response aspect (i.e., positive and negative outcomes),
• Individual differences in VR use (i.e., gender, age, sensation-seeking tendency, and
personal innovation).
(2) Jensen & Konradsen(2018) reviewed the use of HMD’s in education and
training for skill acquisition. The authors examined factors influencing immersion
and presence for applying VR for education, the influence of immersion and presence
on learning, and situations where HMD’s are useful for cognitive, psychomotor and
affective skills acquisition. They also studied physical discomfort due to HMD usage
and learners’ attitudes toward HMD’s. The authors stressed the importance of the
content, e.g.
simulations as learning enablers rather than the HMD itself.
Some
barriers of using HMDs in education and training were identified, i.e. lack of content
and the designs of the HMD’s which are more entertainment-oriented than education-
oriented. They noted that to be relevant for teachers, HMD’s should possess user
content editing capability.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Related Work and Literature Analysis
11
Despite the focus on immersive VR technologies, the study of Jensen and Konrad-
sen[JK18] is different from the scope of this thesis, as their work are not concerned
with analyzing the application of VR in education and in terms of learning content,
design elements, or underly any learning theories that could be achieved by using
VR in education. Furthermore, their findings are limited to declarative knowledge,
gesture skills, and emotional control, while this paper is interested in validating the
application of VR in entrepreneurial education and its possibility of enhancing deci-
sion making in some scenarios.
(3) Chavez & Bayona (2018) looked at VR in the learning context and exam-
ined the characteristics that determine successful implementation of this technology
as well as its positive effects on learning outcomes. The authors defined 24 character-
istics of VR, such as interactive capability, immersion interfaces, animation routines,
movement, and simulated virtual environment. They discovered that, in certain sub-
jects such as medicine, the ‘‘movement’’ feature is vital for learning about the reaction
of a person’s body, whereas, in general education, the ‘‘immersion interfaces’’ are of-
ten used as a way to learn through ‘‘live experience’’ that is closer to reality.
This [BB18] is one of the papers that had the most significance for this thesis, as
the authors further specified 17 positive effects of VR, including improving learning
outcomes, living experiences that are closer to reality, intrinsic motivation, increasing
level of interest in learning, and improved skills.
(4) Wang et all (2018) specifically surveyed the use of VR technologies for edu-
cation and training in the engineering field. The authors focused on VR technologies,
applications, and future research directions. The study found five major technology
categories used in the construction engineering context—desktop VR, immersive VR,
3D game-based VR, information modeling VR, and augmented reality. The authors
noted that desktop VR was used to improve the students’ motivation and compre-
hension. Under immersive VR, the authors subsumed HMDs combined with sensor
gloves and suits, the so called virtual structural analysis program and CAVE systems,
where the immersive virtual environment is formed around the user’s location by us-
ing a 3D immersive VR power wall.
In their work, Wang et al.[WPW18] concluded that immersive VR was important
for improving concentration and giving trainees a measure of control over the envi-
ronment. Building information modeling VR has been applied in construction en-
gineering to visualize schedule information and construction work on site, enabling
students to interact with building elements in a VR environment, and a system that
includes a question-and-answer game to enhance the learning experience. The authors
also found that VR applications are mostly used in architectural visualization and
design education, construction safety training, equipment and operational task train-
ing, and structural analysis education. In addition, Wang et al.[WPW18] revealed
five future directions for VR-related education:
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Literature Review and Related Work
• Integrations with emerging education paradigms,
• Improvement of VR-related educational kits,
• VR-enhanced online education,
• Hybrid visualization approaches for ubiquitous learning activities,
• Rapid as-built scene generation for virtual training.
Although the aforementioned research papers provide valuable insights on the us-
age of VR in education, there is a large gap in the literature, present in the form of
immersion brought by VR. This is because although Suh and Prophet (2018) focused
on immersive VR in their systematic review, they also examined several different ap-
plication areas besides education, such as healthcare and marketing. Thus, in their
work, immersive VR applications in the education field were not discussed in-depth.
Likewise, another review done by Merchant et al.[MZ14] stresses the learning out-
comes of using VR in education, but without taking immersion into account.
In the same manner, Chavez and Bayona[BB18] did not look at immersive VR in
particular but rather examined the characteristics of VR in general, while Wang et
al.[WPW18] discussed immersive VR among other related technologies, such as non-
immersive VR (i.e., desktop VR) and augmented reality.
2.3
Literature Findings and Conclusion
Present in most of the analyzed papers, it is confirmed that VR environments devel-
oped for educational purposes, target mainly higher education. To a lesser extent,
some VR solutions have been developed to target secondary and primary education.
Furthermore, even though the reviewed studies did not usually refer to a specific ped-
agogical approach, three main approaches were found to be explicitly or implicitly
used to develop VR learning environments.
First, the majority of the studies describe learning to be acquired from a constructivist
perspective, where students develop knowledge through active experimentation and
experience process (Kavanagh et al.[KP17]). This was also referred to as experiential
learning or situated learning, where students are able to use the virtual environments
to simulate their actions as if they were in the real-world (Concannon et al.[CR19]).
Other studies exploit the collaborative potential of the VR environments aligning to
the social constructivism perspective. In this case, the interaction within the VR
environment with other students or teachers is possible, which also enables learning
(Concannon et al.[CR19]; Kavanagh et al. [KP17]). Lastly, another use of VR is for
gamification or game-based learning purposes, where the VR technology is utilized
to recreate an environment in which the users play and learn at the same time. Ad-
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Literature Findings and Conclusion
13
ditionally, (Concannon et al.[CR19]) emphasize the importance of student centered
instruction through virtual environments. This means that the students are active
participants and responsible for their own learning by constantly interacting with
the environment, which, at the same time provides feedback and adaptive challenges
(Concannon et al.[CR19]).
In terms for the usability and the reasoning behind using VR in education, Kavanagh
et al.[KP17] as well as Concannon et al.[CR19]), reviewed the studies’ rationale to
use VR as an instructional tool. They concluded that from a pedagogical perspective,
the VR immersion factor enables a learner-centered instruction in which the students
actively lead their own learning process. Students are required to interact directly
with the recreated environment, explore and develop knowledge from their experi-
ence. Additionally, VR can facilitate multi-sensory learning stimuli, simulations for
skill training, access to intangible concepts as well as personalized learning experi-
ences that adapt to the students’ interests and cognitive ability providing different
levels of challenge and real-time feedback (Concannon et al.[CR19]).
From a motivational perspective, since VR is a new technology, making use of it can
improve the students’ engagement, enjoyment and motivation to learn the content by
developing interesting learning activities as well as game-based learning models (Ka-
vanagh et al.[KP17]). Lastly, from a practical perspective, Concannon et al.[CR19]
found that the use of VR provides other benefits compared to training the same skills
in the real world. First, VR can be used to train skills in interaction with objects
that in real-life could be unsafe or inaccessible. Second, the resources required to
train the same skills in the real world such as time, location and cost. For example,
the VR environment can provide a cost-effective solution to train surgical skills that
in the real world can be very costly (Concannon et al.[CR19]), while also enhancing
collaboration in a common virtual space with people in different locations through a
VR system.
When focusing on the learning outcomes of implementing VR in education, the VR
environments’ immersive property allows students to experience learner-centered con-
ditions that make learning more flexible and a unique experience to discover and
construct knowledge at their own pace (Papanastasiou et al.[PG19]). Many studies
that use VR for education are based on the assumption that more immersion is related
to better learning outcomes (Jensen & Konradsen[JK18]). Overall, virtual-reality in-
struction, in its three formats simulations, virtual worlds, and games, has been shown
to be quite effective (Merchant et al.[MZ14]). However, some results may vary accord-
ing to the instructional design features (i.e., type of feedback, collaboration, teacher
availability, among others), outcome measurements, retention intervals, level of im-
mersion and repetition (Jensen & Konradsen[JK18]; Marchant et al.[MZ14]). One of
the main learning outcomes includes knowledge acquisition and skills training (Con-
cannon et al.[CR19]; Jensen & Konradsen[JK18]; Papanastasiou et al.[PG19]). Re-
garding the cognitive skills or knowledge acquisition, the VR systems studied, mainly
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Literature Review and Related Work
focused on helping students remember and understand facts.Nevertheless, no studies
reported the use of VR to help students develop other higher-level cognitive skills
such as critical thinking (Jensen & Konradsen[JK18]).
Furthermore, few studies investigate the use of VR to develop interpersonal or affec-
tive skills (Jensen & Konradsen[JK18]; Papanastasiou et al.[PG19]). Similar to the
psychomotor skills training, this type of training requires repetition and high fidelity
to simulate a virtual human or social situation that may evoke an emotional response
from the learner (Jensen & Konradsen[JK18]). An example of this training is a VR
simulator created to train health professionals to perform diagnostic interviews in
eating disorders through psychopathological explorations of virtual patients (Jensen
& Konradsen[JK18]). Other VR environments are used to develop collaboration and
communication skills by facilitating the interaction and collaboration between people
from different locations or with communication diﬀiculties (e.g., people in the autistic
spectrum; Papanastasiou et al.[PG19]).
Another often mentioned goal when using VR is increasing the users’ motivation
or engagement to learn the subject content by prompting the users’ interest in the
VR environment (Concannon et al.[CR19]). VR encourages students’ active partic-
ipation in learning by doing activities (Papanastasiou et al.[PG19]). In this regard,
Jensen & Konradsen[JK18] found that participants perceived the VR models to be
useful and exciting. Nevertheless, users’ in some studies found the VR models to be
discouraging as it may provoke physical discomfort, feeling of unsafety and loneliness
(Jensen & Konradsen[JK18]).
2.3.1
Connection to Research Questions
Although there are several unaddressed issues in terms of VR in previous papers, such
as the lack of studies involving the application of immersive HMD’s in entrepreneur-
ship education or the fact that most papers do not target only the education sector
when discussing the potential of VR, the papers supported the answering of our re-
search question.
Kavanagh (Kavanagh et al.[KP17]) showed us that VR being a new technology, brings
a new aspect to learning and the use of it can improve the students’ engagement,
enjoyment and motivation to learn the content, by developing interesting learning
activities. In the same manner, Concannon (Concannon et al.[CR19]), showed us
that VR can be used to train skills in interaction with objects that in real-life could
be unsafe or inaccessible, without the resources required to train the same skills in
the real world such as time, location and cost, while also enhancing collaboration
in a common virtual space with people in different locations through a VR system.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Literature Findings and Conclusion
15
Lastly, Papanastasiou (Papanastasiou et al.[PG19]) showed us the learning outcomes
of implementing VR in education, where the VR environments’ immersive property
allows students to experience learner-centered conditions that make learning more
flexible and a unique experience to discover and construct knowledge at their own
pace.
All of these findings connect directly to our research question of identifying the
usefulness of VR in entrepreneurship education, as the same experiences, benefits
and learning outcomes described in these papers, apply also in entrepreneurship ed-
ucation, and as such support the theory that VR could enhance entrepreneurship
education.However, drawn from the analyzed literature, despite the advantages that
VR environments can provide to educational settings, there are also some challenges
or disadvantages of implementing VR in entrepreneurship education. The challenges
have been discussed in the different studies, such as the work of Kavanagh et al.[KP17],
where they classify these disadvantages in four main issues.
First, the setup time, software and hardware costs, as well as training for teachers and
students required to use the VR software in education. Second, the VR solutions often
require a specialized solution that may present inaccuracies regarding recognition or
hardware usability which hampers the learning process. Third, a lack of engagement
or ineffectiveness for the learning goal. Lastly, the insuﬀicient realism employed by
the VR environment, software usability and motion sickness (Kavanagh et al.[KP17]).
Regarding the latter, Jensen and Konradsen[JK18], found eight out of 21 studies that
reported physical discomfort and cyber-sickness symptoms when using VR. These
symptoms influenced the learner’s attitude towards the VR environment and were
correlated with lower learning outcomes (Jensen & Konradsen[JK18]).
==PAGE:24==
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Virtual Reality in
Education: Present
and Future
The concept of VR is not new, as it is a part of a larger family of technology-mediated
experiences involving a varying degree of blends of reality with virtual components.
In the early 1990’s VR’s potential already existed and was discussed and evaluated
by important names such as Milgram and Kishino[MK94] that introduced in 1994
the concepts of ”Mixed Reality” – a merging of the real and virtual worlds, and
the ‘’Mixed Reality Continuum’’ which is a taxonomy of the possible combinations
between the virtual and the real world, as seen in the next figure.
Figure 3.1: Milgram’s Mixed Reality [MK94].
Analyzing fig 3.1, we can see the Virtual Environment (VE) on the right side,
where the user’s view of the world is completely replaced by computer generated vir-
tual content. On the opposite left end is the Real Environment (RE) where none of
the user’s view is replaced by virtual content. Virtual reality is basically the creation
of a realistic or believable virtual world with a computer that users can explore and
interact with in an immersive way. In this sense Kavanagh et al.[KP17] describe it
as “a simulated system or digital representation that can be similar to or completely
different from the real world.”
VR promised to bring an exciting future – where everyone would wave their hands to
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Virtual Reality in Education: Present and Future
travel through strange neon geometric places, converse with virtual people, and expe-
rience adventures in perfectly simulated worlds or times (Steinicke[Ste17]). However,
at the time, VR did not go far, and other than primarily military and industrial uses
such as combat training and 3D visualisations (Cruz-Niera[Cru16]), it was uncomfort-
able, not realistic, expensive and required immense amounts of computing power to
render.
Today, we are greeted with a very different landscape; the technology that once
was too expensive or impractical for consumers is now readily available, thanks to
the VR’s evolution over the course of the last decade, as seen in fig 3.2.
Figure 3.2: VR Evolution [Sph21].
The popularity of several mainstream consumer products like the Google Cardboard,
Daydream View, Oculus Rift, HTC Vive, Samsung Gear VR, Playstation VR, and Mi-
crosoft HoloLens are evidence that technical developments have finally resolved many
of the problems that previously doomed VR. In addition, the popularity of smart-
phones and their rapidly increasing capabilities has expanded VR’s reach to more
==PAGE:27==
3 Virtual Reality in Education: Present and Future
19
consumer bases. Development and investment in VR – including key players Apple,
Microsoft, Facebook, and Google (Mason[Mas16]) – totalled over $2.3 billion in 2016
alone (Digi-Capital[Dig17]). Many are optimistic that VR/AR can transform several
industries, including education, entertainment, healthcare and corporate training, by
bringing immersion to the mix.
Specifically, immersion concerns the amount of senses stimulated, interactions, and
the reality’s similarity of the stimuli used to simulate environments. This feature can
depend on the properties of the technological system used to isolate the user from re-
ality. Higher or lower degrees of immersion can depend by three types of VR systems
provided to the user:
• Non-immersive systems are the simplest and cheapest type of VR applications
that use desktops to reproduce images of the world.
• Immersive systems provide a complete simulated experience due to the support of
several sensory outputs devices such as head mounted displays (HMDs) for enhancing
the stereoscopic view of the environment through the movement of the user’s head,
as well as audio and haptic devices.
• Semi-immersive systems such as Fish Tank VR are between the two above. They
provide a stereo image of a three dimensional (3D) scene viewed on a monitor using
a perspective projection coupled to the head position of the observer.
To further elaborate on this, immersion describes the involvement of a user in a
virtual environment during which his or her awareness of time and the real world of-
ten becomes disconnected, thus providing a sense of ‘‘being’’ in the task environment
instead. Freina and Ott[FO15] define this term as ‘‘a perception of being physically
present in a non-physical world by surrounding the user of the VR system created
with images, sound, or other stimuli’’ so that a participant feels he or she is actu-
ally ‘‘there’’. Likewise, low-budget HMD’s for mobile devices, such as Samsung Gear
VR and Google Cardboard, enable everyone to experience immersive virtual environ-
ments, while in addition the current devices also offer interaction capabilities. While
high-end VR equipment comes with dedicated controllers that support game play
(e.g., Oculus Touch), low-budget HMD’s, such as Google Cardboard, support gaze
control or enable the user to interact with the virtual environment by providing a
magnetic switch.
The HMD market sees the most prevalent use (ref next fig), and is expected[Glo19] to
be valued at USD 25 billion this year(2022), growing at a Compound Annual Growth
Rate of 39.52% between 2019 and 2025.
Therefore, the time is right to study immersive VR, primarily due to the increased
capability of VR technology and reduced costs. For example, the recently released
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Virtual Reality in Education: Present and Future
Figure 3.3: VR Technology Usage.
Oculus Quest comes in the form of a cordless HMD. While the design enables the
user to move more freely, the cost is set at approximately 400 USD—pretty much
the same price as the previous generation Rift with cables. Moreover, VR has been
described by Rogers[Rog19] as the learning aid of the 21st century.
Furthermore, getting on track with this thesis’s topic, in tandem with Rogers[Rog19],
a recent study suggests that students retain more information and can better apply
what they had learned after participating in VR exercises (Krokos, Plaisant, & Varsh-
ney, [KP19]). Considering the potential learning enhancement through VR use, it
is understandable why researchers, organizations, and educators nowadays examine
this technology intensively, looking to add an extra dimension to the classroom with
respect to both teaching and learning.
Sharing the interest that educators and organizations have in VR when it comes to
education, we need to ask the questions of ”why the extra dimension that VR brings
in the classroom is needed” and ”how can VR improve the learning experience ?”.
To answer these questions, we look at the traditional education system and formulate
a set of problems that have been persistent through time; problems that could be
solved by introducing VR in the classroom.
Problem 1: traditional methods of teaching lead to a lack of student en-
==PAGE:29==
3 Virtual Reality in Education: Present and Future
21
gagement
A widespread problem in education is that traditional methods of lecture-based ed-
ucation lead to disengaged students (Delialioglu, [Del12]). This lack of engagement
is considered a major reason for many unfavourable behaviours hindering student
success, including dissatisfaction, negative experience, and dropping out of school
(Delialioglu[Del12]). If students’ engagement with academic activities is increased, so
does the students’ learning and personal development (Delialioglu[Del12]).
Looking at the first problem, we can identify some opportunities that VR can bring
to complement the traditional forms of teaching.
Opportunity 1: virtual reality leads to increased student engagement
Several characteristics of VR provide an opportunity to boost student engagement. As
a hands-on, interactive, immersive experience, it provides a novel way of learning for
students, delivering powerful new experiences they may not have encountered before
(Lau and Lee[LL15]). For example, Google Expeditions allows teachers to transport
students to virtual field trips to Mars, the bottom of the ocean, and many other
settings, which can spark new interest in subject matter, provide a shared experience
for better classroom discussion, and improve overall engagement (Ferriter[Fer16]).
Experiences like these provide unique and fresh learning moments that draw in stu-
dents and spark their interest as they actively explore and exercise their curiosity.
This increased engagement can be an opportunity for addressing typically boring or
low appeal subject areas. For example, Costa and Melotti[CM12] found that VR
exhibits increased interest in archaeology, especially where interest was low in the
past. The novelty and entertainment value of VR can be used strategically to draw
in the attention of lost and disinterested students, including in subjects that some
students may usually find boring or irrelevant. From there, VR-specific teaching can
maximise the learning potential of these experiences, as it also boosts engagement by
providing students with a strong sense of presence and immersion compared to tradi-
tional learning environments (Bailenson et al.,[BY08]; Dalgarno and Lee, [DL10]).
In essence, engaging a student in an authentic, multi-sensory experience, VR makes
a subject area come ”alive”. The ability to simulate an environment and increasing
a student’s sense of presence is one of the most important opportunities of VR to
create more engaging educational experiences.
Opportunity 2: virtual reality allows for constructivist learning
VR also provides an opportunity for constructivist learning, by allowing students
to construct their own knowledge from meaningful experiences. In these types of
experiences, students engage in authentic problems, exploring solutions and perhaps
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Virtual Reality in Education: Present and Future
collaborating with others.This affordance of VR gives students the ability to con-
struct visual and manipulable objects to represent knowledge, an affordance that
traditional learning methods lack. Thus, VR has great potential to enhance the edu-
cational landscape by making immersive learning environments customisable, actively
engaging, and self-paced for student success (Smith et al.[SW08]).
VR also provides an opportunity for training, therapy, or simulation in situations
where repeated practice and a safe space to fail are present. This can be useful as
spaces for therapy for students with disabilities, post-traumatic stress disorder, or
social anxiety. This is because the virtual environment allows students control over
their learning in a consequence free and explorative manner, through which they be-
come empowered and more engaged (Crosier et al.[CC00]; Standen and Brown[SB00]).
VR applications such as VR Language Learning and Public Speaking VR, give stu-
dents a way to practice public speaking without fear of serious consequences from
their mistakes . In essence, VR allows for practice in environments that are highly
immersive and closely parallel real-world situations.
Keeping the scope on highly immersive experiences and looking at the opportuni-
ties that VR can bring in the above mentioned education scenarios, we can easily
identify another problem when it comes to the way traditional teaching is done.
Problem 2:
it is diﬀicult to deliver authentic, highly relevant contexts
for learning
Students often find classroom-based learning to be irrelevant, as there is a discon-
nect between content learned in textbooks and authentic practice in the ‘real-world’.
Gee[Gee04] describes this as education lacking ‘situated’ learning. Correctly imple-
mented, situated learning in the example of biology allows students to learn terms
while seeing the broader applicability, instead of simply memorizing biological facts
isolated from context. Virtual reality can provide an environment for situated learn-
ing that is relatively easy to access. Through the increased relevance and situated
nature of virtual worlds, students can learn academic content in contexts that in-
crease the potential for learning (Gee[Gee04], and as such an opportunity for VR to
be relevant in the classroom is created.
Opportunity: virtual reality provides authentic experiences to impact stu-
dent identity
VR brings with it authentic experiences and makes it possible to visit any location,
time, or person in a relatively inexpensive way via virtual field trips. This creates
powerful learning opportunities for experiencing historical contexts, scientific environ-
ments, and personally meaningful moments, such as the human body to be explored
through the blood vessels, and battles from the 1500’s to be reenacted in great detail
(Bienz[Bie]).
==PAGE:31==
3 Virtual Reality in Education: Present and Future
23
This level of immersion and storytelling is impossible to achieve through standard
means of teaching, and as such VR does not only ”show” better what and how it
happened, but also gives the students the ”feeling” of how it happened through its
immersive techniques, allowing students to experience different stages of emotions
based on what type of material is presented.
Talking about the student’s ”feeling” and emotions experienced in a VR environment,
we acknowledge another problem that is present in the traditional way of teaching,
and that can be partially solved by introducing VR experiences in education.
Problem 3:
teaching 21st century skills in a traditional classroom set-
ting is diﬀicult
A somewhat recent problem in education is that today’s workforce increasingly de-
mands 21st century skills such as creativity, empathy, critical thinking, and techno-
logical literacy, but these kinds of skills are diﬀicult to teach in a traditional classroom
and are not emphasized in curriculum’s or teaching methods. That is because of sev-
eral reasons, most notably that technology is frequently used to simply increase the
effectiveness of traditional teaching methods (Dede[Ded10]). This can also be the
case and an opportunity for using VR, which could help educators and students alike
in the areas of skill building.
Opportunity: virtual reality affords new perspectives and enhances cre-
ativity
When we talk about VR and skill building, VR also enables students to create any-
thing from their imagination and to easily visualise and manipulate objects to make
diﬀicult concepts easier to grasp. Inside creation-oriented or world-building virtual
environments (e.g a tool for building VR apps or models), students can easily visu-
alize or present abstract ideas and demonstrate their mental models (Winn et al.,
[WH00]).This advantage of embodied learning through VR carries great potential in
expensive, dangerous, or spatially creative tasks (Dalgarno and Lee[DL10]).
As an example, Tiltbrush[Goo21] by Google is a VR application that encourages
creativity and artistic expression. Using Tiltbrush, students can paint, sculpt, and
design life-sized three-dimensional objects and landscapes using imaginative and im-
possible materials such as fire, snow and stars – and then share them with others.
Furthermore, in the early days of VR, Winn et al.[WH00]) have also seen the advan-
tages of VR in making abstract concepts into concrete objects in science curricula, so
the VR’s affordance of transferring perspective is not just limited to social or artistic
contexts. They acknowledge that virtual environments can represent in directly visi-
ble and manipulable forms concepts and procedures that are intangible and invisible
in the real world.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Virtual Reality in Education: Present and Future
Another example that comes to mind that facilitates this type of interactions, are
the VR surgeries that medicine students perform as part of their training’s to become
a doctor.The VR environment gives the students and the educators the opportunity
to replicate high risk real life actions such as a surgery,autopsy, etc. in a totally safe
environment that shields the students from making their initial fatal mistakes, while
in the same time giving them the real feel and building their confidence with each
consecutive success.
In conclusion, the introduction of VR in education shows at a first glance that it
could improve general learning contexts, as well as bring a whole new level of experi-
ence for students and educators alike.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Entrepreneurship,
Ethical decision
making and Virtual
Reality: Situational
Analysis
Entrepreneurship education provides individuals with the required skills and knowl-
edge and gives them the ability to recognise relevant opportunities and potential
pitfalls when it comes to a business scenario, but it frequently struggles with finding
effective learning tools.
Yet, at both the theoretical and ontological levels, no firm consensus regarding
entrepreneurship education has been achieved due to the ever-changing landscape
of contemporary entrepreneurship as a concept (Huq & Gilbert[HG00]).
Mwasal-
wiva[Mwa00] emphasises that there is still a non-alignment between what educators
and other stakeholders wish to achieve in training and to transfer the relevant en-
trepreneurial knowledge through applied pedagogical approaches, and relevant suc-
cess indicators. Even more, not all aspects and angles of entrepreneurship can be
taught, with characteristics such as ambition, persistence, self-confidence and risk-
taking being a domain of extensive training (Matlay et al.[MI00]).
A good example of this is that for many years, business educational programs have
had to deal with ethics in entrepreneurship. However, can ethics be taught? Sec-
ondly, how should it be taught? Should ethics teaching be via standalone modules
or embedded in ethics discussion within curricula? Can technology help in teaching
ethics and decision making?
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Entrepreneurship, Ethical decision making and Virtual Reality: Situational Analysis
Ethical decision-making is a crucial part of comprehensive education, but few schools
teach ethics. Introducing ethical dilemmas in the classroom can open up opportuni-
ties not only for debate and critical thinking, but also for personal growth, empathy
for other viewpoints, and self-reflection. Effective ethics instruction is about more
than distributing a list of moral guidelines; it requires teaching students how to nav-
igate their own moral decision-making. Students learn “to search for and evaluate
their assumptions, to find the reasons behind those assumptions, to examine without
prejudice another’s opinion and to make a thoughtful decision with confidence.The
practice not only fosters better ethical decision-making, but it may also have a posi-
tive effect on academic performance.
Exercises that require assessments of ethical dilemmas can improve reasoning and
critical thinking skills—valuable assets in many academic contexts. In this context,
students can apply ethical considerations to historical events, scientific discoveries,
and technological or medical developments.Beyond academics, ethical training de-
velops important “soft skills” like respect, empathy and compassion, as exploring
conflicts from different points of view—and and trying to understand the value be-
hind an opinion—also makes them more empathetic to others.
First, people must perceive the ethical dimensions of an issue that they face (moral
awareness). Second, they must have the ability to decide upon a course of action that
is ethical (moral decision making). Third, they must have the desire to act on that
ethical decision (moral intent). Finally, they must have the motivation and courage
to act upon that desire (moral action). Teaching behavioral ethics can help students
improve on all four dimensions.
These four dimensions where initially categorized in Rest([RN94]), where the four
key steps to acting ethically leads to the understanding of how behavioral ethics con-
tributes, as seen in (ref next fig).
==PAGE:35==
4 Entrepreneurship, Ethical decision making and Virtual Reality: Situational Analysis
27
Figure 4.1: Rest’s Decision Making Model [RN94].
One of the complicated aspects of ethical decision making, is that many moral de-
cisions that are quite straightforward — even easy — to resolve in a classroom or dur-
ing training exercises seem far more diﬀicult to successfully resolve when confronted
during actual day-to-day decision making. This is because responses to dilemmas
in text-based cases often represent what a person thinks they should do, not what
they would really do. The careful and dispassionate reflection involved in studying
text-based cases is not always a feature of real-world decision making, where profes-
sionals are under time and performance pressures and influenced by organizational
cultures.This is because, firstly, in exercises, the consequences of decisions are identi-
fied for participants. Instead of confronting the challenge of identifying which of the
many hundreds of decisions made each day have ethical implications, exercises hand
the specific dilemma to participants. Such exercises vastly simplify one of the main
challenges — identifying the ethical dilemma in the first place, by placing a single
decision into focus. Secondly, distinguishing training exercises from real-life decision
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Entrepreneurship, Ethical decision making and Virtual Reality: Situational Analysis
making, is that training inevitably exposes different points of views and judgments.
Although many organizations outwardly express a desire for a diversity of opinions,
in practice, those differing viewpoints are often stifled by the desire to agree or ap-
pease others. Finally, unlike in training, when a single decision might be given an
hour of careful analysis, most actual decisions are made quickly and rely on intu-
ition rather than careful, reflective reasoning. This can be especially problematic for
moral decisions, which often rely on routine and intuitions that produce mindless
judgements that don’t match up with how we’d desire to respond if we considered
the decision with more time.
This happens because, when there is little time to
deeply reflect on decisions, we rely on routines and the surrounding norms to dictate
behavior.Creating training exercises that better simulate the actual environment, cir-
cumstances, and pressures where ethical decisions are made is the first step toward
addressing these critical challenges. Here is where the potential of bringing Virtual
Reality into entrepreneurship and ethical decision making, can be questioned and
researched.
While utilizing this virtual reality environment has not yet been widely adopted,
it appears that The Sloan School of Management at Massachusetts Institute for Tech-
nology is one of the first educational institutions engaging their business students in a
sophisticated virtual reality exercise by using World Climate, a simulated role-playing
game. In this game, students are challenged to negotiate a climate agreement to re-
duce greenhouse gas emissions. The students have several options on how to approach
the decision-making process with negotiation tactics and advance their improvisation
and public speaking techniques (Childers, 2019[Chi19]). In the same manner, Niebuhr
& Tegtmeier (2019[NOT19]) have investigated how virtual reality environment help
entrepreneurs give more charismatic investor pitches and thus raise their effectiveness
and chances in obtaining desired funding. Through their empirical study, they found
that rehearsing business pitches in a virtual reality setting gradually improves the
speaker’s charismatic tone of voice and enhances their presentation when returning
to the traditional rehearsal setting. The latter would also explain why discussing
and pitching ideas in social virtual reality settings such as AltSpaceVR, is gaining
popularity.
In the same manner, while service-based businesses require sharpening the vast array
of soft skills, product-based business requires visualising the projected outcomes. By
bringing in Virtual Reality, we create the possibility of familiarising the entrepreneur
with product development through three streams, namely simulations where products
can be tested virtually, skills training where individuals can optimise the product de-
velopment and realisation processes, and communication with other actors such as
users, experts, and customers. In this scenario, individuals can interact with objects,
test them in various settings, and assess the prototypes with virtual prototyping. As
a result, Virtual Reality provides individuals with an opportunity to develop compli-
cated and complex radical new products with insignificant costs. Furthermore, these
==PAGE:37==
4 Entrepreneurship, Ethical decision making and Virtual Reality: Situational Analysis
29
products can be developed in an agile design manner (Choi & Chan,[CC04]) so that
an early insight on how a particular product could function in various environments
can be gained (Costa & Jorgen 2006[CJ06]). This is the performance of a contextu-
alized experimentation that lowers the fail factor (Delarue & Lageat[DL06]). These
products could afterwards be presented to other peers in either a decentralised social
virtual reality setting or a teacher-led virtual reality class.
In this sense, the mixed research on VR in entrepreneurship, VR in ethical decision
making, or behavioral ethics in entrepreneurial organizations has developed from a
small niche area to a more stand-alone field, one that has gained not only in number
of articles written but in the legitimacy of the topic and the field. Research has shown
that VR-based dilemmas are more emotionally arousing than those presented as text
(Patil et al., [Pat14]). Scholars have also found that video-based cases may inhibit
critical thinking (Basu Roy & McMahon[BM12]), which could explain why partic-
ipants who watched a video of the ethical dilemma found the decision easier than
peers who read about it, as they reflected on it less. Finally, scholars comparing text
and video cases found that students reading could set their own pace and critically
reflect on the material (Woodham et al.[Woo+15]). Such reflective decision-making
is less emotional (Patil, et al.[Pat14]), and while it takes more effort, it is less likely
to be perceived as diﬀicult or overwhelming.
As an overall assessment, although existing research gives educators plenty of infor-
mation on how to use VR technology in the class room, such as the former mentioned
(Kavanagh et al.[KP17]), video and text are still seen as tried and true, which can
lead to a sense that there is no need for VR. Furthermore, a lack of existing VR cases
for teaching, combined with the perception that developing new ones is diﬀicult and
expensive, also works against the use of VR in business/entrepreneurship teaching.
As a result, whether cases are presented in text, video or VR, a key question in teach-
ing business ethics is whether classroom decision-making accurately reflects what
students would do in real life. Rest[Res86] said that ”Asking people what they would
do in a scenario seems like an obvious approach to assessing whether they would
behave ethically, but stated intentions may not accurately predict actual behaviour”.
As such, to test Rest’s theory and presented in the next chapter, I conducted an
exercise involving 10 persons, that participated in experiencing and answering an eth-
ical dilemma scenario, by using 2 types of message deliveries : a text based version
of the scenario, and a narrated video based scenario.
==PAGE:38==
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Ethical Scenario
Testing and Results
Before going forward with testing and this chapter, I contacted a software develop-
ment company that creates VR training applications and VR research environments
for both the private and the public sectors, in order to discuss the best approach for
introducing VR in an entrepreneurship environment and also validate the use of VR
in ethical decision making.After discussing all implementation possibilities, the main
takeaway from the meeting that I had with the person, was that everything is possible
but not necessarily affordable, as even the simplest VR interaction or scenario cre-
ation requires thousands of script lines and software development hours(application),
and therefore challenging and expensive for me to do on my own in a small available
time window.
As a result of this impediment, the ethical scenario testing was done using a text
based and video based narrated scenario, with the following parameters:
5.0.1
Ethical Scenario - Relationship Dilemma
Thor is CEO of a nonprofit startup. He hired Annie, a high school friend, last summer,
to stabilize the company while Thor finished his degree. Annie is from a prominent
family, with a powerful network that has raised a large amount of money for Thor’s
nonprofit. Both Thor and Annie are committed to the mission of helping oppressed
female students go to college, and with this shared vision they get along well.
Although Annie is great at strategy formulation, Thor finds that she is poor at exe-
cuting plans and taking action. Now that Thor is graduating, he wants to take the
nonprofit to the next level, but is concerned about Annie’s lack of execution will hold
the company back. On the other hand, Annie made a major contribution keeping
the company afloat the past year, in addition to her family’s contributions, not to
mention the two have been friends for some time now.
What should Thor do?
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Ethical Scenario Testing and Results
5.0.2
Theory Testing
The purpose of the testing is to validate the potential of VR in entrepreneurship eth-
ical decision making, and probe if the immersion level brought by ethical dilemmas
being presented in VR, helps in bringing a higher moral awareness and stimulation
of the decision maker’s cognitive abilities in comparison with the traditional methods
of teaching. However, as the testing was not done in VR, but in (1) text based + (2)
video-based narrated scenarios, these findings do not directly validate the use of VR
(HMD) in entrepreneurial decision making.
Even so, from my point of view, this test verifies if a more visual immersive way
of presenting a business case/ethical dilemma combined with the human emotional
reaction (moral awareness, choice making, etc.), gives different results than a pure
text-based(where you have to imagine) teaching material where the students (in this
case the participants) are more detached and prone to make rushed decisions without
reflecting that much on the situation and its outcome.
This being the case, even if the test is not done in VR, the results can be relevant,
as if we see an increase in engagement (and maybe even different answers) with the
narrated video version of the case dilemma, it will enforce the theory that by bringing
an even higher level of immersion in the decision making process through the use of
VR, in comparison with text based and video based cases, the students/participants
will become more moral aware of the case situation, and reflect more on its outcome,
benefits, downsides, implications, etc. before making a decision.
5.0.3
Testing Scenario
The test was conducted by using the Garmin Vivosmart 4 watch seen in fig 5.1 as a
measuring device, with the following key metrics being monitored :
- real time heart rate and average heart rate over the test period
- real time stress levels and average stress levels over the test period
- time
==PAGE:41==
5 Ethical Scenario Testing and Results
33
Figure 5.1: Garmin Vivosmart 4 Metrics.
The Garmin Vivosmart allowed for real-time individual monitoring of the data
for each participant during the test, as well as exporting the measurement data after
each test for later comparison. Prior to the test’s start, each participant wore the
device for 15 minutes, to allow for normalization of each individuals initial metrics.
Furthermore, between each test, test data was collected for each individual and a
period of 15 minutes cool-of break was allocated.
The testing was split in 2 phases and 2 groups, were in the first part, 1 group re-
ceived the ethical scenario delivered in the form of a simple text, while the 2nd group
received the scenario delivered in video format(presentation using a projector) with
live narration/commentary. Both groups were allocated 15 minutes to provide and
answer to the dilemma, and the groups were separated in different rooms with no
contact during both tests. In the second part of the test, the groups switched places.
Upon completing both tests, 2 individual data sets for each participant were col-
lected, that measured their heart rate and stress level across the 15 minutes period
of each test.
5.0.4
Testing Participants
There were 5 males and 5 females volunteers as participants for the test, from which
4 participants knew each other beforehand.The age and occupation of the subjects
are summarized in the next figure.
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Ethical Scenario Testing and Results
Figure 5.2: Test Subjects.
As a remark, none of the participants knew the content of the tests beforehand,
and all of them have a higher education degree.
5.0.5
Results and Discussion
The results obtained during the test, where read directly from the device using the
built in display and based on the oﬀicial classification of the Garmin Vivosmart 4
metrics which are the following:
• Stress Level - the stress level range is from 0 to 100, where 0 to 25 is a resting
state, 26 to 50 is low stress, 51 to 75 is medium stress, and 76 to 100 is a high
stress state.
• Heart Rate - the heart beats per minute range is 0 to 180, where above 100
bpm is considered a high bpm (Tachycardia) and under 60 bpm is considered a
low bpm(Bradycardia)
Taking this classification into account, the results from the 2 tests are presented in
the following fig 5.3
Figure 5.3: End Results.
==PAGE:43==
5 Ethical Scenario Testing and Results
35
As seen in the above table, 2 out of the 10 participants in the test, switched
their initial decision after seeing the video based scenario, from which 1 is a male
participant and 1 is a female participant.What is interesting in this result, is that the
female’s data readings are not very different between the first and the second test,
the male’s stress levels during the second test has dropped with almost 10 points.
Furthermore, we can see from the readings that 70% of the participants had slightly
higher heart beats per minute and stress levels during the video presentation.
As an observer of the test, it was noted that although not timed, the paper/text
base version of the scenario was completed by the participants in shorter time-frame
(about 50% faster) in comparison with the video based scenario.
Asked about their experience during the test and about the moral dilemma involved,
test participants noted the following:
• the text based scenario was easier to follow, as they could always go back and re-
read parts of the question or scenario in order to fully understand the situation
• the text based test seemed more like a straightforward YES or NO situation,
in comparison with the video based test, which seemed more complex, even
though they are exactly the same
• the text based test seemed more suggestive that the right decision is not to keep
Annie
• the video based test seemed longer and more complicated
• the video based test did not allow for re-reads if something was misunderstood
• the video based test presented the relationship dilemma better
• in the video based test, the answer was harder to give (although in 80% of the
cases it remained the same)
Furthermore, when asked about what was the factor that changed their initial deci-
sion, the 2 participants that switched their answers after the second test, replied that
during the video presentation, the scenario became more clearer, which comes a bit
in contradiction with their answers, as the answers are complete opposite from one
another, because while the female changed her answer from keeping Annie to letting
Annie go, the male participant did exactly the opposite and instead of letting Annie
go, he thinks that Annie should stay, as otherwise an injustice will be made.
The conclusion that can be drawn from this test is, that although visually enhanced
methods of teaching etc. could be more immersive, thought and empathy provoking,
or more representative than traditional text, things can get a little confusing when
a lot of visual information has to be processed, especially when we are also adding
ethical decision making into the mix.
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Ethical Scenario Testing and Results
Nonetheless, the test served its purpose, as it proved that a more enhanced visual ex-
perience stimulates the participants(some said it was harder to make a decision, some
said it was easier and clearer, some changed their decision) more than the traditional
text based methods. Considering that this video based test is on a way lower level
than what VR can bring into entrepreneurship education and its business dilemmas,
we can at least be sure that if implemented correctly, it will change the learning
experience for many.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation in
Entrepreneurship:
Theoretical System
Identified in the work of Annetta L.A.[Ann10], serious educational games(SEG) have
been shown to address both the cognitive and affective dimensions of learning [OB05],
and hence, enable users to adapt learning to their cognitive needs, and provide a
higher intrinsic motivation for learning. They have further shown to provoke active
player involvement and deep learning through hands-on exploration and experimen-
tation and increased visualization. More specifically, we see this approach to be a
good candidate method for enhancing the entrepreneurship courses in education, as
we propose the development of a educational application/system that combines ed-
ucational learning theory and entrepreneurship curriculum with existing technology
frameworks, by making use of the technology present in the Oculus Quest 2(OQ2)
VR system [Fac19].
Figure 6.1: Oculus Quest 2[Fac19].
==PAGE:46==
38
6 Implementation in Entrepreneurship: Theoretical System
The OQ2 VR system is chosen as it embodies portability with power and ease of use,
in comparison with other VR systems available today, that require a constant physi-
cal connection to a computer, are more cumbersome, are more expensive, or have a
more diﬀicult to use interface and initial set up. Analyzing the system, Oculus first
tinkered with standalone virtual reality with its Go headset, but it wasn’t until the
Quest model that the company really achieved a genuinely immersive VR experience
without any cables required. The proposed Oculus Quest 2 follows in the footsteps
of its predecessor(Quest), but with a more powerful processor, a sharper screen, and
a lighter design. It does all of this for just $299.99, a full $100 less than the original
Quest and significantly lower than competitors like the $699 HTC Vive Cosmos/Vive
Pro 2 and $999 Valve Index.
Given that there is also an option for PC tethering with an accessory cable, Ocu-
lus Quest 2 is a comprehensive VR system at a reasonable price, that looks to be the
best choice in terms of aiding students and educators alike in their quest to bring VR
into the classroom.
However, before implementing Oculus Quest 2 VR in the classroom, there are a
few considerations educators need to take into account. First, ensure the technology
is adaptive and compatible to the current classroom and school technology infrastruc-
ture (e.g. internet connectivity when streaming rich VR experiences, power sockets
for the connection link, pc powerful enough to stream simultaneously to multiple
devices, etc.). Second, determine the affordability and accessibility of the new VR
technologies, development tools, etc.
in regards to the desired course/curriculum
functionality. VR headsets are an expensive investment for most universities (aver-
age of 100 students per class) and such technologies should bridge the opportunity
gap rather than expand it. And lastly, focus on the learning experience rather than
the excitement of these new technologies, as the purpose of introducing VR in en-
trepreneurship education, is to flip the experience and make it student-centered and
use VR to enhance the curriculum, and not to replace it.
6.1
System Architecture
As seen in fig 6.2 the traditional system makes use of a VR-Service in the form of a
dedicated app store, that can be accessed by using a traditional mobile phone, or by
directly interacting with it from inside the VR experience. This gives the ability for
any user to connect to the platform, no matter the type of mobile phone operating
system that they have, without bringing any additional costs to the table.In the same
time, the store being available worldwide, gives creators the ability to develop ap-
plications and tailor specific experiences for different targeted users and make them
available on the platform for ease of use.
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Platform Functionality
39
Figure 6.2: Oculus Quest App[Fac19].
As the process of creating applications and then getting them published to the Ocu-
lus store, requires at the moment an approval from the Oculust Quest 2 developing
company(Facebook), we propose that for specific educational implementations, a ded-
icated VR educational hub should be developed, where students and educators have
access based on specific credentials.
In this case, talking about implementation in entrepreneurship education, we pro-
pose the creation of a focused study platform, that would give students access to
applications and games specifically designed for enhancing the curriculum with VR
experiences tailored for entrepreneurship such as product prototyping, investments,
idea pitching, business development, decision making, public speaking, and so on.
Furthermore, to increase the platform’s connectivity, the VR hub could be made ac-
cessible also as a group of students for class projects, instead of just individuals in a
classroom/education scenario. In that sense, professors can act as administrators of
the content, and assign, monitor or evaluate a course’s group tasks such as product
prototyping, business plans, etc. Moreover, the access to the university institution’s
cloud, would also enable the sharing of VR experiences, by being able to synchronize
in time and location the content shared simultaneously among multiple VR users.
6.2
Platform Functionality
The core of the entrepreneurship VR platform would be the educational service/appli-
cation that delivers the content to the Oculus Quest 2 headset, and would comprise
==PAGE:48==
40
6 Implementation in Entrepreneurship: Theoretical System
of the following features:
• Content and Delivery Management System - interface that gives the professor
control of what resources are being uploaded to the platform, and is able to delete or
upload custom content such as videos, educational games, and other relevant appli-
cations
• Custom Lessons Plan - interface that allows the professor to plan ahead upcoming
lessons, and allows a level of automation for content delivery ( for example in the
case of studying from home during the pandemic: the professor could preload lessons
that students could experience in a light VR setup such as without being connected
with a wire to a pc
• HMD Management - the professor is able to register and control what content
is delivered to each individual headset. This allows for organizing the headsets in
groups that receive different content from each other. In the same time, the professor
can see in real time what each student is seeing, headset movement, and orientation,
which aids for tracking the student’s progress and focus
• Playback Controls - as the content is sequenced simultaneously to each headset,
the professor controls the pace at which the content is delivered, making it possible to
describe and comment on what the students are seeing, while also having the ability
to pause the feed at any time (e.g. for clarifying something, for asking questions, etc.)
• Step-by-step instructions on how to create custom VR classroom simulations (use-
ful for professors when they want to create a specific scenario or hold a lesson only
in VR) and parameters. The custom-made scenarios can be then shared with the
students/professors.
6.3
Client Functionality
The VR client in this system is Oculus Quest 2 device, through which the chosen
simulation is being served. This is the part of the system that enables the students
to experience the virtual reality content.Depending on the content that is being de-
livered through the HMD, the student will gain access to the following:
• Hand and head based gestures that allow students to navigate and select activ-
ities
• Environment interaction: through the functionality of Oculus Quest 2, the user
can immerse himself and interact with surrounding simulated objects, allowing users
to visualize content and interact with 3D models
• Environment and 3D objects creation and uploading: the student can create, mod-
ify, upload or delete VR elements and objects, as part of tasks or projects
• Student collaboration: students can work together or share models built in their
VR experience and thus collaborate with other students on an assignment or task
• User interaction and collaboration monitoring. The platform detects the actions
==PAGE:49==
6.4 Usability Examples in Entrepreneurship Education
41
and gestures performed by each student and records them, aiding in measuring the
student’s performance and course specific academic outcomes, or his/her contribu-
tions during collaboration tasks
• Self led learning - allows students to explore the course at their own pace, making
their own decisions and learning in their own way, using course resources and mate-
rials made available by the professor
6.4
Usability Examples in Entrepreneurship Education
Given the above proposed theoretical system, we now want to delve a bit deeper and
be more descriptive of the system’s possible usage by giving some examples of how
VR can enhance entrepreneurship education :
1. VR Product prototyping - as entrepreneurship deals with the business sector and
the creation of entrepreneurship ventures and new products, this VR platform
can facilitate the creation of MVP’s during courses using 3D modeling.It can
enhance building, visualizing, presenting and discussing a product prototype
alone or in a group, as part of a task or as an exam.
2. VR Business Idea Brainstorming and Development - being in virtual environ-
ment, brings endless possibilities. As such the students can work alone or co-
create to develop a business idea, from start to finish.
This can start from
creating a Business Model Canvas in VR and finishing with a full blown model
of the business ( e.g. transport company : city infrastructure built in VR or
uploaded from external sources, 3D modeling of the routes, etc.)
3. VR Business Cases for Ethics Training - entrepreneurship deals often with ethi-
cal decision making in business scenarios where a made decision can have serious
impacts on other people or other businesses. As such, entrepreneurship profes-
sors often use business cases to present ethical dilemmas to students. Often,
these cases are presented in text form, limiting a student’s emotional implica-
tion. In this case, professors can use VR to present the same business cases,
but in a more immersive way that will raise a student’s moral awareness and
emphasize the impact of that decision.
4. VR Idea Pitching and Public Speaking - entrepreneurship is all about innovation
and ideas. These ideas need to be presented and sold to possible investors. As
most students do not have experience with public speaking or idea pitching, the
platform could be used to train public speaking and idea pitching either as an
assignment/task given by the professor, or as a self learn and practice activity.
==PAGE:50==
42
6 Implementation in Entrepreneurship: Theoretical System
Regardless of how powerful a platform like this could be and what possibilities it could
offer for seamless collaboration between students and teachers, the implementation
of VR system like this is limited to:
• Cost - VR is a completely new technology that comes with a price. Not only the
price of the device matters but also the price of the content that a university
needs to have to be able to use it effectively
• Time spent in VR - The amount of time spent in VR should be limited. Some
people point out negative experiences such as headache, nausea, motion sickness,
dizziness, etc. It’s advised to take 10-15 minutes break after each 30-minute
session in VR
• Quality of content - You can’t just show fancy pictures and expect students to
get immersed into learning. There has to be a proven teaching methodology
with the use of VR devices under the supervision of an experienced mentor.
Otherwise, the effectiveness of VR in education can’t be measured
• Estimation of VR effectiveness - It’s vital to track the performance of students
with and without the use of VR devices. It’s a serious project to build a sys-
tem like this with supposedly great potential, but there should be A/B testing
performed to make sure the scale of the project will pay off
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion and
Recommendations
Outlining a handful of virtual reality educational settings, we have explored the poten-
tials and possibilities that virtual reality can bring to enhance learning and knowledge
transfer processes for entrepreneurship education. Existing literature shows that vir-
tual reality enables individuals to step into immersive environments, engage in social
interactions with other peers, visualise their actions that are relevant to a particular
learning outcome, and reflect on their actions. Furthermore, during the conducted
research, we were interested in observing if there are any previous implementations
of VR in general education and entrepreneurship education, as well as what the user
adoption might be in practice when it comes to the novel moral dilemma and decision-
making ethics. In this sense, research shows that VR can also be used to effectively
study people’s responses in high stakes decision-making scenarios, but their reaction
might vary, as people’s personalities come into place. While some studies showed
an increase in learning motivation, student interaction, and an increased engagement
during courses where VR was used as a teaching method, other studies also showed
that some of the participants experienced nervous reactions and panicked responses,
as a result of the immersion and the feeling of realness that the VR technology creates.
Given all of these findings, we draw the following answers for the 2 research ques-
tions that motivated this research :
(1). What is the potential of using Virtual Reality in entrepreneurial education?
Educators have slowly begun to embrace VR and its wide possibilities for learning
as the technology rapidly moves to the mainstream. As discussed in 2nd chapter of
this paper, VR is especially useful for providing several opportunities: increasing stu-
dent engagement; providing constructivist, authentic experiences to impact student
identity; allowing for new perspective taking and empathy; and supporting creativity
and the ability to visualise diﬀicult models. A strong reason for utilising VR as a
learning tool in entrepreneurship education is that it brings young students with a
new experience of learning by being immersed and doing high risk activities in a safe
environment, that otherwise would have a meaning full impact in real life.
==PAGE:52==
44
7 Discussion and Recommendations
The most notable activities and areas in entrepreneurship education where VR would
bring direct benefits can be :
• product prototyping : as entrepreneurship and business areas are tied to one an-
other, students and educators alike could use VR to develop, share and analyze
virtual prototypes for different business ideas, without spending real resources
for actual development
• public speaking : there are already available several applications that use the
VR environment to give an user the ability to hold a presentation of an product,
business idea, etc in a safe VR environment, as a means to rehears a business
pitch an prepare a person for the real life interaction with an audience. This
would help student perfect their sales ideas, as well as help eliminate the nervous
aspect of delivering a speech for the first time
• educators can create custom VR environments: these custom environments
allow each aspect of the simulation to be controlled, and can be more effec-
tive than text and video in preparing students on how to respond to various
entrepreneurial environments, such as ethical business dilemmas, business ex-
pansions, etc. Such VR environments can easily be adapted to address pressing
or new issues for a company or industry, and can be tailored according to the
educator’s needs.
• students and educators can visualise and interact with 3D VR environments
and models: as the potential of viewing objects and environments in VR is
limitless, students and educators alike, can see 3D VR models of various objects,
terrains, settlements, etc. that can serve them when planning a business venture,
developing an idea or a product etc.
( e.g.
see the whole city in 3D when
planning a public transport business)
(2).
How could we use Virtual Reality to enhance ethical decision making in en-
trepreneurship educational courses
As VR has hit the mainstream, much debate has arisen over its ethical complexi-
ties. This is due to traditional moral responsibilities that do not always translate to
the digital world, and one aspect we argue is essential to ethical responsibility for
virtual reality, is that VR solutions in education must integrate ethical analysis into
the design process, and practice dissemination of best practices. In the digital era,
organizations and individuals need to uphold ethical and professional responsibilities
to society and the public, and as such, creativity should be combined with diligence.
Decision making, ethics, and critical thinking should go hand in hand throughout
the development process.Furthermore, development needs to include future predic-
tions, forecasting impact, evaluating and elaborating on possible consequences, and
==PAGE:53==
7.1 Considerations
45
identifying any issues with openness and transparency.
As such, VR implementation in entrepreneurial education decision making, is a com-
plex process that is not so easy to achieve. However, one aspect of ethical decision
making in entrepreneurship education where VR can bring enhancements is in the
form of VR assisted cases of business dilemmas.
We mentioned in the 2nd and 3rd chapter of this paper that known traditional meth-
ods of teaching entrepreneurship and business ethics do not create the desired impact
upon the students, and that most persons make decisions based on their personal
moral awareness and character.
VR can enhance this educational experience, by
means of VR business cases, instead of the traditional text or video based business
cases. Research has shown that VR-based dilemmas are more emotionally arousing
than those presented as text (Patil et al.[Pat14]), and that business actors are strongly
influenced by emotions when they make tough calls in crises (Sayegh, Anthony Per-
rewé,[SAP04]). Furthermore, scholars have also found that video-based cases may
inhibit critical thinking (Basu Roy McMahon[BM12]), which could explain why par-
ticipants who watched a video of the ethical dilemma found the decision easier than
peers who read about it, as they reflected on it less. This means that text-based
scenarios, in contrast to VR ones, may give students a particularly unrealistic view of
how they would behave, which could prevent them from acknowledging their biases
and learning mitigation strategies (R. Steinbauer & Anh Mai To[ST04]).
The approach of combining a business case with VR, gives the educators the abil-
ity to create their desired business dilemma scenario, and use that scenario to deliver
a session of immersive decision making to the students, where moral awareness is the
key part. The key note here, is that VR does not replace or force a certain decision,
but merely brings a level of immersion and moral awareness to the decision making
aspect, which is not possible by means of the traditional text base business cases. Ed-
ucators in business area and professionals always look for ways to make their courses
stand out, the superiority of VR in revealing decision-making tendencies during ed-
ucational courses makes it a potential differentiator, and as such creating business
cases with the use of VR is a practical way to improve business ethics training in
entrepreneurship education.
7.1
Considerations
While virtual reality appears to have this huge underused potential, there are several
drawbacks for broader adaptation of virtual reality technologies in entrepreneurship
education, some of which are also presented in the 2nd chapter of this paper.
One important issue in the use of VR is the high level of skill and cost required
==PAGE:54==
46
7 Discussion and Recommendations
to develop and implement VR, particularly immersive systems. Very high levels of
programming and graphics expertise and very expensive hardware and software are
necessary to develop immersive VR, and considerable skill is needed to use it effec-
tively in instruction. While desktop VR technology has dramatically reduced the
skill and cost requirement of virtual environments, it still demands some investment
of money and time. Another set of limitations of VR environments stems from the
nature of the equipment they require. A long-standing problem with immersive VR
has been health and safety concerns for its users. The early literature was heavy
with studies of headaches, nausea, balance upsets, and other physical effects of HMD
systems. While these problems have largely disappeared from current VR research as
the equipment has improved, and appear to be completely absent in the new desktop
systems, little is known about long-term physical or psychological effects of VR usage.
A second equipment limitation of VR arises from the fact that it is computer-based
and requires high-end hardware for successful presentation. Inadequate computing
gear can dramatically limit the response time for navigation and interaction in a vir-
tual environment, possibly destroying its sense of presence for users and damaging or
destroying its usefulness as a simulation of reality. This response situation sometimes
referred to as the “latency problem” of VR, can also arise from bandwidth limitations
when VR is distributed over a network or the Internet, as it would be in an educa-
tional scenario.
According to Kavanagh and colleagues[KP17], they categorized these disadvantages
in four main issues.
First, the setup time, software and hardware costs, as well
as training for teachers and students required to use the VR software in education.
Second, the VR solutions often require a specialized solution that may present inaccu-
racies regarding recognition or hardware usability which hampers the learning process.
Third, a lack of engagement or ineffective for the learning goal. Lastly, the output
problems include the insuﬀicient realism employed by the VR environment, software
usability and motion sickness (Kavanagh et al.[KP17]). Regarding this latter, Jensen
and Konradsen[JK18], found eight out of 21 studies that reported physical discomfort
and cybersickness symptoms when using the VR models. These symptoms influenced
the learner’s attitude towards the VR environment and were correlated with lower
learning outcomes (Jensen Konradsen[JK18]).
Furthermore, altough Jensen & Konradsen and Kavanagh et al. also pointed out
some of the drawbacks of combining VR and ethics, currently, there is a lack of in-
formation on the short and long-term physiological impacts of VR. There is also not
enough known about who and what types of individuals are using VR (age, types of
experience, attitudes, and levels of digital sophistication). Many questions relate to
individual attributes, and to what degree the user needs to possess “critical reasoning”
abilities. As such, the intersection of ethics and virtual reality has to date focused
primarily on individual issues, for example, specific content, or blood or violence.
While these dilemmas are important, many other subtler ethical issues relating to
==PAGE:55==
7.2 Research agenda and recommendations for future development
47
virtual reality, demand the attention of designers, scientists, engineers, and related
communities. Designers, programmers, and testers usually focus on specific areas, yet
they could be involved in contributing to solutions to ethical issues, or they could be
responsible for inputting ethical concerns.
Frequently, designers must make decisions based on the level of their knowledge and
experiences. But designers’ scope of knowledge does not always encompass the wide
range of areas that might impact the public related to physiological, social, or ethical
aspects. Interestingly, with regard to the last point, if a person is immersed and
believes they are really acting out the experience, they will react as they would in a
real situation (i.e., behaviors could emerge). In that case, the user would be actively
and cognitively engaged with the virtual environment. As a result, the ways that VR
intertwines user’s psychological and behavioral aspects must be taken into account
by the designers.
Even with these requirements and drawbacks, virtual reality has significant poten-
tial and is ready for both classroom and personal use. There is a required seismically
shift in education that will push the use of virtual reality tools forward in teaching
curriculum’s of entrepreneurship education. Besides, new, more profiled and fully
supported platforms and the content will need to be developed in order to expand
learners’ engagement into virtual environments. Finally, an undergoing research effort
will need to be expanded with empirical studies in order to support the effectiveness
of incorporating virtual reality in the classroom. Learning possibilities in virtual re-
ality environments are practically endless, and certainly, entrepreneurship education
could stand to benefit.
7.2
Research agenda and recommendations for
future development
Going forward, based on the researched topic and results evidenced in the literature,
it is recommended that further studies and research to be done in the field of Virtual
Reality and ethical decision making, as best practices in this domain are currently
ambiguous and should be properly developed in the future to ensure the proper im-
plementation of such systems.
Furthermore, future work should also include the
exploration of alternative teaching methods when involving entrepreneurship, as cur-
rent methods do not provide a way for the students to experience the impact their
choices might have in a real-world scenario.To elaborate on this, future VR devel-
opment for higher education needs to be built on existing experiments (rather than
being exploratory from scratch such as this paper) and to provide results that allow
for generalization. However, to make thorough contributions, such works need to take
==PAGE:56==
48
7 Discussion and Recommendations
a holistic standpoint, thus providing the necessary theoretical background to build
novel educational VR applications is a future research task. Furthermore, as part of
this future research task, researchers will also need a comprehensive market overview
of existing VR applications that support education at the moment.
Connecting with the above, future research also needs to continue to move beyond
simply assessing moral awareness and measure what perspective the decision maker
has adopted. As noted in the 3rd chapter of this paper, knowing that the decision
maker is not looking at the decision through an ethical frame is not as informative as
knowing through which specific lens that decision maker is looking. Doing so will be
useful for not only understanding why a particular decision has been made, but how
one might alter that outcome. If for example, we know that a certain situation is
likely to prompt a business versus an ethical frame and in turn to produce unethical
decisions, it may be possible to investigate what factors led to the prompting of the
business frame and the diminishing of the ethical frame, and how to produce ethical
outcomes within the business frame.
From my experience as a student, we should consider the students’ wishes on practice-
oriented learning contents rather than memorizing facts. If lecturers have already
had good experiences with VR in their lectures, they could use advanced applications
to make teaching more practice-oriented.
Furthermore, it might require complex
changes of the curriculum to shift the focus from teaching declarative knowledge to
more practice-oriented content. Nevertheless, we believe that the true potential of
VR lies not in better teaching of declarative knowledge, but in offering opportunities
to ‘‘learn by doing’’ which is often very diﬀicult to implement in traditional lectures.
We have limited results in literature concerning VR aiming at improving communica-
tion, collaboration and soft skills, behavioral impacts and analytical skills to be able
to provide some meaningfully recommendations for the most useful design elements
that will meet specific learning goals. Thus, my recommendation to interested edu-
cators is not to be too afraid about applying VR to their curricula if they have the
means to do so.
Since VR applications exist in some fields, it makes sense to learn from existing
good cases such as health education, engineering, etc. Even without a body of best
practices for entrepreneurship education, solid cases can be used as an indicator of
what works. I am aware that the price tag of VR implementation in a classroom can
be maybe too high to be convincing, as long as a positive impact on entrepreneurship
learning is not proven yet, but I recommend starting with a realistically small scope
and tailoring the application case to what seems feasible and achievable. This could
be done with the integration of low-budget mobile HMDs or the use of VR appli-
cations in a few selected lectures, as this could represent first steps toward a broad
adoption of VR in entrepreneurship and higher education.
==PAGE:57==
7.3 Limitations and Delimitations
49
As an overall conclusion on the answers for the research questions, it should be
pointed out that VR is no silver bullet and we must be wary of the tempting novelty
of technology and its hype, as sometimes is followed by disillusionment. Although
VR has the potential to enhance both entrepreneurship education, as well as ethical
decision making, with interactive simulations and stunning visuals that immerse stu-
dents in authentic learning experiences, thorough research and practice are necessary
to explore the full potential of using VR in entrepreneurship educational settings.
7.3
Limitations and Delimitations
There are several limitations when it comes to the content of this thesis and the
results of the exploratory research done to validate the 2 research questions. These
delimitations and limitations are derived in tandem with the outcome of the litera-
ture review[ref here literature review], where it is concluded that due to the current
and previous limited usage of Virtual Reality in an educational setting, along with
the sparse combination of VR and ethics, the research questions and the proposed
educational implementation are backed up only on a theoretical level, and as such
the potential impact on the outcome is not known, as no previous cases of similar im-
plementations where identified in literature. On this note, the following delimitation
parameters are set and considered.
7.3.1
Delimitations
• Research objectives
- the research and the literature review done to reach the objective, considers
only the use of VR in an educational setting and it does not concern with the
general application of VR in the society, in concordance with the scope of this
thesis.
• Research questions
- the area of focus that is used for answering the research questions is delimited
to the educational entrepreneurship and ethical decision making scenarios, as
that is the domain where this research will contribute to.
• Research variables
- in answering the research questions, only literature, technologies, and methods
developed in the time span of 2010-2021 are considered, as the research and its
outcome takes into consideration the advancements made in the VR field in
recent years, in order to back up its theoretical design and prototyping.
7.3.2
Limitations
• Insuﬀicient feedback sample size for the system’s design, or specific participants
==PAGE:58==
50
7 Discussion and Recommendations
for statistical significance
- as this thesis is done in times of a pandemic (COVID-SarsCov2), the access to
relevant people in the VR, educational, and the entrepreneurship fields is very
limited, and as such the sample size is limited to 10 people with an age between
28-37 of which 5 are females and 5 are males
• Lack of previous research studies on the topic which has allowed for further
analysis
- as the advancements in the field of Virtual Reality are the most significant
in the last 10 years, the literature is lacking deep dives into Virtual Reality,
especially when combined with the educational aspect. Furthermore the com-
bination of Virtual Reality and Ethical Decision Making is a niche field, and
previous research studies in this field are very limited, as documented in the
Literature Review section of this paper.
• Limited financial/time resources and/or funding constraints
- as this thesis is done by only 1 student, the software and hardware imple-
mentation of a prototype is not possible, as in order to be able to validate the
prototype, access to a HTC Vive or Oculus Quest 2 devices would be needed,
along with a test bench, software and hardware development kit, etc. which
the student does not posses. As such, the answers to the research questions
are developed based on a theoretical research and approach, along with data
collected during the ethical decision making excercise presented in the previous
chapter
Even though the above limitations and delimitations influence the outcome of this
thesis, to partially overcome these and validate the research and the prototype, cur-
rent modern design and development methods for implementing VR as an application
where taken into consideration before suggesting the design approach and the func-
tionality of a VR system implemented in entrepreneurial education, along with an
extensive documentation on why the advancements in recent years done in the VR
field, could contribute to the spread of this technology in an educational context in
the future. However, these methods and design choices are also made considering
some initial assumptions, as outlined in the next lines.
7.3.3
Assumptions
• Technology Assumptions
- it is assumed that the reader of the paper has basic knowledge of what imple-
menting an Virtual Reality system entails (software, hardware, design, testing)
and has basic knowledge of how it functions (e.g HTC Vive, Oculus Quest, etc.)
• Ethics Theory Assumptions
- it is assumed, that the reader of this paper has knowledge of how ethical
decisions are made in an entrepreneurship/business scenario.
==PAGE:59==
7.3 Limitations and Delimitations
51
• Context Assumptions
- it is assumed that the reader has basic theoretical knowledge on the current
state and practices done in educational systems across the world, and the ad-
vancements and the involvement of technology in a modern educational system.
• Resource Assumptions
- it is assumed that given enough resources (time, human, approved ethical
methodologies and funding) a VR assisted system for entrepreneurship educa-
tion can be implemented
• Continuous Technology Development
- it is assumed that the advancements in the Virtual Reality field will continue
in the upcoming time period, and as such the technology will become cheaper
and easily available in the future, and as such the large scale implementation
of the proposed system as an educational tool will be viable.
Reflecting on all of the points presented above and considering the limitations of this
research and the methods used throughout the paper, this paper’s importance and
relevance comes from improving the literature scene when it comes to combining vir-
tual reality with entrepreneurship and ethics. Furthermore, as the paper suggests a
theoretical approach for a system that can be used as an educational tool, a person
interested in the same domain, could form an idea of the usage and application of
such system in the educational field, while in the same time having the possibility to
contribute to the existing literature, by further continuing the research in the domain,
or by enhancing and modifying this proposed approach and its theoretical implemen-
tation.
As such, the contribution of this paper to the literature may be regarded as a step in
probing and validating the viability of VR as an educational tool in entrepreneurship,
and may be used as an inspiration and a starting point for further research, where
the above mentioned limitations are overcome.
==PAGE:60==
52
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this paper, an exploratory research was conducted focusing on the viability of
immersive VR technologies for entrepreneurship education purposes. Immersive VR
technologies, application domains, learning contents, and design elements being used
in recent literature on educational VR applications were examined and discussed. The
results show that the interest in immersive VR technologies for educational purposes
seems to be quite high, which is indicated by the variety of the research domains
that have applied this technology in teaching. The majority of authors treated VR
as a promising learning tool for higher education, however, the maturity of the use
of VR in higher education is still questionable. Technologies described in most of the
reviewed articles remained in an experimental state and were mostly tested in terms
of their performance and usability.
These facts can hinder the rapid adoption of immersive VR technologies into teaching
on a regular basis. We acknowledge that, in some domains such as engineering and
computer science, certain VR applications have been used on a regular basis to teach
certain skills, especially those that require declarative knowledge and procedural–
practical knowledge. However, in most domains including entrepreneurship education,
VR is still experimental and its usage is not systematic or based on best practices.
This paper pinpoints key gaps that serve to provide insights for future improvements,
especially for VR application developers and teachers in entrepreneurship higher ed-
ucation.
In conclusion, VR technology creates a 3D spatial experience where the user immerses
into a virtual simulation, game or world where he or she can experience different
stimuli to learn (experiential learning), and while it may not be easy to implement in
entrepreneurship education or ethical decision making, that does not mean that it is
not viable and that it could not bring significant improvements to these areas. Time
will tell, if with the wider availability of the technology and eventual decreases in
implementation costs, along with carefully chosen implementation models, will bring
students this immersive learning experience through the means of incorporating VR
into education.
==PAGE:62==
54
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[AA16a]
G. Akcayir and M. Akcayir. “Advantages and challenges associated with
augmented reality for education: A systematic review of the literature.”
In: Educational Research Review, 20 1-11 (2016). url: https://DOI:
10.1016/j.edurev.2016.11.002.
[AA16b]
M. Akcayir and G. Akcayir. Augmented reality in science laboratories:
The effects of augmented reality on university students’ laboratory skills
and attitudes toward science laboratories. 2016.
[AH18]
M. Akdere and L. Hickman. “Developing intercultural competencies through
virtual reality: Internet of Things applications in education and learning.”
In: 2018, pages 24–28.
[Ann10]
L. Annetta. “The “I’s” have it: A framework for serious educational game
design.” In: SReview of General Psychology, Vol., 14 No. 2, pp. 105-1127
(2010).
[AO19]
L. Arksey and H. O’Malley. “Scoping studies: towards a methodological
framework.” In: Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol., vol. 8 no. 1, pp. 19–32 (2019).
[BB13]
D. Bressler and M. Bodzin. “A Mixed Methods Assessment of Students’
Flow Experiences during a Mobile Augmented Reality Science Game.”
In: Journal of Computer Assisted Learning Vol. 29, 505-517 (2013). url:
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12008.
[BB18]
Bayron and Bayona. “Virtual Reality in the Learning Process.” In: Trends
and Advances in Information Systems and Technologies pp.1345-1356
(2018). url: https://10.1007/978-3-319-77712-2%5C_129.
[Bie]
J. Biens. Microsoft Quietly Releases Three new HoloApps, One is More
VR Than MR. url: https://www.roadtoholo.com/2016/04/27/1342/
microsoftquietly- releases- three- new- holoapps- one- is- more-
vr-than-mr/.
[Bis92]
T. R. Bishop. Integrating business ethics into an undergraduate curricu-
lum. 1992.
[BM12]
Robindra Basu Roy and Graham T McMahon. “Video-based cases dis-
rupt deep critical thinking in problem-based learning.” In: Medical educa-
tion 46.4 (2012), pages 426–435.
==PAGE:64==
56
Bibliography
[BNS17]
G. Bujdoso, O.C. Novac, and T. Szimkovics. “Developing cognitive pro-
cesses for improving inventive thinking in system development using a col-
laborative virtual reality system.” In: 8th IEEE International Conference
on Cognitive Infocommunications, CogInfoCom 2017 - Proceedings 2018-
January (2017). url: https://10.1109/CogInfoCom.2017.8268220.
[BY08]
J. Baileson and N. Yee. “The use of immersive virtual reality in the
learning sciences: digital transformations of teachers, students and social
context.” In: The Journal of the Learning Sciences Vol. 17, pp.102–141
(2008).
[CB06]
J. Cohen and R. Bennie. The applicability of a contingent factors model
to accounting ethics research. 2006.
[CC00]
J. Crosier and S. Cobb. “Experimental comparison of virtual reality with
traditional teaching methods for teaching radioactivity.” In: Education
and Information Technologies Vol. 5, No. 4, pp.329–343 (2000).
[CC04]
S. Choi and A. Chan. “A virtual prototyping system for rapid product
development.” In: Computer-Aided Design 36(5), 401-412 (2004).
[CC13]
D.K. Capps and B.A Crawford. Inquiry-based instruction and teaching
about nature of science: are they happening? 2013.
[Chi19]
L. Childers. “ow VR enhances the business school experience.” In: Back-
ground: Theory and research, Psychology Press (2019). url: https://
www.usnews.com/education/best-graduate-schools/top-business-
schools/articles/2019-03-28/how-virtual-reality-enhances-
the-business-school-experience.
[CJ06]
A. Costa and W. Jongen. “New insights into consumer-led food product
development.” In: Trends in Food Science
Technology 17(8), 457-465
(2006).
[CM12]
N. Costa and M. Melotti. “Digital media in archaeological areas, virtual
reality, authenticity and hyper-tourist gaze.” In: Sociology Mind Vol. 2,
No. 1, pp.53–60 (2012).
[CR19]
B. Concannon and R. Roberts. “Head-Mounted Display Virtual Reality in
Post-secondary Education and Skill Training.” In: Frontiers in Education
4 art. no. 80 (2019). url: https://DOI:10.3389/feduc.2019.00080.
[Cra97]
W. Cragg. Teaching business ethics: The role of ethics in business and in
business education. 1997.
[Cru16]
C. Cruz-Niera. “Beyond fun and games: VR as a tool of the trade.” In:
Vol. 11, pages 1297–1300. 2016.
[Ded10]
C. Dede. Comparing frameworks for 21st century skills. 2010.
[Del12]
O. Delialioglu. Student engagement in blended learning environments with
lecture-based and problem-based instructional approaches. 2012.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
57
[Dig17]
C. Digital. Record $2.3 billion VR/AR investment in, 2016, February.
2017. url: https:/www.digi-capital.com/news/2017/02/record-
2%E2%80%933- billion- vrar- investment- in- 2016/#.%20WWZmP.
4jyuUn/.
[DL06]
J. Delarue and T. Lageat. “Conducting contextualized and real-life prod-
uct tests: Benefits and experimental challenges.” In: Woodhead Publishing
(2006).
[DL10]
B. Dalgarno and M. Lee. What are the learning affordances of 3-D virtual
environments? 2010.
[Fac19]
Facebook. Oculus Quest 2. 2019. url: www.oculus.com/quest-2/.
[Fer16]
B. Ferriter. “Tool Review: GoogleExped’s Virtual Reality App.” In: Tem-
pered Radical (2016). url: https://blog.williamferriter.com/2016/
03/09/tool-review-googleexped.%20s-virtual-reality-app/.
[FO15]
L. Freina and M. Ott. “A literature review on immersive virtual reality
in education: state of the art and perspectives.” In: Vol. 1, No. 133, pp.
10-10070. 2015.
[FSU18]
S. Farra, L. Smith, and J. Ulrich. “The Student Experience With Varying
Immersion Levels of Virtual Reality Simulation.” In: Nursing Education
Perspectives: 3/4 2018 Volume 39 - Issue 2 - p 99-101 (2018). url: https:
//DOI:10.1097/01.NEP.0000000000000258.
[Gee04]
J.P. Gee. Situated Language and Learning: A Critique of Traditional
Schooling. 2004.
[Gee09]
J.P. Gee. Deep learning properties of good digital games: how far can they
go? 2009.
[GF15]
M. Gutiérrez and J. Fabiani. Augmented reality to promote collaborative
and autonomous learning in higher education. 2015.
[Glo19]
AR. Global. global-augmented-reality-ar-and-virtual-reality-vr-market-in-
healthcare-marketto-reach-11-14-billion-by-2025. 2019. url: www.prnewswire.
com/news-releases/global-augmented-reality-ar-and-virtual-
reality-vr-market-in-healthcare-marketto-reach-11-14-billion-
by-2025--300831306.html.
[Goo21]
Google. Painting from a new perspective. 2021. url: https : / / www .
tiltbrush.com/.
[HG00]
A. Huq and D. Gilbert. “All the world’s a stage: transforming entrepreneur-
ship education through design thinking.” In: Education and Training
59(2), 155-170 (2000). url: https://doi.org/10.1108/ET-12-2015-
0111.
[HL18]
E. Hu-Au and J. Lee. “Virtual reality in education: a tool for learning in
the experience age.” In: International Journal of Innovation in Education.
4 (2018). url: https://10.1504/IJIIE.2017.10012691.
==PAGE:66==
58
Bibliography
[JK18]
L. Jensen and F. Konradsen. “A review of the use of virtual reality head-
mounted displays in education and training (2018).” In: Education and
Information Technologies, 23 (4) pp. 1515-1529 (2018). url: https://
DOI:%2010.1007/s10639-017-9676-0.
[KP17]
S. Kavanagh and B. Plimmer. “A systematic review of Virtual Reality
in education.” In: Themes in Science and Technology Education,10(2)
85–119 (2017).
[KP19]
E. Krokos and C. Plaisant. “Virtual memory palaces: immersion aids
recall.” In: Virtual Reality 23 1–15 (2019). url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10055-018-0346-3.
[LL15]
K. Lau and P. Lee. “The use of virtual reality for creating unusual en-
vironmental stimulation to motivate students to explore creative ideas.”
In: Interactive Learning Environments 23(1), 3/18 (2015). url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10055-018-0346-3.
[Mas16]
W. Mason. 8 of the Top.10 Tech Companies in the World are Invested in
VR/AR. 2016. url: https://http.//uploadvr.com/8-of-the-top-
10-tech-companiesinvested-in-vr-ar/.
[MI00]
H. Matlay and D. Iacobucci. “Entrepreneurship education in Italian uni-
versities: trend, situation and opportunities.” In: Work Paper 54, 673–696
(2000). url: https://10.1108/00400911211274828.
[MK94]
Paul Milgram and Fumio Kishino. “A Taxonomy of Mixed Reality Vi-
sual Displays.” In: IEICE Trans. Information Systems vol. E77-D, no. 12
(December 1994), pages 1321–1329.
[Mwa00]
E. Mwasalwiba. “Entrepreneurship Education: A Review of Its Objec-
tives, Teaching Methods and Impact Indictors.” In: Education and Train-
ing 52, 20-47 (2000). url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00400911011017663.
[MZ14]
Merchant and Zahira. “Effectiveness of virtual reality-based instruction
on students’ learning outcomes in K-12 and higher education: A meta-
analysis.” In: Comput. Educ. 70 29-40 (2014). url: https://DOI:10.
1016/j.compedu.2013.07.033.
[NA13]
D. Nincarean and M. Alia. Mobile AR: the potential for education. 2013.
[NOT19]
Niebuhr, Oliver, and Silke Tegtmeier. “Virtual reality as a digital learning
tool in entrepreneurship: How virtual environments help entrepreneurs
give more charismatic investor pitches.” In: Digital entrepreneurship. Springer
(2019).
[OB05]
H. Oneil and E. Baker. “Classification of learning outcomes: Evidence
from the computer games literature.” In: The Curriculum Journal, Vol.,
16 pp. 455–474 (2005).
[Pam91]
G. L. Pamental. The course in business ethics: Why don’t the philosophers
give business students what they need? 1991.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
59
[PAS18]
J. Prophet, Ayoung, and Suh. “The state of immersive technology re-
search: A literature analysis.” In: Comput. Hum. Behav. 86 77-90 (2018).
url: https://DOI:10.1016/j.chb.2018.04.019.
[Pat14]
I. Patil. “Affective basis of judgment-behavior discrepancy in virtual ex-
periences of moral dilemmas.” In: Social neuroscience 94-107 (2014).
[PC14]
I. Patil and C. Cogoni. Affective basis of judgment-behavior discrepancy
in virtual experiences of moral dilemmas. 2014.
[PG19]
Papanastasiou and George. “Virtual and augmented reality effects on K-
12, higher and tertiary education students’ twenty-first century skills.” In:
Virtual Reality Volume 23 (2019). url: https://DOI:10.1007/s10055-
018-0363-2.
[Pso13]
J. Psotka. Educational games and virtual reality as disruptive technologies.
2013.
[Res86]
James R Rest. “Moral development: Advances in research and theory.”
In: (1986).
[RJ20]
Radianti and Jaziar. “A systematic review of immersive virtual reality
applications for higher education: Design elements, lessons learned, and
research agenda.” In: Comput. Educ. 147: 103778 (2020). url: https:
//DOI:10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103778.
[RN94]
J. Rest and D. Narvaez. “Moral development in the professions: Psychol-
ogy and applied ethics.” In: Background: Theory and research, Psychology
Press pp. 1–26 (1994). url: https://10.1108/00400911211274828.
[Rog19]
S. Rogers. virtual-reality-the-learning-aid-of-the-21st-century. 2019. url:
www.forbes.com/sites/solrogers/2019/03/15/virtual-reality-
the-learning-aid-of-the-21st-century/?sh=15b7a868139b.
[SAP04]
Lisa Sayegh, William P Anthony, and Pamela L Perrewé. “Managerial
decision-making under crisis: The role of emotion in an intuitive de-
cision process.” In: Human Resource Management Review 14.2 (2004),
pages 179–199.
[SB00]
P. Standen and D. Brown. “Virtual reality and its role in removing the
barriers that turn cognitive impairments into intellectual disability.” In:
Virtual Reality vol. 10 Nos. 3–4, pp.241–252 (2000). url: https://www.
roadtovr.com/fantastic- contraptionhtc- vive- hands- on- pax-
prime-2015/.
[SH13]
J. Smith and R. Hu. Rethinking teacher education: synchronizing eastern
and western views of teaching and learning to promote 21st century skills
and global perspectives. 2013.
[SP16]
R. Sungkur and Panchoo P. Augmented reality, the future of contextual
mobile learning. Interactive Technology and Smart Education. 2016.
==PAGE:68==
60
Bibliography
[Sph21]
L. Sphinx. Evolution of VR in the past decade. 2021. url: https://www.
sphinxworldbiz.com/.
[ST04]
Robert Steinbauer and Anh Mai To. “Virtual Morality.” In: (2004). url:
https://media.cpaontario.ca/insights/pdf/white-paper-virtual-
morality.
[Ste17]
F. Steinicke. “Being Really Virtual: Immersive Natives and the Future of
Virtual Reality.” In: Springer Vol. 11, pages 1297–1300 (2017).
[SW08]
M.J. Smith and K. Wright. “Virtual reality job interview training in
adults with autism spectrum disorder.” In: Journal of Autism and Devel-
opmental Disorders Vol. 44, No. 10, p.2450–2463 (2008).
[Wad16]
M Wadhera. The information age is over; welcome to the experience age.
2016.
[WH00]
W. Winn and H. Hoffman. “The effect of student construction of virtual
environments on the performance of high-and low-ability students.” In:
2000.
[Woo+15]
Luke A Woodham et al. “Medical student and tutor perceptions of video
versus text in an interactive online virtual patient for problem-based
learning: a pilot study.” In: Journal of medical Internet research 17.6
(2015), e151.
[WPW18]
Wang, Peng, and Wu. “A Critical Review of the Use of Virtual Reality
in Construction Engineering Education and Training.” In: International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 15.6 (2018).
[YT13]
J. Yen and C. Tsai. “Augmented reality in the higher education: Students’
science concept learning and academic achievement in astronomy.” In:
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences Vol. 103, 165 – 173 (2013).
[ZG17]
K. Zhang and L. Gao. “Design and Implementation of Fire Safety Ed-
ucation System on Campus based on Virtual Reality Technology.” In:
Proceedings of the 2017 Federated Conference on Computer Science and
Information Systems Vol. 11, pages 1297–1300 (2017). url: https://
doi.org/10.15439/2017F376.
[ZN18]
C. Zizza and D. Nuguri. “Towards a social virtual reality learning environ-
ment in high fidelity.” In: 15th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications
Networking Conference (CCNC) pp. 1-4 (2018).
==PAGE:69==
Articles only
[AA16a]
G. Akcayir and M. Akcayir. “Advantages and challenges associated with
augmented reality for education: A systematic review of the literature.”
In: Educational Research Review, 20 1-11 (2016). url: https://DOI:
10.1016/j.edurev.2016.11.002.
[Ann10]
L. Annetta. “The “I’s” have it: A framework for serious educational game
design.” In: SReview of General Psychology, Vol., 14 No. 2, pp. 105-1127
(2010).
[AO19]
L. Arksey and H. O’Malley. “Scoping studies: towards a methodological
framework.” In: Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol., vol. 8 no. 1, pp. 19–32 (2019).
[BB13]
D. Bressler and M. Bodzin. “A Mixed Methods Assessment of Students’
Flow Experiences during a Mobile Augmented Reality Science Game.”
In: Journal of Computer Assisted Learning Vol. 29, 505-517 (2013). url:
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12008.
[BB18]
Bayron and Bayona. “Virtual Reality in the Learning Process.” In: Trends
and Advances in Information Systems and Technologies pp.1345-1356
(2018). url: https://10.1007/978-3-319-77712-2%5C_129.
[BM12]
Robindra Basu Roy and Graham T McMahon. “Video-based cases dis-
rupt deep critical thinking in problem-based learning.” In: Medical educa-
tion 46.4 (2012), pages 426–435.
[BNS17]
G. Bujdoso, O.C. Novac, and T. Szimkovics. “Developing cognitive pro-
cesses for improving inventive thinking in system development using a col-
laborative virtual reality system.” In: 8th IEEE International Conference
on Cognitive Infocommunications, CogInfoCom 2017 - Proceedings 2018-
January (2017). url: https://10.1109/CogInfoCom.2017.8268220.
[BY08]
J. Baileson and N. Yee. “The use of immersive virtual reality in the
learning sciences: digital transformations of teachers, students and social
context.” In: The Journal of the Learning Sciences Vol. 17, pp.102–141
(2008).
[CC00]
J. Crosier and S. Cobb. “Experimental comparison of virtual reality with
traditional teaching methods for teaching radioactivity.” In: Education
and Information Technologies Vol. 5, No. 4, pp.329–343 (2000).
==PAGE:70==
62
Articles only
[CC04]
S. Choi and A. Chan. “A virtual prototyping system for rapid product
development.” In: Computer-Aided Design 36(5), 401-412 (2004).
[Chi19]
L. Childers. “ow VR enhances the business school experience.” In: Back-
ground: Theory and research, Psychology Press (2019). url: https://
www.usnews.com/education/best-graduate-schools/top-business-
schools/articles/2019-03-28/how-virtual-reality-enhances-
the-business-school-experience.
[CJ06]
A. Costa and W. Jongen. “New insights into consumer-led food product
development.” In: Trends in Food Science
Technology 17(8), 457-465
(2006).
[CM12]
N. Costa and M. Melotti. “Digital media in archaeological areas, virtual
reality, authenticity and hyper-tourist gaze.” In: Sociology Mind Vol. 2,
No. 1, pp.53–60 (2012).
[CR19]
B. Concannon and R. Roberts. “Head-Mounted Display Virtual Reality in
Post-secondary Education and Skill Training.” In: Frontiers in Education
4 art. no. 80 (2019). url: https://DOI:10.3389/feduc.2019.00080.
[DL06]
J. Delarue and T. Lageat. “Conducting contextualized and real-life prod-
uct tests: Benefits and experimental challenges.” In: Woodhead Publishing
(2006).
[Fer16]
B. Ferriter. “Tool Review: GoogleExped’s Virtual Reality App.” In: Tem-
pered Radical (2016). url: https://blog.williamferriter.com/2016/
03/09/tool-review-googleexped.%20s-virtual-reality-app/.
[FSU18]
S. Farra, L. Smith, and J. Ulrich. “The Student Experience With Varying
Immersion Levels of Virtual Reality Simulation.” In: Nursing Education
Perspectives: 3/4 2018 Volume 39 - Issue 2 - p 99-101 (2018). url: https:
//DOI:10.1097/01.NEP.0000000000000258.
[HG00]
A. Huq and D. Gilbert. “All the world’s a stage: transforming entrepreneur-
ship education through design thinking.” In: Education and Training
59(2), 155-170 (2000). url: https://doi.org/10.1108/ET-12-2015-
0111.
[HL18]
E. Hu-Au and J. Lee. “Virtual reality in education: a tool for learning in
the experience age.” In: International Journal of Innovation in Education.
4 (2018). url: https://10.1504/IJIIE.2017.10012691.
[JK18]
L. Jensen and F. Konradsen. “A review of the use of virtual reality head-
mounted displays in education and training (2018).” In: Education and
Information Technologies, 23 (4) pp. 1515-1529 (2018). url: https://
DOI:%2010.1007/s10639-017-9676-0.
[KP17]
S. Kavanagh and B. Plimmer. “A systematic review of Virtual Reality
in education.” In: Themes in Science and Technology Education,10(2)
85–119 (2017).
==PAGE:71==
Articles only
63
[KP19]
E. Krokos and C. Plaisant. “Virtual memory palaces: immersion aids
recall.” In: Virtual Reality 23 1–15 (2019). url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10055-018-0346-3.
[LL15]
K. Lau and P. Lee. “The use of virtual reality for creating unusual en-
vironmental stimulation to motivate students to explore creative ideas.”
In: Interactive Learning Environments 23(1), 3/18 (2015). url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10055-018-0346-3.
[MI00]
H. Matlay and D. Iacobucci. “Entrepreneurship education in Italian uni-
versities: trend, situation and opportunities.” In: Work Paper 54, 673–696
(2000). url: https://10.1108/00400911211274828.
[MK94]
Paul Milgram and Fumio Kishino. “A Taxonomy of Mixed Reality Vi-
sual Displays.” In: IEICE Trans. Information Systems vol. E77-D, no. 12
(December 1994), pages 1321–1329.
[Mwa00]
E. Mwasalwiba. “Entrepreneurship Education: A Review of Its Objec-
tives, Teaching Methods and Impact Indictors.” In: Education and Train-
ing 52, 20-47 (2000). url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00400911011017663.
[MZ14]
Merchant and Zahira. “Effectiveness of virtual reality-based instruction
on students’ learning outcomes in K-12 and higher education: A meta-
analysis.” In: Comput. Educ. 70 29-40 (2014). url: https://DOI:10.
1016/j.compedu.2013.07.033.
[NOT19]
Niebuhr, Oliver, and Silke Tegtmeier. “Virtual reality as a digital learning
tool in entrepreneurship: How virtual environments help entrepreneurs
give more charismatic investor pitches.” In: Digital entrepreneurship. Springer
(2019).
[OB05]
H. Oneil and E. Baker. “Classification of learning outcomes: Evidence
from the computer games literature.” In: The Curriculum Journal, Vol.,
16 pp. 455–474 (2005).
[PAS18]
J. Prophet, Ayoung, and Suh. “The state of immersive technology re-
search: A literature analysis.” In: Comput. Hum. Behav. 86 77-90 (2018).
url: https://DOI:10.1016/j.chb.2018.04.019.
[Pat14]
I. Patil. “Affective basis of judgment-behavior discrepancy in virtual ex-
periences of moral dilemmas.” In: Social neuroscience 94-107 (2014).
[PG19]
Papanastasiou and George. “Virtual and augmented reality effects on K-
12, higher and tertiary education students’ twenty-first century skills.” In:
Virtual Reality Volume 23 (2019). url: https://DOI:10.1007/s10055-
018-0363-2.
[Res86]
James R Rest. “Moral development: Advances in research and theory.”
In: (1986).
==PAGE:72==
64
Articles only
[RJ20]
Radianti and Jaziar. “A systematic review of immersive virtual reality
applications for higher education: Design elements, lessons learned, and
research agenda.” In: Comput. Educ. 147: 103778 (2020). url: https:
//DOI:10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103778.
[RN94]
J. Rest and D. Narvaez. “Moral development in the professions: Psychol-
ogy and applied ethics.” In: Background: Theory and research, Psychology
Press pp. 1–26 (1994). url: https://10.1108/00400911211274828.
[SAP04]
Lisa Sayegh, William P Anthony, and Pamela L Perrewé. “Managerial
decision-making under crisis: The role of emotion in an intuitive de-
cision process.” In: Human Resource Management Review 14.2 (2004),
pages 179–199.
[SB00]
P. Standen and D. Brown. “Virtual reality and its role in removing the
barriers that turn cognitive impairments into intellectual disability.” In:
Virtual Reality vol. 10 Nos. 3–4, pp.241–252 (2000). url: https://www.
roadtovr.com/fantastic- contraptionhtc- vive- hands- on- pax-
prime-2015/.
[ST04]
Robert Steinbauer and Anh Mai To. “Virtual Morality.” In: (2004). url:
https://media.cpaontario.ca/insights/pdf/white-paper-virtual-
morality.
[Ste17]
F. Steinicke. “Being Really Virtual: Immersive Natives and the Future of
Virtual Reality.” In: Springer Vol. 11, pages 1297–1300 (2017).
[SW08]
M.J. Smith and K. Wright. “Virtual reality job interview training in
adults with autism spectrum disorder.” In: Journal of Autism and Devel-
opmental Disorders Vol. 44, No. 10, p.2450–2463 (2008).
[Woo+15]
Luke A Woodham et al. “Medical student and tutor perceptions of video
versus text in an interactive online virtual patient for problem-based
learning: a pilot study.” In: Journal of medical Internet research 17.6
(2015), e151.
[WPW18]
Wang, Peng, and Wu. “A Critical Review of the Use of Virtual Reality
in Construction Engineering Education and Training.” In: International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 15.6 (2018).
[YT13]
J. Yen and C. Tsai. “Augmented reality in the higher education: Students’
science concept learning and academic achievement in astronomy.” In:
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences Vol. 103, 165 – 173 (2013).
[ZG17]
K. Zhang and L. Gao. “Design and Implementation of Fire Safety Ed-
ucation System on Campus based on Virtual Reality Technology.” In:
Proceedings of the 2017 Federated Conference on Computer Science and
Information Systems Vol. 11, pages 1297–1300 (2017). url: https://
doi.org/10.15439/2017F376.
==PAGE:73==
Articles only
65
[ZN18]
C. Zizza and D. Nuguri. “Towards a social virtual reality learning environ-
ment in high fidelity.” In: 15th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications
Networking Conference (CCNC) pp. 1-4 (2018).
==PAGE:74==
66
==PAGE:75==
Misc only
[AA16b]
M. Akcayir and G. Akcayir. Augmented reality in science laboratories:
The effects of augmented reality on university students’ laboratory skills
and attitudes toward science laboratories. 2016.
[Bie]
J. Biens. Microsoft Quietly Releases Three new HoloApps, One is More
VR Than MR. url: https://www.roadtoholo.com/2016/04/27/1342/
microsoftquietly- releases- three- new- holoapps- one- is- more-
vr-than-mr/.
[Bis92]
T. R. Bishop. Integrating business ethics into an undergraduate curricu-
lum. 1992.
[CB06]
J. Cohen and R. Bennie. The applicability of a contingent factors model
to accounting ethics research. 2006.
[CC13]
D.K. Capps and B.A Crawford. Inquiry-based instruction and teaching
about nature of science: are they happening? 2013.
[Cra97]
W. Cragg. Teaching business ethics: The role of ethics in business and in
business education. 1997.
[Ded10]
C. Dede. Comparing frameworks for 21st century skills. 2010.
[Del12]
O. Delialioglu. Student engagement in blended learning environments with
lecture-based and problem-based instructional approaches. 2012.
[Dig17]
C. Digital. Record $2.3 billion VR/AR investment in, 2016, February.
2017. url: https:/www.digi-capital.com/news/2017/02/record-
2%E2%80%933- billion- vrar- investment- in- 2016/#.%20WWZmP.
4jyuUn/.
[DL10]
B. Dalgarno and M. Lee. What are the learning affordances of 3-D virtual
environments? 2010.
[Fac19]
Facebook. Oculus Quest 2. 2019. url: www.oculus.com/quest-2/.
[Gee04]
J.P. Gee. Situated Language and Learning: A Critique of Traditional
Schooling. 2004.
[Gee09]
J.P. Gee. Deep learning properties of good digital games: how far can they
go? 2009.
==PAGE:76==
68
Misc only
[GF15]
M. Gutiérrez and J. Fabiani. Augmented reality to promote collaborative
and autonomous learning in higher education. 2015.
[Glo19]
AR. Global. global-augmented-reality-ar-and-virtual-reality-vr-market-in-
healthcare-marketto-reach-11-14-billion-by-2025. 2019. url: www.prnewswire.
com/news-releases/global-augmented-reality-ar-and-virtual-
reality-vr-market-in-healthcare-marketto-reach-11-14-billion-
by-2025--300831306.html.
[Goo21]
Google. Painting from a new perspective. 2021. url: https : / / www .
tiltbrush.com/.
[Mas16]
W. Mason. 8 of the Top.10 Tech Companies in the World are Invested in
VR/AR. 2016. url: https://http.//uploadvr.com/8-of-the-top-
10-tech-companiesinvested-in-vr-ar/.
[NA13]
D. Nincarean and M. Alia. Mobile AR: the potential for education. 2013.
[Pam91]
G. L. Pamental. The course in business ethics: Why don’t the philosophers
give business students what they need? 1991.
[PC14]
I. Patil and C. Cogoni. Affective basis of judgment-behavior discrepancy
in virtual experiences of moral dilemmas. 2014.
[Pso13]
J. Psotka. Educational games and virtual reality as disruptive technologies.
2013.
[Rog19]
S. Rogers. virtual-reality-the-learning-aid-of-the-21st-century. 2019. url:
www.forbes.com/sites/solrogers/2019/03/15/virtual-reality-
the-learning-aid-of-the-21st-century/?sh=15b7a868139b.
[SH13]
J. Smith and R. Hu. Rethinking teacher education: synchronizing eastern
and western views of teaching and learning to promote 21st century skills
and global perspectives. 2013.
[SP16]
R. Sungkur and Panchoo P. Augmented reality, the future of contextual
mobile learning. Interactive Technology and Smart Education. 2016.
[Sph21]
L. Sphinx. Evolution of VR in the past decade. 2021. url: https://www.
sphinxworldbiz.com/.
[Wad16]
M Wadhera. The information age is over; welcome to the experience age.
2016.
