==PAGE:1==
Technical 
University of 
Denmark 
Evaluation of life-cycle impacts of 
European electricity generation in 
relation to the Planetary Boundaries 
An absolute environmental sustainability 
assessment of the EU-28 electricity generation 
 
Master’s thesis 
Prepared by Liv Kristensen Stranddorf  
February 2022 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Liv Kristensen Stranddorf, s163832 
Master’s thesis in Architectural Engineering 
Evaluation of life-cycle impacts of European electricity generation in relation to the Planetary Boundaries 
August 2021 - February 2022 
35 ECTS 
 
Supervisor: Morten W. Ryberg (Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark) 
Co-supervisor: Julie Clavreul (ENGIE Lab GRIGEN, France) 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Technology, Management and Economics 
Building 358, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
www.man.dtu.dk  
Copyright: Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic 
citation, including author attribution, report title, etc. 
==PAGE:4==
ii 
 
Preface 
This master’s thesis was carried out by Liv Kristensen Stranddorf at the 
Department of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU) in partial fulfillment of the degree Master of 
Science in the field of Architectural Engineering. The thesis was prepared 
in collaboration with ENGIE Lab CRIGEN, France. The thesis accounts for 
35 ECTS points and was performed in the period from August 2021 to 
February 2022 under the supervision of Assistant Professor Morten W. 
Ryberg (DTU) and Julie Clavreul (ENGIE). I would like to express my 
gratitude towards my supervisors for their guidance, inspiration, and 
assistance during the process.  
 
 
 
The Technical University of Denmark, January 27th, 2022 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________ 
Liv Kristensen Stranddorf, s163832  
 
==PAGE:5==
 
iii 
 
 
Thesis structure 
This master’s thesis contains two parts: the main part written as a template for a research article, and 
an accompanying part including supplementary materials. The main part is organized as a traditional 
article including an abstract, introduction to the study, description of the applied methods, 
presentation of the results, discussion of the results and applied methods, and finally a conclusion. The 
main content of each part is described below.  
 
INTRODUCTION  Introduces the concept of the Planetary Boundaries (PBs) and 
the basis for investigating the life-cycle impacts of electricity generation in the 
EU-28 in relation to the PBs. It also addresses the assessment of impacts on 
the PB for biodiversity, which has often been omitted in similar studies. 
 
METHODS  Describes the four scenarios considered in the study and the main 
points of the project scope. It furthermore describes how the impacts on 
biodiversity are assessed and how the PBs are downscaled to the considered 
system to assign the Share of Safe Operating Space (SoSOS). 
 
RESULTS  Presents an interpretation of the results including the assignment 
of the SoSOS. It presents the impacts of the four scenarios on each PB and an 
example of how the environmental burden can shift between PBs. Finally, 
dynamic results of cumulative changes in radiative forcing due to emissions of 
selected greenhouse gases are presented. 
 
DISCUSSION  Discusses the scientific and methodological basis of the study as 
well as methodological choices made. It presents a discussion of the 
assignment of SoSOS, the scenarios considered, and how the electricity mix 
should develop in the future in order to obtain absolute sustainability. 
 
CONCLUSION  Summarizes the findings of the study and concludes that none 
of the scenarios investigated in the study can be considered within the 
assigned SoSOS. This part also includes recommendations for the future 
development of the electricity mix in the EU-28. 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL Elaborates the underlying methodology and 
methodological choices applied in the study as well as background 
information. It furthermore includes results not presented in the article. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
iv 
 
Abbreviations 
 
AESA 
 
 
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment 
AESR 
 
 
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Reference 
BECCS  
 
Bioenergy with Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) 
BI 
 
 
Biosphere Integrity 
BII 
 
 
Biodiversity Intactness Index 
B2B 
 
 
Business-to-Business 
B2C 
 
 
Business-to-Consumer 
CCS 
 
 
Carbon Capture and Storage 
CSP 
 
 
Concentrated Solar Power 
EE-MRIO 
 
Environmentally Extended Multi-Regional Input-Output 
ES 
 
 
Earth System 
EU 
 
 
European Union (EU-28 includes the EU as of 2021 and the United Kingdom) 
FCE 
 
 
Final Consumption Expenditure 
FU 
 
 
Functional Unit 
GHG 
 
 
Greenhouse Gas 
LCA 
 
 
Life Cycle Assessment 
LCI 
 
 
Life Cycle Inventory 
LCIA 
 
 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment 
MSA 
 
 
Mean Species Abundance 
NZE 
 
 
Net-Zero Emissions  
PB 
 
 
Planetary Boundaries 
PB-LCIA  
 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment method for quantifying impacts on the PBs. 
PV 
 
 
Photovoltaic 
SM 
 
 
Supplementary Material 
SOS 
 
 
Safe Operating Space 
SoSOS  
 
Share of Safe Operating Space 
WPD  
 
 
Wind Power Density 
==PAGE:7==
Article template 
Abstract  
 
1 
Evaluation of life-cycle impacts of European electricity 
generation in relation to the Planetary Boundaries 
Liv Kristensen Stranddorf1  
Supervisors: 
Morten W. Ryberg2, Julie Clavreul3, and Anne Prieur-Vernat3 
 
1 Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
2 Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
3 ENGIE Lab CRIGEN, Stains, France
 
 
Abstract 
The Planetary Boundaries (PB) framework was developed to control the 
anthropogenic pressure on the Earth system and delimit a Safe Operating 
Space (SOS) for humanity. Crossing these boundaries can cause important 
subsystems to shift into a new state, potentially with deleterious or 
catastrophic consequences for humanity. Within the European Union (EU), 
the energy sector is responsible for approximately 27% of the total 
greenhouse gas emissions and is thereby the most emitting sector. More 
studies have investigated the life-cycle impacts of electricity generation, but 
assessments of the life-cycle impacts of electricity generation in relation to 
the PBs are currently limited. This study is to our knowledge the first to 
evaluate the life-cycle impacts of electricity generation in the EU-28 and 
relate the impacts thereof to the PBs. This study furthermore includes an 
assessment of the local impacts on the PB biosphere integrity, which has 
often been omitted due to its complexity and inadequate basis for 
quantification. Four scenarios (Base, Blue, Green, and NZE) for the period 
2020-2050 are considered, and two different sharing principles are applied 
for assigning the Share of Safe Operating Space (SoSOS) available for the 
considered system. It is found that neither of the four scenarios can be 
considered within the boundaries of the assigned SoSOS using either of the 
sharing principles. The Base, Blue, and Green scenarios comply with an equal 
number of boundaries in year 2020 and 2050, and whereas the NZE scenario 
is the worst performing scenario in 2020, it is the best performing scenario 
in 2050. The best mix is observed for NZE in 2040, which is especially due to 
the high use of Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies attached to 
coal and natural gas power plants. To improve the performance of the EU-28 
electricity mix, this study recommends a fast inclusion of CCS attached to coal 
power plants as well as more renewable energy sources such as hydro power 
using reservoirs, wind (onshore and offshore), and solar. In addition, the 
study recommends accelerating the development of energy storage to 
promote a full transition to renewable energy sources. 
 
Keywords: Environmental performance of electricity generation, life cycle 
assessment, Planetary Boundaries, absolute environmental sustainability 
assessment, biodiversity integrity 
==PAGE:8==
Article template 
Introduction 
2 
1. Introduction 
The Earth System (ES) has undergone many periods of environmental changes but has been unusually 
stable for the last 10,000 years, known as the Holocene epoch (Rockström et al., 2009). Socio-economic 
trends have been increasing exponentially since 1750 and are putting pressure on the environment 
(Steffen, Broadgate, et al., 2015). This anthropogenic pressure is pushing the stability of the Holocene 
and is threatening the resilience of the ES (IPCC, 2021; Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015). The Planetary 
Boundaries (PB) framework was developed to control the anthropogenic pressure on the ES and define 
the Safe Operating Space (SOS) for humanity with respect to the ES (Rockström et al., 2009; Steffen, 
Richardson, et al., 2015). The SOS is delimited by the PBs which are set at a “safe” distance to determined 
thresholds (Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015). Crossing these thresholds can cause important subsystems 
to shift into a new state, often with deleterious or catastrophic consequences for humanity (Rockström 
et al., 2009; Scheffer et al., 2001). For some processes of the ES, crossing the threshold could trigger a 
nonlinear, abrupt response (Rockström et al., 2009; Steffen et al., 2018) which is seen with the observed 
changes in climate as e.g. the increasing rate of mass loss from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets 
(Shepherd et al., 2012) and the increasing intensity and frequency of rainfalls and droughts in some 
regions (IPCC, 2021; Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015). For other processes at the global scale, crossing 
the threshold would lead to a more gradual but self-perpetuating response e.g. a gradual weakening of 
land and ocean physiological carbon sinks (Steffen et al., 2018). As illustrated in Figure 1, the PB 
framework considers nine boundaries of which two are recognized as “core” PBs due to their 
fundamental importance for the stability of the ES: climate change and Biosphere Integrity (BI) (Steffen, 
Richardson, et al., 2015). Despite the importance of all nine PBs, climate change is the most commonly 
known and is highly affected by anthropogenic activities such as emissions of Greenhouse Gases (GHG) 
and aerosols (Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015), whereas BI is much more complex, and adequate basis 
for estimating the rate of biodiversity loss is lacking.  
 
 
Figure 1   The Planetary Boundaries (PB). The PB is illustrated as a dotted circle. The green area represents the Safe Operating 
Space (SOS) for humanity (below the PB). When exceeding the PB and entering the yellow/orange area, the risk of disrupting 
the stability of the Earth system (ES) increases. The illustration is designed by Azote for Stockholm Resilience Center, based on 
analysis in Persson et al. (2022) and Steffen, Richardson, et al. (2015). 
==PAGE:9==
Article template 
Introduction  
 
3 
The PB framework has been adopted to studies considering systems of different scale and is often used 
in combination with Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). LCA is a standardized methodology (ISO, 2006a, 
2006b), which enables quantification of environmental impacts from the considered system throughout 
its entire life cycle, starting from the material extraction, going through the production and use phase 
to the end-of-life. LCA can show if a system is relatively more sustainable than similar systems but cannot 
show if the system is sustainable in absolute terms, meaning if the emissions and consumption of 
resources associated with the considered system stay within the capacity of the ES. However, by relating 
the environmental impacts quantified using LCA to an Absolute Environmental Sustainability Reference 
(AESR), such as the PBs, the assessment can tell if the system is sustainable in an absolute sense. Such 
an assessment is called an Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment (AESA). To perform an 
AESA, a Share of Safe Operating Space (SoSOS) needs to be assigned to the system considered (Ryberg 
et al., 2020). Sharing principles for assigning the SoSOS are discussed in scientific literature and take 
different approaches e.g. equal share per capita, based on current contribution to environmental 
impacts (known as ‘status quo’ or grandfathering), or based on historic contribution to environmental 
impacts (‘polluter pays’) (Caney, 2009; Lucas et al., 2020; Sandin et al., 2015). Such principles and their 
impacts on AESA have been investigated in several studies (Häyhä et al., 2016; Lucas et al., 2020; Ryberg, 
et al., 2018; Sandin et al., 2015). 
This study seeks to investigate the absolute environmental sustainability performance of the 
electricity generation in EU-28 based on trajectories for the period 2020-2050. EU-28 includes member 
states of the European Union (EU) as of 2021 and the United Kingdom. Despite efforts by governments 
to tackle the causes of global warming, the global CO2 emissions from energy and industry have 
increased by 60% since the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was 
signed in 1992 (IEA, 2021). The energy sector accounts for approximately 27% of the total GHG emissions 
in the EU and is thereby the most emitting sector of the EU (European Environment Agency, 2019a). 
Through the European Green Deal member states of the EU recently committed to act towards climate 
neutrality by 2050 and to reduce emissions of GHGs by at least 55% by 2030 compared to 1990 levels 
(European Commission, 2021b), and the number of governments pledging to reduce GHG emissions to 
net-zero by 2050 is increasing (IEA, 2021). The life cycle impacts of electricity generation have been 
explored at a global level (Pehl et al., 2017; Rauner & Budzinski, 2017) and national level (Akber et al., 
2017; Kiss et al., 2020; Lelek et al., 2015; Zimmermann et al., 2015), but studies covering the impacts 
from the electricity generation in the EU are missing (continent level). Nonetheless, only very few studies 
put the environmental impacts of electricity generation into an absolute perspective, and until now only 
at national level (Algunaibet et al., 2019). 
The present study assesses the life cycle impacts of four scenarios and in relation to the PBs. To do 
so, an AESA is made using the developed PB-based Life Cycle Impact Assessment (PB-LCIA) method 
(Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018), and an investigation of the local impacts on BI, which is 
currently omitted from the PB-LCIA method. For assigning the SoSOS available for the EU-28 electricity 
system, different sharing principles are applied. The assignment of SoSOS is in this study divided into 
three steps, and the first step applies the ‘equal per capita principle’ to scale to countries included in 
EU-28. The next steps scale based on three parameters: Final Consumption Expenditure (FCE), historic 
economic output, and historic emissions of CO2. The application of the last three mentioned parameters 
most commonly reflects the direct flows of money or emissions from the respective company to the end 
consumer (Business-to-Consumer, B2C) only, and omits the possible indirect flows from companies 
delivering products or services to other companies (Business-to-Business, B2B). Omitting the indirect 
flows from B2B can for some sectors result in a largely underestimated assigned SoSOS if their main
==PAGE:10==
Article template 
Methods 
4 
 relationship with clients is B2B. This study is to our knowledge the first to include both direct and 
indirect flows for the assignment of SoSOS.
2. Methods 
This section includes a description of the methods used throughout the study; Section 2.1. includes a 
description of the studied scenarios, Section 2.2. presents the main points from the scope definition, 
Section 2.3. presents the life cycle inventory including the energy mix of the four scenarios, and Section 
2.4. surrounds the life cycle impact assessment including a description of calculations of the impacts on 
BI. Finally, a description of the assignment of SoSOS is included in Section 2.5. 
2.1. Case study scenarios  
This study considers four scenarios for the period 2020-2050: three made by Enerdata (2021) and one 
by IEA (2021). The scenarios represent trajectories for the global impacts on climate change that are 
expected to result in an increase of the global mean temperature of 5-6°C, 3-4°C, 2°C, and 1.5 °C 
respectively, as illustrated in Figure 2. The scenarios consider the total global impacts on climate change, 
and this study focuses on the electricity generation in EU-28. The first scenario, called Base, represents 
a path of continuing existing policies and a lack of support for reducing GHG emissions. In this scenario, 
the mix of energy sources for electricity generation in 2050 will look similar to the mix in 2020. This 
scenario is estimated to support an increase in global mean temperature of 5-6°C. The second scenario, 
Blue, is based on the realization of Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) which as part of the 
Paris Agreement are required by each country to communicate their actions for climate change 
mitigation and adaptation (UNFCCC, 2017). This scenario is expected to lead to an increase in global 
mean temperature of 3-4°C. The third scenario, Green, considers significant improvements in terms of 
the deployment of renewable energies such as solar, hydro, and wind energy (Eurostat, 2021). In this 
trajectory, the increase in global mean temperature is limited to 2°C. The fourth scenario is called NZE 
and represents a path to achieving Net-Zero CO2 Emissions (NZE) by 2050. Whereas the first mentioned 
three scenarios are all developed by Enerdata and are based on the same starting point in terms of 
energy mix and generation, NZE was originally designed for an international perspective but has in this 
study been downscaled to represent EU-28. The starting point of NZE, therefore, differs from the three 
other scenarios as it is based on an international electricity mix. NZE is consistent with a 50% chance of 
limiting the global mean temperature rise to 1.5°C.  
 
 
 
Figure 2   Main points of the four scenarios assessed including the expected temperature increase in 2050 with respect to the 
global mean temperature in 1990. The dotted lines illustrate a range of expected temperature increase. Data for Base, Blue, 
and Green: Enerdata ©  
==PAGE:11==
Article template 
Methods 
 
5 
2.2. Scope definition 
The AESA is carried out using LCA as a tool for assessing the life cycle impacts and relating these to the 
SoSOS available for the EU-28 electricity generation. LCA is a standardized method for assessing the 
environmental impacts associated with a product or a service and is described in ISO 14040 and ISO 
14044 (ISO, 2006a, 2006b). LCA is divided into four steps: (1) goal and scope definition, (2) life cycle 
inventory analysis, (3) life cycle impact assessment, and (4) life cycle interpretation. The following 
sections briefly describe the main aspects of the scope definition, life cycle inventory, and life cycle 
impact assessment to which details can be found in Supplementary Material (SM) part 3. The life cycle 
interpretation is contained in Section 3.  
To support a fair and relevant comparison of scenarios an important aspect of the scope definition is 
to define the Functional Unit (FU) (Hauschild et al., 2017). The FU of a product system is a quantified 
description of the performance in terms of obligatory properties. In this study, the FU is defined as the 
total yearly generation of electricity needed for the EU-28 in the period 2020-2050. The study takes a 
cradle-to-grave perspective and considers all life cycle stages. The decision context for the study is 
defined as ‘accounting environmental impacts’ (situation C1) (EC-JRC, 2010), and the LCI modeling 
framework is attributional. Multifunctional processes are handled using subdivision, which is applicable 
for electricity generation from bioenergy. Electricity from bioenergy is modeled as ‘heat and power co-
generation’, and the co-product, heat, is excluded.  
All background data are based on Ecoinvent v3.6 (Ecoinvent, 2021) and all scenarios are modeled 
using the software SimaPro 9.1.1.7 (PRé Sustainability, 2020). The background data are mainly from the 
geographical area of Germany (DE). This is chosen, as average processes representative for a European 
scope (RER) are not available for the electricity generation technologies considered, and as the specific 
locations of power plants are not known. For a few technologies, DE is not available and other 
geographical scopes have been chosen. This concerns hydropower (reservoir) which is represented by 
French technology (FR), and Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) which is represented by an average global 
production (Rest-of-the-world, RoW). A full overview of all unit processes used for modeling is found in 
SM2.3. 
2.3. Life cycle inventory  
The Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) includes the quantity of future electricity generation and the development 
of the electricity mix for which data is delivered by Enerdata (for scenario Base, Blue, and Green) and 
IEA (scenario NZE). To enable a 1:1 comparison of the four scenarios, this study assumes the same 
development in terms of the quantity of electricity produced in all scenarios. Figure 3-6 illustrates the 
development in mix and quantity for each scenario.  
Most technologies are represented in the Ecoinvent database; however, few technologies have been 
adjusted or added manually. This concerns electricity generation from coal with Carbon Capture and 
Storage (CCS) which is  based on Iribarren et al. (2013), natural gas with CCS is based on Petrakopoulou 
et al. (2015), Bioenergy with CCS (BECCS) is based on Singh et al. (2011),  and Photovoltaics (PV) which 
is based on a French research project, INCER-ACV (Pérez-López et al., 2020). A description of the 
modeling of these technologies can be found in SM2.3. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
Article template 
Methods  
 
6 
As a recent study indicates that the performance of nearly all existing technologies is expected to 
improve over the coming years (A. Singh et al., 2021), it is considered essential to include an assessment 
of the potential influence of technological improvement on the environmental impacts. In the present 
study, the improvement rates reflect the efficiency of the considered power plants. The improvement 
rates are only included in the assessment of the cumulative changes in radiative forcing due to emissions 
of GHGs as explained in the section including the results (Section 3.4). Assumptions regarding the 
improvement rates of each technology are listed in SM1.3.  
 
 
 
Figure 3   Development in electricity mix and electricity generation for the Base scenario in the period 2020-2050. The 
quantity of electricity generated is given in TWh/year and the mix is given in %. The quantity of electricity generated is in this 
study assumed to increase by approximately 25% from 2020 to 2050. Data: Enerdata © 
 
 
 
Figure 4   Development in electricity mix and electricity generation for the Blue scenario in the period 2020-2050. The quantity 
of electricity generated is given in TWh/year and the mix is given in %. The quantity of electricity generated is in this study 
assumed to increase by approximately 25% from 2020 to 2050. Data: Enerdata © 
==PAGE:13==
Article template 
Methods 
 
7 
 
Figure 5   Development in electricity mix and electricity generation for the Green scenario in the period 2020-2050. The quantity 
of electricity generated is given in TWh/year and the mix is given in %. The quantity of electricity generated is in this study 
assumed to increase by approximately 25% from 2020 to 2050. Data: Enerdata © 
 
 
Figure 6   Development in electricity mix and electricity generation for the NZE scenario in the period 2020-2050. The quantity 
of electricity generated is given in TWh/year and the mix is given in %. The quantity of electricity generated is in this study 
assumed to increase by approximately 25% from 2020 to 2050. Data for quantity: Enerdata © 
2.4. Life cycle impact assessment 
In life cycle impact assessment (LCIA), the LCI is translated into environmental impacts. To get the results 
in a format that applies to the PBs, the impacts are calculated using the PB-LCIA method developed by 
Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al. (2018). The PB-LCIA method, however, omits the impacts on two 
of the nine PBs: Biosphere Integrity (BI) and Introduction of novel entities, as characterization models 
were considered immature for the former and a PB was not defined for the latter when the model was 
developed. However, this study includes an assessment of the impacts on BI caused by direct land use, 
which builds on a methodology by Galán-Martín et al. (2021) and Hanafiah et al. (2012). In addition, this 
study excludes the PB on atmospheric aerosol loading even though no PB has been set, see Figure 1 
(Persson et al., 2022; Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015).  
 
==PAGE:14==
Article template 
Methods  
 
8 
2.4.1. Biosphere integrity 
Direct human pressures such as land-use change and indirect anthropogenic pressures like climate 
change have been identified to be major threats to biodiversity (Baisero et al., 2020; Maxwell et al., 
2016; Rockström et al., 2009; Scheffers et al., 2016), and biodiversity losses are expected to continue 
throughout the 21st century (Newbold et al., 2015; Rockström et al., 2009; Sala et al., 2000; van Vuuren 
et al., 2006). Even though the loss of biodiversity is occurring at local to regional levels, it can have 
pervasive effects on the functioning of the ES (Rockström et al., 2009). Furthermore, the rate of 
biodiversity loss interacts with other PBs. For instance, the loss of biodiversity is likely to increase the 
vulnerability of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems to changes in climate and ocean acidity, and thereby 
influence the SOS of those PBs (Rockström et al., 2009).  
The planetary boundary BI is divided into two components among which the first one captures the 
genetic diversity and determines the potential life to continue to coevolve with the abiotic component 
of the ES in the most resilient way possible. The second one captures the role of the biosphere in the ES 
functioning through the value, range, distribution, and relative abundance of the functional traits of the 
organisms present in an ecosystem or biota (Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015). This study includes the 
second component of BI, being the functional diversity for which the present proposed control variable 
is the Biodiversity Intactness Index (BII). BII assesses the change in population abundance due to human 
impacts (Scholes & Biggs, 2005). Due to lack of evidence, a preliminary boundary has been proposed at 
90% of the BII, but with a large uncertainty range at 30-90% (Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015). In the 
absence of more precise parameters, the Mean Species Abundance (MSA) is regarded as a proxy for BII. 
The main difference between BII and MSA is that BII weights according to the species richness in the 
area, while MSA weights all areas equally (Galán-Martín et al., 2021).  
As stated, land-use change and climate change are regarded as the two main stressors of changes in 
BII. However, pressures on climate change primarily impact the global system, and not necessarily the 
areas where the emissions occur. As this study desires to investigate the local impacts on BII, and as 
current methods for investigating the local impacts on BII from pressures on climate change are 
regarded immature, only land use is included. As not all stressors of changes in BII are considered, the 
estimated impacts are considered a lower boundary of impacts. The local impacts on BII are estimated 
using Equation (1). 
 
𝐵𝐼𝐼௟௢௖௔௟,௅௎= 
∑𝑎௜∙(1 −𝑀𝑆𝐴௜
௅௎)
௜
𝐴௧௢௧
 
(1) 
 
where 𝐵𝐼𝐼௟௢௖௔௟,௅௎ is the local BII due to direct land use (% yr) for the considered system, 𝑎௜ is the area 
occupied of land use type i (m2 yr) and 𝐴௧௢௧ is the total area occupied by the studied system (m2yr). (1 −
𝑀𝑆𝐴௜
௅௎) (-) represents the mean species abundance loss for land-use type i, where 𝑀𝑆𝐴௜
௅௎ is the 
biodiversity indicator denoting the mean species abundance for the land use type i (Galán-Martín et al., 
2021). (1-MSA) is given by Hanafiah et al., (2012). A detailed description of the calculations of BII and 
values for MSA are given in SM4. 
2.5. Assigning the share of safe operation space 
When performing an AESA, the environmental impacts associated with the respective product or system 
are considered relative to an AESR, which in this study is defined as the PBs. The SOS to be shared among 
all anthropogenic activities is outlined by the PB minus the natural background level as presented by 
==PAGE:15==
Article template 
Methods 
 
9 
Ryberg, et al. (2018). This share is known as the full SOS and can be found in the SM3. The SoSOS assigned 
to the considered electricity generation activities delimits the area of impacts within which the activities 
can be regarded as ‘absolutely sustainable’ in environmental terms. As an exceedance of one impact 
category might push towards an exceedance of other impact categories, the environmental impacts 
must stay within the assigned SoSOS for all impact categories to be considered absolutely 
environmentally sustainable (Rockström et al., 2009).  
The assignment of SoSOS is most frequently based on direct consumption or direct impacts only, and 
assignments including the indirect consumption or impacts have, to our knowledge, not been reported. 
Especially in industries delivering products or services not only to end consumers (B2C) but also to other 
companies (B2B), the indirect consumption or emissions might constitute a significant proportion of the 
total consumption or emissions. To include both direct and indirect consumption and impacts, this study 
calculates the SoSOS using a Matlab script developed by Oosterhoff et al. (2021), which uses 
Environmentally Extended Multi-Regional Input-Output (EE-MRIO) models from Exiobase v3. MRIO 
modeling is based on vectors and matrices which gives an overview of the economic flows between 
economic sectors across the world (Den Europæiske Unions Publikationskontor, 2011). EE-MRIO is an 
‘extension’ of MRIO with environment-related information for each sector, such as GHG emissions.  
The assignment of the SoSOS can be based on different distributive justice theories. This study 
considers three theories: egalitarianism, utilitarianism, and grandfathering which are applied in two 
principles, as illustrated in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7   Three-step approach to assigning the SOS from global to national level (step 1), from a national level to the final 
consumption sector level (step 2), and from final consumption sector level to intermediate product sector level (step 3). 
Both principles are divided into three steps and apply the same theory in the first and second steps. The 
first step scales down the SOS from global to national level and delimits the SoSOS available for each EU-
28 country. This assignment is founded on egalitarian justice theory and seeks an equal distribution of 
the SOS, as a resource, among all human beings as recommended by Ryberg et al. (2020). Applying this 
approach only requires population numbers and it is the most common practice among reviewed studies 
(Ryberg et al., 2020). The second step scales the SoSOS from a national level to the share available for 
the electricity generation sector in each of the respective EU-28 states. This step takes a utilitarian 
approach which seeks to promote the maximum amount of welfare (Page, 2007). As methods for 
approximating the utility added from industrial units to people are lacking, Ryberg et al. (2020) 
recommend using Final Consumption Expenditure (FCE) as an indicator. FCE is a measure of the 
“expenditures on goods or services that are used for the direct satisfaction of individual needs or wants, 
or the collective needs of members of a community” (Eurostat, 2016).  
The third step assigns from final consumption sectors to intermediate product sectors. Electricity is 
an intermediate product sector for a number of final product sectors. Moreover, an intermediate 
product sector for the electricity production sector is e.g. the generation of electricity from coal. For the 
third step, both two principles assign according to the approach known as ‘status quo’ or grandfathering 
==PAGE:16==
Article template 
Results  
 
10 
but using different data parameters. The first principle assigns based on the current economic output 
from the respective intermediate product sector to the final consumption sector. The second principle 
assigns based on the current emissions of CO2 equivalents (CO2 eq). After applying the three steps to 
each EU-28 country, all shares are aggregated to get the total share available for electricity generation 
in EU-28.  
The share assigned to the EU-28 electricity sector (𝐴𝑆) can be expressed in a simplified manner for 
principles 1 and 2 by Equation (2) and (3) respectively. The equations include the population for the 
considered country c (𝑃𝑜𝑝௖) and the world (𝑃𝑜𝑝ௐ௢௥௟ௗ), 𝐹𝐶𝐸 for the considered country (𝐹𝐶𝐸௖) and its 
electricity generation sector (𝐹𝐶𝐸௦௘௖,௖), economic output for the electricity generation sector 
(𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑂𝑢𝑡௦௘௖,௖) and its intermediate product sectors in country c (𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑂𝑢𝑡௜௡௧,௖), and emissions of GHGs 
given in CO2eq for the electricity generation sector (𝐶𝑂ଶ𝑒𝑞௦௘௖,௖) and its intermediate product sectors in 
country c (𝐶𝑂ଶ𝑒𝑞௜௡௧,௖). Equation (4) expresses how the SoSOS for each PB p is found by multiplying AS1 
or AS2 with the SOS for each p. A summary of the scaling steps applied can be found in SM3.2. 
 
𝐴𝑆ଵ= ෍
𝑃𝑜𝑝௖
𝑃𝑜𝑝ௐ௢௥௟ௗ
∙𝐹𝐶𝐸௦௘௖,௖
𝐹𝐶𝐸௖
∙𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑂𝑢𝑡௜௡௧,௖
𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑂𝑢𝑡௦௘௖,௖
௖
 
(2) 
𝐴𝑆ଶ= ෍
𝑃𝑜𝑝௖
𝑃𝑜𝑝ௐ௢௥௟ௗ
∙𝐹𝐶𝐸௦௘௖,௖
𝐹𝐶𝐸௖
∙𝐶𝑂ଶ𝑒𝑞௜௡௧,௖
𝐶𝑂ଶ𝑒𝑞௦௘௖,௖
௖
 
(3) 
𝑆𝑜𝑆𝑂𝑆௣= 𝐴𝑆௫∙𝑆𝑂𝑆௣          , 𝑥 ∀ {1 ⋁ 2}  
(4) 
3. Results 
The following presents the results and an interpretation of the results. First, Section 3.1 describes the 
assigned SoSOS to the considered system using the two principles described in Section 2.5. Thereafter, 
the impacts of the four scenarios on each PB are presented in Section 3.2. Section 3.3 shows an example 
of burden-shifting between PBs, and finally, Section 3.4. depicts a dynamic calculation of the cumulative 
changes in radiative forcing due to emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O. 
3.1. The share of safe operating space 
The share of the full SOS assigned to the EU-28 electricity generation was calculated to be 𝐴𝑆ଵ=
 2.50𝐸−03 and 𝐴𝑆ଶ=  1.85𝐸−02 using principles 1 and 2 respectively. This means that the electricity 
generation in EU-28 gets 0.25% of the total global share using principle 1 and 1.85% using principle 2 
and that the share is about 7.4 times larger using principle 2 than principle 1. In relation to the total 
share for EU-28 calculated based on population (see SM3.3.), AS1 constitutes around 4%, while AS2 
constitutes around 28%. The assigned SoSOS for each PB is listed in SM3.2.  
3.2. Impacts per Planetary Boundary 
The following section shows and describes the results for each of the seven PBs included in the study. 
The results in this section are calculated at steady state for each year from 2020 to 2050, meaning that 
it does not consider temporal and spatial information. A time-dependent assessment of the cumulative 
==PAGE:17==
Article template 
Results  
 
11 
changes in radiative forcing due to emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O is however also performed 
considering the natural decay of the considered GHGs. The results of this are shown in Section 3.4. 
As previously described, seven out of nine PBs are considered in this study. Some of the PBs are 
further divided into sub-indicators reflecting e.g., different scales, archetypes, or biomes. This concerns 
climate change, which is divided into two indicators, freshwater use is divided into four indicators, 
biogeochemical flows are divided into two indicators, and land system change is divided into four. In 
total 15 indicators are considered in this study. Overall, the Base, Blue, and Green scenarios comply with 
6/15 boundaries defined by SoSOS 1 and 10/15 of the boundaries defined by SoSOS 2 both in 2020 and 
2050. In 2020 the NZE scenario complies with 5/15 of the boundaries defined by SoSOS 1 and 10/15 
defined by SoSOS 2, and in 2050 NZE complies with 6/15 of the boundaries defined by SoSOS 2 and 
12/15 defined by SoSOS 2. An overview of this is given in SM6.4.  
3.2.1. Climate change 
The PB on climate change is divided into two indicators: the atmospheric concentration of CO2 and 
radiative forcing - the rate of energy change per unit area of the globe as measured at the top of the 
atmosphere (Rockström et al., 2009). Figure 8 illustrates how the considered system contributes to the 
energy imbalance. The impacts on the atmospheric concentration of CO2 are not shown here (see 
SM6.1.) as the two indicators show the same tendencies.  
Figure 8 shows that the contribution from NZE in 2020 is more than twice the size of the contribution 
from Base, Blue, and Green. This is largely due to the high consumption of fossil fuels (coal, lignite, oil, 
and natural gas) in the global electricity mix compared to the European, which is the cause of about 96% 
of radiative forcing in NZE and about 92% in Base, Blue, and Green in 2020. NZE is however performing 
best in 2050 and the radiative forcing from NZE is even lower in 2040. This can be explained by the larger 
share of CCS attached to coal, natural gas, and bioenergy power plants in 2040 (about 4.3% of 
production) compared to 2050 (about 3.1% of production). This implies that there is a large potential 
for lowering the radiative forcing by applying CCS technologies. In total, the potential radiative forcing 
caused by Base decreases by 12% from 2020 to 2050, for Blue by 44%, for Green by 78%, and for NZE by 
96%, but none of the scenarios manages to reduce the impacts to a level below SoSOS 1 or 2 in 2050. 
NZE however gets just below SoSOS 2 in 2040. 
3.2.2. Ocean acidification 
The boundary for ocean acidification is directly linked with the boundary for climate change defined by 
the atmospheric concentration of CO2 (Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015). Globally the ocean absorbs 
about 30% of the CO2 that is released to the atmosphere which results in a formation of carbonic acid 
(H2CO3) in the ocean, and the pH is then decreased (Dessler, 2016). The gradual acidification furthermore 
affects carbonate chemistry in surface ocean waters and specifically lowers the saturation state of 
aragonite (ΩArag), which is a type of calcium carbonate formed by many marine organisms (Steffen, 
Richardson, et al., 2015). The impacts on ocean acidification are illustrated in Figure 9. The correlation 
with CO2 concentration is clear as all scenarios follow the same path in the two impact categories and 
are affected by the same energy sources. However, where none of the scenarios comply with the 
assigned SoSOS for climate change, the NZE scenario manages to get below the boundary for ocean 
acidification defined by SoSOS 2.  
 
==PAGE:18==
Article template 
Results  
 
12 
 
Figure 8   Impacts of the four scenarios on Climate change – energy imbalance. The left side shows the impacts from Base 
scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned 
SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four 
scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9   Impacts of the four scenarios on Ocean acidification. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario (grey), Blue 
scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) 
and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 
2050. 
==PAGE:19==
Article template 
Results  
 
13 
3.2.3. Stratospheric ozone depletion 
The impacts on stratospheric ozone depletion of all four scenarios stay below the boundary of SoSOS 1 
and 2 throughout the entire period considered, as illustrated in Figure 10. The left side of the figure is 
scaled logarithmically, and the impacts are around a factor 10 to 103 lower than the boundaries. The 
impacts on this PB are therefore considered of low significance. 
 
 
Figure 10   Impacts of the four scenarios on Stratospheric ozone depletion. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
 
3.2.4. Freshwater use  
The use of freshwater is divided into two levels: global level and river basin level. The latter is further 
divided into three archetypes: semidry, dry, and humid. Freshwater use at river basin level in semidry 
regions (Figure 11) and dry regions (Figure 12) are driven by the use of freshwater from Mexico and 
Australia respectively. The characterization factors for use of freshwater are higher in semidry and dry 
regions than in humid regions due to the low availability of water (Ryberg et al., 2018), which means 
that the impacts per unit of used freshwater are higher in dryer regions. The semidry and dry regions 
are in all four scenarios highly affected by coal, onshore wind, and PV. The impacts from coal are mainly 
caused by the import of coal from Latin America/Mexico and Australia, where hydropower makes up a 
large part of the electricity mix. Likewise, are impacts from onshore wind and PV due to the import of 
elements for the construction of turbines and PV panels, which are produced in Mexico and Australia 
using their electricity mix. The modeling of electricity from wind and PV energy is based on generic 
processes from the Ecoinvent database, which assumes that parts of the plants are produced in Mexico 
and Australia, but in reality, this might be different. The impacts from Base, Blue, and Green on semidry 
regions stay below both boundaries, but for dry regions, these three scenarios exceed both boundaries. 
==PAGE:20==
Article template 
Results  
 
14 
For NZE a general decrease is observed together with a drop in 2040, which can be explained by the 
decreasing use of coal and the high use of CCS attached to coal and natural gas (highest in 2040). The 
processes used for modeling of CCS attached to coal and natural gas show positive impacts (negative 
values) on freshwater basins as the captured carbon is modeled as an avoided substance produced 
anthropogenically. This does however not reflect reality, and more studies show that the use of CCS will 
increase the use of water (Rosa et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2020). The impacts on freshwater use from CCS 
are therefore considered uncertain in this study. 
Figure 13 illustrates the impacts on freshwater use in humid regions. This archetype is mostly 
impacted by the use of coal, nuclear, natural gas, and hydro. The impacts from coal are mainly caused 
by the import of coal from Russia, where hydropower makes up a large part of the electricity mix. 
Likewise, are the impacts from nuclear due to the share of hydropower in the electricity mix used for 
the production of uranium and handling of radioactive waste, and the contribution from hydropower 
(pumped storage) is due to the use of electricity for pumping water. The contribution from natural gas 
is due to the high use of water both for the extraction of natural gas, but also for the transformation of 
the fuel’s chemical energy into electricity (EIA, 2021).  
The impacts on global freshwater use stay well below the SoSOS 1 and 2 for all scenarios, and the 
impacting energy sources are similar to what is seen for humid regions as the humid regions make up 
the largest part of global impacts (see Figure 14). 
 
 
Figure 11   Impacts of the four scenarios on Freshwater use – basin semidry. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
==PAGE:21==
Article template 
Results  
 
15 
 
Figure 12   Impacts of the four scenarios on Freshwater use – basin dry. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
 
 
 
Figure 13   Impacts of the four scenarios on Freshwater use – basin humid. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
==PAGE:22==
Article template 
Results  
 
16 
 
Figure 14   Impacts of the four scenarios on Freshwater use – global. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario (grey), 
Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted 
red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 
and 2050. 
3.2.5. Biogeochemical flows 
The PB for biogeochemical flows is divided into the flow of phosphorus (P) and the flow of nitrogen (N). 
The boundary for P is defined for the annual outflow of P to soil and marine waters (Ryberg, Owsianiak, 
Richardson, et al., 2018; Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015). The boundary for the flow of N is defined for 
emissions of N-compounds to freshwater, groundwater, and air (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 
2018). The impacts of the considered four scenarios on biogeochemical flows are illustrated in Figure 15 
and Figure 16 for P and N respectively. 
The impacts on P from all four scenarios stay within the boundary of SoSOS 2 but exceed SoSOS 1 
throughout the entire period considered. Whereas Base, Blue, and Green decrease from 2035 and 
onwards, NZE increases until 2050. A large contribution to the outflow of P is seen from bioenergy. This 
is mainly due to the use of vegetable oils (palm, soy, and cottonseed) for harvesting forests and chipping 
wood. In the process of refining vegetable oils, a large quantity of wastewater is produced, which is 
treated using different inorganic chemicals, among which is phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5). Solar power 
is also seen to be a large contributor, which is mainly due to the production of PV panels. About 60% of 
the outflow of P from the production of PV panels is due to the use of metals and semimetals (aluminum, 
silver, and silicon), and for processing the respective metals, wastewater is produced, which is treated 
using phosphorus pentoxide and other inorganic chemicals. 
The impacts on N (Figure 16) from all four scenarios decrease over time, but none of the scenarios 
manages to limit their emissions to below SoSOS 1 or 2. These impacts are mainly due to emissions from 
transportation and harvesting where e.g. diesel and vegetable oils are used as fuels (scope 3 emissions).  
 
==PAGE:23==
Article template 
Results  
 
17 
 
Figure 15   Impacts of the four scenarios on Biogeochemical flows – regional P. The left side shows the impacts from Base 
scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned 
SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four 
scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. 
 
 
Figure 16   Impacts of the four scenarios on Biogeochemical flows – N. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
==PAGE:24==
Article template 
Results  
 
18 
3.2.6. Land system change 
The PB on land system change is divided into two levels: global level and biome level. The latter is further 
divided into three archetypes: boreal, temperate, and tropic. As the used PB-LCIA method assembles 
impacts on all biomes into one category, the division into biomes is done manually through the 
investigation of flows for each energy source. The flows from tropic areas comprise close to 0% and are 
therefore neglected in this study. The impacts on boreal (Figure 17) and temperate (Figure 18) areas 
stay within the limits of SoSOS 1 and 2 for all four scenarios. All scenarios show an increase in impacts 
until 2035 after which Base and Blue start decreasing. This can be explained by the decreasing use of 
bioenergy which is the dominating source of land system change in boreal and temperate areas. Green 
is the scenario containing most bioenergy, and the impacts from this scenario are therefore highest. The 
impacts from NZE increase throughout the entire period considered, which is due to the increasing use 
of bioenergy and BECCS. 
As illustrated in Figure 19, the global impacts of land system change are well below the boundaries of 
SoSOS 1 and SoSOS 2 – a factor 103 to 104 lower. The impacts on this PB are therefore considered of low 
significance. 
 
 
Figure 17   Impacts of the four scenarios on Land system change - boreal. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
==PAGE:25==
Article template 
Results  
 
19 
 
Figure 18   Impacts of the four scenarios on Land system change - temperate. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
 
 
Figure 19   Impacts of the four scenarios on Land system change - global. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
==PAGE:26==
Article template 
Results  
 
20 
3.2.7. Biodiversity intactness index  
For BII only one SoSOS is defined. The full SOS for humanity (see SM3.1.) is a biodiversity intactness level 
at 90%, meaning a biodiversity loss at a maximum of 10%. As the biodiversity loss is assessed locally, it 
is assumed that a piece of land can only be occupied by one system at a time, and the SoSOS used for 
BII, therefore, equals the full SOS.  
The impacts on BII estimated as the loss of biodiversity due to the direct use of land are illustrated in 
Figure 20. Comparing the right side of Figure 20 to the right side of Figure 18, the influencing energy 
sources to biodiversity loss look similar to the sources impacting land system change in temperate 
regions. The high influence of bioenergy and BECCS on BII is mainly due to their high occupation of 
intensive forest, which is estimated to cause a loss of biodiversity of about 50% (Alkemade et al., 2009). 
The impacts from solar power on BII increase with the increased use of PV in the production mix, which 
is mainly due to the occupation of industrial areas. The occupation of industrial areas is estimated to 
cause a loss of biodiversity of about 95% in the affected area (Alkemade et al., 2009). Comparing the left 
side of Figure 18 and Figure 20, the impacts from Base, Blue, and Green do not correlate. This can be 
explained by the fact that the calculations of land system change do only account for the transformation 
of land from and to forest (mainly intensive), and that BII only accounts for the occupation of different 
types of land, but not the type of land it is transformed from and to. A typical type of land used for 
ground-mounted PV panels is e.g. agricultural land or crop land (Adeh et al., 2019; Pascaris et al., 2020), 
and the transformation of such land types is not accounted for in the calculations of land system change. 
It is important to note that the impacts on BII are highly dependent on the reference value chosen. 
As this study uses the total area occupied by the studied system as a reference value (see 𝐴௧௢௧ presented 
in Equation (1)), the local impacts on BII will appear rather high. To put the area occupied by the 
considered system in a global perspective, the considered system occupies a total area of about 224-
562 thousand km2, and the total global terrestrial area is around 130 million km2 (The World Bank, 
2020a). This means that the considered system occupies around 0.17-0.43% of the total global terrestrial 
area, and if the reference value had instead been the global terrestrial area, the impacts on BII would 
have appeared much lower.  
 
==PAGE:27==
Article template 
Results  
 
21 
 
Figure 20   Impacts of the four scenarios on Biodiversity Intactness Index (BII) – biodiversity loss. The left side shows the impacts 
from Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the 
assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the 
four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. 
 
3.3. Burden shifting 
Lowering GHG emissions has often been approached as the most urgent environmental parameter for 
stakeholders to act upon. Changing input parameters of a system, e.g., the mix of energy sources for 
electricity generation, to reduce the environmental impacts on one planetary subsystem may, however, 
cause shifts of burdens and increase impacts on another planetary subsystem. In AESA it is important to 
consider the performance of all impact categories as a system cannot be considered absolute 
environmentally sustainable if all boundaries are not met. Figure 21 illustrates the impacts of the NZE 
scenario on 11 impact categories in relation to SoSOS 1 to show a case of burden shifting. Among the 
impact categories shown in Figure 21, a decrease is observed for 7 impact categories and an increase 
for 4. Considering the two core PBs, climate change and BII, the impacts on climate change (energy 
imbalance) decrease by approximately 97% from 2020 to 2050 whereas BII increases by around 6.5%. In 
this case, it is important to note that the impacts on BII are considered a lower boundary as it only 
accounts for the direct use of land. At the same time, it is worth noting that climate change is also 
regarded as one of the main stressors of biodiversity loss, and if climate change was included in the 
assessment of BII, the development of BII in the period of 2020-2050 might have looked differently.  
Furthermore, the impacts on BII are assessed locally, and the impacts on BII would be different if they 
were assessed globally. 
==PAGE:28==
Article template 
Results  
 
22 
 
Figure 21   Impacts of the NZE scenario on 12 impact categories in relation to SoSOS 1 to show the potential shift of burdens. 
Two impact categories are left out of the illustration: Stratospheric ozone depletion and Land system change – global. The 
scale is logarithmic and is given in “number of times SoSOS 1 is exceeded”. 
3.4. Dynamic assessment of impacts on radiative forcing  
Figure 22A and B depicts a dynamic calculation of the cumulative changes in radiative forcing due to 
emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O in the period from 2020 to 2050 for the four scenarios. The calculations 
are based on Ryberg et al. (2018) and Li et al. (2021) and consider the natural decay of the considered 
GHGs in the period from 2020 to 2100 and the conversion of CH4 into CO2 at the end of the lifetime of 
CH4. The calculations are further explained in SM5. Figure 22B furthermore considers estimates of the 
technological improvement of power plants. The assumptions regarding this are available in SM1.3.  
It is important to note that the dynamic assessment only accounts for the system considered, meaning 
the four scenarios in the period of 2020-2050, and Figure 22 thereby illustrates the cumulative changes 
in radiative forcing if the emissions stop in 2050. When improvement rates are not included, none of the 
scenarios’ radiative forcing reaches a level below either SoSOS 1 or 2 in the year 2100. When including 
improvement rates, the radiative forcing of NZE in 2100 reaches a level just below SoSOS 2 and Green 
reaches the same level as SoSOS 2. A small increase is observed for NZE as it approaches 2050 which can 
be explained by the larger share of CCS technologies included in the 2040 mix compared to the mix in 
2045 and 2050.  
==PAGE:29==
Article template 
Results  
 
23 
Comparing Figure 22A and Figure 22B to the impacts on the atmospheric energy imbalance calculated 
at steady state (Figure 8), the impacts show almost contradicting trends. In Figure 8 the impacts decrease 
from 2020 to 2050, whereas the impacts illustrated in Figure 22A and Figure 22B increase. The reason 
for this is that the impacts calculated at steady state do not include temporal information, but only the 
yearly emissions. This shows that the inclusion of temporal information such as the natural decay, the 
conversion of CH4 into CO2, and the accumulation of GHGs in the atmosphere are important parameters 
to consider when estimating the impacts on atmospheric energy imbalance. 
 
 
Figure 22   Cumulative change in radiative forcing due to the emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O from 2020 to 2050 for scenario 
Base (grey), Blue (blue), Green (dark green), and NZE (light green) in relation to SoSOS 1 (red dotted line) and SoSOS 2 (yellow 
dotted line). The calculations are based on Ryberg et al. (2018) and Li et al. (2021) and consider the natural decay of the GHGs 
and the conversion of CH4 into CO2 at the end of the lifetime of CH4. A: excludes estimations of technological improvement, B: 
includes estimations of the technological improvement of power plants.
==PAGE:30==
Article template 
Discussion 
24 
4. Discussion 
This section includes a discussion of the scientific and methodological basis of the study as well as 
methodological choices made. Section 4.1. presents a discussion of the assignment of SoSOS, and 
Section 4.2. includes a discussion of the scenarios considered and how the electricity mix should develop 
in the future. In Section 4.3. the influence of the geographical scope on the modeling of wind and solar 
power is discussed, and in Section 4.4. the PB framework and the modeling of BII are discussed.  
4.1. The Share of Safe Operating Space 
4.1.1. Is a static SoSOS representative? 
The SoSOS was calculated statically using EE-MRIO data from 2011. These data were chosen due to 
availability and as they were applicable for use in the model developed by Oosterhoff et al. (2021). 
However, questions arise as to whether a statically calculated SoSOS can be used in connection with 
trajectories for the period from 2020 to 2050. 
The two calculations of SoSOS are based on population numbers, FCE, economic output, and CO2 eq 
emissions, which are all variable parameters that change over time. Historically, the population has been 
increasing over time, but the population growth rate in the EU and globally has been decreasing over 
the last 50 years (The World Bank, 2020c). The growth rate of the EU is among the lowest globally (The 
World Bank, 2020b), which means that the SoSOS assigned to EU-28 based on population is decreasing. 
Comparing the SoSOS assigned to EU-28 based only on population for 2011 and 2020, the share for 2020 
is 8% lower than the share for 2011. Using population numbers from 2011 thereby overshoots the share 
for EU-28 for 2020. The population of the EU is expected to peak in 2026 and thereafter decrease 
(Eurostat, 2020), whereas the global population is expected to increase until it reaches about 10.9 billion 
in 2100 (Roser, 2019). This supports the theory that the calculated SoSOS based only on population 
overshoots the share available for EU-28, and that the overshoot will increase over time.  
Roelofsen et al. (2020) suggest that the electricity produced from renewable energy will become 
cheaper, which will decrease the general prices of electricity and thereby affect the FCE. This could point 
towards a decreasing SoSOS assigned to the EU-28 electricity generation. On the other hand, the 
consumption of electricity is expected to increase, and technologies are generally expected to become 
more efficient and emit less GHGs, which makes it difficult to predict how the parameters will influence 
the SoSOS in the future.   
As good forecasts have been made for the development in population numbers, this study 
recommends that similar studies use such forecasts for assigning the SoSOS to individuals. For the 
following steps of the assignment of SoSOS, this study recommends using forecasts if available, and else 
to use statical calculations based on the latest data available. For long-term studies, it is also 
recommended that the calculations are updated as new data become available.  
4.1.2. The choice of distribution principles 
The choice of distributive justice principles applied for the assignment of SoSOS was in this study 
identified to have a great influence on the results. The two principles apply the same theories in step 1 
and 2, namely ‘equal per capita’ (egalitarianism) and FCE (utilitarianism), as recommended by Ryberg et 
al. (2020). Even though the same principles are applied in step 1 and 2, SoSOS 2 is about 7.4 times larger 
than SoSOS 1, which implies that the parameters applied in step 3 - economic output (grandfathering) 
and CO2 eq emissions (grandfathering) - influence the assigned share greatly. It also implies that the 
==PAGE:31==
Article template 
Discussion  
 
25 
inclusion of indirect contributions (B2B) to economic output and GHG emissions affect the assigned 
share to a great extent. If indirect contributors were not included, SoSOS 1 and 2 would be identical, and 
step 3 could be completely omitted. 
The grandfathering principle assigning based on the current environmental pressure is favorable for 
sectors emitting high amounts of GHGs, and as previously described, the energy sector is the most 
emitting sector of the EU (European Environment Agency, 2019a). Therefore, it is expected that the 
SoSOS 2 is higher than the SoSOS 1. The fact that SoSOS 1 is lower than SoSOS 2 shows that the economic 
output delivered from each intermediate product sector to the electricity sector is relatively low 
compared to the amount of GHGs emitted.  
As argued by Brejnrod et al. (2017) there is no objective way to assign the SoSOS, as the chosen 
principle will always be considered more or less fair depending on the eyes of the beholder. It can be 
argued that ‘equal per capita’ (egalitarianism) is a fair distribution since the Earth belongs to all of us. 
However, it is not given that all people require the same share of “ecological resources” to experience 
the same level of welfare (Ryberg et al., 2020). For instance, the need for electricity for lighting or heating 
might be higher in cold regions with few hours of daylight, and the need for transport fuels higher in 
sparsely populated regions with larger geographical distances. It has also been argued that the 
developing countries should get a larger share than developed countries, as developed countries are 
largely responsible for the threat of climate change due to their past emissions (Bovens, 2011). This 
theory contradicts the theory of grandfathering in which the emission targets are set in line with past 
emissions. Grandfathering has been discussed much in literature and is often defended because it is 
pragmatic (Bovens, 2011), but its moral ground has often been difficult for philosophers to defend 
(Caney, 2009; Sandin et al., 2015). Utilitarianism is commonly used in combination with ‘equal per capita’ 
for sharing among industrial units (Ryberg et al., 2020). It holds the goal of maximizing the sum of welfare 
but does not take the potential increase in inequality into account. Thus, arguments can be made for 
and against each of the presented theories, and the choice of theories often depends on subjective 
perceptions of what is fair as well as the availability of data 
Recommending one of the principles presented in this study is based on promoting the performance 
of AESAs, and this study, therefore, recommends using the principles of SoSOS 2. One of the main 
reasons for recommending SoSOS 2 is its pragmatic basis where environmental budgets are assigned 
based on environmental data. In addition, SoSOS 2 allows producers to set limits for flows included in 
their supply chain and promote CO2 eq emissions as a competitive parameter in the market. However, 
the study also recommends some adjustments. One of the adjustments recommended is to consider all 
intermediate product sectors collectively and not disaggregated. If the intermediate product sectors are 
considered separately, the most emitting intermediate product sectors such as electricity produced 
from coal, oil, and gas will receive the largest shares, which does not enhance the transition towards 
absolute environmental sustainability. This study furthermore recommends that the SoSOS allocated 
based on CO2 eq emissions is only used as a boundary for climate change and not for the remaining PBs, 
as the burdens on all PBs do not necessarily correlate (see Figure 21). For the remaining PBs, this study 
recommends assigning based on environmental data within each given PB, if data are available. In a 
longer time-perspective, this study recommends that environmental budgets are distributed by 
governments or the EU like e.g. economic budgets are. In this way, the importance of the sectors for the 
functioning of society can be emphasized and it is also ensured that we do not exceed the overall share 
available for society.  
 
==PAGE:32==
Article template 
Discussion 
26 
4.2. Scenarios and future electricity mix 
4.2.1. The NZE scenario and potentials of CCS 
The basis of the NZE scenario is different from the three other scenarios, which is clear from both the 
energy mix illustrated in Figure 6 and the results for e.g. the energy imbalance in the atmosphere shown 
in Figure 8. The NZE reflects an international scenario and can therefore not be applied directly to the 
context of the EU-28. However, it shows an example of a more radical development in the energy mix 
and environmental impacts, and therefore it can be used to show a more ambitious and faster shift 
towards an electricity sector based primarily on renewable energy. 
 In 2040 the NZE scenario consists of about 85% renewable energy sources (wind, solar, hydro, 
bioenergy, and geothermal), 10% fossils (primarily nuclear), and 5% CCS attached to coal, natural gas, 
and bioenergy plants. With this mix, the NZE scenario manages to reach the SoSOS 2 for energy 
imbalance and stays within the boundary of 13 out of 15 defined by SoSOS 2. It is thereby the best 
performing mix observed in the study. One of the main reasons why this mix achieves such good results 
is that it uses CCS. For the energy imbalance, the CCS contributes with negative impacts that deduct 
about 65% of the positive impacts. The use of CCS attached to coal and natural gas is generally observed 
to influence the results positively (negative results), but BECCS only influences positively on climate 
change and ocean acidification. BECCS is not modeled as a fully combined system like coal and natural 
gas with CCS but is modeled using a combination of processes for electricity generation from bioenergy 
and inventory for post-combustion CCS technology, as explained in SM2.3.1. As BECCS is not modeled 
as a fully combined system, the influence of BECCS is considered rather uncertain.  
The use of CCS attached to coal and natural gas has, however, shown rather large potential for 
reducing impacts, and some studies state that the use of CCS is necessary to achieve the goals of the 
Paris Agreement (Budinis et al., 2018; International Association of Oil & Gas Producers, 2019; Masson-
Delmotte et al., 2019). Furthermore, CCS technologies are found to be very cost-effective in the long run 
compared to other mitigation options (Budinis et al., 2018; European Commission, 2021a). The captured 
CO2 can additionally be used in “power-to-x” by combining it with hydrogen (H2) and thereby produce 
methanol, which can be used as a fuel. On the other hand, CCS is met by barriers such as high short term 
costs which abstain operators with less strong economy from implementation, and the lack of economic 
incentive in capturing, compressing, and storing (Budinis et al., 2018; Cuéllar-Franca & Azapagic, 2015; 
Shackley et al., 2009).  
Another dimension affecting the need for CCS is the development of energy storage. Today, the use 
of renewable energy sources is accompanied by low stability as it is highly dependent on the weather. 
The use of fossil energy sources can therefore be argued to be a necessity to stabilize the electricity 
generation in the short run. In the long run, the development of energy storage - in the form of e.g. 
batteries, ‘power-to-X’, and water reservoirs - is expected to support the stabilization of renewable 
energy sources, and the use of fossils can thereby be phased out. Thus, the use of CCS may be a 
parameter that makes it acceptable to use fossil fuels in the short run, but in the long run, this study 
supports a full transition to renewable energy sources.  
4.2.2. How to develop our future electricity mix? 
None of the four scenarios assessed in this study reaches absolute environmental sustainability 
regarding either SoSOS 1 or 2 in the period 2020 to 2050. All four scenarios perform better in more 
impact categories in 2050 than in 2020, and in 2050 NZE generally performs best. As explained, the best 
==PAGE:33==
Article template 
Discussion  
 
27 
mix is observed for NZE in 2040, but even with this mix only half of the boundaries defined by SoSOS 1 
are met and 13/5 defined by SoSOS 2.  
The European Environment Agency (2019b) reports that rising energy consumption is observed, which 
slows the EU progress on increasing the share of renewables and reaching energy efficiency targets, and 
if this tendency continues, the possibilities of meeting politically determined goals as the European 
Green Deal and the Paris Agreement, as well as absolute environmental sustainability goals, in the near 
future can be questioned. To obtain absolute environmental sustainability regarding either SoSOS 1 or 
2 this study recommends a fast inclusion of more CCS attached to coal power plants, as this energy 
source performs best in most impact categories and results in negative impacts on all impact categories. 
Furthermore, the study recommends including more renewable energy sources such as hydro power 
using reservoirs, wind (onshore and offshore), and solar (PV and CSP). In addition, it is recommended to 
accelerate the development of energy storage to promote a full transition to renewable energy sources.  
4.3. The influence of geographical scope on solar and wind power 
In this study, most technologies are modeled using data representing the geographical area of Germany 
(DE) as average processes representative for a European scope (RER) are not available in the Ecoinvent 
database, and as the specific locations of power plants are not known. This choice may influence the 
representativity of the results, especially concerning the energy sources that are highly influenced by 
the location of plants, e.g. wind and solar power.  
The generation of power from wind energy is dependent on the Wind Power Density (WPD), which is 
a quantitative measure of wind energy available at a given location. As reported by Badger et al. (2021), 
the WPD is generally highest in northern Europe and especially around Norway, Denmark, and the 
United Kingdom. The WPD at locations of current offshore wind farms in the EU-28 varies from around 
1000 to 1500 W/m2, whereas the onshore WPD in EU-28 varies from around 200 to 1400 W/m2  (Badger 
et al., 2021; European Commission, 2022). This underlines that the placement of wind turbines is 
essential for the energy output. Using data representative for Germany is considered reasonable for 
offshore wind as the WPD for German offshore wind farms is around 1200 W/m2. The WPD onshore in 
Germany varies from being high along the northern coast (around 800-1000 W/m2) to being rather low 
in the southern region (250-450 W/m2). As the output span for onshore production is so wide, using a 
German average is considered rather uncertain. For electricity produced from wind energy, it should 
also be noted that the technology is modeled using generic data from the Ecoinvent database, which 
was last updated in 2014. These data are therefore expected to be rather outdated, and an investigation 
of more suitable inventory is expected to improve the results. 
The power from PV panels is modeled to represent a French context using data concerning the 
average annual energy output in France. This parameter changes greatly depending on the location of 
PV panels. de Wild-Scholten et al. (2014) reports that the energy output from PVs at an optimum angle 
can vary from being 767 kWh/kWp/yr in Iceland to 1724 kWh/kWp/yr in Cyprus. In this study, 1237 
kWh/kWp/yr is used for France, which is considered to be a reasonable estimate for a mean value. 
Common for PV and wind is that the output span is very wide, and specifications regarding location will 
therefore improve the results. Furthermore, parameters such as the electricity mix used for production 
and the rates at which the technology is improving are expected to influence the impacts of electricity 
from PV panels (and many other energy sources) greatly. Attempts were made to include the potential 
improvements, but a further investigation of the influence of such parameters would improve the 
results.  
==PAGE:34==
Article template 
Discussion 
28 
4.4. The Planetary Boundaries framework 
4.4.1. The modeling of biodiversity intactness index 
The impacts on BII calculated in this study are regarded as a lower boundary and are accompanied by 
several uncertainties. Firstly, MSA is regarded as a proxy for BII due to the lack of more precise 
parameters. Unlike the BII, MSA weighs all areas equally and does not consider the distribution of 
populations within particular species or the reduction in productivity of ecosystems (Alkemade et al., 
2009; Biggs et al., 2008; Galán-Martín et al., 2021). Such shortcomings in methods for assessing the 
impacts on biodiversity have been reflected in more studies, and there is a clear need for further 
investigation and development within the subject (Biggs et al., 2008; Curran et al., 2011; Hanafiah et al., 
2012).  
Secondly, the changes in BII are driven by multiple stressors among which direct human pressures 
such as land-use change and climate change have been identified to be the main stressors (Baisero et 
al., 2020; Maxwell et al., 2016; Rockström et al., 2009; Scheffers et al., 2016). As this study desires to 
assess the local impacts on BII, only direct land use is included in the assessment. Even though direct 
land use has been the most influential driver for biodiversity loss to date (Millennium Ecosystem 
Assessment, 2005), the importance of stressors can change over time (Hanafiah et al., 2012). Whereas 
local ecosystems may be restored after an area of land has been used anthropogenically, the emissions 
of GHGs will remain in the atmosphere over a longer period. The time horizon of the two main stressors 
of biodiversity loss thereby differs, and there is a risk that the impacts from climate change and 
potentially other stressors will increase over time. 
Thirdly, there is a need to reach an agreement on a common method for assessing the impacts on BII. 
As stressed in Section 3.2.8., the results will differ greatly depending on the size of the area used for 
reference value. The denser the production site is, the greater the impact will seem as the difference 
between the numerator and the denominator in Equation (1) will decrease. Therefore, this study 
recommends future studies to investigate and develop the method for estimating impacts on BII. 
4.4.2. The shortcomings of the PB framework 
The PB framework was developed to control the anthropogenic pressure on the ES (Rockström et al., 
2009; Steffen, Richardson, et al., 2015), and it is thereby exclusively concerned with the environmental 
perspective of sustainability. When considering the generation of electricity, more aspects, however, 
appear to be essential for future development. One aspect is the risks associated with certain energy 
sources. E.g. nuclear performs well regarding climate change and has often been highlighted as a source 
for low-carbon energy (Bickerstaff et al., 2008; Corner et al., 2011). It is, on the other hand, also 
associated with risks such as plant accidents which can cause both long- and short-term health issues as 
well as major impacts on ecosystems (Christodouleas et al., 2011; European Parliament, 2016). Another 
aspect is the stability of energy sources. As mentioned in Section 4.2.2., this study recommends 
increased use of renewable energy sources such as hydro power using reservoirs, wind onshore and 
offshore, and solar (both PV and CSP). The use of most renewable energy sources for electricity 
generation is, however, associated with low stability, and as it is costly to store large quantities of 
electricity over a longer period, there is a need for the generation to be stable and not too dependent 
on the weather. The risks and energy instability are just two examples of aspects not considered in an 
AESA, but which could be essential, when choosing the future composition of electricity mix.
 
 
==PAGE:35==
Article template 
Conclusion  
 
29 
5. Conclusion 
This study presented an investigation of the life-cycle impacts of electricity generated in the EU-28 in 
relation to the PBs and represents a basis for performing AESAs of electricity generation at a continental 
level. The study used the developed PB-LCIA method (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018) and 
included an assessment of the local impacts on the PB biosphere integrity which is currently omitted 
from the PB-LCIA method. The study assessed four scenarios developed for EU-28 in the period 2020-
2050 and applied two different sharing principles for assigning the SoSOS including both direct and 
indirect consumption and impacts. It is found that neither of the four scenarios can be considered within 
the boundaries of the assigned SoSOS using either of the two sharing principles, and none of the 
scenarios can thereby be considered absolutely environmentally sustainable. The Base, Blue, and Green 
scenarios comply with an equal number of boundaries in year 2020 and 2050, and whereas the NZE 
scenario is the worst performing scenario in 2020, it is the best performing scenario in 2050. The best 
mix, with respect to the PBs, is observed for NZE in 2040, which is especially due to the high use of CCS 
attached to coal and natural gas power plants. To improve the performance of the EU-28 electricity mix, 
this study recommends a fast inclusion of CCS attached to coal power plants as well as more renewable 
energy sources such as hydro power using reservoirs, wind (onshore and offshore), and solar (PV and 
CSP). In addition, the study recommends accelerating the development of energy storage in order to 
promote a full transition to renewable energy sources.
 
 
==PAGE:36==
Article template 
References 
30 
References 
Adeh, E. H., Good, S. P., Calaf, M., & Higgins, C. W. (2019). Solar PV Power Potential is Greatest Over Croplands. 
Scientific Reports, 9(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47803-3 
Akber, M. Z., Thaheem, M. J., & Arshad, H. (2017). Life cycle sustainability assessment of electricity generation in 
Pakistan: Policy regime for a sustainable energy mix. Energy Policy, 111, 111–126. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2017.09.022 
Algunaibet, I. M., Pozo, C., Galán-Martín, Á., Huijbregts, M. A. J., Mac Dowell, N., & Guillén-Gosálbez, G. (2019). 
Powering sustainable development within planetary boundaries. Energy & Environmental Science, 12(6), 
1890–1900. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8EE03423K 
Alkemade, R., van Oorschot, M., Miles, L., Nellemann, C., Bakkenes, M., & ten Brink, B. (2009). GLOBIO3: A 
Framework to Investigate Options for Reducing Global Terrestrial Biodiversity Loss. Ecosystems 2009 12:3, 
12(3), 374–390. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10021-009-9229-5 
Badger, J., Bauwens, I., Casso, P., Davis, N., Hahmann, A., Hansen, S. B. K., Hansen, B. O., Heathfield, D., Knight, O. 
J., Lacave, O., Lizcano, G., Bosch i Mas, A., Mortensen, N. G., Olsen, B. T., Onninen, M., Potter Van Loon, A., 
& Volker, P. (2021). Global Wind Atlas. Energydata.Info. https://globalwindatlas.info/ 
Baisero, D., Visconti, P., Pacifici, M., Cimatti, M., & Rondinini, C. (2020). Projected Global Loss of Mammal Habitat 
Due to Land-Use and Climate Change. One Earth, 2(6), 578–585. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ONEEAR.2020.05.015 
Bickerstaff, K., Lorenzoni, I., Pidgeon, N. F., Poortinga, W., & Simmons, P. (2008). Reframing nuclear power in the 
UK energy debate: nuclear power, climate change mitigation and radioactive waste. SAGE. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963662506066719 
Biggs, R., Simons, H., Bakkenes, M., Scholes, R. J., Eickhout, B., van Vuuren, D., & Alkemade, R. (2008). Scenarios 
of biodiversity loss in southern Africa in the 21st century. Global Environmental Change, 18(2), 296–309. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.02.001 
Bovens, L. (2011). A Lockean defense of grandfathering emission rights. The Ethics of Global Climate Change, 
124–144. https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511732294.007 
Brejnrod, K. N., Kalbar, P., Petersen, S., & Birkved, M. (2017). The absolute environmental performance of 
buildings. Building and Environment, 119, 87–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.04.003 
Budinis, S., Krevor, S., Dowell, N. Mac, Brandon, N., & Hawkes, A. (2018). An assessment of CCS costs, barriers 
and potential. Energy Strategy Reviews, 22(August), 61–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2018.08.003 
Caney, S. (2009). Justice and the distribution of greenhouse gas emissions. 
Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1080/17449620903110300, 5(2), 125–146. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17449620903110300 
Christodouleas, J. P., Forrest, R. D., Ainsley, C. G., Tochner, Z., Hahn, S. M., & Glatstein, E. (2011). Short-Term and 
Long-Term Health Risks of Nuclear-Power-Plant Accidents. N Engl j Med, 364, 2334–2375. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1103676 
Corner, A., Venables, D., Spence, A., Poortinga, W., Demski, C., & Pidgeon, N. (2011). Nuclear power, climate 
change and energy security: Exploring British public attitudes. Energy Policy, 39(9), 4823–4833. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2011.06.037 
Cuéllar-Franca, R. M., & Azapagic, A. (2015). Carbon capture, storage and utilisation technologies: A critical 
analysis and comparison of their life cycle environmental impacts. Journal of CO2 Utilization, 9, 82–102. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCOU.2014.12.001 
 
==PAGE:37==
Article template 
References 
 
31 
Curran, M., De Baan, L., De Schryver, A. M., Van Zelm, R., Hellweg, S., Koellner, T., Sonnemann, G., & Huijbregts, 
M. A. J. (2011). Toward meaningful end points of biodiversity in life cycle assessment. Environmental 
Science and Technology, 45(1), 70–79. https://doi.org/10.1021/es101444k 
de Wild-Scholten, M., Cassagne, V., & Huld, T. (2014). Solar Resources and Carbon Footprint of Photovoltaic 
Power in Different Regions in Europe. Katalog BPS, XXXIII(2), 81–87. 
http://www.americanbanker.com/issues/179_124/which-city-is-the-next-big-fintech-hub-new-york-stakes-
its-claim-1068345-
1.html%5Cnhttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15003161%5Cnhttp://cid.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/d
oi/10.1093/cid/cir991%5Cnhttp://www.scielo 
Den Europæiske Unions Publikationskontor. (2011). Environmentally extended input-output tables and models 
for Europe - Publications Office of the EU. https://op.europa.eu/da/publication-detail/-
/publication/1edb6271-5b07-40fa-ae6b-55bce1c1c220 
Dessler, A. (2016). Introduction to Modern Climate Change  (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
EC-JRC. (2010). International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook - General guide for Life Cycle 
Assessment - Detailed guidance (First edit). Publications Office of the European Union. 
https://doi.org/10.2788/38479 
Ecoinvent. (2021). ecoinvent Database – ecoinvent. https://ecoinvent.org/the-ecoinvent-database/ 
EIA. (2021). Natural gas explained. U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). 
https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/natural-gas/ 
Enerdata. (2021). Research on energy efficiency, CO2 emissions, energy consumption, forecast. 
https://www.enerdata.net/ 
European Commission. (2021a). Carbon capture, use and storage. European Commission. 
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/carbon-capture-use-and-storage_da 
European Commission. (2021b). Delivering the European Green Deal. 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal/delivering-european-green-
deal_en 
European Commission. (2022). European Atlas of the Seas. European Commission. 
https://ec.europa.eu/maritimeaffairs/atlas/maritime_atlas/#lang=EN;p=w;bkgd=5;theme=913:0.75;c=5170
27.93914611405,7370931.386460172;z=5 
European Environment Agency. (2019a). EEA greenhouse gases - data viewer. https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-
and-maps/data/data-viewers/greenhouse-gases-viewer 
European Environment Agency. (2019b). Rising energy consumption slows EU progress on renewables and energy 
efficiency targets. European Environment Agency. https://www.eea.europa.eu/highlights/rising-energy-
consumption-slows-eu 
European Parliament. (2016). Chernobyl 30 years on: Environmental and health effects. European Parliament. 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_BRI(2016)581972 
Eurostat. (2016). Glossary: Final consumption expenditure. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=Glossary:Final_consumption_expenditure 
Eurostat. (2020). Population projections in the EU - Statistics Explained. Eurostat. 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=People_in_the_EU_-
_population_projections&oldid=497115#Population_projections 
Eurostat. (2021). What is the share of renewable energy in the EU? European Comission. 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/infographs/energy/bloc-4c.html 
==PAGE:38==
Article template 
References 
32 
Galán-Martín, Á., Tulus, V., Díaz, I., Pozo, C., Pérez-Ramírez, J., & Guillén-Gosálbez, G. (2021). Sustainability 
footprints of a renewable carbon transition for the petrochemical sector within planetary boundaries. One 
Earth, 4(4), 565–583. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.04.001 
Hanafiah, M. M., Hendriks, A. J., & Huijbregts, M. A. J. (2012). Comparing the ecological footprint with the 
biodiversity footprint of products. Journal of Cleaner Production, 37, 107–114. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.06.016 
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K., & Olsen, S. I. (2017). Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice. Life Cycle 
Assessment: Theory and Practice, 1–1216. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3 
Häyhä, T., Lucas, P. L., van Vuuren, D. P., Cornell, S. E., & Hoff, H. (2016). From Planetary Boundaries to national 
fair shares of the global safe operating space — How can the scales be bridged? Global Environmental 
Change, 40, 60–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.GLOENVCHA.2016.06.008 
IEA. (2021). Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector. International Energy Agency, 224. 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers. (2019). The potential for CCS and CCU in Europe (Issue June). 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/iogp_-_report_-_ccs_ccu.pdf 
IPCC. (2021). Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In Cambridge University Press. 
Iribarren, D., Petrakopoulou, F., & Dufour, J. (2013). Environmental and thermodynamic evaluation of CO2 
capture, transport and storage with and without enhanced resource recovery. Energy, 50(1), 477–485. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.12.021 
ISO. (2006a). ISO 14040: Environmental management - Life Cycle Assessment - Principles and Framework. 
International Organization for Standardization. 
ISO. (2006b). ISO 14044: Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Requirements and guidelines. 
International Organization for Standardization. 
Kiss, B., Kácsor, E., & Szalay, Z. (2020). Environmental assessment of future electricity mix – Linking an hourly 
economic model with LCA. Journal of Cleaner Production, 264, 121536. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121536 
Lelek, L., Kulczycka, J., Lewandowska, A., & Zarebska, J. (2015). Life cycle assessment of energy generation in 
Poland. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 2015 21:1, 21(1), 1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/S11367-015-0979-3 
Li, Y., Lan, S., Ryberg, M., Pérez-Ramírez, J., & Wang, X. (2021). A quantitative roadmap for China towards carbon 
neutrality in 2060 using methanol and ammonia as energy carriers. IScience, 24(6), 102513. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102513 
Lucas, P. L., Wilting, H. C., Hof, A. F., & van Vuuren, D. P. (2020). Allocating planetary boundaries to large 
economies: Distributional consequences of alternative perspectives on distributive fairness. Global 
Environmental Change, 60, 102017. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.GLOENVCHA.2019.102017 
Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., Pörtner, H.-O., Roberts, D. J., Skea, J. P. R., Shukla, P. R., Pirani, A., Moufouma-
Okia, W., Péan, C., Pidcock, R., Connors, S., Matthews, J. B. R., Chen, Y., Zhou, X., Gomis, M. I., Lonnoy, E., 
Maycock, T., Tignor, M., & Waterfield, T. (2019). Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the 
impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission 
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change,. In IPCC 
(Vol. 291, Issue 5813). https://doi.org/10.1038/291285a0 
Maxwell, S. L., Fuller, R. A., Brooks, T. M., & Watson, J. E. M. (2016). Biodiversity: The ravages of guns, nets and 
bulldozers. Nature 2016 536:7615, 536(7615), 143–145. https://doi.org/10.1038/536143a 
 
==PAGE:39==
Article template 
References 
 
33 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. (2005). Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Biodiversity Synthesis. World 
Health Organization, 18(2), 54. http://www.bioquest.org/wp-content/blogs.dir/files/2009/06/ecosystems-
and-health.pdf 
Newbold, T., Hudson, L. N., Hill, S. L. L., Contu, S., Lysenko, I., Senior, R. A., Börger, L., Bennett, D. J., Choimes, A., 
Collen, B., Day, J., De Palma, A., Díaz, S., Echeverria-Londoño, S., Edgar, M. J., Feldman, A., Garon, M., 
Harrison, M. L. K., Alhusseini, T., … Purvis, A. (2015). Global effects of land use on local terrestrial 
biodiversity. Nature, 520(7545), 45–50. https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE14324 
Oosterhoff, H. C., Ryberg, M. W., & Laurent, A. (2021). A Framework for the Absolute Environmental 
Sustainability Assessment of Companies in the Business-to-Many context. 
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2683895748 
Page, E. A. (2007). Justice Between Generations: Investigating a Sufficientarian Approach. 
Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1080/17449620600991960, 3(1), 3–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17449620600991960 
Pascaris, A. S., Schelly, C., & Pearce, J. M. (2020). A first investigation of agriculture sector perspectives on the 
opportunities and barriers for agrivoltaics. Agronomy, 10(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy10121885 
Pehl, M., Arvesen, A., Humpenöder, F., Popp, A., Hertwich, E. G., & Luderer, G. (2017). Understanding future 
emissions from low-carbon power systems by integration of life-cycle assessment and integrated energy 
modelling. Nature Energy 2017 2:12, 2(12), 939–945. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-017-0032-9 
Pérez-López, P., Jolivet, R., Blanc, I., Besseau, R., Douziech, M., Gschwind, B., Tannous, S., Schlesinger, J., Brière, 
R., Prieur-Vernat, A., & Clavreul, J. (2020). INCER-ACV : Incertitudes dans les méthodes d’évaluation des 
impacts environnementaux des filières de production énergétique par ACV. Final report. Deliverable of 
ADEME Study 1705C0045. 77 Pp. https://librairie.ademe.fr/energies-renouvelables-reseaux-et-
stockage/4448-incer-acv.html%0A 
Persson, L., Carney Almroth, B. M., Collins, C. D., Cornell, S., de Wit, C. A., Diamond, M. L., Fantke, P., Hassellöv, 
M., MacLeod, M., Ryberg, M. W., Søgaard Jørgensen, P., Villarrubia-Gómez, P., Wang, Z., & Hauschild, M. Z. 
(2022). Outside the Safe Operating Space of the Planetary Boundary for Novel Entities. Environmental 
Science & Technology. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c04158 
Petrakopoulou, F., Iribarren, D., & Dufour, J. (2015). Life-cycle performance of natural gas power plants with pre-
combustion CO 2 capture. Greenhouse Gases: Science and Technology, 5(3), 268–276. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ghg.1457 
PRé Sustainability. (2020). New release: SimaPro 9.1.1 is here! - SimaPro. https://simapro.com/2020/whats-new-
in-simapro-9-1-1/ 
Rauner, S., & Budzinski, M. (2017). Holistic energy system modeling combining multi-objective optimization and 
life cycle assessment. Environmental Research Letters, 12(12), 124005. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/AA914D 
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., Chapin, F. S., Lambin, E. F., Lenton, T. M., Scheffer, M., Folke, 
C., Schellnhuber, H. J., Nykvist, B., de Wit, C. A., Hughes, T., van der Leeuw, S., Rodhe, H., Sörlin, S., Snyder, 
P. K., Costanza, R., Svedin, U., … Foley, J. A. (2009). A safe operating space for humanity. Ecology and 
Society, 461(7263), 472–475. https://doi.org/10.1038/461472a 
Roelofsen, O., Somers, K., Speelman, E., & Witteveen, M. (2020). How electrification can help industrial 
companies cut costs | McKinsey. McKinsey. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-
natural-gas/our-insights/plugging-in-what-electrification-can-do-for-industry 
Rosa, L., Sanchez, D. L., Realmonte, G., Baldocchi, D., & D’Odorico, P. (2021). The water footprint of carbon 
capture and storage technologies. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 138(October). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110511 
==PAGE:40==
Article template 
References 
34 
Roser, M. (2019). Future Population Growth. Our World in Data. https://ourworldindata.org/future-population-
growth 
Ryberg, M. W., Andersen, M. M., Owsianiak, M., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2020). Downscaling the planetary 
boundaries in absolute environmental sustainability assessments – A review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
276, 123287. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2020.123287 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Clavreul, J., Mueller, C., Sim, S., King, H., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2018). How to bring 
absolute sustainability into decision-making: An industry case study using a Planetary Boundary-based 
methodology. Science of The Total Environment, 634, 1406–1416. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2018.04.075 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Richardson, K., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2018). Development of a life-cycle impact 
assessment methodology linked to the Planetary Boundaries framework. Ecological Indicators, 88, 250–
262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.065 
Ryberg, M. W., Wang, P., Kara, S., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2018). Prospective Assessment of Steel Manufacturing 
Relative to Planetary Boundaries: Calling for Life Cycle Solution. Procedia CIRP, 69(May), 451–456. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.11.021 
Sala, O. E., Chapin, F. S., Armesto, J. J., Berlow, E., Bloomfield, J., Dirzo, R., Huber-Sanwald, E., Huenneke, L. F., 
Jackson, R. B., Kinzig, A., Leemans, R., Lodge, D. M., Mooney, H. A., Oesterheld, M., Poff, N. L. R., Sykes, M. 
T., Walker, B. H., Walker, M., & Wall, D. H. (2000). Global biodiversity scenarios for the year 2100. Science, 
287(5459), 1770–1774. https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.287.5459.1770 
Sandin, G., Peters, G. M., & Svanström, M. (2015). Using the planetary boundaries framework for setting impact-
reduction targets in LCA contexts. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 2015 20:12, 20(12), 
1684–1700. https://doi.org/10.1007/S11367-015-0984-6 
Scheffer, M., Carpenter, S., Foley, J. A., Folke, C., & Walker, B. (2001). Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. Nature 
2001 413:6856, 413(6856), 591–596. https://doi.org/10.1038/35098000 
Scheffers, B. R., De Meester, L., Bridge, T. C. L., Hoffmann, A. A., Pandolfi, J. M., Corlett, R. T., Butchart, S. H. M., 
Pearce-Kelly, P., Kovacs, K. M., Dudgeon, D., Pacifici, M., Rondinini, C., Foden, W. B., Martin, T. G., Mora, C., 
Bickford, D., & Watson, J. E. M. (2016). The broad footprint of climate change from genes to biomes to 
people. Science, 354(6313). https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAF7671 
Scholes, R. J., & Biggs, R. (2005). A biodiversity intactness index. Nature 2005 434:7029, 434(7029), 45–49. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03289 
Shackley, S., Reiner, D., Upham, P., de Coninck, H., Sigurthorsson, G., & Anderson, J. (2009). The acceptability of 
CO2 capture and storage (CCS) in Europe: An assessment of the key determining factors. Part 2. The social 
acceptability of CCS and the wider impacts and repercussions of its implementation. International Journal 
of Greenhouse Gas Control, 3(3), 344–356. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2008.09.004 
Shepherd, A., Ivins, E. R., A, G., Barletta, V. R., Bentley, M. J., Bettadpur, S., Briggs, K. H., Bromwich, D. H., 
Forsberg, R., Galin, N., Horwath, M., Jacobs, S., Joughin, I., King, M. A., Lenaerts, J. T. M., Li, J., Ligtenberg, S. 
R. M., Luckman, A., Luthcke, S. B., … Zwally, H. J. (2012). A Reconciled Estimate of Ice-Sheet Mass Balance. 
Science, 338(6111), 1183–1189. https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.1228102 
Singh, A., Triulzi, G., & Magee, C. L. (2021). Technological improvement rate predictions for all technologies: Use 
of patent data and an extended domain description. Research Policy, 50(9), 104294. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104294 
Singh, B., Strømman, A. H., & Hertwich, E. G. (2011). Comparative life cycle environmental assessment of CCS 
technologies. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 5(4), 911–921. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2011.03.012 
 
==PAGE:41==
Article template 
References 
 
35 
Steffen, W., Broadgate, W., Deutsch, L., Gaffney, O., & Ludwig, C. (2015). The trajectory of the Anthropocene: 
The Great Acceleration: Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1177/2053019614564785, 2(1), 81–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2053019614564785 
Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E. M., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S. R., Vries, 
W. de, Wit, C. A. de, Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G. M., Persson, L. M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, 
B., & Sörlin, S. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Science, 
347(6223). https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.1259855 
Steffen, W., Rockström, J., Richardson, K., Lenton, T. M., Folke, C., Liverman, D., Summerhayes, C. P., Barnosky, A. 
D., Cornell, S. E., Crucifix, M., Donges, J. F., Fetzer, I., Lade, S. J., Scheffer, M., Winkelmann, R., & 
Schellnhuber, H. J. (2018). Trajectories of the Earth System in the Anthropocene. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 115(33), 8252–8259. https://doi.org/10.1073/PNAS.1810141115 
The World Bank. (2020a). Land area (sq. km) . The World Bank. 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/AG.LND.TOTL.K2 
The World Bank. (2020b). Population growth (annual %) - European Union, East Asia & Pacific, South Asia, South 
Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, Middle East & North Africa, North America, Latin America & Caribbean, Europe 
& Central Asia, New Zealand, Australia. The World Bank. 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.GROW?locations=EU-Z4-8S-ZA-ZG-ZQ-XU-ZJ-Z7-NZ-AU 
The World Bank. (2020c). Population growth (annual %) - World. The World Bank. 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.GROW 
UNFCCC. (2017). Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). UNFCCC. https://unfccc.int/process-and-
meetings/the-paris-agreement/nationally-determined-contributions-ndcs/nationally-determined-
contributions-ndcs 
van Vuuren, D. P., Sala, O. E., & Pereira, H. M. (2006). The future of vascular plant diversity under four global 
scenarios. Ecology and Society, 11(2). https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-01818-110225 
Yang, L., Lv, H., Jiang, D., Fan, J., Zhang, X., He, W., Zhou, J., & Wu, W. (2020). Whether CCS technologies will 
exacerbate the water crisis in China? —A full life-cycle analysis. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 134(September), 110374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110374 
Zimmermann, B. M., Dura, H., Baumann, M. J., & Weil, M. R. (2015). Prospective time-resolved LCA of fully 
electric supercap vehicles in Germany. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management, 11(3), 
425–434. https://doi.org/10.1002/IEAM.1646 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
Article template 
List of figures 
36 
List of figures 
Figure 1   The Planetary Boundaries (PB). The PB is illustrated as a dotted circle. The green area represents the Safe 
Operating Space (SOS) for humanity (below the PB). When exceeding the PB and entering the yellow/orange 
area, the risk of disrupting the stability of the Earth system (ES) increases. The illustration is designed by Azote 
for Stockholm Resilience Center, based on analysis in Persson et al. (2022) and Steffen, Richardson, et al. 
(2015). ................................................................................................................................................................ 2 
 
Figure 2   Main points of the four scenarios assessed including the expected temperature increase in 2050 with 
respect to the global mean temperature in 1990. The dotted lines illustrate a range of expected temperature 
increase. Data for Base, Blue, and Green: Enerdata © ...................................................................................... 4 
 
Figure 3   Development in electricity mix and electricity generation for the Base scenario in the period 2020-2050. 
The quantity of electricity generated is given in TWh/year and the mix is given in %. The quantity of electricity 
generated is in this study assumed to increase by approximately 25% from 2020 to 2050. Data: Enerdata ©
 ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
 
Figure 4   Development in electricity mix and electricity generation for the Blue scenario in the period 2020-2050. 
The quantity of electricity generated is given in TWh/year and the mix is given in %. The quantity of electricity 
generated is in this study assumed to increase by approximately 25% from 2020 to 2050. Data: Enerdata ©
 ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
 
Figure 5   Development in electricity mix and electricity generation for the Green scenario in the period 2020-2050. 
The quantity of electricity generated is given in TWh/year and the mix is given in %. The quantity of electricity 
generated is in this study assumed to increase by approximately 25% from 2020 to 2050. Data: Enerdata ©
 ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7 
 
Figure 6   Development in electricity mix and electricity generation for the NZE scenario in the period 2020-2050. 
The quantity of electricity generated is given in TWh/year and the mix is given in %. The quantity of electricity 
generated is in this study assumed to increase by approximately 25% from 2020 to 2050. Data for quantity: 
Enerdata ©......................................................................................................................................................... 7 
 
Figure 7   Three-step approach to assigning the SOS from global to national level (step 1), from a national level to 
the final consumption sector level (step 2), and from final consumption sector level to intermediate product 
sector level (step 3). ........................................................................................................................................... 9 
 
Figure 8   Impacts of the four scenarios on Climate change – energy imbalance. The left side shows the impacts 
from Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ............................................ 12 
 
Figure 9   Impacts of the four scenarios on Ocean acidification. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the 
assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy 
sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ..................................................................................... 12 
 
Figure 10   Impacts of the four scenarios on Stratospheric ozone depletion. The left side shows the impacts from 
Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ............................................ 13 
 
==PAGE:43==
Article template 
List of figures 
37 
Figure 11   Impacts of the four scenarios on Freshwater use – basin semidry. The left side shows the impacts from 
Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ........................................... 14 
 
Figure 12   Impacts of the four scenarios on Freshwater use – basin dry. The left side shows the impacts from Base 
scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together 
with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution 
from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ................................................................ 15 
 
Figure 13   Impacts of the four scenarios on Freshwater use – basin humid. The left side shows the impacts from 
Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ........................................... 15 
 
Figure 14   Impacts of the four scenarios on Freshwater use – global. The left side shows the impacts from Base 
scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together 
with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution 
from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ................................................................ 16 
 
Figure 15   Impacts of the four scenarios on Biogeochemical flows – regional P. The left side shows the impacts 
from Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ........................................... 17 
 
Figure 16   Impacts of the four scenarios on Biogeochemical flows – N. The left side shows the impacts from Base 
scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together 
with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution 
from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ................................................................ 17 
 
Figure 17   Impacts of the four scenarios on Land system change - boreal. The left side shows the impacts from 
Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ........................................... 18 
 
Figure 18   Impacts of the four scenarios on Land system change - temperate. The left side shows the impacts from 
Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ........................................... 19 
 
Figure 19   Impacts of the four scenarios on Land system change - global. The left side shows the impacts from Base 
scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together 
with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution 
from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ................................................................ 19 
 
Figure 20   Impacts of the four scenarios on Biodiversity Intactness Index (BII) – biodiversity loss. The left side shows 
the impacts from Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario 
(light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side 
shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. .......................... 21 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
Article template 
List of figures 
38 
Figure 21   Impacts of the NZE scenario on 12 impact categories in relation to SoSOS 1 to show the potential shift 
of burdens. Two impact categories are left out of the illustration: Stratospheric ozone depletion and Land 
system change – global. The scale is logarithmic and is given in “number of times SoSOS 1 is exceeded”. ... 22 
 
Figure 22   Cumulative change in radiative forcing due to the emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O from 2020 to 2050 for 
scenario Base (grey), Blue (blue), Green (dark green), and NZE (light green) in relation to SoSOS 1 (red dotted 
line) and SoSOS 2 (yellow dotted line). The calculations are based on Ryberg et al. (2018) and Li et al. (2021) 
and consider the natural decay of the GHGs and the conversion of CH4 into CO2 at the end of the lifetime of 
CH4. A: excludes estimations of technological improvement, B: includes estimations of the technological 
improvement of power plants. ........................................................................................................................ 23 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
Supplementary Material  
Evaluation of life-cycle impacts of European electricity generation in 
relation to the Planetary Boundaries 
 
Liv Kristensen Stranddorf1  
Supervisors: 
Morten W. Ryberg2, Julie Clavreul3, and Anne Prieur-Vernat3 
 
1 Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
2 Department of Technology, Management, and Economics, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
3 ENGIE Lab CRIGEN, Stains, France 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
2 
Table of content  
Introduction to Supplementary Material ............................................................................... 3 
1. Assumptions..................................................................................................................... 4 
1.1. Quantity of electricity produced ......................................................................................... 4 
1.2. Energy mixes and technologies ........................................................................................... 4 
1.3. Technological improvement ................................................................................................ 6 
2. Basis for life cycle assessment ........................................................................................... 7 
2.1. Goal definition ..................................................................................................................... 7 
2.2. Scope definition ................................................................................................................... 7 
2.3. Life cycle inventory .............................................................................................................. 9 
3. The Planetary Boundaries and the Safe Operating Space ................................................. 13 
3.1. The Planetary Boundaries framework ............................................................................... 13 
3.2. Assignment of SoSOS ......................................................................................................... 14 
3.3. SoSOS in perspective ......................................................................................................... 17 
4. Specifications on impacts on Biodiversity Intactness Index (BII) ....................................... 18 
5. Dynamic modeling of impacts on radiative forcing ........................................................... 20 
6. Supporting results .......................................................................................................... 22 
6.1. Impacts on the atmospheric CO2 concentration ............................................................... 22 
6.2. Impacts on atmospheric aerosol loading .......................................................................... 23 
6.3. Potential impacts ............................................................................................................... 25 
6.4. The exceedance of assigned SoSOS ................................................................................... 29 
References ......................................................................................................................... 33 
List of figures ..................................................................................................................... 36 
List of tables ....................................................................................................................... 37 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                                Introduction 
 
3 
Introduction to Supplementary Material 
The Supplementary Material (SM) includes specifications concerning the underlying methodology and 
methodological choices applied in the study. The SM includes six parts. The first part includes a list of 
assumptions made throughout the study. The second part presents the basis for the life cycle 
assessment performed in the study including the goal and scope definition and specifications on the 
life cycle inventory. The third part elaborates on the Planetary Boundaries (PB) framework and the 
assignment of the share of safe operating space. Part four explains the assessment of the impacts on 
the biodiversity intactness index, and part five explains the methodology behind the dynamic 
calculations of the impacts on radiative forcing. The sixth and final part of the SM presents detailed 
and supplementary results including impacts on the PBs climate change (atmospheric CO2 
concentration) and atmospheric aerosol loading, which were not presented in the article. This part 
furthermore includes tables of the results obtained in the study and an overview of how much the 
results exceed the assigned share of safe operating space. 
Moreover, three Excel spreadsheets are enclosed, which are referred to as SM7, SM8, and SM9. 
SM7 contains calculations of the results at steady-state and is the basis for the results shown in the 
article Section 3.2. and 3.3. SM8 and SM9 include dynamic calculations of the impacts of GHG 
emissions on radiative forcing and are the basis for the results presented in the article Section 3.4.  
SM9 considers technological improvement, and SM8 does not consider technological improvement.
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                               Assumptions   
 
4 
1. Assumptions 
The assumptions made in this study are divided into three subsections: 1) assumptions regarding the 
quantity of electricity produced, 2) assumptions regarding energy mixes and how different energy 
generation technologies are modeled, and 3) assumptions regarding the technological improvement 
rates.  
 
1.1. Quantity of electricity produced 
The amount of electricity produced in all scenarios is assumed to be the amount stated by Enerdata 
(2021) for the Base scenario. This assumption is made to enable direct comparison between the four 
scenarios. The quantities are given in TWh per year for every fifth year in Table S1. The quantity is 
extrapolated linearly between every fifth year. 
 
Table S1   The assumed quantity of electricity produced per year in EU-28 given in (TWh/year). Data: Enerdata © 
 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Quantity of electricity 
produced (TWh/year) 
3068 
3329 
3469 
3591 
3666 
3731 
3813 
 
 
1.2. Energy mixes and technologies 
The following includes assumptions regarding the modeling of energy sources. Some energy sources 
included in the scenarios are not represented in the database Ecoinvent v3.6, and assumptions 
regarding modeling have therefore been necessary. Other assumptions regard the distribution 
between energy sources gathered into the same category, and some concern simplifications to delimit 
the project. 
1.2.1. Bioenergy 
- Due to the lack of technological specifications in the data delivered from Enerdata, all electricity in 
the category bioenergy is generated as cogeneration with heat from the incineration of wood. 
1.2.2. Coal and lignite 
- In the data delivered from Enerdata coal and lignite are gathered into the same category. It has 
therefore been necessary to make assumptions concerning the share between the two sources. 
The share between electricity generated from lignite and coal is based on the shares stated by  
McKinsey&Company (2010).  
1.2.3. Hydropower 
- The share between electricity generated from hydro reservoir and hydro pumped storage is based 
on the shares stated by International Renewable Energy Agency (2018).  
1.2.4. Hydrogen 
- Electricity generated from hydrogen (used in the NZE scenario) is kept out of the study. Electricity 
based on hydrogen is expected to be generated from a mix of coal and natural gas with Carbon 
Capture Utilization and Storage (CCUS) and electrolysis with Photovoltaic (PV)/wind (International 
Energy Agency, 2021). Information is missing to enable the modeling of hydrogen-based 
electricity, and it is therefore considered too complex to include in this study. 
==PAGE:49==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                               Assumptions  
 
5 
1.2.5. Marine 
- Due to the lack of specific inventory, electricity from marine power plants is modeled as 
hydropower using reservoirs. 
1.2.6. Nuclear 
- Due to the lack of technological specifications in the data delivered from Enerdata, all electricity 
generated from nuclear is modeled using a Pressure Water Reactor (PWR), even though more 
technologies exist for generating power from nuclear. 
1.2.7. Wind 
- Wind turbines are expected to increase in capacity and the Ecoinvent process for >3MW onshore 
wind turbines was therefore considered appropriate. However, the emissions of GHGs from 
generating 1 kWh electricity using this process are considered too high (29.8 g CO2eq/kWh) (NREL, 
2013; Peach, 2021), and for that reason the electricity generated from onshore wind turbines is 
modeled using the process for 1-3MW onshore wind turbines (17.7 g CO2eq/kWh). 
- Due to a lacking inventory for larger wind turbines, the electricity generation from offshore wind 
turbines is modeled as 100% medium turbines (1-3 MW). 
1.2.8. Other 
- The category “Other” delivered in scenarios from Enerdata (Enerdata, 2021) is modeled as 100% 
geothermal as the shares of technologies are not stated. Furthermore, the category “Other” is 
only responsible for a very little share of the total energy generation, and the importance of the 
category is therefore considered low.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                               Assumptions   
 
6 
1.3. Technological improvement  
A. Singh et al. (2021) indicate that the performance of nearly all existing technologies are expected to 
improve over the coming years and based on this, it was considered essential to include an assessment 
of the potential influence of technological improvement on the environmental impacts. In this study, 
the improvement rates reflect the efficiency of the considered power plants, and assumptions 
regarding this are listed in Table S2. As some of the improvement rates are confidential, the specific 
rates are not stated. 
 
Table S2  Sources and assumptions to improvement rates. 
Energy source 
Assumption/source to improvement rate 
Bioenergy 
Assuming the same as natural gas (combined cycles). 
Coal 
Based on predictions from (Enerdata, 2021). Same as lignite. 
Geothermal 
Assuming the same as natural gas (combined cycles). 
Hydropower, pumped storage 
Assuming the same improvement rates as coal and lignite. 
Hydropower, reservoir 
Assuming the same improvement rates as coal and lignite. 
Lignite 
Based on predictions from (Enerdata, 2021). Same as coal. 
Natural gas, combined cycles 
Based on predictions from (Enerdata, 2021). 
Natural gas, conventional 
Based on predictions from (Enerdata, 2021). 
Nuclear 
Assumed to be the mean value of coal and natural gas (conventional). 
Oil 
Assumed to be the mean value of coal and natural gas (conventional). 
Solar (PV and CSP) 
Based on Frischknecht et al. (2015). It also includes an increase in the lifetime 
of PV panels from 30 years in 2020 to 35 years in 2050. 
Wind, offshore 
Based on predictions by IRENA (2019) 
Wind, onshore 
Based on predictions by IRENA (2019) 
Coal with CCS 
Assuming the same as coal power plants as CCS is considered an external 
technology added to the power plant. 
Natural gas with CCS 
Assuming the same as natural gas power plants (combined cycles) as CCS is 
considered an external technology added to the power plant. 
Bioenergy with CCS (BECCS) 
Assuming the same as bioenergy power plants as CCS is considered an 
external technology added to the power plant. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                               Basis for Life Cycle Assessment 
7 
2. Basis for life cycle assessment 
The following presents the background for the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) conducted in the study. 
This part covers the goal and scope definition and key elements of the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI).  
 
2.1. Goal definition 
The goal and scope definition of this study covers the main elements of recommended LCA reporting 
sections given in Hauschild et al. (2017). The goal definition is essential for setting the scene for the 
following LCA phases, while the scope definition seeks to ensure consistency of applied methods, 
assumptions, and data, and to enable reproducibility (Hauschild et al., 2017). The methodological 
assumptions made are not covered in this section as they are listed in SM1.  
2.1.1. Intended applications 
The study considers three scenarios for the electricity generation in the EU-28 made by Enerdata 
(2021) and one by IEA (2021) for the period 2020-2050. EU-28 includes member states of the European 
Union (EU) as of 2021 and the United Kingdom. The overall goal of the study is to assess the life cycle 
impacts of electricity generation in the EU-28 and its impacts on the Planetary Boundaries (PB). To do 
so an Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment (AESA) is carried out using LCA as a tool for 
assessing environmental life cycle impacts. The LCA carried out is not compared to LCAs of similar 
systems but is compared to the PBs defined by (Rockström et al., 2009).  
2.1.2. Reasons for carrying out the study and decision context 
The EU seeks to lower its environmental impacts and as the energy sector is the most emitting sector 
of the EU - accounting for 27% of the total GHG emissions in the EU (European Environment Agency, 
2019) - there is a large potential for reducing its environmental impacts. The reason for carrying out 
this study is to assess if the forementioned four scenarios are sustainable in an absolute environmental 
sense. 
The decision context of the study was defined as ‘accounting environmental impacts’ (situation C1) 
(EC-JRC, 2010; Hauschild et al., 2017). The reason for this is that the analysis is of descriptive nature 
and no decisions are expected to be made based on this LCA.  
2.1.3. Influencing actors  
The study is carried out by Liv Kristensen Stranddorf as part of her M.Sc. thesis at the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU) and is supervised by Morten Ryberg (Assistant Professor, DTU) and Julie 
Clevreul (ENGIE Lab CRIGEN, Stains, France). The methodologies and results used and developed in the 
study will be communicated openly to the public in an anonymous format. 
 
2.2. Scope definition 
The LCA carried out in this study takes a cradle-to-grave perspective and considers all life cycle stages 
both in the LCI and LCIA. 
2.2.1. Functional unit and reference flows 
The Functional Unit (FU) of a product system is a quantified description of the performance in terms of 
obligatory properties (Consequantial-LCA.org, n.d.). With the same FU across studies, LCAs can be 
compared. In this study, the FU is defined as the total yearly generation of electricity needed for the 
EU-28 in the period 2020-2050. The reference flow needed to obtain this FU will differ from year to 
==PAGE:52==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                               Basis for Life Cycle Assessment  
 
8 
year as the composition of energy sources is expected to change over time. The reference flow is given 
per year from 2020 to 2050 in Table S3. 
 
Table S3   Reference flow needed to realize the defined FU. The flow is given in (TWh/year) and is the total amount of 
electricity needed in EU-28 in the given year. Data: Enerdata © 
 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Reference flow for all 
scenarios (TWh/year) 
3068 
3329 
3469 
3591 
3666 
3731 
3813 
2.2.2. LCIA modeling framework  
The study takes a cradle-to-grave perspective and considers all life cycle stages. The decision context 
for the study was defined as ‘accounting environmental impacts’ (situation C1) (EC-JRC, 2010), and the 
LCI modeling framework is attributional. Multifunctional processes were handled using system 
expansion by substitution. 
2.2.3. System boundaries 
The system boundaries of the study are illustrated in Figure S1, which shows that all life cycle stages 
from cradle to grave are included in this study. 
 
 
Figure S1   System boundaries for all modeled systems. The green boxes illustrate extraction processes, light turquoise is 
transportation processes, and blue is production or treatment processes. The grey boxes are co- or waste processes, and the 
yellow box is the final product. The solid line illustrates the system boundary and the dotted line encircles the foreground 
system. 
 
==PAGE:53==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                               Basis for Life Cycle Assessment 
9 
2.2.4. Representativeness of LCI data 
Technological representativity: This study uses the database Ecoinvent v3.6. A newer version of the 
Ecoinvent exists (3.7), but as this is not included in the most recent license for the software Simapro, 
version 3.6 was used. Ecoinvent 3.6 was released in 2019 (Ecoinvent, 2019) and as it has been 
considered that most of the technologies used for electricity generation within the EU-28 have not 
changed drastically since 2019, the database is considered technologically representative for 2020. As 
the study considers electricity generation in the period 2020-2050, it is expected that the technologies 
will improve over time (A. Singh et al., 2021). One scenario is made considering the assumed 
improvement rates. The assumed improvement rates can be seen in SM1.  
 
Geographical representativity: As the study considers the overall electricity generation of the EU-28, 
the specific location of current and future power plants is unknown. The background data are mainly 
from the geographical area of Germany (DE). This was chosen as average processes representative for 
a European scope (RER) are not available in Ecoinvent 3.6 for the electricity generation technologies 
considered. For a few technologies, DE is not available in Ecoinvent 3.6 and other geographical scopes 
were chosen. This concerns hydropower (reservoir) which is represented by French technology (FR), 
and Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) which is represented by an average global production (Rest-of-
the-world, RoW). A full overview of all unit processes used for modeling is found in SM2.3. The chosen 
data are considered geographically representative for this study, but specifications regarding the 
geographical location of the production would improve the certainty of the results. 
 
Temporal representativity: The study desires to model a system representative for the period from 
2020 to 2050. As data is not available for future electricity generation, only data covering the current 
generation is used. The temporal representativeness is therefore considered to decrease concurrently 
with the progress in time. Technological improvement rates are however included in one scenario. 
These improvement rates are based on projections, and the certainty of these rates is therefore 
considered low. 
 
2.3. Life cycle inventory 
Most of the electricity generation technologies considered in this study are modeled using processes 
from Ecoinvent 3.6. Some technologies are however not represented in Ecoinvent and have been 
modeled using LCI from other studies, as described in SM section 2.3.1. The datasets used from 
Ecoinvent are gathered from the category “Electricity by fuel”. These datasets represent the 
generation of high voltage electricity at grid-connected power plants covering all life cycle stages from 
cradle to grave i.e., from extraction and production of materials both for plant construction and 
electricity generation, generation of electricity, and management of waste generated from plants and 
electricity generation. The datasets are given with the unit 1 kWh of high voltage electricity generated 
and arrived at the busbar. The unit processes from Ecoinvent used in the study are presented in Table 
S4. As most input parameters such as energy mix and improvement rates are confidential, they are not 
presented.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                               Basis for Life Cycle Assessment  
 
10 
Table S4   Unit processes from Ecoinvent 3.6 used in this study. 
Energy source 
Ecoinvent process 
Bioenergy 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 
6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Cut-off, U 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, hard coal | Cut-off, U 
Geothermal 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, deep geothermal | Cut-
off, U 
Hydropower, pumped storage 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, hydro, pumped storage | 
Cut-off, U 
Hydropower, reservoir 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, hydro, reservoir, alpine 
region | Cut-off, U 
Lignite 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, lignite | Cut-off, U 
Natural gas, combined cycles  
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, natural gas, combined 
cycle power plant | Cut-off, U 
Natural gas, conventional 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, natural gas, conventional 
power plant | Cut-off, U 
Nuclear 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, nuclear, pressure water 
reactor | Cut-off, U 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, oil | Cut-off, U 
Wind, offshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, 
offshore | Cut-off, U 
Wind, onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, 
onshore | Cut-off, U. 
 
2.3.1. Technologies modeled using LCI from other studies 
Coal with carbon capture and storage 
Electricity from coal-fired power plants with Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) is modeled using 
primary data developed and collected by Iribarren et al. (2013). They investigated the overall life-cycle 
performance of six cases of plants, from the mining of coal to the geological storage of the CO2 
captured. The six cases reflect six different technologies, and as the share between technologies used 
in EU-28 is not known, an average of the six cases is used. The secondary data is derived from 
Ecoinvent 3.6. The LCI used for modeling coal with CCS can be seen in Table S5. 
 
Natural gas with carbon capture and storage 
Electricity produced from natural gas-fired power plants with CCS is modeled from inventory 
developed by Petrakopoulou et al. (2015). They investigated the life-cycle performance of two 
combined-cycle systems for power generation with pre-combustion CO2 capture, and an average of 
those two cases is used in this study. All secondary data is derived from Ecoinvent 3.6. The LCI used for 
modeling natural gas with CCS can be seen in Table S5. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                               Basis for Life Cycle Assessment 
11 
Table S5   Life cycle inventory used for modeling coal with CCS (Iribarren et al., 2013) and natural gas with CCS 
(Petrakopoulou et al., 2015). 
Energy source 
 
Coal with CCS 
(Iribarren et al., 2013) 
Natural gas with CCS 
(Petrakopoulou et al., 2015) 
Inputs 
 
 
 
From the environment 
 
 
 
Air 
g 
 
5945 
Water 
g 
 
470 
From the technosphere 
 
 
 
Coal 
g 
660.12 
 
Natural gas 
g 
1.05 
149.48 
Ammonia 
g 
1.03 
 
Limestone 
g 
38.63 
 
NaOH 
g 
0.03 
 
Solvent MEA 
g 
0.33 
1.36 
Solvent selexol 
g 
0.0012 
 
Fuel oil 
g 
7.89 
 
Water 
g 
 
590 
Palladium (catalyst) 
mg 
 
0.60 
Outputs 
 
 
 
Products 
 
 
 
Net electricity (at plant) 
kWh 
1.00 
1.00 
CO2 (l) 
kg 
1.18 
0.36 
Waste to treatment 
 
 
 
Hazardous waste 
g 
0.49 
 
Municipal waste 
g 
1.63 
 
Catalysts  
mg 
 
0.60 
Wastewater 
kg 
 
0.51 
Emissions to air 
 
 
 
Carbon dioxide 
g 
146.69 
52.34 
Sulfur dioxide 
g 
0.37 
 
Nitrogen oxides 
g 
1.16 
0.44 
Ammonia 
g 
0.24 
 
Particulates 
g 
0.14 
 
Solvent MEA 
g 
0.02 
0.55 
Water 
g 
 
0.75 
 
==PAGE:56==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                               Basis for Life Cycle Assessment   
 
12 
Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage  
Electricity produced from bioenergy with CCS (BECCS) is modeled using a combination of direct 
processes from Ecoinvent 3.6 for electricity generation from bioethanol and inventory of CCS 
processes presented by Singh et al. (2011). They investigated CCS technologies used pre and post-
combustion. In this study inventory for post-combustion capture is used as this technology is not 
connected directly to the existing power plant. All secondary data is derived from Ecoinvent 3.6. The 
LCI used for modeling CCS post-combustion can be seen in Table S6. 
 
Table S6   Life cycle inventory used for modeling CCS post-combustion (Singh et al., 2011) for use in combination with 
bioenergy (BECCS). 
Energy source 
 
CCS post-combustion 
(Singh et al., 2011) 
Inputs 
 
 
Activated carbon 
kg 
6.00E-05 
Decarbonised water 
kg 
8.00E-01 
Electricity 
kWh 
3.43E-01 
Monoethanolamine 
kg 
1.60E-01 
Sodium hydroxide 
kg 
1.30E-03 
Outputs 
 
  
Hazardous waste 
kg 
6.00E-05 
Emissions to air 
 
  
Ammonia 
kg 
3.49E-05 
Acetaldehyde 
kg 
1.67E-10 
Carbon dioxide 
kg 
-1 
Formaldehyde 
kg 
2.62E-10 
Monoethanolamine 
kg 
6.27E-08 
Nitrogen oxides 
kg 
-3.66E-05 
Particulates <2.5 um 
kg 
-2.85E-05 
Particulates >10 um 
kg 
-3.18E-05 
Particulates >2.5 um and <10um 
kg 
-3.35E-05 
Sulfur oxides 
kg 
-7.61E-04 
 
 
Photovoltaic 
The technology of Photovoltaic (PV) panels is developing rapidly, and various research groups have 
been working on reinventing the initial PV solar cells and enhancing their production efficiency (Farji, 
2021). With technologies improving every year, the LCI present in Ecoinvent 3.6 with an average 
production volume valid for 2012, is considered rather outdated. Electricity produced from the use of 
PV is in this study modeled with inventory made in the context of a French research project, INCER-
ACV (Pérez-López et al., 2020), in which they assessed uncertainties in methods to evaluate 
environmental impacts of the energy production sector using LCA. The inventory used is 
representative for PV panels installed on open ground. 
The power from PV panels is modeled to represent a French context using data concerning the 
average annual energy output in France. This parameter changes i.a. depending on the location of PV 
panels, is in this study assumed to be 1237 kWh/kWp/yr for France. 
 
==PAGE:57==
Supplementary Material                                                                                  The Planetary Boundaries and the Safe Operating Space 
13 
3. The Planetary Boundaries and the Safe Operating Space 
This section includes a presentation of the Planetary Boundaries (PB) framework and the reported 
values for the natural background level and the full Safe Operating Space (SOS). It furthermore 
includes calculations of the assigned SoSOS and an assessment of the assigned SoSOS for the electricity 
sector of EU-28 in relation to the total share available for EU-28.   
 
3.1. The Planetary Boundaries framework 
The PB framework was developed to control the anthropogenic pressure on the Earth System (ES) by 
defining a Safe Operating Space (SOS) for humanity with respect to the ES (Rockström et al., 2009; 
Steffen et al., 2015). The PB framework defines boundaries for nine planetary systems of which seven 
are included in the PB-based Life Cycle Impact Assessment (PB-LCIA) methodology developed by 
(Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). The PB-LCIA methodology does not include 
characterization of potential impacts on biosphere integrity and introduction of novel entities (Ryberg, 
Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). The Biosphere Integrity (BI) is a two-component approach 
whereas one component, namely the Biosphere Intactness Index (BII), is included in this study, as 
described in SM4. Table S7 presents the PBs and natural background level as reported by (Steffen et 
al., 2015), and the SOS defined by (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Clavreul, et al., 2018). The full SOS determines 
the SOS available for humanity and is calculated by subtracting the natural background level from the 
PB. 
 
Table S7   The values of the Planetary Boundaries given by (Steffen et al., 2015), the Natural Background level given by 
(Steffen et al., 2015), and the Full Safe Operating Space for humanity given by (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Clavreul, et al., 2018). *The 
values given for atmospheric aerosol loading are only valid for a region with a South Asian monsoon. 
Impact category 
Unit 
Planetary 
Boundary 
Natural 
Background 
Level 
Full Safe 
Operating 
Space 
Climate Change - energy imbalance 
Wm-2 
1 
0 
1 
Climate Change - CO2 concentration 
ppm CO2 
350 
278 
72 
Ocean acidification  
mol 
2.75 
3.44 
0.69 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
DU 
275 
290 
15 
Biogeochemical flows - P, regional 
Tg P yr-1 
26.2 
20 
6.2 
Biogeochemical flows - N, regional 
Tg N yr-1 
62 
0 
62 
Land-system change - Global 
% 
75 
100 
25 
Land-system change - Boreal 
% 
85 
100 
15 
Land-system change - Tropic 
% 
85 
100 
15 
Land-system change - Temperature 
% 
50 
100 
50 
Freshwater use - Global 
km3 yr-1 
4000 
0 
4000 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
- 
1 
0 
1 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
- 
1 
0 
1 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
- 
1 
0 
1 
Atmospheric aerosol loading* 
- 
0.25 
0.14 
0.11 
Biosphere integrity – Biosphere 
intactness level (BII) 
% loss 
10 
0 
10 
==PAGE:58==
Supplementary Material                                                                                  The Planetary Boundaries and the Safe Operating Space 
 
14 
3.2. Assignment of SoSOS 
In accordance with Ryberg et al. (2020), Table S8 represents seven dimensions of the justice theories 
applied in this study. The dimensions include the following (described as in Ryberg et al. (2020)): 
 
Currency
Answering what it is that ultimately should be distributed in some way.
Pattern
The operational rule the distribution should follow, e.g. equality.
Target
The target of distribution, being e.g. among individuals, among social 
groups, among countries. 
Geographical scope
The geographical scope of the distribution, e.g. global, national, or 
regional. 
Temporal scope
The temporal scope of the distribution, e.g. infinite time, a person’s 
lifetime, or shorter periods of time. 
Constraints
Some distributive principles are added a clause on the otherwise 
desired distribution. For instance, Luck egalitarianism is egalitarianism 
with luck as a clause, meaning that personal responsibility does justify 
deviation from the relevant equal distribution. 
Clauses
The all else being equal, or ceteris paribus, clause is added when a 
distributive principle is meant to be combined with another principle 
or other moral consideration. This is typically the case with 
egalitarianism, meaning that equality matters, but it is not all that 
matters. Utilitarianism, in contrast, is a single principle intended to 
answer all moral matters. Therefore, it is not followed by the ceteris 
paribus clause. 
 
As described in the article Section 2.5. the share of the full SOS assigned to the EU-28 electricity sector 
(𝐴𝑆) can be expressed in a simplified manner for principles 1 and 2 by Equation (S1) and (S2) 
respectively. Equation (S3) is then used to calculate the Share of Safe Operating Space (SoSOS) for each 
impact category using either principle 1 or 2. The calculated SoSOS 1 and 2 for all impact categories are 
listed in Table S9. 
 
𝐴𝑆ଵ= ෍
𝑃𝑜𝑝௖
𝑃𝑜𝑝ௐ௢௥௟ௗ
∙𝐹𝐶𝐸௦௘௖,௖
𝐹𝐶𝐸௖
∙𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑂𝑢𝑡௦௨௕,௖
𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑂𝑢𝑡௦௘௖,௖
௖
= 2.50𝐸−03 
(S1) 
𝐴𝑆ଶ= ෍
𝑃𝑜𝑝௖
𝑃𝑜𝑝ௐ௢௥௟ௗ
∙𝐹𝐶𝐸௦௘௖,௖
𝐹𝐶𝐸௖
∙𝐶𝑂ଶ𝑒𝑞௦௨௕,௖
𝐶𝑂ଶ𝑒𝑞௦௘௖,௖
௖
= 1.85𝐸−02 
(S2) 
𝑆𝑜𝑆𝑂𝑆௣= 𝐴𝑆௦௨௕∙𝑆𝑂𝑆௣ 
(S3) 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
Supplementary Material                                                                                  The Planetary Boundaries and the Safe Operating Space 
15 
Table S8   Summary of scaling steps applied in the three-step approach for assigning the SoSOS. 
 
Clauses 
All else 
being equal 
None 
None 
None 
Constraints 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Temporal scope 
Annual distribution 
based on population 
in 2011. 
Annual distribution 
based on Final 
Consumption 
Expenditure (FCE) in 
2011. 
Annual distribution 
based on economic 
output in 2011. 
Annual distribution 
based on CO2eq 
emissions in 2011. 
Geographical 
scope 
Global 
Nations 
Nations 
Nations 
Target 
Nations 
Final 
consumption 
sectors 
Intermediate 
product 
sectors 
Intermediate 
product 
sectors 
Pattern 
Equal share of SOS 
among all individuals 
Assigned share is 
proportional to the 
perceived welfare by 
national 
consumption, 
distributed 
throughout the 
whole supply chain 
Assigned share is 
proportional to 
economic output of 
the respective 
intermediate product 
sector to the final 
product sector 
Assigned share is 
proportional to 
CO2eq emissions of 
the respective 
intermediate product 
sector to the final 
product sector 
Currency 
SOS as a 
finite 
resource 
 
Distributive 
justice theories 
Egalitarianism 
Utilitarianism 
Grandfathering 
Grandfathering 
From scale to 
scale 
Step 1: Global to 
national 
Step 2: National 
to final 
consumption 
sector  
Step 3a: Final 
consumption 
sector to 
intermediate 
product sector 
Step 3b: Final 
consumption 
sector to 
intermediate 
 
==PAGE:60==
Supplementary Material                                                                                  The Planetary Boundaries and the Safe Operating Space 
 
16 
Table S9   Assigned Share of Safe Operating Space (SoSOS) using principle 1 (SoSOS 1) and principle 2 (SoSOS 2). *The values 
given for Atmospheric aerosol loading are only valid for a region with a South Asian monsoon. 
Impact category 
Unit 
SoSOS1 
SoSOS2 
Climate Change - energy imbalance 
Wm-2
2.50E-03 
1.85E-02 
Climate Change - CO2 concentration 
ppm CO2 
1.80E-01 
1.33E+00 
Ocean acidification  
mol 
1.72E-03 
1.28E-02 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
DU 
3.75E-02 
2.78E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - P, regional 
Tg P yr-1
6.25E-02 
4.63E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - N, regional 
Tg N yr-1
2.50E-03 
1.85E-02 
Land-system change - Global 
% 
2.50E-03 
1.85E-02 
Land-system change - Boreal 
% 
2.50E-03 
1.85E-02 
Land-system change - Tropic 
% 
2.75E-04 
2.04E-03 
Land-system change - Temperature 
% 
1.55E-02 
1.15E-01 
Freshwater use - Global 
km3 yr-1
1.55E-01 
1.15E+00 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
- 
3.75E-02 
2.78E-01 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
- 
3.75E-02 
2.78E-01 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
- 
1.25E-01 
9.25E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading* 
- 
1.00E+01 
7.40E+01 
Biosphere integrity –  
Biosphere intactness level (BII) 
% loss 
2.50E-02 
1.85E-01 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
Supplementary Material                                                                                  The Planetary Boundaries and the Safe Operating Space 
17 
3.3. SoSOS in perspective 
Section 3.1. of the article includes an assessment of how much the two SoSOS constitutes of the total 
share available for EU-28 calculated based on population. The calculations relevant for that 
assessment are presented in Equation (S4)-(S6). The calculations include the AS1 and AS2 as calculated 
in (S1) and (S2) and population numbers for the World (𝑃𝑜𝑝ௐ௢௥௟ௗ) and the EU-28 (𝑃𝑜𝑝ா௎ିଶ଼) in 2020 
(The World Bank, 2020). 
 
𝑃𝑜𝑝ௐ௢௥௟ௗ= 7.76𝐸+ 09 
𝑃𝑜𝑝ா௎ିଶ= 5.15𝐸+ 08 
 
𝐴𝑆ா௎ିଶ଼= 𝑃𝑜𝑝ா௎ିଶ
𝑃𝑜𝑝ௐ௢௥௟ௗ
= 6.64𝐸−02 
(S4) 
𝐴𝑆ଵ 𝑜𝑓 𝐸𝑈−28 =
𝐴𝑆ଵ
𝐴𝑆ா௎ିଶ
= 2.50𝐸−03
6.62𝐸−02 ∙100 = 3.77% 
(S5) 
 
𝐴𝑆ଶ 𝑜𝑓 𝐸𝑈−28 =
𝐴𝑆ଶ
𝐴𝑆ா௎ିଶ
= 1.85𝐸−02
6.62𝐸−02 ∙100 = 27.89% 
(S6) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                   Biodiversity Intactness Index 
 
18 
4. Specifications on impacts on Biodiversity Intactness Index (BII) 
This section elaborates the method used for assessing the impacts on the biosphere integrity, which 
was also described in Section 2.4.1. of the article. The following description includes some repetition 
from the article but also additional information. 
Two of the PBs, namely climate change and biosphere integrity (BI), have been identified to be 
connected to all of the other PBs (Steffen et al., 2015). They operate at the level of the whole ES (Mace 
et al., 2014), and have coevolved for nearly 4 billion years (Steffen et al., 2015). These two PBs are 
regulated by the other boundaries and at the same time, they provide overreaching systems at a 
planetary level within which the other boundary processes operate. Furthermore, it has been 
identified that large changes in climate change or BI are likely to, on their own, push the ES out of the 
Holocene state (Steffen et al., 2015). This stresses the importance of maintaining the two PBs, climate 
change and BI, at a stable level within the SOS. Climate change has through the last decades gained 
great recognition and attention, whereas BI is much more complex, and adequate basis for estimating 
the rate of biodiversity loss is lacking.  
The planetary boundary BI is divided into two components: the first one capturing the genetic 
diversity and determining the potential life to continue to coevolve with the abiotic component of the 
ES in the most resilient way possible, and the second one capturing the role of the biosphere in the ES 
functioning through the value, range, distribution, and relative abundance of the functional traits of 
the organisms present in an ecosystem or biota (Steffen et al., 2015). This study includes the second 
component of BI being the functional diversity for which the present proposed control variable is the 
Biodiversity Intactness Index (BII). BII assesses the change in population abundance due to human 
impacts (Scholes & Biggs, 2005). Due to lack of evidence, a preliminary boundary has been proposed at 
90% of the BII, but with a large uncertainty range at 30-90% (Steffen et al., 2015). In the absence of 
more precise parameters, the Mean Species Abundance (MSA) is regarded as a proxy for BII. The main 
difference between BII and MSA is that BII weights according to the species richness in the area, while 
MSA weights all areas equally (Galán-Martín et al., 2021). This study assesses the local impacts on BII 
based on previous studies by Hanafiah et al. (2012) and Galán-Martín et al. (2021). 
Land use change and climate change are regarded as the two main stressors of changes in BII. 
However, pressures on climate change primarily impact the global system, and not necessarily the 
areas where the emissions occur. As this study desires to investigate the local impacts on BII, and as 
current methods for investigating the local impacts on BII from pressures on climate change are 
regarded immature, only LU is included. As not all stressors of changes in BII are considered, the 
estimated impacts are considered a lower boundary of impacts. The local impacts on BII are estimated 
using Equation (S7). 
 
𝐵𝐼𝐼௟௢௖௔௟,௅௎= 
∑𝑎௜∙(1 −𝑀𝑆𝐴௜
௅௎)
௜
𝐴௧௢௧
 
(S7) 
 
where 𝐵𝐼𝐼௟௢௖௔௟,௅௎ is the local BII due to direct LU (% yr) for the considered system, 𝑎௜ is the area 
occupied of land use type i (m2yr) and 𝐴௧௢௧ is the total area occupied by the studied system (m2yr). 
(1 −𝑀𝑆𝐴௜
௅௎) (-) represents the mean species abundance loss for land-use type i, where 𝑀𝑆𝐴௜
௅௎ is the 
biodiversity indicator denoting the mean species abundance for the land use type i (Galán-Martín et 
al., 2021). (1-MSA) is given by Hanafiah et al., (2012). 𝑎௜ was calculated from the environmental flows 
==PAGE:63==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                   Biodiversity Intactness Index 
19 
of the considered system which were estimated using the PB-LCIA methodology (Ryberg, Owsianiak, 
Richardson, et al., 2018) in SimaPro v. 9.1.1.7 (PRé Sustainability, 2020). Each environmental flow for 
the occupation of land was matched to an MSA classification based on Alkemade et al. (2009) as listed 
in Table S10.  
 
Table S10   Environmental flows for the occupation of land matched to MSA classification based on Alkemade et al. (2009) 
Environmental flow 
MSA classification  
(Alkemade et al., 2009) 
1-MSA 
Occupation, annual crop 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, annual crop, irrigated 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, annual crop, irrigated, intensive 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, annual crop, non-irrigated 
Low-input agriculture 
0.70 
Occupation, annual crop, non-irrigated, extensive 
Low-input agriculture 
0.70 
Occupation, annual crop, non-irrigated, intensive 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, arable land, unspecified use 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, construction site 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, dump site 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, forest, extensive 
Lightly used natural forest 
0.30 
Occupation, forest, intensive 
Secondary forest  
0.50 
Occupation, grassland, natural (non-use) 
Primary vegetation (grass or scrublands) 
0.00 
Occupation, grassland, natural, for livestock grazing 
Livestock grazing 
0.30 
Occupation, industrial area 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, inland water body, unspecified 
- 
1.00 
Occupation, mineral extraction site 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, pasture, man-made 
Man-made pastures 
0.90 
Occupation, pasture, man-made, extensive 
Livestock grazing 
0.30 
Occupation, pasture, man-made, intensive 
Man-made pastures 
0.90 
Occupation, permanent crop 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, permanent crop, irrigated 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, permanent crop, irrigated, intensive 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, permanent crop, non-irrigated 
Intensive agriculture 
0.90 
Occupation, seabed, drilling, and mining 
- 
0.00 
Occupation, seabed, infrastructure 
- 
0.00 
Occupation, shrubland, sclerophyllous 
Primary vegetation (grass or scrublands) 
0.00 
Occupation, traffic area, rail network 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, traffic area, rail/road embankment 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, traffic area, road network 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, unknown 
- 
0.00 
Occupation, unspecified, natural (non-use) 
- 
0.00 
Occupation, urban, discontinuously built 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, urban/industrial fallow (non-use) 
Built-up areas 
0.95 
Occupation, water bodies, artificial 
Water bodies/courses, artificial 
1.00 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                Dynamic Modeling of Radiative Forcing 
 
20 
5. Dynamic modeling of impacts on radiative forcing 
This section includes a description of the method used for assessing the cumulative changes in 
radiative forcing due to emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O in the period from 2020 to 2050 for the four 
scenarios, which are illustrated in Section 3.4. of the article. The calculations are based on Ryberg et al. 
(2018) and Li et al. (2021) and consider the natural decay of the considered Greenhouse Gases (GHGs) 
in the period from 2020 to 2100 and the conversion of CH4 into CO2 at the end of the lifetime of CH4. 
First, the natural decay of GHG k is expressed by Eq. (S8) and specifically for CO2 by Eq. (S9). 
 
𝐹𝑅௧,்,௞=  𝑒𝑥𝑝൬−(𝑇−𝑡)
𝛼௞
൰          , 𝑡≤𝑇, 𝑘∈{𝐶𝐻ସ, 𝑁ଶ𝑂} 
(S8) 
𝐹𝑅௧,்,஼ைమ= 𝑎଴+ ∑
𝑎௡∙𝑒𝑥𝑝ቀ
ି(்ି௧)
ఈ೙ቁ
ଷ
௡ୀଵ
          , 𝑡≤𝑇  
(S9) 
Eq. (S8) and (S9) express which fraction (FR) of GHG k emitted in year T that remains in the 
atmosphere in year t. 𝛼௞ is the atmospheric lifetime of the respective GHG, 𝛼஼ுସ= 12.4 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 and 
𝛼ேଶை= 121 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 (Myhre et al., 2013). For CO2 specific coefficients and time constants are expressed 
for the removal processes: a0 = 0.212, a1 = 0.244, a2 = 0.336, a3 = 0.207, 𝛼ଵ= 336.4 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠, 𝛼ଶ=
27.89 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠, and 𝛼ଷ= 4.055 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 (Joos et al., 2013).  
 
The cumulative mass (𝑚்,௞) of GHG k in the atmosphere in year T can then be expressed by Eq. (S10). 
 
𝑚𝑇,𝑘= ෍𝐹𝑅𝑡,𝑇,𝑘∙൫𝑒𝑇,𝑘
𝑃
+ 𝑒𝑇,𝑘
𝐶൯
𝑇
+ 𝑒𝑇,𝑘
𝑁         , 𝑘∈൛𝐶𝑂2, 𝐶𝐻4, 𝑁2𝑂ൟ, 𝑡≤𝑇  
(S10) 
where 𝑒்,௞
௉ and 𝑒்,௞
ே are the positive and negative emissions of GHG [kg] at time T, and 𝑒்,௞
஼ is the 
emission of GHG k in year T due to a GHG species conversion in the atmosphere. The latter is included 
for CO2 to account for the conversion of CH4 into CO2 and is expressed by Eq. (S11). For CH4 and N2O: 
𝑒்,௞
஼
= 0. 
𝑒𝑇,𝐶𝑂2
𝐶
= ቆ
𝑀𝐶𝑂2
𝑀𝐶𝐻4
ቇ∙෍൫𝐹𝑅𝑡,𝑇−1,𝐶𝐻4 −𝐹𝑅𝑡,𝑇,𝐶𝐻4൯∙𝑒𝑇,𝐶𝐻4
𝑃
          , ∀𝑇> 1 
(S11) 
where 𝑀஼ைమis the molar mass of CO2 (44.01 g/mol) and 𝑀஼ுర is the molar mass of CH4 (16.04 g/mol). 
The concentration of GHG k in the atmosphere at time T is estimated according to Eq. (S12).  
𝑐𝑇,𝑘= 𝑚𝑇,𝑘∙
109𝑝𝑝𝑏
𝑀𝑘
ൗ
𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑟𝑀𝑎𝑖𝑟
ൗ
          , 𝑘∈൛𝐶𝑂2, 𝐶𝐻4, 𝑁2𝑂ൟ 
(S12) 
 
==PAGE:65==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                Dynamic Modeling of Radiative Forcing 
21 
Where Mk is the molar mass of GHG k [g/mol], mair is the mass of the atmosphere (5.15E+18 kg), and 
Mair is the molar mass of air (28.97 g/mol). The range in radiative forcing to time T (𝑅𝐹்) caused by the 
considered system is then estimated using Eq. (S13). 
𝑅𝐹𝑇= ෍𝑅𝐸𝑘
𝑘
∙𝑐𝑇,𝑘          , 𝑘∈൛𝐶𝑂2, 𝐶𝐻4, 𝑁2𝑂ൟ 
(S13) 
where REk denotes the radiative efficiency of GHG k, 𝑅𝐸஼ைమ= 1.37 ∙10ିହ𝑊 𝑚ିଶ𝑝𝑝𝑏ିଵ, 𝑅𝐸஼ுర=
3.63 ∙10ିସ𝑊 𝑚ିଶ𝑝𝑝𝑏ିଵ, and 𝑅𝐸ேమை= 3.00 ∙10ିଷ𝑊 𝑚ିଶ𝑝𝑝𝑏ିଵ. 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
 
22 
6. Supporting results 
This section includes supplementary material on the impacts on climate change including impacts on 
the indicator atmospheric concentration of CO2, which are not included in the article. The section 
furthermore includes calculated impacts on atmospheric aerosol loading, which was excluded from the 
article as no global PB has been defined yet. Additionally, the section includes tables of the calculated 
results and an overview of how much the results exceed the boundaries defined by SoSOS 1 and 2.  
6.1. Impacts on the atmospheric CO2 concentration  
The PB on climate change is divided into two indicators: the atmospheric concentration of CO2 and 
radiative forcing - the rate of energy change per unit area of the globe as measured at the top of the 
atmosphere (Rockström et al., 2009). As the impacts on the two indicators show the same tendencies, 
only the impacts on radiative forcing were shown in Section 3.2.1. of the article. This section presents 
both indicators to enable a comparison.  
As described in Section 3.2.1. of the article and as can be seen from Figure S2 and Figure S3, impacts 
on climate change are highly driven by the use of fossil fuels (coal, lignite, oil, and natural gas). This is 
also the main reason why the contribution from NZE in 2020 is more than twice the size of the 
contribution from Base, Blue, and Green. NZE is however performing best in 2050 and the radiative 
forcing from NZE is even lower in 2040. This can be explained by the larger share of CCS attached to 
coal, natural gas, and bioenergy power plants in 2040 (about 4.3% of production) compared to 2050 
(about 3.1% of production). This implies that there is a large potential for lowering the radiative 
forcing by applying CCS technologies. In total, the potential radiative forcing caused by Base decreases 
by 12% from 2020 to 2050, for Blue by 44%, for Green by 78%, and for NZE by 96%, but none of the 
scenarios manages to reduce the impacts to a level below SoSOS 1 or 2.  
 
 
Figure S2   Impacts of the four scenarios on Climate change – energy imbalance. The left side shows the impacts from Base 
scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned 
SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four 
scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. 
==PAGE:67==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
23 
 
Figure S3   Impacts of the four scenarios on Climate change – energy imbalance. The left side shows the impacts from Base 
scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned 
SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four 
scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. 
6.2. Impacts on atmospheric aerosol loading 
No global PB has been set for atmospheric aerosol loading (Persson et al., 2022; Steffen et al., 2015), 
and the impact category was therefore excluded from the study. However, a regional boundary has 
been reported for a region with South Asian monsoon (Steffen et al., 2015). Ryberg, Owsianiak, 
Richardson, et al. (2018) developed characterization factors for quantifying the impacts on the impact 
category to prepare for a future PB, and the characterization factors are included in the PB-LCIA 
method (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). This study, therefore, assessed the impacts on 
atmospheric aerosol loading and compared them to the regional boundary defined, but we are aware 
that the region is not valid for this study.   
The atmospheric aerosol loading is affected by the emission of aerosols such as black carbon, 
organic carbon, sulfates, nitrates, and dust, which influences the solar radiation and regional ocean-
atmosphere circulation (Ramanathan et al., 2005; Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). The 
changes in radiative forcing from atmospheric aerosol loading can also cool the Earth's surface and 
reduce evaporation and rainfalls, but as the aerosols have short lifetimes of a week or two, the 
impacts mainly affect areas close to where they are emitted (Ramanathan et al., 2005). The control 
variable is the aerosol optical depth (AOD) which expresses the absorption or scattering of solar 
radiation (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). 
As seen from Figure S4, the main constituting energy sources in 2020 are fossil fuels and bioenergy. 
This is especially due to the formation of black carbon and organic aerosols from incomplete 
combustion of fossil and biomass-based fuels (Boucher et al., 2013). The impacts on the respective PB 
are decreasing over time for all scenarios, and in 2050 the contribution spreads widely between 
different energy sources such as fossil fuels, nuclear, wind, solar, and bioenergy. The contribution from 
nuclear and wind is mainly due to the use of fossil fuels in the production of elements for plant 
==PAGE:68==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
 
24 
construction. The contribution from solar can also be traced back to the production, which takes place 
in China, where the electricity mix is highly dominated by fossil fuels. 
 
 
Figure S4   Impacts of the four scenarios on Atmospheric aerosol loading. The left side shows the impacts from Base scenario 
(grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), together with the assigned SoSOS 1 
(dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in 
year 2020 and 2050. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
25 
6.3. Potential impacts  
Table S11-Table S14 lists the calculated impacts on each PB indicator for every fifth year in the period 
2020-50 for each of the four scenarios. 
 
Table S11   The calculated potential impact of the Base scenario on all considered PB indicators. Impacts are given per year 
for every fifth year in the period 2020-2050.  
2050 
2.85E-01 
2.15E+01 
6.58E-02 
1.02E-03 
1.87E-03 
3.31E-02 
1.20E-02 
4.37E+00 
1.25E-03 
3.87E-02 
3.56E+00 
1.55E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.40E-03 
9.32E-05 
5.36E-01 
2045 
3.04E-01 
2.29E+01 
7.01E-02 
1.05E-03 
1.85E-03 
3.39E-02 
1.21E-02 
4.43E+00 
1.30E-03 
4.28E-02 
3.84E+00 
1.85E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.24E-03 
9.83E-05 
5.30E-01 
2040 
3.07E-01 
2.32E+01 
7.08E-02 
1.03E-03 
1.84E-03 
3.42E-02 
1.20E-02 
4.42E+00 
1.32E-03 
4.56E-02 
4.00E+00 
2.07E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.85E-03 
9.75E-05 
5.26E-01 
2035 
3.04E-01 
2.29E+01 
7.00E-02 
1.00E-03 
1.82E-03 
3.41E-02 
1.18E-02 
4.36E+00 
1.34E-03 
4.78E-02 
4.09E+00 
2.25E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.35E-03 
9.54E-05 
5.23E-01 
2030 
3.03E-01 
2.29E+01 
7.00E-02 
9.57E-04 
1.80E-03 
3.49E-02 
1.17E-02 
4.35E+00 
1.33E-03 
4.42E-02 
4.31E+00 
2.08E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.90E-03 
8.97E-05 
5.22E-01 
2025 
3.32E-01 
2.50E+01 
7.65E-02 
8.83E-04 
1.86E-03 
3.84E-02 
1.19E-02 
4.40E+00 
1.40E-03 
4.05E-02 
5.44E+00 
1.93E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.50E-03 
8.41E-05 
5.21E-01 
2020 
3.24E-01 
2.45E+01 
7.49E-02 
8.10E-04 
1.69E-03 
3.57E-02 
1.18E-02 
4.37E+00 
1.34E-03 
3.67E-02 
5.94E+00 
1.79E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.10E-03 
7.51E-05 
5.19E-01 
Unit 
Wm-2 
ppm 
Omega Aragon 
DU 
- 
- 
- 
km3 
AOD 
Tg P 
Tg N 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% biodiversity loss 
Impact category 
Climate change - Energy imbalance 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
Ocean acidification 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
Freshwater use - Global 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
Land-system change - Boreal 
Land-system change - Tropic 
Land-system change - Temperate 
Land-system change - Global 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
 
==PAGE:70==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
 
26 
Table S12   The calculated potential impact of the Blue scenario on all considered PB indicators. Impacts are given per year for 
every fifth year in the period 2020-2050. 
2050 
1.80E-01 
1.36E+01 
4.14E-02 
7.87E-04 
1.84E-03 
2.83E-02 
1.03E-02 
3.83E+00 
1.15E-03 
4.20E-02 
2.68E+00 
1.76E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.95E-03 
6.20E-05 
5.46E-01 
2045 
2.04E-01 
1.54E+01 
4.70E-02 
8.46E-04 
1.78E-03 
2.84E-02 
1.05E-02 
3.90E+00 
1.18E-03 
4.60E-02 
2.87E+00 
2.05E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.75E-03 
7.16E-05 
5.38E-01 
2040 
2.21E-01 
1.67E+01 
5.09E-02 
8.81E-04 
1.75E-03 
2.84E-02 
1.06E-02 
3.92E+00 
1.20E-03 
4.83E-02 
3.01E+00 
2.24E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.30E-03 
7.80E-05 
5.32E-01 
2035 
2.35E-01 
1.77E+01 
5.42E-02 
9.06E-04 
1.71E-03 
2.84E-02 
1.07E-02 
3.96E+00 
1.22E-03 
4.98E-02 
3.17E+00 
2.44E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.86E-03 
8.20E-05 
5.27E-01 
2030 
2.65E-01 
2.00E+01 
6.10E-02 
9.37E-04 
1.69E-03 
3.01E-02 
1.12E-02 
4.15E+00 
1.24E-03 
4.49E-02 
3.64E+00 
2.35E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.62E-03 
8.73E-05 
5.24E-01 
2025 
3.13E-01 
2.36E+01 
7.21E-02 
9.04E-04 
1.77E-03 
3.51E-02 
1.17E-02 
4.32E+00 
1.33E-03 
4.06E-02 
4.93E+00 
2.08E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.91E-03 
8.66E-05 
5.21E-01 
2020 
3.25E-01 
2.45E+01 
7.49E-02 
8.10E-04 
1.69E-03 
3.57E-02 
1.18E-02 
4.37E+00 
1.34E-03 
3.67E-02 
5.94E+00 
1.79E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.12E-03 
7.51E-05 
5.19E-01 
Unit 
Wm-2 
ppm 
Omega Aragon 
DU 
- 
- 
- 
km3 
AOD 
Tg P 
Tg N 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% biodiversity loss 
Impact category 
Climate change - Energy imbalance 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
Ocean acidification 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
Freshwater use - Global 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
Land-system change - Boreal 
Land-system change - Tropic 
Land-system change - Temperate 
Land-system change - Global 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
27 
Table S13   The calculated potential impact of the Green scenario on all considered PB indicators. Impacts are given per year 
for every fifth year in the period 2020-2050. 
2050 
6.72E-02 
5.03E+00 
1.54E-02 
4.52E-04 
1.56E-03 
2.15E-02 
7.80E-03 
2.91E+00 
9.44E-04 
4.27E-02 
1.80E+00 
2.80E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.82E-03 
2.17E-05 
5.51E-01 
2045 
9.75E-02 
7.32E+00 
2.24E-02 
5.26E-04 
1.53E-03 
2.24E-02 
8.10E-03 
2.99E+00 
9.91E-04 
4.74E-02 
2.03E+00 
3.25E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.07E-03 
3.39E-05 
5.44E-01 
2040 
1.29E-01 
9.72E+00 
2.97E-02 
6.03E-04 
1.52E-03 
2.34E-02 
8.53E-03 
3.14E+00 
1.04E-03 
5.01E-02 
2.30E+00 
3.41E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.52E-03 
4.54E-05 
5.38E-01 
2035 
1.59E-01 
1.20E+01 
3.66E-02 
6.80E-04 
1.49E-03 
2.38E-02 
8.93E-03 
3.28E+00 
1.07E-03 
5.12E-02 
2.53E+00 
3.42E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.57E-03 
5.63E-05 
5.31E-01 
2030 
2.05E-01 
1.55E+01 
4.72E-02 
7.87E-04 
1.46E-03 
2.50E-02 
9.77E-03 
3.60E+00 
1.09E-03 
4.56E-02 
2.96E+00 
3.22E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.03E-03 
7.01E-05 
5.27E-01 
2025 
2.77E-01 
2.09E+01 
6.39E-02 
8.81E-04 
1.53E-03 
2.97E-02 
1.12E-02 
4.13E+00 
1.21E-03 
4.04E-02 
4.26E+00 
2.46E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.95E-03 
8.36E-05 
5.21E-01 
2020 
3.24E-01 
2.44E+01 
7.47E-02 
8.07E-04 
1.59E-03 
3.47E-02 
1.18E-02 
4.36E+00 
1.31E-03 
3.63E-02 
5.93E+00 
1.79E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.13E-03 
7.48E-05 
5.19E-01 
Unit 
Wm-2 
ppm 
Omega Aragon 
DU 
- 
- 
- 
km3 
AOD 
Tg P 
Tg N 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% biodiversity loss 
Impact category 
Climate change - Energy imbalance 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
Ocean acidification 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
Freshwater use - Global 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
Land-system change - Boreal 
Land-system change - Tropic 
Land-system change - Temperate 
Land-system change - Global 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
 
28 
Table S14   The calculated potential impact of the NZE scenario on all considered PB indicators. Impacts are given per year for 
every fifth year in the period 2020-2050. 
2050 
2.40E-02 
1.75E+00 
5.34E-03 
2.30E-04 
8.90E-05 
1.40E-02 
4.88E-03 
1.53E+00 
7.98E-04 
5.18E-02 
1.46E+00 
1.79E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.98E-03 
2.82E-05 
5.79E-01 
2045 
2.14E-02 
1.57E+00 
4.80E-03 
2.33E-04 
-7.06E-04 
6.31E-03 
4.87E-03 
1.52E+00 
6.55E-04 
4.98E-02 
1.38E+00 
1.78E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.94E-03 
2.68E-05 
5.76E-01 
2040 
1.85E-02 
1.37E+00 
4.18E-03 
2.36E-04 
-1.49E-03 
-1.15E-03 
4.87E-03 
1.52E+00 
5.18E-04 
4.79E-02 
1.31E+00 
1.77E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.93E-03 
2.53E-05 
5.73E-01 
2035 
1.16E-01 
8.74E+00 
2.67E-02 
4.17E-04 
-3.95E-04 
1.50E-02 
6.53E-03 
2.13E+00 
7.69E-04 
4.27E-02 
1.94E+00 
1.56E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.39E-03 
4.31E-05 
5.67E-01 
2030 
2.62E-01 
1.98E+01 
6.04E-02 
8.13E-04 
7.26E-04 
3.08E-02 
9.07E-03 
3.19E+00 
1.05E-03 
3.76E-02 
2.66E+00 
1.33E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.81E-03 
8.33E-05 
5.60E-01 
2025 
3.84E-01 
2.89E+01 
8.84E-02 
7.04E-04 
2.09E-03 
6.65E-02 
1.05E-02 
3.56E+00 
1.56E-03 
3.00E-02 
4.19E+00 
1.08E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.29E-03 
8.71E-05 
5.53E-01 
2020 
7.56E-01 
5.71E+01 
1.74E-01 
1.75E-03 
3.63E-03 
9.92E-02 
1.68E-02 
6.31E+00 
2.24E-03 
2.48E-02 
6.20E+00 
8.24E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.70E-03 
2.09E-04 
5.45E-01 
Unit 
Wm-2 
ppm 
Omega Aragon 
DU 
- 
- 
- 
km3 
AOD 
Tg P 
Tg N 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% biodiversity loss 
Impact category 
Climate change - Energy imbalance 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
Ocean acidification 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
Freshwater use - Global 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
Land-system change - Boreal 
Land-system change - Tropic 
Land-system change - Temperate 
Land-system change - Global 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
29 
6.4. The exceedance of assigned SoSOS 
The following presents calculations of how much the potential impacts on each impact category 
exceed the assigned SoSOS. The numbers are colored in red if they exceed the assigned SoSOS and in 
green, if they stay below the assigned SoSOS. Table S15 and Table S16 present how much the Base 
scenario exceeds the SoSOS 1 and 2 respectively, likewise, Table S17 and Table S18 present the 
exceedance from the Blue scenario, Table S19 and Table S20 for the Green scenario, and Table S21 and 
Table S22 for the NZE scenario. 
 
Table S15   The number of times the potential impacts of the Base scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 1. If the exceedance is 
<1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with green. If the exceedance is >1, the impacts are above 
the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with red. 
Impact category 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Climate change -Energy imbalance 
1.30E+02 
1.33E+02 
1.21E+02 
1.22E+02 
1.23E+02 
1.22E+02 
1.14E+02 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
1.36E+02 
1.39E+02 
1.27E+02 
1.27E+02 
1.29E+02 
1.27E+02 
1.20E+02 
Ocean acidification 
4.34E+01 
4.44E+01 
4.06E+01 
4.06E+01 
4.10E+01 
4.07E+01 
3.81E+01 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
2.16E-02 
2.36E-02 
2.55E-02 
2.68E-02 
2.75E-02 
2.80E-02 
2.73E-02 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
6.77E-01 
7.44E-01 
7.21E-01 
7.26E-01 
7.34E-01 
7.39E-01 
7.50E-01 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
1.43E+01 
1.54E+01 
1.40E+01 
1.36E+01 
1.37E+01 
1.36E+01 
1.32E+01 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
4.72E+00 
4.77E+00 
4.70E+00 
4.74E+00 
4.81E+00 
4.85E+00 
4.79E+00 
Freshwater use - Global 
4.37E-01 
4.40E-01 
4.36E-01 
4.36E-01 
4.42E-01 
4.44E-01 
4.38E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
4.88E+00 
5.08E+00 
4.82E+00 
4.86E+00 
4.81E+00 
4.72E+00 
4.56E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
2.37E+00 
2.62E+00 
2.85E+00 
3.09E+00 
2.95E+00 
2.76E+00 
2.50E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
3.84E+01 
3.51E+01 
2.78E+01 
2.64E+01 
2.58E+01 
2.48E+01 
2.30E+01 
Land-system change - Boreal 
4.76E-01 
5.14E-01 
5.55E-01 
5.99E-01 
5.52E-01 
4.93E-01 
4.14E-01 
Land-system change - Tropic 
6.13E-01 
6.61E-01 
7.13E-01 
7.69E-01 
7.08E-01 
6.33E-01 
5.32E-01 
Land-system change - Temperate 
4.08E-02 
4.40E-02 
4.72E-02 
5.08E-02 
4.68E-02 
4.19E-02 
3.52E-02 
Land-system change - Global 
1.20E-03 
1.35E-03 
1.44E-03 
1.53E-03 
1.56E-03 
1.57E-03 
1.49E-03 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
5.19E+00 
5.21E+00 
5.22E+00 
5.23E+00 
5.26E+00 
5.30E+00 
5.36E+00 
 
Table S16   The number of times the potential impacts of the Base scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 2. If the exceedance is 
<1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with green. If the exceedance is >1, the impacts are above 
the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with red. 
Impact category 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Climate change -Energy imbalance 
1.75E+01 
1.79E+01 
1.64E+01 
1.64E+01 
1.66E+01 
1.64E+01 
1.54E+01 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
1.84E+01 
1.88E+01 
1.72E+01 
1.72E+01 
1.74E+01 
1.72E+01 
1.62E+01 
Ocean acidification 
5.86E+00 
5.99E+00 
5.48E+00 
5.48E+00 
5.54E+00 
5.49E+00 
5.15E+00 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
2.92E-03 
3.18E-03 
3.45E-03 
3.62E-03 
3.72E-03 
3.78E-03 
3.69E-03 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
1.62E-04 
1.82E-04 
1.94E-04 
2.06E-04 
2.11E-04 
2.13E-04 
2.02E-04 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
9.14E-02 
1.00E-01 
9.74E-02 
9.81E-02 
9.92E-02 
9.98E-02 
1.01E-01 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
1.93E+00 
2.08E+00 
1.88E+00 
1.84E+00 
1.85E+00 
1.83E+00 
1.79E+00 
Freshwater use - Global 
6.37E-01 
6.44E-01 
6.35E-01 
6.40E-01 
6.50E-01 
6.55E-01 
6.46E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
6.58E-01 
6.86E-01 
6.51E-01 
6.56E-01 
6.50E-01 
6.38E-01 
6.16E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
3.20E-01 
3.53E-01 
3.85E-01 
4.17E-01 
3.98E-01 
3.73E-01 
3.37E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
5.18E+00 
4.74E+00 
3.76E+00 
3.57E+00 
3.49E+00 
3.35E+00 
3.10E+00 
Land-system change - Boreal 
6.43E-02 
6.94E-02 
7.50E-02 
8.09E-02 
7.45E-02 
6.66E-02 
5.59E-02 
Land-system change - Tropic 
8.27E-02 
8.92E-02 
9.63E-02 
1.04E-01 
9.55E-02 
8.55E-02 
7.18E-02 
Land-system change - Temperate 
5.52E-03 
5.94E-03 
6.38E-03 
6.86E-03 
6.32E-03 
5.66E-03 
4.76E-03 
Land-system change - Global 
5.90E-02 
5.94E-02 
5.88E-02 
5.89E-02 
5.97E-02 
5.99E-02 
5.91E-02 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
5.19E+00 
5.21E+00 
5.22E+00 
5.23E+00 
5.26E+00 
5.30E+00 
5.36E+00 
==PAGE:74==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
 
30 
Table S17   The number of times the potential impacts of the Blue scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 1. If the exceedance is 
<1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with green. If the exceedance is >1, the impacts are above 
the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with red. 
Impact category 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Climate change -Energy imbalance 
1.30E+02 
1.25E+02 
1.06E+02 
9.42E+01 
8.84E+01 
8.16E+01 
7.21E+01 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
1.36E+02 
1.31E+02 
1.11E+02 
9.86E+01 
9.26E+01 
8.54E+01 
7.54E+01 
Ocean acidification 
4.34E+01 
4.18E+01 
3.54E+01 
3.14E+01 
2.95E+01 
2.72E+01 
2.40E+01 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
2.16E-02 
2.41E-02 
2.50E-02 
2.42E-02 
2.35E-02 
2.26E-02 
2.10E-02 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
6.76E-01 
7.08E-01 
6.76E-01 
6.83E-01 
6.99E-01 
7.13E-01 
7.34E-01 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
1.43E+01 
1.40E+01 
1.21E+01 
1.14E+01 
1.14E+01 
1.14E+01 
1.13E+01 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
4.72E+00 
4.68E+00 
4.48E+00 
4.28E+00 
4.24E+00 
4.21E+00 
4.13E+00 
Freshwater use - Global 
4.37E-01 
4.32E-01 
4.16E-01 
3.96E-01 
3.92E-01 
3.90E-01 
3.84E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
4.88E+00 
4.85E+00 
4.50E+00 
4.43E+00 
4.37E+00 
4.30E+00 
4.19E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
2.37E+00 
2.62E+00 
2.89E+00 
3.21E+00 
3.12E+00 
2.97E+00 
2.71E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
3.84E+01 
3.18E+01 
2.35E+01 
2.05E+01 
1.94E+01 
1.85E+01 
1.73E+01 
Land-system change - Boreal 
4.78E-01 
5.55E-01 
6.27E-01 
6.52E-01 
5.98E-01 
5.46E-01 
4.70E-01 
Land-system change - Tropic 
6.13E-01 
6.60E-01 
7.12E-01 
7.68E-01 
7.07E-01 
6.32E-01 
5.31E-01 
Land-system change - Temperate 
4.10E-02 
4.73E-02 
5.30E-02 
5.49E-02 
5.04E-02 
4.60E-02 
3.96E-02 
Land-system change - Global 
1.20E-03 
1.39E-03 
1.40E-03 
1.31E-03 
1.25E-03 
1.15E-03 
9.92E-04 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
5.19E+00 
5.21E+00 
5.24E+00 
5.27E+00 
5.32E+00 
5.38E+00 
5.46E+00 
 
Table S18   The number of times the potential impacts of the Blue scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 2. If the exceedance is 
<1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with green. If the exceedance is >1, the impacts are above 
the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with red. 
Impact category 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Climate change -Energy imbalance 
1.75E+01 
1.69E+01 
1.43E+01 
1.27E+01 
1.19E+01 
1.10E+01 
9.73E+00 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
1.84E+01 
1.77E+01 
1.50E+01 
1.33E+01 
1.25E+01 
1.15E+01 
1.02E+01 
Ocean acidification 
5.86E+00 
5.65E+00 
4.78E+00 
4.25E+00 
3.99E+00 
3.68E+00 
3.25E+00 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
2.92E-03 
3.26E-03 
3.38E-03 
3.26E-03 
3.17E-03 
3.05E-03 
2.83E-03 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
1.62E-04 
1.87E-04 
1.89E-04 
1.77E-04 
1.69E-04 
1.55E-04 
1.34E-04 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
9.13E-02 
9.55E-02 
9.12E-02 
9.22E-02 
9.43E-02 
9.62E-02 
9.92E-02 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
1.93E+00 
1.90E+00 
1.63E+00 
1.54E+00 
1.54E+00 
1.54E+00 
1.53E+00 
Freshwater use - Global 
6.37E-01 
6.32E-01 
6.05E-01 
5.78E-01 
5.72E-01 
5.69E-01 
5.57E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
6.58E-01 
6.54E-01 
6.07E-01 
5.98E-01 
5.90E-01 
5.80E-01 
5.65E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
3.20E-01 
3.54E-01 
3.91E-01 
4.34E-01 
4.21E-01 
4.01E-01 
3.66E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
5.18E+00 
4.29E+00 
3.17E+00 
2.77E+00 
2.62E+00 
2.50E+00 
2.33E+00 
Land-system change - Boreal 
6.46E-02 
7.50E-02 
8.46E-02 
8.80E-02 
8.08E-02 
7.37E-02 
6.34E-02 
Land-system change - Tropic 
8.27E-02 
8.91E-02 
9.62E-02 
1.04E-01 
9.54E-02 
8.54E-02 
7.17E-02 
Land-system change - Temperate 
5.53E-03 
6.38E-03 
7.15E-03 
7.42E-03 
6.81E-03 
6.21E-03 
5.35E-03 
Land-system change - Global 
5.90E-02 
5.83E-02 
5.61E-02 
5.35E-02 
5.29E-02 
5.27E-02 
5.18E-02 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
5.19E+00 
5.21E+00 
5.24E+00 
5.27E+00 
5.32E+00 
5.38E+00 
5.46E+00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
31 
Table S19   The number of times the potential impacts of the Green scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 1. If the exceedance 
is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with green. If the exceedance is >1, the impacts are 
above the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with red. 
Impact category 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Climate change -Energy imbalance 
1.30E+02 
1.11E+02 
8.20E+01 
6.36E+01 
5.17E+01 
3.90E+01 
2.69E+01 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
1.36E+02 
1.16E+02 
8.59E+01 
6.65E+01 
5.40E+01 
4.07E+01 
2.79E+01 
Ocean acidification 
4.33E+01 
3.70E+01 
2.74E+01 
2.12E+01 
1.72E+01 
1.30E+01 
8.91E+00 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
2.15E-02 
2.35E-02 
2.10E-02 
1.81E-02 
1.61E-02 
1.40E-02 
1.21E-02 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
6.36E-01 
6.13E-01 
5.83E-01 
5.98E-01 
6.09E-01 
6.13E-01 
6.23E-01 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
1.39E+01 
1.19E+01 
9.99E+00 
9.54E+00 
9.38E+00 
8.95E+00 
8.59E+00 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
4.71E+00 
4.48E+00 
3.91E+00 
3.57E+00 
3.41E+00 
3.24E+00 
3.12E+00 
Freshwater use - Global 
4.36E-01 
4.13E-01 
3.60E-01 
3.28E-01 
3.14E-01 
2.99E-01 
2.92E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
4.75E+00 
4.38E+00 
3.96E+00 
3.90E+00 
3.78E+00 
3.61E+00 
3.43E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
2.35E+00 
2.60E+00 
2.94E+00 
3.31E+00 
3.23E+00 
3.06E+00 
2.75E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
3.83E+01 
2.75E+01 
1.91E+01 
1.63E+01 
1.48E+01 
1.31E+01 
1.16E+01 
Land-system change - Boreal 
4.79E-01 
6.57E-01 
8.60E-01 
9.13E-01 
9.09E-01 
8.68E-01 
7.48E-01 
Land-system change - Tropic 
6.12E-01 
6.60E-01 
7.12E-01 
7.68E-01 
7.07E-01 
6.32E-01 
5.31E-01 
Land-system change - Temperate 
4.10E-02 
5.56E-02 
7.23E-02 
7.66E-02 
7.62E-02 
7.26E-02 
6.26E-02 
Land-system change - Global 
1.20E-03 
1.34E-03 
1.12E-03 
9.01E-04 
7.26E-04 
5.42E-04 
3.48E-04 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
5.19E+00 
5.21E+00 
5.27E+00 
5.31E+00 
5.38E+00 
5.44E+00 
5.51E+00 
 
Table S20   The number of times the potential impacts of the Green scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 2. If the exceedance 
is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with green. If the exceedance is >1, the impacts are 
above the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with red. 
Impact category 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Climate change -Energy imbalance 
1.75E+01 
1.50E+01 
1.11E+01 
8.59E+00 
6.98E+00 
5.27E+00 
3.63E+00 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
1.83E+01 
1.57E+01 
1.16E+01 
8.98E+00 
7.29E+00 
5.49E+00 
3.77E+00 
Ocean acidification 
5.85E+00 
5.00E+00 
3.70E+00 
2.86E+00 
2.33E+00 
1.75E+00 
1.20E+00 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
2.91E-03 
3.17E-03 
2.83E-03 
2.45E-03 
2.17E-03 
1.89E-03 
1.63E-03 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
1.62E-04 
1.81E-04 
1.52E-04 
1.22E-04 
9.80E-05 
7.32E-05 
4.70E-05 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
8.59E-02 
8.28E-02 
7.88E-02 
8.08E-02 
8.22E-02 
8.27E-02 
8.41E-02 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
1.87E+00 
1.61E+00 
1.35E+00 
1.29E+00 
1.27E+00 
1.21E+00 
1.16E+00 
Freshwater use - Global 
6.36E-01 
6.05E-01 
5.28E-01 
4.82E-01 
4.61E-01 
4.38E-01 
4.22E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
6.42E-01 
5.92E-01 
5.34E-01 
5.26E-01 
5.11E-01 
4.87E-01 
4.64E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
3.17E-01 
3.52E-01 
3.98E-01 
4.47E-01 
4.36E-01 
4.13E-01 
3.72E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
5.17E+00 
3.71E+00 
2.58E+00 
2.20E+00 
2.00E+00 
1.77E+00 
1.57E+00 
Land-system change - Boreal 
6.46E-02 
8.87E-02 
1.16E-01 
1.23E-01 
1.23E-01 
1.17E-01 
1.01E-01 
Land-system change - Tropic 
8.27E-02 
8.91E-02 
9.61E-02 
1.04E-01 
9.54E-02 
8.53E-02 
7.16E-02 
Land-system change - Temperate 
5.54E-03 
7.51E-03 
9.76E-03 
1.03E-02 
1.03E-02 
9.81E-03 
8.45E-03 
Land-system change - Global 
5.89E-02 
5.58E-02 
4.86E-02 
4.43E-02 
4.24E-02 
4.04E-02 
3.94E-02 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), local 
5.19E+00 
5.21E+00 
5.27E+00 
5.31E+00 
5.38E+00 
5.44E+00 
5.51E+00 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                     Supporting Results 
 
32 
Table S21   The number of times the potential impacts of the NZE scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 1. If the exceedance is 
<1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with green. If the exceedance is >1, the impacts are above 
the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with red. 
Impact category 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Climate change -Energy imbalance 
3.03E+02 
1.54E+02 
1.05E+02 
4.65E+01 
7.40E+00 
8.56E+00 
9.59E+00 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
3.17E+02 
1.61E+02 
1.10E+02 
4.86E+01 
7.61E+00 
8.72E+00 
9.70E+00 
Ocean acidification 
1.01E+02 
5.13E+01 
3.50E+01 
1.55E+01 
2.43E+00 
2.78E+00 
3.09E+00 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
4.66E-02 
1.88E-02 
2.17E-02 
1.11E-02 
6.30E-03 
6.23E-03 
6.13E-03 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
1.45E+00 
8.36E-01 
2.91E-01 
-1.58E-01 
-5.94E-01 
-2.83E-01 
3.56E-02 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
3.97E+01 
2.66E+01 
1.23E+01 
5.99E+00 
-4.62E-01 
2.52E+00 
5.60E+00 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
6.73E+00 
4.21E+00 
3.63E+00 
2.61E+00 
1.95E+00 
1.95E+00 
1.95E+00 
Freshwater use - Global 
6.31E-01 
3.56E-01 
3.19E-01 
2.13E-01 
1.52E-01 
1.52E-01 
1.53E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
8.15E+00 
5.66E+00 
3.83E+00 
2.80E+00 
1.88E+00 
2.38E+00 
2.90E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
1.60E+00 
1.94E+00 
2.43E+00 
2.76E+00 
3.09E+00 
3.21E+00 
3.34E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
4.00E+01 
2.71E+01 
1.72E+01 
1.25E+01 
8.43E+00 
8.90E+00 
9.40E+00 
Land-system change - Boreal 
2.20E-01 
2.89E-01 
3.55E-01 
4.15E-01 
4.72E-01 
4.74E-01 
4.77E-01 
Land-system change - Tropic 
2.91E-01 
3.67E-01 
4.35E-01 
4.82E-01 
5.24E-01 
5.25E-01 
5.26E-01 
Land-system change - Temperate 
2.16E-02 
2.63E-02 
3.05E-02 
3.51E-02 
3.95E-02 
3.96E-02 
3.98E-02 
Land-system change - Global 
3.34E-03 
1.39E-03 
1.33E-03 
6.90E-04 
4.05E-04 
4.29E-04 
4.52E-04 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), 
local 
5.45E+00 
5.53E+00 
5.60E+00 
5.67E+00 
5.73E+00 
5.76E+00 
5.79E+00 
 
Table S22   The number of times the potential impacts of the Green scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 2. If the exceedance 
is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with green. If the exceedance is >1, the impacts are 
above the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with red. 
Impact category 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
Climate change -Energy imbalance 
4.09E+01 
2.07E+01 
1.42E+01 
6.28E+00 
9.99E-01 
1.16E+00 
1.29E+00 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
4.28E+01 
2.17E+01 
1.48E+01 
6.56E+00 
1.03E+00 
1.18E+00 
1.31E+00 
Ocean acidification 
1.37E+01 
6.93E+00 
4.73E+00 
2.09E+00 
3.28E-01 
3.76E-01 
4.18E-01 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
6.29E-03 
2.54E-03 
2.93E-03 
1.50E-03 
8.51E-04 
8.41E-04 
8.28E-04 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
4.51E-04 
1.88E-04 
1.80E-04 
9.32E-05 
5.47E-05 
5.79E-05 
6.10E-05 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
1.96E-01 
1.13E-01 
3.92E-02 
-2.13E-02 
-8.02E-02 
-3.82E-02 
4.81E-03 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
5.36E+00 
3.59E+00 
1.66E+00 
8.09E-01 
-6.23E-02 
3.41E-01 
7.56E-01 
Freshwater use - Global 
9.09E-01 
5.68E-01 
4.90E-01 
3.53E-01 
2.63E-01 
2.63E-01 
2.64E-01 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
1.10E+00 
7.65E-01 
5.17E-01 
3.78E-01 
2.54E-01 
3.22E-01 
3.92E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - Regional P 
2.16E-01 
2.61E-01 
3.28E-01 
3.72E-01 
4.18E-01 
4.34E-01 
4.51E-01 
Biogeochemical flows - N 
5.40E+00 
3.65E+00 
2.32E+00 
1.69E+00 
1.14E+00 
1.20E+00 
1.27E+00 
Land-system change - Boreal 
2.97E-02 
3.91E-02 
4.79E-02 
5.61E-02 
6.38E-02 
6.40E-02 
6.44E-02 
Land-system change - Tropic 
3.93E-02 
4.96E-02 
5.88E-02 
6.51E-02 
7.07E-02 
7.09E-02 
7.11E-02 
Land-system change - Temperate 
2.92E-03 
3.55E-03 
4.12E-03 
4.74E-03 
5.33E-03 
5.34E-03 
5.38E-03 
Land-system change - Global 
8.52E-02 
4.81E-02 
4.30E-02 
2.88E-02 
2.05E-02 
2.06E-02 
2.06E-02 
Biosphere intactness level (BII), 
local 
5.45E+00 
5.53E+00 
5.60E+00 
5.67E+00 
6.00E+00 
5.76E+00 
5.79E+00 
 
==PAGE:77==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                                  References 
33 
References 
Alkemade, R., van Oorschot, M., Miles, L., Nellemann, C., Bakkenes, M., & ten Brink, B. (2009). GLOBIO3: A 
Framework to Investigate Options for Reducing Global Terrestrial Biodiversity Loss. Ecosystems 2009 12:3, 
12(3), 374–390. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10021-009-9229-5 
Boucher, O., Randall, D., Artaxo, P., Bretherton, C., Feingold, G., Forster, P., Kerminen, V.-M., Kondo, Y., Liao, H., 
Lohmann, U., Rasch, P., Satheesh, S. K., Sherwood, S., Stevens, B., & Zhang, X.-Y. (2013). Clouds and 
aerosols. Climate Change 2013 the Physical Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 9781107057, 571–658. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.016 
Consequantial-LCA.org. (n.d.). Glossary and definitions. Retrieved September 1, 2021, from 
https://consequential-lca.org/glossary/ 
EC-JRC. (2010). International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook - General guide for Life Cycle 
Assessment - Detailed guidance (First edit). Publications Office of the European Union. 
https://doi.org/10.2788/38479 
Enerdata. (2021). Research on energy efficiency, CO2 emissions, energy consumption, forecast. 
https://www.enerdata.net/ 
European Environment Agency. (2019). EEA greenhouse gases - data viewer. https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-
and-maps/data/data-viewers/greenhouse-gases-viewer 
Farji, M. (2021). Development of Photovoltaic Cells: A Materials Prospect and Next-Generation Futuristic 
Overview. Brazilian Journal of Physics, 51(6), 1916–1928. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13538-021-00981-w 
Frischknecht, R., Itten, R., Wyss, F., Blanc, I., Heath, G., Raugei, M., Sinha, P., & Wade, A. (2015). Life Cycle 
Assessment of Future Photovoltaic Electricity Production from Residential-scale Systems Operated in 
Europe. IEA-PVPS, Task 12, Subtask 2.0. 
Galán-Martín, Á., Tulus, V., Díaz, I., Pozo, C., Pérez-Ramírez, J., & Guillén-Gosálbez, G. (2021). Sustainability 
footprints of a renewable carbon transition for the petrochemical sector within planetary boundaries. One 
Earth, 4(4), 565–583. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.04.001 
Hanafiah, M. M., Hendriks, A. J., & Huijbregts, M. A. J. (2012). Comparing the ecological footprint with the 
biodiversity footprint of products. Journal of Cleaner Production, 37, 107–114. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.06.016 
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K., & Olsen, S. I. (2017). Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice. Life Cycle 
Assessment: Theory and Practice, 1–1216. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3 
IEA. (2021). Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector. International Energy Agency, 224. 
International Energy Agency. (2021). Net Zero by 2050 – Analysis - IEA. https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-
2050 
International Renewable Energy Agency. (2018). Global Energy Transformation: A Roadmap to 2050. 
www.irena.org 
IRENA. (2019). FUTURE OF WIND Deployment, investment, technology, grid integration and socio-economic 
aspects A Global Energy Transformation paper Citation About IRENA. International Renewable Energy 
Agency. www.irena.org/publications. 
Iribarren, D., Petrakopoulou, F., & Dufour, J. (2013). Environmental and thermodynamic evaluation of CO2 
capture, transport and storage with and without enhanced resource recovery. Energy, 50(1), 477–485. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.12.021 
==PAGE:78==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                                  References 
34 
Joos, F., Roth, R., Fuglestvedt, J. S., Peters, G. P., Enting, I. G., Von Bloh, W., Brovkin, V., Burke, E. J., Eby, M., 
Edwards, N. R., Friedrich, T., Frölicher, T. L., Halloran, P. R., Holden, P. B., Jones, C., Kleinen, T., Mackenzie, 
F. T., Matsumoto, K., Meinshausen, M., … Weaver, A. J. (2013). Carbon dioxide and climate impulse 
response functions for the computation of greenhouse gas metrics: A multi-model analysis. Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Physics, 13(5), 2793–2825. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-13-2793-2013 
Li, Y., Lan, S., Ryberg, M., Pérez-Ramírez, J., & Wang, X. (2021). A quantitative roadmap for China towards carbon 
neutrality in 2060 using methanol and ammonia as energy carriers. IScience, 24(6), 102513. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102513 
Mace, G. M., Reyers, B., Alkemade, R., Biggs, R., Chapin, F. S., Cornell, S. E., Díaz, S., Jennings, S., Leadley, P., 
Mumby, P. J., Purvis, A., Scholes, R. J., Seddon, A. W. R., Solan, M., Steffen, W., & Woodward, G. (2014). 
Approaches to defining a planetary boundary for biodiversity. Global Environmental Change, 28(1), 289–
297. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.GLOENVCHA.2014.07.009 
McKinsey&Company. (2010). Transformation of Europe’s power system until 2050 Including specific 
considerations for Germany Electric Power and Natural Gas Practice. 
Myhre, G., Shindell, D., Bréoon, F.-M., Collins, W., Fuglestvedt, J., Huang, J., Koch, D., Lamarque, J.-F., Lee, D., 
Mendoza, B., Nakajima, N., Robock, A., Stephens, G., Takemura, T., & Zhang, H. (2013). Anthropogenic and 
Natural Radiative Forcing. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In Cambridge 
University Press. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.018 
NREL. (2013). Wind LCA Harmonization. 2012(Awea), 2. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-
9290.2012.00464.x/pdf.National 
Peach, S. (2021). What’s the carbon footprint of a wind turbine? » Yale Climate Connections. Yale Climate 
Connections. https://yaleclimateconnections.org/2021/06/whats-the-carbon-footprint-of-a-wind-turbine/ 
Pérez-López, P., Jolivet, R., Blanc, I., Besseau, R., Douziech, M., Gschwind, B., Tannous, S., Schlesinger, J., Brière, 
R., Prieur-Vernat, A., & Clavreul, J. (2020). INCER-ACV : Incertitudes dans les méthodes d’évaluation des 
impacts environnementaux des filières de production énergétique par ACV. Final report. Deliverable of 
ADEME Study 1705C0045. 77 Pp. https://librairie.ademe.fr/energies-renouvelables-reseaux-et-
stockage/4448-incer-acv.html%0A 
Persson, L., Carney Almroth, B. M., Collins, C. D., Cornell, S., de Wit, C. A., Diamond, M. L., Fantke, P., Hassellöv, 
M., MacLeod, M., Ryberg, M. W., Søgaard Jørgensen, P., Villarrubia-Gómez, P., Wang, Z., & Hauschild, M. Z. 
(2022). Outside the Safe Operating Space of the Planetary Boundary for Novel Entities. Environmental 
Science & Technology. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c04158 
Petrakopoulou, F., Iribarren, D., & Dufour, J. (2015). Life-cycle performance of natural gas power plants with pre-
combustion CO 2 capture. Greenhouse Gases: Science and Technology, 5(3), 268–276. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ghg.1457 
PRé Sustainability. (2020). New release: SimaPro 9.1.1 is here! - SimaPro. https://simapro.com/2020/whats-new-
in-simapro-9-1-1/ 
Ramanathan, V., Chung, C., Kim, D., Bettge, T., Buja, L., Kiehl, J. T., Washington, W. M., Fu, Q., Sikka, D. R., & Wild, 
M. (2005). Atmospheric brown clouds: Impacts on South Asian climate and hydrological cycle. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102(15), 5326–5333. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0500656102 
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., Chapin, F. S., Lambin, E. F., Lenton, T. M., Scheffer, M., Folke, 
C., Schellnhuber, H. J., Nykvist, B., de Wit, C. A., Hughes, T., van der Leeuw, S., Rodhe, H., Sörlin, S., Snyder, 
P. K., Costanza, R., Svedin, U., … Foley, J. A. (2009). A safe operating space for humanity. Ecology and 
Society, 461(7263), 472–475. https://doi.org/10.1038/461472a 
 
==PAGE:79==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                                  References 
35 
Ryberg, M. W., Andersen, M. M., Owsianiak, M., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2020). Downscaling the planetary 
boundaries in absolute environmental sustainability assessments – A review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
276, 123287. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2020.123287 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Clavreul, J., Mueller, C., Sim, S., King, H., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2018). How to bring 
absolute sustainability into decision-making: An industry case study using a Planetary Boundary-based 
methodology. Science of The Total Environment, 634, 1406–1416. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2018.04.075 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Richardson, K., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2018). Development of a life-cycle impact 
assessment methodology linked to the Planetary Boundaries framework. Ecological Indicators, 88, 250–
262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.065 
Ryberg, M. W., Wang, P., Kara, S., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2018). Prospective Assessment of Steel Manufacturing 
Relative to Planetary Boundaries: Calling for Life Cycle Solution. Procedia CIRP, 69(May), 451–456. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.11.021 
Scholes, R. J., & Biggs, R. (2005). A biodiversity intactness index. Nature 2005 434:7029, 434(7029), 45–49. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03289 
Singh, A., Triulzi, G., & Magee, C. L. (2021). Technological improvement rate predictions for all technologies: Use 
of patent data and an extended domain description. Research Policy, 50(9), 104294. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104294 
Singh, B., Strømman, A. H., & Hertwich, E. G. (2011). Comparative life cycle environmental assessment of CCS 
technologies. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 5(4), 911–921. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2011.03.012 
Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E. M., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S. R., Vries, 
W. de, Wit, C. A. de, Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G. M., Persson, L. M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, 
B., & Sörlin, S. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Science, 
347(6223). https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.1259855 
The World Bank. (2020). Population, total. The World Bank. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                              List of figures 
36 
List of figures  
Figure S1   System boundaries for all modeled systems. The green boxes illustrate extraction processes, light 
turquoise is transportation processes, and blue is production or treatment processes. The grey boxes are 
co- or waste processes, and the yellow box is the final product. The solid line illustrates the system 
boundary and the dotted line encircles the foreground system. ...................................................................... 8 
 
Figure S2   Impacts of the four scenarios on Climate change – energy imbalance. The left side shows the impacts 
from Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ............................................ 22 
 
Figure S3   Impacts of the four scenarios on Climate change – energy imbalance. The left side shows the impacts 
from Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ............................................ 23 
 
Figure S4   Impacts of the four scenarios on Atmospheric aerosol loading. The left side shows the impacts from 
Base scenario (grey), Blue scenario (blue), Green scenario (dark green), and NZE scenario (light green), 
together with the assigned SoSOS 1 (dotted red) and SoSOS 2 (dotted yellow). The right side shows the 
contribution from energy sources in the four scenarios in year 2020 and 2050. ............................................ 24
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                                List of tables 
37 
List of tables 
Table S1   The assumed quantity of electricity produced per year in EU-28 given in (TWh/year). Data source: 
Enerdata © ........................................................................................................................................................ 4 
 
Table S2  Sources and assumptions to improvement rates. ...................................................................................... 6 
 
Table S3   Reference flow needed to realize the defined FU. The flow is given in (TWh/year) and is the total 
amount of electricity needed in EU-28 in the given year. Data source: Enerdata © ........................................ 8 
 
Table S4   Unit processes from Ecoinvent 3.6 used in this study. ............................................................................ 10 
 
Table S5   Life cycle inventory used for modeling coal with CCS (Iribarren et al., 2013) and natural gas with CCS 
(Petrakopoulou et al., 2015). ........................................................................................................................... 11 
 
Table S6   Life cycle inventory used for modeling CCS post-combustion (Singh et al., 2011) for use in combination 
with bioenergy (BECCS). .................................................................................................................................. 12 
 
Table S7   The values of the Planetary Boundaries given by (Steffen et al., 2015), the Natural Background level 
given by (Steffen et al., 2015), and the Full Safe Operating Space for humanity given by (Ryberg, Owsianiak, 
Clavreul, et al., 2018). *The values given for atmospheric aerosol loading are only valid for a region with 
South Asian monsoon. ..................................................................................................................................... 13 
 
Table S8   Summary of scaling steps applied in the three-step approach for assigning the SoSOS. ........................ 15 
 
Table S9   Assigned share of safe operating space (SoSOS) using principle 1 (SoSOS 1) and principle 2 (SoSOS 2). 
*The values given for Atmospheric aerosol loading are only valid for a region with South Asian monsoon.. 16 
 
Table S10   Environmental flows for the occupation of land matched to MSA classification based on Alkemade et 
al. (2009) .......................................................................................................................................................... 19 
 
Table S11   The calculated potential impact of the Base scenario on all considered PB indicators. Impacts are 
given per year for every fifth year in the period 2020-2050. .......................................................................... 25 
 
Table S12   The calculated potential impact of the Blue scenario on all considered PB indicators. Impacts are given 
per year for every fifth year in the period 2020-2050. .................................................................................... 26 
 
Table S13   The calculated potential impact of the Green scenario on all considered PB indicators. Impacts are 
given per year for every fifth year in the period 2020-2050. .......................................................................... 27 
 
Table S14   The calculated potential impact of the NZE scenario on all considered PB indicators. Impacts are given 
per year for every fifth year in the period 2020-2050. .................................................................................... 28 
 
Table S15   The number of times the potential impacts of the Base scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 1. If the 
exceedance is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with green. If the 
exceedance is >1, the impacts are above the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with red. ....................... 29 
 
Table S16   The number of times the potential impacts of the Base scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 2. If the 
exceedance is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with green. If the 
exceedance is >1, the impacts are above the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with red. ....................... 29 
 
==PAGE:82==
Supplementary Material                                                                                                                                                                List of tables 
38 
Table S17   The number of times the potential impacts of the Blue scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 1. If the 
exceedance is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with green. If the 
exceedance is >1, the impacts are above the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with red. ....................... 30 
 
Table S18   The number of times the potential impacts of the Blue scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 2. If the 
exceedance is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with green. If the 
exceedance is >1, the impacts are above the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with red. ....................... 30 
 
Table S19   The number of times the potential impacts of the Green scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 1. If the 
exceedance is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with green. If the 
exceedance is >1, the impacts are above the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with red. ....................... 31 
 
Table S20   The number of times the potential impacts of the Green scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 2. If the 
exceedance is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with green. If the 
exceedance is >1, the impacts are above the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with red. ....................... 31 
 
Table S21   The number of times the potential impacts of the NZE scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 1. If the 
exceedance is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with green. If the 
exceedance is >1, the impacts are above the assigned SoSOS 1, which is indicated with red. ....................... 32 
 
Table S22   The number of times the potential impacts of the Green scenario exceed the assigned SoSOS 2. If the 
exceedance is <1, the impacts are below the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with green. If the 
exceedance is >1, the impacts are above the assigned SoSOS 2, which is indicated with red. ....................... 32 
 
 
