==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
RF and Microwave characterization
of bacterial cells suspended in liquid
Marcos González Díaz (s192344)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project presented a novel methodology to obtain the dielectric spectroscopy of
bacterial cells suspended in liquid at radiofrequency (RF) and microwave frequen-
cies. The methodology was based on a microfluidic chip with coplanar waveguides
and a SU-8 reservoir. The chip design and fabrication were covered as well as the
transmission line theory behind the methodology. In addition, water experimental
results showed agreement when compared to a commercially available conductivity
meter and the water dielectric properties available in the literature. Lastly, bacte-
rial cells suspended in liquid were measured using the methodology presented in this
work. The experimental results were compared to an analytical approach proving
that the dielectric properties of the membrane and cytoplasm could be characterized
by the methodology presented in this thesis. The future applications of this project
involve solving impedance flow cytometry (IFC) state-of-the-art challenges such as
the accurate classification of heat-treated cells.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis of science (M.Sc.Eng) was prepared at the department of Electrical
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring the M.Sc.Eng degree in Electrical Engineering with specialization in
Space Technology. The project was supervised by Associate Professor Tom Keinicke
Johansen and SBT Instruments Chief Executive Oﬀicer Gustav Skands.
Kongens Lyngby, February 28, 2022
Marcos González Díaz (s192344)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This work would not have been possible without the aid of many people who shared
their knowledge selflessly. I would like to start expressing my gratitude to my su-
pervisor, Tom Keinicke Johansen, who always showed interest in this project and
guided me throughout my thesis. I wish to show my appreciation to my co-supervisor,
Gustav Skands, who gave an excellent feedback and trusted in my work since the be-
ginning. I would also like to thank my colleagues from SBT Instruments, specially
Peter Lüttge Jordal, Christian Flindt Heckermann and Chris Ernskov Douglas, who
offered valuable assistance in their area of expertise. The DTU Nanolab team, who
offered suggestions about the fabrication process of the microfluidic chip. Finally, I
wish to extend my special thanks to my family and friends. And for my girlfriend,
Paula Lopez Diez, who supports me every day with her love.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Impedance flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theoretical approach to bacteria characterization
5
2.1
Theory of dielectric materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Transmission Line Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Microwave dielectric characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Transmission line calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Lumped-elements per unit length model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
TDR length correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Mapping complex dielectric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Chip design and Fabrication
27
4.1
Wafer design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Experimental Methods and Results
37
5.1
Calibrating the experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Conductivity experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Silver-coated beads experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Bacteria experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.5
Discussion of the conductivity experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
Mixture theory analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Conclusions
55
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Society has been transitioning to a digital world in the last few decades. SBT In-
struments, a disruptive start-up located in Herlev, Denmark, contributes to the digi-
talization of biology by developing and selling lab-on-a-chip devices for easy bacteria
enumerations. Through the product BactoBox®, SBT can enumerate bacteria in liq-
uids within minutes. This is a huge advantage in comparison with the traditional
microbiology methods used in the industry.
One of the most widely used traditional methods for enumerating bacteria is plate
count agar (PCA). PCA employs a principle of promoting growth of bacteria on a
medium substrate after which the bacteria can be counted through a visual inspection.
By distributing the bacterial sample onto the medium substrate, colonies will emerge
on the surface of the substrate after some days. The concentration is determined by
counting the number of colony forming units (CFU) and dividing by the volume of
sample that has been put onto the agar. There are some disadvantages associated
with the plate count approach:
• Different bacteria species require different medium to form colonies and there-
fore to be counted.
• It is manual process that is labour-intensive.
• It takes days or even weeks to obtain results.
BactoBox® offers a solution to all problems above: simple to use, single cell
characterization and results in a few minutes. This is a clear example how technol-
ogy makes bacteria counting easier and accessible thus speeding up quality control
processes and research speed within areas such as biotechnology and pharma.
1.1
Impedance flow cytometry
Flow cytometry is the study of cells in a flow. Impedance flow cytometry (IFC) was
first mentioned in the literature in 2001 [1] and, currently, is the core technology
behind BactoBox®. As deduced from the name, IFC is the study of cells in a flow
using electrical impedance measurements. The core of the technology is a microfluidic
chip with flow channels and electrodes. The sample liquid travels through a flow
channel that contains a set of electrodes positioned opposite to each other inside the
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
channel. AC voltage is applied to this set of electrodes which generates an electric
field across the liquid. This electric field gets disturbed when a particle passes through
the electrodes leading to a change of current.
The setup can be expanded to contain two set of opposite facing electrodes. In
such a setup, a differential current between the two set of electrodes is measured. In
Figure 1.1, an illustration of the microfluidic channel along with the detected signal
is shown.
t
 iA-iB
(a)
(b)
B
A
Figure 1.1: (a) Drawing of the two set of opposite electrodes, A and B. (b) An
illustration of the differential current iA −iB as a function of time when a bacterium
has passed through the set of electrodes.
The pipeline for an IFC device consists of a sinusoidal voltage generator, which
is connected to the electrodes, two transimpedance amplifiers to transform the cur-
rent running through each electrode into voltage, a differential amplifier in order to
subtract one electrode set from another and I-Q demodulator to extract the ampli-
tude and phase information of the sinusoidal signal. An illustration of this pipeline
is shown in Figure 1.2.
Transimpedance 
amplifier
I-Q 
demodulator
Amplitude
Phase
Differential
amplifier
Figure 1.2: Drawing of the IFC pipeline. From left to right, the stages are: voltage
source, two set of electrodes, transimpedance amplifier, differential amplifier and I-Q
demodulator.
The two main challenges associated with this technology are event detection and
event characterization.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Impedance flow cytometry
3
1.1.1
Event detection
The volume of an individual bacterium is approximately 0.4-3 µm3 [2]. The change
of current due to bacteria located in between electrodes is in the order of nA. These
events have to be clearly above the noise level in order to be detectable. Hence, the
circuit and microfluidic chip design must be able to demonstrate a high signal-to-noise
ratio of an event. For instance, M. Crescentini designed a low noise transimpedance
amplifier able to detect currents in the pA range [3]. As the events are detected,
it is necessary to characterize or classify whether the event is a viable bacterium or
another type of particle.
1.1.2
Event characterization
Event detection is a matter of signal-to-noise ratio. However, event characterization
is much more complex. Each bacteria species is characterized by its own membrane
multilayer structure and size. The distinctive electrical properties of the membrane
structure and size leads to a unique impedance signature.
Figure 1.3 depicts the
equivalent circuit of a bacterium for a single-shell model. This impedance signature
is frequency dependent due to the capacitive properties of the membrane. Low fre-
quencies probes the physical size of the bacterium, since Cmem is acting as an open
circuit whereas Rmem is high due to the low-conductive properties of the membrane.
At higher frequencies, the membrane capacitance is transitioning from open circuit to
short circuit, giving information about the membrane status. Lastly, at even higher
frequencies, the membrane capacitance is short-circuited and information from the
cytoplasm is obtained.
1.1.3
State-of-the-art challenges
Characterizing the electrical properties of biological cells has presented its merits and
drawbacks depending on the selected approach. H. Morgan investigated broadband
measurements using a digital-based technique to measure biological cells [4]. How-
ever, digital processing was limiting the maximum working frequency due to the low
sample rate of the data acquisition device. Xiao Ma presented a high-frequency ana-
log solution for ultra-wideband impedance spectroscopy of a biological cell [5]. On
the other hand, it requires high resolution optical instruments to trapped single cells
that substantially complicates the experimental setup.
Single cell bacteria differentiation requires understanding of which frequencies
make viable bacteria distinguishable from other non-viable inclusions. For instance,
SBT has shown that it is possible to distinguish the viability of E. coli treated with
ethanol using the phase information at 6.9 MHz [6]. However, SBT was not able to
differentiate between heat-treated and viable cells. Ethanol affects the physical struc-
ture of cell membranes [7]. This disruption has an impact in Cmem which provokes
a phase shift at 6.9 MHz compared to viable cells. On the contrary, heat-treated E.
coli cells have a degradation of cytoplasmic molecules deep inside the cell [8]. This
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.3: Equivalent circuit model for a bacterial cell and surrounding media.
Cm and Rm are the equivalent capacitance and resistance of the medium. Cmem and
Rmem are the equivalent capacitance and resistance of the membrane. Rcyto is the
equivalent resistance of the cytoplasm.
example enhances the importance of ultra-wide band measurements for improving
bacteria viability classification.
This project aims to explore the radiofrequency (RF) and microwave frequency
range and probe at cell cytoplasm, where meaningful information about cell viability
is expected to present. Furthermore, a simple experimental setup and ultra-wideband
measurements are required to implement an easy-to-use analytical tool for bacteria
characterization. Hence, a novel approach is presented using transmission line meth-
ods to extract the dielectric properties of bacterial cells suspended in liquid.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical approach
to bacteria
characterization
In this chapter, the theoretical background used in our novel approach is described.
Firstly, the polarization phenomena are explained, from simple to heterogeneous di-
electrics. Then, transmission line theory is introduced. Finally, state-of-the-art mi-
crowave dielectric characterization methods are found and their pros and cons are
exposed.
2.1
Theory of dielectric materials
The main objective of this thesis is to investigate the electrical response of bacterial
cells suspended in liquid.
Understanding the physical relations between dielectric
materials and electromagnetic fields is key in order to develop the correct methodology.
Hence, in this section, the theory behind these processes is explained in detail.
2.1.1
Polarization
In electrical engineering, materials can be classified into three different groups: con-
ductor, semiconductor and dielectric. Conductors contain free electrons ready to flow
when an electric field is applied, creating an electrical current. On the other hand,
dielectric materials have negative electrons bonded to positive nucleus that do not
move at macroscopic level when an electric field is applied. Instead, the equilibrium
status is ruptured and the charges at atomic level are aligned to the applied electric
field. This phenomenon is called polarization.
Distribution of charges changes for specific materials, therefore the complexity of
the polarization process increases. In order to make it simple for the reader, litera-
ture expresses five types of polarization: electronic, atomic, ionic, orientational, and
interfacial polarizations [9]. These all emerge at different oscillation periods of the
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theoretical approach to bacteria characterization
applied electrical field, as shown in Figure 2.1. At RF and microwave frequencies,
only the orientational polarization phenoma can be seen.
Frequency [Hz]
Relative permittivity
100
interfacial
orientational
atomic
electronic
RF and Microwave
 range
1010
1013
1016
Figure 2.1: The plot shows the relation between the relative permittivity (ϵ
′
r) and
frequency. Four types of polarization phenomena are arising at different frequencies.
The plot is merely illustrative, frequencies are approximated.
Meanwhile atomic, ionic and electronic polarization occurs at atomic levels, the
orientational one arises at molecular scale. Larger scales result in lower resonance
frequencies. Depending on the structure of the atomic bounds of its molecules, a
material can possess a permanent dipole moment. This is the case for water molecules.
When this dipole moment is externally disturbed by an electric field, the dipole gets
polarized aligning with the external field.
The complex dielectric properties of a
material are directly related to the polarization phenomena.
2.1.2
Complex permittivity
The relations between electric and magnetic field are defined by Maxwell equations.
In this project, the electric flux density is of interest:
∇× H = ∂D
∂t + J
(2.1)
where H is the magnetic field vector, D the electric flux density vector and J the
current density vector. The electric flux density vector can be related to the electric
field as follows:
D = ϵ0E,
(2.2)
where E is the electric field vector and ϵ0 is the free-space permittivity. The material
where the electric field is propagating might not free-space. Thus, one more parameter
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Theory of dielectric materials
7
should be added to the expression:
D = ϵ0E + P,
(2.3)
where P is the electric dipole moment or average polarization. The polarization factor
in a dielectric material is a linear function of the electric field:
P = χeϵ0E,
(2.4)
where χe is the electric susceptibility. Hence, an ideal isotropic and lossless dielectric
material can be characterized by the relative permittivity:
ϵr = 1 + χe.
(2.5)
Here, the relative permittivity is expressed as a scalar. However, in reality, it depends
on other factors as frequency.
In order to obtain this relation, the time dependency needs to be taken into
account.
Assuming that the electric field follows a sinusoidal function, the time
derivative of a function is equivalent to the multiplication of its Fourier transform
by a factor of jω. Furthermore, by Ohm’s law, the current density J guards a linear
relation with the electric field E:
J = σE,
(2.6)
where σ is the conductivity of the medium. Rewriting (2.1) in the frequency domain
following the rule explained above, the expression is:
∇× H = jωϵrϵ0E + σE = jω
(
ϵrϵ0 −jσ
ω
)
E,
(2.7)
where the complex permittivity is defined as ϵrϵ0−j σ
ω. The complex permittivity takes
the losses of the medium into account. Still and all, this is not the only dissipative
effect of a dielectric. The polarization phenomenon is not ideal, which means that
energy will be thermally dissipated in the process. Hence, another term is added to
the complex permittivity:
ϵ∗= (ϵ′
r −jϵ′′
r) ϵ0
(2.8)
where the real part indicates the polarizability of the medium and the imaginary
part the dissipative losses due to the polarization phenomena. Lastly, the complex
permittivity can be defined as its final form:
ˆϵ = ϵ′
rϵ0 −j
(
ϵ′′
rϵ0 + σ
ω
)
.
(2.9)
2.1.3
Frequency dependency of a dielectric
As explained in the previous section, there is a strong dependency between the po-
larization type and the frequencies in which they arise (see Figure 2.1). Thus, an
updated definition of ϵ∗is needed. Due to the frequency range used in this project,
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theoretical approach to bacteria characterization
only orientational polarization has to be accounted for. Therefore the Cole-Cole func-
tion is a perfect representation of liquids with permanent dipole moment, like the
ones that will be investigated in this project [10]. The expression is:
ϵ∗(w) = ϵ∞+
ϵs −ϵ∞
1 + (jωτ)β
(2.10)
where ϵ∞is the complex dielectric at high frequencies, ϵs is the static dielectric, τ
the relaxation time, ω is the angular frequency and β accounts for the distribution of
the relaxation time. When β = 1, then the Cole-Cole equation converts to the Debye
equation.
One example of the real and imaginary part of the complex permittivity can be
visualized in Figure 2.2.
The resonance peak on the imaginary part has a direct
correlation with the relaxation time of the material, or, in other words, the time
molecules take to return to equilibrium state.
Resonance occurs, and dissipative
losses are incremented when the oscillation period of the applied electromagnetic
field approaches to the relaxation time of the material.
101
105
109
1013
2
2.5
Frequency [Hz]
ϵ′
r
101
105
109
1013
0
0.2
0.4
Frequency [Hz]
ϵ′′
r
Figure 2.2: Complex relative permittivity, ϵr = (ϵ
′ + jϵ
′′)/ϵ0, of a fictional material
using Cole-Cole equation for the following specific values: β = 1, τ = 80 ps, ϵ∞/ϵ0 =
1.82 and ϵs/ϵ0 = 2.83
.
2.1.4
Heterogeneous medium
The theory behind homogeneous dielectric has been described.
However, it is of
interest to this project to understand the effect of heterogeneous dielectrics, which is
the case of bacteria suspended in liquid.
Maxwell Garnett has derived the formulas to define the effective macroscopic
dielectric of heterogeneous medium [11]. Hence, volume average electric field and flux
density are introduced:
⟨D⟩= ϵmix ⟨E⟩.
(2.11)
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Theory of dielectric materials
9
Starting from a simple mixture, where a host medium ϵh contains multiple spherical
inclusions ϵi and the volume ratio between the inclusions and the total volume is f.
Thus, the flux density and electric field can be rewritten as follows:
⟨D⟩= fϵiEi + (1 −f)ϵhEh,
(2.12)
⟨E⟩= fEi + (1 −f)Eh,
(2.13)
where Ei and Eh are assumed to be the constant electric field of the inclusion and
the host medium respectively. As a result, the mixture permittivity defined in (2.11)
is written as:
ϵmix = fϵiA + ϵh(1 −f)
fA + (1 −f)
,
(2.14)
where A is the field relation between Ei = AEh. This ratio, for spherical inclusions
is defined as [12]:
Ei =
3ϵh
ϵi + 2ϵh
Eh.
(2.15)
The Maxwell Garnett equation for spherical inclusions can be derived in its final
form:
ϵmix = ϵh + 3fϵh
ϵi −ϵe
ϵi + 2ϵh −f(ϵi −ϵh).
(2.16)
This expression is an interesting qualitative tool on how inclusions influence the
average permittivity of a heterogeneous medium. It works for lossy mediums (ϵ∗) but
it should be noted that no resonance effects coming from the inclusions are accounted
for and low inclusion concentrations are assumed.
Bacteria have a complex structure contrary to the one described above. Still, from
Maxwell Garnett, other models have been derived for multilayer spherical models [13]:
ϵ∗
mix = ϵ∗
h
1 + 2fγCM
1 −fγCM
with
γCM = ϵ∗
p −ϵ∗
h
ϵ∗p + 2ϵ∗
h
(2.17)
where f is the ratio between particle volume and total volume, γCM is the Clausius-
Mossotti factor, ϵ∗
p and ϵ∗
h are the complex permittivity of the particle and host
medium respectively. Same expression can be applied for the complex dielectric of
the particle:
ϵ∗
p = ϵ∗
m
1 + 2fγCM
1 −fγCM
with
γCM = ϵ∗
cp −ϵ∗
m
ϵ∗cp + 2ϵ∗m
(2.18)
where f is
(
R
R+d
)3
, ϵ∗
m and ϵ∗
cp are the complex dielectric of the membrane and
cytoplasm respectively. In Figure 2.3, an illustration of the single shell model used
for the above expressions is shown.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theoretical approach to bacteria characterization
ε*
h
ε*
cp
ε*
m
R
R+d
Figure 2.3: Single shell bacteria model where ϵ∗is the complex permittivity. The
subscripts ’h’, ’m’ and ’cp’ refers to host medium, membrane and cytoplasm respec-
tively. R is the cytoplasm radius and R + d is the cell radius.
2.2
Transmission Line Theory
At RF and microwave frequency band, one way to obtain the dielectric properties
of a material is by propagating electromagnetic waves through a transmission line.
In this section, the relations between these electromagnetic waves and the dielectric
material are explained.
2.2.1
Lumped-element per unit length model
In analog electronics, at low frequencies, circuit designers treat wire connections as
ideal. On the contrary, when the electrical wavelength is in the same order of the
physical dimensions of the line, the electromagnetic wave must be contained using
transmission lines. This is the case for microwave frequency band, which wavelengths
range from 30 cm to 1 mm.
An infinitesimal length of a transmission line can be represented by its RLGC
equivalent circuit (see Figure 2.4). R refers to the series resistance per unit length, in
Ω/m, L refers to the series inductance per unit length, in H/m, G refers to the shunt
conductance per unit length, in S/m and C refers to the shunt capacitance per unit
length, in F/m.
Understanding the underlying theory of the lumped-element circuit model de-
scribed above is of great importance for the development of this project. To begin
with, transmission lines are characterized by at least two conductors. R symbolizes
the finite conductivity of the conductors. L symbolizes the inductance created by
the interaction of magnetic fields due to alternating current running through the con-
ductors. C symbolizes the electric field stored by the dielectric when a voltage is
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Transmission Line Theory
11
Figure 2.4: Equivalent infinitesimal circuit for transmission lines.
applied across the conductors. G symbolizes the losses due to conductance or dissipa-
tive effects of the dielectric surrounding the conductors. As a consequence, all these
parameters will depend on the geometry and electrical properties of the conductors
and electromagnetic intrinsic properties of the material surrounding the conductors.
Using the above model and Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws, more complex
wave equations can be derived [14]. Two new definitions arised from these derivations:
the complex propagation constant γ and characteristic impedance Z0. The imaginary
part of the former is associated to the phase of the sinusoidal propagating wave and
its real part is associated to the attenuation constant. The characteristic impedance is
associated to the voltage and current relation on the line. They both can be expressed
by the lumped-element per unit length model as:
Z0 =
√
R + jwL
G + jωC ,
γ =
√
(R + jωL)(G + jωC),
(2.19)
where ω is the angular frequency and j2 = 1. For a low-loss transmission line, where
R ≪jωL and G ≪jωC, the above expressions are simplified. On the other hand,
measuring lossy dielectrics is the target of this project. Consequently, by approximat-
ing γ using the first two terms of the Taylor series expansion, the following expression
is obtained:
γ ≈jω
√
LC
[
1 −j
2
( R
ωL + G
ωC
)
−
RG
2ω2LC
]
.
(2.20)
In order to obtain the electrical properties of the dielectric, only if RC ≪2ω2LC,
the following expression has to be considered:
ℑ{γ} = jω
√
LC = jω
√
µϵ
′
(2.21)
where µ is the permeability of the dielectric and ϵ
′ is the real part of the complex
permittivity of the material.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theoretical approach to bacteria characterization
All these theoretical expressions applies to all transmission lines. Different conduc-
tor geometries lead to different transmission line types such as coaxial lines, striplines,
microstrip lines or coplanar waveguide. When it comes to fabricate transmission lines
on wafers, the simplest type is coplanar waveguide. In the next section, geometry re-
lated expressions will be derived for coplanar waveguides.
2.2.2
Coplanar Waveguide
The advantage of coplanar waveguide over other transmission line types is that the
conductors are in the same plane. In Figure 2.5 an illustration of the conductor and
dielectric geometry is depicted. In clean room wafer production, this type of geometry
can be done in three steps, lithography mask, thin film metal deposition and lift off
of the lithography mask. The chip fabrication will be covered in detail in Chapter 4.
h1
h2
g
g
w
t
Figure 2.5:
Cross-sectional view of a multilayer grounded Coplanar Waveguide
(CPWG). Gold color indicates conductor material. ϵr is the relative permittivity of
the dielectric material. g indicates the gap between the main conductor and ground.
w indicates the width of the main conductor and t the thickness of the conductor. h
indicates the height. The subscripts ’1’ and ’2’ differentiate the bottom and the top
dielectric material, respectively.
The analytical expression of a grounded coplanar waveguide can be found in [15].
This is based on quasi-static conformal mapping techniques where the frequency de-
pendency is ignored and a zero thickness conductor (t = 0) is assumed.
ϵeff = 1 + q1(ϵr1 −1) + q2(ϵr2 −1)
(2.22)
where ϵr is the relative permittivity and q1 and q2 can be expressed as:
q1 = K(k1)
K(k′
1)
[K(k3)
K(k′
3) + K(k4)
K(k′
4)
]−1
,
(2.23)
q2 = K(k2)
K(k′
2)
[K(k3)
K(k′
3) + K(k4)
K(k′
4)
]−1
,
(2.24)
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Transmission Line Theory
13
where K is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind and its partial filling factors
(ki) con be expressed as:
k1 =
sin(πw/4h1)
sin(π(w + 2g)/4h1)
k′
1 =
√
1 −k2
1
(2.25)
k2 =
sin(πw/4h2)
sin(π(w + 2g)/4h2)
k′
2 =
√
1 −k2
2
(2.26)
k3 =
tanh(πw/4h1)
tanh(π(w + 2g)/4h1)
k′
3 =
√
1 −k2
3
(2.27)
k4 =
w
w + 2g
k′
4 =
√
1 −k2
4
(2.28)
where w, g, hi are the geometry of the CPWG found in Figure 2.5.
This analysis can be translated to characteristic impedance (Z0) and propagation
constant (γ) as follows:
Z0 = 60π
√ϵeff
[K(k3)
K(k′
3) + K(k4)
K(k′
4)
]−1
(2.29)
γ = αc + j ω√ϵeff
c
(2.30)
where ω is the angular frequency, c is the velocity of light in free space and αc is the
attenuation factor of the conductor given by:
αc = Rc + Rg
2Z0
(2.31)
where w, g and t are the geometry defined in Figure 2.5, Rc and Rg are the series
resistances in ohms per unit length of the center conductor and ground respectively,
and can be expressed as:
Rc =
Rs
4w(1 −k2
0)K2(k0)
[
π + ln
(4πw
t
)
−k0 ln
(1 + k0
1 −k0
)]
(2.32)
Rg =
k0Rs
4w(1 −k2
0)K2(k0)
[
π + ln
(4π(w + 2g)
t
)
−1
k0
ln
(1 + k0
1 −k0
)]
(2.33)
where K is the elliptic integral of first kind, k0 is the partial filling factor and Rs is
the surface skin effect resistance given by:
Rs =
√ωµ
2σ
(2.34)
where ω is the angular frequency in radians, µ the permeability of the conductor and
σ is the conductivity of the conductor.
In order to check the validity of these expressions, a comparison between them and
two widely used software electromagnetic programs has been carried out. The results
are shown in Figure 2.6, where both analytical and simulated data are in agreement.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theoretical approach to bacteria characterization
0
10
20
30
40
−30
−20
−10
0
Frequency [GHz]
S [dB]
S11 2D Ansys
S21 2D Ansys
S11 ADS
S21 ADS
S11 3D Ansys
S21 3D Ansys
S11 Analytical
S21 Analytical
Figure 2.6: Amplitude plot of the S-parameters of a CPWG 5 mm length line for the
different methods described in the legend. The geometry of the CPWG is: ϵr1 = 3.78,
ϵr2 = 1, h1 = h2 = 500 µm, g = 10 µm, w = 100 µm, t = 200 nm and σ = 4.1 · 107
S/m.
2.3
Microwave dielectric characterization
There are several ways of measuring the electrical properties of a material. In the
previous section, the relation between dielectric properties and transmission line were
determined. In this section, the state-of-the-art methods are described. Additionally,
the pros and cons of these methods are discussed.
2.3.1
Resonant methods
This method consists on taking advantage of the resonance properties of an specific
circuit like ring or cavity resonators [16] [17]. This design can be simplified by its
equivalent series RL or parallel GC. At a certain frequency, the average magnetic
energy stored in the inductor is the same as the average electric energy stored in the
capacitor [18], and thereby resonance occurs. Here is the expression for the parallel
case:
Wm = We
↔
1
4|I|
1
w2L = 1
4|I|C2.
(2.35)
Knowing that the inductance of the circuit is fixed, the loss and dielectric con-
stant of the material under observation will be directly related to the resistance and
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Microwave dielectric characterization
15
capacitance, which can be extracted from following expressions for the parallel case:
w0 =
1
√
LC
BW = 1
Q0
= w0RC
(2.36)
where w0 is the resonance frequency, BW is the fractional bandwidth and Q is the
quality factor.
The advantage of this method is its simplicity and accuracy. It is only necessary to
know the resonance frequency and fractional bandwidth to extract the desired infor-
mation. Furthermore, measuring frequency presents better accuracy than measuring
impedance. On the other hand, this method only allows to obtain the permittivity
and loss of the material at a single frequency.
2.3.2
Non-resonant methods
These methods are based on measuring the reflection and transmission coeﬀicients
of a transmission line.
When the material under observation is located over the
transmission line, this interacts with the electromagnetic wave provoking a change in
the reflection and transmission coeﬀicients. From the transmission line theory, the
relation between this change and the complex permittivity of the material can be
extracted. In this section, some state-of-the-art methods will be described.
2.3.2.1
Multiline method
From transmission line theory, the relative permittivity can be expressed in terms of:
ϵ
′
r =
(ℑ{γ}
β0
)2
,
(2.37)
where γ is the propagation constant and β0 is the free-space constant.
The multine method consists of calculating the relative permittivity from multiple
transmission lines with different lengths [19]. This configuration permits to calibrate
the uncertainties coming from undesired effects using the properties of the transmit-
ting matrices. For the two lines calibration case, the following expressions are needed
for calculating the propagation constant γ:
M = T1[T2]−1,
(2.38)
(λ1
λ2
)
= M11 + M22 ±
√
(M11 −M22)2 + 4M12M21
2
,
(2.39)
λav = 1
2
(
λ1 + 1
λ2
)
,
(2.40)
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theoretical approach to bacteria characterization
γ = ln(λav)
ldiff
+ j 2πn
ldiff
,
(2.41)
where T1 and T2 are the transmission matrices for each line, ldiff is the length dif-
ference between both transmission lines, λav is the eigenvalues average and n is an
integer.
This method presents a highly accurate calibration process until the mm-range
[20]. However, it comes with a complex design of the chip and procedure.
2.3.2.2
Nicholason-Ross-Weir Method
Nicholason-Ross- Weir (NRW) method is based on solving the following equation from
transmission line theory [21]:
t = exp(−γl),
(2.42)
where l is the length of the transmission line and γ the propagation constant where
the complex permittivity will be extracted:
γ = 1
l (−ln(|t|) −j arg t −j2πn),
(2.43)
where n is an integer that accounts for the phase ambiguity.
Furthermore, t can be obtained from the S-parameters and reflection coeﬀicient Γ
as:
Γ = Z1 −Z0
Z1 + Z0
(2.44)
t =
S11 + S21 −Γ
1 −(S11 + S21)Γ,
(2.45)
where Z0 and Z1 are the characteristic impedance of the line of the material under
observation and S the S-parameters matrix.
Lastly, the permittivity can be calculated from the propagation constant as seen
in Equation 2.37.
This method does not need complex calibration steps to obtain the desired permit-
tivity. On the other hand, the phase ambiguity makes it diﬀicult to use in broadband
measurements. It also requires that the sample under observation to be contained all
over the transmission line, typically waveguides and coaxial lines. Thereby, it makes
the configuration diﬀicult to measure liquids.
2.3.3
γ extraction from ABCD parameters
A transmission line network can be represented by the following ABCD parameters:
ABCD =
( cosh γl
jZ0 sinh γl
jY0 sinh γl
cosh γl
)
,
(2.46)
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Microwave dielectric characterization
17
where Z0 =
1
Y0 is the characteristic impedance of the line, γ the propagation constant
of the line and l the length of the line.
Thus, the propagation constant can be expressed as:
γ = sinh−1 BC
l
=
√
(R + jωL)(G + jωC)
(2.47)
and the characteristic impedance Z0 as:
Z0 =
√
B
C =
√
R + jωL
G + jωC
(2.48)
Once the propagation constant is obtained, the relative permittivity can be obtained
with 2.37.
These ideal equations might be subjected to small errors in the S-parameters, as
explained in [22].
Hence, an alternative approach has been shown.
This consists
of two different lengths of transmission line where the propagation constant can be
calculated as follows:
γ = ln(S21,l2/S21,l1)
l1 −l2
(2.49)
This method obtains γ directly from one line measurement. On the contrary, the
literature has shown numerical issues when calculating the characteristic impedance.
Calibration steps should be added in order to improve the numerical stability of the
method.
Non-resonant methods allow to obtain the dielectric spectroscopy of a material.
For heterogeneous media, the polarization phenomena depend on the relaxation time
for the specific mixture. Therefore, resonant methods are not suitable for this project.
In the next chapter, a novel non-resonant approach based on γ extraction from ABCD
parameters is described.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
In this chapter, it is described how to obtain the dielectric properties of a liquid
under observation by using only transmission lines. The method consists of lumped-
elements per unit length fitting and a posterior mapping of the conductance, G, and
capacitance, C, to the complex dielectric of the liquid.
3.1
Transmission line calibration
The microfluidic chip design possesses two physical constraints. The transmission line
must be accessible by the contact probes and the water must be contained using a
reservoir. Based on these requirements, the entire transmission line can be divided
into five different networks, as shown in Figure 3.1. The two air slots are needed to
contact the probes of the measuring equipment whereas the two SU-8 slots act as
reservoir of the liquid.
Figure 3.1: Coplanar waveguide for measuring fluid dielectric constant. Z and γ
are the characteristic impedance and propagation constant of the transmission line,
respectively. The subscripts ’1’, ’2’ and ’3’ refer to air, SU-8 and fluid for the top
part of the dielectric, respectively.
There are multiple ways of characterizing microwave networks. As this network
consists of five transmission lines in cascade, the ABCD or transmission matrix rep-
resentation, introduced in (2.46), is the most applicable. The idea is that cascade
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Methodology
connection of networks is equal to transmission matrices multiplications. Hence, the
above presented network can be expressed as:
Ttotal = T1T2 (T3) T2T1
(3.1)
where Ti is the transmission matrix of the ith line. The desired information is in T3,
where the liquid under observation is located. Therefore, a de-embedding procedure
can be expressed as:
T3 = T −1
2
T −1
1
TtotalT −1
1
T −1
2
.
(3.2)
From ABCD matrix of the fluid T3, Z0 and γ can be obtained using (2.48) and
(2.47), where the length of the line is assumed to be known.
Similarly, lumped-elements per unit length can be extracted from the Z0 and γ:









R(f) = ℜ{γZ0}
L(f) = ℑ{γZ0}/ω
C(f) = ℑ{γ/Z0}/ω
G(f) = ℜ{γ/Z0}
(3.3)
where ω is the angular frequency, ℑ{·} is the imaginary part and ℜ{·} is the real part.
These expressions allow moving from RLGC models to ABCD parameters and vice
versa as tools for analysis and fitting models.
T1 and T2 transmission lines must be known in order to extract Z3 and γ3. Two
calibration lines are needed, one containing only the air region and the other contain-
ing air and the polymer SU-8. The reason why the second calibration line contains
an air region aside from the polymer is to be able to contact with the probes.
Air
l1
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Calibration Transmission Lines. (a) TL for calibrating Z1 and γ1. (b)
TL for calibrating Z2 and γ2
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Lumped-elements per unit length model
21
Measuring on Figure 3.2(a) will follow the analytical expression given by:
Tcal1(R1(f), L1(f), G1(f), C1(f)) = TA
(3.4)
where T depends on per unit length lumped-elements R1(f), L1(f), G1(f) and C1(f)
since the length l1 is assumed to be known.
Similarly, the transmission matrix on Figure 3.2(b) is given by:
TB = T1T2T1
Tcal2 (R2(f), L2(f), G2(f), C2(f)) = T −1
1
TBT −1
1
(3.5)
where T1 is known from the first calibration step.
3.2
Lumped-elements per unit length model
It has been described in the previous section that the ABCD or transmission matrix
of a given transmission line can be expressed as a function of its lumped-elements
per unit length model. The complex permittivity is hidden in the shunt elements:
the capacitance and conductance. In [23], a more complex RLGC representation was
introduced as:









R(f) = R0 + √fRs
L(f) = L∞+ Rs/(2π√f)
G(f) = G0 + 2πfkϵ
′′
r (ω)ϵ0
C(f) = kϵ
′
r(ω)ϵ0
(3.6)
where f is the frequency, R0 is the DC resistance, Rs is the skin-effect resistance,
L∞is the inductance at high frequencies, G0 is the shunt conductance at DC, k is
a fringe effect constant and ϵ∗
r(ω)ϵ0 is the frequency dependent effective complex di-
electric of the transmission line. Similarly, the complex permittivity will follow the
Cole-Cole equation introduced in Section 2.3, which accounts for molecules polariza-
tion phenomena. This model depends on four parameters: the permittivity at high
frequencies ϵ∞, the static permittivity ϵs, the relaxation time τ and the distribution
of the relaxation time β.
The fitting procedure will consist on two steps: polynomial fitting and manual
fitting. The polynomial fitting finds the resistance and inductance of the line as a
function of frequency. As these parameters depends on the conductor geometry, it is
assumed to be the same for each region of the transmission line. Only one calibration
is needed as a result. On the other hand, for the shunt capacitance and conductance,
the manual fitting will be used. It is more important to obtain physical-describable
values rather than a good fit and that is why manual fitting is applied.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methodology
3.2.1
Polynomial fitting
The polynomial form is expressed like:
p(x) =
k
∑
j=0
cjxj
(3.7)
where k is the degree of the polynomial and cj is the jth coeﬀicient of the polynomial.
The algorithm searches the coeﬀicients that minimize the squared error:
E =
M
∑
m=0
|p(xm) −ym|2
(3.8)
where m is the length of the vector, p the polynomial of degree k and y the vector to
be fitted. In this case, the vectors to be fitted y are R(f) and L(f) extracted from
the ABCD parameters of the first calibration line (3.4) using the Equation (3.3).
3.2.2
Manual fitting
The capacitance C(f) and the conductance G(f) depends on ϵ∞, ϵs, τ, β and G0.
These parameters are tuned, always keeping the values physically reasonable. Then
both the measurement and the model are compared. The tuning process is repeated
until they are in agreement.
3.3
TDR length correction
Lastly, from the fitting procedure, T1 and T2 are known. The lengths of the lines
are also known from the layout design. Thus, from Equation (3.2), T3 can be de-
embedded. However, the discontinuities between the different lines are not taken into
account. Despite the fact that the physical length of the lines has submicron accuracy,
the electrical length might vary due to these discontinuities. As a consequence, Time
Domain Reflectometry (TDR) is used to compensate for this issue.
A time-domain simulation need to be run in order to visualize the TDR. For this
purpose, the electromagnetic software ADS from Keysights® was used.
It should
be noted that the measurement for TDR calibration is taken without liquid in the
reservoir. The idea is that T3 = T1, which was known from the first calibration step.
Two simulations should be carried out: measurement and models. The former is just
the calibration measurement, connecting the transient voltage source on one end of
the transmission line leaving the other end open. The latter is the fitted models from
the calibration lines. In Figure 5.7, the TDR simulations are shown.
From the simulations, two voltages are obtained: VA(t) and VB(t). There are five
variables to be optimized: l1, l2, l3, l4 and l5 in order to minimize the squared error
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Mapping complex dielectric
23
B
A
Measurement
Ttotal
T1(l1)
T2(l2)
T1(l3)
T2(l4)
T1(l5)
Model
Time-domain simulation
Figure 3.3: ADS time-domain simulation for TDR correction. Ttotal is the measured
ABCD matrix of the device without liquid. Ti is the fitted model for each transmis-
sion line where the subscripts ’1’ and ’2’ refers to air and SU-8 slots respectively.
between the measurement and the model:
E =
T
∑
i=0
|VA(ti) −VB(ti)|2
(3.9)
Again, this optimization step is carried out manually.
The importance of having
physical reliable length is superior to a perfect fit.
3.4
Mapping complex dielectric
The transmission line properties γ3 and Z3 of the fluid region will be obtained from
de-embedding the lead transmission line with the corrected lengths. As the electric
field is not only propagating through the fluid but also the substrate, the effective
permittivity will be a combination of both. However, only the complex dielectric of
the fluid is within the scope of this project. Thus, another de-embedding step must be
added in order to obtain the complex dielectric and conductivity of the liquid under
observation.
From the previous steps, γ is fitted for both air and SU-8 line. Following this
expression:
ϵeff
r =
(ℑ{γ}c
2πf
)2
,
(3.10)
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methodology
Calibration Line  1
S-parameters 
ABCD parameters: TA
R1(f)  L1(f)  C1(f)  G1(f)
} }
}
}
}
Polynomial
 fitting
Rm(f) Lm(f)
Rm(f) Lm(f)
Manual
fitting
}
}
Cm1(f) Gm1(f)
l1  l2  l3
Manual
fitting
Cm2(f) Gm2(f)
Calibration Line 2
S-parameters 
ABCD parameters: TB
De-embeding air
T2 = T1
-1TBT1
-1
T1(l)
T2(l)
Measurement
Calibration Measurement
S-parameters 
ABCD parameters: Ttotal
T3 = T2
-1
 T1
-1 TtotalT1
-1 T2
-1
De-embeding air + SU-8
 length
R2(f)  L2(f)  C2(f)  G2(f)
R3(f)  L3(f)  C3(f)  G3(f)
 length
TDR
correction
S-parameters 
ADS simulation
Mapping 
dielectric
l1 l2 l3 l4 l5
Figure 3.4: Summary diagram chart of the calibration pipeline. Each block refers
to one measurement. The three calibration measurements on the left were used to
de-embed the measurement and map the dielectric.
where ℑ{γ} is the imaginary part of the propagation constant called phase constant,
c is the speed of light in vacuum and f the frequency. However, for lossy dielectrics,
this relation is only valid at high frequencies, as explained in (2.20), when it fulfills
RC ≪2ω2LC. Thus, the fringe effect factor k is calibrated so that ϵ
′
r matches the
effective permittivity obtained from γ at high frequencies.
Finally, the effective permittivity is a combination of the top (ϵr2) and bottom
(ϵr1) dielectrics depending on geometrical constrains. As for the first calibration, it
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Mapping complex dielectric
25
is assumed that ϵr2(f) = 1 for the air. Hence, from Equation (2.22), fused silica
properties can be obtained as follows:
ϵr1(f) = ϵeff
r (f) −1 −q2 ∗(ϵr2(f) −1)
q1
+ 1,
(3.11)
where q1 and q2 are geometry-related parameters which expressions can be found in
Equation (2.23) and (2.24), ϵeff
r
is the effective complex dielectric, ϵr2 is the complex
dielectric of air and f the frequency.
Once k and ϵr1(f) are calculated, the rest of the top material properties ϵr2(f)
can be obtained in the inverse manner:
ϵr2(f) = ϵeff
r
(f) −1 −q1 ∗(ϵr1(f) −1)
q2
+ 1.
(3.12)
Lastly, G0 is also a combination of the conductivity of the fused silica, the liquid
and the fringe effect. By assuming that the conductivity of the fused silica is σ0 = 0
S/m and the electric field strength is symmetric, the conductance G0 can be related
to the conductivity of the liquid like:
σ0 = 2G0
k
(3.13)
where k is the fringe effect constant.
At this point, after all the calibration steps, the complex dielectric and conduc-
tivity of the liquid under observation has been achieved. In Figure 3.4 the entire
calibration pipeline has been summarized into a diagram chart.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Chip design and
Fabrication
In this chapter, the design and fabrication of the microfluidic chip is described. The
wafer was processed with the support of DTU Nanolab staff and using DTU Nanolab’s
clean room facilities.
Thin film deposition
Lithography
Lithography 
Spin coating nLOF
Image exposure
PEB and Development 
Blank wafer
Cr + Au Deposition
Lift-off
Spin coating SU-8
Image exposure
PEB and Development
CPW  transmission lines
Reservoir
Figure 4.1: Diagram of the clean room process for fabricating the chip. The CPW
transmission lines were fabricated through lithography and thin film deposition pro-
cesses. The reservoir was fabricated by means of a lithography process.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Chip design and Fabrication
4.1
Wafer design
There are two main tasks when designing the layout of the wafer. The first task
involves designing the CPW to contain the electromagnetic field that allow obtaining
the dielectric properties of a liquid. The second task is to design a reservoir, which
confines the liquid on the transmission lines. The reservoir was made using photo
definable epoxy polymer called SU-8.
4.1.1
CPW design
Low-loss substrate such as fused silica is required in microwave applications. The
gap spacing of the conductors, 10 and 20 µm, were based on J. C. Booth’s exper-
imental results [19]. The characteristic impedance (Z0) must match the character-
istic impedance of the vector network analyzer (VNA). The standard characteristic
impedance for the VNA is 50 Ω. Therefore, the center conductor width is tuned using
the analytical expression for a CPW defined in (2.29). The parameters given to the
equation were: ϵ1 = 3.78 (fused silica), ϵ2 = 1 (air), h1 = 500 µm, h2 = 10000 µm,
t = 200 nm and g = [10, 20] µm. These parameters were based on the fabricated
CPW that will be explained in the next sections. The solution is given by Figure 4.2,
where the values chosen are 95 and 188 µm respectively. Since this calculation is a
rough approximation, the numbers were rounded to 100 and 200 µm.
100
200
40
50
60
70
Line width [µm]
Z0 [Ω]
50 Ω
10 µm
20 µm
Figure 4.2: Characteristic impedance, Z0, for each conductor geometry variation as
a function of the width of the center conductor for the given dielectric disposition.
Based on Chapter 3, two calibration CPW transmission lines must be included
for each conductor geometry variation. It is also of interest to create uncorrelated
data and give more robustness to the proposed methodology by designing different
CPW lengths. Hence, three more variations for each conductor geometry calibration
line were added. These variations consisted of 10, 15 and 20 mm transmission line
lengths.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Wafer design
29
In Figure 4.3, the wafer design is shown. The CPW transmission lines for the
first calibration step were placed on the left side of the wafer. They consisted of
two geometry variations and three length variations. To utilize the excess area of
the wafer, the variations were doubled, resulting in twelve transmission lines in total.
The CPW transmission lines for the second calibration step were placed on the right
side. They consisted of the two conductor geometry variations and the three length
variations in addition to the SU-8 layer on the CPW transmission lines. The main
chip was located in the right-mid area surrounded by dice lines. The circles were
designed to increase the photoresist area in contact with the chemical bath during
the lift-off process, which will be explained later in this chapter.
100 mm wafer
20 mm
10 mm
15 mm
10 mm
4 mm
20 um
200 um
450 um
10 um
100 um
225 um
Layer 1
Layer 2
Dice lines
Lift-off circles
Figure 4.3: Different lengths of CPW lines on a 100 mm wafer. Layer 1 represents
the layout of the metallization and Layer 2 represents the SU-8 layout on top of the
metallization.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Chip design and Fabrication
4.1.2
Reservoir design
A second dielectric was needed on top of the fused silica to keep the liquid confined
on the CPW transmission lines. The width of the liquid channel was designed to be
1 mm as a compromise between clogging issues and small liquid volumes. The inlet
and outlet were located at the extremes of the channel and were designed to be 2.25
mm in diameter. The reservoir was aligned in the middle of the transmission line
in order to keep a symmetric layout. Additionally, the surface area of the second
substrate was reduced by including empty circles and rectangles around the channel.
The purpose was to reduce the film stress which causes the SU-8 to delaminate. In
Figure 4.4, the microfluidic chip layout is depicted. The lines surrounding the chip
marks where it will be diced. The dimensions of the transmission line can be deducted
from Figure 4.3.
24 mm
27.5 mm
10 mm
1 mm
⌀2.25 mm
5 mm
Figure 4.4: Microfluidic chip for measuring dielectric spectroscopy of liquids. Two
CPW are used: 10 and 20 µm gaps. The chip dimensions are 24 × 27.5 mm. The
liquid channel width is 1 mm.
4.2
Fabrication
Wafer substrates for microwave applications required to be a low-loss dielectric. Fused
silica wafer with a thickness of 500 µm and a diameter of 100 mm was used in this
project. The fabrication process can be divided in three processes: CPW, reservoir
fabrication and sealing of the microfluidic chip.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Fabrication
31
4.2.1
Fabrication of the CPW transmission lines
The first step of the chip manufacturing process is to make the CPW on the fused
silica substrate. The CPW transmission lines are made using a lift-off process in the
clean room facilities. The lift-off process involves depositing a photoresist, which is
patterned according to the CPW structures that are desired to be metallized. After
patterning, the entire substrate is covered in metal through a metal evaporation
process.
The photoresist is then dissolved in a chemical bath thus lifting off the
metal on the photoresist, but leaving the metal that is on the substrate.
4.2.1.1
Deposit of photoresist
The first step of a lift-off process is to spincoat photoresist onto a blank substrate.
The thickness of the photoresist is defined by spin speed of the spin coater machine.
Figure 4.5a shows the relation between spin speed and film thickness for the selected
photoresist for patterning the CPW. DTU Nanolab recommends having a thickness
larger than five times the thickness of the metal, which in this project was designed
to be 200 nm. Thus, 2 µm thickness was suﬀicient.
2000
4000
6000
2
3
Spin Speed [rpm]
Film Thickness [µm]
(a)
Fitted curved
AZnLOF 2020
1000
2000
3000
4000
50
100
150
200
250
Spin Speed [rpm]
Film Thickness [µm]
(b)
SU-8 2075
Figure 4.5: Spin curves for (a) AZ nLOF 2020 and (b) SU-8 2075 resist for Gamma
UV and RCD8 spin coaters respectively.
The samples were measured by DTU
Nanolab staff.
4.2.1.2
Image exposure
Patterning the photoresist involves the use of ultraviolet light to transfer the layout
to a light-sensitive chemical material such as the photoresist. DTU facilities have
two methods available for µm resolution: mask and maskless aligners. The former
requires the fabrication of a mask that contains the pattern of the structure that
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Chip design and Fabrication
is going to be fabricated, whereas the latter is a movable laser that can write the
structures directly in the photoresist. Therefore, the maskless aligner method was
selected. Simplicity when iterating designs, and not relying on external suppliers are
the key reasons. As a drawback, it takes 25 minutes to expose the image instead of
less than a minute for the mask aligner.
The AZ nLOF 2020 resist used for patterning the CPW has a spectral sensitivity
from 310 nm up to 380 nm. There are two maskless aligners at DTU Nanolab that
fulfill the spectral sensitivity of the photoresist: MLA01 and MLA02 from Heidel-
berg®. The latter needs less time to exposure the image and thereby was the selected
machine to pattern the CPW.
Two parameters were used to control the MLA02. The dose, that controls the
energy of the incident light in the photoresist, and the defocus, that sets the distance
between the light source and the wafer. Hence, a dose-defocus test was carried out to
obtain the optimum parameters for patterning the CPW structures in the photoresist.
The dose sweep started from 300 mJ/cm2 until 400 mJ/cm2 with 50 mJ/cm2 step size.
The defocus test was starting from -2 until -15 with -2 step size where 0 sets the focus
at the top of the resist and -10 defocus shifts the focus upwards by 6 µm. In Figure 4.6,
two screenshots were taken from the dose-defocus test wafer after development. It can
be clearly seen that (a) has a perfect resist removal even on the edges in comparison
with (b) which shows poor results. The former dose-defocus parameters were used
during this project.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Microscope images for different dose and defocus. (a) Dose 400 mJ/cm2,
Defocus -15. (b) Dose 300 mJ/cm2, Defocus -9
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Fabrication
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Thin film deposition methods. (a) Sputtering, complete coverage. (b)
E-beam evaporation, line-of-sight coverage.
4.2.1.3
Deposit of metal
Metal deposition is needed to create CPW conductors. The thickness of the metal
layer must be suﬀicient not to peel off the wafer when contacting the probes. DTU
Nanolab suggested that 200 nm is suﬀicient for this kind of applications. Regarding
the choice of the metal, at microwave frequencies, gold is always the best choice due to
low losses. However, gold has a poor adhesion to fused silica. Thus, 5 nm Chromium
layer was deposited between the gold and fused silica to increase the adhesion.
There are two possible methods to deposit gold at DTU Nanolab: E-beam evap-
oration and sputtering. E-beam evaporation is called line of sight deposition. The
metal evaporated is deposited only on the top of the surfaces. Sputtering covers all
the surface, including the edges. There will always be an angle to the side walls of
the opened photoresist structures when doing cleanroom processing. The coverage
of such angles is less with E-beam evaporation, and as a result, E-beam evaporation
was used in this project to metallize the substrates. In Figure 4.7 the difference of
step coverage between both methods is depicted.
The thin film deposition was followed by a lift-off process consisting of dissolving
100 m
Air
20 m 
200 m 
Fused Silica
⌀40 m 
Figure 4.8: 2D electric field simulation for CPW. The dashed circle of 40 µm of
diameter indicates the area of interest.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Chip design and Fabrication
the photoresist. The wafers were submerged in chemical bath for approximately one
hour after which the CPW transmission lines were successfully present on the fused
silica wafer.
4.2.2
SU-8 reservoir
Finally, another lithography process was carried out to pattern the reservoir. In the
methodology, the electromagnetic wave was assumed to be contained in two layers.
Hence, the reservoir was designed to be suﬀiciently thick to contain the depth of the
electric field. The electric field for CPW with 20 µm gap and 200 µm was investi-
gated using the 2D electromagnetic software from Ansys® . In Figure 4.8, the results
are shown.
Most of the electric field is confined within 40 µm around the center
conductor. Consequently, the thickness of the reservoir was decided to be 100 µm.
SU-8 photoresist available at DTU Nanolab was selected since it possesses a thickness
range from 50 to 250 µm, as shown in Figure 4.5b.
The spectral sensitivity of the SU-8 ranges from 350 to 400 nm. Due to resist
thickness limitations in MLA02, MLA01 was used for patterning the reservoir. The
resolution requirements for the reservoir are two orders of magnitude larger that
for the CPW. As a result, there is no benefit in optimizing the dose and defocus
parameters to obtain high resolution patterns. A standard recipe suggested by DTU
Nanolab for 100 µm SU-8 was used.
10 mm
24 mm
Figure 4.9: Picture of the final chip fabricated at DTU Nanolab. The two CPW
transmission lines were visualized with the microscope and two screenshots were taken.
The reservoir width was measured to be 1 mm.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Fabrication
35
Completing the fabrication procedures outlined in this section resulted in a mi-
crofluidic chip that could be used for characterizing bacterial cells suspended in liquid.
The final microfluidic chip is shown in Figure 4.9.
4.2.3
Sealing of the microfluidic chip
The last step before measurements could be made on the microfluidic chip was to
ensure the sealing of the reservoir to facilitate the introduction of liquid sample. The
goal was to seal the open channel using a flat sheet gasket. A gasket needs to be
pressed suﬀiciently to make a tight seal.
Hence, two 3D printed structures were
designed and made to assist in.
First, two holes were drilled through the flat sheet gasket and aligned to the inlet
and outlet of the microfluidic chip. Then, based on the layout design of the chip,
two 3D structures were designed, as shown in Figure 4.10. The holder of the chip
contained two holes, where the head of the screws were located. These holes were
aligned to the thread of the lid, so when tightening the screws, the lid presses the
gasket down. Furthermore, inlet and outlet holes could be accessed by the top part
of the lid. The two CPW lines of the microfluidic chip were left open, so they could
be accessed by the probes.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Chip design and Fabrication
Holder
Lid
Chip
Inlet
Outlet
Probe
area
Probe
area
(a)
(b)
Screw thread
Screw thread
Screw head
Gasket
(c)
Figure 4.10: 3D drawing of the final device. (a) Top view. (b) Trimetric view, lid
separated from the holder for a better view. (c) Isometric view removing half section
from the lid and gasket.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental Methods
and Results
In this chapter, the experimental work is presented. First, the experimental setup was
calibrated using the novel methodology explained in Chapter 3. Then, three experi-
ments were carried out where different liquid samples were measured and discussed.
Lastly, results were further analyzed and compared to an analytical approach.
1
2
2
5
3
4
6
1. Syringe
2. Probes
3. VNA
4. Microscope
5. DUT
6. Waste test tube
Figure 5.1: Picture of the experimental setup. The microfluidic chip and 3D struc-
tures were assembled and located on the probe station. The inlet an outlet were
connected to the syringe and waste test tube respectively. The probes coming from
the VNA were contacting the chip using the microscope.
The experimental setup is shown in Figure 5.1. The device was sitting on the
grounded probe station converting CPW to CPWG. Tape was used to fix the 3D
structures, syringe and the waste test tube to the probe station.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Experimental Methods and Results
Coplanar probes with 150 µm pitch named Picoprobes from GGB Industries®
were used. In the background, the VNA 37397D lightning from Anritsu® can be
seen connected to the probes by coaxial cables. The S-parameters frequency range
measured by this equipment ranges from 40MHz to 60 GHz. For numerical stability
reasons of the proposed methodology, a narrower range from 500 MHz to 30 GHz
was used in this project. The calibration method used for moving the reference plane
to the tip of the probes is Short-Open-Load-Thru (SOLT). For that, the dedicated
calibration substrate (CS-5 from GGB Industries® ) was used.
Concerning the liquid interface, the inlet and outlet of the microfluidic chip were
connected to the syringe and waste test tube respectively. Hence, the microfluidic
109
1010
50
60
70
Frequency [Hz]
ℜ{Z0}
109
1010
20
40
60
Frequency [Hz]
ℜ{γ}
109
1010
−40
−20
0
Frequency [Hz]
ℑ{Z0}
109
1010
0
500
1000
Frequency [Hz]
ℑ{γ}
g = 10 µm l = 10 mm
g = 10 µm l = 15 mm
g = 10 µm l = 20 mm
g = 20 µm l = 10 mm
g = 20 µm l = 15 mm
g = 20 µm l = 20 mm
Figure 5.2: Characteristic impedance, Z0, and propagation constant, γ, is shown
as a function of frequency for three different line lengths: 10 mm, 15 mm and 20 mm
and two different gaps: 10 µm and 20 µm.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Calibrating the experimental setup
39
chip could be filled with liquid or emptied by means of the syringe.
5.1
Calibrating the experimental setup
The first step to perform the measurements involved calibrating the experimental
setup. This was performed using the on-chip calibration lines without liquid. As
explained in Chapter 3, three calibration measurements were required.
5.1.1
Calibration line 1: air
The goal of this calibration measurement was to characterize the air transmission
line. Different geometrical dimensions of CPW were fabricated in order to validate
the methodology. In total, six measurements were made, two different conductor ge-
ometries g = [10, 20] µm, and three different lengths l = [10, 15, 20] µm. In Figure 5.2,
the real and imaginary part of Z0 and γ for all the measurements are shown. It can
be seen that these parameters show invariance to the length of the transmission line.
However, noticeable differences arise from the two conductor geometries.
The imaginary part of the propagation constant γ or the so-called phase constant
is interesting. The phase constant depends on the effective permittivity of the di-
electric. As the six measurements share the same dielectric properties, no differences
are visualized. On the other hand, the characteristic impedance and the real part of
γ or attenuation constant, has a dependency on the conductor loss. Hence, for the
two different conductor geometries, two different responses were obtained. A lower
attenuation constant is seen for g = 20 µm lines. This is related to a wider center
conductor which leads to lower conductor loss. This effect is also seen in Z0 at low
frequencies, where the conductor loss is still significant. At infinite frequencies, Z0 is
converging to the low-loss value.
Lastly, these plots are in agreement with the analytical expressions that were used
in Chapter 4 to design the coplanar waveguides. At infinite frequencies, where the
conductor losses are no longer relevant, Z0 converges to 50 Ω, value that was aimed
by the chip design. Once that the experimental results show concordance with the
theory, the next step is to fit the RLGC model to characterize the air CPW.
In Figure 5.3, the RLGC model is depicted for g = 10 µm. Based on l = 10 mm,
the RLGC model was fitted as explained in Chapter 3. The polynomial degrees for
R1 and L1 were 6 and 7 respectively. The manual fitting for the Cole-Cole equation
was G0 = 0.001, ϵs = 2.84, ϵ∞= 2.74, τ = 1, k = 4.69 and β = 0.4.
The same process was repeated for the g = 20 µm case. In Figure 5.4, the lumped-
elements per unit length are depicted. Using the measurement from l = 10 mm, the
RLGC model was fitted.
The polynomial degrees for R1 and L1 were 4 and 10
respectively. The manual fitting for the Cole-Cole model was G0 = 0.002, ϵs = 2.84,
ϵ∞= 2.8, τ = 80 ps, k = 4.69 and β = 0.8.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Experimental Methods and Results
109
1010
4
6
Frequency [Hz]
R [kΩ/m]
109
1010
300
350
400
Frequency [Hz]
L [nH/m]
109
1010
0
0.2
0.4
Frequency [Hz]
G [Siem/m]
109
1010
100
110
120
130
140
Frequency [Hz]
C [pF/m]
l = 10 mm
l = 15 mm
l = 20 mm
RLGC fitted model
Figure 5.3: Lumped-elements per unit length of the air transmission line. The solid
lines represent the different CPW lengths for a given conductor geometry g = 10 µm.
The dashed lines represent the fitted model.
5.1.2
Calibration line 2: SU-8
The second step in the calibrating procedure was to obtain the lumped-elements per
unit length for the SU-8 transmission line. Six measurements were taken during this
calibration step. Three different lengths of the transmission line and two different
conductor geometries. Using the fitted RLGC models shown in the previous section
and the lengths of the transmission line from the layout design, the air transmission
lines were de-embedded, as described in Chapter 3.
The results for g = 10 µm are shown in Figure 5.5. The series resistance R2(f)
and the series inductance L2(f) were taken from the previous calibration step, as
it is assumed to be permittivity independent.
The plots show concordance with
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Calibrating the experimental setup
41
the presented assumption. In addition, the shunt conductance G2(f) and the shunt
capacitance C2(f) were manually fitted resulting in the following values: G0 = 0.01,
ϵs = 4.2, ϵ∞= 3.5, τ = 146 ps and k = 4.69 and β = 0.2.
In Figure 5.6, consistent results for g = 20 µm are depicted. The manual fitting
results in G0 = 0.01 S/m, ϵs = 4.1, ϵ∞= 3.7, τ = 146 ps and k = 4.69 and β = 0.5
whereas the series elements are assumed to be constant, as can be reassured in the
plots.
Finally, both air and SU-8 fitted Cole-Cole models are compared in Table 5.1.
SU-8 transmission line presents a higher static permittivity than air, which is the
expected result.
109
1010
2
3
4
5
Frequency [Hz]
R [kΩ/m]
109
1010
250
300
350
Frequency [Hz]
L [nH/m]
109
1010
0
0.5
1
Frequency [Hz]
G [Siem/m]
109
1010
100
110
120
130
140
Frequency [Hz]
C [pF/m]
l = 10 mm
l = 15 mm
l = 20 mm
RLGC fitted model
Figure 5.4: Lumped-elements per unit length of the air transmission line. The solid
lines represent the different CPW lengths for a given conductor geometry g = 20 µm.
The dashed lines represent the fitted model.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Experimental Methods and Results
5.1.3
Calibration measurement: TDR
After the first two calibration lines were measured and the lumped-elements per unit
length were obtained, the third calibrating process was adjusting the lengths of each
transmission line model due to discontinuity effects.
In order to carry out this calibration, a measurement of the microfluidic chip
without any liquid was made. The length of each transmission line was tuned to
match the model and the measurement. The results were: l1 = 5.1 mm, l2 = 4.5 mm,
l3 = 1 mm, l4 = 4.5 mm and l5 = 5.2 mm.
In Figure 5.7, the comparison between the model and measurement is shown. For
109
1010
4
6
Frequency [Hz]
R [kΩ/m]
109
1010
300
350
400
450
Frequency [Hz]
L [nH/m]
109
1010
0
1
2
Frequency [Hz]
G [Siem/m]
109
1010
140
160
180
200
Frequency [Hz]
C [pF/m]
l = 10 mm
l = 15 mm
l = 20 mm
RLGC fitted model
Figure 5.5: Lumped-elements per unit length of the SU-8 transmission line. The
solid lines represent the different CPW lengths for a given conductor geometry g = 10
µm. The dashed lines represent the fitted model.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Calibrating the experimental setup
43
g = 10 µm case, both the measurement and the model are in agreement. On the
other hand, for the g = 20 µm case, there are discrepancies when transitioning from
air to SU-8. These discrepancies are discussed in the next section.
5.1.4
Obtaining liquid dielectric properties
In the previous sections, the three calibrating steps were conducted and discussed for
two different conductor geometries. However, the results were expressed as effective
dielectric. One last processing step was needed to map the effective dielectric to the
109
1010
0
2
4
6
8
Frequency [Hz]
R [kΩ/m]
109
1010
250
300
350
Frequency [Hz]
L [nH/m]
109
1010
0
1
2
Frequency [Hz]
G [Siem/m]
109
1010
140
160
180
200
Frequency [Hz]
C [pF/m]
l = 10 mm
l = 15 mm
l = 20 mm
RLGC fitted model
Figure 5.6: Lumped-elements per unit length of the SU-8 transmission line. The
solid lines represent the different CPW lengths for a given conductor geometry g = 20
µm. The dashed lines represent the fitted model.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Experimental Methods and Results
Material
Gap [µm]
G0 [S/m]
ϵeff
s /ϵ0
ϵeff
∞/ϵ0
τ [ps]
β
k
Air
10
0.001
2.84
2.74
40
0.5
4.69
Air
20
0.002
2.84
2.8
80
0.8
4.69
SU-8
10
0.01
4.2
3.5
146
0.2
4.69
SU-8
20
0.01
4.1
3.7
146
0.5
4.69
Table 5.1: Effective Cole-Cole parameters for the two CPW lines with different gaps.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
1
1.5
Time [ns]
Voltage [V]
(a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
1
1.5
Time [ns]
(b)
Measurement
Model
Figure 5.7: TDR simulation comparing model and measurement. (a) Gap = 10 µm.
(b) Gap = 20 µm.
desired liquid dielectric properties.
Firstly, fringe effect constant k was obtained. The relative effective permittivity
at high frequencies using the γ approach in (3.10) has to match the Cole-Cole relative
effective permittivity at high frequencies, as explained in the methodology. In Fig-
ure 5.8 an illustration of this approach is shown. The Cole-Cole effective permittivity
with adjusted k = 4.67 is in agreement for both conductor geometries. As a result,
this factor was used in the previous calibrating steps to fit the Cole-Cole parameters
of the calibration lines.
Lastly, the fused silica dielectric properties were obtained using the analytical
approach in (3.11) and the air CPW experimental results. The relative permittivity
of air was assumed to be 1. Hence, the rest of the top dielectrics could be mapped
using (3.12) assuming that the fused silica relative permittivity is experimentally
obtained.
Figure 5.9 and Table 5.2 show the results of the mapping procedure. The fused
silica results are consistent for both conductor geometries whereas the SU-8 presents
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Calibrating the experimental setup
45
discrepancies. The g = 20 µm geometry presents lower relative permittivity. This
correlates with the discrepancies shown in the third calibration step for that geometry.
As wider gaps between conductors lead to higher electric field depths, the electromag-
netic wave is travelling through a three layer dielectric, fused silica, SU-8 and air,
resulting in lower effective dielectric. On the other hand, the third calibration mea-
surement was made with the 3D structures and microfluidic chip assembled. Hence,
109
1010
2
4
6
8
10
Frequency [Hz]
ϵeff
r
(a)
109
1010
2
4
6
8
10
Frequency [Hz]
ϵeff
r
(b)
FS from γ
FS from Cole-Cole
SU-8 from γ
SU-8 from Cole-Cole
Figure 5.8: Effective permittivity calibration illustration. (a) Gap = 10 µm. (b)
Gap = 20 µm.
109
1010
0
0.1
0.2
Frequency [Hz]
ϵ
′′
r
109
1010
3
3.5
4
4.5
Frequency [Hz]
ϵ
′
r
Fused Silica g=10 µm
Fused Silica g=20 µm
SU-8 g=10 µm
SU-8 g=20 µm
Figure 5.9: Complex dielectric de-embededded using air and fused silica results.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Experimental Methods and Results
the electromagnetic wave was travelling through fused silica, SU-8 and PLA, material
of the 3D printed structures. Therefore, SU-8 RLGC model for g = 20 µm is not in
agreement with the experimental results. Conclusively, geometry conductor g = 10
µm is going to be used in the experiments.
Material
Gap [µm]
σ0 [S/m]
ϵs/ϵ0
ϵ∞/ϵ0
τ [ps]
β
Fused Silica
10
0.0004
4.68
4.47
40
0.5
Fused Silica
20
0.0008
4.67
4.55
80
0.8
SU-8
10
0.004
3.69
2.3
146
0.2
SU-8
20
0.004
3.5
2.7
146
0.5
Table 5.2: Mapped Cole-Cole parameters for the two calibration lines with different
gaps.
5.2
Conductivity experiment
This experiment consisted of measuring three different water-based conductivities to
validate that the experimental setup can accurately measure the conductivity of a
liquid. Conductivity in a water-based liquid is directly related to its salinity. When
salts dissolve in water they form ionic particles with positive or negative charge that
contribute to the conductivity of the medium. Hence, in order to get different conduc-
tivities, different concentrations of Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) were dissolved in
demineralized water. For measuring the conductivity, a handheld conductivity meter
VWR® HCO 304 was used. The list of measurements for this experiment were:
• Calibration measurement. No liquid is introduced in the reservoir.
• Demineralized water. σ0 = 0.02 S/m. T ≈20◦C.
• 1:7 1xPBS in demineralized water. σ0 = 0.214 S/m. T ≈20◦C.
• PBS. σ0 = 1.52 S/m. T ≈20◦C.
In Figure 5.10, the results for the experiment are shown.
The resistance and
inductance are not depicted since the dielectric only affects the shunt lumped-elements.
Furthermore, the conductance is plotted in a log-log axis in order to visualize better
the low frequencies, where the conductivity of the media plays an important role.
The calibration measurement is compared with the air RLGC model fitted in the
previous section. The experimentally measured capacitance is in agreement with the
model. On the other hand, the water-based experimental results have to be fitted.
The capacitance is in agreement with the theory: different concentration of salin-
ity are not affecting the permanent dipole moment of water molecules. However, the
main change occurs in the DC conductance. The low frequency conductance increases
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Silver-coated beads experiment
47
109
1010
10−4
10−2
100
102
Frequency [Hz]
G [S/m]
109
1010
0
0.5
1
1.5
Frequency [Hz]
C [nF/m]
σ0 = 0.02 S/m
σ0 = 0.214 S/m
σ0 = 1.55 S/m
Air
σ0 = 0.02 S/m fit
σ0 = 0.214 S/m fit
σ0 = 1.55 S/m fit
Air fit
Figure 5.10: Shunt lumped-elements per unit length for the conductivity experiment.
Solid lines represent the experimental results whereas dashed lines represent the fitted
model.
as expected when the salinity of the medium increases. In Table 5.3, the experimen-
tal results are compared to dielectric parameters of water at 20◦C available in the
literature [24]. The static relative permittivity obtained using the proposed method-
ology presents a relative error of less than 1%. Conclusively, another indication of
the validity of the methodology presented in this work is shown.
Sample
σ0 [S/m]
ϵs/ϵ0
ϵ∞/ϵ0
τ [ps]
β
Demineralized water
0.149
79.81
6.75
10
1
1:10 1xPBS
0.319
79.81
6.75
10
1
1xPBS
1.684
79.81
6.75
10
1
Literature [24]
80.21
5.70
9.37
1
Table 5.3: Summary table for the Cole-Cole parameters after mapping the effective
permittivity to the liquid.
5.3
Silver-coated beads experiment
In this experiment, particles with a well-define shape, size and dielectric properties
were suspended in a host medium and measured. The particles were purchased from
Cospheric® and can be found as ID: SiO2MS-AG-4.1 2.0µm. The main properties
are: 2 µm of diameter, 85 nm silver coating, spherical shape and a coeﬀicient of
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Experimental Methods and Results
variation of less that 10%. The silver beads were counted using BactoBox® which
also functions as a particle counter, so the concentration of beads was known. The
samples prepared for this experiment were:
• 1:10 1xPBS in demineralized water. σ0 = 0.19 S/m. T ≈20◦.
• 1:10 1xPBS in demineralized water with 1 · 106 silver-coated particles/mL. T ≈
20◦.
• 1:10 1xPBS in demineralized water 1:10 1xPBS with 2 · 106 silver-coated parti-
cles/mL. T ≈20◦.
In Figure 5.11, the experimental results are shown. A slight difference can be seen
on the capacitance per unit length. It is diﬀicult to assess whether this difference is
within the variance of the experimental setup or comes from the silver-coated inclu-
sions. It is important to note that there are external factors affecting the variance.
For instance, the conductivity and permittivity of the water is temperature dependent
[24]. Furthermore, each sample was prepared independently. Consequently, the small
differences found in the fitted Cole-Cole parameters shown in Table 5.4 are inconclu-
sive. As a result, a higher concentration of particles is needed to relate the mixture
theory with the experimental data due to the variance involved in the experiment.
109
1010
100
101
102
Frequency [Hz]
G [S/m]
109
1010
0.5
1
1.5
Frequency [Hz]
C [nF/m]
Water
106 silver beads
2 · 106 silver beads
Water fit
106 silver beads fit
2 · 106 silver beads fit
Figure 5.11: Shunt lumped-elements per unit length for the silver-coated beads
experiment. Solid lines represent the experimental results whereas dashed lines rep-
resent the fitted model.
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Bacteria experiment
49
Sample
σ0 [S/m]
ϵs/ϵ0
ϵ∞/ϵ0
τ [ps]
β
Water
0.235
79.4
6.86
12
0.9
106 silver beads
0.256
80.59
6.86
12
0.9
2 · 106 silver beads
0.213
80.99
6.86
12
0.9
Table 5.4: Cole-Cole parameters of the liquid samples fitted from the experimental
results from the silver-coated beads experiment.
5.4
Bacteria experiment
The final goal of this project was to characterize bacterial cells suspended in liquid.
The previous experiments have given insights about the experimental setup. Hence,
all this knowledge was used to prepare the bacteria samples. Bifidobacterium animalis
subsp. lacti was selected due to its poor growth at conditions without any oxygen
present and therefore its high suspension stability during the measurements [25].
The host medium used was De Man, Rogosa, and Sharpe (MRS) broth which is
a selective culture medium to grow Lactobacilli. The sample preparation consisted of
adding 1 g of dry powder bacteria to 10 mL MRS. The bacteria concentration was
measured to be around 1010 mL−1 by using BactoBox®. Then, the test tube was
shaken until all the bacteria were dissolved in the MRS broth. Lastly, the sample was
run through a 10 µm filter to get rid of undesired particles.
The measured samples during this experiment were:
• MRS medium. σ0 = 0.98 S/m. T ≈20◦.
• MRS medium diluted in 10 mL of 1:10 PBS. σ0 = 0.29 S/m. T ≈20◦.
• MRS medium + 1 g bacteria. Concentration ≈1010 mL−1. T ≈20◦.
• MRS medium + 1 g bacteria diluted in 10 mL of 1:10 PBS. Concentration ≈
109 mL−1. T ≈20◦.
The experimental results are depicted in Figure 5.12 and its fitted Cole-Cole pa-
rameters are shown in Table 5.5. It is evident that there is a clear difference between
the host medium and its diluted version. The conductance per unit length at low fre-
quencies is lower for the diluted samples. This is due to the ion concentration of MRS
which is much higher than PBS. On the right side, the capacitance per unit length
also varies. MRS shows a polarization phenomenon at low frequencies whereas the
dilution remains steady. This can be explained by the MRS content which provides
carbon, nitrogen and vitamins for bacterial growth. This complex mixture shows the
limitations of using the one-pole Cole-Cole model.
Furthermore, there is also a clear difference between the high concentration of
bacteria and its host medium. The bacteria sample presents a lower conductance and
capacitance per unit length. Later in this chapter, the data will be analyzed using
the mixture theory.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Experimental Methods and Results
109
1010
100
101
102
Frequency [Hz]
G [S/m]
109
1010
0.5
1
1.5
Frequency [Hz]
C [nF/m]
MRS
Bacteria
MRS 1:10
Bacteria 1:10
MRS fit
Bacteria fit
MRS 1:10 fit
Bacteria 1:10 fit
Figure 5.12: Shunt lumped-elements per unit length for the bacteria experiment.
Solid lines represent the experimental results whereas dashed lines represent the fitted
model.
Finally, lowering the concentration of bacteria seems to play an important role in
the results. Both diluted samples, with and without bacteria, are overlapping due to
the resolution of the experimental setup being reached.
Sample
σ0 [S/m]
ϵs/ϵ0
ϵ∞/ϵ0
τ [ps]
β
MRS medium
1.06
74.25
4.29
15
0.7
Bacteria
0.93
70.68
4.88
16
0.7
MRS medium 1:10
0.33
76.63
6.86
12
0.8
Bacteria 1:10
0.33
76.63
6.86
12
0.8
Table 5.5: Cole-Cole parameters of the liquid samples fitted from the experimental
results from the bacteria beads experiment.
5.5
Discussion of the conductivity experiment
The different host media used in the experiments were also measured using HCO
304 from VWR®. This device is based on two pole graphite measurement cell. An
alternating current at kHz range is applied, and the resultant voltage is related to
conductivity by geometry constrains. It can measure up to 10 S/m.
In Figure 5.13, the methodology used in this project is compared to the commer-
cially available handheld conductivity meter. The samples were fitted using linear
==PAGE:61==
5.6 Mixture theory analysis
51
regression showing great linearity despite the fact that it was not the main objective
of this project. The results validate the methodology presented in this work, as it
is not only measuring the complex dielectric at RF and microwave frequencies but
giving reliable conductivity of the media whose impact arises at lower frequencies.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
HCO σ0 [S/m]
This project σ0 [S/m]
y = 1.0426x + 0.0702
Samples
Figure 5.13: The derived conductivity from using the methodology presented in this
thesis versus the conductivity measured with a commercially available conductivity
meter. The graph shows great alignment between the two methods.
5.6
Mixture theory analysis
Results for silver beads and bacteria inclusions were shown in the previous sections.
The former experiment was declared inconclusive due to the resolution of the exper-
imental setup. In this section, the mixture theory described in Chapter 2 is related
to the bacteria experimental results in order to draw relevant conclusions.
There are multiple unknowns concerning electrical properties and size of the bacte-
ria measured in this project. The only known parameter is the bacteria concentration
measured with Bactobox®. As a consequence, the qualitative analysis increases in
complexity. A literature search was performed to find relevant values of the complex
permittivity of cytoplasm and membrane as well as sizes.
Bifidobacterim animalis is a gram-positive and rod-shape bacterium [25]. Another
species from the same family, Lactobacilli, ranges 0.6 −0.9 µm across by 1.5 −6 µm
long [26]. For gram-positive bacteria, the outer membrane consists of 30-100 nm of
peptidoglycan and approximately 8 nm of lipid membrane [27, 28]. The peptidoglycan
has a high conductivity and permittivity (ϵr = 60, σ ≈3.3 S/m) [29] whereas the lipid
membrane acts as an isolator (ϵr ≈5.5) [30]. The cytoplasm is composed of water
(80%), salts and various organic molecules, therefore a slightly lower permittivity
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Experimental Methods and Results
than water is assumed. Likewise, the cytoplasm has a relaxation time, which can be
extracted from the experimental results.
Figure 5.14 depicts the comparison between experimental fitted data and mixture
theory. In Table 5.6, the values used in the mixture analytical expression are shown.
The complex dielectric of the membrane is accounting for peptidoglycan and lipid
membrane, therefore a weighted average from the data available in the literature was
selected. Regarding the cytoplasm, the permittivity and conductivity were tuned to
fit the experimental data, based on its high water content.
Mixture element
σ0 [S/m]
ϵs/ϵ0
ϵ∞/ϵ0
τ [ps]
β
Cytoplasm
0.3
60
6.75
18
1
Membrane
2.3
40
Host medium
1.06
74.25
4.29
15
0.7
Table 5.6: Summary table for the values required to calculate the complex permit-
tivity of the mixture ϵmix. The thickness of the membrane is d = 50 nm and the
radius of the bacterium is R + d = 1.6 µm.
The experimental fitted results show agreement when compared to the mixture
theory. The cytoplasm presents lower conductivity and permittivity than the host
109
1010
20
30
40
Frequency [Hz]
ϵ
′′/ϵ0
109
1010
20
40
60
Frequency [Hz]
ϵ
′/ϵ0
Host medium
Mixture experimental ϕ = 1010 mL−1
Mixture analytical ϕ = 1010 mL−1
Figure 5.14: Comparison between analytical and experimental results. The complex
permittivity follows the form ϵ = ϵ
′ −jϵ
′′ and ϵ0 is the permittivity of free-space. The
host medium and mixture refer to MRS and bacteria mixture experimental fitted
results respectively. The dashed line refers to the analytical result of the mixture. ϕ
indicates the bacteria concentration.
==PAGE:63==
5.6 Mixture theory analysis
53
medium.
At RF and Microwave frequencies, the membrane barely influences the
mixture response. Consequently, a lower imaginary and real part of the permittivity
of the mixture is seen in the experimental fitted results.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions
This project aimed to characterize bacterial cells suspended in liquid by means of
dielectric spectroscopy at radiofrequency and microwave frequencies.
During the
project, a novel methodology that determines the electrical properties of liquids using
coplanar waveguides was presented. Furthermore, a microfluidic chip was designed
and fabricated using the facilities at DTU Nanolab. Finally, it was found that par-
ticles and bacteria inclusions in host media can be characterized by analyzing their
dielectric properties.
In Chapter 2, the analytical expressions for determining the permittivity of inclu-
sions suspended in a host media were introduced. In addition, the transmission line
theory was related to the permittivity of the surrounding dielectric. More specifically,
the geometrical constraints of coplanar waveguides were linked to the transmission
line theory.
In Chapter 3, a novel methodology for measuring the frequency dependent di-
electric properties of a liquid was described. The methodology was based on three
calibration steps. The first two steps were the characterization of the transmission
lines of air and SU-8.
The third step was to account for minor electrical length
corrections using time domain reflectometry. Finally, it was explained how the di-
electric properties of a liquid could be precisely obtained after performing the three
calibration steps.
In Chapter 4, the microfluidic chip was designed with consideration to the re-
quirements of the novel methodology developed in Chapter 3. Additionally, all the
processes accomplished during the fabrication of the chip at DTU Nanolab clean room
were outlined. Finally, a solution on how to interface between the microfluidic chip
and the liquid was presented by using custom 3D printed structures and a sealing
gasket.
Three different experiments were carried out and discussed in Chapter 5. First,
the three calibration steps from the novel methodology described in Chapter 3 were
applied to obtain the dielectric properties of the liquid.
The goal of the first experiment was to validate whether the experimental setup
proposed in this thesis could accurately measure the conductivity of a liquid. Three
different water-based solutions with different conductivities were prepared, and it
was shown that the approach presented in this project gives the conductivity with
a high degree of accuracy when compared to a commercially available conductivity
meter. The second experiment concerned measuring on silver-coated beads with well-
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Conclusions
defined dielectric properties and size to validate the experimental setup. It was found
that the experimental setup did not have suﬀicient resolution to work with samples
that had a concentration of approximately 106 particles/mL due to the small volume
ratio of the particles to the liquid. Consequently, higher concentrations were used
in the third experiment. The purpose of the third experiment was to characterize
the dielectric properties of bacterial cells.
A high concentration of bacterial cells
suspended in liquid were measured and characterized. The experimental results were
compared to an analytical approach.
Data available in the literature for the size
and dielectric properties of the membrane and cytoplasm for similar bacteria species
were used as input to obtain analytical results.
Accounting for small differences
between values available in literature, and the actual bacteria used in this project, the
results showed strong agreement between the analytical model and the experimentally
derived measurements validating the methodology developed in the project.
Conclusively, it has been demonstrated how a novel methodology can be imple-
mented to accurate characterize the dielectric properties and size of the membrane
and cytoplasm of bacteria suspended in liquid. Furthermore, it was also demonstrated
that RF and microwave frequency band allows probing at the cytoplasm.
Future work would involve using the proposed experimental setup and methodol-
ogy presented in this thesis to solve state-of-the-art challenges within impedance flow
cytometry. As addressed in the introduction, these challenges particularly concern
accurate classification of heat-treated cells, e.g. heat-treated E. coli cells, which is
not possible without using the proposed work because of the necessity to probe into
the degraded cytoplasm of the cells to classify them correctly. This is achievable by
using RF and microwave characterization.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Shady Gawad, Laurent Schild, and P.H. Renaud. “Micromachined impedance
spectroscopy flow cytometer for cell analysis and particle sizing.” In: Lab on a
chip 1 (October 2001), pages 76–82. doi: 10.1039/b103933b.
[2]
Petra Levin and Esther Angert. “Small but Mighty: Cell Size and Bacteria.”
In: Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 7 (June 2015). doi: 10.1101/
cshperspect.a019216.
[3]
Marco Crescentini et al. “A Low-Noise Transimpedance Amplifier for BLM-
Based Ion Channel Recording.” In: Sensors 16.5 (2016). issn: 1424-8220. doi:
10.3390/s16050709. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/16/5/709.
[4]
Shady Gawad et al. “Impedance spectroscopy using maximum length sequences:
Application to single cell analysis.” In: Review of Scientific Instruments 78.5
(2007), page 054301. doi: 10.1063/1.2737751. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
1063/1.2737751. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2737751.
[5]
Xiao Ma et al. “Sensitivity Analysis for Ultra-Wideband 2-Port Impedance
Spectroscopy of a Live Cell.” In: IEEE Journal of Electromagnetics, RF and
Microwaves in Medicine and Biology 4.1 (2020), pages 37–44. doi: 10.1109/
JERM.2019.2921221.
[6]
Christian Vinther Bertelsen et al. “Investigating the Use of Impedance Flow Cy-
tometry for Classifying the Viability State of E. coli.” In: Sensors 20.21 (2020).
issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s20216339. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-
8220/20/21/6339.
[7]
Sarah Huffer et al. “Role of Alcohols in Growth, Lipid Composition, and Mem-
brane Fluidity of Yeasts, Bacteria, and Archaea.” In: Applied and Environmen-
tal Microbiology 77.18 (2011), pages 6400–6408. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00694-11.
eprint: https://journals.asm.org/doi/pdf/10.1128/AEM.00694-11. url:
https://journals.asm.org/doi/abs/10.1128/AEM.00694-11.
[8]
Shigenobu Mitsuzawa, Shigeru Deguchi, and Koki Horikoshi. “Cell structure
degradation in Escherichia coli and Thermococcus sp. strain Tc-1-95 associated
with thermal death resulting from brief heat treatment.” In: FEMS Microbiology
Letters 260.1 (July 2006), pages 100–105. issn: 0378-1097. doi: 10.1111/j.
1574- 6968.2006.00301.x. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/femsle/
==PAGE:68==
58
Bibliography
article-pdf/260/1/100/19121022/260-1-100.pdf. url: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00301.x.
[9]
A. Sihvola. “Electromagnetic mixing formulas and applications.” English. In:
Electromagnetic Waves Series 47. United Kingdom: Institute of Electrical En-
gineers, 1999. Chapter 2, pages 20–22.
[10]
Friedrich Kremer. “Dielectric spectroscopy–yesterday, today and tomorrow.” In:
Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids 305 (July 2002), pages 1–9. doi: 10.1016/
S0022-3093(02)01083-9.
[11]
James Clerk Maxwell. A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. Volume 1. Cam-
bridge Library Collection - Physical Sciences. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511709333.
[12]
A. Sihvola. “Electromagnetic mixing formulas and applications.” English. In:
Electromagnetic Waves Series 47. United Kingdom: Institute of Electrical En-
gineers, 1999. Chapter 3, page 44.
[13]
Koji Asami. “Characterization of heterogeneous systems by dielectric spectroscopy.”
In: Progress in Polymer Science 27.8 (2002), pages 1617–1659. issn: 0079-6700.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079- 6700(02)00015- 1. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079670002000151.
[14]
David M Pozar. “Microwave engineering; 3rd ed.” In: Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2005.
Chapter 2, pages 49–50. url: https://cds.cern.ch/record/882338.
[15]
“Conventional Coplanar Waveguide.” In: Coplanar Waveguide Circuits, Com-
ponents, and Systems. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2001. Chapter 2, pages 11–86.
isbn: 9780471224754. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/0471224758.ch2.
[16]
U. Schwerthoeffer, R. Weigel, and D. Kissinger. “A highly sensitive glucose
biosensor based on a microstrip ring resonator.” In: 2013 IEEE MTT-S In-
ternational Microwave Workshop Series on RF and Wireless Technologies for
Biomedical and Healthcare Applications (IMWS-BIO). 2013, pages 1–3. doi:
10.1109/IMWS-BIO.2013.6756148.
[17]
K.B. Yu et al. “Accurate microwave resonant method for complex permittivity
measurements of liquids [biological].” In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave The-
ory and Techniques 48.11 (2000), pages 2159–2164. doi: 10.1109/22.884209.
[18]
David M Pozar. Microwave engineering; 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2005. url:
https://cds.cern.ch/record/882338.
[19]
Jochem Roelvink, Samir Trabelsi, and Stuart O. Nelson. “A Planar Transmission-
Line Sensor for Measuring the Microwave Permittivity of Liquid and Semisolid
Biological Materials.” In: IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measure-
ment 62.11 (2013), pages 2974–2982. doi: 10.1109/TIM.2013.2265453.
[20]
C. A. E. Little et al. “Modeling electrical double-layer effects for microfluidic
impedance spectroscopy from 100 kHz to 110 GHz.” English. In: Lab on a Chip
17.15 (2017). Cited By :17, pages 2674–2681. url: www.scopus.com.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
59
[21]
Filippo Costa et al. “Electromagnetic Characterisation of Materials by Using
Transmission/Reflection (T/R) Devices.” In: Electronics 6.4 (2017). issn: 2079-
9292. doi: 10.3390/electronics6040095. url: https://www.mdpi.com/
2079-9292/6/4/95.
[22]
M. J. Degerstrom, B. K. Gilbert, and E. S. Daniel. “Accurate resistance, in-
ductance, capacitance, and conductance (RLCG) from uniform transmission
line measurements.” In: 2008 IEEE-EPEP Electrical Performance of Electronic
Packaging. 2008, pages 77–80. doi: 10.1109/EPEP.2008.4675881.
[23]
Jianmin Zhang et al. “Causal RLGC(f) Models for Transmission Lines From
Measured S-Parameters.” In: IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compati-
bility 52.1 (2010), pages 189–198. doi: 10.1109/TEMC.2009.2035055.
[24]
Udo Kaatze. “Electromagnetic Wave Interactions with Water and Aqueous
Solutions.” In: Electromagnetic Aquametry: Electromagnetic Wave Interaction
with Water and Moist Substances. Edited by Klaus Kupfer. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pages 15–37. isbn: 978-3-540-26491-0. doi:
10.1007/3-540-26491-4_2. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-26491-
4_2.
[25]
Mikkel Jungersen et al. “The Science behind the Probiotic Strain Bifidobac-
terium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12®.” In: Microorganisms 2.2 (2014), pages 92–
110. issn: 2076-2607. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms2020092. url: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2076-2607/2/2/92.
[26]
Fatih Ozogul and Imen Hamed. “Lactic Acid Bacteria: Lactobacillus spp.: Lac-
tobacillus acidophilus.” In: Reference Module in Food Science. Elsevier, 2016.
isbn: 978-0-08-100596-5. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100596-
5.00852-0. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780081005965008520.
[27]
Anne Mai-Prochnow et al. “Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria differ
in their sensitivity to cold plasma.” In: Scientific Reports 6 (December 2016),
page 38610. doi: 10.1038/srep38610.
[28]
Jonathan Lombard. “Once upon a time the cell membranes: 175 years of cell
boundary research.” In: Biology direct 9 (December 2014), page 32. doi: 10.
1186/s13062-014-0032-7.
[29]
Ralph Hölzel. “Non-invasive determination of bacterial single cell properties
by electrorotation.” In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell
Research 1450.1 (1999), pages 53–60. issn: 0167-4889. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0167-4889(99)00036-1. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0167488999000361.
[30]
Wei Bai, Ke-Seng Zhao, and K Asami. “Dielectric properties of E. coli cell as
simulated by the three-shell spheroidal model.” In: Biophysical chemistry 122
(August 2006), pages 136–42. doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2006.03.004.
==PAGE:70==
