==PAGE:1==
CO2 for CO2
Optoacoustic CO2 sensing with gas­filled
hollow­core fiber lasers
Master Thesis
DTU Fotonik
Department of photonics engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
CO2 for CO2
Optoacoustic CO2 sensing with gas­filled hollow­core fiber lasers
Master Thesis
January, 2022
By
Xinxi Zeng
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Xinxi Zeng, 2022
Published by:
DTU, Department of Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Pl., Building 343, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Neural Devices and Gas Photonics group,
Department of Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Kongens Lyngby, January 28th 2022
Xinxi Zeng s192175
CO2 for CO2
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Over the past one and half century, the global emissions of greenhouse gas (GHG) has been
rising continuously across sectors and sub­sectors. Amongst various well­known GHGs, carbon
dioxide (CO2) gas is considered to be the main source of the greenhouse effect. Thus, it is
imperative to develop a system for monitoring the concentration of CO2 in order to acquire a
better understanding of the impacts brought by CO2, and in the meantime, explore the ways of
controlling carbon emission.
In this work, a CO2 detection system based on photoacoustic (PA) process is proposed. The ex­
citation source for the PA signal is Raman laser at center wavelength of 1946 nm generated from
stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) process with a 1533 nm custom­made fiber laser emitting
at repetition rate of 8.7 KHz. The SRS process takes place in a nested anti­resonance hollow
core fiber (ARHCF) filled with CO2 gas with adjustable pressure in the gas cells. The generated
Raman laser is then guided into the PA cell with CO2 gas diluted in argon (Ar) gas. for PA signal
generation. Generated signal is collected by a microphone and processed by a lock­in amplifier.
The characterization of the laser system including the pump laser and CO2 filled ARHCF has
proven that the laser setting has enabled sufficient suppression of higher­order Stokes so that
of the full pulse energy is confined on the first­order line at 1946 nm.
It is found that the PA signal intensity exhibits a near­linear response in the region of 1­25%
CO2 concentration where the measurement showed good repeatability with the biggest devia­
tion of 2.72% and stability during measurements. Further measurements confirmed the linear
response of PA signal intensity on CO2 concentration with varying Raman laser power and vary­
ing CO2 pressure in the gas cell for Raman laser generation. The system proposed in this work
has presented a new possibility for CO2 detection and monitoring.
CO2 for CO2
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deep gratitude to my supervisors Professor Christos Markos and
Dr.Yazhou wang for this great thesis opportunity and experience. I would like to thank Profes­
sor Christos Markos for providing me this thesis opportunity, welcoming me to the group and
guiding me for the past five months. I would like to thank Dr.Yazhou wang for designing, im­
plementing the experimental concept, and sharing his knowledge and guidance throughout the
whole process, and keeping things on the right track.
I would also like to thank my friends here in Denmark: Erik, Josue, Joan, Kitti, Laura, Li, Mark
and Rose for being supportive not only for the thesis process, but also throughout my time in
Denmark, for the dinner nights, drinking nights, partying nights or just simply hanging out to­
gether, for all the fantastic moments in the past two and half years. I want to thank my flatmates:
Eszter, Joan and Xiaodi for supporting me and being great friends. I am also grateful for my
friends in China, whom I haven’t seen for two and half years, for being there for me when I
needed a talk.
Last but not least, I want to thank my family, especially my mom back in China for supporting
every decision I made, for always thinking of me.
CO2 for CO2
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Stimulated Raman scattering process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
ARHCF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Numerical model of stimulated Raman scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
PA signal generation and detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Experimental setup and characterisation
21
3.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Fiber characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Laser characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Characterisation of PA signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Long­term stabilization of Raman Laser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Experimental results
34
4.1
Locating the linear response region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Repeated measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Measurement under various Raman power
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Measurement under 1 bar and 5 bar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Conclusion
40
6
Perspectives
41
References
43
A Appendix Tables
47
CO2 for CO2
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
Frequency shifting with SRS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Schematic of the SRS light–matter interaction.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Illustration of SRS regimes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Comparison between ANF and NARF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Pulse propagation simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Principal set­up of a PA cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
Illustration of PA signal generation with Raman laser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1
Experimental setup.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Photo and SEM of ARHCF. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Transmission and Loss spectra after the ARHCF. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Measured Laser spectrum.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Impact of CO2 pressure on Raman laser.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Characterisation of PA signal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.7
Configuration of lock­in amplifier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.8
User interface of LabOne. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.9
2.5 hours Stabilization of PA signal intensity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1
Measurement for locating linear response region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Repeatability measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Comparison of measured PA signal for different Raman power. . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Comparison of measured PA signal for different pressure in gas cell. . . . . . . .
39
CO2 for CO2
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Over the past one and half century, the global emissions of GHG has been rising continuously
across sectors and sub­sectors, in electricity production, from industrial sources, land­use and
management, and transport, through to comparatively small sources such as fugitive emissions,
waste burning and aviation, reaching the highest level in 2019 [1].
In 2015, the Paris Agreement set a goal of limiting the global temperature increase to 1.5◦C
and 2◦C above pre­industrial level. However, with recent trends in emissions, planned infras­
tructure, and national policy commitments, Paris agreement’s long­term goals seem to be out
of reach [2].
Amongst various well­known GHGs, CO2 gas is considered to be the main source of the green­
house effect [3, 4]. Thus, it is imperative to develop a system for monitoring the concentration
of CO2 in order to acquire a better understanding of the impacts brought by CO2, and in the
meantime, explore the ways of controlling carbon emission.
The present technology for gas detection can be divided into chemical methods and optical
spectroscopy methods. The traditional chemical methods mainly consist of electro­chemical
method, gas chromatography, and chemical analysis, which have the downsides of high cost
and low sensitivity. Optical spectroscopy, on the other hand, have been applied widely on gas
detection and monitoring owing to its unique advantages of high sensitivity, fast response time,
long lifetime, and long­term stability. The spectroscopy technologies include differential Optical
Absorption Spectroscopy (DOAS), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Tunable
Diode Laser Absorption Spectroscopy (TDLAS) and photo­acoustic spectroscopy (PAS) [5, 6].
In previous works, several research groups have presented solid results on detecting Co2 with
low detection limit and low measurement error using various detection technologies, some with
various wavelengths, or various trace gases in one system. But most of the research work is
dedicated to CO2 with relatively low concentration (on the level of hundreds of ppm), few results
were published with higher concentration of CO2 [5–12].
Among these technologies, PAS has the advantage of high sensitivity, wide dynamic range,
short optical path owing to its compact size, and low back­ground noise [13]. Thus, PAS tech­
nology was chosen for the monitoring of CO2 concentration in a PA cell.
As for the excitation source for PA signal generation, the CO2­based hollow­core fiber Raman
laser system developed by Wang et al [14] is used. The system demonstrated good long­term
stability , high pulse energy and low relative intensity noise (RIN). Pumped by a 1533 nm fiber
laser, the resulting Raman laser has the center wavelength of 1946 nm after vibrational SRS in
an 8 m CO2­filled nested ARHCF [14].
With recent development on hollow­core fiber (HCF) technology, by strong confinement of the
laser beam in the hollow­core region, the high silica loss at infrared region can be overcome [14].
CO2 for CO2
1
==PAGE:10==
This work combines the newly­developed CO2­based Raman laser system with PAS, focuses
on the detection of Co2 (with Ar as diluting gas) with 1­25 % (equivalent to 10000­250000 ppm)
in PA cell. The results showed near­linear relation between CO2 concentration and detected PA
signal amplitude, and the repeated measurements demonstrated good repeatability and stabil­
ity of the experiment.
In the following sections, the theories involved including the principles of SRS in pulsed laser,
ARHCF, and PA signal generation and analysis will be briefly explained. The experimental
setup, procedure and results will be presented and discussed.
CO2 for CO2
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical background
This chapter will be dedicated to the explanation of the physical theories involved in the gas
detection system, including both the Raman laser system and PAS system. The main theories
will cover the principles of SRS in pulsed laser, ARHCF, and PA signal generation and analysis.
2.1
Stimulated Raman scattering process
The phenomenon of SRS in a laser cavity was first discovered in 1962, and the physical princi­
ple of SRS was soon explained with regards to the quantized fields and polarizability­induced
amplitude changes of classical waves [15].
The general principle of SRS in a laser cavity can be described as: the red­shifted beam with
frequency of ωs (Stokes) is generated by a pump laser with frequency of ωp during the process
of spontaneous Raman scattering. When travelling through the cavity, part of the red­shifted
beam will return to the medium (gas in this case), and stimulate another Raman process to
generate Stokes photons. This process gives rise to the number of photons with ωs while the
number of photons with ωp decreases. The residual energy with frequency of ων can be ex­
pressed as ¯hων = ¯h(ωp −ωs), which is absorbed by the Raman active medium via excitation of
the vibrational mode. As demonstrated in figure 2.1, the Raman transition introduces the energy
exchange from the pump laser beam to the red­shifted frequency . In addition to radiation at
ωs, there is also the emission of anti­Stokes frequency ωas = ωp + ωµ in the laser cavity [15].
Figure 2.1: Frequency shifting with SRS. A coherent light beam with frequency ωp is incident on
a material with a strong Raman resonance at ων. Coherent driving of the Raman mode produces
radiation at a new (Stokes­shifted) frequency ωs = ωp­ων that is also coherent.The SRS process
transfers energy from the ω1 mode to the ωs mode. The energy difference ¯h(ωp­ωs) is absorbed
through a Raman transition in the material [15].
In the following sections, the SRS process will be viewed from the light fields’ point. The am­
plitude changes in the fields induced by SRS interaction will then be connected to vibrational
CO2 for CO2
3
==PAGE:12==
motions in the material. Thus the light­matter interaction in SRS process can be roughly ex­
plained.
2.1.1
Field picture
Assuming the incident pump field E1 with frequency ω1 and Stokes field E2 with frequency ω2
generated by a laser source. The intensity of the beams are proportional to | Ei |2 where i =1,2,
this can also be expressed as ni¯hωi with ni representing the number of photons in mode ωi.
If there is any changes occurred in the gas (pressure adjustment in this case), the intensity of
pump or Stokes beam after propagating through the medium will also change. From the field
perspective, SRS process and the energy flow between light fields and medium can be intu­
itively understood, however, nature of photo­induced response in the medium is not explained
[15].
To demonstrate the SRS interaction with regards to energy levels in the infrared (IR) region,
the Jablonski diagram is used, as shown in figure 2.2. In the diagram, the vibrational states
(Vn) of a molecule in the ground electronic state (S0) can be probed by directly measuring the
absolute frequency of Raman shifts (Stokes and anti­Stokes). As shown in the figure, when the
incident photons with energy of ¯hω1 and Raman (inelastic) scattering occurs where the photons
are scattered at a different frequency compares to the incident photons. When Stokes scatter­
ing happens, the emitted photon has the energy of ¯hω2 = ¯hω1 −¯hωvib, where the ¯hωvib denotes
the vibrational energy , ωvib represents vibrational frequency, the energy difference between the
two photons, ¯hωvib is absorbed by the medium, corresponds to the energy required to excite
a molecule to a higher vibrational mode. For the case of anti­Stokes scattering, the incident
photon excite the molecule starting in excited vibrational states V2 to a virtue excited state with
higher energy compares to the one in Stokes scattering, the emitted photon has the energy of
¯hω1 + ¯hωvib[16, 17].
Figure 2.2: Schematic of the SRS light–matter interaction. This Jablonski energy diagram show­
cases some of the transitions involved in IR absorption including Raman Stokes, anti­Stokes
and Resonance Raman scattering.
CO2 for CO2
4
==PAGE:13==
2.1.2
Classical Vibrational Motions
Different from the field picture, the classical SRS model takes the vibrational motions of the
material into account. Due to the incident fields, there are vibrational oscillators in the material,
the SRS model is used to o determine the magnitude of the polarization caused by vibrational
oscillators. The nuclei cannot follow the incident fields adiabatically as the frequency of the in­
cident radiation is usually much higher that that of the nuclear vibrational motions in molecules.
Since the electrons of the molecules can follow the fast oscillation of driving fields, the molecules
couple to the fields through their electrons. If electron motions couple with the nuclear modes,
the resulting electron oscillation will also contain the information about the nuclear vibrations.
Therefore, Raman processes can indirectly probe nuclear motions in the molecule through the
motion of electrons [15].
With electronic polarizability αc, the electron response to an optical field can be expressed as
E(t) = Ae−iωt + c.c.. The optical field induces the time­dependent molecular polarization ex­
pressed as µ(t) = αc(t)E(t). By not taking nuclear modes or any non­linearities into accounts,
αc can be considered a constant αc0, and the molecular polarization has a linear response to
the field. The nuclear mode Qn(t) which describes the displacement of the nuclei along the
generalized nuclear coordinate Qn, the electron motion can be distorted when αc dependends
on the nuclear positions. Thus, (∂αc/∂Qn)0 ̸= 0. With the coupling between electronic and
nuclear motions, the motion of electrons will affect the motion of nuclear. With driving fields
E1(t) and E2(t), the nuclear mode experiences a driving force F(t) at frequency Ω= ω1 −ω2,
which can be expressed as
F(t) = ( ∂αc
∂Qn
)0[A1A2 ∗e−1Ωt + c.c.]
(2.1)
The coupling term ∂αc
∂Qn )0 determines the magnitude of F(t). The coupling term drives a material
motion under the influence of two incoming fields, it acts as a source of non­linearity. The time­
varying nuclear displacement Qn(t) under F(t) can be expressed as Qn(t) = Qn(Ω)e−iΩt +c.c.,
which describes a harmonic motion of the nuclear mode with the amplitude expressed as
αc = 1
m( ∂αc
∂Qn
)0
A1A∗
2
ω2ν −Ω2 −2iΩγ
(2.2)
where m represents the reduced mass of the nuclear oscillator, ων is the resonance frequency
of the harmonic nuclear mode, and γ is the damping constant. When the coupling term is high,
the nuclear motion is significant, indicating that the coupling term in essential for SRS. The am­
plitude increases linearly in fields E1 and E2. Additionally, when Ω= ων, the amplitude also
increases [15].
The induced polarization of the sample can be expressed as P(t) = Nαc(t)E(t), where N is
the number of molecules in the interaction volume and E(t) is the total applied field. Under
Raman active modes, the electron oscillation is affected by the mobility of the nuclei, αc is no
longer considered a constant. To take the effect of the nuclear modes into account, αc can be
expanded in a Taylor series as
Qn(Ω) = αc0 + ( ∂αc
∂Qn
)0Qn(t) + ...
(2.3)
Since the total electric field in the material is E(t) = E1(t) + E2(t), the induced polarization in
CO2 for CO2
5
==PAGE:14==
the interaction volume is expressed as
P(t) = N[αc0 + ( ∂αc
∂Qn
)0Qn(t)][E1(t) + E2(t)]
(2.4)
The coupling term in this equation affects the terms that consist the contribution of three field
interactions: two interactions to drive Qn(t) and one with either E1 or E2. These interactions of
two frequencies (ω1,ω2) produce polarization components at four distinct frequency combina­
tions in the material: ωcs = 2ω2 −ω1 (coherent Stokes frequency), ωs = ω2 (Stokes frequency),
ωs = ω1 (pump frequency) and ωas = 2ω1 −ω2 (anti­Stokes frequency). With ωs and ωp, the
amplitudes of the SRS polarization components can be expressed as
P(ωs) = 6ε0χ∗
NL(Ω)|A1|2A2
(2.5)
P(ωp) = 6ε0χNL(Ω)|A2|2A1
(2.6)
Where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity and χNL is the Raman­dependent nonlinear susceptibility
of the material, which describes its frequency­dependent response to incoming fields. In the
case where the frequency difference Ωcoincides with the resonance frequency of the nuclear
mode, the material becomes more responsive [15].
From eq.2.5 and 2.6, it can be seen that the SRS process introduces oscillating polarization
components at the pump and Stokes frequencies. Both P(ωs) and P(ωp) exhibit dependency
on χNL, and show similar amplitudes while oscillate with different phases. Thus, the nonlinear
polarization produces two field components Es(ω2) and Ep(ω1) as it radiates. The two compo­
nents arrive in the far­field detector with distinct phases. Detected signal will be proportional
to |P 2|, when the direction of phase­matched detected signal is different from the direction
of the probing fields. When the detected signal is in the phase­matched direction that is the
same as the direction of the probing fields, interference occurs between the incident fields com­
ponents E1, E2 and the induced field components. Measured intensity can be expressed as
I(ω2) = ε0c/2|Es + E2|2 at the Stokes frequency. The generated SRS signal contains the
interference term between the signal fields and the incident fields, and can be expressed as
Ss(ω2) ∝|A1|2|A2|2ImχNL(Ω)
(2.7)
Sp(ω1) ∝−|A1|2|A2|2ImχNL(Ω)
(2.8)
It can be seen that both signals contain the imaginary part of the nonlinear susceptibility, which
describes the dissipative part of the material response. And both signals scale linearly with
the intensity of the pump and Stokes laser beams. The classical model described in this part
anticipates a gain at Stokes wavelength and a loss at pump wavelength, indicating the energy
transfer between the field modes [15].
2.1.3
SRS in transient limit
For gas molecules such as H2 and CO2, many theoretical and experimental studies have been
curried out over the years to investigate the transient Raman interactions.
When ignoring
higher­order Stokes generation, anti­Stokes generation, level saturation, diffraction, and quan­
tum noise, the Raman laser wave equations can be expressed as
∂As
∂z + 1
νs
∂As
∂t = −iγ1Q∗
eAp −αsAs
(2.9)
∂Ap
∂z + 1
νp
∂Ap
∂t
= −iλs
λp
γ1QeAs −αpAp
(2.10)
CO2 for CO2
6
==PAGE:15==
∂Qe
∂t + Qe
T2
+ ν ∂Qe
∂z = −iγ2ApA∗
s
(2.11)
where Ap and As represents the complex amplitudes of the pump and Stokes waves, respec­
tively. Qe denotes the quantity of macroscopic polarization through which the pump and Stokes
waves are coupled, with γ1 and γ2 being the coupling constants. νp and νs are the group ve­
locities of the pump and Stokes lasers. νph is the vibrational velocity of molecules.z is the
propagation distance along the fiber, t is the time. T2 is the dephasing time of the molecular
vibration (CO2 in this case). αp and αs are the optical losses of the pump and Stokes lasers,
while λp and λs are the corresponding wavelengths respectively, which can be expressed as
γ2 = 1
2
√
gR
AeffCT2
(2.12)
γ1 = Cγ2
(2.13)
C = 4πω2
s(ωp −ωs)λs
c2
(2.14)
Where Aeff is the effective mode area of the ARHCF, gR is the gain coefficient of CO2 at the
steady Raman regime and is pressure­dependent [13].
In previous research and paper, it has been shown that the pulse evolution contains three
regimes by nature when assuming the pulse duration is much less than T2, as depicted in fig.2.3.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the regimes of evolution. With the conservation of total photon number
in both pump and Stokes waves. [18]
At the beginning of the SRS process, as shown as the I regime, the intensity of the Stokes
wave is low in comparison with the pump, and the photon number at the Stokes wavelength
grows exponentially, while the the photon number at the pump wavelength decreases expo­
nentially. When the evolution proceeds to the transition regime, the intensities for Stokes and
pump are comparable to each other. This regime is short when the phase change is small and
the duration is comparable with the entire pulse. When it enters the J regime, where the pump
pulse depletes, and the Stokes pulse evolved in to a shape described the initial conditions and
z­independent function
K(t) = |Ap(z, t)|2 + γs
γp
|As(z, t)|2
(2.15)
CO2 for CO2
7
==PAGE:16==
Thus, the pump and material excitation oscillate with a frequency proportional to z1/2 and
|Ap(z, t)|2 ∝z1/2 [18].
In I regime when neglecting the pump depletion and the pump intensity is larger than the Stokes
intensity. When the Stokes pulse and pump pulse reach a phase­lock condition, the amplitude
of the Stokes pulse increases exponentially, and the gain reaches maximum when the Stokes
pulse comes before the pump pulse by about the pump width. When the Stokes is phase­locked
to the pump phase, the Stokes pulse and the pump pulse become comparable, and the transi­
tion regime is rapid. In order to reach the phase locking condition, the Stokes amplitude should
be much smaller than the pump in the beginning. The Stokes pulse will evolve to the shape
determined by K(t) in a singular way in the J regime [18].
2.1.4
ν1/2ν2 Fermi dyad and Fermi resonance in CO2 gas with SRS
The above described theories are useful to explain the general SRS in gas molecules such as
H2 and CO2, and there have been several reports with Raman laser generation at 2 µm with
H2 gas inside ARHCF, the Raman laser was generated by pump laser with wavelength around
1 µm via vibrational SRS process. But when protability is required for installing these lasers in
practical applications, it is troublesome to use high pressure H2. In addition, a high amount of
heat will be released when using H2 for its long vibrational Stokes shift coefficient (4155 cm−1
), and will in consequence introduce a long­term drift of the Raman laser, affecting its stability.
However, by making use of the SRS through the rovibrational Q­branch of the ν1 band of the
ν1/2ν2 Fermi dyad of CO2, the problem can be addressed [14].
When the collisional broadening induces significant overlap due to a specific spectral lines spac­
ing, line coupling may occur because of rotational energy transfer. This motional or collisional
narrowing effect has been investigated in the Q­branches of the Fermi dyad ν1/2ν2 of CO2 by
coherent Raman technique, where the Q­branch indicates the case where the rotational quan­
tum numbers in the ground state and the excited state are the same. In the work of Lavorel
et.al [19], the 2ν2 Q­branch component has been investigated for it exhibits a strong collapse at
moderate density. By modeling the relaxation matrix with energy corrected sudden (ECS) and
modified energy gap (MEG) laws, the collisional narrowing was taken into account for obtaining
the line broadening and line shift [19].
The normalized SRS isotropic Q­branch profile can be expressed containing G­matrix
I(ω) = π−1Re{Tr{ρ¯αG−1(ω)¯α}}
(2.16)
Where ρ is the density operator, ¯α is the average polarizability, and rovibrational matrix ele­
ments of G(ω) contains the number density of perturbers, the position for isolated line of the
ν ≡2ν2 vubrational band and matrix element operator for J −J′ (J denotes the rotational quan­
tum number) transition in the initial and final vibrational states [19].
After introducing the intensity vector including real and imaginary parts
uν
j = pν
j + iqν
j
(2.17)
Where pν
j and qν
j are the intensity parameters. Eq.2.16 can be further expressed as
I(ω) = π−1 ∑
j
pν
j γν
j
(γν
j )2 + (ω −ων
j )2 + π−1 ∑
j
qν
j (ω −ων
j )
(γν
j )2 + (ω −ων
j )2
(2.18)
CO2 for CO2
8
==PAGE:17==
Eq.2.18 generalizes the case of any line overlap. In this equation, the line coupling effect caused
by collisionally induced energy transfers was considered by using the intensity parameter pν
j ,
broadening γν
j and eigen­frequency ων
j . The spectrum of the Q­branch contains a sum of ad­
ditive Lorentzian components as for isolated Q lines. qν
j , γν
j and ων
j characterize a dispersive
contribution that redistributes the intensity inside the branch without modifying the integrated
intensity, however, it can modify the Lorentzian components i eq.2.18. The two parameters pν
j ,
qν
j dependes on the density, the broadening γν
j of the additive Lorentzian components is not
proportional to the density when line mixing happens [19].
In eq.2.18, the intensity I is described in frequency domain, thus, the real part of the time
correlation function for isotropic polarizability can be obtained through Fourier transform
I(t) =
∑
j
uν
j e−Dν
Jt; ReDν
j = γν
j > 0
(2.19)
I(t = 0) which is equivalent to the integrated intensity, can be expressed as
I(t = 0) =
∑
j
uν
j =
∑
j
ρj(¯αν
j )2
(2.20)
I(t = 0) is dependence on both density and temperature. In the case of neglecting the rotational
dependence of ¯αν
j , and will result in
(¯αν
j )−2 =
∑
j
pν
j = 1;
∑
j
qν
j = 0
(2.21)
In order to utilize eq.2.18 to calculate the Q­branch profile, the width γν
j and eigen­frequency
ων
j with regards to the relaxation matrix elements W ν
JJ need to be known. For the generation of
theoretical SRS Q­branch, the relaxation models should be applied. From previous researches,
two models with approximate sum rule have been applied on the case of N2
−
∑
J′̸=J
nReWJJν = γν
J −γν
(2.22)
which is a product of the unitarity of the scattering matrix, it assures the conservation of the total
rovibrational population. γν
J and γν denote rovibrational and pure vibrational linewidths (HWHM)
for the uncoupled lines. In the process, the imaginary part of the off­diagonal relaxation matrix
elements is neglected. In the case of CO2, the vibrational width is not neglected. In addition,
the line coupling is more efficient in CO2 because the 2ν2 CO2 band has lower rotation­vibration
coupling constants than that for N2. As a result, for CO2 the gas phase for low densities that
the binary collisional regime is relevant, the collapse of the Q­branch appears. Thus, through
energy transfers and dephasing mechanims,the relaxation models provides the method to in­
vestigate the collisionally induced narrowing [19].
For a quantitative analysis of the SRS spectra at room and moderate temperatures, two fitting
laws: MEG and ECS­P models are used. The fitting laws have dependence on the fitting param­
eters that characterize the amplitude of energy transfer rates, their temperature dependence,
the rotational energy defects and the effective collisional length [19].
With the MEG for pure CO2, the state­to­state rate constants are given for upwards rotational
transitions (J →J′, J′ > J), with the detailed balance principle, downwards transitions rates
CO2 for CO2
9
==PAGE:18==
can be obtained. The ECS­P model is a product from a dynamical scaling law, and is obtained
by additional modeling of the basis relaxation rates (O →J) by a polynomial law [19].
The determination of the parameters for MEG and ECS­P models are based on the sum rule
relating the energy transfer rates to the linewidths. From previous researches, the calculated ro­
tational linewidths for the ν1 and 2ν2 Q­branches were based on a semi­classical model. Subse­
quently, the calculated values were compared with measurements for infrared and anisotropic
Raman lines. As the calculated linewidths only involved rotational relaxation processes, the
vibrational dependence in eq.2.22 was excluded by setting γν = 0 and γν
J ≃γJ. At room tem­
perature, the ν1 Q­branch in CO2 CARS spectra was deduced. The parameters for eq.2.22 for
MEG and ECS­P laws were calculated using least­square fitting method. From their results, the
fitting quality of the input line broadening coefficients for MEG and ECS­P models is different.
The ECS­P showed better result with a lower standard deviation compared to MEG model. Ad­
ditionally, when rotational quantum number J is high, the MEG model showed a fast decrease
of line broadening coefficients at room temperature [19].
With the fitting parameters determined, the relaxation matrix elements W ν
JJ can be calculated
from the MEG and ECS­P models. When strong collapse of the Q­branches occurs, a pure
rotational relaxation model is not applicable for describing the SRS profiles. Thus the vibrational
relaxation processes need to be considered for the SRS profile calculation. And the relaxation
matrix is expressed as
nW ν
JJ′ = nWJJ′(1 −δJJ′) + [γJ + γν −iδν]δJJ′
(2.23)
Where δJJ′ represents the line shift parameter for J −J′ transition, δν ≃δν
J ≡−nImW ν
JJ is
the vibrational line shift for resonance frequency and γJ ≡nReWJJ is the rotational linewidth.
In the case of isolated Q lines, the rotational dependence of the line shifts take place through
vibration­rotation coupling and stays weak. In eq.2.23, vibrational linewidth γν and line shift δν
are free parameters that can be obtained from the collapsed Q­branches using least­square
fit. In the experiment conducted in [19], When the rotational part of W is modeled using ECS­P
model, the resulting Q­branch profile has higher accuracy than that from MEG model, thus, more
appropriate for obtaining the vibrational parameters γν and δν. In the 2ν2 Q­branch, by applying
the ECS­P rovibrational model and least­square fitting procedure, the deduced vibrational line
shift showed a linear dependence when density is moderate, but a non­linear dependence on
higher density [19].
Unlike the case with vibrational line shift, the line broadening showed a linear dependence over
the whole density range. In addition, when the temperature becomes higher, the individual ro­
tational linewidths (in amagat units) increases, and the collisional narrowing also grows at low
density. At low density, the the vibrational contribution can be accurately extracted [19].
When line mixing happens at moderate density, the Q­branch profile becomes asymmetric, and
the asymmetry fades away when density becomes higher. For density higher than 30 amagat,
the profile is approximately a Lorentzian line. Over the whole density range, an additive su­
perposition of Lorentzian and dispersive components can be produced by the theory of the line
mixing. The intensity parameters pν
j and qν
j depends on the density and the characteristic width
γν
j is proportional to the density in the asymptotic limit of isolated lines [19].
CO2 for CO2
10
==PAGE:19==
Thus, from the results of [19], under the effect of collisionally induced rotational energy transfers,
the Q­branch profile showed sharp changes. Vibrational relaxation (the depahsing mechanism)
is more effetive on the profile with higher density. Thus, the rovibrational relaxation matrix shall
be modeled in order to analyze the Q­band shapes. The dynamical ECS­P model and SRS
measurements enabled the accurate determination of the vibrational relaxation cross sections
and shifts of the resulting pure vibrational line. And the strong collapse of the Q­branch of CO2
can make the ν1 band quite intense [19].
When Fermi resonances occurs, two vibrational bands that have nearly the same energy and
symmetry in both IR and Raman spectroscopies will be splitted. The two bands are usually a
fundamental vibration. The wavefunctions for the two resonant vibrations will mix and cause
changes on both the frequency and intensity, resulting in two strong bands in the spectrum. The
mixing will happen when the energies of the two states are similar and symmetry requirement
of vibrational transition is fulfilled, the resulting modes can be described by a linear combi­
nation of the two interacting modes. This interaction will widen the gap between the energy
levels. The mixing of the two states equalized the intensities of the vibrations which allows a
weak overtone (happens when a vibrational mode is excited from the energy level to the en­
ergy levels higher than the first excited state)or combination band (happens when more than
two fundamental vibrations are excited simultaneously) to show significant intensity from the
fundamental with which it has Fermi resonance with. The three fundamental vibrations of CO2
molecule are ν1 = 1337cm−1, ν2 = 667cm−1, ν3 = 2349cm−1. Based on group theory calcula­
tions, CO2 molecule has only one Raman (symmetric stretching vibrations) and two IR active
modes (asymmetric stretching and bending vibrations) [20].
By using the SRS process through CO2’s rovibrational Q­branch of the ν1 band of the ν1/2ν2
Ferimi dyad, the 2 µm Raman laser can be directly generated by 1.5 µm laser as the relatively
low Stokes shift coefficient of fundamental vibrations at 1385 cm−1. In addition, Dicke narrow­
ing and collisional line­mixing effect can form a narrow linewidth of Raman gain ( 300 MHz at
1 bar), thus enabling the development of laser with ultra­narrow line width. Thus, the theories
can be applied for the 1946 nm Raman laser generated by 1533 nm pump laser thourgh SRS
process with CO2 gas used in this work [14].
CO2 for CO2
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2
ARHCF
Compared to fibers with solid material, hollow core fibers allows one to exploit the ultra­low
Rayleigh scattering and nonlinear coefficients of gas by guiding light through gas. Thus, allows
propagation at ultra­low loss and non­linearity. Moreover, they have faster propagation speed
and laser­induced damage thresholds compare to solid fibers. Lastly, they are more suitable for
enhancement and study of gas­light interactions because of their ability to confine light within a
micrometer­sized fiber core (air) region, thus enabling an efficient SRS process [21].
The two main types of single­material hollow core fibers are: photonic bandgap fibers (PBGF)
based on photonic bandgap guidance and anti­resonant hollow core fibers (ARHCF) that has
the guiding mechanism of a combination of inhibited coupling to low density of states cladding
modes and anti­resonance. Amongst various types of ARHCF, a negative curvature nested
anti­resonant hollow­core fiber (NARF) is used in this work. The dimension and characterisa­
tion of this specific fiber will be introduced in sec.3.2.
For PBGF, by arranging glass rods in the cladding in a periodical manner, at some frequencies
and angles of incidence, an out­of­plane photonic bandgap can be formed that extends below
the air­line and can guide an air­mode in a suitably engineered defect. The thin glass struts to
interconnect the nodes is necessary for structural stability but detrimental for the fiber’s guid­
ance properties as it eliminates high order bandgaps and leaves one spectral region available
for air guidance. At frequencies within the bandgap, the nodes are in anti­resonance and thus
effective at ’repelling’ light or radially back­scattering it to the core. Thus, the confinement loss
(CL), due to light leakage from the core, can be relatively low by adding rings of resonators
around the central defect. To widen the bandgap, the thin glass struts are thinly fabricated
so that they are not in anti­resonance at the operating wavelength. On the surface of glass
struts, the electromagnetic field intensity is higher than that around the rods, especially for the
struts surrounding the core where the modal intensity is higher. Thus, there is scattering at the
air­glass surfaces, which are intrinsically ‘rough’ due to frozen in thermodynamic fluctuations.
Making surface scattering loss (SSL) the dominant source of loss in PBGF [21].
As for ARHCFs, the thin membranes of equal thickness d and refractive index n surrounding
the core are designed so that the operational wavelength sits in between the high loss resonant
wavelengths of the fiber, which can be expressed as
λm = 2d
√
n2 −1
m
, m = 1, 2, 3...
(2.24)
Where the glass modes in the struts and air mode are matched in phase. The glass membranes
are in anti­resonance at the low­loss operating wavelengths, and the electromagnetic field on
at least one of the two air­glass interfaces is minimized in order to have a low SSL value. How­
ever, there are still factors limiting the overall optical performances of ARHCFs, one of them
is the presence of undesired and thicker nodes at the intersection between struts, which will
result in the presence of loss peaks and dips within the anti­resonant windows, which are detri­
mental to both the loss and the dispersive properties of the fibers. To address this issue, fiber
with a negative curvature core surround can be used, its nodes are designed to be far away
from the center. Another issue is that it is difficult to arrange the anti­resonant membranes to
achieve a coherent light reflection in the radial direction. A possible way to tackle this issue is
anti­resonant fiber with a simplified cladding made of just one ring of capillaries [21].
CO2 for CO2
12
==PAGE:21==
From the loss measurement show in [21], with the comparison of a typical ARF(with a simplified
hexagram cladding) and a state­of­the­art PBGF, the trade­off between loss and bandwidth is
demonstrated. The CL­dominated ARFs are inherently lossier than SSL­dominated PBGFs,
meanwhile, PBGFs’ bandwidth is generally 2 to 10 times narrower than ARFs. It is caused
by the bandgap­distorting effect of the struts combined with the potential presence of surface
modes, parasitic modes located on incorrectly terminated the core surrounds, which can further
reduce the available bandwidth through anti­crossing with the air guided modes [21].
The use of core boundaries with a negative curvature to locate undesirable nodes in positions
has been investigated by previous works, where the modal field intensity is lower and there­
fore to reduce their detrimental effects. Further improvements have enabled elimination of the
nodes to reduce the CL. This fiber design is shown in the top of fig.2.4(a), with a distance of
d, the tubes are azimuthally separated and light localization in the core occurs due to the two
Fresnel reflections from inner and outer surface of the thin glass tubes that form the core sur­
rounding. The further improved design is shown in the bottom of fig.2.4(a), which adds another
ring of nested tubes with the same thickness as the outer ones, and attached to the cladding
at the same azimuthal position. This design is adopted in this work, as named NARF. In com­
parison with standard anti­resonant nodeless fiber, the nested elements has the advantage of
further improving the confinement of the mode to the core, as the difference shown in fig.2.4(b)
between the top and bottom parts. The confinement exists both along the radial directions
where the resonant tubes are present (y axis) and in between them (x axis). The previous
results showed a significant reduction in CL for NARF design by comparing the normalized fun­
damental mode (FM) intensities in the two fibers calculated along two orthogonal directions [21].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: Comparison between anti­resonant nodeless fiber (ANF), (top) and the version with
nested elements (NARF) proposed in this work (bottom): (a) structure; (b) 3­dB contour plots
of the fundamental mode’s z­Poynting vector, showing how the addition of the nested ring de­
creases the field on the outer cladding [21].
CO2 for CO2
13
==PAGE:22==
With further comparison and measurements in [21], the nested structure design of NARF showed
lower values of CL and SSL compared to other ARFs. NARFs can be bent to reasonably small
bend radii, indicating a good bend performance, despite the large core to wavelength ration.
And the additional nested elements can also improve the bend robustness.The high suppres­
sion on higher order modes can also be achieved by controlling the radial separation between
nested elements, indicating an effective single mode over an adequate distance [21].
Moreover, the efficient SRS process in gas­filled ARHCF such as in this work can lead to the
generation of cascaded Raman Stokes lines, enabling the potential for multi­wavelength (or fre­
quency comb­like) laser emission. By controlling the gas­pressure dependent dispersion, when
the phase matching condition of anti­Stokes line generation is satisfied, through four wave mix­
ing with a Stokes photon and an anti­Stokes photon, the generated Stokes lines leads to the
formation of multiple anti­Stokes lines. Thus, it can achieve multi­wavelength operation in a
broad range. The ARHCF in this work has been reported to be used for Raman laser genera­
tion spanning from 1.53 µm to 2.4 µm [22]. In this work, the ARHCF is pumped by a 1533 nm
laser, a Raman Stokes line at 1946 nm is generated [14].
CO2 for CO2
14
==PAGE:23==
2.3
Numerical model of stimulated Raman scattering
For numerical modelling and simulation of the laser beam propagation in the ARHCF, the Raman
laser wave equations 2.9­2.11 mentioned in 2.1.3 should be applied. Since the dispersion in
the ARHCF is weak, and the pulse duration is 7 ns, thus the difference between νs and νp can
be neglected, and can be replaced with νg. By transforming the equations into moving frame of
reference, T = T −Z/νg, z′ = z −νpht, and the equations can be rewritten as
∂As
∂z′ = −iγ1Q∗
eAp −αsAs
(2.25)
∂Ap
∂z′ + ( 1
νp
−1
νs
)∂Ap
∂t′ = −iλs
λp
γ1QeAs −αpAp
(2.26)
∂Qe
∂t′ + Qe
T2
= −iγ2ApA∗
s
(2.27)
By assuming the pump and Stokes signals have no imaginary part, the relationship between
input electric amplitude A(t) and corresponding laser instant power P(t) in the ARHCF can be
expressed as
A(t) =
√
2
cε0
P(t)
Aeff
=
√
2
cε0
1
Aeff
U(t)
(2.28)
Where c is the light speed, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity and U(t) =
√
P(t), thus the wave
equations can be expressed as
∂Us
∂z′ = −iγ1Q∗
eUp −αsUs
(2.29)
∂Up
∂z′ + ( 1
νp
−1
νs
)∂Up
∂t′ = −iλs
λp
γ1QeUs −αpUp
(2.30)
∂Qe
∂t′ + Qe
T2
= −i 2
cε0
1
Aeff
γ2UpU∗
s
(2.31)
Together with the coefficients 2.12­2.14, the propagation of the laser beam in the ARHCF can
be modeled and simulated. Simulated pulse propagation results including the pulse profiles of
pump laser, Raman laser and residual pump after propagating through ARHCF, progression
of average output power and quantum efficiency with regards to propagation distance in the
ARHCF can be seen in fig.2.5. The parameters used for the simulation can be seen in Ap­
pendix table A.1.
From fig.2.5(a), it can be seen that the Raman laser has a lower pulse peak power compares to
the pump laser and residual pump, and due to negligible dispersion effect of the ARHCF, there
appears to be an overlap between the peak regions of the Raman laser and pump laser. Since
the SRS needs a certain power threshold to initiate, the residual pump pulse exhibits sub­pulses
that correspond to the leading and trailing edges of the original pump pulse. The difference
between the two pulses might be caused by a minor residual transient Raman regime [23].
Fig.2.5(b) and (c) show that the average output power and quantum efficiency both reached
the maximum value when propagating 4.99 m in the ARHCF, reaching 0.516 W and 42.2%
respectively. When it propagates in the ARHCF further to 8 m as used in this work, the values
slowly declines to 0.43 W and 35% respectively, still sufficient for conducting the measurements
required in this work, though the values are not optimum, the 8­meter fiber length is kept the
same as in [14] as to have a consistency between the two works and future projects which will
utilize this setting.
CO2 for CO2
15
==PAGE:24==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.5: Pulse propagation simulation. (a) simulated pulse profiles of pump laser, Raman
laser and residual pump after propagating through ARHCF. And the progression of (b) average
output power and (c) quantum efficiency with regards to propagation distance in the ARHCF.
CO2 for CO2
16
==PAGE:25==
2.4
PA signal generation and detection
2.4.1
PA­signal generation
The detection scheme applied in this work is PAS which is based on the absorption of electro­
magnetic radiation by analyte molecules. Compares to conventional absorption spectroscopy
which is based on excitation by electromagnetic radiation with intensity and the measurement
of reflected or transmitted light intensity, PAS pressure waves are detected which are generated
directly by the absorbed energy. PAS has the advantage of wide dynamic range, allowing the
determination of absorption coefficients over several orders of magnitude [24].
Light absorption and scattering can both make an impact on the signal for conventional ab­
sorption spectroscopy. PA signals are generated only by the absorbed fraction of the excitation
beam as scattering does not change the thermal state of the sample. Therefore, it is not nec­
essary for PAS system to filter the sample to remove scattering particles. Since the PA signal
depends on the incident radiation power, the sensitivity can be modified by choosing an appro­
priate radiation source [24].
In a resonant PA cell, vibrational levels in the IR region in the absorbing molecules (CO2 molecules
in our case) are excited by photons of the Raman pulse. In this process, the dominant process
is the vibrational–translational (V–T) energy transfer, there is also a small amount of heat gen­
erated by non­resonant vibrational–vibrational relaxation, because in the pressure domain of
trace­gas analysis the collisional deactivation is much faster than spontaneous emission. The
temperature increase of the gas will cause an outgoing pressure wave. After multiple reflec­
tions of the sound pulse by the hard walls of the PA cell, the eigenmodes of the resonator will
be excited. The overlap of the laser beam with the mode pattern of the acoustic eigenmodes
determines the efficiency of excitation. The excited acoustic field decays as each mode decays
at its own rate when the light pulse exits the cell. The decay rate of each modes is determined
by its Q factor as the ratio between the accumulated energy in the resonator and the energy
loss per cycle [25].
The PA wave with an acoustic frequency defined by the modulation frequency of the laser can
be detected using microphones placed inside of the PA cell [24].The intensity of the PA wave
depends on the absorption coefficient and thus, according to the Beer–Lambert law, on the
concentration of CO2 [13]. The signal amplitude can be expressed as
p = FW0α
(2.32)
Where F is the cell constant, W0 is the incident radiation power and α is the absorption co­
efficient of the sample. The principal setup of PA cell for gas phase analysis can be seen in
fig.2.6.
CO2 for CO2
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.6: Principal set­up of a PA cell for gas phase analysis [24].
When modulation frequency is comparable to the first acoustic resonance frequency of the PA
cell, the acoustic wavelength reaches the cell dimensions, and the resonant eigenmodes of the
cell can be excited, leading to an amplification of the signal. Thus, standing acoustic waves
can be generated. Resonance properties mainly depend upon the geometry and size of the
cavity. The modulation frequency is tuned to one of the eigen­frequencies of the cell and thus
the signal is amplified by a quality factor Q, resulting in a cell constant F expressed as
F = Qi
Ci(γ −1)
ωiV
(2.33)
Where C denotes a factor that depends on the positions of the laser beam and the microphone
relative to the pressure distribution in the cell, γ is the adiabatic coefficient of the gas,ω is the
adiabatic coefficient of the gas, ω = 2πν is the modulation frequency,V is the volume of the cell.
The index i indicates that ω, Q, and Ci are parameters describing the i­th eigenmode of the cell.
With a high Q­factor, the resonance profile in resonant cells becomes narrow and small drifts of
modulation frequency or speed of sound in the gas mixture cause strong changes in Q [24].
Since broadband generation of various acoustic frequencies can be caused by pulsed exci­
tation, in gas phase analysis by pulsed laser PAS, all eigenmodes of the cell can be excited
simultaneously. The cell design in this work is optimized to excite one selected eigenmode,
which is well separated from the neighboring ones. Thus, each Raman laser pulse generates
an exponentially decaying sine wave with the amplitude expressed as
p = Ccell(γ −1)
V
αE
(2.34)
where E represents the pulse energy and can be described as E = Pt where P is the pulse
power and t is the pulse duration. It can be seen that the PA signal amplitude does not depend
on Q­factor, modulation frequency or repetition rate. Thus, the signal has no dependency of
the speed of sound in the cell but only on the geometrical properties of the cell. If the signal is
dominated by one eigenmode and the contributions of other eigenmodes can be neglected, cell
constants can be calculated. Pulsed laser PAS can therefore be applied to ”absolute” absorp­
tion measurements in gases [24]. From eq.2.27, it can be seen that the PA signal amplitude
has a dependency on Raman laser power, as will be proved by the measurement in later section.
From previous researches, it has been shown that the PA signal amplitude increased linearly
with the growing concentration of the gas concentration in the PA cell [13, 26, 27], as the higher
CO2 for CO2
18
==PAGE:27==
concentration, the more gas (CO2 or methane (CH4) in above­mentioned works) molecules are
involved in the PA process to generate higher signal intensity. In this work, the target gas for
detection in PA cell is CO2 with diluting gas chosen to be Ar, and the relation between PA signal
intensity and CO2 concentration in the PA cell is investigated.
The principle of PA signal generation integrated with a CO2 filled ARHCF based NIR Raman
laser can be seen in fig.2.7.
Figure 2.7: Illustration of PA signal generation integrated with a CO2 filled ARHCF based NIR
Raman laser
As exhibited in the figure and explained in previous sections, the pulsed pump laser enters the
ARHCF filled with CO2 at certain pressure level, after the vibrational SRS process where the
photons at pump wavelength interact with CO2 molecules, the photons at Stokes wavelengths
are emitted, forming Raman laser, the Raman laser subsequently enters PA cell with CO2 gas of
certain concentration, generating a localized transient heating and expansion of CO2 molecules,
subsequently PA signals to be detected.
2.4.2
PA­signal detection
In this work, the sound waves generated directly in the gas phase are detected by a 1/2” low­
noise free­field TEDS condenser microphone (type4955, Brüel & Kjær) with a sensitivity of 1100
mV/Pa. The term TEDS stands for transducer electronic data sheet, which is standardized
method that identifies and describes the sensor or actuator device. The TEDS contains such
information as manufacturer, sensor model number, serial number, measurement range, sen­
sitivity, calibration information, etc [28].
A condenser microphone such as the one in this work, contains an electrically conductive di­
CO2 for CO2
19
==PAGE:28==
aphragm and a metal packplate, acting as a capacitor. As the PA waves hit the diaphragm, the
distance between two capacitor plates varies as the diaphragm moves. Thus, the capacitance
varies relative to the frequency of the PA waves, and converted to electrical signal [29].
The electrical signal then passes through a pre­amplifier which is followed by a filter for lineari­
sation of the free­field response. The signal is then further amplified by an amplifier and passes
through a set of bandpass filters to reach the lock­in amplifier for signal multiplication with a
reference signal.
For most lock­in amplifiers, the input signal Vin(t) and reference signal Vr(r) are identical, the
lock­in takes the two inputs and puts them through a signal mixer, for non­sinusoidal signals,
using the Fourier theorem, the periodic signals can be expanded into a sum of linear indepen­
dent function of sine and cosine terms. Demodulation is equivalent to selecting the terms with
frequencies within one filter bandwidth around a single reference, this will reduce the infinite
sum to a single sine and cosine term Y (quadrature component) and X(in­phase component),
with other components average to 0, forming the components of a quadrature demodulator, ca­
pable of measuring both the amplitude and the phase of the signal of interest. The result after
the low­pass filter is the demodulated signal X +iY , where X is the real and Y is the imaginary
part of a signal depicted on the complex plane. The transformation of X and Y into the amplitude
R and phase θ information of Vin(t) can be performed with trigonometric operations [30].
After mixing, the lock­in amplifier separates the DC components from the components of twice
the demodulation frequency by using low­pass filter. The shape of the filter can be modified by
selecting the order, a higher­order results in a more ideal, rectangular filter transfer function that
blocks frequencies outside of the filter bandwidth more efficiently, but takes longer response
time. The response time can be interpreted by the time constant which relates to the time it
takes to reach a defined percentage of the final value. The time constant of a low­pass filter
can be expressed as
TC =
FO
2πfcut−off
(2.35)
Where FO is a factor that depends on the filter slope, fcut−off is the cut­off frequency defined
as the frequency at which the transfer function of a system shows 3 dB attenuation relative to
DC. The configuration of the lock­in amplifier in this work will be introduced in later section.
CO2 for CO2
20
==PAGE:29==
3
Experimental setup and characterisation
3.1
Setup
The setup for the experiment is shown in figure 3.1, which contains both the path of laser beam
and the path of gases involved. This setup will be explained in detail in the following subsections.
Figure 3.1: Experimental setup of the Photo­acoustic detection of CO2
3.1.1
Light path
In this experiment, the configuration for Raman laser generation was adopted from previous
experiment conducted by Wang et al. [14] with a custom­made 1553nm Er­doped fiber laser
(BKtel Photonics, France) as pump source, it consists of a directly modulated distributed feed­
back diode laser, seeding two stages of Er­doped fiber pre­amplifiers and subsequently a power
Er/Yb­doped fiber amplifier [23]. A linear polarized pulse train with repetition rate of 8.7 kHz is
generated by the seed oscillator.
The generated pump pulse is then collimated through a pair of plano­convex lenses to be cou­
pled into the ARHCF. Between the two collimating lenses, a half­wave plate (HWP) is placed for
laser polarization tuning to minimize the polarization difference between the pump and the sig­
nal from the weak birefringence of the ARHCF,thus improving the Raman gain [23]. The pump
is coupled into the coiled ARHCF of 8m fiber length and 10cm bending radius, with a coupling
efficiency of ∼80% [14]. The ARHCF is sealed by two gas cells that can endure up to 20 bar of
CO2 pressure placed at each end. The output beam from ARHCF is first collimated by a convex
lens, then passes through a dispersive prism acting as a long­pass filter to separate the 1946nm
Raman laser generated by SRS process from the residual pump spatially. By doing so, both of
the lasers can be characterized simultaneously. Subsequently, the separated Raman laser is
CO2 for CO2
21
==PAGE:30==
re­directed into the PA cell by a set of reflective mirrors. The angles of the mirrors are adjusted so
that the Raman laser beam is entering through the center of the PA cell for PA signal generation.
The Raman laser beam coming out of the PA cell is then incident on a CaF2 window which
acts as a beam splitter. The transmitted light is detected by the power meter consisting of a
thermal surface absorber (S405C,Thorlabs) and a power meter console. The reflected light
passes through a set of continuously variable neutral density filters (NDC­50C­4M,Thorlabs) as
attenuators so that the optical power will not saturates the amplified mid­infrared photodetec­
tor (PDAVJ8,Thorlabs). The photodetector is connected to an oscilloscope (Teledyne Lecroy
HD09000) to record pulse peak intensity. The peak intensity is recorded and plotted in matlab
as a function of time to monitor the stability of the output Raman power.
3.1.2
Gas path
As shown in figure 3.1, the CO2 and Ar gas are stored in two gas tanks, and connected to cor­
responding mass flow controllers (MFC, CS­200, Sevenstar) with the maximum flow rate of 2
SLM (originally with 200 sccm, later changed to the models with 2 SLM for a more stable and
repeatable experimental setting). The flow rate MFCs can be adjusted individually by software
by setting the percentage of the flow rate (with 100% corresponds to 2 SLM). The gases with
adjusted flow rate are coupled into one gas tube using check valve to enter the PA cell. The
gas out of the PA cell is released through gas outlet.
Generated PA signal will be detected by the low noise microphone installed on top of the PA
cell, which will then be processed by lock­in amplifier (MFLI 500kHz, Zurich Instruments).
CO2 for CO2
22
==PAGE:31==
3.2
Fiber characterisation
In this section, the ARHCF setup and its characteristics including measured transmission spec­
trum and calculated fiber loss will be briefly explained.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.2: The picture of (a) ARHCF setup and scanning electron microscope pictures of (b)
cross section of ARCHF ,(c) diameter of hollow­core region and (d) diameter of outer and inner
capillaries.
The fiber design is similar to that of the bottom of fig.2.4(a). Figure 3.2 showcases the actual
picture of the ARHCF setup and several SEM images to provide an overview of the fiber config­
uration. Fig.3.2(a) is the setup of coiled ARHCF showing the laser input and output ends, with
10 cm bend radius. In previous experiment, various bend radii were applied to investigate the
Raman laser power. The CO2 pressure in the fiber was maintained at atmospheric pressure.
The results suggested that when bend radii exceeds 10 cm, the impact from bend loss is not
significant. It is worth noticing that bend radii less than 10 cm might cause damage to the cap­
illary structure of the ARHCF [14].
Fig.3.2(b) shows the SEM image of ARHCF with a nested structure, forming a center hollow­
core region of 37.6 µm in diameter as marked in fig.3.2(c). Fig.3.2(d) shows the measured
diameters of outer and inner capillaries to be 22.4 µm and 5.85 µm respectively, their corre­
sponding wall thicknesses are 363 nm and 630 nm. The nested structure is selected for its
feature on reducing the fiber loss resulting from surface scattering, bend and light leakage [14].
To investigate characteristics of the ARHCF, simulations and measurements have been con­
ducted to obtain the spectra with resonance peak and loss of the fiber. The results can be seen
in figure 3.3.
CO2 for CO2
23
==PAGE:32==
To measure the transmission spectrum of the ARHCF, a supercontinuum laser source (SuperK
Extreme, NKT Phtonics) was used. The output light was coupled in to an optical spectrum an­
alyzer (Spectro 320, Instrument Systems) with a ZBLAN fiber pacth cable. In figure 3.3(a), the
normalized spectra of of the supercontinuum laser before coupling into and after propagating
through the ARHCF in ambient conditions can be seen. In the grey area of the plot around 850
nm, the spectrum has seen a significant drop after propagating through the ARHCF due to reso­
nance. In the longer wavelength region of around 1.1 µm to 2.4 µm, the difference between the
two spectra increases as wavelength grows, which might be caused by the increase of ARHCF
loss [14].
Figure 3.3(b) shows the loss spectra ranging from 1.5 µm to 3.0 µm, excluding fiber bend loss,
the loss of ARHCF was calculated using finite element method with COMSOL software. The
principle and calculation method for the fiber transmission properties was as discussed in [19],
where ECS­P and MEG laws were applied to model the relaxation matrix to account for the
collisional narrowing induced by rotational energy transfers,these two models allow for the cal­
culation of the relaxation matrix through the inversion of line broadening coefficients. With
these methods, the 2ν2 component of the Fermi dyad ν1/2ν2 of CO2 has been studied with
high­resolution SRS. From the results, the loss at 1.53 µm and 1.95 µm were found to be ap­
proximately 0.008 dB/m and 0.35 dB/m, respectively. The wide transmission window from 1.5
to 2 µm supports the first­order Raman conversion, while it significantly increases the threshold
of higher­order Stokes, which cannot be reached by the first­order Stokes with a pulse energy
less than 20 µJ. As a result, the higher­order Stokes are blocked, causing the confinement of
the full pulse energy on the first­order line at 1946 nm [14].
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: (a) Spectra of a supercontinuum laser before coupling into and after propagating
through the ARHCF filled with ambient air. (b) Calculated fiber loss of the ARHCF using the
finite element method with COMSOL software [14].
CO2 for CO2
24
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Laser characterisation
In this section, the characterisation of the Raman laser system is described. The procedure and
results are presented in [14], as the same laser system is applied in this work, thus the results
can be adopted here to demonstrate the its features.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.4: Measured Laser spectrum (a) The measured spectrum ranging from 1.5 to 2.1 µm
for both the residual pump and Raman laser is shown on the left axis. Absorption spectrum of
CO2 obtained from the high­resolution transmission molecular absorption database(HITRAN)
[31] is shown on the right axis. Zoomed spectrum from 1.85 to 2.05 µm is the inset of (a). (b) and
(c) shows when the pump power is set to a maximum level of 1.74 W and 0.62 W respectively,
the comparison of the output pump lasers from the nested ARHCF filled with either CO2 or Ar
at atmospheric pressure.
By adjusting the orientation of the HWP, the average Raman power was measured to be 122
mW at atmospheric pressure and maximum pump power that corresponds to 15.3 µJ pulse
energy.Figure 3.4(a) demonstrates the measured spectrum of both the residual pump and Ra­
man laser on the range of 1.5 to 2.1 µm. In order to measure the spectrum, the light was
coupled in to the optical spectrum analyzer (Spectro 320, Instrument Systems) using a ZBLAN
fiber patch cable, same measurement method as used for obtaining fig.3.3(a). The two spikes
around 1533 nm and 1946 nm can be clearly observed, corresponding to the pump and 1st
order Raman Stokes lines shown in fig.3.3(b), indicating the absence of anti­Stokes lines and
higher order Stokes. The center wavelength of 1946 nm for Raman laser can be seen from the
inset of fig.3.4(a). To prove the absence of higher order Stokes, a 2.5 µ m long pass filter was
CO2 for CO2
25
==PAGE:34==
put at the output side of the ARHCF. Since there was no power observed with thermal power
meter, it can be said that the higher order Stokes was absent . As for the absorption spectrum
of CO2, the data including the CO2 absorbance for corresponding wavelength (converted from
the relation: k = 1/λ where k is the wavenumber) was obtained from HITRAN database [31].
It can be observed that there is an overlap between the generated Raman laser and the CO2
absorption band [14].
The amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) distribution of the output pump laser from the ARHCF
filled with either CO2 or Ar at atmospheric pressure was measured, with SRS process prohib­
ited in the case with Ar. The spectrum was recorded by an optical spectrum analyzer (ANDO
AQ6317B, AssetRelay) with a resolution of 0.01 nm. When the maximum pump power was 1.74
W as depicted in fig.3.4(b), the spectrum for the case of pure CO2 gas shows a lower signal
intensity at the spike region compares to the case of pure Ar, while the rest of the spectrum
remains similar for both cases. When the maximum pump power was 0.62 W as depicted in
fig.3.4(c), the spectra for both CO2 and Ar cases show similar profiles, indicating there is no
SRS process present in both cases. The comparison between fig.3.4(b) and (c) indicates that
the SRS process only occurs during laser pulse, and because of ASE’s low power level, it is left
in the pump wavelength region [14].
Figure 3.5(a) shows a plot of measured Raman pulse energy as a function varying pressure in
the gas cell, with the inset containing the measured beam profiles of the Raman laser (left) and
the residual pump (right), it can be inferred that both of the light beams operate in fundamental
mode as their profiles exhibit Gaussian­like distribution. When the pressure in the CO2­filled
ARHCF increases over the range of 1 to 17 bar, the pulse energy already reaches the maximum
level of 16.3 µJ (corresponding to 28% quantum efficiency) at 1.2 bar and drops quickly after­
wards, as shown in fig.3.5(a). This tendency is different from other reported gas­filled ARHCF
Raman lasers presented [23, 32], where the pulse energy keeps increasing as the pressure in­
creases, eventually reaching a saturation level [33]. This difference observed is caused by the
generated Raman laser overlapping with the CO2 absorption band, as discussed in fig.3.4(a).
The increase of the gas pressure inside the ARHCF fiber leads to the increase of the Raman
gain bandwidth (due to the reduced gas molecule dephasing time) and consequently the laser
linewidth [34], meanwhile it broadens the absorption linewidth of the CO2 gas due to the en­
hanced molecule collisions. As a result, the overlap between the Raman laser line and CO2
absorption line increases with higher gas pressure. This was experimentally verified by inves­
tigating the direct CO2 absorption of the Raman laser by passing the collimated laser beam
through a gas chamber filled with pure CO2 at different pressures. Both ends of the gas cell
are sealed by two CaF2 windows for gas filling, thus the hollow cylindrical shape inside of the
gas cell allows for 20 cm long optical path. An IR photodetector (PDAVJ10, Thorlabs) was used
for recording the pulse peak intensity. It is worth noticing that, although the peak intensity has
a high pulse­to­pulse fluctuation due to quantum noise, its statistical behavior allows a stable
distribution, thus it can be used for measuring CO2 absorption [14].
The CO2 absorption under different pressure inside of the gas chamber is depicted in fig.3.5(b),
while the gas pressure inside ARHCF for Raman laser generation was 10 bar, this is to broaden
the laser linewidth to increase the overlap with CO2 absorption spectra. As demonstrated on
the plot, as the CO2 pressure in the PA cell increases from 1 to 15 bar, the corresponding peak
intensity decreases [14]. It is because when the overlap between laser linewidth and CO2 ab­
sorption spectra, more laser power will be absorbed by CO2, resulting less laser power for SRS
process, lowering the Raman laser power for PA signal generation later on, however, with a
CO2 for CO2
26
==PAGE:35==
wider overlap between laser linewidth and CO2 absorption spectra, larger part of the incoming
Raman laser will interact with CO2 molecules for PA signal generation. The above mentioned
two processes result in a compromise between power loss in SRS process and more PA signal
generation with broader Raman laser linewidth caused by higher CO2 pressure for SRS process.
When CO2 pressure was set to 1.2 bar for Raman pulse generation, the the pump pulse energy
was varied. the corresponding measured Raman pulse engergy was recorded and plotted as
a function of varying pump pulse energy as shown in fig.3.5(c). The measured Raman pulse
engery exhibits an almost linear trend after the pump pulse energy is higher than the threshold
of around 50 µJ, and the maximum value of the Raman pulse engery is 16.3 µJ [14].
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.5: (a) Raman pulse energy versus the CO2 pressure. Insets of (a) are measured
beam profiles of the Raman laser (left) and the residual pump (right).(b) Measured pulse peak
intensities of the Raman laser after propagating through a 20 cm long gas chamber under dif­
ferent CO2 pressures. (c)Raman laser pulse energy measurements versus pump pulse energy.
(d) Average of 10,000 pulses at different pressures for residual pump (top) and Raman laser
(bottom) [14].
The pulse profiles of the residual pump and Raman laser were measured under three different
CO2 for CO2
27
==PAGE:36==
pressure settings inside of ARHCF for comparison to investigate the impact of the pressure as
shown in fig.3.5(d). In order to have the comparison on the same basis, the Raman laser power
was adjusted to 4.4 mW by modifying the pump power. Each pulse profile is an average of
10,000 measured pulses.The power coupling into the detector is controlled by neutral density
filters to ensure that most of the laser pulses lie in the linear detection regime of the photode­
tector [35]. From the top plot of fig.3.5(d) with residual pump pulse profile, it can be seen that
as the pressure increased from 2 bar to 10 bar, the pulse duration decreased from 5.3 ns to
3.0 ns, and a second peak gradually appears in the trailing edge region [32]. From the bot­
tom of fig.3.5(d), an oscillation on the trailing edge of the Raman pulses can be observed, it is
caused by the 100 MHz bandwidth limitation of the mid­IR photodetector. The amplitude of the
oscillation decreases with higher pressure, indicating the increase of the Raman pulse duration,
this phenomenon is caused by the decrease in molecular dephasing time, which is essential for
measuring the transition time from spontaneous Raman scattering to SRS state [36]. From the
residual pump pulse profile in the top of fig.3.5(d), it can be seen that the amplitude of the center
region from 6 ns to 8 ns is higher at 10 bar than at 5 bar. It indicates that the CO2 absorption
loss for Raman laser is higher at higher pressure, which is in line with the trend in fig.3.5(b).
In addition, from the Raman laser pulse profile showing in the bottom of fig.3.5(d), the pulses
show different delays in their leading edges. This phenomenon is caused by the dependence
of the Raman gain bandwidth and CO2 absorption coefficient on CO2 pressure. The Raman
gain bandwidth will shorten the gas dephasing time and thus the delay as the pressure of CO2
increases, while CO2 absorption coefficient will increase the threshold of SRS and the delay.
Thus, the delay is counteracted result of both the Raman gain bandwidth and CO2 absorption
coefficient [14].
CO2 for CO2
28
==PAGE:37==
3.4
Characterisation of PA signal
In this section, the characterisation of the PA signal including the configuration of PA cell, mea­
surement of PA signal and background signal in time and frequency domain will be presented.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.6: (a) The configuration of PA cell including resonance chamber and acoustic filter. (b)
shows the measured PA time signal of the 1­inch microphone presented in [25], with resulting
signal strength of 1.2 mV. (c) and (d) shows measured PA signal and background signal in time
and frequency domain, respectively.
Fig.3.6(a) shows the configuration of the PA cell used in this work. It can be seen that it adopts
the conventional cylindrical structure with a single hollow­core cylinder region running through a
stainless steel housing. The radius of the cylinder is 4 mm and the length is 10 cm, its acoustic
eigenmodes are placed within the broad spectrum range of the PA signals excited by the pulsed
laser. This dimension shortens the gas diffusion time and enables fast monitoring of CO2. The
cylinder inner surface is polished to ensure the uniformity of the acoustic refections. The optical
windows at both ends of the cylinder are made of sapphire glass. Buffer regions with acoustic
filters are designed to avoid the acoustic excitation disturbances caused by the absorption of
optical windows and the environmental acoustic noise, these acoustic filters are designed to
filter out the noise at frequency of 3 KHz which is also the resonance frequency of the PA cell.
The microphone is placed halfway between the ends of the cylinder to pick up the PA signal,
and with a frequency range of 5 to 20 KHz[13].
Fig.3.6(b) shows the measured PA time signal of a 1­inch condenser microphone (type 4179,
Brüel & Kjær) with frequency range of 7Hz to 12.5 KHz and sensitivity of 101.0 mV/Pa pre­
sented in [25]. The principle of PA cell design and microphone placement is similar to that of
CO2 for CO2
29
==PAGE:38==
this work. For PA signal excitation, a pulsed line­tunable CO2 transversely excited atmosphere
laser (Lumonics Model 102­2) was used, with repetition rate of 0.5 Hz and a pulse energy of
10 mJ, in a gas mixture lean in N2 to obtain a dominating main pulse with a length of ∼300 ns.
The gas mixture in the PA cell was 10.3 ppmV of C2H4 buffered in N2. The signal detected by
microphone was then coupled to a a low­noise pre­amplifier(Brüel & Kjær 2660) and fed into a
selective filter–amplifier system with a center band­pass frequency of 4100 Hz. The decay time
here is ∼80 ms, as the signal intensity gradually decreases [25]. In order to obtain such a pulse
behaviour, the repetition rate of the laser shall be relatively low, since the pump laser used in
this work has a high repetition rate, and we did not get the laser source with low repetition rate
to conduct the measurement as this thesis is written, the plot from [25] is used to compare with
fig.3.6(c).
Fig.3.6(c) and (d) show the measured PA signal and background signal in time and frequency
domain from previous work of the group. With ambient air condition during test, and 400 ppmv
CO2 concentration in the PA cell. The Raman laser has an 8 kHz pulse repetition rate.The mea­
sured relative pulse energy noise (REN) is 5%. From fig.3.6(c) it can be seen that the PA signal
has exhibits a slightly higher amplitude compares to the background signal. With the high rep­
etition rate of 8 kHz and the pulse duration of 7 ns. Thus, as opposed to the signal presented in
fig.3.6(b), each signal pulse generated by PA process from Raman laser pulse can no longer be
distinguished on the plot but overlapping with the neighbouring pulse, and the decay of signal
intensity cannot be observed. After Fourier transformation into the time domain, it can be seen
that the PA signal and background signal have similar spectra profiles over the spectral range
shown in Fig.3.6(d), except for the region around 8 kHz, where the signal shows an obvious
spike, indicating the PA signal has the same frequency at 8 kHz as the Raman laser repetition
rate, while the background shows no response to the Raman laser excitation, in addition, it is
obvious that the spikes appeared near the region of 16 KHz and 16 KHz, exhibiting the signal’s
periodic feature, which requires a lock­in amplifier to further filter out the noise and amplify the
signal.In this work, the laser repetition rate is set to 8.7 kHz.
The detected PA signal from microphone is then processed by the lock­in amplifier which was
properly configured with LabOne software to amplify the signal and record the PA signal intensity
as a function of time. The lock­in amplifier covers a wide frequency range from DC to 500 kHz,
its A/D conversion and D/A conversion are both 16 bits with sampling rate of 60 mega samples
per second (MSa/s). Fig.3.7 shows the screenshot of the lock­in amplifier configuration applied
in this work. It can be seen that the external reference signal is generated by a phase lock loop
(PLL) with 8.7 kHz matching the PA signal generated by Raman laser with 8.7 kHz.
Figure 3.7: Configuration of lock­in amplifier
After going through the signal mixer together with the PA signal, the output X and Y compo­
CO2 for CO2
30
==PAGE:39==
nents then pass through low­pass filter with the order set to the highest level at 8, and TC set
to 300.0 ms, thus frequencies outside the filter bandwidth are blocked more efficiently, to have
a higher signal­to­noise ration (SNR), but with a relatively long reponse time. The ouput signal
is subsequently processed by sinc filter which is a comb filter with notches at integer multiples
of the demodulation frequency, thus allows for strong attenuation of the ω(ω = ωin = ωr) and
2ω components. The output signal from low­pass filter will enter data transfer module and be
recorded.
Fig.3.8 shows a full screenshot of the LabOne measurement software for the lock­in amplifier
during one of the measurements. On top half of the screenshot, the graphical representation
of the modulators in the form of block­diagrams can be seen, demonstrating the configuration
of the lock­in amplifier. The bottom half of the screenshot showcases the measured PA signal
intensity over time, by properly adjusting the scale of X and Y­axis, the progress of the PA inten­
sity can be monitored, the recorded data can be exported to be further processed and analyzed.
The difference in signal intensity can be clearly observed when changing CO2 concentration in
the PA cell, as the stair­like behaviour. By visual observation, when the curve is flat for over 5
mins in the plot, the signal is regarded as stabilized and the equilibrium in the PA cell has been
reached, and the measurement for the next CO2 concentration setting can commence.
Figure 3.8: Screenshot of the user interface of LabOne software for the lock­in amplifier, includ­
ing its configuration and recorded PA signal intensity as a function of time.
CO2 for CO2
31
==PAGE:40==
3.5
Long­term stabilization of Raman Laser
After setting up the experimental equipment as demonstrated in 3.1, characterizing the laser,
ARHCF, PA cell and configuring the lock­in amplifier, the noise performance of the Raman laser
after propagating through the PA cell was then investigated to evaluate the stability of the sys­
tem.
In principle, the Raman lasers possess a rather high pulse­to­pulse fluctuation owing to the fact
Figure 3.9: 2.5 hours stabilization with 6 bar of CO2 pressure in gas cell
that the SRS process is initiated by random quantum noise. In this work, relative intensity noise
(RIN, defined as the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean value of pulse peak intensity) is
applied to evaluate the noise performance [14]. The CO2 pressure in the gas cells connecting
to the ARHCF was set to 6 bar, while the CO2 concentration in the PA cell varied over during
the process (with Ar concentration adjusted accordingly, for instance, when CO2 is set to 1% of
maximum flow rate, Ar will be set to 99% of maximum flow rate, since the maximum flow rate
for both MFCs is 2 SLM, CO2 concentration in the PA cell will be 1%).
The measurement was performed over a period of 2.5 hours, the peak intensity of 16,153 pulses
were measured by the mid­infrared photodetector (PDAVJ8,Thorlab) and recorded by the oscil­
loscope. Before the measurement, the laser system had been warming­up for 1 hour to stabilize
the pump laser and the coupling efficiency into the ARHCF. The measurement result can be
seen in fig.3.9, the average peak intensity over 2.5 hours is calculated to be 0.0272 V, showing
a good long­term stability, indicating that the system is suitable for conducting the experiment
of photoacoustic CO2 detection.With the RIN calculated to be 6.232%, the Raman laser also
exhibits a good noise performance.
It is worth noticing that as mentioned in section 3.1.2, the MFCs used in this experiment were
with maximum flow rate of 200 sccm for both CO2 and Ar gas originally. In the measurements
CO2 for CO2
32
==PAGE:41==
of the first few weeks, after setting up the equipment including guiding the Raman laser beam
through the PA cell and determining the configuration of the lock­in amplifier, the measurement
of the PA signal with different CO2 concentration (by adjusting its flow rate to the percentage of
maximum flow rate) with Ar flow rate changed correspondingly, and the total flow rate of CO2
and Ar was kept to be 200 sccm.
As the measurement proceeded by changing the flow rates of both gases to test linearity and
repeatability of the PA system, two main issues occurred: the system took quite long time to
reach the equilibrium condition when the detected PA signal stabilised after changing the flow
rate of the gases, and the PA signal amplitudes were not constant for the same CO2 concen­
tration settings when it was changed in different trends (higher to lower concentration, or the
opposite) or with different intervals, thus, the measurement did not present good repeatability.
The first issue could be caused by the relatively small total flow rate of 200 sccm, as it will take
longer time for the gases to fill in the whole PA cell and for the signal to stabilize. Moreover,
from fig.3.6(a) of PA cell geometry, it can be seen there are several small cavities in the corners
created by the acoustic filters and the optical windows, these cavities inevitably create reservoir
for gases in PA cell. When the total gas flow rate is relatively slow, the time it takes for the
incoming gas to fill in the cell, especially the cavities will be quite long, thus the slow process
to reach equilibrium (over 10 mins during our experiment). In addition, even when the signal
seemed to be stable, there might still be residual gas from previous settings because the low
gas flow rate was not strong enough to sweep away the residual gas. This explains the second
issue, since the residual gas composition might be different after each measurement, the gas
composition for the same setting will in turn vary, resulting in different PA signal amplitudes for
the same CO2 concentration.
Thus, in later experiments, the MFCs were changed to the models with maximum flow rate of 2
SLM, with the higher flow rate, the equilibrium in PA cell can be accomplished faster, reducing
the stabilization time after each change of CO2 concentration. With the high total flow rate of
2 SLM for each setting, the residual gas in the filter cavities can be swept away by the strong
incoming gas flow, enabling a more accurate and repeatable measurement setting, which is
proved by the experimental results in the following section.
CO2 for CO2
33
==PAGE:42==
4
Experimental results
In this chapter, the experimental results for this work are presented, including the measurement
for locating the linear response range, repeated measurement in the linear range for verifying
the repeatability of of the system, measurement under various power while the CO2 pressure
remained unchanged the gas cell for Raman laser generation, and measurement under differ­
ent CO2 pressure in gas cell for Raman laser generation while the Raman laser power into the
PA cell was kept the same using a neutral density filter. From the results, the PA gas detection
system can be proofed to be effective for photoacoustic CO2 detection in the linear range of
1% to 25% concentration (while the Ar concentration varied from 99% to 75% correspondingly).
It is worth noticing that, before each measurement section mentioned below, the laser system
has been warmed up for 1 hour in order to have a stable Raman laser power at around 50 mW
(while the pump laser power was set to maximum) on the output end of PA cell detected by
thermal surface absorber (S405C,Thorlabs) as shown in fig.3.1.
4.1
Locating the linear response region
As discussed in section.2.4.1, theoretically, the response of PA signal intensity should be linear
as increasing CO2 concentration. Thus the CO2 concentration in PA cell was adjusted by MFC
from 1% to 100%, with the interval being 1% in 1% to 10%, and 5% in 20% to 100%(while the
Ar concentration varied from 99% to 0% correspondingly). In the meantime, the CO2 pressure
in gas cell for Raman laser generation was kept constant at 1 bar. Each concentration setting
was measured for around 10 minutes including the time for the signal reached equilibrium, and
the PA signal intensity was taken as the average of the stabilized value. The average PA signal
intensity is plotted as a function of CO2 concentration as shown in fig.4.1(a). The corresponding
tables with data can be found in Appendix table A.2 and table A.3.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: Measured PA signal intensity from (a)1% to 100% and (b)1% to 25% CO2 concen­
tration in PA cell. Raman laser was generated with 1 bar of CO2 pressure in the gas cell.
It can be seen that when the CO2 concentration exceeds 25%, the response of the average
PA signal intensity with increasing concentration is no longer linear as the PA signal intensity
CO2 for CO2
34
==PAGE:43==
exhibits a decrease from 25% to 50% and 95% to 100% of CO2 concentration, which cannot be
explained as in section.2.4.1. However, this could be attributed to attenuation of acoustic wave
as described in [37].
When the gas model is considered to be ideal, it is assumed that the gas molecules only pos­
sess kinetic energy (i.e. no vibrational/rotational internal energy) and only experience elastic
collisions. This approximation is applicable for for weakly polar gases and at pressures and tem­
peratures close to ambient conditions. Under these conditions, there is no change in entropy,
thus, no acoustic wave attenuation occurs as the wave resembles an isentropic compression/­
expansion cycle [37].
The ideal acoustic wave mentioned above was derived in the ideal conditions of constant en­
tropy. When polyatomic molecules such as CO2 has internal (e.g. rotational and/or vibrational)
degrees of freedom. The acoustic wave generated from PA process may modulate the exter­
nal degree of freedom of the molecules (translational, i.e. kinetic energy) via the flow velocity,
the thermodynamic equilibrium of the energies of the internal and external degrees of freedom
maybe disturbed. In consequence, irreversible transfers of energy occur.The transfers of en­
ergy have an opposed direction at each π phase shift of the wave and lead to attenuation of the
acoustic wave. This process, known as bulk viscosity, is one of the dissipative processes that
transfer energy from the coherent acoustic wave into thermal energy, which lead to r acoustic
wave attenuation and increase in entropy [37].
Another dissipative process presents in the PA system is thermal conduction. As an acoustic
wave contains a periodic oscillation of the temperature. As both CO2 and Ar gas have non­zero
thermal conductivity, there is heat flowing from higher temperature regions towards the lower
temperature regions. Leading to energy dissipation and thus acoustic wave attenuation [37].
As the above mentioned is only assumption for occurrence of the non­linear response, it re­
quires a more thorough investigation both theoretically and experimentally, which is beyond the
scope of this work. Thus, the focus of this work is on the relatively linear response region be­
tween 1% and 25% CO2 concentration. The average PA signal intensity in this region is plotted
as a function of CO2 concentration as shown in fig.4.1(b) with an interval of 1% CO2 concentra­
tion. It can be seen that the response of PA signal intensity is relatively linear to increasing CO2
concentration. Thus, it can be inferred that the experimental setup in this work is applicable for
optoacoustic detection of CO2 concentration ranging from 1% to 25%, in the following section,
more measurements are presented in order to verify the validity of the above conclusion, and
the repeatability of the experiment.
CO2 for CO2
35
==PAGE:44==
4.2
Repeated measurement
In order to determine if the linear response is repeatable, the experiment configuration was
kept the same as mentioned in section 4.1, while in the first part of the measurement, the CO2
concentration was adjusted from 1% to 25% and back to 1%, the process was done twice. The
measured PA signal intensity after lock­in amplifier is plotted as a function of time, one of plotted
the ascending and descending dynamic evolution process can be seen in figure.4.2(a) exhibit­
ing a stair­like shape.
The ascending and descending process took 1 hour combined. During the monitoring process,
the PA cell was under a constant flow of CO2 at a specifc concentration. The time required for
reaching an equilibrium between two consecutive concentrations ranged from 87 s to 287 s,
including the MFCs adjustment time for every concentration of approximately 10 s, and the gas
diffusion time from MCFs to the PA cell. It can be seen that the equilibrium level for each CO2
concentration remains similar when the CO2 concentration was altered both in the ascending
and descending orders, exhibiting a good repeatability.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: Measured data from lock­in amplifier with (a)repeat from 1% to 25% and (b)repeat
between 10% and 20% of CO2 concentration in PA cell. Raman laser was generated with 1 bar
of CO2 pressure in the gas cell.
In order to further prove the statement and verify the stability , another measurement with the
CO2 concentration alternating between 10% and 20%, the dynamic evolution process is shown
in figure.4.2(b). On x­axis from left to right, the average PA signal intensity for 10% of CO2
concentration is 28.93 µV, 28.77 µV and 28.62 µV respectively, and 64.37 µV, 62.62 µV and
63.47 µV respectively for 20% of CO2. The largest deviation for 10% of CO2 concentration is
1.07% between 28.93 µV and 28.62 µV and 2.72% between 64.37 µV and 62.62 µV for 20%
of CO2 concentration. The corresponding tables with data can be found in Appendix table A.4
and table A.5.
Therefore, it can be concluded that the PA detection system has a relatively linear response in
the range of 1% to 25% for CO2 concentration and has a good repeadability with low deviations
over time.
CO2 for CO2
36
==PAGE:45==
4.3
Measurement under various Raman power
After locating the linear response region and the repeatability of the system. Another measure­
ment was conducted focusing on the linear response region of 1% to 25% CO2 concentration,
with the rest configuration unchanged as previous measurements. The CO2 pressure was kept
constant at 1 bar for Raman laser generation. Each concentration setting was measured for
around 10 minutes including the time for the signal reached equilibrium, and the PA signal in­
tensity was taken as the average of the stabilized value.
The first set of data was measured with Raman laser output power at 50 mW on the thermal
surface absorber. Then a continuous neutral density filter (NDL­25C­2, Thorlabs) was placed
between the long­pass filter and PA cell, to modify the Raman power coming out of the PA cell.
The succeeding measurement was done when the output Raman power was modified to 30
mW and 15 mW. The average PA signal intensity under each Raman laser power setting was
plotted as a function of CO2 concentration in PA cell as shown in fig.4.3. The corresponding
table with data can be found in Appendix table A.6.
Figure 4.3: Comparison of measured PA signal for different Raman power from 1% to 25% CO2
concentration in PA cell, together with linear fit and 95 confidence band for the data. Raman
laser was generated with1bar of CO2 pressure in the gas cell.
It can be observed that under the three different Raman power settings, the results all exhibit
linear dependence of the PA intensity on the CO2 concentration. Along with each data point,
the corresponding fitted linear functions and 95% confidence bands are also presented. The
linear functions for each Raman power setting are expressed as:
I50mW = 3.6736 · 10−6 ∗C50mW −4.7527 · 10−6
I30mW = 2.1655 · 10−6 ∗C30mW + 1.7812 · 10−7
CO2 for CO2
37
==PAGE:46==
I15mW = 1.0654 · 10−6 ∗C15mW −1.1243 · 10−6
Where I and C denote PA signal intensity (unit: V) and CO2 concentration (unit: %) respectively.
The linear regression expressions act as calibration models to calculate the CO2 concentration
from the corresponding PA intensity under certain Raman power. Moreover, it can be seen that
with the same CO2 concentration in the PA cell, the PA signal intensity increases under higher
Raman laser power, it can be explained by eq.2.27 where the PA amplitude P is proportional
to the laser pulse energy E.
4.4
Measurement under 1 bar and 5 bar
The impact of CO2 pressure on Raman pulse generation has been shown in fig.3.5(d). In this
work, the impact of CO2 pressure in gas cell on PA signal intensity was investigated.
The CO2 pressure in gas cell was set to 1 bar and 5 bar respectively, while keeping the Ra­
man laser power out of PA cell was kept close with a continuous neutral density filter between
long­pass filter and PA cell. The amplified mid­infrared photodetector and the oscilloscope were
used to ensure that the Raman laser intensities are comparable under both pressure settings
and to record the peak pulse intensities. Each concentration setting was measured for around
10 minutes including the time for the signal reached equilibrium, and the PA signal intensity was
taken as the average of the stabilized value. The average PA signal intensity is plotted as a
function of CO2 concentration as shown in fig.4.4(a). The corresponding table with data can be
found in Appendix table A.7.
Along with each data point, the corresponding fitted linear functions and 95% confidence bands
are also presented in fig.4.4(a). The linear functions for each Raman power setting are ex­
pressed as:
I1bar = 1.4037 · 10−6 ∗C1bar −1.5883 · 10−6
I5bar = 1.1683 · 10−6 ∗C5bar −3.3437 · 10−7
It can be seen that under both 1 bar and 5 bar of CO2 pressures in the gas cell, the PA signal
intensity exhibits a linear response to increasing CO2 concentration in PA cell.
In fig.4.4(b), the peak pulse intensity was plotted over a timespan of 30 mins for the case of 1
bar. The average peak intensity is calculated to be 0.0149 V, RIN is calculated to be 5.57%.
The histogram of the measured data is shown in fig.4.4(c).
In fig.4.4(d), the peak pulse intensity was plotted over a timespan of 30 mins for the case of 5
bar. The average peak intensity is calculated to be 0.0144 V, RIN is calculated to be 9.50%.
The histogram of the measured data is shown in fig.4.4(e).
It can be seen that the noise performance for the case of 1 bar is a better than the case of 5 bar
of CO2 with lower RIN value.
CO2 for CO2
38
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.4: (a) Raman laser was generated with 1 bar and 5 bar of CO2 pressure in the gas
cell respectively. PA signal measured from 1% to 25% CO2 concentration in PA cell, together
with corresponding linear fits and 95 confidence bands for the data. (b) peak intensity and
(c)histogram of Raman pulse with 1 bar of CO2 pressure in laser gas cell. (d) peak intensity
and (e)histogram of Raman pulse with 5 bar of CO2 pressure in laser gas cell.
CO2 for CO2
39
==PAGE:48==
5
Conclusion
A CO2 trace gas detection system has been presented in this work, the detection scheme is
based on PA signal excitation by pulsed Raman laser at the wavelength of 1946 nm, which was
generated from SRS process through an 8­meter­long nested ARHCF with both ends sealed by
gas cells which can be filled with CO2 gas, the pressure is controlled by the valve on gas tank.
The pump laser is a custom­made 1553nm Er­doped fiber laser, with the repetition rate set to
8.7 KHz.
The generated Raman laser is then guided into the PA cell for PA signal generation. Generated
signal is collected by a microphone and processed by a lock­in amplifier. The characterisation
of the laser system including the pump laser and CO2 filled ARHCF has proven that the laser
setting has enabled sufficient suppression of higher­order Stokes so that of the full pulse energy
is confined on the first­order line at 1946 nm. By comparing the measured spectrum for residual
pump and Raman laser and the CO2 absorption spectrum obtained from HITRAM database, an
overlap between the generated Raman laser and the CO2 absorption band can be observed.
With increasing CO2 pressure in the gas cell, the generated laser line width broadens, increas­
ing the overlap with CO2 absorption spectra, thus more energy lost due to absorption, resulting
a decrease in Raman laser peak intensity.
After the characterisation of PA signal and configuration of lock­in amplifier, it is proven that the
experimental setup has a good long­term stability as the measured Raman peak intensity over
the period of 2.5 hours. The corresponding RIN value is calculated to be 6.232%, indicating it
has a good noise performance on peak intensity.
During the experiment, it is found that the PA signal intensity exhibits a linear response in the
region of 1­25% CO2 concentration (with corresponding Ar concentration varied from 99% to
75%), however, from 26% to 100% CO2 concentration, the response of the PA signal intensity
is no longer linear, which is not in line with the prediction. This non­linear response requires a
more thorough and detailed investigation in future research and experiments.
For the linear region of 1­25% CO2 concentration, the measurement showed good repeatability
and stability with the biggest deviation of 2.72%, when the CO2 concentration was varied and
measured repeatedly. Further measurements confirms the linear response of PA signal inten­
sity on CO2 concentration with varying Raman laser power and varying CO2 pressure in the gas
cell for Raman laser generation. In the meantime, the peak Raman intensity remained relatively
stable during the measurements when the CO2 concentration was adjusted. With the RIN of
5.57% at 1 bar of CO2 pressure in the gas cell, indicating it has a good noise performance on
peak intensity during the experiment.
It can be concluded that the system proposed in this work can generate a stable Raman laser for
PA signal excitation with low RIN. The generated PA signal intensity exhibits linear dependence
on CO2 concentration in the range of 1­25% CO2 concentration. The linear dependency is valid
with varying Raman power and CO2 pressure in gas cell. The system also showed good stability
and repeatability. Thus, the system presents a new scheme of CO2 detection and monitoring
with Raman laser generated from CO2 filled ARHCF.
CO2 for CO2
40
==PAGE:49==
6
Perspectives
The PA CO2 detection system proposed in this work has shown the linear dependence of PA
signal intensity on CO2 concentration in the range of 1­25% CO2 concentration. However, the
non­linear region of 26­100 % CO2 concentration requires more thorough and detailed research
and experiments in the future in order to improve the performance of the system and to cover
the full range. This non­linear response could be attributed to the dissipative processes pre­
sented in the PA system, including thermal conduction and bulk viscosity, which will lead to the
attenuation of acoustic wave generated by PA process. During the dissipative processes, the
energy will be transferred from the coherent acoustic wave into thermal energy. This explana­
tion needs to be validated in future research where the temperature change in the gas cell is
monitored.
For the linear region of 1­25% CO2 concentration, there are still some oscillation parts in fig.4.1(b),
which presents an obstacle if the system is to be utilized. The oscillation might be caused by
a possible double­linear dependence of the PA signal on the CO2 concentration as the case of
CH4 depicted in [26], where the first is the linear variation with the gas concentration, as the
increasing amount of energy absorbed in CO2. The second is the linear response caused by
the changing of molecular relaxation rate in response to the CO2 concentration [26]. However,
the a linear variation of the relaxation rate in their work was obtained from small CH4 concen­
trations, thus, the validity of this theory should be proved for CO2 and higher concentration by
further experiments.
Another aspect that can be explored in our detection system would be the progress of PA signal
response in closed PA cell with certain CO2 concentration, rather than the open PA cell with
constant gas flow as we did in this master thesis. In one of the measurements, the PA signal
intensity was measured in a closed PA cell with certain CO2 concentration, instead of reach­
ing an equilibrium condition with stable PA signal, the detected signal kept a slowly but steady
increase for a few hours. It might because when the gas flow is absent, more CO2 molecules
are populated through energy transfer from the acoustic wave. However, since the focus of this
master thesis is on the PA signal under constant gas flow in the PA cell, and the time required
to achieve stabilization of PA signal intensity in closed PA cell is too long for the scale of this
thesis, this aspect of the system was not investigated. In future work, it might be of interest to
perform more measurements on a closed PA cell with varying CO2 concentration, to investigate
the time it takes for each configuration to reach equilibrium in the PA cell with a constant PA
signal amplitude, and the comparison of stabilized PA signal amplitudes.
As mentioned in section 3.4, it relies on visual observation of the PA signal intensity curve to de­
termine when the equilibrium in the PA cell has been reached and the signal becomes stable, in
general, this method is sufficient to conduct measurements. However, when the measurement
requires a more accurate timing, or under some CO2 concentration settings, the fluctuation of
PA signal intensity is relatively strong, making it more difficult to determine the time, this method
might not be the most ideal one.
Although it has been demonstrated by the measurements that the proposed system has a good
long­term stability of Raman laser power. It is worth pointing out that the time it takes for reach­
CO2 for CO2
41
==PAGE:50==
ing the stable laser output is relatively long (∼1 hour), as the fiber end of laser input is heated
by pump laser, resulting in the softening of the fiber end, this induces a slight drift of the fiber
end. Though slightly, this heat­induced drift causes a misalignment between the fiber end and
pump laser beam, significantly lowering the coupling efficiency, thus, causing a drop on result­
ing Raman power. During this stabilization process the position of the gas cell holding the fiber
end should be re­adjusted to ensure the optimum light coupling. However, after the stabiliza­
tion, there were still occasional power drops during the measurement process, thus it requires
constant monitoring on the Raman laser power and sometimes micro­adjustment.
CO2 for CO2
42
==PAGE:51==
References
[1]
Lamb W et al. “A review of trends and drivers of greenhouse gas emissions by sector from
1990 to 2018”. In: ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH LETTERS 16.7 (2021), p. 073005.
ISSN: 1748­9326 (online). DOI: 10.1088/1748-9326/abee4e(online). URL: https://iopscience.
iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/abee4e.
[2]
Niklas Höhne et al. “Emissions: world has four times the work or one­third of the time”.
English. In: Nature 579.7797 (2020), pp. 25–28. ISSN: 0028­0836. DOI: 10.1038/d41586-
020-00571-x.
[3]
V Batarshin, A Gulevatenko, and A Semiokhin. “The Use and Utilization of CO2, as Part of
the Fight with Greenhouse Effect”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science. Vol. 666. 3. IOP Publishing. 2021, p. 032018.
[4]
Tongxin Dai et al. “The development of TDLAS CO2 gas detection system with VCSEL
light source”. In: International Conference on Sensors and Instruments (ICSI 2021). Ed.
by Fengjie Cen and Wei Wei. SPIE, July 2021. DOI: 10.1117/12.2603005. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1117%2F12.2603005.
[5]
Hong lian Li et al. “Measurement of CO2 concentration based on supercontinuum laser
absorption spectroscopy”. eng. In: Optoelectronics Letters 17.3 (2021), pp. 176–182.
ISSN: 19935013, 16731905. DOI: 10.1007/s11801-021-0099-1.
[6]
Guolin Li, Enting Dong, and Wen­hai Ji. “A Near­Infrared Trace CO2 Detection Sys­
tem Based on an 1,580 nm Tunable Diode Laser Using a Cascaded Integrator Comb
(CIC) Filter­Assisted Wavelength Modulation Technique and a Digital Lock­in Amplifier”.
In: Frontiers in Physics 7 (2019), p. 199. ISSN: 2296­424X. DOI: 10.3389/fphy.2019.00199.
URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fphy.2019.00199.
[7]
G. Wysocki, A. A. Kosterev, and F. K. Tittel. “Influence of molecular relaxation dynamics
on quartz­enhanced photoacoustic detection of CO2 at λ =2 μm”. eng. In: Applied Physics
B: Lasers and Optics 85.2­3 (2006), pp. 301–306. ISSN: 14320649, 09462171. DOI: 10.
1007/s00340-006-2369-9.
[8]
Guolin Li, Enting Dong, and Wen Hai Ji. “A Near­Infrared Trace CO2 Detection System
Based on an 1,580 nm Tunable Diode Laser Using a Cascaded Integrator Comb (CIC)
Filter­Assisted Wavelength Modulation Technique and a Digital Lock­in Amplifier”. eng.
In: Frontiers in Physics 7 (2019), p. 199. ISSN: 2296424x. DOI: 10.3389/fphy.2019.00199.
[9]
Zihao Yuan et al. “Measurement of co2 by wavelength modulated reinjection off­axis in­
tegrated cavity output spectroscopy at 2 µm”. eng. In: Atmosphere 12.10 (2021), p. 1247.
ISSN: 20734433. DOI: 10.3390/atmos12101247.
[10]
Honglian Li et al. “Research on the measurement of CO2 concentration based on multi­
band fusion model”. eng. In: Applied Physics B: Lasers and Optics 127.1 (2021), p. 5.
ISSN: 14320649, 09462171. DOI: 10.1007/s00340-020-07564-8.
[11]
Sully Milena Mejia Quintero et al. “All­Fiber CO￿Sensor Using Hollow Core PCF Oper­
ating in the 2 µm Region”. eng. In: Sensors (basel, Switzerland) 18.12 (2018), p. 4393.
ISSN: 14243210, 14248220. DOI: 10.3390/s18124393.
[12]
Florent Starecki et al. “Mid­IR optical sensor for CO2 detection based on fluorescence ab­
sorbance of Dy3+:Ga5Ge20Sb10S65 fibers”. eng. In: Sensors and Actuators, B: Chemi­
cal 207 (2015), pp. 518–525. ISSN: 18733077, 09254005. DOI: 10.1016/j.snb.2014.10.011.
[13]
Yazhou Wang et al. “Mid­infrared photoacoustic gas monitoring driven by a gas­filled
hollow­core fiber laser”. eng. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (2021), p. 3512. ISSN: 20452322.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-83041-2.
CO2 for CO2
43
==PAGE:52==
[14]
Yazhou Wang et al. CO2­based hollow­core fiber Raman laser with high­pulse energy at
1.95 um. 2021. arXiv: 2109.00215 [physics.optics].
[15]
Richard C. Prince, Renee R. Frontiera, and Eric O. Potma. “Stimulated Raman scatter­
ing: From bulk to nano”. eng. In: Chemical Reviews 117.7 (2017), pp. 5070–5094. ISSN:
15206890, 00092665. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00545.
[16]
Carlos F.G.C. Geraldes. “Introduction to Infrared and Raman­Based Biomedical Molecular
Imaging and Comparison with Other Modalities”. eng. In: Molecules (basel, Switzerland)
25.23 (2020), p. 5547. ISSN: 14203049. DOI: 10.3390/molecules25235547.
[17]
Lorna Ashton and Royston Goodacre. “APPLICATION OF DEEP UV RESONANCE RA­
MAN SPECTROSCOPY TO BIOPROCESSING”. eng. In: (2013).
[18]
G HILFER and CR MENYUK. “STIMULATED RAMAN­SCATTERING IN THE TRAN­
SIENT LIMIT”. eng. In: Journal of the Optical Society of America B­optical Physics 7.5
(1990), pp. 739–749. ISSN: 15208540, 07403224. DOI: 10.1364/JOSAB.7.000739.
[19]
B. Lavorel et al. “Study of collisional effects on band shapes of the ν1/2ν2 Fermi dyad
in CO2 gas with stimulated Raman spectroscopy. II. Simultaneous line mixing and Dicke
narrowing in the ν1 band”. eng. In: Journal of Chemical Physics 93.4 (1990), pp. 2185–
2191. ISSN: 00219606, 10897690. DOI: 10.1063/1.459050.
[20]
URL: https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry_
Textbook_Maps/Supplemental_Modules_(Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry)/Spectroscopy/
Vibrational_Spectroscopy/Vibrational_Modes/Combination_Bands%2C_Overtones_and_
Fermi_Resonances.
[21]
Francesco Poletti. “Nested antiresonant nodeless hollow core fiber”. eng. In: Optics Ex­
press 22.20 (2014), pp. 23807–23828. ISSN: 10944087. DOI: 10.1364/OE.22.023807.
[22]
Abubakar Isa Adamu et al. “Multi­wavelength high­energy gas­filled fiber Raman laser
spanning from 1.53  µm to 2.4  µm”. eng. In: Optics Letters 46.3 (2021), pp. 452–455.
ISSN: 15394794, 01469592. DOI: 10.1364/OL.411003.
[23]
Yazhou Wang et al. “High pulse energy and quantum efficiency mid­infrared gas Ra­
man fiber laser targeting CO2 absorption at 4.2  µm”. eng. In: Optics Letters 45.7 (2020),
pp. 1938–1941. ISSN: 15394794, 01469592. DOI: 10.1364/ol.389613.
[24]
Thomas Schmid. “Photoacoustic spectroscopy for process analysis”. eng. In: Analytical
and Bioanalytical Chemistry 384.5 (2006), pp. 1071–1086. ISSN: 16182650, 16182642.
DOI: 10.1007/s00216-005-3281-6.
[25]
Stefan Schäfer, András Miklós, and Peter Hess. “Quantitative signal analysis in pulsed
resonant photoacoustics”. eng. In: Applied Optics 36.15 (1997), pp. 3202–3211. ISSN:
1559128x, 15394522, 00036935. DOI: 10.1364/AO.36.003202.
[26]
S. Schilt, J. P. Besson, and L. Thévenaz. “Near­infrared laser photoacoustic detection of
methane: The impact of molecular relaxation”. eng. In: Applied Physics B: Lasers and
Optics 82.2 (2006), pp. 319–329. ISSN: 14320649, 09462171. DOI: 10.1007/s00340-005-
2076-y.
[27]
T. Laurila et al. “Cantilever­based photoacoustic detection of carbon dioxide using a fiber­
amplified diode laser”. eng. In: Applied Physics B: Lasers and Optics 83.2 (2006), pp. 285–
288. ISSN: 09462171, 14320649. DOI: 10.1007/s00340-005-2106-9.
[28]
D. Potter. “Overview and applications of the IEEE P1451.4 smart sensor interface stan­
dard”. eng. In: Proceedings, Ieee Autotestcon (2002), pp. 777, 778, 779, 780, 781, 782,
783, 784, 785, 786. ISSN: 10807725. DOI: 10.1109/AUTEST.2002.1047959.
[29]
URL: https://www.neumann.com/homestudio/en/what-is-a-condenser-microphone.
[30]
URL: https://docs.zhinst.com/mfli_user_manual/signal_processing_basics.html.
[31]
URL: https://hitran.org/lbl/.
CO2 for CO2
44
==PAGE:53==
[32]
M Astapovich et al. “EFFICIENT 4.42 ΜM RAMAN LASER BASED ON HOLLOW­CORE
SILICA FIBER”. und. In: Applied Photonics 1­2 (2018), pp. 32–52. ISSN: 24114375, 24114367.
DOI: 10.15593/2411-4367/2018.1-2.03.
[33]
W. K. Bischel and M. J. Dyer. “Wavelength dependence of the absolute Raman gain co­
efficient for the Q(1) transition in H2”. eng. In: Journal of the Optical Society of America
B (optical Physics) 3.5 (1986), pp. 677–682. ISSN: 15208540, 07403224. DOI: 10.1364/
JOSAB.3.000677.
[34]
W. K. Bischel and M. J. Dyer. “Temperature dependence of the Raman linewidth and line
shift for the Q(1) and Q(0) transitions in normal and para­H2”. eng. In: Physical Review
a (general Physics) 33.5 (1986), pp. 3113–23. ISSN: 05562791. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.
33.3113.
[35]
Yazhou Wang et al. “Noise Performance and Long­Term Stability of Near­ And Mid­IR
Gas­Filled Fiber Raman Lasers”. eng. In: Journal of Lightwave Technology 39.11 (2021),
pp. 3560–3567. ISSN: 15582213, 07338724. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.2021.3067514.
[36]
IA WALMSLEY et al. “STABILIZATION OF STOKES PULSE ENERGIES IN THE NON­
LINEAR REGIME OF STIMULATED RAMAN­SCATTERING”. eng. In: Optics Commu­
nications 53.2 (1985), pp. 137–140. ISSN: 18730310, 00304018. DOI: 10.1016/0030-
4018(85)90248-2.
[37]
Flavien Gyger. Brillouin scattering in gas­filled hollow­core fibres. Tech. rep. EPFL, 2020.
CO2 for CO2
45
==PAGE:54==
CO2 for CO2
46
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix Tables
Parameter
Value
Unit
c
3·108
m/s
ħ
6.63·10−34
m2·kg/s
ε0
8.85·10−12
F· m−1
Aeff
8.04·10−12
m2
λp
1.533
μm
λs
1.95
μm
αp
0.08
dB/m
αs
0.35
dB/m
gR
1.1*10−11
m−1·W −1
Δν
3·108
Hz
T2
1.06·10−9
s
ωs
9.67·1014
Hz
ωp
1.23·1015
Hz
γs
1.91·108
/
γp
2.86·10−15
/
Ppeak
24
kW
Table A.1: Parameters used for simulation of laser propagation in ARHCF.
CO2 for CO2
47
==PAGE:56==
CO2 concentration
(%)
PA signal
intensity (V)
1
3.68E­07
2
7.35E­07
4
6.36E­06
6
1.70E­05
8
2.90E­05
10
3.37E­05
15
4.86E­05
20
7.48E­05
25
9.85E­05
30
6.79E­05
35
5.61E­05
40
6.19E­05
45
5.02E­05
50
3.76E­05
55
4.71E­05
60
6.15E­05
65
7.78E­05
70
1.06E­04
75
1.55E­04
80
2.47E­04
85
3.98E­04
90
5.38E­04
95
5.64E­04
100
4.65E­04
Table A.2: PA intensity with 1 % to 25% CO2
concentration.
CO2 concentration
(%)
PA signal
intensity (V)
1
8.67E­07
2
4.48E­06
3
7.48E­06
4
1.23E­05
5
1.90E­05
6
2.59E­05
7
2.96E­05
8
3.17E­05
9
3.19E­05
10
3.39E­05
11
3.59E­05
12
3.84E­05
13
4.11E­05
14
4.29E­05
15
4.56E­05
16
4.72E­05
17
5.17E­05
18
5.63E­05
19
6.15E­05
20
6.83E­05
21
7.63E­05
22
8.01E­05
23
8.47E­05
24
8.53E­05
25
8.61E­05
Table A.3: PA intensity with 1 % to 25% CO2
concentration.l
CO2 for CO2
48
==PAGE:57==
CO2 concentration
(%)
PA signal intensity(V)
1st ascending
order
1st descending
order
2nd ascending
order
2nd descending
order
1
4.09E­07
4.01E­07
4.01E­07
3.88E­07
5
1.39E­05
1.13E­05
1.18E­05
1.03E­05
10
3.18E­05
2.98E­05
3.00E­05
2.89E­05
15
4.48E­05
4.37E­05
4.32E­05
4.33E­05
20
7.31E­05
7.04E­05
6.80E­05
6.70E­05
25
8.70E­05
8.70E­05
8.39E­05
8.39E­05
Table A.4: PA signal intensity with repeated measurement from 1% to 25% CO2 concentration.
CO2 concnetration
(%)
PA signal intensity (V)
10
2.89E­05
2.88E­05
2.86E­05
20
6.44E­05
6.26E­05
6.35E­05
Table A.5: PA signal intensity with repeated measurement between 10% and 20% CO2 con­
centration.
CO2 for CO2
49
==PAGE:58==
CO2 concentration
(%)
PA signal intensity(V)
50 mW
30 mW
15 mW
1
4.04E­07
4.64E­07
4.49E­07
5
1.39E­05
1.45E­05
4.77E­06
10
3.17E­05
2.13E­05
8.93E­06
15
4.45E­05
2.90E­05
1.28E­05
20
7.30E­05
4.77E­05
2.13E­05
25
8.71E­05
5.27E­05
2.59E­05
Table A.6: PA signal intensity under different Raman laser powers.
CO2 concnetration
(%)
PA signal intensity (V)
1 bar
5 bar
1
5.63E­07
4.26E­07
5
6.01E­06
6.38E­06
10
1.19E­05
1.11E­05
15
1.71E­05
1.54E­05
20
2.70E­05
2.57E­05
25
3.46E­05
2.77E­05
Table A.7: Measured PA signal intensity with Raman laser generated with 1 bar and 5 bar of
CO2pressure in the gas cell
CO2 for CO2
50
==PAGE:59==
In this work, a CO2 detection system based on PA process is proposed. The excitation source for the
PA signal is Raman laser at center wavelength of 1946 nm generated from SRS process with a 1533
nm custom­made fiber laser at repetition rate of 8.7 KHz. The SRS process takes place in a nested
ARHCF filled with CO2 gas with adjustable pressure in the gas cells. The generated Raman laser is
then guided into the PA cell with CO2 gas diluted in argon gas. for PA signal generation. Generated
signal is collected by a microphone and processed by a lock­in amplifier. The characterisation of the
laser system including the pump laser and CO2 filled ARHCF has proven that the laser setting has
enabled sufficient suppression of higher­order Stokes so that of the full pulse energy is confined on
the first­order line at 1946 nm.
It is found that the PA signal intensity exhibits a linear response in the region of 1­25% CO2 concentra­
tion. For the linear region of 1­25% CO2 concentration, the measurement showed good repeatability
and stability with the biggest deviation of 2.72%, when the CO2 concentration was varied and mea­
sured repeatedly. Further measurements confirms the linear response of PA signal intensity on CO2
concentration with varying Raman laser power and varying CO2 pressure in the gas cell for Raman
laser generation. In the meantime, the peak Raman intensity remained relatively stable during the
measurements when the CO2 concentration was adjusted, with the RIN of 5.57% at 1 bar of CO2
pressure in the gas cell.
The system proposed in this work can generate a stable Raman laser for PA signal excitation with
low RIN. The generated PA signal intensity exhibits linear dependence on CO2 concentration in the
range of 1­25% CO2 concentration. The linear dependency is valid with varying Raman power and
CO2 pressure in gas cell. The system also showed good stability and repeatability.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl., Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
