==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
LiRA project: An architectural framework for
deploying machine learning to production
Supervisors
Ekkart Kindler
Milena Bajic
Student
Aayush Dhakal
February 13, 2022
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Deploying machine learning models to production environment requires the input data to
be transformed in a manner so that it can be fed into a trained machine learning model.
This thesis focuses on how incoming geospatial data in production can be processed so
that it can be used as input to a pre­trained machine learning model. Specifically, the
machine learning model expects input corresponding to a fixed length of road. Overtime,
the predictions produced on the same segment of road must be aggregated into a single
value. The thesis slightly touches upon an architecture that can be implemented for a
scalable and customizable solution that respects these constraints in a production envi­
ronment. In addition, major focus has been made on the process of mapping the geo
data into roads on a map and segmenting the roads into unique segments of fixed length
as that is the fundamental problem that needs to addressed before the models can be
deployed successfully. The thesis will use Live Road Assessment (LiRA) project as the
testbed which means the technical details will refer directly to the LiRA system.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to thank Ekkart Kindler for providing me this opportunity to work on
this project and also providing great support and guidance throughout the project period.
I have gained invaluable knowledge during the course of this project that I am sure will be
helpful throughout my career.
I would also like to thank Milena Bajic and Shahrzad Pour who also provided great guid­
ance and feedback at various stages of the project.
Lastly, I would like to thank my friends and family for always supporting me, specially
during the masters education period.
iv
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
3
Problem Statement
5
3.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Methodology
6
4.1
Design science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Agile methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5
Analysis
7
6
Solution
12
6.1
Representation of GPS points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
6.2
Representation of windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
6.3
Using GPS points to create windows in ways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.4
Interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
6.5
Residual distance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.6
Aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.7
Domain Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7
Architecture
24
8
Implementation
27
8.1
Map match
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8.2
Post processing map match response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
8.3
Create windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
8.4
Map data into windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
8.5
Predict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
8.6
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
9
Evaluation
45
9.1
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
9.2
Evaluation with selected data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
10 Future Work
49
11 Conclusion
50
Bibliography
51
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Every year, the Danish Road Directorate (DRD) operates huge vehicles loaded with mul­
tiple sensors which goes around the streets of Denmark to gather road condition data.
The reason for collecting this data is to get an overview of the condition of roads and al­
locate resources required for maintaining them. There are multiple variations of vehicles
including ARAN (Automatic Road Analyzers) [6] and P79 Profilometer [20]. The data is
mostly collected by these vehicles but in some cases even manual inspection are made
for the collection of data. This way of collection is a problem because of several reasons.
Firstly, the data is only collected annually so the data might not be up to date throughout
most of the year. Secondly, this is an expensive operation as the vehicles must travel all
over the country to gather these data [14].
LiRA stands for Live Road Assessment, and it is a project which aims to solve this problem
by using data collected by sensors on modern cars. With an increase of automotive sen­
sors being installed in cars as suggested by Statista Research Deparment [9], it makes a
lot of sense to use these devices to collect various measurements throughout the car trip.
The collected trip data can then be used to recognize patterns which leads to an auto­
mated and efficient system of accurate road condition predictions. Car trip data includes
driving information such as acceleration, speed and other which is then used as input to
a machine learning model to predict the road conditions as mentioned in the paper from
Shahrzad and et.al. [16]. Currently, the LiRA project is collaborating with Green Mobil­
ity (a car rental company) to provide them with the required car sensor data. The LiRA
project is therefore a collaboration between the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
Green Mobility and the DRD.
As mentioned earlier, P79 and ARAN vehicles collect data from the roads using various
sensors. To gather initial training data for the machine learning algorithm, a fleet of Green
Mobility (GM) cars was driven simultaneously with P79 and ARAN vehicles under the
same road conditions [15]. The collected data is used to train machine learning models
which later can be used to predict road conditions when new GM data is received.
In production, data from GM cars will be collected which is then processed and stored
in a database. This data should be used to produce road condition predictions using the
machine learning models mentioned earlier. Notice that, collection of car sensor data is
already implemented. Also, the machine learning models are trained and ready to be
used. However, at this point of time, it is not possible to use the fore mentioned sensor
data with the machine learning models.
This thesis focuses on mapping GM sensor data to specific sections of road which enables
to get road condition predictions for each of these sections. Also, there should be a
mechanism to store the data in a predictions database so that it can eventually be used
to access road condition data from the frontend. So, in other words, the raw sensor data
produced by the GM cars are required to be transformed such that it can be used as input
to the trained machine learning models.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Background
This section will discuss about the work that has already been done in LiRA project and
subsequently will mention the motivation and need of the work that this thesis will focus
on.
As mentioned in the notes provided in Intro to ML course at DTU [12], machine learning
is defined as the process of using algorithms to use past experiences to learn ability of
generalizing similar future situations. Depending on the literature one is studying, there
might be slightly differing steps that comprises a machine learning pipeline. However,
for simplicity one can characterize machine learning into two broad steps: training and
prediction. Training in this context will include steps such as gathering and preparing data,
choosing a model, training a model, and evaluation as described in this online article by
Yufeng [23]. Training is generalized here because it is not the primary focus of the project.
The major focus is rather getting an already trained machine learning model to production.
Using machine learning in the context of geographical data is a highly interesting topic due
to the number of use cases that it can offer. This allows scenarios such as collecting data
from buses and cars for a trip and use that to predict certain characteristics of the road
that they rode on. Geographical data in machine learning does not simply mean using
geographical information such as latitude and longitude as one of various input features
in a machine learning algorithm. It means that geographical information is actually used
to identify which geolocation the data was collected from and then use data accordingly
to produce a prediction for the location. Geolocation in this case refers to the location of a
point with respect to artifacts on a map such as roads, buildings instead on simply latitude
and longitude positions.
Figure 2.1: High level overview of ML training process
LiRA project collects data from Green Mobility car sensors. Ideally, the system should
support the prediction of any type of road condition metric provided that there is enough
data to train a machine learning model using that metric. In the initial phase of LiRA
project, the domain experts and scientists focused at the IRI metric. IRI stands for Inter­
national Roughness Index and it is a metric of the roughness of a road. Road Roughness
Estimation Using Machine Learning by Milena and et. al. [5] provides an in depth explana­
tion of the machine learning side of road roughness prediction in the context of LiRA. The
following section will briefly discuss the machine learning training process summarized
from the paper mentioned earlier. Also, IRI is used as an example metric but it should be
noted that, IRI can be replaced by any metric and it will not have an impact on this thesis.
2
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:9==
In the Figure 2.1, a high level and simplistic illustration of the machine learning training
process in the LiRA project is shown. The GM sensor data and P79/ARAN data are
collected for the same road network. The P79 data is used as reference data in this
process which means this data is used to generate IRI labels for the machine learning
algorithm. Note that IRI is the target value in this context as that will be the output of the
algorithm. The input data is the GM sensor data itself. As we have both input data and
target value in place, a machine learning model can be trained.
As mentioned in the introduction section, P79 and ARAN vehicles collected road condi­
tion data using various sensors. P79 specifically is a vehicle equipped with profilometer
technology which analyzes the roughness of the road. The internal software in P79 can
compute IRI value for 10 meter length of road. However, as GM data and P79 data are
collected from two different sources, they are not aligned yet. Alignment in this scenario
means to have target value from P79 data and input data from GM cars for the same
section of road. To achieve that, the start and end GPS coordinates of each P79 data
segment is taken and the GM points which are closest to those start and end coordinates
are found. Then, the GM data can be matched with IRI value calculated using P79 data
for the same stretch of road. Note that during this process GM and P79 data are still not
referenced to the map. The aligning is done solely based on latitude and longitude values
of the points. Also, as mentioned earlier P79 profilometer can compute IRI for every 10
meters but due to inaccuracy of the GM GPS sensors, 100 meter was the optimal length
for which satisfactory predictions were made. In this way, the input data and target val­
ues of 100 meters length required for the machine learning training was collected and
computed which led to the training to be possible.
We discussed a way how the machine learning model is currently being trained using input
data and target values (computed from P79/ARAN reference data). However, deploying
this trained model to production is a completely different story. Firstly, it should be realized
that in the training process explained above, there is no need of having any references
of which exact road segment the data belongs to. The segment in this context refers to
an arbitrarily long stretch of road on a map. The training process is only concerned with
the input values and corresponding target value. In contrast, after deploying the machine
learning model to production, we are interested in getting IRI prediction for a specific
segment of the road on a map.
Figure 2.2: Trip 1
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.3: Trip 2
In the Figures 2.2 and 2.3 we can see that two different car trips are made in the same
section of a road, but at different times. They have different start and end positions. We
need to split the road into segments of equal length to enable machine learning predictions
on the road. If we split the road simply starting from the start position for both of these
trips, naturally the segments are going to be completely different across these two trips.
This is not ideal because LiRA project is focused on getting predictions for segments of
the road so that road conditions for a specific segment can be seen on a map. This
means that each prediction must be referenced to a specific segment of the road. In
addition, predictions produced across multiple trips can then be aggregated into a single
value which can be consumed by the users. Furthermore, LiRA project aims to provide a
historical overview of the condition of roads so that the most optimum time to start road
maintenance can be discovered which also requires the predictions to belong to specific
segments of a road. So, this leads to the need of a way to uniquely identify segments of
road and reference the predictions computed from GM data to these unique segments so
that they can be aggregated.
4
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:11==
3
Problem Statement
Sensor data collected from Green Mobility cars comprises of geographical data consisting
of latitude and longitude information in addition to vehicular data such as acceleration.
These data are collected, processed and stored in a database. A machine learning model
requiring data corresponding to 100m length of road segment as an input is trained. As
shown in Figure 3.1, we are missing the red component that is required to make these
two compatible with each other.
Figure 3.1: High level representation of the problem
To achieve the compatibility, firstly the thesis must aim to find a way to map match GPS
points to real world artifacts such as roads. Secondly, the sensor data collected must be
split into unique segments of a fixed size so that they can be used as input to the machine
learning model. When the segments can be uniquely identified, aggregation over those
sections is possible as well.
3.1
Research Questions
The thesis is primarily going to be research based and mainly aims to answer the following
research questions which will be the focus of the report to follow.
• How can one map a list of geographic coordinates into real world artifacts such as
roads, and split them into sections to facilitate machine learning process?
• How can one aggregate machine learning prediction received from different trips for
same segment of the road?
Even though LiRA project will be used as a test bed to prove the feasibility of the concepts
introduced, the findings of the thesis might be relevant for other similar problems in this
domain.
3.2
Considerations
Even though the research questions sound general, there were a few constraints that
was provided as prerequisites to this project which must be respected. As the entire LiRA
system up to now was built with Open Street Map (OSM) in mind, it was required to use
OSM as the geographical database. OSM will be defined in the analysis section of the
report. In addition, the machine learning research was already carried out which required
the input to the trained machine learning model to accept input data corresponding to a
100 meters of road length to compute a prediction.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
5
==PAGE:12==
4
Methodology
4.1
Design science
Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) will be applied during the project. DSRM
consists of three major cycles which are Relevance, Design and Rigor Cycle. Relevance
Cycle refers to identifying problem and setting requirements for them [3]. This cycle has
been carried out by defining the above­mentioned research questions. Also, it is required
to set some acceptance criteria for the results of the research questions which in this case
will be the tests that will be carried out to see if the solution produces valid result using
empirical evidence, if possible. In addition to tests, the results will be evaluated from a
practical perspective because the end solution needs to have pragmatic validity rather
than objective truth. Surely, objective truth is great but the solution must have practical
usefulness as well which is the focus of design science research.
One can argue that design cycle is where most of the work is done, and the research
is carried out. This cycle produces artefacts which can be in the form of code, models,
techniques, and anything in between. Also, the produced artefacts must be evaluated
during this phase. Rigor cycle includes the use of current knowledge base as a foundation
to the research. This will be respected in this project and the knowledge base will be used
so that the final contribution is an actual research instead of a routine design [2].
4.2
Agile methodology
Agile methodology will be loosely used during the course of this project. The methodology
suggests to have short cycles of development and thus producing artefacts on an ongoing
basis[1]. In this project, the artefact is going to primarily be running code and design of the
same. Also, a backlog of all the tasks required to be accomplished should be maintained
with each containing a priority associated with it. This priority can change on a regular
basis depending on the time left and the progress achieved. This agility will have a very
distinct advantage over a waterfall approach which normally does not have the flexibility
of changing priorities of tasks. It is specially important in this project because there is a
time constraint and therefore shorter research cycles and ability to re­prioritize tasks is
essential.
6
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:13==
5
Analysis
This chapter will introduce concepts and terminologies that will be used further in the
report. Also, the problem statement will be analyzed in detail.
Open Street Map (OSM)
Open Street Map [19] is used as the geographic database for the LiRA project. OSM is
an open­source database where independent “mappers” can contribute data about any
location and improve the database. Open Street Map has a native API which gives users
information about a specific way, node, relation and so forth.
Node
Node is simply a point which has latitude and longitude attributes referenced to it. Nodes
can also optionally take a set of tags which provides further information about the point.
The tags could include information such as type of way, amenity, if it is a building and so
on.
Figure 5.1: Way and node in OSM map
Way
Way is a list of nodes which form a road section. Similar to nodes, a way can also contain
tags which provides information about the way.
Tags [22] are key value pair that provides additional meta data about the way. It should
be noted that not all the ways are roads. As mentioned, way is simply a list of nodes
which might be any kind of artefact. Other artefacts such as buildings, sidewalks are also
considered a way. highway is a popular tag that provides information about the type of
road. For instance, highway: motorway means the way is a part of a motorway whereas
building: yes means the way represents a building.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
7
==PAGE:14==
Nodes and ways are fundamental building blocks of the OSM database. Naturally, they
will be used in this project to reference GPS points and compute distance from one point
to other and so on.
Let us recall Figure 3.1 and start from the left component which is the sensor data. As we
discussed, we are working on the ”red component” in the diagram which takes this sensor
data as an input. Therefore, it is important to understand precisely what that refers to.
Sensor data in this context can be sub categorized into two different types; GPS data and
Vehicular sensor data (non­GPS data).
GPS data
GPS data refers to data that provides information about the position of the car in a spe­
cific time. It contains longitude and latitude information in addition to timestamp of the
recording. GPS positions are recorded at regular intervals which is propagated back to
the sensor database server.
1
{
2
"TS_or_Distance": 2021-04-22 01:07:03.486000+00:00,
3
"T": track.pos,
4
"Message":
5
{
6
'lat': 55.123,
7
'lon': 12.987
8
}
9
}
Listing 1: GPS data sample
Vehicular sensor data (Non­GPS data)
Green Mobility cars are equipped with various sensors that produce a huge array of infor­
mation which includes vibrations and inclinations using accelerometers and gyroscopes,
sound from the microphones, and even images of the road through the backup camera
[16]. These data are collected using sensors installed inside of the car. The sensors
produce these data continuously throughout the car trip and sends it to the server with a
timestamp of when the reading was recorded. Even though a wide range of sensor data
is recorded, here we will have a look at the accelerometer data so that the data format is
more clearer.
1
{
2
"TS_or_Distance": 2021-04-22 01:05:02.627000+00:00,
3
"T": acc.xyz,
4
"Message":
5
{
6
'acc.xyz.z': 0.9961,
7
'acc.xyz.y': -0.1172,
8
'acc.xyz.x': 0.1563
9
}
10
}
Listing 2: Acceleration (Type of vehicular sensor data) data sample
TS_or_Distance is a highly accurate timestamp at which the measurement was recorded.
8
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:15==
T denotes the type of measurement whereas the Message contains a nested JSON object
which contains the actual measurement data.
GPS data is collected in much lower frequency than other measurements. This means
that GPS information is not attached to individual vehicular sensor measurement but
rather they are standalone measurement made in regular intervals. There are ways of
approximating the GPS coordinates of each of these measurements estimation using the
timestamp and the frequent GPS measurements received.
Working with geographical data can be tricky because it normally needs to be mapped to
real world artifacts such as roads or buildings so that prediction for a specific geolocation
can be made. As shown in the following figure, the left illustration is simply a collection
of coordinates in two dimensions. They are similar to GPS coordinates where each co­
ordinate comprises of latitude and longitude information. Naturally, the next step will be
to figure out which location in the real world does these coordinates belong to. The red
lines on the right illustration highlights the path that the coordinates were collected from.
The coordinates are not exactly on a path which shows that the coordinates might not be
entirely accurate when collected.
Figure 5.2: Mapping coordinates to paths
Now, the next problem is to represent the sensor data recorded on those paths in such a
manner where it can be used as input to the machine learning algorithm. This step really
depends on how the machine learning model was trained. One of the ways the machine
learning can be trained is based on distance which is how it is currently trained in LiRA.
Let us have a look at Figure 5.3, where paths are drawn using various node from N1 to
N7. In addition, x marks are the data recorded in that specific location. Then, we can
simply collect all the data for a specific distance and use that as the input to the trained
machine learning model. We can see that, windows W1, W2, W3, and W4 have a fixed
equal length. Therefore, the data collected for each of these windows will be an individual
input to the model. Naturally, that will result one prediction for each of these windows.
Obviously, for this to work, the machine learning model must be trained using this specific
distance as the input. Now, the data collected every fixed distance can be aggregated
and corresponding features can be extracted. The extracted features in machine learning
refers to the transformed numerical values that convey the same information as the actual
data but is in a format which can be used as input to the machine learning algorithm. This
allows these features to then be used as input to the model and yield respective prediction.
In this way, a prediction can be computed for a specific length of a path.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 5.3: Splitting the path into windows
In the following section, the above mentioned concepts will be discussed using LiRA
project as a concrete example as this will make it easier to get a better grasp of the
problem. As previously mentioned, LiRA project uses sensor data produced by GM cars
as input to the machine learning model. Now, let us define a car traveling from a point
to another as a trip. Imagine a collection of data is received for a trip from car sensors
where each sensor data point comprises of a number of information. The information in­
cludes GPS coordinates (latitude and longitude) of the position where the measurement
was done, the recorded measurement value, and the time of measurement. The times­
tamp of the measurement of the sensor data will help to know the ordering of the recorded
measurements. However, the data in that state is not going to help much because it does
not have any reference to the position of roads. This is why the GPS positions must be
matched to locations on a map as shown in the Figure 5.2. To achieve that, we are going
to use map match service provided by the OSRM service.
OSRM [18] is a routing engine that provides a robust API for a variety of different oper­
ations. The operations include map matching GPS points, finding routes between two
points, finding nearest point in a road network to name a few. We are briefly going to
discuss the map match and the nearest service provided by OSRM.
Map match service
Map match service is one of many services provided by the OSRM service. It takes a
stream of GPS points as input and snaps each point to the closest possible point in the
road network. Optionally, timestamps could also be passed alongside the GPS points to
help the algorithm used by map match service to better match the points to the roads.
The response received from the map match service contains the snapped/corrected GPS
points alongside a number of additional information about those points. After receiving
the exact position of GPS points in the map with the help of map match service, windows
as shown in Figure 5.3 can be created in the road path. In the figure we can see that
there are nodes which form the path of the road.
10
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:17==
Nearest service
OSRM also provides a service similar to map match called the nearest service. This ser­
vice takes only one coordinate at a time and snaps the point to the closest road network.
This is a simpler version of map matching as this does not need to take account of other
points through out the trip. This service might return different possible snapped coordi­
nates for one input coordinate. This is specifically useful when a single GPS point must
be map matched to the road network.
So, after the GPS coordinates are snapped to the road network, the road network must
be split into unique segments of 100 meter length. After the sections in the road can
be uniquely identified and predictions produced from the machine learning model can
be referenced to these sections, the predictions can be aggregated using a variety of
functions. For example, an exponential decay function can be used which will assign a
higher weight to the most recent prediction and simultaneously reduce the weights of the
prediction value of old predictions. This allows the newest predictions to have more value
compared to the old ones. The parameters of these functions can be tuned to find the
one that models this use case the best.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
11
==PAGE:18==
6
Solution
This chapter will aim to come up with a solution to the research questions above in the
context of the LiRA project.
As it is apparent from the problem statements, we firstly need to find a way to map a list
of geographic coordinates into real world objects. In our case, the real world objects are
simply roads on which the vehicle has travelled on.
6.1
Representation of GPS points
In the context of LiRA, the sensor data database contains both GPS and vehicular sensor
data. Vehicular sensor data does not have location associated with it. The geographic
coordinates in the research question can be represented as the GPS sensor data here.
These are the measurements that are made periodically (circa three times a second). In
addition to the the latitude and longitude information, timestamp is also recorded for every
measurement.
Figure 6.1: Coordinates plotted as re­
ceived from sensors
Figure 6.2: Coordinates map matched
using OSRM service
Figure 6.1 shows the GPS points plotted as received from sensors. Here, it is plotted in
a map so we can estimate the track followed by the car to produce these coordinates.
However, note that there is no concept of roads inherently within these coordinates. This
is where the map match service provided by OSRM is used. As discussed in subsection 5,
this service was also investigated during the course of this project as a potential alternative
to map match service. However, map match takes multiple coordinates at a time and also
provides a much richer annotation response compared to nearest service.
The map match service does two important things for us. Firstly, it snaps each coordinate
passed to the most plausible point in the road network as shown in Figure 6.2. Secondly,
it provides a number of annotated meta data information about each of these coordinates
with respect to their position in the OSM map. One of the important annotations is called
a RouteLeg object. The relevance of this object will be discussed shortly.
As our machine learning model requires data for every 100 meters to be included as a
window, we need a mechanism to know how far each point is from the start position. The
start position can be any arbitrary position on the map. To achieve that, we need to know
12
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:19==
the distance of a point from its start node. The start node and end node of a GPS point
are the nodes along the path of the trip that when connected, includes the GPS point. For
instance, in Figure 6.3, the start and end nodes of the point P2 are N2 and N3 respectively.
The start and end node is also dictated by the direction of travel. In the example, the car
is traveling from N1 through all the nodes until it reached N7. This means the car firstly
reaches node N2 and then point P3 and finally node N3. Therefore, N2 is the start node
and N3 is the end node of the point. The following example will show the reason for
computing distance of every GPS point from its start node.
Let us take an example using Figure 6.3 as a reference. As the earth is a sphere, we also
need to compensate the arc that occurs when measuring the distance between two points
which is why we will use haversine formula. Haversine formula [11] is used to compute the
distance between two points in a sphere ”as the crow flies”. All the distance mentioned
here will implicitly mean haversine distance instead of linear distance. If distx−y means
distance from x to y then, distance between the node N1 and point P4 (distN1−P4) can be
represented as follows.
distN1−P4 = distN1−N2 + distN2−N3 + distN3−P4
(6.1)
The Equation 6.1 states that the distance between node N1 and point P4 is the sum of
distance between nodes N1 and N2, distance between nodes N2 and N3 and distance
between node N3 and point P4.
Thus, distN1−N2 and distN2−N3 are distances between nodes and therefore are values
which can be easily computed/retrieved. distN3−P4 is the component that needs to be
computed for each point. Notice that distance between N3 and P4 is simply the distance
between P4 and its start node. Also, it should be obvious that haversine formula can be
used in this case because there are no more intermediary nodes in between P4 and N3.
Finally, we can see that computing distance of a point from its start node is necessary to
get the total distance from any arbitrary start position to that point provided that there is a
path between them.
We have learned the need of computing distance of a point from its start node which is to
calculate the distance up to that point from another position in the map. Now, note that
it is also important to know the position of each point in a specific road because that will
allow us to know how far the point is from a node. For example, in Figure 6.3, we need
to know that point P1 is situated in between nodes N1 and N2 in order to compute the
distance between its start node N1 and the point itself.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 6.3: Coordinates of a trip map matched to a road
OSRM map match service does not directly provide the information of what the start
node and the end node of each point is. However, in the JSON response, it provides a
RouteLeg object for each consecutive points pair which can be processed to produce start
and end node for each point.
What are RouteLeg objects and why are they relevant?
A RouteLeg object is one of the many meta information contained in the map match ser­
vice response from OSRM that contains information such as distance between nodes,
duration taken to get from one node to another and most importantly nodes spanned be­
tween two consecutive GPS points. Each RouteLeg object corresponds to information
about two consecutive GPS points. It can be thought as an object that contains all the
information of how to get from one GPS point to the next corresponding point. Therefore,
there will exist n­1 RouteLeg objects for n GPS points. Let us look at an example to see
how nodes in RouteLeg object works. In the example shown in Figure 6.3, nodes spanned
from P1 to P2 are N1, N2, N3. As it can be seen, the start and end node of both of these
points are added to the nodes spanned list along with any potential intermediary nodes.
The nodes spanned of all the points in the aforementioned example will be shown below.
Points
Nodes
P1, P2
N1, N2, N3
P2, P3
N2, N3
P3, P4
N2, N3, N4
P4, P5
N3, N4, N5
P5, P6
N4, N5, N6, N7
Table 6.1: Points and nodes in RouteLeg object
Table 6.1 shows the nodes returned in RouteLeg object for different pair of points. Having
a closer look at the table, we can discover an interesting property which is as follows.
14
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:21==
Let p1 and p2 be two consecutive nodes in a trip and RouteLeg nodes of p1
and p2 are n1, n2,..., nm, where m is the number of nodes in this RouteLeg
object. Then, start node and end node of p1 are n1 and n2, respectively.
(6.2)
Applying this generalization, we can compute the start and end nodes of all the points as
shown in table .
Point
Start node
End node
P1
N1
N2
P2
N2
N3
P3
N2
N3
P4
N3
N4
P5
N4
N5
P6
N6
N7
Table 6.2: Points and their start and end nodes in RouteLeg object
Start and end nodes of all the points can be computed using the above mentioned gen­
eralization but there is a slight problem with it. As there are only n­1 RouteLeg objects
for n GPS points, the last point will not have a start and end node. That can be fixed by
extending the generalization 6.4 as follows.
Let p1 and p2 be two consecutive nodes in a trip and RouteLeg nodes of p1
and p2 are n1, n2,..., nm, where m is the number of nodes in this RouteLeg
object. Then, start node and end node of p2 are nm−1 and nm, respectively.
(6.3)
Now, using generalizations 6.4 and 6.3, given a list of points and the RouteLeg objects
they represent, we can compute the start and the end node of each GPS point.
Nodes traversed
Nodes traversed refers to the list of nodes that provide the information of the nodes that
were traversed during the course of the trip. Figuring out the nodes traversed during a trip
is important because that will allow us to know exactly which roads the car was traveling
on.
Let us now look at how this can be computed. In Figure 6.3, we can see that there are a
number of GPS points from P1 to P6. The nodes traversed in this example would be N1,
N2, N3, N4, N5, N6, N7. This can be computed from the RouteLeg objects mentioned
earlier. The following section will describe how that is achieved.
It might be tempting to think that if all the Nodes column at Table 6.1 are combined then
that will result the nodes traversed list. However, that will also lead to duplicate nodes
being added to the list. For example, adding all the nodes to a list will result [N1, N2, N2,
N2, N3, N2, N3, N4, N3, N4, N5, N4, N5, N6, N7]. This can be solved by checking if the
node that is to be added is the last or second to last element in the resulting list and only
add if it does not fulfill that condition. So, for the same example, after adding nodes in the
first row of the table the resulting nodes traversed list is [N1, N2, N3]. Now, the second
row contains [N2, N3], but notice that the resulting list already has N2 and N3 as either
last or second last element in this list. Therefore, we do not add them. This check must
be carried out all through and the final result will be the nodes traversed list.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
15
==PAGE:22==
6.2
Representation of windows
In the context of LiRA project, a window is an arbitrarily long segment of road. Currently,
domain experts have agreed to set the length of a window to be 100 meters. Data recorded
in each 100 meter window can be then processed to produce input to the machine learning
model. Therefore, there must be a way to represent the windows so that the data can be
stored and used in the LiRA system. So, to represent a window in a system, we need to
store the location of two points on the map. Then, we can simply refer to these two points
as the endpoints of the window. Let us call these endpoints WindowRef (abbreviation for
Window Reference).
One solution that might be tempting is to use GPS latitude and longitude positions of each
window endpoint. This seems to work but this will not allow us to retain the information of
which road does the WindowRefs belong to. A better approach is to use the start node,
end node and the exact distance of the point from the start node. This can be thought of
as a vector that has a direction and a magnitude.
1
{
2
"W2":
3
[
4
"WR2": {
5
'start_node': N2,
6
'end_node': N3,
7
'distance': 30
8
},
9
"WR3": {
10
'start_node': N3,
11
'end_node': N4,
12
'distance': 40
13
}
14
]
15
}
Listing 3: Representation of a Window
As depicted in Figure 6.4, windows are created using WindowRefs. Let us take an exam­
ple of Window 2 which is represented as W2 in the Figure 6.4. The Listing 3 represents
W2 which is a list of two WindowRefs WR2 and WR3. WR2 is at a distance of 30 me­
ters from its start node N2. Also, notice that end node provides the direction of the point
from start node. Therefore, start node, end node and distance from the start node will be
enough information to represent a WindowRef.
The example shown above uses nodes to reference exactly where a WindowRef is lo­
cated. But, recall that we want the windows to be reused so that even if there are multiple
trips riding on the same segment of the road, it should be possible to aggregate them
together to produce one single prediction for the segment. To achieve that, we need to
complement this solution by using ways as well.
As already discussed in previous sections, a way is a collection of nodes that form a
longer stretch of a road. Each way can be used as an individual mini­road which has its
own list of windows. There are a couple of advantages of using this approach. Firstly, it
is relatively simple to represent windows using ways because the windows are going to
16
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:23==
Figure 6.4: WindowRefs and Windows in a map
be every 100 meters away from the start of the way. This is because a new window starts
from the start of a way and this extends for 100 meters. Then, the next window starts
from the end of the previous window. This continues until we are left with a distance less
than 100 meters in that way. This means that we can not create any more valid windows
and therefore stop. This will lead to an obvious question which is, how do we represent
the last bit of road that is less than 100 meters. They are not long enough to be a valid
window but we should still compute predictions for that segment. This is an important
point and will be discussed later.
In the Figure 6.5, three different ways represented by three distinct colors can be seen.
W1, W2 and W3 represent Way 1, Way 2 and Way 3 which are colored blue, brown and
green respectively for better clarity. Also, the orange pointers are used to denote the
direction of the way. Recall that ways are simply a list of nodes. This means that the
nodes in the list of the way has an ordering. Table 6.3 shows the nodes and its ordering
for all three ways shown in Figure 6.5.
Way
Nodes
W1
[N1, N2, N3, N4]
W2
[N7, N6, N3, N5]
W2
[N8, N7, N9]
Table 6.3: Ordering of nodes in ways
Given the information in Table 6.3, Figure 6.5 can be modeled as the Table 6.4. Firstly,
notice that each way has a WindowRef at the very start. Also, Index depicts which window
of this way is being referenced. Index of 0 means window 0 −100m from the start of the
way whereas Index of 2 means 200 −300m of the same. On the other hand, Direction
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 6.5: Windows in multiple ways
Way
Index
WindowRef start
WindowRef end
Direction
W1
0
WR1
WR2
True
W1
1
WR2
WR3
True
W2
0
WR4
WR5
True
W2
1
WR5
WR6
True
W3
0
WR7
WR8
False
Table 6.4: Details about windows
denotes if this window is created in the direction of the ordering of the nodes in the way.
There are two possible options of ordering so therefore we can use a boolean value to
represent if the ordering of the nodes in the way is one way or the other. True or False
should not be mistaken to have positive or negative connotation in this context but rather
just a way to differentiate which direction of nodes it is referencing.
As shown in Figure 6.6, the ”True” direction of the way is N1, N2, N3, N4 as denoted by
the orange arrow. However, if a car travels from the other direction N4, N3, N2, N1, it still
belongs to this way but its most likely the other side of the road which means the Direction
attribute in this case is going to be ”False”. Therefore, the Direction variable can be used
to identify which side of the road is the car driving on.
WR1 and WR2 form the first window in W1 whereas WR2 and WR3 form the second
window of the same. There cannot be a window after that in W1 because the distance
between WR3 and the end of W1 (N4) is shorter than the length of a window. This means
that W1 only has two valid windows which are WR1 ­ WR2 and WR2 ­ WR3.
[WR1, WR2, WR3] are windowrefs with direction True along the blue way with nodes N1,
N2, N3, N4. On the contrary, [WR1’, WR2’, WR3’] are windowrefs along the same way
but now the direction is False.
18
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:25==
Figure 6.6: Direction of way
Also, each way has a fixed number of valid windows which can be easily computed using
the following generalization. If x is the length of any arbitrary way and window length is
the length of a window. Then,
number of windows = x / window length
(6.4)
6.3
Using GPS points to create windows in ways
So far we have established a mechanism to split roads into windows by splitting each
individual way into multiple windows. Also, we have discussed in section.6.2 on how to
represent GPS points using nodes.
As we know already, GPS measurements are taken at regular intervals and there will be
a lot more vehicular sensor measurements taken in between any two consecutive GPS
measurements. As we can imagine, the GPS measurements will not exactly occur at
the location of a WindowRef. Therefore, we have to make an approximation of the time
when the car arrived at a WindowRef position. If we do that for all the WindowRefs, we can
create windows based on approximated time at which the car reached those WindowRefs.
Figure 6.7: WindowRefs and GPS data
Let us look at the Figure 6.7 which shows a car trip which goes along this particular way
comprising of nodes N1 through N4. We can also see that this way has three WindowRefs
WR1, WR2 and WR3 where P1, P2,..., P5 are GPS measurements. In this example, the
points are ordered with respect to timestamps that they were recorded in. This means that
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
19
==PAGE:26==
P1 was recorded before point P2 and so on. Notice that, due to this temporal property,
we can basically use timestamps of two points to get data that was recorded between
these two points. It should also be noted that we are assuming that there are no spatial or
temporal errors in the information. In other words, the timestamps and location information
are assumed to be correct. Errors might exist in real world data which must be addressed
to use this solution. These errors will be discussed in the evaluation section of the report.
6.4
Interpolation
In the previous section, we discussed how we can create windows using timestamps of
WindowRefs. However, we also discussed how it is not possible for a GPS point to ex­
actly be recorded at the position of a WindowRef. Therefore, we need to compute the
timestamp of WindowRefs using interpolation. Simply put, interpolation is the process of
approximating an unknown value using what is known. In this case, we can use the posi­
tion and timestamp of two closest GPS points to compute what the approximate timestamp
of a WindowRef is.
Figure 6.8 shows two consecutive GPS points P1 and P2 that has a WindowRef WR in
between them. It can be seen that the P1 occurs at time TP1, WR at time TWR and P2 at
time TP2. It should be obvious to see that they have a property TP1 < TWR < TP2. Also,
dP1 is the distance from point P1 to WindowRef WR whereas dP1−P2 is distance between
the points P1 and P2.
Figure 6.8: Interpolation of WindowRef’s timestamp
Here, dP1, dP1−P2, TP1 and TP2 are all values that are known. We are interested to find
the timestamp of the WindowRef TWR. If we divide the total time elapsed between points
P1 and P2, and divide that by the total distance between the same points then we get the
time elapsed per unit distance. We can then multiply that with the distance between point
P1 and WindowRef WR to compute the time taken to get from the point to WindowRef.
TWR −TP1 = TP2 −TP1
dP1−P2
∗dP1
(6.5)
Now, we can move TP1 to the other side of the equation so that we get the timestamp of
the WindowRef WR.
20
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:27==
TWR = TP1 + TP2 −TP1
dP1−P2
∗dP1
(6.6)
So, the above mentioned equation allows us to get the best possible approximation for
the timestamp at which the car was at the position represented by a WindowRef using the
distance and timestamps of two closest GPS points, one on each side. This now allows
us to create windows using the approximated timestamps of the WindowRefs along the
road.
As P1 and P2 are consecutive GPS points, the distance between them (dP1−P2) can
also be called distance delta between P1 and P2. This terminology will be used in the
implementation section of the project as well.
Figure 6.9: WindowRefs and sensor data
As we have discussed how to compute windows, let us have a look at Figure 6.9 to get a
visual idea behind it . As it can be seen, non­GPS sensor data are represented using small
circles. The position of these data is assumed using the timestamp property that each of
these data points have. As we already have a mechanism to compute the timestamp of
the WindowRefs, we can select all the non­GPS data between two WindowRefs based
on the timestamps.
For example, to get all the data belonging to the window WR1 ­ WR2, it should satisfy the
following property, where TG is the timestamp of any data point that is located between
WR1 and WR2.
TWR1 < TG < TWR2
For clarity, it should be mentioned that in Figure 6.9, the colors of the sensor data is used
to represent the window that each of them belong to. The green ones are the sensor data
that was recorded in the window WR1 - WR2 and similarly the blue circles represent the
data belonging to window WR2 - WR3.
6.5
Residual distance
Thus far, we talked how to uniquely identify a window using ways. Also, we discussed
a method to create windows based on interpolated timestamps of WindowRefs. But, the
windows are only created for 100 meter segments. It is extremely unlikely that a way has a
length that is an exact multiple of 100 meters. There is always going to be some residual
distance less than 100 meters that could not be a valid window. However, we cannot
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
21
==PAGE:28==
simply ignore these segment of roads as that will lead to a lot of gaps in the prediction
results.
Figure 6.10: Window for residual distance
In the attached Figure 6.10, way W1 has two valid windows which are WR1 ­ WR2 and
WR2 ­ WR3. The nodes traversed during the trip is N1, N2, N3, N4, N5, N6. However,
there is a segment between WR3 and N4 that is still a part of the way W1 but cannot be
represented as a window due to not being the appropriate length. To solve this issue,
we are going to use data from the following way W2 until the length of a valid window
is attained. This can be defined as a window filler because we are using filler data so
that we can create a valid window. Obviously, in theory this will lead to slightly inaccurate
result as we are using data from unrelated window as well. But we can also store the
information of how many meters of the correct road segment was used compared to the
window filler and use that information to compute how reliable this prediction is going to
be.
6.6
Aggregation
Aggregation is also a key concept in this process. Unfortunately, due to time constraints on
the project, a detailed research in this area could not be carried out. However, this section
will briefly discuss the motivation behind aggregation. In addition, it will also provide high
level ideas that can be developed further in the future.
Multiple trips might produce different prediction for same windows. However, we need to
aggregate all of the predictions to a single value for each window so that the results can
be easily consumed by the users.
6.6.1
Temporal aggregation
In the conference paper named Geospatial Data Aggregation and Reduction in Vehicular
Sensing Applications: the Case of Road Surface Monitoring [4], temporal aggregation is
roughly defined as an approach to aggregate results collected from the same position on
the same road at different times. The timestamps of the predictions at the same point
can be sorted by timestamp in descending order. The contribution that each prediction
provides to the final value decreases substantially over time. Therefore, a decay func­
tion that downgrades the weight of the older predictions seems like the correct approach
forward.
However, it should be noted that the time between predictions might also be relevant
during the assignment of weights to different predictions. For example, let us assume
22
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:29==
that a section of road received two predictions p1 and p2 in two consecutive days. Another
section of road also received two predictions p′
1 and p′
2 but it was received two months
apart. As you can imagine, p1 and p2 might have relatively similar weights due to their
close time proximity compared to p′
1 and p′
2 where the older prediction (p′
1) might have
exponentially lower weight compared to the new prediction p′
2.
6.7
Domain Model
Figure 6.11: Domain Model of learning component in LiRA
The domain model as depicted in Figure 6.11 shows the various entities that exist in the
domain at a conceptual level concerning the learning component which is the focus of
the project. The behavior and data of the entities are modeled. Node and Way in the
domain model are identical to the ones that exist in OSM. A way can have two or upwards
of nodes however a Node does not need to be necessarily part of a way as denoted
by the multiplicity in the relationship between them. SensorData represents the entire
data collected from GM cars. There are two types of SensorData namely, GPS data and
vehicular sensor data (non­GPS data). Both of them share a timestamp property however
the content of the two differ as shown in the diagram.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
23
==PAGE:30==
7
Architecture
This chapter is going to provide a high level architecture that could be implemented for
the learning component in LiRA system. The ideal architecture in this case is one where
the components are scalable, customizable and decoupled with each other as much as
possible. This will help for independent development and deployment cycles leading to a
streamlined experience.
Figure 7.1: Simplistic architecture of LiRA focused on Learning Component
Firstly, the different components that will be shown in architecture diagram will be briefly
discussed here.
• Sensor Data Server This component is external to the learning component being
discussed in this thesis. The server contains the sensor data which includes both
GPS data and vehicular measurements which is required for the next step.
• DataPreparer Data preparation means to transform the sensor data received from
the above mentioned component and map match it in addition to computing various
information regarding the GPS measurements. This component is responsible for
computing the path taken by the car during the trip, detecting the way that a mea­
surement belongs to and so on. In essence, this component should transform the
data so that it is ready to be segmented into windows by the next component.
• DataToWindowsMapper When the GPS data is properly prepared by the previous
component, DataToWindowsMapper will split the roads corresponding to the GPS
measurements into uniquely identifiable static segments. The to and from times­
tamps of the unique segments (aka windows) will then be used to map the vehicular
measurement data into individual segments.
• Extract features This component will take the segmented data produced by the
previous component as input and extract features so that the result can be used by
the machine learning model to compute predictions for those individual segments.
• Run ML Predictor The features extracted in the previous step is used by this com­
ponent to compute the predictions for the segments. This component has access
to the trained machine learning models as well.
24
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:31==
• LiRA database This is a storage that can be used by one or multiple components
to persist data.
• Aggregator This component fetches all predictions for each specific segment of
road and aggregates the results to a single value. The execution of this component
can be carried out at regular intervals or when a specific set of constraints has been
fulfilled or can be executed after processing every trip.
Figure 7.1 shows a simplistic way of designing the learning component. The various com­
ponents are called one after the other and there is a synchronous relationship between
them meaning that the DataToWindowsMapper depends on DataPreparer to complete. If
there is a technical problem after the completion of any components, the whole pipeline
must be run again as there is no persistence of the artefacts produced by any components
except the Run ML Predictor component.
Figure 7.2: Advanced architecture of LiRA focused on Learning Component
Figure 7.2 depicts an improved architecture of the learning component. We can see that
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
25
==PAGE:32==
we have a new component called ML Orchestrator. This component orchestrates var­
ious tasks such that asynchronous communication is possible between components. In
this case, a technology such as message queue can be used for communication. Firstly,
Sensor Data Server pushes a trip id which the ML Orchestrator can pick up. Then, it
firstly sends an asynchronous request to DataPreparer to fetch the data with the specific
trip id and subsequently prepare it. After the DataPreparer is done preparing the data,
the result is stored in the database. Also, the DataPreparer component sends a pro­
cess complete message back to the orchestrator. The orchestrator then continues this
process with DataToWindowsMapper, Extract Features and finally Run ML Predictor.
When Run ML Predictor returns a process complete response for a specific trip id, the
orchestrator can be sure that the trip has been processed successfully and thus return a
process complete message back to its caller.
This type of communication enables scalability because due to the decoupled nature of
the components, resources can be allocated accordingly. For example, if DataPreparer
requires more time to execute, the orchestrator can process other trips in the meanwhile
and when the DataPreparer is done with its execution, it simply sends a message back to
the orchestrator which can then handle the remaining steps of the trip. Also, each compo­
nent can be run inside a container such as Docker [7] and the number of containers can be
up or down scaled based on the requirement of data. There are container orchestration
software such as Kubernetes [13] available which can be used for this exact purpose.
26
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:33==
8
Implementation
The implementation section will provide details about the most important and interesting
parts of the code. This section complements the Solution section nicely by providing
examples of those concepts. The major focus in this section will be the process of how
the geo data can be split into static and uniquely identifiable segments. Implemented tests
will also be discussed at the end of the section.
Specifically, Python is used as the language to implement the algorithms discussed in
this thesis. It is a versatile language which makes it easy to handle large data in memory
using libraries such as pandas. Specifically, DataFrame [21] is a flexible matrix like data
structure in pandas which is used in the implementation of the software. In this data
structure each sensor data is stored as a row and properties of the sensor data are stored
as columns.
Figure 8.1: Implementation steps shown using swim lanes
Figure 8.1 shows key implementation details in each component of the architecture. It
looks like there is a synchronous relationship between the components as seen in the
diagram. This is true for the current implementation of the software. However, decou­
pling them into components as discussed in the previous chapter should be fairly simple
provided that the infrastructure for such componentization is already in place within the
LiRA system.
8.1
Map match
As mentioned already, we will use the map match service provided by OSRM. We split
the GPS data into chunks of small number of points to map match at one time. This is
because it is efficient for the server to map match around 100 points. Ideally, using a
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
27
==PAGE:34==
high number of points results in better map matching but an optimal number of points was
found to be 100 as any more than that was significantly impacting the performance of the
map match. Therefore, currently each chunk is configured to use 100 GPS measurement
points.
1
def map_match(gps, r=30):
2
lat = gps.lat
3
lon = gps.lon
4
c = list(zip(lon,lat))
5
radiuses = [r]*len(lat)
6
timeout = 100
7
client = osrm.Client(host='http://liradbdev.compute.dtu.dk:5000',
8
profile='car', timeout=timeout)
9
match_response = client.match(coordinates=c, radiuses=radiuses,
10
annotations=True)
11
wp = [i['location'] if i!=None else (np.NaN,np.NaN) for i in
12
match_response['tracepoints'] ]
13
gps['lon_map'] = list(zip(*wp))[0]
14
gps['lat_map'] = list(zip(*wp))[1]
15
legs = match_response['matchings'][0]['legs']
16
legs.append(
17
{'annotation':
18
{
19
'nodes': [legs[len(legs)-2]['annotation']['nodes'][-2],
20
legs[len(legs)-2]['annotation']['nodes'][-1]]
21
}
22
})
23
gps['nodes'] = [i['annotation']['nodes'] if i!=None else (np.NaN)
for i
24
in match_response['matchings'][0]['legs']]
25
gps['start_node'] = [i[0] if i else (np.NaN,np.NaN) for i in
26
gps['nodes']]
27
gps['end_node'] = [i[1] if i else (np.NaN,np.NaN) for i in gps['nodes']]
Listing 4: Map match function implementation
Code snippet 4 shows the map match function that is called by each chunk of GPS points.
Here, the dataframe containing the GPS measurements is gps Firstly, at Line 7 we can
see that an API request to OSRM map match service is made. The parameters passed
are a list of GPS coordinates represented by variable c. radiuses take a list of numbers
that specify the radius of error which is considered during the map match. In this case,
we are using 30 meters as that is considered to be the average inaccuracy of the GPS
sensors used by GM cars. annotations=True specifies that we want extra annotated
results about the map matched GPS points. This will provide us with RouteLeg objects
which is discussed in detail in Section 6.1.
28
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:35==
Request:
GET http://liradbdev.compute.dtu.dk:5000/match/v1/car/
12.58667,55.68305;12.58671,55.68306?annotations=nodes
Response:
{
"code": "Ok",
"matchings": [
{
"confidence": 0,
"geometry": "arzrIuiykALJ",
"legs": [
{
"annotation": {
"nodes": [
5683223841,
286531710,
300361944
]
},
"steps": [],
"distance": 9.1,
"duration": 0.9,
"summary": "",
"weight": 0.9
}
],
"distance": 9.1,
"duration": 0.9,
"weight_name": "routability",
"weight": 0.9
}
],
"tracepoints": [
...
]
}
Listing 5: JSON response received from map match request
Let us take the Listing 5 which shows an example API request and response. For sim­
plicity, this example uses only two GPS points as input coordinates which is the minimum
number of points accepted by map match service. Recall that we have n −1 RouteLeg
objects for n GPS points. In this example, we have two GPS points which means we will
have one RouteLeg object. We use generalizations 6.4 and 6.3 in line 23 and 25 of the
code snippet Listing 4 to compute the start_node and end_node. Also, the nodes attribute
in the annotation object contains a list of nodes that are required to get from the first point
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
29
==PAGE:36==
to second. This is stored as nodes attribute of the first point in the GPS dataframe. This
means nodes column of a GPS point in the dataframe will contain the nodes required to
get from that GPS point to the next consecutive point.
8.2
Post processing map match response
8.2.1
Nodes traversed
We already discussed in subsection 6.1 how nodes traversed can be computed for a trip
using the response from OSRM map match service.
We can see in code snippet 4 that we add a new column in gps dataframe called nodes
which contain all the nodes returned by the RouteLeg object. Recall that RouteLeg object
returns information about getting from a point to the consecutive point.
1
nodesTraversed = [node for nodes in gps['nodes'] for node in nodes]
2
3
nodesTraversed = remove_consecutive_nodes(nodesTraversed)
4
5
def remove_consecutive_nodes(list, numberOfElementsToCheck=2):
6
stack = []
7
for i in list:
8
if not (element_exists(stack, numberOfElementsToCheck, i)):
9
stack.append(i)
10
return stack
11
12
def element_exists(stack, numberOfElementsToCheck, i):
13
if len(stack) < numberOfElementsToCheck:
14
numberOfElementsToCheck = len(stack)
15
16
for j in range(1, numberOfElementsToCheck+1):
17
if (i == stack[-j]):
18
return True
19
return False
Listing 6: Compute nodes traversed function
In the code snippet Listing 6, line 1 combines all the nodes in the gps dataframe into a list.
However, there might be duplicate nodes in consecutive RouteLeg objects. Therefore, in
line 3, we remove the consecutive duplicate nodes from the list using remove_consecutive_nodes
function. The function takes an optional parameter numberOfElementsToCheck which is
by default 2. This provides the information of how many elements in the resulting list
must be checked before adding it to the list. In ideal scenarios 2 must be passed as just
checking last and second last element should be enough.
8.2.2
Compute distance from start node
Equation 6.1 in the Solution section shows the motivation behind needing to compute the
distance of each GPS point from the start node. This step is fundamental to calculating
distance of a GPS point from any other point in the map.
The code required to achieve that is relatively trivial. compute_distance_from_start_node
function takes the dataframe df as input and iterates through each GPS point. At each it­
eration it gets the actual GPS latitude and longitude values of the start node of the current
GPS point. Then, it calculates haversine distance [11] between the latitude and longitude
30
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:37==
1
def compute_distance_from_start_node(df: DataFrame):
2
dist = []
3
for _, row in df.iterrows():
4
current_start_node = int(row['start_node'])
5
node = getGPSFromNode(current_start_node)
6
dist.append(haversine_distance(node[0], float(row['lat_map']),
7
node[1], float(row['lon_map'])))
8
9
df['dist'] = dist
10
return df
Listing 7: Compute distance from start node of each GPS point
of the start node and the GPS point. The resulting distance is stored in the dist column
in the dataframe.
8.2.3
Compute distance delta between consecutive points
In the equation 6.6, we can see that the distance between two consecutive GPS points
(dP1−P2 in the equation) is needed to interpolate the WindowRef timestamps if there ex­
ists a WindowRef between two consecutive points. Therefore, now we will see how the
implementation for the distance delta is carried out.
Firstly, let us look at the concept of a section. A section is a subset of a way. This is
needed because during a trip, it is not guaranteed that the car will travel on a complete
way. It could ride only over a short section of a way. For example, in the Figure 8.4, the
nodes traversed list of the trip is [N1, N2, N3, N6, N7] as shown by the wide black arrows.
Notice that neither W1 nor W2 are fully covered by this trip. Only a short section of the
ways are covered. To be precise, [N1, N2, N3] of W1 and [N3, N6, N7] of W2 are covered.
Also, notice that the direction of the way is also relevant here therefore that information is
also part of the section.
Figure 8.2: Car trip over multiple ways
Function depicted in snippet 8 shows that we firstly call the map_nodes_to_ways function
which takes the nodesTraversed parameter. This function goes through the nodes in
the nodesTraversed list and figures out which section of ways are represented by the
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
31
==PAGE:38==
1
def compute_distance(df:DataFrame, nodesTraversed):
2
sections = map_nodes_to_ways(nodesTraversed)
3
curr_section = curr_meas_idx = residue = 0
4
distFromWayStart, distDelta, way, directionList, distDictList = [], [], [], [], []
5
isNewSection = True
6
7
for section in sections:
8
nodes = get_nodes(section.way)
9
if not section.direction:
10
nodes.reverse()
11
dists = getCumulativeDistanceBetweenNodes(nodes)
12
distDictList.append({node: dist for node, dist in zip(nodes, dists)})
13
14
while curr_meas_idx < len(df):
15
while curr_meas_idx < len(df) and df.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['start_node']
16
not in sections[curr_section].nodes:
17
curr_start_node = df.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['start_node']
18
distFromWayStart.append(distDictList[curr_section][curr_start_node] +
19
df.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['dist'])
20
if curr_meas_idx == 0:
21
distDelta.append(0)
22
elif isNewSection:
23
firstNodeInSection = sections[curr_section].start_node
24
startNodeOfCurrMeas = df.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['start_node']
25
residue += distDictList[curr_section][firstNodeInSection] -
26
distDictList[curr_section][startNodeOfCurrMeas]
27
distDelta.append(df.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['dist'] + residue)
28
else:
29
distDelta.append(distFromWayStart[curr_meas_idx] -
30
distFromWayStart[curr_meas_idx-1])
31
residue = 0
32
isNewSection = False
33
way.append(sections[curr_section].way)
34
directionList.append(sections[curr_section].direction)
35
curr_meas_idx += 1
36
37
if curr_section+1 < len(sections):
38
next_section_start_node = sections[curr_section+1].start_node
39
temp = distDictList[curr_section][next_section_start_node] -
40
distFromWayStart[-1]
41
residue = temp
42
isNewSection = True
43
curr_section += 1
44
df['way'] = way
45
df['forwardDirection'] = directionList
46
df['distDelta'] = distDelta
47
return df
Listing 8: Function to compute distDelta, direction and way
32
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:39==
nodes. Therefore, this function returns a list of Section object containing the attributes;
way, direction, start_node, end_node, and nodes. The start_node, end_node are the start
and end nodes of the section and not the way itself. Nodes is the list of nodes contained
in the section.
The dataframe df already has columns such as dist, start_node and end_node popu­
lated calculated using the prior mentioned functions. start_node and end_node are the
start and end nodes of this measurement whereas dist contains the distance of the mea­
surement from its start_node.
Now, the first for loop iterates through each Section object in sections and gets the nodes
represented by the section’s way. The list of the nodes is reversed if the direction of
this section is reversed with respect to the direction of the way. distDictList is a list
of dictionaries where each dictionary has node as the key and the distance to that node
from the starting node of the way as value. In the Figure 8.3, the value of distDictList
is going to be as shown is Listing 9.
[
{
'N1': 0,
'N2': dist(N1-N2),
'N3': dist(N1-N2) + dist(N2-N3),
'N4': dist(N1-N2) + dist(N2-N3)} + dist(N3-N4),
'N5': dist(N1-N2) + dist(N2-N3)} + dist(N3-N4) + dist(N4-N5)
},
{
'N6': 0,
'N4': dist(N6-N4),
'N7': dist(N6-N4) + dist(N4-N7)
'N8': dist(N6-N4) + dist(N4-N7) + dist(N7-N8)
},
]
Listing 9: distDictList variable example
The reason behind computing the distDictList is to easily access the distance of any node
from the start of its way.
Then, we iterate through each measurement in the dataframe. We also have a inner while
loop which iterates the dataframe one at a time until we detect a measurement whose start
node is not in the nodes list of the current section. This means that a specific section is
completely processed and therefore we exit out of the while loop to start processing a new
section. During this iteration, distance delta (distDelta) of each measurement is com­
puted one by one. direction and way of the measurement is going to be identical with the
section that it belongs to. Therefore, those values of the measurement are assigned from
the section’s values as shown in line 33 and 34. In line 18, we compute the total distance
of this measurement from the start of the way and store that in distFromWayStart. If the
current measurement is the first in this dataframe, this means the distDelta is 0. There­
fore, we append 0 if that is the case in line 21. However, if the measurement is part of a
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
33
==PAGE:40==
new section (which implicitly means it is part of a completely new way compared to last
measurement), then we simply add the dist of this measurement with the residue value.
residue value is the combination of two values and is only relevant when a measure­
ment is detected in new section. One of them is the distance between the measurement
and the end node of the section. This residue distance must be added to the dist of next
measurement to compute the distance delta. The second residue distance is the distance
between first node in the new section and the start node of the current measurement.
Let us look at the Figure 8.3 to visualize the scenario. The car trip traversed through
nodes [N1, N2, N3, N4, N7, N8] which means we have two sections [N1, N2, N3, N4] and
[N4, N7, N8]. Also, there are GPS measurements P1, P2, P3 and P4 for which we have
to compute the distance delta. Notice that as P2 and P3 are in two different ways, we first
need to compute the distance between P2 and N4 denoted by residue1, and subsequently
also add the distance between N4 and N7 denoted by residue2. Therefore, the distance
delta between P2 and P3 is the sum of residue1, residue2 and distP3 which is exactly
what we do in line 25.
On the other hand, if the measurement is not a part of a new section compared to the last
measurement then we simply take the difference between the distFromWayStart of the
last measurement and this measurement which will result in the distance delta between
two points. Let us again look at the Figure 6.10. dist′
P1 and dist′
P2 are the distance of
P1 and P2 from the start of their respective way. Now, to compute the distance delta
between them, we can simply take the difference between them. Therefore, distance
delta between P1 and P2 is dist′
P2 ­ dist′
P1. Notice that this concept is applied at line 29
­ 30 in the code snippet 8.
Figure 8.3: Section and residue distances
The algorithm runs until there is no measurement left to be processed in the dataframe
df. Finally, the lists way, directionList and distDelta are assigned as columns in the
original dataframe df and returned.
8.3
Create windows
Creating windows is the most important step of this entire process and everything we did
up to now leads to this. All the information computed so far such as way, direction,
distDelta, start_node, end_node, and more are going to be used.
34
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:41==
Let us firstly look at WindowRef class. The object in this class stores the information about
the position of a window endpoint (WindowRef). Recall that two window endpoints are
needed to create a window. Therefore, start node, end node and distance helps to exactly
locate the position of the WindowRef. This class also has a reference to a Section object
which is a shorter segment of a way. A Section object has a way that it belongs to, start
and end nodes depicting the start and end positions of the Section and the direction of the
section with respect to way. A WindowRef always belongs to a Section. idx is the index
of WindowRef along the path of a way. For example, idx 1 means that this WindowRef
is 100 meters away from the start of its way.
WindowRefMetaData contains extra information about a WindowRef. The relevant one
currently is the timestamp property which provides the timestamp of when the car reached
at this WindowRef position.
Window has three attributes. The first two are startRefMetaData and endRefMetaData
which contains a reference to the information about both start and end WindowRef in
addition to the timestamps of when the WindowRef was reached. Recall that if a window
is not of valid length and has residual distance, then we need to use measurements from
the successive sections until the valid window length is reached. validWindowLength
attribute in this class stores the information of what length of window is used from the
correct section. This helps to later aggregate the results by providing lower confidence to
a prediction based on what the validWindowLength is.
Figure 8.4: Model classes concerning windows and their relationship
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
35
==PAGE:42==
Now, as we have an idea of the different classes concerning windows, let us look at how
windows are created. The only parameter needed to identify the windows that needs to be
created is nodesTraversed. As nodes traversed is a list of nodes that was traversed during
the course of the trip, we can use that information to exactly compute which WindowRefs
are going to be covered by the car in this trip.
The code snippet 10 shows the implementation of how WindowRefs are created using
the nodes traversed list. Firstly, map_nodes_to_ways function is called which is already
discussed earlier. This function returns a list of sections along the nodes traversed by the
car. We then iterate through each of these sections and we call
create_windowRefs_for_section function which takes the section as an input and re­
turns all the WindowRefs that exist in this section. All of the WindowRefs are added to a
list and finally returned.
1
def windowRefs_from_nodesTraversed(nodesTraversed):
2
sections = map_nodes_to_ways(nodesTraversed)
3
res = []
4
for section in sections:
5
validatedWindowRefs = create_windowRefs_for_section(section)
6
7
for i in validatedWindowRefs: i.section = section
8
9
res.extend(validatedWindowRefs)
10
return res
Listing 10: Create WindowRefs from nodes traversed
Now, we have a list of WindowRefs that are relevant in the car trip that we are currently
processing. As described in section 6.3, we can now take each pair of consecutive mea­
surements and check if there exists one or multiple WindowRefs in between them. If
yes, we compute the approximate timestamp at which the car reached the WindowRef
position(s) using interpolation.
After getting all the WindowRefs for the car trip, we iterate through the measurements
selecting two consecutive measurements at a time. In the code snippet 11, Line 12 ­ 15
shows that we step through the nodes traversed (nT) one by one until ntIdx1 points to the
start_node of the first measurement (meas1) and ntIdx2 points to the end_node of the
second measurement (meas2). Notice that if there exists any WindowRefs between these
two measurements then we can traverse the nodes contained in the sublist of nT from
index ntIdx1 to index ntIdx2 and see if we detect the start_node of any WindowRefs.
This is exactly what we do from Line 17 to 24.
getWindowRefsBetweenTwoMeas function takes the list of all WindowRefs in this trip
(windowRefs), the sublist of nT containing nodes between index ntIdx1 and ntIdx2 (slicedNodes),
distance from the start node of both measurements, and the distance between each node
in the sublist of nT (slicedNodesDist). This provides all the information needed to detect
WindowRefs between the two measurements. wrPointer keeps track of where exactly we
are in the list of windowRefs. This is an optimization to prevent checking for windowRefs
from the beginning at each iteration.
Let us look at the Figure 8.5 to visualize the variables mentioned here, in a diagram.
P1 and P2 are two measurements which are represented as meas1 and meas2 in our
algorithm. slicedNodes is going to be nodes between these two measurements including
their start and end nodes which in this context will be [N2, N3, N4, N5, N6]. meas1[’dist’]
36
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:43==
1
def create_windows(data: DataFrame, nT):
2
windowRefs = windowRefs_from_nodesTraversed(nT)
3
ntIdx1 = ntIdx2
= wrPointer = 0
4
lastRefMeta = WindowRefMetaData()
5
curr_meas_idx = 1
6
windows = []
7
allNodesDist = get_distance_between_nodes_core(nT)
8
while curr_meas_idx < len(data):
9
meas1 = data.iloc[curr_meas_idx-1]
10
meas2 = data.iloc[curr_meas_idx]
11
12
while ntIdx1 < len(nT) and nT[ntIdx1] != meas1['start_node']:
13
ntIdx1 += 1
14
while ntIdx2 < len(nT) and nT[ntIdx2] != meas2['end_node']:
15
ntIdx2 += 1
16
17
slicedNodes = nT[ntIdx1: ntIdx2+1]
18
inBetweenRefs = []
19
# get all windowRefs between two nodes
20
if slicedNodes:
21
slicedNodesDist = allNodesDist[ntIdx1: ntIdx2+1]
22
slicedNodesDist = get_cumulative_sum(slicedNodesDist)
23
inBetweenRefs, wrPointer = getWindowRefsBetweenTwoMeas(windowRefs,
24
slicedNodes, wrPointer, meas1['dist'], meas2['dist'], slicedNodesDist)
25
26
# at this point we are sure that all the inBetweenRefs must be processed
27
for (ref, meas1ToWinrefDist) in inBetweenRefs:
28
isDifferentWay = ref.section.way != lastRefMeta.winRef.section.way if
29
lastRefMeta.winRef and lastRefMeta.winRef.section else False
30
if isDifferentWay:
31
windows.append(compute_window_to_complete_last(data, lastRefMeta,
32
curr_meas_idx, meas1ToWinrefDist))
33
34
refTime = interpolate_time_with_dist_delta(meas2['distDelta'],
35
meas1['TS_or_Distance'], meas2['TS_or_Distance'], meas1ToWinrefDist)
36
37
if not isDifferentWay:
38
windows.append( Window (lastRefMeta, WindowRefMetaData(ref, refTime,
39
curr_meas_idx, meas1ToWinrefDist) ))
40
lastRefMeta = WindowRefMetaData(ref, refTime, curr_meas_idx,
41
meas1ToWinrefDist)
42
43
if isDifferentWay and ref.idx > 0:
44
windows.append(compute_window_complete_first(data, lastRefMeta,
45
curr_meas_idx, meas1ToWinrefDist))
46
47
curr_meas_idx += 1
48
return windows
Listing 11: Create windows algorithm
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
37
==PAGE:44==
and meas2[’dist’] are the distances of each of the measurement points from its start nodes
as shown in the figure.
Figure 8.5: Visualization of a scenario when detecting WindowRefs
After we get a list of WindowRefs between the two measurements (if they exist) we iterate
through each of them one by one as shown in Line 27. First thing we check at Line 28
is if the current WindowRef is part of a different way compared to the last one. If yes,
isDifferentWay is set to true and we have to complete the last invalid window using
data from another way. This is handled by compute_window_to_complete_last function.
In a nutshell, this function keeps processing measurements until we reach a distance
exceeding 100 meters. Then, we interpolate to precisely approximate the timestamp of
where the 100 meters would end.
Now, we compute the approximate timestamp of the WinRef using the
interpolate_time_with_dist_delta function. If isDifferentWay is set to False it means
that we are still processing WindowRef of same way as before. In that case, we create a
Window using the WindowRefMetaData result of the most recently processed WindowRef
and the last WindowRefMetaData stored in memory as lastRefMeta. Notice that we are
also storing the curr_meas_idx in the WindowRefMetaData object. This is because we
might need to revert back to this measurement index if the next WindowRef is part of a
different way. After reverting, we can start measuring 100 meters until a valid window
length is reached.
Figure 8.6: Visualizing interpolation of WindowRef’s timestamp
Also, we store meas1ToWinrefDist which is the distance from meas1 to the current Win­
dowRef. This is needed to compute the interpolation. We have already talked about
interpolation in section 6.4. A visual representation of the interpolation at Line 34 ­ 35 is
shown in Figure 8.6. The interpolate_time_with_dist_delta takes four parameters.
38
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:45==
The first is measDistDelta which is the distance between the two measurements. The
second and third are timestamps of meas1 and meas2, respectively. The last one is the
distance from meas1 to the WindowRef which is shown as meas1toWinRefDist in the fig­
ure. The return value of the function is the interpolated timestamp of WR as shown in the
figure.
Figure 8.7: Visualizing residual distance
In Line 40, we set the lastRefMeta to the WindowRef that is most recently processed.
After all the measurements are processed, the resulting windows list will contain a list of
Window objects.
Figure 8.8: Handling window with residual distance
Notice that we have different logic if isDifferentWay is true as shown in Line 30 ­ 32
and Line 43 ­ 45. This is because there is some residue distance in the start of the
section or the end of the section and they need to be handled differently. In the Figure
8.7, the nodes traversed by the car are [N1, N2, N3, N4, N5, N6]. We see that W1 has
an invalid window between WR2 and N3 denoted by ”W1 last residue” and therefore we
need to use data from next section until it reaches a valid length of 100 meters. Let us
look at the code snippet 12 which shows how the compute_window_to_complete_last
function is implemented which is used at Line 31 in code snippet 11. Firstly, we revert
curr_meas_idx to the measurement index of the last WindowRef as shown in Line 4. We
initialize curr_rolling_dist to the distance between the WindowRef and the following
measurement. In the Figure 8.8, it can be seen that distance between WR and meas2
is measToWinRefDist −measDistDelta as shown in Line 5. Now, we keep adding
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
39
==PAGE:46==
1
def compute_window_to_complete_last(data, lastRefMeta, curr_meas_idx,
2
meas1ToWinrefDist):
3
refTime = None
4
curr_meas_idx = lastRefMeta.measIdx
5
curr_rolling_dist = data.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['distDelta'] -
6
lastRefMeta.meas1ToRefDist
7
8
while curr_rolling_dist < 100 and curr_meas_idx < len(data)-1:
9
curr_meas_idx += 1
10
curr_rolling_dist += data.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['distDelta']
11
12
if curr_rolling_dist >= 100:
13
refTime = interpolate_time_with_dist_delta(
14
data.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['distDelta'],
15
data.iloc[curr_meas_idx-1]['TS_or_Distance'],
16
data.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['TS_or_Distance'],
17
100 - curr_rolling_dist + data.iloc[curr_meas_idx]['distDelta'])
18
19
return Window (lastRefMeta, WindowRefMetaData(None, refTime,
20
curr_meas_idx, meas1ToWinrefDist),
21
calculate_valid_window_length(lastRefMeta.winRef, True))
Listing 12: Function that completes last invalid window
the distDelta of subsequent measurements until the curr_rolling_dist exceeds 100
meters. Then, we have interpolate to find a dummy WindowRef to complete the invalid
window.
Figure 8.9: Invalid window interpolation
This is depicted in Figure 8.9 which is the state reached when the code reaches Line 13 in
Listing 12. WR’ is the dummy WindowRef in this example which means this WindowRef
does not belong to any particular way but the distance from WR to WR’ is 100 meters.
Also, meas4 and meas5 represent curr_meas_idx - 1 and curr_meas_idx. The first
three parameters of the interpolate time with dist delta function must be obvious. The
40
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:47==
fourth one is the distance represented by a question mark in the figure. By using simple
mathematics we can compute that distance to be 100 −curr_rolling_dist + distDelta.
After the interpolation is computed, we have successfully approximated the timestamp of
the dummy WindowRef WR’ to complete the WindowRef WR.
In Figure 8.7, we see a second scenario which is denoted by ”W2 first residue”. Here,
notice that the start of way W2 is the node N8. This means that the car did not traverse
from the start of W2 and therefore we have distance from N3 to WR3’ that is not covered
as a valid window. Thus, when we detect the WindowRef WR3’, we should start mea­
suring back the distance from WR3’ in the opposite direction until we get to 100 meters
of distance. In this case, the end point of this new window will be somewhere in W1 and
the start point would be WR3’. Note that we are measuring backwards from WR3’ in this
case. To figure out the starting point of the window, we use an algorithm similar to Listing
12. Due to the similarity, compute_window_complete_first will not be discussed here.
8.4
Map data into windows
In the previous section, we discussed how to detect WindowRefs in the path traversed by
the car during the trip and approximate the timestamps of when those WindowRefs posi­
tions were reached by the car. Now, we can use those timestamps to map the vehicular
sensor data into respective windows because each of the sensor data has a timestamp
of measurement attached to them.
1
splittedData = []
2
for window in windows:
3
splittedData.append((
4
(allData['TS_or_Distance'] > window.startRefMetaData.timestamp) &
5
(allData['TS_or_Distance'] < window.endRefMetaData.timestamp)
6
))
Listing 13: Map vehicular sensor data to windows
Code snippet 16 shows how the data can be mapped simply by using the timestamp
property of each window’s start and end WindowRefMetaData object.
8.5
Predict
After the vehicular measurements are mapped into windows of appropriate length, the
feature extraction script is executed. This implementation of this script was carried out by
machine learning experts and provided as an artefact. The output provided by the script
can then be used by the prediction script. Prediction script accepts the id of the trip and
the type of machine learning model to use and subsequently uses the list of extracted
features where each element represent a window. The output of this script is then a
list of predictions each corresponding to the road condition prediction for their respective
window. Currently, the results are stored in a pickle file however this can be stored in a
database as a future improvement.
8.6
Testing
As the implementation logic was fairly complicated, a number of test suites were written
during the course of the development of the software to prevent bugs when refactoring
the code and also in general to have a peace of mind that expected functionality was
preserved. The automated tests were mostly unit tests whereas manual testing were also
carried out using real data when automated testing was not feasible.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
41
==PAGE:48==
8.6.1
Unit tests
Unit tests are the tests of a method or class in an isolated environment. They must be
cheap to run and test individual behavior. Ideally, all the functionalities must be covered
by tests but in this project, only the must important functions are tested using unit testing.
A couple of interesting unit tests will be explained in detail in the following section. The
input data are particularly complicated therefore illustrations will be used for clarity.
getWindowRefsBetweenTwoMeas
This function gets all the WindowRefs that exist between two GPS measurements. To
achieve that, input data is created as shown in the code snippet 14. The complementary
Figure 8.10 provides more context about the input data in the code. windowRefs is the list
of all the WindowRefs computed from nodes traversed in the trip. allNodes is the sublist of
nodes traversed list that includes start node and end node of both measurements (m1 and
m2) and any potential intermediary nodes. allNodesDist is cumulative distance between
them. Third and fourth parameters are the distances of m1 and m2 from their respective
start nodes denoted by blue arrows in the figure. WindowRefs and their distance from
start node are shown in red color.
1
def test_getWindowRefsBetweenTwoMeas_extra_node_first():
2
windowRefs = [WindowRef(124, 125, 10), WindowRef(127, 128, 10),
3
WindowRef(128, 129, 10), WindowRef(128, 129, 110),
4
WindowRef(130, 131, 50)]
5
allNodes = [124, 125,126,127,128,129]
6
allNodesDist = [0, 20, 60, 100, 200, 320]
7
actual, wrPointerActual = getWindowRefsBetweenTwoMeas(windowRefs,
8
allNodes, 5, 113, allNodesDist, 0)
9
expected = [(WindowRef(124, 125, 10), 5), (WindowRef(127, 128, 10), 105),
10
(WindowRef(128, 129, 10), 205), (WindowRef(128, 129, 110), 305)]
11
wrPointerExpected = 4
12
assert wrPointerActual == wrPointerExpected
13
assert len(actual) == len(expected)
14
for i, j in zip(actual, expected):
15
assert i == j
Listing 14: Map data to windows
The expected list contains all the WindowRefs that exist in between these two measure­
ments. We can compare the expected list in the code with the one in the figure to verify
that the test is correctly testing the outcome. wrPointer provides the index from where
the algorithm to start the search for the next WindowRef. As we started with wrPointer
value of 0 and the first four WindowRefs are expected to be included in the actual result,
the expected return wrPointer value is 4.
42
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:49==
Figure 8.10: Test data for getWindowRefsBetweenTwoMeas
create_windows
Recall that create_windows function takes a pandas dataframe containing the GPS data
from the trip in addition to a list of nodes traversed during the trip. The code snippet
shown in Listing 15 shows that some functions are mocked using the mock library offered
by python [17]. The patch decorator can be used to inject fake results during the execution
of code to mock external dependencies. The nodes and ways used in the test do not exist
in the OSM database therefore the functions that are used in create_windows that make
calls to the OSM server are mocked. As we do not receive data from OSM to test the
functionality of the algorithm, the data was created artificially which is represented in the
Figure 8.11.
1
@mock.patch("utils.algorithms.windowRefs_from_nodesTraversed",
2
return_value=get_windowRefs(), autospec=True)
3
@mock.patch("utils.algorithms.get_distance_between_nodes_core",
4
return_value=[90,50,120,70,30,80])
5
@mock.patch("utils.algorithms.calculate_valid_window_length", return_value=None)
6
def test_func(mock_func1, mock_func2, mock_func3):
7
nodesTraversed = ['123', '124', '125', '126', '127', '128', '129']
8
df = get_data()
9
actual = create_windows(df, nodesTraversed)
10
11
expected = get_expected_result()
12
13
for act, exp in zip(actual, expected):
14
assert act.startRefMetaData.isShallowEqualWith(exp.startRefMetaData)
15
assert exp.endRefMetaData.isShallowEqualWith(exp.endRefMetaData)
Listing 15: Create windows test
nodesTraversed contains all the nodes from 123 to 129. These are the nodes that are part
of the input dataframe df. The measurements and their distance from the start node is
represented by dark green color whereas WindowRefs and their distance is shown in red.
W1 and W2 represent two different ways shown in blue and light green color respectively.
Notice that the start of both of these ways are not included in the nodesTraversed list
because they are not part of the input GPS points dataframe. The test finally tests if the
correct Window objects were created which implicitly means that the start and end Win­
dowRefs represented by them are also as expected. Also, the interpolated timestamps
by the algorithm is tested against the expected timestamps.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 8.11: Test data for create_windows including two ways
8.6.2
Manual testing
The overall pipeline run of fetching the data, map matching, computing various attributes
of the GPS points, creating windows, extracting features and finally predicting was not
covered by an end to end integration test. This was rather carried out manually by running
the script and checking the output results. Manual tests were used in this case because it
would take a substantial resources including time to automate the tests which was deemed
not to be feasible in this project.
44
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:51==
9
Evaluation
Any solution needs to be evaluated from a practical and correctness perspective to prove
that it achieved what was expected of it. This is a key aspect of the Design Science
methodology which was used as a framework for this thesis. The evaluation will mainly
consists of testing if the windows created by the solution are of valid lengths. Also, the
interpolated timestamps will be evaluated based on real trip data.
Green Mobility trip id 7792 was used throughout the course of the thesis to test the func­
tionality of the software. Due to the nature of the GPS data, there were some challenges
with using the entire trip for evaluation which led to using a smaller part of the trip for
evaluating the solution. The exact challenges are quite interesting and will be discussed.
9.1
Challenges
9.1.1
Map matching to nearby roads
It has been experienced that map matching the GPS points correctly is non­trivial. The
OSRM service can be used to map match the points and receive ”corrected” GPS co­
ordinates along side additional meta data information. However, the response is highly
unpredictable as there has been a significant number of encounters such as the ones
shown in Figure 9.4 and Figure 9.6. It should be noted that the solution discussed in
this thesis is built upon ”chained” property between measurements which means that two
consecutive GPS points are taken to detect the direction of the car trip, distance between
points and so on. Therefore, the data in this state is not going to function as expected
with the solution proposed in this thesis.
Figure 9.1: Coordinates plotted as re­
ceived from sensors
Figure 9.2: Coordinates map matched
using OSRM service
9.1.2
Mismatch between temporal and spatial ordering of data
The Figure 9.3 shows that GPS points along the path N1 through N4 are monotonically
moving forward both in space and time, before map matching is applied. The bottom part
of the figure shows the result after map matching, where points P2 and P3 now have
changed order which means they are misaligned. With respect to time, P3 has a higher
timestamp than P2. This makes it extremely difficult to figure out the route that the car trip
took. This is actually because currently the way to figure out the nodes traversed by a car
during a trip is by taking two consecutive measurements and adding the nodes required
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
45
==PAGE:52==
to get from first measurement to the other into a list and continually doing this until the
entire list of points is traversed. This was found to be the best workaround to compute
this information because OSRM does not provide this information out­of­the­box or any
other relevant information to figure this out more robustly. Imagine in this setup, due to
this misalignment, the route of the car trip will be computed as N1, N2, N3, N2, N3, N4
which is not correct.
Future work section will discuss a bit more about what the approach forward could be with
relation to these challenges with the data quality and map match service.
Figure 9.3: Temporal and spatial misalignment of GPS points after map matching
9.2
Evaluation with selected data
Due to the above mentioned challenges with the collected sensor data, the solution was
later built with the assumption that these problems will be fixed and the input data to the
solution discussed in this project will be free from issues. Therefore, now the following
section will discuss about a stretch of the road which did not run into the above mentioned
issues.
Here, we will see an example of a 2000 meters long stretch of road that could successfully
be segmented into windows. The data corresponding to timestamp TS_or_Distance >
'2021-04-22 01:43:22' and "TS_or_Distance" < '2021-04-22 01:48:55' for GM trip
7792 was selected as this stretch of road . The entire flow of map matching, computing
various distances and finally computing windows was carried out for the given data. The
number of windows created for the data was 28 but for brevity only some will be shown
here in Listing 16.
In Listing 16, we can see the timestamps of various ways and the windows that they
46
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:53==
1
Window 1
2
Way: 455570584, Direction: True, Window index: 0, validWindowLength: 51.27405
3
Start TS: 2021-04-22 01:47:43.186788352, End TS: 2021-04-22 01:47:53.339190784
4
5
Window 2
6
Way: 199469588, Direction: True, Window index: 0, validWindowLength: 100
7
Start TS: 2021-04-22 01:47:49.145065728, End TS: 2021-04-22 01:47:57.999244288
8
9
Window 3
10
Way: 199469588, Direction: True, Window index: 1, validWindowLength: 100
11
Start TS: 2021-04-22 01:47:57.999244288, End TS: 2021-04-22 01:48:06.644733440
12
13
Window 4
14
Way: 199469588, Direction: True, Window index: 2, validWindowLength: 30.17993
15
Start TS: 2021-04-22 01:48:06.644733440, End TS: 2021-04-22 01:48:14.064022272
16
17
Window 5
18
Way: 455570581, Direction: True, Window index: 0, validWindowLength: 59.12270
19
Start TS: 2021-04-22 01:48:08.966188800, End TS: 2021-04-22 01:48:16.515160832
Listing 16: Compute windows to complete last function
contain. The first way 455570584 is only around 51 meters long which means that it
could not be a valid window by itself. Therefore, it used the data from the subsequent
section/way. This can be verified by looking at the End TS of Window 1 which is 01:47:53.
However, the Start TS of the next window (Window 2) is 01:47:49 which is lower than the
End TS of previous window. This means that there is a overlap between Window 1 and
Window 2 which is expected. Notice that the second way 199469588 has a total length of
100 + 100 + 30.17 which is 230.17 meters in total. Here, the second and third windows will
have no overlap which is reflected in the timestamps of these two windows. The same is
true for Window 3 and Window 4. However, again due to only being 30 meters, Window
4 needs data from subsequent way which results in an overlap between Window 4 and
Window 5.
The correctness of the length of the windows can be seen by cross checking the length
of the ways as received from OSM edit pane [8].
Figure 9.4:
Length of way
455570584
Figure 9.5:
Length of way
199469588
Figure 9.6:
Length of way
455570581
The interpolated timestamps as shown in the Listing 16 was verified to be correct by man­
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
47
==PAGE:54==
ual inspection. The map matched result is exported to a csv file and the GPS measure­
ments corresponding to the ways shown in the listing are searched in the map matched
result file. When the measurements that correspond to the WindowRef that we are look­
ing for are found, we can simply apply interpolation to get the result and verify that it is as
expected.
Manual inspection on real data and automated unit testing of functions including the
create_windows which tests multiple different scenarios of GPS measurement data shows
that when provided with data following specific constraints, the solution correctly segments
the road into windows using timestamps.
Also, another important observation is that the average length of a window was calculated
to be around 63.55 meters. This might be slightly concerning as this means on average
about 37 meters of data is being used as ”filler data” which might lead to inaccurate re­
sults. Obviously as mentioned in previous sections, assigning lower confidence to the
predictions produced using data from other windows is a fix but this might still be a prob­
lem. This problem can also be mitigated if the window size is reduced from 100 meters
to some lower number but this is a decision concerned with the machine learning domain
experts as the window size is determined by them. However, this solution is customisable
in the sense that the window size can easily be updated if needed.
The time taken from when the data was done map matched to the creation of windows
was about 25 seconds for 477 GPS measurements spanning over 2000 meters. The
device used to carry out this test was a virtual machine called mnemosyne from the DTU
GPU cluster [10]. It had 7 Titan V GPUs with 12 GB of GPU RAM. The host CPU was 2
x Xeon E5­2620 v4 8c/16t ­ 2.1 GHz. The host RAM was 256 GB. A stress test was not
performed because of the complication of getting large amount of data in a state that was
ready to be used with this solution. However, extrapolating from this limited result which
probably has a high overhead, we can make a conservative assumption of approximately
19 GPS points are processed per second using the provided machine.
48
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:55==
10
Future Work
Although a lot of new discoveries were made and a working software was implemented
in the duration of this thesis, there are still things that can be done to further improve the
system and ultimately integrate the system into the LiRA system. The majority of work
has been carried out to figure out how to segment the road into equal windows so that
machine learning model can use the data for 100 meters length and produce correspond­
ing predictions. The component that creates the windows of 100 meters length requires
a dataframe that contains the input data and the nodes traversed list which contains all
the nodes through which the trip was carried out.
Firstly, the process of computing the nodes traversed list is quite naive currently. Its lim­
itations are also discussed in the evaluation section where the lack of first party support
from OSRM service regarding getting the list of nodes traversed is unfortunate. Currently,
post processing is done on the map match response to recreate the path that the GPS
measurements represent from the start to the end positions in the trip but it is not quite
robust and runs into errors every now and then. This will not be acceptable solution when
deployed to production. It should be noted that it is quite fundamental to know the path
taken by the car during the trip as this will help determine the direction of the travel, com­
pute distances between various points in the trip and so on. Also, one of the reasons
the current solution cannot directly be integrated to the LiRA system is due to the lack
of robust mechanism to compute the nodes traversed list. Therefore, more research is
needed in this area as part of the future work.
If computing the nodes traversed list from the OSRM services is not possible, a heuristic
based approach can also be researched. Currently, the distance between two GPS points
is calculated strictly using the path taken by the car (which uses the nodes traversed
list). However, it might be possible to make an assumption that for close GPS points,
the shortest distance between the two points is the path taken by car. This might lead to
inaccurate results because it is plausible that the car took a completely different route to
get between those two points. Nevertheless, it might be a valid alternative as well.
As mentioned in the evaluation section, the average length of a window was only around
63 meters which meant that on average almost one third of the data was borrowed by a
window from another segment to produce a prediction. Currently, we are splitting each
way into windows of 100 meters which evidently leads to windows with less than 100
meters which means data has to be borrowed from next section. An alternative solution
could be to not split the ways into segments of 100 meters but rather split the entire
road network into 100 meter windows and storing the WindowRef positions of them in
the database. This will eliminate the need of using ways and windows can be simply
referenced using nodes in the map. More research in this regard might also help in the
future.
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
49
==PAGE:56==
11
Conclusion
This thesis had major focus on integrating a collection of sensor data from Green Mobility
cars with a trained machine learning model. The trained model had a specific require­
ment of taking data corresponding to a fixed length of road as input. Firstly, a thorough
background study was carried out to understand what already had been accomplished so
far in the context of LiRA project and also similar projects to draw inspiration. Later, two
research questions were formulated to set a specific goal and scope the project.
The first research question was to come up with a solution to split the road segments
represented by a stream of geo data such that data corresponding to those segments can
be fed into a trained machine learning model. The data is firstly map matched using OSRM
map match service. Then, the route taken by the car in the trip is estimated using the
computed nodes traversed list. Each way in the path of the car trip was split from its start
node for each 100 meters of length and estimated timestamps at each endpoint of these
segments are estimated using the timestamps of the nearby GPS measurements. These
estimated timestamps helps to map the vehicular sensor data into individual windows.
Feature extraction of the vehicular sensor data is then possible which finally can be used
as input to the trained machine learning model to produce predictions.
This thesis has successfully analyzed the problem in the context of LiRA system and de­
vised a solution that can be used under specific circumstances. If the given map matched
data does not contain any data points with temporal and spatial misalignment as dis­
cussed in the evaluation section, the solution provided in this thesis can be used to split
the corresponding roads into static windows which can subsequently be uniquely identi­
fied using way as one of the key identifiers. This means that over the course of multiple
trips, if cars ride on the same segment of the road, it is possible to aggregate the results.
This is because each prediction is tied to a uniquely identifiable segment. The second
research question was concerned about the aggregation of the results over multiple dif­
ferent trips. The fact that a segment of road can be uniquely identified on a map implies
that the predictions produced for those segments can be aggregated together into a sin­
gle value using an applicable mathematical function. This means the second research
question was also answered successfully.
Even though the thesis was mostly focused on the mapping of data and splitting them into
road segments, the project also highlights a high level architecture of the different compo­
nents that could be used to deploy a machine learning system to production specifically
one that uses geospatial data. The components and the communication between them is
also discussed which might inspire future design of the system.
Overall, the thesis has managed to answer the research questions set out during the start
of the project. A software solution is also in place which upon further improvement can
be integrated into the LiRA system.
50
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Kent Beck et al. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. 2001. url: http://www.
agilemanifesto.org/.
[2]
Alan Hevner. “A Three Cycle View of Design Science Research”. In: Scandinavian
Journal of Information Systems 19 (Jan. 2007), pp. 87, 92.
[3]
Alan Hevner and Samir Chatterjee. Design Research in Information Systems. 2010.
[4]
Emanuele Lattanzi et al. “Geospatial Data Aggregation and Reduction in Vehicular
Sensing Applications: the Case of Road Surface Monitoring”. In: Nov. 2014. doi:
10.1109/ICCVE.2014.7297643.
[5]
Milena Bajic and et al. “Road Roughness Estimation Using Machine Learning”. In:
(2021), p. 3. url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2107.01199.pdf.
[6]
ARAN Road Survey Vehicle. url: https : / / www . fugro . com / our - services / asset -
integrity/roadware/equipment-and-software (visited on 12/15/2021).
[7]
Docker. url: https://www.docker.com/ (visited on 02/04/2022).
[8]
Get length of way in OSM. url: https://help.openstreetmap.org/questions/469/
where-can-i-see-the-length-of-a-certain-way-element-in-the-osm-data (visited on
02/04/2022).
[9]
Global market for automotive sensors. url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/
1011203/projected-global-automotive-sensor-market/ (visited on 12/15/2021).
[10]
GPU cluster at DTU Compute. url: https://itswiki.compute.dtu.dk/index.php/GPU_
Cluster (visited on 02/04/2022).
[11]
Haversine distance. url: https://www.igismap.com/haversine- formula- calculate-
geographic-distance-earth/ (visited on 01/12/2022).
[12]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learn­
ing and Data Mining ­ Lecture Notes.
[13]
Kubernetes. url: https://kubernetes.io/ (visited on 02/04/2022).
[14]
LiRA – Strategic Relevance. url: http://lira-project.dk/strategic-relevance-of-the-
project/ (visited on 12/01/2021).
[15]
LiRA Research. url: http://lira-project.dk/research/ (visited on 12/15/2021).
[16]
Live Road Condition Assessment with Internal Vehicle Sensors. url: https://journals-
sagepub-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/doi/pdf/10.1177/03611981211016852 (visited on
09/01/2021).
[17]
Mock in python. url: https://pypi.org/project/mock/ (visited on 02/02/2022).
[18]
Open Source Routing Machine. url: http://project-osrm.org/docs/v5.24.0/api.
[19]
Open Street Map. url: https://www.openstreetmap.org/.
[20]
P79 Profilometer. url: https://greenwood.dk/road/profiler/ (visited on 12/15/2021).
[21]
Pandas DataFrame. url: https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.
DataFrame.html (visited on 02/04/2022).
[22]
Tags in OSM. url: https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tags (visited on 10/10/2021).
[23]
G Yufeng. Steps of machine learning. url: https://towardsdatascience.com/the-7-
steps-of-machine-learning-2877d7e5548e (visited on 11/10/2021).
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
51
==PAGE:58==
52
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
==PAGE:59==
LiRA project: An architectural framework for deploying machine learning to production
53
