==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis:
Single Catalytic Particle Activity
Measurements Using Micro Scale
Cavities
By:
Lau Morten Kaas (s164015)
Signature
Supervised By:
Professor Peter C.K. Vesborg
PhD Hjalte R. Ambjørner
PhD student Tobias G. Bonczyk
Post doc Edwin Dollekamp
Danmarks
Tekniske 
Universitet
Master’s Thesis
DTU, Technical University of Denmark
Date: 21st of February 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this thesis a micro mechanical device, consisting of cylindrical cav-
ities etched in silicon dioxide and sealed by a graphene or a few layer
graphite membrane, was fabricated and characterized. The idea be-
hind the device was to seal catalytic nanoparticles in a small conﬁned
reaction volume, and by measuring the deﬂection of the membrane
as they react, measure their catalytic activity. The device was fab-
ricated in the DTU Nanolab Cleanroom using standard cleanroom
techniques and the catalytic nanoparticles were deposited using a
cluster source. After sealing the device with the graphite membrane,
it was characterised using Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and Scan-
ning Electron Microscopy (SEM). 3 diﬀerent sealing techniques were
tested, but only mechanical exfoliation yielded useful membranes.
The leak rates of these were tested using a pressure box, in which
the AFM was placed. This box can be pumped down to a rough
vacuum, and the gasses trapped inside the cavities will thus leak out
over time. By calibrating the cavities and measuring the membrane
deﬂection as the trapped gasses leak, the leak rates of the cavities
were found. Since the chip has to be heated for the envisioned cat-
alytic reaction to occur, leak tests after heating were also conducted.
These showed a signiﬁcant change in the leaking behaviour, though
no quantitative analysis could be done. This change thus has to be
investigated further. Attempts to image the nanoparticles using SEM
were also conducted, but not achieved to a satisfying degree. The aim
of measuring the catalytic activity of single catalytic particles, was
not achieved in this work.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude towards my supervisors
Hjalter R. Ambjørner, Tobias Bonczyk, Edwin Dollekamp and Peter
C.K. Vesborg for the continued opportunity of working along the
ATOMICAR project and the assistance throughout the project. This
has enabled me to push my skill-set and understanding further. I
would further like to thank Yanyin Liu, for funny moments in the
oﬃce, and help with his laser setup.
It still gives me a felling of awe, thinking about the scales involved.
How we are able to manipulate the world at such scales, and how far
these are from our every day life. I am still convinced that through
hard and clever work, the overall project will aid the fundamental
understanding of catalysis in the future.
I would also like to thank my family for the continued support to pur-
sue a path in life, I ﬁnd interesting. Especially my late grandfather,
who continue to be an inspiration of what you can achieve in life, by
keeping your head high and pushing forward.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Fabrication Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Atomic Force Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Calibrating the Cavities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Device Fabrication
20
3.1
Chip Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Particle Deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Chip Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Chip Sealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Sample Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Characterization Techniques
34
4.1
AFM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Reactor Characterization and Calibration
39
5.1
Calibration and Leak Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Heat Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Quantiﬁcation of Nanoparticles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Discussion
61
7
Conclusion
63
8
Outlook
64
Bibliography
65
A Appendix: Optical Images of Graphite Transfer Testing
67
B Appendix: Ammonia Leak - Stamping method
69
==PAGE:5==
C Appendix: CAB Cavities Flipping Behaviour
71
D Appendix: Cavity Dimension
73
E Appendix: AFM data
77
==PAGE:6==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
1
Introduction
Heterogeneous catalysis plays an important and growing role in modern society.
One of the most notable roles, at the moment, is enabling ammonia production
using the Haber-Bosch process. This process is used to produce 175 million tons of
ammonia as of 2021 for fertilizer and other usages[1], thus sustaining the nourish-
ment of millions of people.
The fundamental understanding of heterogeneous catalyst has been vastly ex-
panded since the middle of the past century due to a combination of developments
in quantum mechanics, increasing computational power and reﬁned experimental
investigation[2, p. XV]. Many studies on catalytic activity uses single crystals as
a model catalyst. In these studies the activation energy for reactant adsorption
varies from crystal plane to crystal plane, as predicted by theory [2, p.171]. This
demonstrates the dependence of activity on the coordination of the catalytic active
atoms. One limiting factor for gaining insights into the catalytic process under
real operating condition, has been the requirement for low pressure. This is the
case if the product has to be detected by a mass spectrometer or adsorbates has to
be avoided. Furthermore many characterisation techniques such as Transmission
Electron Microscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy, losses sensitivity when op-
erated at elevated pressure. This is in stark contrast to industrial operations where
catalytic reactions are often performed at high pressure and elevated temperature
to increase the reaction rate. This is the so-called pressure gap[3].
State of the art techniques for bridging the pressure gap include, depending on
the usage, mu-reactors and sniﬀer chips [4],[5]. These work by having diﬀerential
pressures. Meaning having a reactor with high pressure, and then letting some
of the gas in the reactor escape through tiny holes or pores and being pumped
to a mass spectrometer. This creates a pressure diﬀerential across the membrane
containing the holes or pores, and ensures the mass spectrometer can operate at
low vacuum conditions, while the reaction can operate at high pressure.
Due to the size (millimetre-range diameter) of these reactors, they still only allow
ensemble measurements. Not for measurements on a single or a few number of
catalytic particles. Meaning that even though a very small range of particle sizes
could be produced, the shape of these can still vary greatly. Since the activity
depends exponentially on the activation energy following the Arrhenius behaviour.
One type of particle or facet could be responsible for most of the product formation.
This particle would not be detectable using an ensemble of particles, and only really
detectable when the number of particles under investigation comes close to one.
The aim of this project is to measure the catalytic activity of a countable number
of nanoparticles. This is envisioned achieved using a fabricated micro mechanical
device, consisting of a cylindrical cavity etched in silicon dioxide, covered by a thin
graphite membrane. This sealed cavity thus constitutes a micro-sized reactor. The
catalytic nanoparticles can be created and deposited inside this micro-sized reactor
using a cluster source. By sealing the catalytic particles inside the cavities/reac-
Page 1 of 77
==PAGE:7==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
tors, and letting them react in an appropriate atmosphere, the deﬂection of the
membrane can be used as a very sensitive pressure sensor. This is mainly due to
graphene/few layered graphite being impermeable to gasses [6],[7] and being very
thin, thus making it very ﬂexible and sensitive. This, in combination with the ideal
gas law, can then be used to calculate the catalytic activity of the particles. This
project is performed within the ATOMICAR project, which is also where the idea
for the micro-sized reactor originates. The device is fabricated in the DTU Nanolab
Cleanroom.
The proposed method of investigation, using micro-meter sized reactors, allows the
lower bound for how many particles are under investigation to be pushed further.
By reﬁning the masking of the cavities when depositing nanoparticles it would in
principle allow for measurements on a single catalytic particle. This work aims to
realise such a device, and characterize it, with the ultimate goal of measuring the
catalytic activity of a few nanoparticles.
To realise this, the project is divided into several sub-tasks, which follow the overall
structure:
1. Design and fabrication of the micro-reactors
2. Deposition of nanoparticles/masking
3. Sealing of cavities/reactors
4. Characterization/calibration of sealed reactors
5. Measurement of catalytic reaction
Each task is of cause interlinked, but can be investigated more or less independently,
one task at a time.
All of these task were however not completed in this project. Most signiﬁcantly
was the measurement of a catalytic reaction not attempted at all. This was due to
diﬃculties, with especially sealing of the cavities and how this interlinks with the
characterization. Furthermore quantiﬁcation of the nanoparticles were not achieved
to a satisfying degree in this project.
Page 2 of 77
==PAGE:8==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
2
Theory
First the theory behind the fabrication techniques used to micro-fabricate the chip
will be presented. Then the theory of the main characterisation techniques used,
will be presented. A schematic of the design from micro-reactor to wafer scale can
be seen in ﬁgure 1.
Page 3 of 77
==PAGE:9==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 1: A schematic of the designed reactor from cavity scale to wafer scale
used in this project. Cavity: illustrates a top view and side cut of the cylindrical
cavities, which range from 1.5-4 µm in diameter and are around 300 nm in depth.
Field: illustrates how the cavities are arranged in a 16x16 grid of cavities of a given
diameter, spaced 10 µm apart, center to center. Chip: illustrates how the ﬁelds are
arranged in rows of 18 and 3 columns. The diameter goes up in increments of 0.5
µm from ﬁeld to ﬁeld going from 1.5-4 µm, meaning each row has 3 ﬁelds with each
cavity size. Each chip measures 5x10 mm2, with the ﬁelds towards the top of the
chip, so it can be handled without inﬂuencing the cavities. Wafer: illustrates the
overall arrangement of the designed chips on the wafer. Here the chips are arranged
in a 12 by 6 grid centred around the middle of the wafer. The wafer is a standard
100 mm single side polished Si(100)-wafer.
Page 4 of 77
==PAGE:10==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
2.1
Fabrication Techniques
Oxidation
This section is based on [8].
For the design a thin oxide ﬁlm is needed, to provide an inert reaction volume, while
making it thin will help alleviate charge-up, when imaging with the SEM (Scanning
Electron Microscopy). At the same time the oxide ﬁlm has to be thick enough, for
the graphite membrane to be free standing. The target thickness is thus chosen to
be 350 nm, since no membrane deﬂections beyond 150 nm have been seen, while
this will keep the thickness to a minimum. In the DTU Nanolab Cleanroom, oxide
thicknesses larger than 300 nm have to be grown using wet oxidation due to higher
growth rates, compared to using dry oxidation.
Thus wet oxidation is chosen,
despite giving a lower quality and less dense oxide due to H2 being generated in
the oxide as seen in the reaction scheme below. Further more thermal grown oxide
will be amorphous, again lowering the density [9, p.394].
Wet oxidation works by exposing the Si-wafers to water vapour at elevated tem-
peratures (900-1150 ◦C ). The oxide grows according to the following reaction[9,
p.394]:
Si(s) + 2H2O(g) −→SiO2(s) + 2H2(g)
(1)
To generate the water vapour, a steamer is used. This generates vapour by heating
puriﬁed DI water. Other methods include using a torch or using a bubbler. The
torch burns H2 with O2, this generates a higher quality steam, but is more costly.
The bubbler, bubbles O2 in a DI water container near the boiling point, this is
cheaper, but generates a less clean and uniform steam [8]. The thickness of the
oxide can be calculated using the Deal-Groves model, but in the DTU Nanolab
Cleanroom, to achieve better accuracy, each recipe for each furnace has been char-
acterised empirically. This is done by ﬁtting a second degree polynomial to the
oxidation time as a function of the measured oxide thickness.
Other techniques to deposit oxide include TEOS (Tetra-Ethyl-Ortho-Silicate) which
is a LPCVD (Low Pressure Chemical Vapour Deposition) technique. This technique
can be used at lower temperature (725 ◦C ). The main disadvantages are that it can
incorporate impurities (carbon) into the ﬁlm. Further more surface contaminants
will be buried, since the oxide is deposited and not grown and the density is slightly
lower than thermal oxide.
Lithography
This section is based on [10] and [11, chap.9].
Lithography in nanofabrication consists of several steps which enables the desired
features to be etched in the sample. This is achieved by making a thin ﬁlm with
the desired pattern, which can withstand, or be partially sacriﬁced when etching.
Page 5 of 77
==PAGE:11==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
The ﬁrst step is thus to deposit the thin ﬁlm, called photoresist, on the sample.
First the substrate is pretreated, this is done using HMDS (Hexamethyldisilazane).
The main function of the the HMDS is to make the surface hydrophobic. This
ensures that the wafer is not covered in a thin water ﬁlm, and makes the resist wet,
and adhere better to the surface [11, chap.9].
Since the pattern takes much less than half of the area, and there are no mechanical
requirements to the resist, a positive tone resist should be used. Since all structures
are above 1.5 µm, an UV-resist can be used, since exposing using UV is faster than
using e-beam, which has a much smaller write area.
A positive photoresist has three main components[11, chap.9] a base resin, a pho-
toactive compound (PAC) and a solvent. In the photoresist used in this project,
AZ MiR 701, the resin is novolak and the PAC is diazonapthoquinine (DNQ). The
PAC acts as an inhibitor, preventing the resist being dissolved in the developer.
When the PAC is exposed to light, in the photoactive part of the spectrum, it will
partially decompose and lose the inhibiting ability. Here the DNQ will absorb a
water molecule and release a nitrogen molecule and turn into a carboxylic acid[11,
chap.9]. The resist will thus become soluble in the areas where it has been exposed.
To get an fairly uniform resist ﬁlm, the resist is spin-coated on the wafer. This is
done by applying a few millilitres in the middle of the wafer, and then spinning it
at a few thousand rpm to get the desired thickness. When spinning the resist, the
thickness can be calculated as[11, chap.9]:
t ∝
r η
ω
(2)
Where η is the viscosity of the resist, and ω is the spin speed of the spin plate. To
get the best feature resolution the resist ﬁlm should be as thin as possible. However
the ﬁlm should also be as uniform as possible, which is hard for very thin ﬁlms.
This is due to two reasons, the percentage change in thickness is larger, if the ﬁlm
is thin, and mainly, the risk of getting defects in the resist ﬁlm is dependent on the
thickness of the ﬁlm[11, chap.9].
Next, to transfer the desired pattern from the sketch to the sample, some kind of
mask or raster-able light source (Maskless aligner) is required. This enables transfer
of the pattern, for a positive tone resist, by exposing the areas of the pattern
with UV-light. In this case the UV-light activates the PAC, and decomposes the
inhibitor, DNQ, in the resist. In this work a maskless aligner was used to do the
exposure. This works by having a grid plate with small mirrors with an adjustable
angle. By scanning this across the surface, and changing the angle of the mirrors
to reﬂect the UV-light from the source down on the sample with resist at the
right time, it can expose the desired pattern. Traditionally the UV-light source
were speciﬁc spectral peaks from a Hg lamp. But more modern systems, such as
the Maskeless Aigner in DTU Nanolab Cleanroom, uses lasers with the speciﬁc
wavelength instead.
Page 6 of 77
==PAGE:12==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Using a mask the optical limit is given by Fresnel diﬀraction and can be approxi-
mated by equation (9.2) in [11, chap. 9]
linewidth ≈
s
λ

g + d
2

(3)
Where λ is the wavelength of the light, g is the gap between the mask and the
sample, and d is the thickness of the resist. If the mask is in contact, this limits is
around 1 µm, however over- and underexposure can change this. When using the
maskless exposure this limit is still in place, due to diﬀraction oﬀthe mirrors and
the distance from the mirrors to the sample.
Underexposure is when too little light hits the target area, causing some of the PAC
not to decompose and thus inhibiting development of the resist. An illustration of
this can be seen in ﬁgure 2, where the sidewalls of the structure are sloped, because
the light dose reaching the sides was to little. If the pattern is overexposed, the
diﬀracting light will start activating the PAC around the area of interest and thus
make the pattern larger, as shown in ﬁgure 2. This can also leave the sides with a
lower slope than in the ideal case (vertical sidewalls). For these features it is gen-
erally better to do slight overexposure, than having the the features underexposed.
This is because underexposure, will cause greater imperfections in the shape and
size of the cavities than overexposure.
Figure 2: Adapted from [10]. Illustrates 6 scenarios when exposing and developing
the photoresist. The top row illustrates 3 scenarios when exposing the photoresist.
The ﬁrst drawing illustrates under exposure. The middle one illustrates correctly
exposed photoresist. And the last, in the top row, illustrates when the resist is
over exposed. In the bottom row the development of the photoresist is illustrated.
The ﬁrst illustrates under development. The next illustrates a correctly developed
photoresist. And the last illustrates overdeveloped photoresist.
Since the cavities range in size, from 1.5 µm to 4 µm in diameter, a dose test has to
be conducted. This is done by repeating a given structure, here a ﬁeld of cavities,
Page 7 of 77
==PAGE:13==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
using diﬀerent defocus and dose in each iteration. After development, the wafer
is inspected, and the defocus and dose that gave, as close to the desired cavity
diameter, was chosen. Here a dose of 170 mJ/cm2 and defocus of 0 was found
to give the best result. Unfortunately the computer connected to the microscope,
which was used for inspection, did not have more storage, so the images could not
be saved.
After exposing the desired pattern, it can be developed. This is done by dissolving
the exposed parts of the resist.
In this case Tetramethylammonium hydroxide
(TMAH) is used as developer. The Novolak is soluble in TMAH, and areas where
the DNQ is decomposed, will thus dissolve.
After development, the resist on top of the wafer can protect the areas they cover
from etching, and the envisioned structures can be etched in the wafer.
Etching
This section is based on [12].
When it comes to etching the structures, there are two main methods; wet etching
and dry etching. Dry etch is generally a method that combines physical etching
(bombardment) and chemical etching using gaseous species, forming volatile prod-
ucts as they react with the sample. For wet etching the samples are dipped in a
chemical bath, and all sides of the wafer are etched by the chemicals.
The main advantages of dry etching are the ability to do very anisotropic etches and
having a controllable etch rate. Dry etching works by igniting a plasma of the given
reaction gases, using a radio frequency potential, over the sample. This plasma will
form radicals and ionised gas species. By having an overall bias (platen) in the
chamber, the ionised species will bombard the surface, dependent on the bias and
species, and thus physically etch the sample. Meanwhile the radicals, which are
not charged, will diﬀuse towards the surface and chemically react with the surface
atoms thus chemically etch the sample. The overall process can be designed to be
very directional, due to etch direction of the ions being directed by the bias voltage.
The processes can be designed such that that chemical etching is enhanced by the
physical bombardment of ions. This works by the chemical process or the desoption
of the products being activated by the ions. The dependence of the chemical etch
on the physical etch, will improve the anisotropy of the etch.
For dry etching silicon dioxide, the gasses used are CF4 and H2. And it reacts with
the silicon oxide according to the following reaction:
CF4(g/p) + SiO2(s) −→SiF4(g) + CO2(g)
(4)
When the CF4 reacts with the SiO2, ion bombardment will increase the etch-rate
since it can help break the Si-O bond. SiF4 has a boiling point of -144 ◦C at 1
mTorr, the product will thus form a gaseous species and get sucked away by the
vacuum.
Page 8 of 77
==PAGE:14==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
The advantages of wet etch are high etch rates and very material dependent etch
rates. This also means that to get a certain depth, some kind of stop layer can be
used. The second advantage of the wet etch is, due to being chemical baths, it can
handle multiple wafers at once (in carriers called ’boats’). The main disadvantages
are, wet etch will etch isotropically in amorphous materials (as the thermally grown
silicon oxide) and etching a given depth and stopping in the same material can be
very diﬃcult. Since the bottom of the cavities should still have a thin oxide ﬁlm
left, and the walls of the cavities should be fairly vertical, to give a well deﬁned
volume, wet etch cannot be used.
2.2
Atomic Force Microscopy
In order to measure the deﬂection of the graphite membranes an Atomic Force
Microscope (AFM) is used. The main reason, and advantage, of the AFM is the
extremely high vertical resolution, down to the ˚Angstrom range. At the same time
the lateral resolution is also high, limited by tip convolution, but most often the
chosen pixel resolution is the limiting factor (for a 10x10 µm2 image with 256x256
pixels, each pixel corresponds to ≈40x40 nm2). Furthermore, the samples do not
need to be conductive, as is the case for the samples investigated here [13, p. 580].
This allows for very accurate measurements of topological features, such as the
deﬂection of membranes. Most other microscopy methods (optical and electron
microscopy for example) only give a 2D projection of a surface, and quantiﬁcation
of the deﬂection can thus be diﬃcult. The two main disadvantages of the AFM are
the interaction between the probe and the surface can change the measured height
(especially when working with membranes), and the time a to collect a scan, which
takes minutes due to raster scanning.
The AFM theory used in this project will only be described brieﬂy, and is based
on [14] and [13].
The working principle of the AFM is to physically probe the surface of the sample
to diﬀerent degrees dependent on operating mode as illustrated in ﬁgure 3. This
is done using a very sharp tip with radius between 5 and 50 nm, mounted on a
cantilever[13, p. 580]. By measuring the deﬂection of the cantilever, as the tip
experience attractive or repulsive forces from the sample surface atoms, the force
can be measured [13, p. 579]. By raster scanning the surface in the xy-plane and
monitoring the forces the tip experiences, to give the signal for the z-direction, the
sample surface can be imaged. An illustration of the AFM working principle can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.
Page 9 of 77
==PAGE:15==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 3: Adapted from [2]. An illustration of the working principles of an AFM.
Here the tip, mounted on a cantilever, can be seen in close proximity to the sample
surface causing the cantilever to deﬂect. This deﬂection, is measured by a laser that
is reﬂected oﬀthe back of the cantilever and measured by a position sensitive photo-
detector (PSPD). Knowing the spring constant of the cantilever the deﬂection can
be used to calculate the force between the tip and the sample. Dependent on the
operating mode the cantilever base can be used to drive the cantilever, making it
oscillate as it is raster scanning the sample surface.
Operating Modes
There are three main operating modes: contact, non-contact and tapping mode.
In contact mode, as the name suggests, the tip is in contact with the surface.
This means that the tip will experience a repulsive force from the surface, thus
making the cantilever deﬂect. By monitoring the deﬂection of the cantilever, the
forces between the sample and the tip can be kept constant. This can be achieved
by adjusting the height of the base of the cantilever over the sample. Using the
adjustments as the signal will thus give a height proﬁle of the sample[15].
The next common operating mode is non-contact, here the tip is oscillating further
away from the sample, and only probe into the attractive regime of the surface
potential. This method is very sensitive but can also be sensitive to water and
other contamination on the surface. Water on the surface can aﬀect the sample,
by shielding Van der Waal forces[16]. For non-contact a range of signals can be
recorded and used as feedback or height signal.
The third method, tapping mode, combines the two methods and gets the beneﬁts of
both while the drawbacks are limited. In tapping mode, the cantilever is oscillating
with a greater amplitude than non-contact and thus probes from where the tip and
the surface cannot feel eachother, and into the repulsive regime. This is shown
schematically in ﬁgure 4.
By tapping the surface instead of being in constant
contact, the lateral forces exerted on the sample surface are limited compared to
contact mode. This is important when working with thin membranes, since these
can potentially be moved around or ripped apart by the tip, if it was in constant
Page 10 of 77
==PAGE:16==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
contact. By tapping into the repulsive regime of the surface potential, the eﬀects of
water contamination are limited, compared with non-contact mode [14, chap. 15].
Tapping mode is what is used in this project, mainly due to the low lateral forces,
while still being in contact with the surface as described.
Figure 4: Adapted from [14]. Illustration of the forces exerted on the ”tapping”
AFM tip by the sample surface, here approximated by the 12-6 Lennard-Jones
potential. The piezo element shakes the cantilever with z(t) at a distance d from
the sample surface, with an amplitude A. It is worth noting that the dimensions
are not to scale: The length scales for the plotted surface potential is less than 5
nm, while the oscillation of the cantilever is up to 50 nm.
As the AFM scans the sample surface, the interaction between the tip and sample
surface dampens the oscillation of the cantilever. A feedback loop maintains a given
percentage, called the setpoint, of the free oscillation amplitude of the cantilever
as it is scanned across the sample surface. This is done by adjusting the distance d
between the base of the cantilever and the sample. This adjustment, can be used to
give the height signal for imaging, since the oscillation amplitude depends linearly
on the average tip sample distance [14, chap. 15]. Lowering the setpoint will thus
make the tip interact more strongly with the sample, whilst a higher setpoint will
weaken the interacting. If the chosen setpoint is to high, the feedback loop might
cause the AFM to loss contact with the sample surface.
Phase
Monitoring the phase between the oscillation of the cantilever and the cantilever
base can be a powerful tool, when analysing AFM images. Especially on samples
Page 11 of 77
==PAGE:17==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
with changing material properties, such as going from a hard surface to a suspended
membrane. After some derivation starting from assuming that the tip sample in-
teraction is conservative, the cantilever behaviour can be described as a spring
following Hooke’s law and the operation takes place close to resonance frequency.
The relationship between phase and the tip sample interaction, can be written as
equation 15.12 in [14]:
cos φ = −2Qcant
kAAfree
⟨Ftsz⟩
(5)
Where φ is the phase, Qcant is the quality factor of the cantilever, k is the spring
constant of the cantilever, A is the oscillation amplitude, Afree is the free oscillation
amplitude and ⟨Ftsz⟩is the average tip sample force times distance. This shows
that the phase between the oscillation of the cantilever and the base, depends on
whether the interaction between the tip and the sample is overall attractive or
repulsive. This can be seen by evaluating the expression. Firstly when looking
at ﬁgure 4, it can be seen that Fts is zero for most of the oscillation, where it is
diﬀerent from zero is close to the sample, and thus where z is negative. An overall
attractive force (< 0), between the tip and the sample, would thus make ⟨Ftsz⟩
positive. This would make φ < −90o, and vice versa for ⟨Ftsz⟩being negative (a
repulsive interaction), would result in φ > −90o. Monitoring the phase can thus
be used to distinguish whether the interaction between the tip and the sample is
overall attractive or repulsive. This can be used to help ensure that imaging, only
takes place in one of these regimes, and does not jump back and forth between the
regimes.
Amplitude
Since the overall force, experienced by the cantilever, is a combination of the spring
forces, approximated by Hooke’s law, and the surface potential of the sample. The
oscillator will be an anharmonic oscillator[14, chap. 15]. Due to being an anhar-
monic oscillator, the resonance curve of the oscillation amplitude can be bistable for
a given driving frequency. This leads to the coexistence of two vibrational modes,
a low-amplitude and a high-amplitude mode[14, chap. 15]. Since the amplitude is
the signal used to measure the height of the sample, a jump between the solutions
in oscillation amplitude, will cause a perceived jump in height of the surface by
the software. The two vibrational modes corresponds to a net repulsive and a net
attractive tip-sample interaction[14, chap. 15]. The jump in oscillation amplitude
is thus accompanied with a jump in phase due to the changing interaction. Imaging
in the same phase regime will ensure that the imaging will take place in the same
amplitude branch of the oscillation amplitude. This ensures consistent imaging, so
diﬀerent scans and measured membrane deﬂections can be compared.
Page 12 of 77
==PAGE:18==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
2.3
Scanning Electron Microscopy
This section is based on [17].
To visualise and quantify the nanoparticles a Scanning Electron Microscope is used.
The main working principle behind a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) is using
the particle behaviour of the electron. This is done by focusing a beam of acceler-
ated electrons on a speciﬁc point on the sample. The incoming electrons will then
interact with the electric ﬁeld of the nucleus and electrons in the sample. This
will scatter some of the electrons back, giving rise to a couple of diﬀerent signals
dependent on the interaction with the sample. These are: Secondary electrons(I
and II)(SE I and SE II), Back scattered electrons (BSE), and in principle Auger
electrons. Further more the interaction between the probing electrons and the sam-
ple, can cause diﬀerent types of irradiation; x-rays and cathodoluminescence.
The Setup/SEM column
The SEM consists of a column, which is able to maintain a vacuum, ﬁgure 5 il-
lustrates the SEM column. The better the vacuum the longer the mean free path
of the electrons, and the better the signal to noise ratio. Vacuum levels around
10−5 Torr, giving a mean free path around 102 m, is typically enough in the main
chamber[17]. UHV is not necessary, except around the gun and unless the sample
dictates so, in both cases to protect from contamination and water. For dielectric
samples low vacuum can help with charging, but at a cost of resolution, since the
gaseous species will be able to discharge some of the electrons[18].
Page 13 of 77
==PAGE:19==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 5: Taken from [18]. Illustration of the SEM column and detectors. The
probing electrons are generated at the electron source, and are focused throughout
the column using electron magnetic lenses and apertures to a spot, which is scanned
across the sample.
As the source of electrons there are generally two types, thermal emission guns
(TEG) and ﬁeld emission guns (FEG). For a thermal emission source, the ﬁlament is
heated resistvily, and the electrons are extracted with a small voltage, before being
accelerated using a high voltage (tension). For a FEG, a high voltage is applied
between the ﬁlament and a so-called Wehnelt cylinder to extract the electrons. The
main advantages of the TEG, is not requiring as high a vacuum, and being able
to sustain a higher current. The main advantages of the FEG, is having a much
smaller emission radius giving a much higher current density (and smaller probe
size) and a longer lifetime of the ﬁlament. After being extracted from the source
the electrons are accelerated using high voltage (high tension) to between 5 and 30
keV.
From the emission gun the electrons are collected and demagniﬁed through a con-
denser lens. An aperture can be placed in front of the condenser lens. The strength
of the condenser lens and size of the condenser aperture strongly inﬂuences the size
of the ﬁnal probe size (stronger and smaller gives a smaller probe size). But this
comes at a cost of beam current, as the next lens in the column, the objective lens,
will collect less of the incoming beam. The objective lens is used to focus the beam
Page 14 of 77
==PAGE:20==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
on the sample (correct working distance) and together with the objective aperture
do the ﬁnal control of the probe size and depth of focus (small aperture gives large
depth of focus, but low current).
Now the electrons are focused at a spot on the sample, as they leave the col-
umn through the pole piece, the electrons enter the chamber where the sample is
mounted. The focused beam interacts with the sample, giving rise to an interac-
tion volume of the electrons in the sample as shown in ﬁgure 6. The interaction
volume describes how the electrons behave as they propagate into the sample, and
which signals can escape from certain depths within the sample. As the electrons
move through the sample two main mechanisms happen, namely elastic and in-
elastic scattering. In the elastic scattering process the incoming electrons interact
strongly with the electric ﬁeld of nucleus or electron cloud. This can change tra-
jectory of the electron, while the electron maintains most of the kinetic energy in
this process. This process is what gives rise to back scattered electrons. In the
inelastic scattering process the incoming electrons interacts with the electrons of
the sample. This can result in an energy transfer from the incoming electron to the
sample electron creating a secondary electron, which has enough energy to escape
its host atom and the sample. This can leave the atom exited, and a characteristic
x-ray or an Auger electron can be emitted during the relaxation process.
Figure 6: Taken from [17]. Illustrates the interaction volume of the electron beam
as it probes the sample. The interaction volume thus illustrates how deep into the
sample the diﬀerent signals contain information about. Here it can be seen that
secondary electrons only come from near the surface, while back scattered electrons
can come from further within the sample. The depth and size of the interaction
volume depends on the acceleration voltage and the sample.
The signal for imaging is achieved by raster scanning the focused beam over the
surface of sample as illustrated in ﬁgure 7. The intensity for a given detector at
a given point is thus processed to a given pixel value in the image.
This also
means that higher magniﬁcation, is achieved by scanning a smaller area with the
Page 15 of 77
==PAGE:21==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
appropriate spot size as illustrated in ﬁgure 7. The magniﬁcation is thus image
pixel area to the scanned area on the sample ratio.
Figure 7: Adapted from [17]. A sketch illustrating how the raster scanning and
monitored signal turns into an image, and how this determines the magniﬁcation
of the SEM. It can be seen that higher magniﬁcation is achieved by scanning a
smaller physical area and scaling that up to the given pixel area.
Secondary electrons
As mentioned the inelastic scattering process can give rise to secondary electrons.
The secondary electrons are deﬁned as the electrons having a kinetic energy less
than 50 eV[17]. This means that their mean free path in the sample is low according
to the universal curve (see ﬁgure 4.7, page 135 in [2]). The secondary electrons that
escape the sample are thus all generated where the interaction volume is near the
surface as can be seen on ﬁgure 6. Measuring these low energy electrons can thus
yield information about the surface topography. Narrow and pointy features will
have a larger parts of the interaction volume near the surface, and more electrons
will thus escape, making them appear brighter.
The outgoing secondary electrons are detected by a Everhart–Thornley detector
(ETD) see ﬁgure 5.
This works by having a Faraday-cage with a low positive
bias, attracting the low energy electrons towards the detector, whereas high energy
electrons will not be aﬀected greatly. When inside the detector a high potential (∼
10 kV) accelerates the electrons towards a scintillator. Here photons are emitted,
as the electrons hit the scintillator, these are multiplied and converted back into
electrons to give the ﬁnal signal.
Page 16 of 77
==PAGE:22==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Due to the electron beam coming from above the sample, the ETD is placed to
the side and thus have an angle with respect to the sample. This also means that
parts facing towards the detector will appear brighter, and sides facing away or in a
trench appear darker, if even visible. This can help with topographic interpretation,
as the sample has bright spots and shadows. A through lens or in lens detector can
also be implemented in the microscope. This allows for higher lateral resolution,
but lower height contrast.
Back Scattered Electrons
If an incoming electron is scattered out of the sample in an elastic scattering, it
is a back scattered electron. These electrons only lose a fraction of their kinetic
energy, and are thus able to escape the sample from further into the sample. This
means the BSE signal is not as sensitive to the topography of the sample as the SE
signal. But the scattering cross section of the sample atoms is proportional to the
atomic number squared. Thus the back scattered electrons can give mass contrast,
not only of the surface, but also from within the sample.
The detector for the BSE is placed symmetrically around the pole piece, from which
the initial electron beam passes through, see ﬁgure 5. The detector consists of a
PN-junction, the detection scheme is thus excitation of electron-hole pairs in the
junction. Since the bandgab is less than the energy of the back scattered electrons
(>50 eV) the electrons will be able to excite more pairs. The more energy the
electron has, the more pairs it will excite, and the more signal it will generate[18].
Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
When a SE is emitted, the host atom gets excited and the relaxing process can emit
a photon. This photon will have a characteristic energy dependent on the element,
and from which shells the electron leaving and the electron relaxing comes from.
The energy diﬀerence between these shells will determine the energy of the photon.
Measuring the energy of this photon thus enables elemental analysis of the sample.
The X-rays are detected by an Oxford Instruments X-Max EDS System.
This
consists of a Silicon Drift Detector, cooled by a Peltier element. The detection
scheme is based on excitations of electron-hole pairs in a PN-junction. When a X-
ray photon enters the PN-junction, it will create electron-hole pairs in its wake. The
amount of electron-hole pairs generated is correlated to the energy of the photon.
Thus by detecting the the current, the detector can calculate the energy of the
X-ray photon.
Aberrations
Back of the envelope calculations would let you to believe that the resolution of
the SEM could be down to tens of picometers due to the de Broglie wavelength
Page 17 of 77
==PAGE:23==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
(λ = h/√2meeV = 6.626 · 10−34 Js/
p
2 · 9.109 · 10−31 kg · 1.602 · 10−19 C · 30 kV =
7.08 pm (not taking relativistic speeds into account)). This is not the case for two
reasons, mainly the interaction volume, and secondly aberrations in the lenses.
The interaction volume as described above, means that the electrons spread out
in the sample, and thus gather information from a larger volume of the sample.
This can be resolved by thinning the sample down, thus cutting oﬀthe interaction
volume, leading to Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM). The lens
aberrations sets a lower bound of how small the spot size can be and thus again
how big an area of the sample, information is gathered from.
2.4
Calibrating the Cavities
In order to use the cavities to measure the activity of the catalytic nanoparticles,
they have to be calibrated. Two things needs to be known; the leak rate, and
the correlation between membrane deﬂection and the pressure diﬀerence across the
membrane has to be quantiﬁed. This is done by ﬁrstly doing a pressure sweep on
the cavities. This means the external pressure is changed in steps from atmospheric
pressure down to rough vacuum, and in each step the deﬂection of the membrane
is measured using an AFM. To measure the deﬂection of the membranes, while at
the same time being able to control the external pressure, the AFM is place in an
acrylic pressure box as illustrated in ﬁgure 22.
The resultant curve from the pressure sweep is ﬁtted using an simpliﬁed version of
equation (3) in [6]:
∆P = az + bz3 + c
(6)
Where ∆P is the pressure diﬀerence across the membrane, a, b, c are ﬁtting con-
stants and z is the measured deﬂection of the membrane. The pressure diﬀerence
across the membrane is deﬁned as:
∆P = Pcavity −Pbox
(7)
Where Pcavity is the pressure inside the cavity and Pbox is the measured pressure in
the acrylic box.
To account for the behaviour of the gas sealed and evolved in the cavities, the
leak rates of the cavities have to be known. This is done by doing a leak test
measurement, where the chip is put in the AFM pressure box, which is pumped
down.
By tracking the deﬂection of the membrane as the internal gasses leak
out over time, the leak rates can be calculated. Using the ﬁt from the pressure
sweep, and knowing that external pressure was ≈0 mbar the internal pressure can
be calculated. This can be used to calculate the amount of molecules leaving the
sealed cavity per second by ﬁtting the calculated internal pressure against time and
using the ideal gas law.
Pcavity(t) = ∆P(t) + Pbox ≈∆P(t) = dek·t
(8)
Page 18 of 77
==PAGE:24==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Using the ideal gas law, and neglecting the change in volume due to the deﬂection of
the membrane, the leak rate can be found by diﬀerentiating the number of molecules
with respect to time:
r = dN
dt =
d∆P(t)
dt
kbT V = kdek·t
kbT V
(9)
Error analysis
The errors associated with ﬁtting and calculations are estimated using propagation
of errors [19]. For equation 7 the propagation of errors for the sum are estimate by:
σ∆P =
q
σ2
κ + σ2
γ + σ2
c
(10)
where
σκ = az
sσa
a
2
+
σz
z
2
(11)
σγ = bz3
sσb
b
2
+
3σz
z
2
(12)
Where σ∆P is the standard deviation of the calculated pressure diﬀerence. σa, σb
and σc are the standard deviations on the ﬁtting constants a, b and c in equation 7
respectively. Lastly σz is the inherent error of height measurements using the AFM,
which will be quantiﬁed later on. The standard deviation of the ﬁtting constants
are found during the ﬁt of the experimental data.
For equation 9 the propagation of the product errors are estimated by:
σr = r
sσk
k
2
+
σd
d
2
+
σV
V
2
+
σT
T
2
+
σexp
ekt
2
(13)
σr = r
sσk
k
2
+
σd
d
2
+
σV
V
2
+
σT
T
2
+ (σtk)2
(14)
Where σr is the standard deviation of the calculated leak rate. σk and σd are the
standard deviations of the ﬁtting constants k and d. σV and T are the standard
deviations of the volume of the cavity and the temperature under which the mea-
surement takes place. The last term is the σexp, this is found by diﬀerentiating
using equation (3.23) in [19] to be σexp = ektkσt.
Page 19 of 77
==PAGE:25==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
3
Device Fabrication
To make the reactors a series of micro-fabrications steps conducted in the DTU
Nanolab Cleanroom have to be done, these are illustrated in ﬁgure 8. This sec-
tion, will thus present the methods and decisions used for fabrication of the device
following the steps in ﬁgure 8
3.1
Chip Fabrication
The chosen wafers are SN603; these are 100 mm in diameter, 525 ± 20 µm thick
single side polished n-type Si-wafers, with a resistivity of 1-20 Ωcm. The main
consideration here is that all the processes happen on one side, so it only needs
to be polished on that side. This makes it easier to handle the wafers, since the
non-working side is matte, and the wafers are a bit cheaper. Another consideration,
could be the resistivity, but they are the same for the standard wafers in the shop.
Once purchased the wafers were oxidised in furnace C1 using the recipe WET1050,
which ﬂows steam (H2O vapour) from the steamer at 10 L/min at 1050 ◦C. This
was done for 45 min (according to calculation template in LabAdviser, and cross
referenced with process logs of other people). The samples were not annealed in
N2, but the oven was cooled down right after oxidation. The target thickness was
350 nm, but the thickness, measured by 5-point Ellipsometry, was 312 nm.
Page 20 of 77
==PAGE:26==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 8: A Sketch of the process ﬂow used to fabricate the micro-sized reactor
cavities. The rectangle illustrates a cross section, and the square illustrates a top
view.
Then resist was deposited using Spin Coater: Gamma UV. The chosen resist is
AZ MiR 701. The main reasons are that it is a positive resist, and it is soluble
in acetone. The machine does every part of the resist application. First it primes
the surface using HMDS. This is done in the HMDS oven, where the wafer is ﬁrst
heated to 120 ◦C in a low vacuum, to dehydrate it. Then HMDS is bobbled into
the chamber using N2 as a carrier gas. Finally the chamber is purged using N2 and
cooled down. After priming, the wafer is taken out, and onto a spinner. This slowly
ramps up, applying 3 ml of resist at a 800 rpm, to distribute the resist evenly. Then
spin-oﬀis performed at approximately 4600 rpm to give the ﬁnal thickness. This
yields a resist thickness around 1.5 µm. Lastly the resist is set, by soft baking at 90
◦C for 60 s to evaporate most of the solvent and make the resist more mechanically
stable.
To make the desired pattern in the photoresist Aligner: Maskless 02 is used. The
main advantage of this machine is that the pattern can be exposed without a mask.
This saves time and money, when multiple iterations or prototyping are necessary.
The pattern was designed (shown in ﬁgure 1) in Klayout, and exported to GDS-ﬁle
format. The chosen dose was 170 mJ/cm2 and the defocus was 0, based on the
dose and defocus test. A schematic of the design can be seen in ﬁgure 1.
Page 21 of 77
==PAGE:27==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
The wafer, with the now exposed pattern, was developed in Developer: TMAH
UV-lithography. This was done using recipe 3001-DCH, which consists of a post
exposure bake for 60 s at 110 ◦C and, after cooling, a single puddle of developer
AZ 726 MIF (2.38% TMAH (Tetramethylammonium hydroxide) in water) was
dispensed. After 60 s, the developer was removed by spin-oﬀat 4000 rpm. The wafer
was rinsed by a continues water stream for 30 s at 4000 rpm with an approximate
dispense rate of 500 ml/min. Lastly it was dried using a nitrogen stream.
To etch the structures the AOE (Advanced Oxide Etcher) was used. This was
mainly due to the small depth of the cavities, that was required. To achieve a
cavity depth of 300 nm, the recipe SLOWSIO2 was used for 4 min and 36 s. This
recipe has a coil power of 200 W, platen power of 25 W, platen temperature of
0 ◦C, CF4 ﬂow of 20 sccm, H2 ﬂow of 10 sccm and a pressure of 3 mTorr. After
etching the remaining resist was left as a mask for the particle deposition.
Now the chips, measuring 10x5 mm2 allowing for 72 chips on a wafer in a square
pattern, were cut-out. This was done by Tobias Bonczyk from ATOMICAR using
Laser Micromachining Tool according to the pattern in ﬁgure 1.
The actual obtained diameter of the chips are measured using SEM, and measure-
ments can be seen in appendix D. The measured diameters are summerized in table
1.
Nominal diameter [µm]
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Measured diameter [µm]
1.3
1.9
2.4
2.9
3.4
3.9
Table 1: Comparison between the target (nominal) diameter and the measured
diameter of the cavities. Measured using SEM imaging shown in appendix D. It
can be seen that all of the measured diameters are smaller than nominal size.
3.2
Particle Deposition
The Ru-particles and Mo2C were deposited by Jerome Vernieres and Ke Zhang DTU
Physics, using the cluster-source. Their instructions were as big and few particles
as possible, and they tried to make 6-10 nm particles.
To avoid nanoparticles
from being deposited on the top surface of the wafer, and only be deposited inside
the cavities, the photoresist was left on the chips after fabrication, as mentioned.
This was done to keep the surface roughness as low as possible, for better graphite
sealing.
3.3
Chip Cleaning
The resist is soluble in acetone, which is thus used to clean the chips when nanopar-
ticles have been deposited. It was however found that this was not enough, and a
thin ﬁlm remained on the surface around the cavities, as can be seen in ﬁgure 9.
Page 22 of 77
==PAGE:28==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Further investigation was thus required in order to remove the remains of the pho-
toresist. The thin ﬁlm itself was not investigated any further, only how to remove
it. Normally the resits is removed using oxygen plasma, and tests on wafers without
particles, showed that this would work. The reason why this was not a suitable
method, was that the nanoparticles would get strongly oxidised by the plasma, and
become amorphous. A cleaning method without the use of oxidising chemicals, was
thus pursued.
This started with a sample which was 2 hours in a beaker with approximately 20
ml of acetone. It was noted that there were no diﬀerence between being 30 min
in the acetone and being 2 hr in the acetone bath. The result after 2 hours are
shown in ﬁgure 9. It can be seen that the thin ﬁlm remains around the cavities
after cleaning.
(a) Optical image at 4x magniﬁcation.
(b) Optical image at 10x magniﬁcation.
Figure 9: Optical images at 4x and 10x magniﬁcation of the same chip. This chip
has been in acetone for 2 hr. As can be seen, a thin ﬁlm remains around the cavities.
After this unsuccessful cleaning attempt, some new chips were cleaned in acetone
at elevated temperatures. In ﬁgure 10a the result of cleaning the chip in 10 min in
acetone going from room temperature to 60 ◦C can be seen. The temperature, is
the target temperature of the hot plate, and not the temperature of the solution,
which was not measured. In ﬁgure 10b the result after a chip being in acetone at
60 ◦C for 10 min can be seen. Removing the resist at elevated temperature did not
perform better with regards to the thin ﬁlm.
Page 23 of 77
==PAGE:29==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
(a) Optical image of the chip that has been
in acetone for 10 min, while the tempera-
ture were elevated from room temperature
to 60 ◦C .
(b) Optical image of the chip that has been
in acetone for 10 min, while the tempera-
ture were elevated to 60 ◦C .
Figure 10: Optical images at 4x magniﬁcation of the two chips that have been
cleaned in acetone at elevated temperature.
The ﬁrst test using mechanical force, was done using a tissue. This was done by
having the chip in acetone for 15 min at room temperature and then wiping with a
paper cloth. An additional dip in acetone for 10 min did not dissolve more residue.
The result seen in ﬁgure 11, left some residue streaks, on the sample.
Figure 11: Optical image at 10x magniﬁcation, where the chip has been in acetone
bath and subsequently wiped using a tissue.
The previous method shows it is possible to remove the ﬁlm using mechanical force,
but it needs to be reﬁned. The ﬁrst step was to do the wiping, with a material
soaked in acetone. This could not be easily done using a tissue, since this would
get acetone on the gloves of the operator. An easy alternative is to use cotton buds
soaked in acetone instead. The results below, are from wiping with a cotton bud
soaked in acetone, and then 10 min in acetone. This seems to clean the surface
quite nicely, but inspection with the AFM, as seen in ﬁgure 13, shows residue on
the inside of the edge of the cavities corresponding to the direction of the stroke
(blue arrow).
Page 24 of 77
==PAGE:30==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
(a) Optical image at 4x magniﬁcation.
(b) Optical image at 10x magniﬁcation.
Figure 12: Optical images of the chip after being cleaned with a cotton bud soaked
in acetone, and then dipped in acetone for 10 min.
Figure 13: AFM image of a cavity after being cleaned using acetone bath and
cottonbud wipe. The arrow indicates the direction of the wiping. This image is
upside down compared to the optical images, meaning the blue arrow points in the
direction, which corresponds to up on the optical images.
The previous method seems to work well, but it deposits material inside the cavities.
Therefore another attempt at doing a mechanically free procedure was carried out.
This time the chip was in acetone for 10 min, then IPA for 10 min and lastly in
acetone for 10 min again. This did not give a better result compared to just using
one 10 min dip in acetone as shown in ﬁgure 14.
Page 25 of 77
==PAGE:31==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 14: Optical image at 4x magniﬁcation of the chip that has been 10 min in
acetone followed by 10 min in IPA and lastly 10 min in acetone again.
The next method tried to mitigate the disadvantages of the cotton bud method by
adding a ultrasonic cleaning step. The chip was ﬁrst cleaned using a cotton bud
soaked in acetone, then in an acetone bath for 10 min, before being transferred to
a new ”clean” acetone bath and ultrasonicated for 5 min. This left the surface of
the chip clean, and AFM imaging showed only little residue left in the cavities.
(a) Optical image at 4x magniﬁcation
(b) Optical image at 10x magniﬁcation
Figure 15: Optical images of the sample being cleaned using a cotton bud soaked
in acetone, and then cleaned in an ultrasonicator.
This method gave by far the best result, the only problem is that sometimes residue
from the acetone evaporation is left on the surface of the chip. This can make
transferring graphite harder, as it does not stick as well to the surface. It was
found that this problem can be somewhat alleviated, by quickly blowing the acetone
puddle on the chip oﬀ, using compressed air.
Page 26 of 77
==PAGE:32==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
(a) Optical image, showing the thin ﬁlm,
and some leftover resist residue, after the
chip being in acetone for 6 min.
(b) Optical image, showing the thin ﬁlm re-
maining after being in a tube furnace with
a 10:1 Ar:H2 gas mixture.
Figure 16: Optical images showing a sample before and after being in the tube
furnace at 400 ◦C in a mixture of 10:1 Ar:H2 for 4 hours.
One further method was carried out. Here the chip was cleaned in acetone for 6
min, this dissolved most of the resist, and left the chip with the thin ﬁlm as can be
seen in ﬁgure 16a. After cleaning in acetone, the chip was put in a tube furnace,
and heated to 400 ◦C for 4 hr in a 10:1 Ar:H2 gas ﬂow. When cooled down the chip
was inspected again. It can be seen by comparing ﬁgure 16a and 16b that only a
bit of leftover resist residue was burned oﬀ, while the ﬁlm remained the intact.
The best method for cleaning the chips was thus deemed to be dissolving the resist
in acetone for about 5 min.
Then wiping oﬀthe thin ﬁlm using a cotton bud
soaked in acetone. Finally the chips should be transferred to a clean beaker with
new acetone and put in a ultrasonicator for more than 5 min.
3.4
Chip Sealing
Gel-pack/stamping transfer method
To seal the fabricated cavities with catalytic nanoparticles inside, graphene/few
layer graphite (FLG) was used. Initially the transfer was done using a stamping
technique using Gel-Pack[20]. For the ﬁrst method the stamp was made by ﬁrst
cleaving a piece of graphite using tape.
When this has been done a couple of
times an area on the tape with a high density of graphite is pressed against a
approximately 1x1 cm2 piece Gel Pack ﬁlm. This is then investigated using an
optical microscope to locate a thin graphite ﬂake. If non were found, the graphite
ﬂakes on the Gel Pack can be cleaved again using the tape. This process can be
repeated a couple of times, but if it is unsuccessful too many times, the quality
of the remaining ﬂakes starts to deteriorate. The best approach at this point is
to create a new stamp. The stamping transfer technique was chosen since it is a
deterministic1 method that is easy and does not involve any chemical treatment,
and thus leaves very little residue. A schematic of this setup is shown in ﬁgure 17.
1Here deterministic means being able to determine approximately where the ﬂake goes.
Page 27 of 77
==PAGE:33==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
The main disadvantage of this method is it generally yields higher leaking cavities,
in part due to the thicker ﬂakes being used. This was initially not believed to
be an issues, since preliminary testing in the ATOMICAR project suggested, that
ammonia did not leak, as atmospheric gasses do. The ammonia would thus be
trapped in the cavities, while atmospheric gasses could leak in and out easily.
The stamping technique involves, at least, one stage which can be manipulated in
the x, y, z-direction with micrometer precision. For the setup used here two stages
were used, in order to better align the sample and the stamp with the optical
microscope, as shown in ﬁgure 17. By mounting the stamp to a glass slide, the
backside of the FLG can be seen through the glass slide and the polymer stamp.
The FLG is then aligned using the stages to overlap with the cavities, with the
particles under investigation. When aligned the stamp is slowly brought closer to
the sample, while adjusting the alignment when needed. When in contact, it is very
important to move as slowly as possible, and when using the Gel-Pack stamping
method, try to deform the polymer as little as possible. After contact, the stamp
is slowly withdrawn and the FLG should stick to the sample surface.
Figure 17: A Sketch of the stamping setup, used for Gel Pack and CAB transfer.
Here the stamp with the graphite/FLG is mounted upside down on a glass slide
on a micromanipulator. The sample is mounted on another micromanipulator. By
using the optical microscope the sample and graphite/FLG can be aligned and
transferred/stamped by bringing them in contact.
After a some attempts, this method was abandoned due to the very high leak rates
(complete response (fully leaked) in <20 min, see appendix B). But more impor-
tantly it was found that ammonia shared the same leaking behaviour as atmospheric
gas species as shown in the appendix ﬁgure 54.
Page 28 of 77
==PAGE:34==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
CAB Transfer Method
The next sealing technique used, was the so-called CAB (Cellulose Acetate Bu-
tyrate) method [21].
This method has generally shown lower leak rates, but it
involves wet chemical steps, which can break the suspended membranes. For CAB
transfer graphene is mechanically exfoliated onto a wafer, which is then covered by
CAB. When the CAB has cured the wafer can be inspected optically, and FLG (<5
nm thick ﬂakes) can easily be found. These areas can be cut out, and by applying
a droplet of water, the cut-out CAB with the graphite will release from the surface.
This can then be transferred onto the sample, using the stamping technique. Here
the CAB stamp is placed on a Gel-Pack stamp, which is then place on the glass
slide for stamping. When the CAB stamp comes in contact with the sample, the
sample is heated to 135 ◦C and cooled back down. This slightly melts the CAB,
and when the stamp is withdrawn it sticks to the sample surface. Now the FLG
in between the CAB and the sample surface. The CAB is dissolved in Ethyl ac-
etate, for 5 min in one solution and then 30 min in a new solution. After this, the
sample is place in acetone for 5 min, then hexane for 1 min, and lastly dipped in
tetradecaﬂuorohexane. The ﬁrst two chemical steps are to dissolve the CAB and
clean the sample. The subsequent steps are used to lower the surface tension of
the surrounding liquid to keep as many membranes intact as possible. It is thus
important that the samples do not dry out in-between beakers when using this
method.
Initially the measured leak rates were very low, but subsequent pressure sweeps
showed a ﬂipping behaviour of the membranes, this is shown in the appendix C
ﬁgures 56 and 57. This behaviour was measured on all of the investigated CAB
samples (>20 cavities), and this technique was thus abandoned. The behaviour
was not investigated further, but if it were to, the starting point would be the
temperature used during transfer.
Mechanical Exfoliation
Lastly the mechanically exfoliation method was used[22]. This method was initially
avoided, due to low yields, but more importantly not being deterministic. This
method works by putting a few graphite ﬂakes on some tape, and then thinning
the ﬂakes down by cleaving it using the tape. After this has been done a couple of
times, an area on the tape with a high density of ﬂakes can be pressed against the
sample surface. After about 10 min the tape can be released from the sample by
pulling it oﬀ, vertically. This leaves a random amount of graphite to FLG ﬂakes in
random locations on the sample along with some tape residue dependent on sample
temperature.
A few diﬀerent pretreatments to the sample surface were investigated. First the
standard method, which consists of transferring the FLG straight after having the
sample in oxygen plasma (5 sccm, 120 W) was used. This means that the sample
Page 29 of 77
==PAGE:35==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
is slightly warm (to the touch), when transferring. An optical image can be seen
in ﬁgure 18, here a very thin ﬂake can be seen on the sample surface.
Figure 18: Optical image of TTchip7 after exfoliation transfer after oxygen plasma
pretreatment. Here the red circle outlines a very thin ﬂake. An overview image of
TTchip 7 can be seen in appendix A ﬁgure 50.
For samples with nanoparticles the oxygen plasma should be avoided, as mentioned
previously. The next method that was investigated was thus to transfer onto a
sample that had been in a tube furnace at 400 ◦C for 6 hr in 10:1 Ar/H2 atmosphere.
While the sample was warm, the graphite containing tape was brought into contact.
The tape was released in the same way as previously. Optical images of some of
the thin graphite/FLG ﬂakes can be seen in ﬁgure 19.
(a) The blue triangle in the middle of
the image is the graphite ﬂake.
(b) The small blue spots in the middle of
the ﬁelds are the graphite ﬂake.
Figure 19: Optical image of TTchip 15B after exfoliation transfer after being
preteated a tube furnace at 400 ◦C for 6 hr in 10:1 Ar/H2 atmosphere. The light
blue stains towards the bottom of the images are tape residue. An overview image
of TTchip 15B can be seen in appendix A ﬁgure 51.
This seems to give a reasonable transfer, and with more attempts a thinner more
well placed ﬂake could possible be made. Next a more simple approach was inves-
Page 30 of 77
==PAGE:36==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
tigated. After the sample had been cleaned in acetone, it was placed on a hot plate
set to 100 ◦C for 10 min. Then the sample was quickly taken oﬀ, and the tape was
pressed against it and left for 10 min before peeling oﬀ, as described previously.
Optical images of the samples after transfer can be seen in ﬁgure 20.
(a) Graphite ﬂakes on ﬁeld 32 and 33.
A fairly thin ﬂake (around 7-10 nm in
height) can be seen in ﬁeld 33 just under
the white graphite ﬂake.
(b) Some fairly thin but wrinkled ﬂakes on
the top of ﬁeld 40 around the middle of ﬁeld 43.
Figure 20: Optical image of TTchip 16A after exfoliation transfer after being
preteated by being placed on a hotplate at 100 ◦C for 10 min. An overview im-
age of TTchip 16A can be seen in appendix A ﬁgure 52.
This method also worked well, and yielded some decent sized ﬂakes.
The last mechanically exfoliation method investigated was simply just to transfer
from the tape onto a cold sample. The tape was thus pressed against the sample,
straight after cleaning and left there for 10 min before being peeled oﬀ. The result
can be seen in the optical images in ﬁgure 21.
Page 31 of 77
==PAGE:37==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 21: Optical image of TTchip 16C after exfoliation transfer after not being
preteated.
No thin ﬂakes could be located on the chip.
An overview image of
TTchip 16C can be seen in appendix A ﬁgure 53.
The last method did not work well, and as cen be seen in appendix A ﬁgure 53.
generally had a low transfer yield compared to the other methods.
In general all of the methods where the sample were slightly heated seems to work
well. Even-though the number of thin ﬂakes is very low. It should however, be
mentioned that the sample size is very low for a transfer process which is believed
to have a great deal of randomness associated with it. Only two samples were tested
using each method (except plasma cleaning, where only one sample were made),
and the images above show all of the thin ﬂakes that were located.
Page 32 of 77
==PAGE:38==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
3.5
Sample Overview
The table below gives a short summary of the history with regards to particle
deposition, cleaning and transfer of the presented samples.
Chip
Particle depo.
Date
Primary cleaning
TTchip7
No
Wipe, 15 min Ace, 5min sonication
in Ace, 10 min IPA
TTchip15A
No
10 min Ace, wipe,
overnight in Ace
TTchip16A
No
10 min Ace, wipe, stored in Ace
for 1 hr
TTchip16C
No
10 min Ace, wipe, stored in Ace
for 1 hr
MoC chip1
Mo2C
19/01
10 min Ace, wipe, 15min sonication
in Ace
TTchip10A
No
3 min Ace, wipe, 10 min Ace
Chip
Further cleaning
Transfer
Comment
TTchip7
Oxygen plasma
Mech. exfo.
Control chip for chip 4
with Ru particles
TTchip15A
Tube furnace 6 hr
Mech. exfo.
Tube furnace 6 hr
TTchip16A
Mech. exfo.
Hotplate 100 ◦C and
Tube furnace 6 hr afterwards
TTchip16C
Mech. exfo.
Cold transfer
MoC chip1
Tube furnace 6 hr
No
For SEM imaging to see particles
TTchip10A
Tube furnace 6 hr
CAB
Table 2: Summary of the most investigated/presented chips and their treatment
throughout the project. Notice that the table is wrapped, so each chip has two
entries. TT stands for Transfer Test. Ace stands for acetone. Tube furnace means
the chip has been in a tube furnace at 400 ◦C for the given amount of time in a
10:1 Ar:H2 atmosphere.
Page 33 of 77
==PAGE:39==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
4
Characterization Techniques
Now that the reactors can be sealed using mechanical exfoliation, their behaviour
can be characterized. This section will present the concrete characterization instru-
ments and methods used in this project.
4.1
AFM
To measure the deﬂection of the membrane, and the surface roughness a Flex AFM
by Nanosurf is used. This is connected to a C3000 controller from Nanosurf, and
interfaces with the Nanosurf proprietary software on the PC. The probes used are
Tap150GD-G from BudgetSensors. These have a resonance frequency around 150
kHz, a spring constant of 5 N/m and a tip radius of 10 nm. To achieve external
rough vacuum conditions the AFM is placed in an acrylic box, which can be sealed
as shown in ﬁgure 22. The acrylic box is connected to an Edwards nXDS6i dry
scroll pump, which can be used to achieve a rough vacuum. The pressure in the box
can be monitored by a pressure sensor, which automatically logs the pressure in the
box. All of this is placed on a ACCURION HALCYONICS i4 vibration isolation
table.
Figure 22: A Sketch of the AFM setup. Here the AFM can be seen inside the
acrylic pressure box, which can be sealed oﬀand pumped down. This is placed on
top of a vibration isolation table. Connections between the AFM and the controller
and the computer are drilled and sealed in the acrylic box.
The membrane deﬂection is measured from the surface of the graphite to the max-
imum deﬂection of the membrane. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 23 (right panel),
where the distance between the two dotted lines is the measured distance. This is
done manually, which of cause introduces some reading error. Both in ﬁnding the
line scan with the largest deﬂection and accurately measuring the deﬂection. This
error is analysed, by making the same scan 6 times at the same conditions, and
measuring the deﬂection of 8 cavities, independently. The measured deﬂections are
Page 34 of 77
==PAGE:40==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
shown in table 3 along with the calculated mean and standard deviation. In ﬁgure
23 an AFM image of some of the investigated cavities can be seen.
Deﬂection
meas. #
Cavity
1
Cavity
2
Cavity
3
Cavity
4
Cavity
5
Cavity
6
Cavity
7
Cavity
8
1 [nm]
54.1
46.6
45
47.7
44.3
49.8
39.8
43.8
2 [nm]
53.7
46.2
44.8
50.3
43.5
49.6
43.1
44.8
3 [nm]
53.3
46.4
44.3
49.7
43.9
50.2
42
45.9
4 [nm]
52.3
46.7
44.6
49.4
43.6
50.2
43.3
45.2
5 [nm]
53
46.7
46.6
49
43
49.9
42.4
45.5
6 [nm]
53.7
46
43.9
49.5
43.5
49.8
42.7
45.7
Mean [nm]
53.4
46.4
44.9
49.3
43.6
49.9
42.2
45.2
SD [nm]
0.6
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.4
0.2
1.2
0.7
Table 3: Table showing the measured deﬂections in nanometers for quantiﬁcation of
reading error. The two bottom rows are the calculated mean and standard deviation
(SD) for each series of measurements on the given cavity. The investigated cavities
can be seen in ﬁgure 23. The largest standard deviation is 1.2 nm.
These measurements were taken in a series, and thus only constitute an estimate
of the reading error, when measuring the deﬂection, using the technique presented
above. The inherent error in measuring with the AFM from session to session is
thought to be larger, and will be discussed further, later on.
Figure 23: Snapshot of how the deﬂection measurements were collected manually,
here on TTchip 7.
This is done by locating the line scan with the maximum
deﬂection for each cavity, and using an in-built tool in the Nanosurf software to
measure the deﬂection. The left panel is the collected AFM image (height), where
the white circles are the upward deﬂecting cavities, and the orange background is
the surface of the sample with graphite on top. The black lines are an artefact of
the line adjustment. The right panel shows the line scan, from the black triangle
on the left panel. Here the black line is the forward scan, and the dotted line is the
tool used to manually measure the deﬂection.
Page 35 of 77
==PAGE:41==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
4.2
SEM
To quantify and investigate the catalytic nanoparticles a Quanta FEG 200 ESEM
from FEI is used. The SEM is placed in building 314, which is a building specially
designed to house electron microscopes (SEMs and TEMs). This means external
noise and vibrations are greatly reduced. To image the nanoparticles as little probe
size as possible is used, to get signal from as little area as possible for each pixel
as illustrated in ﬁgure 7. This is done by adjusting the spot, to the smallest size,
and using the smallest (objective) aperture (20 µm in diameter). In principle as
high acceleration voltage as possible should give the smallest spot. But it should
be remembered that this will also increase the size of the interaction volume, thus
information from a larger area will be collected. The detector used is the secondary
electron detector. This is because when imaging nanoparticles the back scattered
signal is very small, and the current is too low to give a distinguishable image.
The secondary electrons are very topography sensitive, so imaging approximately
spheres on a ﬂat surface should give good contrast.
Figure 24: A photo image of the Quanta FEG 200 used in this project. The main
components relevant to this project are highlighted.
The alignment of the apertures and the adjustment to the astigmatism, were done
on the edge of the chips as shown in ﬁgures 25 and 26. This place was the most well
suited, since the laser cutting from the fabrication, left a lot of debris and holes in
greatly varying sizes. This makes it much easier to focus and do the adjustments
while increasing the magniﬁcation in steps, since there is always features relevant
to the speciﬁc magniﬁcation. Figure 25, shows that under good conditions, in an
area where focusing is easy, features down to around 20 nm could be discerned,
with the current level of user experience.
Page 36 of 77
==PAGE:42==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 25: SEM image of the edge of the chip using an acceleration voltage of
30 kV, the smallest spot size and detecting secondary electrons.
Here a lot of
random debris and holes can be seen after the laser cutting process. This is used
to align the apertures and adjust the astigmatism of the system. The insert is a
table of some small measured features on the image. Here the the length column,
is the measured diameter, in nanometers, of some small particles located at the
corresponding numbers in the image.
Page 37 of 77
==PAGE:43==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 26: SEM image of the edge of the chip using an acceleration voltage of 3
kV, the smallest spot size and detecting secondary electrons. Here a lot of random
debris and holes can be seen after the laser cutting process. This is used to align the
apertures and adjust the astigmatism of the system. The insert is a table of some
small measured features on the image. Here the the length column, is the mea-
sured diameter, in nanometers, of some small particles located at the corresponding
numbers in the image.
Page 38 of 77
==PAGE:44==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
5
Reactor Characterization and Calibration
In this section the measurements on the cavities will be presented along with ﬁrst
some qualitative comments on the obtained measurements and later some quantita-
tive data analysis of the leak rates. First AFM measurement on two diﬀerent chips
TTchip7 and TTchip 16A will be presented and then SEM imaging on MoCchip1.
After this, data analysis of the leak rate for TTchip7 will be performed. Access to
the raw data is explained in appendix E.
But ﬁrst, the uncertainty of the measurements will be presented. As shown pre-
viously the reading error of using the AFM was about 1 nm, but the inherent
uncertainty using it from session to session is believed to be closer to 2 nm. This
number comes mostly from user experience, and especially when imaging the height
of the graphite ﬂakes from one session to another. The uncertainty of the pressure
sensors are 10 mbar. The uncertainty in the temperature comes mostly from the
ﬂuctuations in the room and is assumed to be 2 K. The uncertainty in time is
fairly low compared to the measured time scales and is assumed to be 1 min due to
rounding the time to each whole minute while measuring. For the ﬁtted parameters
the uncertainty is extracted from the ﬁtting.
5.1
Calibration and Leak Test
As mentioned previously to calibrate the cavities the leak rates has to be known.
The leak rate is quantiﬁed using the AFM, by measuring the deﬂection of the cavi-
ties over time as it is in the pressure box, starting at atmospheric pressure and going
straight to rough vacuum. To be able to convert the measured deﬂection versus time
to a internal pressure versus time, ﬁrstly a pressure sweep is done. The ﬁrst sample
investigated is TTchip 7 and the investigated cavities are shown in an overview
AFM image in ﬁgure 23. As can be seen in table 2, the graphite on TTchip7 was
mechanically exfoliated after oxygen plasma treatment. The numbering starts with
the top left cavity as number 1, and follows the reading direction making the bot-
tom right cavity number 8. The measurements were taken as overview images as
illustrated to the left in ﬁgure 23, and not as images of single cavities. This method
was used to monitor more cavities at once, at the cost of temporal and spacial
resolution.
Figure 27 illustrates what a pressure sweep measurement series looks like for a
single cavity. The pressure diﬀerence starts a 0 mbar (1000 mbar in the box) and
is stepped down by pumping out the pressure box in steps and measuring the
deﬂection in each step. The top branch in the ﬁgure (black) is going down in box
pressure as illustrated by the arrow. This ends at roughly 1000 mbar of pressure
diﬀerence across the membrane before the box pressure is brought back up (gray)
in pressure again in steps.
Page 39 of 77
==PAGE:45==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 27: Illustration of what a pressure sweep measurement series looks like. The
ﬁrst axis is the calculated pressure diﬀerence, using equation 7, and assuming the
internal pressure remains constant throughout the series (approximately 90 min) in
mbar. The second axis is the measured membrane deﬂection in nanometers using
the method described in section 4.
In ﬁgure 27, it can be seen that the measurements from going down in pressure does
not overlap with the measurements going back up. This is caused by the gas inside
the cavity leaking out during the measurement series, which takes approximately
90 min. This is ampliﬁed by the fact the the membrane is most sensitive at low
deﬂections, causing the discrepancy to be larger (the sensitivity can be seen as the
slope, which is greatest at low deﬂections). The higher sensitivity at low pressure
diﬀerences, is also why the steps in pressure is smaller to begin with, as can be
seen on ﬁgure 27. The lack of overlap is cause of some concern for the validity of
assuming that the internal pressure remains constant through out the measurement
series, which is clearly not the case. In general only the initial curve, for going down
in box pressure (black) is used to make the calibration ﬁt, as this is seen as the
most accurate. The curve from going up in box pressure (gray) is generally just
considered as a validation of the general behaviour.
Figure 28 illustrates what a leak test measurement looks like for a single cavity. The
leak test measurement series consists of membrane deﬂection measurements against
time measured using the AFM. The time starts as the box pressure is pumped down
to rough vacuum, and the ﬁrst measurement starts as the box pressure stabilises.
It generally takes around 10 min for the box pressure to stabilise. At each data
point, except the points below 500 min, 3 measurements are taken, but only the
ﬁrst is used. The 2 other points are just taken to conﬁrm the behaviour at the
given point in time.
Page 40 of 77
==PAGE:46==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 28: Illustration of what a leak test looks like here for TTchip7 cavity 1. The
ﬁrst axis is the time after evacuating the pressure box in minutes. The second axis
is the measured membrane deﬂection in nanometers using the method described in
section 4.
Now the real measurement series can be introduced. First the the pressure sweep
for all 8 tracked cavities on TTchip7 can be seen in ﬁgure 29. It can be seen that
all 8 cavities follows the same general behaviour, with some variation with regards
to the size of the response and the overlap of the curves going up and down in
pressure diﬀerence.
Page 41 of 77
==PAGE:47==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 29: Pressure sweep measurements for the 8 cavities measured on TTchip7.
The ﬁrst axis is the calculated pressure diﬀerence, using equation 7, and assuming
the internal pressure remains constant throughout the series (approximately 90
min) in mbar. The second axis is the measured membrane deﬂection in nanometers
using the method described in section 4.
In ﬁgure 30, the leak test measurement series on TTchip7 can be seen. Here it
can be seen that all of the 8 tracked cavities behaves in more or less the same way.
With the measured deﬂection going down as time passes while the chip is in a rough
vacuum in the pressure box, and the gasses inside the cavities leak out. It is worth
noting the some of the cavities can be seen leaking faster than others. For example
the deﬂection of cavity 1 goes down faster than the deﬂection of cavity 8.
Page 42 of 77
==PAGE:48==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 30: Leak test for the 8 cavities on TTchip7 shown in ﬁgure 23. Measured
using the AFM and having the chip in the pressure box at rough vacuum. The ﬁrst
axis is the time after evacuating the pressure box to rough vacuum in minutes. The
second axis is the measured membrane deﬂection in nanometers using the method
described in section 4.
5.2
Heat Test
Since the cavities have to be heated to start the envisioned reactions, the behaviour
of the cavity after being heated is investigated. This is done on TTchip16A, which
has mechanically exfoliated graphite transferred after being heated to 100 ◦C as
shown in table 2. An optical image of the investigated ﬂake can be seen in ﬁgure
20a and AFM images of the ﬂake before and after heating can be seen in ﬁgure 31
and 32.
Page 43 of 77
==PAGE:49==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 31: A snapshot of the measurement on TTchip16A before heat treatment in
the tube furnace. The 2 ﬁrst cavities from the left are the 2 cavities that have been
investigated. The cavity to the far left is thus named cavity 1 and the cavity in the
middle cavity 2 (for TTchip16A). Here the 3 panels are the three monitored signals
while imaging; the measured height, the oscillation amplitude and the phase. The
centres and depicted ranges are consistent with ﬁgure 32.
Figure 32: A snapshot of the measurement on TTchip16A after heat treatment in
the tube furnace. Here strains in the membrane across the cavities can be seen.
90 degree rotated images of the cavities have been taken to conﬁrm the behaviour.
Looking at the cavity to the far left, cavity 1, a small ’wing’ can be seen on the wide
line across the membrane. This wing, would ﬂip independently of the behaviour of
the strained line. Here the 3 panels are the three monitored signals while imaging;
the measured height, the oscillation amplitude and the phase. The centres and
depicted ranges are consistent with ﬁgure 31.
Here a pressure sweep and leak test were performed before and after the chip had
been heated in the tube furnace at 400 ◦C for 6 hr in a 10:1 Ar:H2 atmosphere.
Page 44 of 77
==PAGE:50==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 33: Pressure sweep measurements for the 2 cavities on TTchip16A shown in
ﬁgure 31 before heat treatment. The ﬁrst axis is the calculated pressure diﬀerence,
using equation 7, and assuming the internal pressure remains constant through-
out the series (approximately 90 min) in mbar. The second axis is the measured
membrane deﬂection in nanometers using the method described in section 4.
In ﬁgure 33 the pressure sweep before heat treatment in the tube furnace can be
seen. It can be seen that the cavities leak so fast that curve for cavity 1 is almost
oval, the pressure sweep can thus not be used for calibration. The fast leaking
behaviour is also shown in the leak test in ﬁgure 34.
Page 45 of 77
==PAGE:51==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 34: Leak test for the 2 cavities on TTchip16A shown in ﬁgure 31 before
heat treatment. Measured using the AFM and having the chip in the pressure box
at rough vacuum. The ﬁrst axis is the time after evacuating the pressure box to
rough vacuum in minutes. The second axis is the measured membrane deﬂection
in nanometers using the method described in section 4.
Figure 34 shows the leak test of the investigated cavities before the heat treatment
in the tube furnace. It can be seen that the cavities have almost leaked completely
after 300 min.
Now the chip is heat treated as described above.
Page 46 of 77
==PAGE:52==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 35: Pressure sweep measurements for the 2 cavities on TTchip16A shown in
ﬁgure 32 after heat treatment. The ﬁrst axis is the calculated pressure diﬀerence,
using equation 7, and assuming the internal pressure remains constant through-
out the series (approximately 90 min) in mbar. The second axis is the measured
membrane deﬂection in nanometers using the method described in section 4.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 35, the behaviour in the pressure sweep is now more
consistent, and could in principle be used to calibrate the cavities. But as shown
in ﬁgure 31 and 32, the behaviour of the membrane has changed. And the method
used for measuring the deﬂection as described in section 4, does not capture the
deﬂection behaviour. This due to a strong strain in the membrane across the cavity
as shown in ﬁgure 32. This can be seen in the plateau around 400 to 600 mbar of
pressure diﬀerence, but is more strongly seen in the following leak test.
Page 47 of 77
==PAGE:53==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 36: Leak test for the 2 cavities on TTchip16A shown in ﬁgure 32 after
heat treatment. Measured using the AFM and having the chip in the pressure box
at rough vacuum. The ﬁrst axis is the time after evacuating the pressure box to
rough vacuum in minutes. The second axis is the measured membrane deﬂection
in nanometers using the method described in section 4.
Figure 36, shows the measured leak test for the 2 investigated cavities on TTchip16A
after the heat treatment in the tube furnace. Here the measured deﬂection using
the method described in section 4, using the maximum deﬂection, can be seen to
occasionally jump. An AFM image of before and after the jump in measured de-
ﬂection during the pressure sweep can be seen by comparing ﬁgures 37 and 38.
Here the box pressure goes from 900 mbar to 850 mbar, and part of the membrane
on cavity 1 ﬂips. When looking at the phase, this ﬂip is not associated with a ﬂip
in phase and the interaction thus stays the same. This shows that after the heat
treatment the membrane is starting to behave irregularly. This jumps looks, in the
height proﬁle, very much like a instability, but this is not detectable in the phase.
Due to the pour behaviour of the pressure sweeps and unstable membranes, further
analysis into ﬁnding the leak rate is not pursued.
Page 48 of 77
==PAGE:54==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 37: A snapshot of the measurement during the pressure sweep on TTchip16A
after heat treatment in the tube furnace. Here the box pressure is 900 mbar. Here
the 3 panels are the three monitored signals while imaging; the measured height, the
oscillation amplitude and the phase. The centres and depicted ranges are consistent
with ﬁgure 38.
Figure 38: A snapshot of the measurement during the pressure sweep on TTchip16A
after heat treatment in the tube furnace. Here the box pressure is 850 mbar. Here
the 3 panels are the three monitored signals while imaging; the measured height, the
oscillation amplitude and the phase. The centres and depicted ranges are consistent
with ﬁgure 37.
Attempts to image using scanning parameters (mainly changing oscillation am-
plitude and setpoint) that did not show this behaviour was attempted without
success.
5.3
Quantiﬁcation of Nanoparticles
As mentioned previously SEM was used to try and image and quantify the number
of nanoparticles in each cavity. Here a sample with Mo2C nanoparticles around
10 nm in original size are investigated. It should however be mentioned that these
particles are oxidized quickly in an ambient atmosphere (under which they are
stored) and will subsequently grow in size.
Page 49 of 77
==PAGE:55==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
After focusing and adjusting the alignment and astigmatism on the edge as men-
tioned previously, a cavity is found and focused on. Here cavity A2 in ﬁeld 18 is
investigated (called f18A2). The small depth of the cavities and subsequent short
etch time makes most of the cavities fairly round and without to many distinct
features. This can make ﬁnding the optimal focus diﬃcult, and is also one of the
reasons why the adjustments to the system is made on the edge of the chip.
Figure 39: SEM image of cavity f18A2 on MoC chip1, a cavity designed to be 4
µm in diameter. Before investigating on the bottom of the cavity.
By zooming in on the bottom of the cavity smaller particles can be located. In
ﬁgure 40 a long and thin particle can be seen in the top left corner, and in the
middle a small and roughly round particle can be seen.
Page 50 of 77
==PAGE:56==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 40: SEM image of the bottom of cavity f18A2. Here two sets of particles
can be seen, one large and narrow in the top left corner and one small and round
in the middle.
By focusing the electron beam on a small area around the particles, the particles
will charge up during an extended exposure. Here the particles were focused on for
about 1 min each. and the result can be seen in ﬁgure 41
Page 51 of 77
==PAGE:57==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 41: SEM image of the same area as ﬁgure 40 after the particles has been
exposed to the SEM beam for 1 min each. In the length column in the insert the
measured diameter of the small particle to 26 nanometers.
In ﬁgure 41, the eﬀects of focusing the electron beam on the particles can be seen.
The long particle has been charged signiﬁcantly, while the small particle in the
middle did not charge substantially. This indicates that the small particle is able
to dispose of the incoming electrons, while the large particle charges up. indicating
that the large particle is an organic residue (resist) while the small particle are
more metallic in nature. I should however be mentioned that not many such par-
ticles could be found on the sample. Most of the located particles, had the same
appearance as the long particle here, and charged up when being focused on. From
the insert in ﬁgure 41 the measured diameter of the small particle can be seen to be
roughly 26 nm. This is larger than the target particle size from the cluster source.
But as shown in ﬁgure 25 and 26, this is comparable to the sizes measured there
and might be the limit of what can be achieved for the current user level.
Page 52 of 77
==PAGE:58==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 42: SEM image of cavity f18A2 on MoC chip1, after extended exposure on
the particles found on the bottom. A black square due to charging can clearly be
seen, where the extended exposure took place.
Figure 42 is an SEM image showing how the bottom of the cavity is charged after
the prolonged exposure during the accusation and investigation of ﬁgure 40 and 41
Since no deﬁnitive quantiﬁcation of the nanoparticles could be obtained on the
fabricated samples. A sample which had been characterized using Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM) and shown to have around 10 nm Mo2C nanoparticles
was investigated. This sample consists of a thin SiO2 ﬁlm supported by a gold
grid. The particles are deposited all over the sample, but by looking on the thin
ﬁlm part, most of the beam electrons will go through the ﬁlm. This means the
surface sensitivity is increased since electrons not coming from the surface, would
have gone through the ﬁlm, and are lost in the conductive tape underneath.
Page 53 of 77
==PAGE:59==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 43: SEM image of a TEM grid containing nanoparticles. In the length col-
umn in the insert the measured diameter of the particles can be seen in nanometers.
Figure 43 is a SEM image of the TEM grid with Mo2C nanoparticles, where particles
can be seen. The length column in the insert in ﬁgure 43, shows the measured
diameter of the particles (in nanometers) seen on the ﬁgure. These are in general
measured to be around 100 nm, which is much greater than the expected diameter,
and no newly obtained TEM images are available to conﬁrm this size. The measured
size is above the measured feature resolution, and is thus believed to be fairly
consistent.
Page 54 of 77
==PAGE:60==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 44: SEM image at the same area on the TEM grid as shown in ﬁgure 43
but at higher magniﬁcation showing 3 particles. In the length column in the insert
the measured diameter of the particles can be seen in nanometers.
Figure 44 shows a SEM image of the same area as in 43 but at higher magniﬁcation.
Here it can be seen that the particles still measure around 100 nm in diameter.
5.4
Data Analysis
As mentioned the conversion from membrane deﬂection to pressure diﬀerence across
the membrane (and thus internal pressure since the pressure box is at rough vac-
uum) the measured pressure sweep from ﬁgure 29 is ﬁtted using equation 6 and
least squares ﬁtting. The ﬁtted numerical values can be seen in the legend in ﬁgure
45.
Page 55 of 77
==PAGE:61==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 45: Fit to the pressure sweep for TTchip 7 presented in ﬁgure 29, using
equation 6.
The axis are ﬂipped compared to ﬁgure 29.
The ﬁrst axis is thus
membrane deﬂection in nanometers and the second axis is the calculated internal
pressure assuming the box pressure is 0 mbar. The numeric values of the ﬁtted
parameters can be seen in the legend.
Using the ﬁtted parameters from ﬁgure 45 and equation 6, the relationship between
deﬂection and pressure diﬀerence across the membrane is know for each cavity. The
measured deﬂection in the leak test for TTchip7 in ﬁgure 30 can thus be calculated
into the internal pressure. This is shown in ﬁgure 46.
Page 56 of 77
==PAGE:62==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 46: Calculated internal pressure versus time. Using the data from the leak
test in ﬁgure 30 and the calibration using equation 6 and the ﬁtted values from ﬁgure
45 for each cavity. The ﬁrst axis is the time since pumping down the pressure box
in minutes, and the second axis is the calculated internal pressure of the cavities in
mbar. The error bars are calculated using equation 10.
The leak rate can then be found by ﬁtting the exponential function presented in
equation 8 to the calculated internal pressure versus time presented in ﬁgure 46.
Here the initial pressure is ﬁxed to the measured starting pressure of 1000 mbar,
while the exponent is found by least squares ﬁtting. The numerical values of the
ﬁtted exponents can be seen in the legend of ﬁgure 47.
Page 57 of 77
==PAGE:63==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 47: Exponential ﬁt to the calculated internal pressure presented in ﬁgure
46 using equation 8. Here the initial pressure is ﬁxed to 1000 mbar and the ﬁtted
exponent can be seen in the legend. The ﬁrst axis is the time since pumping down
the pressure box in minutes, and the second axis is the calculated internal pressure
of the cavities in mbar.
From the ﬁts in ﬁgure 47, the exponents can be extracted and used in equation 9
to calculate the leak rate of the cavities. Figure 48 illustrates how the leak rate
depends on time.
Page 58 of 77
==PAGE:64==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 48: Plot of the calculated leak rate against time for each cavity, based on
the ﬁt in ﬁgure 47 and equation 9. The error bars are calculated using equation
14. The ﬁrst axis time in minutes and the second is molecules per minute.
Using the calculated leak rates, they can also be plotted against the internal pres-
sure as shown in ﬁgure 49. This shows that for each cavity there is a roughly linear
relationship between the calculated leak rate and the internal pressure.
Page 59 of 77
==PAGE:65==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 49: Plot of the calculated leak rate against the calculated pressure diﬀerence
for each cavity, based on the calculated internal pressure from ﬁgure 46 for the ﬁrst
axis, and the calculated leak rate in ﬁgure 47 as the second axis. The error bars
are calculated using equation 10 for the ﬁrst axis and equation 14 for the second
axis.
As shown in ﬁgure 49, the calculated leak rates for TTchip7 depend on the internal
pressure(here meaning it depends on the pressure diﬀerence across the membrane).
But generally the leak rates for air found here are on the order of 1011 molecules/min
which is on the order of 109 molecules/s. This is 6 orders of magnitude larger than
what was measured by Bunch et al.[6]. But by comparing the leak test in ﬁgure 34,
36 and 30, it can be seen that there are great ﬂake to ﬂake variations in the leak
rates.
Page 60 of 77
==PAGE:66==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
6
Discussion
To round this thesis oﬀ, a ﬁnal discussion of the results and design decisions are
made. This is accompanied with some thoughts on aspects that needs attention in
the future, if a rigorous measurement protocol for measuring the catalytic activity
using this kind of device, is to be produced.
This is followed by a conclusion in the next section and lastly an outlook.
Through the project the change in volume of the cavities, as the membranes deﬂect,
has been neglected. This might be problematic and using these shallow cavities a
membrane deﬂection of 50 nm will change the volume of the cavity by approxi-
mately 10 % assuming paraboloid behaviour. This could be included, in further
investigation using shallow cavities. It should however be remembered this will
complicate the leak rate calculations, since these take their basis in the ideal gas
law, and diﬀerentiation of this.
In addition to this, it would be interesting to see how the charging behaves for
thicker oxides. Even on the thin bottom (< 50 nm) of these samples charging could
be observed, by comparing ﬁgure 39 and 42, and could be seen days later using the
AFM. If the charging does not get signiﬁcantly worse for thicker oxides, it might
be worth using thicker oxides such that the relative change in volume gets smaller.
Using a thicker oxide would also allow for larger particles, which could be observed
using the SEM more easily. Since the risk of the membrane getting stuck on the
particles would be lower if the depth of the cavities were greater. One drawback,
other than charging, will be the higher cavity walls blocking secondary electrons
leaving the sample. Furthermore the particles used, were the largest particles the
cluster source could produce, thus getting larger particles would require other tech-
niques. These techniques have to be compatible with the current masking technique
of using the photo resist as the deposition mask. Otherwise, a diﬀerent masking
technique has to be developed.
After consulting a SEM expert, it was made clear that imaging of nanoparticles are
possible, but require a lot of user experience to give quantitative images.
As was shown comparing ﬁgure 34 and 36 the behaviour of the membranes changed
greatly after being heated. Further investigation into this would be necessary for
the reactors to be used to measure the catalytic activity. The main reason for this
is that the catalytic processes, which are envisioned investigated using this device,
are thermally activated. Heating again to see if the behaviour has stabilised or if it
keeps changing for each heat cycle would be of most interest and importance, for
the cavities to be calibrated.
Furthermore, the leak rates while heating are most likely diﬀerent, from the leak
rates are room temperature, which are what have been investigated here. Char-
acterization of the leak rates at elevated temperatures would thus also be of great
importance for the continuation of this project. If reactions where the reactant or
Page 61 of 77
==PAGE:67==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
product can be shown to leak very slowly even at elevated temperature, a mea-
surement protocol taking advantage of this can be envisioned. But if both sides
of the reaction have leak rates that are dependent on the temperature, a rigorous
measurement protocol is much more diﬃcult.
A more rigorous scheme of measuring the deﬂection compared to the method used
in this thesis, presented in section 4, could be necessary. The limitations of the used
method were highlight by the change in behaviour after heating the samples, where
strains across the membrane changed its deﬂecting behaviour. A diﬀerent scheme
to do this, could be to numerically integrate the deﬂection of the membrane and
correlate this with the pressure diﬀerence across the membrane (using a pressure
sweep). Such schemes were pursued, but time constraints did not allow them to be
ﬁnish.
The leak rates here are generally much higher than what has been reported in
literature. Comparing the measured leak rates in ﬁgure 48 to the reported leak rate
of air by Bunch et al.[6]. Here they report leak rates for air around 103 Atoms/sec
while the leak rates found here are around 109 Atoms/sec. It is not clear where
this great discrepancy comes from, but it should be noted, as is also shown in the
thesis, that sample to sample variations are rather large(some samples leak faster
than what is measurable using the AFM, while others take more than 50 hr).
One major drawback of using the proposed method for characterizing the catalytic
activity, is the lack of insight into the reactor gas composition. This means if a
reaction, which could yield diﬀerent products is under investigation, these cannot be
detected directly. If however, the leaking behaviour of the gaseous species involved
in the reaction under investigation diﬀer enough, ﬁne calibration of the cavities
might be able to discern the diﬀerent leaking behaviours of the species.
Page 62 of 77
==PAGE:68==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
7
Conclusion
In this project micro-size cavities were successfully designed and fabricated in the
DTU Nanolab Cleanroom. This was achieved using standard cleanroom fabrication
techniques.
Due to the small size of the catalytic nanoparticles, determination of whether
nanoparticles had been deposited inside the cavities or not, could not be quan-
tiﬁed to a satisfying degree. This also means that assessing if masking could be
done using the photo resist and the eﬀects of cleaning if oﬀ, was not possible.
Cleaning oﬀthe photoresist turned out to be more cumbersome than anticipated.
But through a lot of trail and error, a protocol for doing so was developed. This
consisted of ﬁrst having the samples in acetone for a short time, and then wiping
oﬀthe thin ﬁlm that remained using a cotton bud soaked in acetone. Lastly the
chips were placed in a ultrasonicator, to release as much of the remaining residue
as possible. An optical image of the ﬁnal result can be seen in ﬁgure 15.
To seal the cavities into reactors, 3 diﬀerent methods were investigated. Initially
the Gel-Pack stamping technique was used, but after testing showed that ammonia
could indeed leak, this technique was abandoned. The next investigated technique
was CAB transfer. Initially this technique showed promising leak rates, but sub-
sequent pressure sweeps showed a very unpredictable ﬂipping behaviour as shown
in ﬁgure 57. Lastly mechanical exfoliation was used. Only a few attempts of using
this technique were tested due to time constraints. But the initial sample TTchip7,
showed low leak rates and systematic response during pressure sweeping as pre-
sented in ﬁgure 29 and 30. The calculated leak rates for air, shown in ﬁgure 48,
were on the order of 109 Atoms/sec (for all of the 8 investigated cavities on the
ﬂake) compared to 103 Atoms/sec in literature [6]. Using the calculated leak rate,
and the calculated internal pressure of the cavities ﬁgure 49 shows a linear relation
between the leak rate and the internal pressure.
Since the reactors have to be heated for a reaction to occur, the behaviour of the
cavity after being heated was investigated. This was done on TTchip16A where
the membranes also had been mechanically exfoliated. Here the chip was heated to
400 ◦C in a 10:1 Ar:H2 atmosphere in a tube furnace. Due to the membrane being
unstable after the treatment no quantitative analysis of the change in leak rate
were conducted. But by comparing the leak tests shown ﬁgure 34 and 36, it can
be seen that before the heat treatment the reactor has reached equilibrium with
the rough vacuum within 500 min, whereas after, the deﬂection of the membrane
is still going down after 1500 min. Leak rates at elevated temperatures were not
investigated, this is deﬁnitely something that should be investigated in the future.
The ultimate goal of measuring the catalytic activity of a few nanoparticles, using
the fabricated device, was not achieved in this project. Characterization of the
behaviour of the sealed cavities as an small reaction volume was not completed in
this project. But avenues of continued research and investigation for the reactors
to work as a characterization device has been highlighted.
Page 63 of 77
==PAGE:69==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
8
Outlook
As mentioned, this work highlights some interesting paths of further investigation
to realise the device as rigorous characterization device.
Most importantly the
changing behaviour of the membranes after, and perhaps during, heating has to be
investigated further.
More work can also be done on testing the sealing of the cavities. Here CAB sealing
was shown to have a ﬂipping behaviour. The origins of this behaviour is unknown,
but one thing that could be investigate is whether the temperature during transfer
has an eﬀect. A modiﬁcation to the transfer that could be pursued, is heating the
stamp instead of the chip, while stamping.
It would also be interesting to try to use larger gas molecules and test their leak
rates. This could for example be diﬀerent small organic molecules. If some size
of molecule is found to have a very low leak rate, where ambient gasses might
leak quickly, a protocol could be designed around this and used to characterize the
activity of nanoparticles.
Page 64 of 77
==PAGE:70==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Bibliography
[1] U.S. Geological Survey.
U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Sum-
maries, January 2021, Nitrogen (ﬁxed) - Ammonia. U.S. Geological Survey,
Jan 2021. https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2021/mcs2021-nitr
ogen.pdf.
[2] Ib Chorkendorﬀand Johannes W Niemantsverdriet. Concepts of modern catal-
ysis and kinetics. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
[3] H-J Freund, Helmut Kuhlenbeck, J¨org Libuda, G¨unther Rupprechter, Marcus
B¨aumer, and Heiko Hamann. Bridging the pressure and materials gaps between
catalysis and surface science: clean and modiﬁed oxide surfaces. Topics in
Catalysis, 15(2):201–209, 2001.
[4] Toke R Henriksen, Jakob L Olsen, Peter Vesborg, Ib Chorkendorﬀ, and Ole
Hansen. Highly sensitive silicon microreactor for catalyst testing. Review of
Scientiﬁc Instruments, 80(12):124101, 2009.
[5] Daniel B Trimarco, Thomas Pedersen, Ole Hansen, Ib Chorkendorﬀ, and Pe-
ter CK Vesborg. Fast and sensitive method for detecting volatile species in
liquids. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 86(7):075006, 2015.
[6] J Scott Bunch, Scott S Verbridge, Jonathan S Alden, Arend M Van Der Zande,
Jeevak M Parpia, Harold G Craighead, and Paul L McEuen. Impermeable
atomic membranes from graphene sheets. Nano letters, 8(8):2458–2462, 2008.
[7] PZ Sun, Qian Yang, WJ Kuang, YV Stebunov, WQ Xiong, Jin Yu,
Rahul Raveendran Nair, MI Katsnelson, SJ Yuan, IV Grigorieva, et al. Limits
on gas impermeability of graphene. Nature, 579(7798):229–232, 2020.
[8] DTU Nanolab Thin Film lecture. Thin Film Tool Package Training (TPT)
course. DTU Nanolab, sep 2021. http://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/in
dex.php/LabAdviser/Courses/TPT Thin Film.
[9] Simon Min Sze and M.K. Lee. Semiconductor devices: physics and technology.
John wiley & sons, 2008.
[10] DTU Nanolab Lithograpy lecture. Lithographt Tool Package Training (TPT)
course. DTU Nanolab, sep 2021. http://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/in
dex.php/LabAdviser/Courses/TPT Lithography.
[11] Sami Franssila. Introduction to microfabrication. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[12] DTU Nanolab Dry Etch lecture.
Dry Etch Tool Package Training (TPT)
course. DTU Nanolab, sep 2021. http://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/in
dex.php/LabAdviser/Courses/TPT Dry Etch.
Page 65 of 77
==PAGE:71==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
[13] B. Bhushan. Springer Handbook of Nanotechnology. Springer Handbook of
Nanotechnology. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.
[14] Bert Voigtl¨ander. Scanning probe microscopy. Springer, 2015.
[15] Chris Gibson and Steven Moody. myScope. Microscopy Australia: Scanning
Probe Microsope Traning module. https://myscope.training/#/SPMlevel
2 1, 2014. [Online; accessed 01-01-2022].
[16] C Julian Chen.
Introduction to scanning tunneling microscopy, volume 4.
Oxford University Press on Demand, 1993.
[17] Bob Hafner. Scanning electron microscopy primer. Characterization Facility,
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, pages 1–29, 2007.
[18] DTU Nanolab SEM lecture. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Tool Pack-
age Training (TPT) course. DTU Nanolab, sep 2021. http://labadviser.n
anolab.dtu.dk/index.php/LabAdviser/Courses/TPT SEM.
[19] John Taylor. Introduction to error analysis, the study of uncertainties in phys-
ical measurements. University Science Books, 1997.
[20] Andres Castellanos-Gomez, Michele Buscema, Rianda Molenaar, Vibhor
Singh, Laurens Janssen, Herre SJ Van Der Zant, and Gary A Steele. Deter-
ministic transfer of two-dimensional materials by all-dry viscoelastic stamping.
2D Materials, 1(1):011002, 2014.
[21] Gr´egory F Schneider, Victor E Calado, Henny Zandbergen, Lieven MK Van-
dersypen, and Cees Dekker. Wedging transfer of nanostructures. Nano letters,
10(5):1912–1916, 2010.
[22] Kostya S Novoselov, Andre K Geim, Sergei V Morozov, De-eng Jiang, Yanshui
Zhang, Sergey V Dubonos, Irina V Grigorieva, and Alexandr A Firsov. Electric
ﬁeld eﬀect in atomically thin carbon ﬁlms. science, 306(5696):666–669, 2004.
Page 66 of 77
==PAGE:72==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
A
Appendix: Optical Images of Graphite Trans-
fer Testing
This appendix has optical overview images of the mechanical transferred graphite
using diﬀerent pretreatment methods to the chip surface. At this low magniﬁcation
thin ﬂakes are generally hard to see, due to low contrast and, in general, being small
(most often <1000 µm2).
Figure 50: Optical overview image of TTchip7 after mechanical exfoliation after
plasma treatment. The black and white pieces are thick graphite ﬂakes.
Page 67 of 77
==PAGE:73==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 51: Optical overview image of TTchip15B after mechanical exfoliation after
tube furnace treatment in 10:1 Ar/H2 at 400 ◦C for 6 hr. The black and white
pieces are thick graphite ﬂakes. The stains, especially along the edges are tape
residue
Figure 52: Optical overview image of TTchip16A after mechanical exfoliation after
hotplate treatment at 100 ◦C for 10 min. The black and white pieces are thick
graphite ﬂakes. The stains, especially along the edges are tape residue
Page 68 of 77
==PAGE:74==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 53: Optical overview image of TTchip16C after mechanical exfoliation on
the chip at room temperature. The black and white pieces are thick graphite ﬂakes.
B
Appendix: Ammonia Leak - Stamping method
In ﬁgure 54 the resonance frequency of the membrane is excited and tracked using
a laser setup, which will not be described further in this report. The resonance
frequency of the membrane changes as the pressure diﬀerence changes. From 2300
s to 5400 s is when going from ambient pressure around 1000 mbar to vacuum.
Then from 5400 s to 9200 s is letting in roughly 1.2-1.4 bar of ammonia in the
cell. And going from 9200 s to 13800 s is after evacuating the cell again i.e. letting
ammonia leak out.
Page 69 of 77
==PAGE:75==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 54: Leak test for ammonia using Yanyin’s laser setup. The blue dots are
the measured pressure of the cell, where the chip is placed in. The orange line
is the measured ambient pressure and the green dots are the measured resonance
frequency of the membrane using the laser setup.
In ﬁgure 55 the starting points of pressure switches are aligned. It can be seen the
leaking behaviour is roughly the same independent on it is ambient gasses leaking
out, or ammonia leaking in or out of the cavity.
Page 70 of 77
==PAGE:76==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 55: Leak test for ammonia using Yanyin’s laser setup. Here the switches
between each mode of operation are cutout from the data in ﬁgure 54 and aligned
in time. The blue dots thus show the measured frequency from the beginning of
the experiment until roughly minute 18, this is while the pressure cell is at rough
vacuum to evacuate the cavity. The orange dots are roughly from minute 50 to
70 on ﬁgure 54, corresponding to going from rough vacuum to slightly over 1 bar
of ammonia in the pressure cell. And thus corresponds to ammonia leaking into
the cavity. The green dots are roughly from minute 113 to minute 133 on ﬁgure
54, corresponding to going from an ammonia over pressure in the cavity to rough
vacuum. Corresponding to ammonia leaking out of the cavity again.
C
Appendix: CAB Cavities Flipping Behaviour
The two subsequent ﬁgures show leak test and pressure sweep on a cavity which
had been sealed using the CAB method. This clearly illustrates that the ﬂipping
behaviour of the cavities are a problem. For the leak test it appears as if the cavity
is not leaking at all. But when this is compared with the pressure sweep, it can be
seen that the respond is very irregular. This means that the correlation between
the deﬂection and the pressure diﬀerence across the membrane is ill deﬁned.
Page 71 of 77
==PAGE:77==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 56: Leak test on cavity f8E9 on TTchip10A which had been CAB sealed.
The ﬁrst axis is the measured membrane deﬂection using the AFM, the second axis
is time after the box is pumped down. It appears to be very leak tight, as the
deﬂection does not decrease in the measured time.
Page 72 of 77
==PAGE:78==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 57: Pressure sweep taken just before the leak test in ﬁgure 56 on cavity
f8E9 on TTchip10A which had been CAB sealed. The ﬁrst axis is the measured
membrane deﬂection using the AFM, the second axis is the calculated pressure
diﬀerence across the membrane assuming the internal pressure stays constant. The
top branch is going down in box pressure, this leads into the bottom branch as the
box pressure is increased again.
This ﬂipping behaviour, in the response of the cavities, is not deemed suitable to
monitor the pressure of the cavity. In principle the point around which it ﬂips
(where there is a measurable response) could be used to monitor the pressure by
adjusting the box pressure. However the membranes are very unstable around this
point, and controlling the box pressure with such precision and frequency is very
diﬃcult.
D
Appendix: Cavity Dimension
In this appendix the cavity diameter is quantiﬁed on chip MoCchip1, using SEM.
Page 73 of 77
==PAGE:79==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 58: SEM image of MoCchip1, where the yellow cicle indicates the measured
cavity. The measured area of the cavity is 1.381 µm2 giving a diameter of 1.32 µm.
Figure 59: SEM image of MoCchip1, where the yellow cicle indicates the measured
cavity. The measured area of the cavity is 2.856 µm2 giving a diameter of 1.91 µm.
Page 74 of 77
==PAGE:80==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 60: SEM image of MoCchip1, where the yellow cicle indicates the measured
cavity. The measured area of the cavity is 4.654 µm2 giving a diameter of 2.43 µm.
Figure 61: SEM image of MoCchip1, where the yellow cicle indicates the measured
cavity. The measured area of the cavity is 6.644 µm2 giving a diameter of 2.91 µm.
Page 75 of 77
==PAGE:81==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
Figure 62: SEM image of MoCchip1, where the yellow cicle indicates the measured
cavity. The measured area of the cavity is 8.984 µm2 giving a diameter of 3.38 µm.
Figure 63: SEM image of MoCchip1, where the yellow cicle indicates the measured
cavity. The measured area of the cavity is 12.156 µm2 giving a diameter of 3.93
µm.
Page 76 of 77
==PAGE:82==
Master’s Thesis
Lau M. Kaas
E
Appendix: AFM data
The raw AFM for all of the data collected in this project can be accessed at:
https://dtudk-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/s164015 dtu dk/EjBUOX
x-M0xNqLlLZ4acR5YBOYc4-ZWA6Xh97fcHEiIsUQ?e=JW4CRI . This ﬁle format can
be opened using Gwyddion, and there converted to other formats such as xyz etc.
Along with the data ﬁles are an OneNote ﬁle containing a measurement log.
The data for the pressure sweep for TTchip7 presented in ﬁgure 29 was based on
measurement IDs 10220 - 10244.
The data for the reading error analysis presented in table 3 was based on measure-
ment IDs 10245- 10251.
The data for the leak test for TTchip7 presented in ﬁgure 30 was based on mea-
surement IDs 10271-10370.
The data for the pre-heat leak test on TTchip16A presented in ﬁgure 34 was based
on measurement IDs 10575-10658.
The data for the pre-heat pressure sweep on TTchip16A presented in ﬁgure 33 was
based on measurement IDs 10677-10701.
The data for the post-heat leak test on TTchip16A presented in ﬁgure 36 was based
on measurement IDs 10790-10923.
The data for the post-heat pressure sweep on TTchip16A presented in ﬁgure 35
was based on measurement IDs 10734-10759.
Page 77 of 77
