==PAGE:1==
Automatic segmentation of microstructural
features in cortex using convolutional neural
network modelling
Oldouz Majidi
(s163502)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Supervisors:
Tim Bjørn Dyrby, Associate Professor
Mariam Andersson, Postdoc
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 321
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis focuses on the automatic segmentation of microstructural features in
the cortex using convolutional neural network modeling on ultra-high-resolution syn-
chrotron data in 3D. The main goal is to detect, analyze, and segment different
anatomical features in the cerebral cortex and their 3D organization in cytoarchitec-
tonics. Correspondingly, it also analyses and segments the anatomical features of the
brain network connecting to the anatomical features of the cerebral cortex (the brain
connectome). In this project, two different 3D-Unet models are developed where the
outputs of the models are the probability maps and the predicted labels for various
classes. The first model is a complex 3D-Unet model where a transfer learning tech-
nique is applied by using a pre-trained VGG16 as the 3D-Unet model’s backbone plus
added ImageNet weights as its encoder weights. This model is also improved by using
self-training multiple times. The next model is a non-complex 3D-Unet model with-
out a backbone and started training from scratch. The performance of the models
is carefully evaluated on the visual cortex dataset (as the main data) and compared
with each other extensively. Also, a crossing fibre volume is used to test how the
models perform on another similar dataset. We compute the accuracy of each class
separately in order to check how each class performs.
In the end, a quantitative
characterization of the predicted labels is performed.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis investigates about the automatic segmentation of microstructural features
in cortex using convolutional neural network modeling project which is prepared at
the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. degree
in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
Kongens Lyngby, February 21, 2022
Oldouz Majidi
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my main supervisor Prof. Tim
B. Dyrby, and Co-supervisor Mariam Andersson for the necessary guidance and valu-
able support throughout this research project, for their patience, motivation, and
immense knowledge. I would also appreciate their insightful comments and encour-
agement, also for some questions which motivated me to widen my research from
various perspectives. Their guidance helped me in all the time of research and writ-
ing of this thesis. Learning from their knowledge helped me to become passionate
about my research topic and I could not have imagined having a better advisor and
mentor for my M.Sc. study.
Besides my supervisor, I would like to thank the DTU HPC and DRCMR IT
staff for their supportive IT service. Without their precious support, it would not be
possible to conduct this research.
And finally, last but by no means least, I would like to thank my family: my par-
ents for supporting me spiritually throughout writing this thesis and my life in general.
Thanks for all your encouragement!
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The Central Nervous System and Synchrotron Data
5
2.1
Human Brain Anatomy and its functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Imaging Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Feature, Data labelling and Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Framework and Implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Methods
22
3.1
Multi-class Semantic Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
The 2D U-Net Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
U-Net Model’s Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
The 3D U-Net model with Vgg16 as backbone . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
The 3D U-Net model with no backbone and no pre-trained encoder
weights: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Train-Validation-Test set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.7
Data Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.8
Data Augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.9
Training and Testing Time Augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.10 Training models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.11 The class weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.12 Loss Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.13 Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.14 Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
3.15 Self-Training and Improvements of The Manually Drawn Labels Using
CNN Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.16 Quantity analysis of anatomical features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Results
39
4.1
Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.3
Evaluation of the performance of models by using ROC curve . . . . .
75
4.4
Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical features . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5
Discussion
83
6
Conclusion
87
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A
An Appendix
88
A.1 Lobes of the Brain and What They Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone . . . .
90
A.3 Results from 3D-Unet on another data (crossing fibre volume) . . . . .
106
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone . .
106
A.5 Generative Adversarial Networks Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
Bibliography
125
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The cerebral cortex is a structure located at the surface of the brain and is where
all our daily impressions based on our sensory inputs are being processed and our
responses are made.
The cortex is organized into cortical regions each related to
a brain function and can be identified from their cytoarchitectural organization i.e.
number of cellular layers and how they are stacked. In 1909 Brodmann mapped the
brain regions of human, and monkey brains from the cytoarchitecture of the cellular
layers. Only a few brains have been mapped because the methods are very tedious
and applied only to 2D histological images. Recently, phase contrast synchrotron
radiation imaging of a small tissue sample can visualize in 3D cortical cells, their nu-
clides, and dendrites in ultra-high image resolution. From the primary visual cortex
in the monkey brain, we have obtained such an ultra-high image resolution 3D data
set. From visual inspection, one clearly can observe a high density of cell bodies, their
cell membranes, nuclei, and dendritic three.
Neurodegenerative and inflammatory diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Multiple
Sclerosis cause the death of brain cells because they attack the microstructure of the
brain (e.g. cell bodies/axons). These disorders slowly degrade the patient’s ability
in speaking, move, remember, and concentrate. Creating new 3D insights into brain
anatomy helps to map normal features and pathology of these diseases to understand
their underlying mechanism then develop treatment techniques against these diseases.
The current techniques of Electron Microscopy (EM) imaging of observing the
tissue sample of the central nervous system through 2D slices is very time-consuming
since capturing an image needs a long time. Also, for taking a volumetric image,
the sample needs to be sliced physically, one piece at a time. Although this method
can produce ultra-high-resolution images of neural tissue structures (such as cells and
axons). For the same reason, it is also largely limited by its field of view (FOV). As
the EM images have such a narrow FOV, it is diﬀicult to use the obtained knowledge
from these kinds of images widely to the rest of nerve tissue in the same area.
Also, some features about the brain tissue microstructure in vivo in humans from
diffusion MRI (e.g. cell density, axon diameter) are extractable. Early results show
that these are beneficial in identifying new biomarkers of disease.
However, each
diffusion MRI image voxel is very large compared to the size of these structures i.e.
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Research Aim
2
the resolution is low, therefore, biophysical models have to be fitted to the diffusion
MRI signal to get estimates of the microstructural features. But the problem is that
the accuracy of the achieved measurements from diffusion MRI is uncertain yet, and
It is also in doubt how the biophysical models are representative of the underlying
microstructure. Therefore, it is very important to have another 3D imaging technique,
with ultra-high-resolution. This helps to validate the microstructural measures that
are extracted with diffusion MRI, and improve the biophysical models [4],[14]. There-
fore, in this project, the most recent and powerful imaging modality that combining
holotomography with a Nano-Scale X-ray imaging system and enabling volumetric
images at an extremely superior-resolution image is used and the volumes are ana-
lyzed in detail. This imaging technique is called X-Ray Nano-Holotomography (XNH)
where there is also no need for any physical slicing and is used for collecting 3D syn-
chrotron data.
Since the primate brains are more similar to human brains, hence for gathering
these volumes, a tissue sample from the 32-month vervet monkey visual cortex (V1 re-
gion) is used. This gives better control of the tissue preparation to ensure good tissue
quality while it is not possible with humans. Several deep learning approaches such
as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are performed for features segmentation
in the brain cortex [29] [31] [34]. This project gives the opportunity to automatically
segment microstructural features in the cortex using deep learning techniques because
complete manual annotation of such huge datasets is not practically feasible. The
project will help clinicians and doctors to diagnose and treat brain diseases in a more
accurate, better, and faster way by segmenting the various brain cortex regions and
analyzing their multiple layers, and their relation to different parts of the body.
1.1
Research Aim
This project aims to analyze and automatically segment micro-structural cortical fea-
tures in the brain using Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) modeling applied to
ultra-high-resolution synchrotron data to potentially map the cytoarchitectural orga-
nization of the cortex. Specifically, the main focus is to segment in the cerebral cortex
anatomical features such as cell bodies and axons as well as their 3D organization in
cortical layers (cytoarchitectonics). Similarly, the anatomical features of the brain
network including axons and cell bodies connecting to the anatomical features of the
cerebral cortex (the brain connectome) are segmented.
Here, the potential of a convolution neural network as a segmentation tool is
explored. Training and test samples are manually drawn on the synchrotron data
for each of the tissue classes. Experiments to explore an optimal pre-processing of
the sparse synchrotron data set as well as of the training/test data to obtain the
best segmentation result will be evaluated. Two 3D-Unet models are developed and
tested where the first model is a 3D-Unet model with VGG16 as its backbone and the
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Related work
3
second model is a 3D-Unet model with no VGG16. Finally, the performance of the
segmentation results must be evaluated and quantitative analysis of the segmentations
are performed.
1.2
Related work
Introduction of automatic segmentation technique for different features such as myelin
and axon applying deep learning techniques like a convolutional neural network from
the Electron Microscopy (EM) images started in 2018 [60]. The authors provide some
valuable quantitative information about the thickness of myelin and density of axon
by segmenting myelin and axon from the microscopic images of mouse, rat, human,
and macaque.
The data is manually labeled and the best performing model is 2
dimensional U-net model with 3 layers and a large filter. The model is trained in a
clear procedure to produce new models. The number of convolutions in each layer
is increased for the ultra-high-resolution image. The main goal is to build a model
that can successfully predict three different classes of features (background, axon, and
myelin). Having Ultra high-resolution EM images almost free of noise, outstanding
visual quality, and very clear distinction and intensity between different features con-
tribute to achieving excellent results and get succeeded in this project. Some other
types of the image such as XNH makes the job for CNN hard because these images
show an extremely different signal ratio or noise.
Another approach [37] is demonstrating the automatic segmentation of neuronal
morphologies by applying convolutional neural networks. This makes the extraction
of neuronal morphologies possible and faster from the volumetric X-ray Holographic
Nano-Tomography (XNH) datasets. They built a 3D-Unet model. The sample is the
fly leg nerve. The model is already trained on EM images then retrained the same
model on XNH images. The XNH data is labeled sparsely. The model is applied to
the other two XNH datasets to correct the predicted segmentation. Then the model is
re-trained with these right and corrected segmented features. Also for every axis, the
model predicts three bi-directional aﬀinity maps instead of producing a probability
map for each class. These aﬀinity maps are used to produce the membrane predictions
where areas with low aﬀinity describe the existing space between the neurons. In this
paper, the voxels were put together into super-pixels for the instance segmentation of
neurons. They obtained a full segmentation of two classes of background and axons
by integrating a watershed transformation algorithm according to super-pixel aﬀinity.
The completed segmentation of the EM data helped the model has the highest per-
formance in prediction but the experience looks amazing that they gained excellent
results by pre-training on different types of imaging modality.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Related work
4
This thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 describes the central nervous system,
synchrotron data, and its collection.
Methods are in chapter 3 which provides a
precise and clear description of how the experiments are done and the rationale for
why specific experimental procedures are chosen.
Chapter 4 includes the results
of the developed models evaluated on the visual cortex dataset and crossing fibre
dataset. Chapter 5 interprets and explores the underlying meaning of this project,
and discusses the significance of the findings.
In the end, overall arguments are
summarized in the conclusion part in chapter 6.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
The Central Nervous
System and
Synchrotron Data
2.1
Human Brain Anatomy and its functions
The central nervous system (CNS) is a system of the vertebrate nervous system. The
CNS involves two regions: the brain and the spinal cord. The brain is located in the
skull where the spinal cord is located in the spine [16][45][40].
The brain is made up of many different highly complex parts. It consists of three
main portions: Cerebrum, Brainstem, and Cerebellum. Cerebrum is the front part
of the brain and it is the largest portion that has some responsibility for various ac-
tions such as hearing, vision, movement, learning, and emotions. The hemispheres
of the cerebral are split into various lobes where every lobe manages different body
functions, for example, the frontal lobes are responsible for speech and personality,
while the temporal lobes include language and memory functions. The parietal and
occipital lobes are responsible for sensations and visions. Some of the tissue studied
during this project are from the occipital lobe 1. The cerebrum also has the outer
part and inner part which is gray matter and white matter respectively. The
most outer gray matter layer is called the cerebral cortex [38].
1For more details about the occipital lobe, please read Appendix A.1.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Human Brain Anatomy and its functions
6
Figure 2.1: Brains of human, rhesus monkey, swine, and rat with their average
brain weight in every piece [46].
”The permissions for the images
of the human brain, monkey brain, monkey MRI are obtained from
JC Fournet (University Hospital Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Canada,
http://www.humpath.com), CA Pardo-Villamizar(JohnsHopkins Uni-
versity School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA) and C Franc ￿ois (Inserm
UMR975, Paris, France), respectively”.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Human Brain Anatomy and its functions
7
2.1.1
Gray matter and white matter
Figure 2.2: Gray and white matters [53].
The central nervous system consists of two different parts which are Gray matter
and White matter. The outer portion of the brain which is darker is gray matter.
The inner part which is lighter than the gray matter is called white matter. The
white matter includes nerve fibers. On the outside of the spinal cord, the white
matter is placed where the gray matter is located within. These regions of the brain
control different responsibilities. The gray matter’s task is to manage the processing
and interpreting information. The white matter’s task is to transfer the information
to the other regions of the nervous system [53].
Mainly, gray matter is made of neurons somas that are the round central cell
bodies and white matter is consists of axons that are the long stems that connect
neurons. The axons are wrapped with a protective coating that is called myelin [53].
Figure 2.3 shows the connections between the gray matter and white matter [55].
Figure 2.3: Connections of matters [55].
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Human Brain Anatomy and its functions
8
2.1.2
Visual region of cortex in human brain
The cortical region of the brain is the visual cortex that gets, integrates, and processes
visual information relayed from the retinas. It is placed in the occipital lobe, which is
the most posterior area of the brain. The visual cortex includes five different regions
from V1 to V5 based on function and structure. The main goal of the visual cortex is
to receive, integrate, and segment visual information. The visual data from the retinas
before moving to the visual cortex, first go through the thalamus, where it synapses
in a nucleus which is known as lateral geniculate. Then this visual information is
transformed to the first region of the visual cortex (V1 region). Every hemisphere
owns its visual cortex that gets information from the contralateral eye [21].
Figure 2.4: Visual cortex [35]. Different regions of V1-V5 in the visual cortex are
highlighted with different colors. In the thesis, V1 cortex is studied
that is shown with yellow color.
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Human Brain Anatomy and its functions
9
2.1.3
Neuron Anatomy
The essential units of the nervous system and brain are neurons. The main three
parts of the neurons are dendrites, a soma or cell body, and an axon. Many axons
are surrounded by a kind of covering or sheath which is called myelin [41].
Figure 2.5: Neuron Anatomy [53].
2.1.3.1
Dendrites
The dendrites are like a tree branch. Here, a neuron gets the synaptic inputs from the
other cells. Indeed, the dendrites are built to get communications from other parts.
They have some structures such as a tree’s leaf which is called spines. The dendrite
receives and processes the messages and information from the axons [41]. Dendrites
are thin and long but in reality, a quantitative analysis of the dendrites is complex
because the diameters of the dendrite vary significantly [8].
2.1.3.2
Soma or cell bodies
The soma is the non-process portion and bulbous body of a neuron. It contains the
cell nucleus which is a key feature of the cell body. DNA of the neurons is housed in
soma and the nucleus is the source of most of the made RNA in neurons. The cells
receive some sensory input from the environment and send motor commands to the
muscles, transform and relay the electrical signals at each step in between [41].
2.1.3.3
Axons
The axons are the neuron’s output structure is located in the subcortical tissue of the
brain and mostly is placed in white matter. Axons are called nerve fibers that are
extensions of neurons (nerve cells). Their shape is long and thin. The nerve fibres
(axons) are protected by myelins from injuries. The white matter is lighter than the
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Imaging Techniques
10
gray matter because myelin gives its color to the white matter. The role of axons is
to communicate electrical signals (action potentials) between brain regions [33].
Figure 2.6: Neurons architecture from different view [41].
Figure 2.6 shows the neurons anatomy in more details. In general, the axons are
much longer than dendrites. The right bottom image shows a segmented dendrites
including its spines.
2.2
Imaging Techniques
3D volumetric images produce vital information about the health of the brain. There
are various imaging techniques that take images from different regions of the brain.
2.2.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
One of the noninvasive methods for testing patients’ tissues, organs, and skeletal
systems in radiology is Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). It is a medical imaging
modality that is frequently used imaging test for diagnosis of brain diseases and spinal
cord. MRI uses a strong magnetic field, radio waves, and magnetic field gradients
to produce a detailed image of different tissues and organs of the patient body. In
general, many MRI machines are made in large sizes and tube-shaped magnets. MRI
scanner is able to generate 3D images. For generating an image, the subject needs to
lie inside the machine and the magnetic field realigns water molecules in the subject’s
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Imaging Techniques
11
body temporarily [32]. Diffusion MRI is an MRI technique that provides valuable
information in biological tissues by measuring the micro-scale molecular diffusion.
This technique is popular for human brain imaging. The resolution of diffusion MRI
images are very raw concerning the axons scale, since the resolution of a voxel is
around 1mm, therefore, by fitting biophysical models to the received signals, these
images can only obtain information regarding the axon diameters distribution [4] [14].
2.2.2
Phase-Contrast X-Ray Imaging
Phase-Contrast X-Ray Imaging or phase-sensitive X-ray imaging or in-line hologra-
phy is a modern medical imaging technique that is suitable for digital X-ray detectors.
A phase-contrast is a light microscopy method that is used to increase the contrast of
images of colorless and transparent specimens. In order to generate an image, Phase-
Contrast X-Ray applies information regarding changes in the phase of an X-ray beam
that crosses through a target. The phase retrieval is performed by iterative algorithms.
The main idea of this type of imaging technique is that the measured intensity varia-
tions across the X-ray detector vary when the X-ray detector is moved closer to and
further from the object [61]. Figure 2.7 illustrates the intensity variations and their
behavior as it propagates among free space.
Figure 2.7: Illustration of how Phase-Contrast X-Ray Imaging works [61], [50]. a)
and b) shows how the intensity variations across the X-ray detector
varies when the X-ray detector is moved closer to and further from the
object. R1 is the distance between the X-ray source and object. R2
is the distance between the object and image detector. The right side
image shows another form of this imaging technique where the object is
between incident wave and perturbed wave. The propagation distance
is the distance between the object and the image detector.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Imaging Techniques
12
The intensity variations need the illuminating X-ray beam to be spatially coherent,
that is uniform amplitude. This means that the X-ray emission spot becomes very
tiny and very far away (which is related to a low flux) causes to long exposure times.
This problem can be solved by applying an X-ray source like a synchrotron because
it is able to produce an X-ray beam that includes both a very small emission spot
and high flux that makes the exposure time shorter.
2.2.3
Synchrotron
Synchrotron Radiation (SR) was announced in May 1947 by Frank Elder, Anatole
Gurewitsch, Robert Langmuir, and Herb Pollock in a letter with the title ”Radiation
from Electrons in a Synchrotron” [39]. A synchrotron is an extraordinarily powerful
source of X-rays and a specific type of cyclic particle accelerator. It uses a robust
magnetic field to synchronize and control a beam of particles to increase their kinetic
energy, by increasing the power of the magnetic field. The X-rays are generated by
huge energy of electrons since they are circulated around the synchrotron as it is
shown on Figure 2.8.
”Synchrotron radiation is the electromagnetic waves emitted by a charged particle
that moves in a curved trajectory at a speed close to the speed of light” [39].
Figure 2.8: Illustration of Synchrotron radiation machine in details [51].
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Imaging Techniques
13
A synchrotron machine continues to accelerate electrons to extraordinary high
energy and makes them change direction occasionally. Indeed, there is a physical
phenomenon that the whole world of synchrotron science relies on: A moving elec-
tron emits energy when it changes its direction. Also, when the electron goes faster
suﬀiciently then the emitted energy is at X-ray wavelength. The synchrotron machine
works day and night but it is shut down for short and long periodic maintenance. The
XNH volumes examined in this project are acquired at beamline ID16A of the Eu-
ropean Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) which is located in Grenoble, France
[17].
2.2.4
Holotomography
One way to present a single medical image with the needed necessary information
in detail is to extend the dimension of the imaging technique from 2D to 3D be-
cause in many situations, observing a projection of a sample has not obtained almost
enough information as needed. This is possible via Holotomography (HT) imaging
technique. It is a laser method that is able to capture images in 3D and measure
the 3D refractive index tomogram of a microscopic object, e.g. tissues and biological
cells. HT takes two-dimensional images at the various direction and angles across the
subject’s volume and combines them into a three-dimensional image. Also, HT uses
the fundamentals of holographic imaging and inverse scattering for measuring the
3D refractive index tomogram of object [7] [36]. Holotomography is not only able to
capture images from different angles but it is also able to take images from many var-
ious distances for each of these angles as it is illustrated in Figure 2.9. It shows the
back-projection algorithm as an example of the tomographic reconstruction technique.
The main point of the back-projection algorithm depends on the truth that the
Fourier transform of a 1D projection taken at one angle from an object is equal with
the slice through the 2D Fourier transform of the object function at the same angle.
Taking projections of the object from various angles, the 2D Fourier transform of
the objective function will be filled up. Therefore, by calculating the inverse Fourier
transform of the 2D images, one can reconstruct the object function - that is, the
2D image of the object [6].
Hence, X-Ray Nano Holotomography (XNH) in the
holographic imaging regime is the imaging modality that combines holotomography
with a Nano-Scale X-ray imaging system and enables volumetric images at acceptable
high-resolution taken in high speedway.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Data Acquisition
14
Figure 2.9: Illustration of one-dimensional projections applied to reconstruct a two-
dimensional image using back-projection [36] where it shows the steps
in a simple back-projection. A) Projection profiles for a point source of
radioactivity for various projection angles and B) Back-projection of an
intensity profile through the image at the angle where it corresponds to
the profile. This process is repeating for all the projection profiles until
to generate a back-projected image.
2.3
Data Acquisition
Data are acquired by Mariam Andersson, Prof. Tim Bjørn Dyrby, and others in the
European Synchrotron Radiation Facility located in Grenoble, France [17] and the
Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR), Copenhagen University
Hospital Hvidovre. In the work [5], the crossing fibre volume is shared and described
in detail. The XNH volume of the cortex has not been publicly shared yet.
The data include two different volumes of a tissue sample from the 32-month vervet
monkey visual cortex (V1 region) imaged with X-ray Nano-Holotomography (phase-
contrast tomography (XNH). The V1 sample has been stained with 0.5% osmium
tetroxide, which stains fatty substances and makes them appear very black/electron-
dense. In the volumetric image, both gray matter and white matter are visible. The
white matter especially involves myelinated axons. Since myelin is a lipid, the white
matter areas will appear very dark in contrast to the grey matter, which appears as
a lighter grey. Another sample with lots of easy-to-segment axons is from a crossing
fibre region of the same vervet monkey brain, in the anterior white matter.
The original volumes (.VOL formats) are provided, but are all above 32 GB each.
It is diﬀicult to load these in image viewers; therefore, some down-sampled NIFTI
(.nii) volumes are prepared. In this project, one volume of sample is chosen where
the file has a 100nm voxel size in the original image volume, and the down-sampling
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Data Acquisition
15
factor in the .nii version is 5 (voxel size isotropic 500nm. Figure 2.10 shows two
different volumetric samples in 3D. The left volume is from the visual cortex and the
right volume is from crossing fibre.
Figure 2.10: Whole volume of visual cortex (left) and crossing fibre (right) in 3D
[5]. The visual cortex includes different features such as blood vessels,
cells, and axons. The crossing fibre includes many axons. The shape
of the volumetric images are like a cylinder with diameter 204µm and
length 204µm.
Figure 2.11 shows an example of the visual cortex where it includes grey mat-
ter and a band of white matter. The left side image shows the cortex tissue sample
from the top where one can clearly see blood vessels, cells with their nucleus, cell
bodies, dendrites, and axons. The right side image shows the sample from a side in
3D where gray matter and a band of white matter is visible. Grey matter includes
cell bodies and cell bodies and the white matter is full of myelinated axons. The
size of ultra-high-resolution data is (2048, 2048, 2048). It has a very high contrast
but lots of noise with a minimum value −384 and a maximum value equal to 255.
When dealing with ultra-high-resolution and large 3D data, getting memory errors
is a very common problem in deep learning due to the limited memory capacity of
computing devices. Therefore, the input volumes into the CNN model have to be
either down-sampled or cropped.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Data Acquisition
16
Figure 2.11: A tissue sample from the visual cortex 3D imaged with X-ray nano-
holotomography (phase-contrast tomography) [5]. The cortex sample
contains information of the cytoarchitecture of cell bodies in cortex.
Figure 2.12 shows a sample of crossing fibre brain connections within the brain
network has recently been analysed manually to segment features such as axon and
cell bodies [5].
Figure 2.12: An example of crossing fibre sample with manually segmented axons
[5]. The crossing fibre sample shows axons which are part of the brain
connectome.
The main data used in this project is visual cortex volume, but the crossing fibre
volume is also used to experience and test how models performs on another similar
data.
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Data Acquisition
17
Since the gathered raw ultra-high-resolution synchrotron data is a very large file,
it is argued to down-sample the 3D volumetric data to the size of (410, 410, 408) with
500nm voxel size. By down-sampling the data of 32 GB, it is converted to 4 KB
volumetric image to make it easy to work with. The type of down-sampled data is
’float64’, but it is converted to ’uint8’ with values between 0–255. This helps to train
the model faster and easier. Also, do not allow to get memory and computational
errors.
Figure 2.13 shows different slices of visual cortex from gray matter and white
matter in the downsampled volume. In the top images, some features such as blood
vessels, cells with a nucleus, and axons are visible clearly. At the bottom, two image
includes blood vessels and many axons which are a little blurry.
Figure 2.13: A cross slice of visual cortex (V1 reigon) in a down-sampled tissue,
the top two from grey matter and the bottom two from white matter.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Feature, Data labelling and Pre-processing
18
2.4
Feature, Data labelling and Pre-processing
After the raw data is obtained, in order to start the labeling, different features become
identified, investigated, and explained to learn different anatomical features, their
shapes, and some other properties on the raw data.
It is decided to choose four
different classes for background, blood vessels, cells bodies, and myelinated axons to
do multi-class semantic segmentation.
The labeling of the raw synchrotron data for each of the tissue classes is done
manually but it is done sparsely since the CNN can learn the anatomical features
for each class and automatically predict those. This was also useful to save time in
drawing because it is not necessary to draw the whole 3D volume.
2.4.1
Issues with manually labeling of anatomical features On
ITK-SNAP Tool
ITK-SNAP [59] is a modern software application that is used to segment features
in 3D medical images. After different features are identified and studied in the visual
cortex, we start drawing the features manually on the ITK-SNAP Tool. But drawing
different features varies on the tool, and even the labeling is done sparsely, it is still
very time-consuming and has its own diﬀiculties. Especially, drawing some classes’
labels like cell bodies and myelinated axons were a very tough and time-consuming
job.
• Blood vessels: On the tool, the easiest task was the labeling of blood vessels
class because the intensity of blood vessels is the same on the whole area of the
feature and it is easy to draw the label for this class. Drawing the blood vessels
took a day to be labeled.
• Cells: By scrolling the 3D volume up and down in the depth on the z-axis cells
appear and disappear on various slices. The cells are diﬀicult to delineate with
the adaptive paintbrush in ITK-SNAP due to their diffuse boundaries. Also, a
cell’s shape is not a square (2D) or a cube (3D) but the tool made lots of cubic
cells’ labels because the intensity of cells is not the same inside the feature,
therefore, while drawing the labels in 2D, the tool spreads the color out and
makes the shape of cells as cubic form. An example of this problem is shown
in Figure 2.15. These noises were tried to be deleted as much as possible but
there are still lots of them included in the labels.
• Myelinated axons The most diﬀicult labeling of the feature on the tool was
myelinated axons. Axons are surrounded by myelins which have different colors.
The unusual shape and directions of axons and the myelins around them, being
very narrow in some depth of volume made the labeling very time-consuming.
Also, having different intensities between myelins and axons made this labeling
not feasible within the scope of this project. Instead, it is tried to just draw a
few long snake shapes and try to include myelin around the axon.
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Feature, Data labelling and Pre-processing
19
Figure 2.14 shows an example of manually labeling of different features on ITK-
SNAP Tool where it indicates features with different colors (red: blood vessels, blue:
cells, green: myelinated axons, and yellow: (this feature was like cells and it was not
used) and black: background).
Figure 2.14: An example of manually labeling the features in 3D from a side using
ITK-SNAP Tool from white matter (top) to gray matter (down).
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Feature, Data labelling and Pre-processing
20
An example of cell manual labelling problem is shown in Figure 2.15 where
it shows the default shape the ITK-SNAP adaptive paintbrush cannot find strong
enough boundaries (as it is explained in Section 2.4.1).
The cubic of cells are
obviously visible on the figure and some of them are indicated.
Figure 2.15: An example of cubic cells by manually labeling the features on ITK-
SNAP tool from (top) grey matter view.
After labeling is done, the masks are ready as the true labels for the supervised
learning task as it is shown in Figure 2.16. This figure also shows a visualization of
an image in 2D where the image’s color bar shows the intensities of different features
in the image where features with black color are myelins around the axons and white
color are blood vessels. The mask in the figure includes various anatomical features
with different colors (purple: background, blue: blood vessels, green: cells, and yel-
low: this class is skipped). Although the labels are described as ”true labels”, they
have issues and limitations that have been described above.
In the histogram, the most common value is 0.06 that belongs to the background
outside the tomographic reconstruction (the gray area behind the data), the dark
areas where the x-axis values are between 0 −130 generally belong to myelin. The
values between 130−160 show the cells and the lighter values greater than 200 belong
to blood vessels.
==PAGE:28==
2.5 Framework and Implementations
21
Figure 2.16: An example of image (top left) and its mask (top right), and the
histogram of data (down).
2.5
Framework and Implementations
In this project, Python programming language is considered for implementing the
proposed approaches. Also, Keras and Tensoflow as a Python-based scientific com-
puting package is applied for a replacement for NumPy to use the power of GPUs.
This provides maximum flexibility and speed in the deep learning research platform.
For training the CNN model on GPU, we got supported by DTU’s High-Performance
Computing (HPC).
For segmenting the features and visualization of them, some useful tools such as
ITK-SNAP is used based on the paper [59]. Some other libraries such as Numpy,
Matplotlib, Nilearn, 3D-connected-component, blob analysis, 3D-model-
segmentation [48] are used in this project.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
3.1
Multi-class Semantic Segmentation
One of the essential tasks in computer vision is binary or multi-class semantic segmen-
tation which assigns the semantic labels to every pixel in a 2D image or every voxel
in the 3D volume. This technique helps to differentiate different objects in the im-
age. It has shown its success in many different medical image analyses, especially for
brain segmentation such as identifying, detecting, and segmenting brain tumors. In
this project, multi-class semantic segmentation allows us to analyze and segment the
brain cytoarchitectonics and its connectome in more detail. A 3D Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) is used based on Conv3D layers for the segmentation
task. After discussing and investigating various 3D models such as FPN, PSPNet,
Linknet, SegNet, etc. It is decided to choose U-Net model which is one of the best
and most successful performed models until now [2]. The task is to perform multi-
class semantic segmentation to extract the geometry of the region of interest through
3D data segmentation. It lets for conversion into 3D U-Net models, which permits
quantification and visualization of the scanned visual cortex region.
3.2
The 2D U-Net Model
The U-Net is a popular neural network model widely used for medical image analysis
in healthcare. It is a more or less symmetric Encoder-Decoder model with U-shaped
architecture and a powerful tool for the segmentation of biomedical data. It is sig-
nificant for medical tasks especially for semantic segmentation, but it has also been
successful in some other contexts such as reconstructing of medical image, pixel-wise
regression, estimating fluorescent stains using image-to-image translation, and bind-
ing site prediction of protein structure in computational drug design [25] [58] [9]. It
gets an image as an input and output is a gray-scale image with the same shape and
size as an input image. In the decoder part, existing a large number of feature chan-
nels let the model propagate the context information to higher resolution layers. The
output represents the probability of every pixel that is the region of interest (ROI).
In general, the U-Net model includes three parts of contracting path (down-sampling
or encoder), bottleneck, and expansive path (up-sampling or decoder). The encoder
part applies convolutions and pooling layers that decrease the input image and the
==PAGE:30==
3.3 U-Net Model’s Architecture
23
decoder part increases the image size. In the end, the input and output sizes are the
same, but the number of channels can be different.
3.3
U-Net Model’s Architecture
The original U-Net model is explained in more detail in [44]. The model is made
in 2D that involves 23 convolutional layers. The architecture and the layers are as
follows: The repeated applications of two 3x3 convolutions, an activation function,
and 2x2 max pooling with stride 2 for each. A rectified linear unit (ReLU) is applied
as an activation function in the model. In the paper [44], the number of feature chan-
nels is doubled for each down-sampling step. But in the symmetrical part in every
up-sampling step which up-samples the feature map, 2x2 convolution is used that
divides the number of feature channels in half. The up-sampling part also consists
of concatenation with the cropped feature map from the down-sampling part. This
cropped feature map should correspond to the same layer in each encoder and decoder
part. The expansive part also consists of two 3x3 convolutions with a ReLU activa-
tion function. The last layer is 1x1 convolution layer that maps each 64 component
feature vector to the number of classes. In order to loss of the pixels of the border in
each convolution, cropping is needed.
The reason making the U-Net model into a powerful outstanding tool over the
other models is because it adds the Skip Connection that increases the performance
of the network and makes it more robust than the other architectures for the segmen-
tation tasks. The skip connection step is shown in Figure 3.1. Vanishing gradients
are a big problem in machine learning and skip connections allow the gradients to
more freely move by connecting each layer to its twin-layer. By this job, each layer is
not only connected to its previous layer but is also connected to its twin layers and it
helps with vanishing the gradients. Skip connection has also another advantage that
avoids checkboard artifacts that occasionally plague these kinds of neural network
models.
Figure 3.1: Skip Connection.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 The 3D U-Net model with Vgg16 as backbone
24
Figure 3.2: Illustration of 3D U-Net architecture including an encoder, bottleneck,
and decoder paths from left to the right respectively, where the input is
a 3D voxel with a number of channels and the output is a 3D probability
map/ predicted labels of different classes. Green boxes represent feature
maps.
Concatenations (blue), Convolutions + ReLU (orange), Max
pooling (red), and Up-Convolutions (purple) are shown with different
colors in the model’s architecture. The network architecture is an edited
form of the 3D Unet model from original 3D Unet paper [11] and [1].
3.4
The 3D U-Net model with Vgg16 as backbone
In this project, a 3D U-Net model is built where the architecture of the model is
illustrated in Figure 3.2. The first 3D model is made with combinations of U-Net
and VGG16 as its backbone. The model was created in 3D and it is a modified version
of the original 2D model. It is a fully convolution neural network made in order to
analyze the volumetric biomedical synchrotron data and it still has common parts
with 2D U-Net model but with different layers, shapes, kernel sizes, etc., and included
various hyperparameters. VGG16 classification model without the last dense layer
as the extraction of feature is chosen for the model’s backbone. The input shape of
the backbone is (height, weight, depth, number of channels). The model outputs four
different classes of background, blood vessels, cells, and myelinated axons. The last
layer’s activation function is Softmax in this model. For not starting from scratch,
==PAGE:32==
3.4 The 3D U-Net model with Vgg16 as backbone
25
it is decided to use a pre-trained ImageNet [13], as its encoder weights where the
encoder weights are not frozen to be used in the training of the model. From the top
of the model, the encoder features which are the list of the numbers of the layers begin.
The model adds skip connections which means each layer from the encoder block is
concatenated with its corresponding layer in the decoder part. The model includes a
down-sampling block and up-sampling block. The decoder convolutional layer filters
are (256, 128, 64, 32, 16) respectively. The decoder parts apply batch normalization in
their layers. There is no dropout in this model’s layers.
3.4.1
The Encoder-Decoder Blocks
3.4.1.1
U-Net encoder
In the down-sampling (encoder) block, the 3D model includes the repeated application
of 3 × 3 × 3 convolutions and then a rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function
with 3 × 3 × 3 kernel size. The padding of ’same’ is used where it means to pad left
and right evenly. But if the number of added columns is odd, then it adds the extra
column to the right. The same logic exists vertically as well. There may be an extra
row of zeros at the bottom. Batch normalization is applied in every layer as well, and
2 × 2 × 2 max pooling with stride 2 for each. Also, more details about how features
are extracted using the VGG16 architecture are explained in the following section.
3.4.1.2
VGG16
One of the most successful and popular artificial neural network models based on
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) is VGG16 proposed by Karen Simonyan and
Andrew Zisserman from the University of Oxford [47]. In 2014, it was used for the
ImageNet Challenge. The model’s architecture consists of convolution + ReLU, max
pooling, fully connected + ReLU, and softmax activation function at the end of the
model, but more details are explained in paper [47]. The famous model obtained
92.7% top-5 test accuracy on the ImageNet dataset.
3.4.1.3
ImageNet encoder weights
One of the most significant hyperparameters of the CNN models are its weights and
they should be updated multiple times by an optimizer in the back-propagation step
to reduce the loss function. The ImageNet data has been trained many times and
achieved the best weights for the training of CNN models. In order to not start from
scratch and get high-performance results, the U-Net model starts with ImageNet
weights as its encoder weights.
Previously, 2D models pre-trained on the ImageNet [13] data have proofed ex-
cellent potential for transfer learning into various domains with achieving higher
accuracy and faster convergence [22]. This is also involving applications to medical
==PAGE:33==
3.4 The 3D U-Net model with Vgg16 as backbone
26
image analysis [18] [26] [42] [49]. In order to leverage pre-training on extensive scale
2D image data for 3D medical image analysis, a technique is used for transferring the
weights from 2D to 3D CNNs. Figure 3.3 shows schematic representation of 2D and
3D input samples, convolutions, and output feature maps.
The history of ImageNet starts in 2006 by AI researcher Fei-Fei Li from Stanford
University. She began to gather the data in order to train the AI models with im-
proved and extensive available data. The data includes more than 14 million images
with more than 20, 000 categories. The paper ” ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database” discuss the collection of the data and its challenges comprehensively
[13].
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the diagram of 2D and 3D input samples, convolutions,
and the output feature maps. The 2D input image has dimensions H
× W, where H is the height and W is the width of the image. The 2D
convolutions are 2D matrices with kernels (weights) with the size of k
× k; in our project, the k = 3. The 3D volume shape is (F, H, W),
where F, H, and W are frames, height, and width respectively. The 3D
convolutions are moving across the volume of the sample and are 3D
matrices with the size of k × k × k and k = 3.
Applying pre-trained VGG16 and ImageNet as encoder weights are beneficial and
a good starting point for transfer learning on medical image analysis since it increases
the inference speed because of the simplified kernel in the first layer of the model. It
removes some useless pre-processing before inference. It also leads to more accurate
classification results with a high-performance model [57].
==PAGE:34==
3.5 The 3D U-Net model with no backbone and no pre-trained encoder weights:
27
3.4.1.4
U-Net decoder
The symmetric decoder blocks are performed in this part where the skip-connections
from corresponding encoder blocks are extracted here to connect each layer to its
previous twin layers. The up-sampling block includes 5 number of up-sampling blocks
with an activation function. There is also no dropout in the layers. The features are
concatenated to the de-convolutional outputs. The Softmax activation function at the
end of the model extracts a probability map or segmentation map of predicted labels
of the input patches that are expanded to the four different classes of background,
blood vessels, cells, and myelinated axons.
3.5
The 3D U-Net model with no backbone and no
pre-trained encoder weights:
Also, a non-complex 3D U-Net with 3x3x3 convolutional layers with 2x2x2 max pool-
ing are developed to check how the model performs in this case. The architecture and
number of layers and other parameters in this model are the same as before but this
time in the model there is no backbone, no pre-trained encoder weights, and no back-
bone pre-processing on data. The input shape is (height, width, depth, number of
channels) where the number of channels is 1 and number of classes are 4 (Background,
blood vessels, cells, and myelinated axons), ReLU as activation function. The decoder
filters are (256, 128, 64, 32, 16) and there is a batch normalization without dropout.
3.6
Train-Validation-Test set
The data is split into the training, validating, and test sets. As mentioned before, the
size of whole volumetric image is (410, 410, 410), but this volumetric image is center
cropped to the size of (256, 256, 256) that includes 90% for training set and 10%
for validation set. The area outside the center-cropped is kept for test sets. Figure
3.4 shows how the volumetric sample is split into training set (pink), validation set
(purple), and test set (blue).
3.6.1
Patch size
The cropped image is divided into small patches in the size of (64, 64, 64). The step
size is chosen 16 and that means each patch goes 16 steps forward and it overlaps with
its neighbor patch. The model with a chosen step size of 16 provides good performance
on a fair amount of data. Firstly, the step size of 1 was chosen, but due to gaining
a large amount of data around 262, 144 = 64 × 64 × 64 images for the training and
validating, the High-Performance Computing’s system complained about the memory
and gave an error. It asked to use 245 GB to train the model with this amount of
==PAGE:35==
3.7 Data Pre-processing
28
Figure 3.4: Illustration of whole volumetric image and how it is split to Train-
Validation set (the center-cropped image) and Test set.
images which is not possible using the DTU HPC current computational technologies.
Inside of the center-cropped volume with the size of (256, 256, 256). The number of
small patched images with 16 step size is 1955 images for training and 242 images for
the validating. This amount of data is a fair amount to every artificial neural network
to learn the tasks like segmentation, classification, object detection, and some other
similar tasks eﬀiciently.
3.7
Data Pre-processing
As mentioned, the whole volumetric image is cropped from the center of the volume to
the size of (256, 256, 256) with a voxel size of 500nm. Figure 3.5 shows an example
of the center-cropped sample where it consists of all the manually labeled features.
3.8
Data Augmentation
Before training the data, some transformations are done. Using the data augmen-
tation technique helps to improve the performance of the model without needing to
gather more additional data. Also, the model learns what a feature looks like rather
than having it memorize the specific way features appear in the training set. Also,
data augmentation can prevent overfitting. The transformation includes standardiza-
tion and scaling for the first 3D-Unet model with VGG16 as its backbone.
==PAGE:36==
3.8 Data Augmentation
29
Figure 3.5: Visualisation of center cropped image (left) and its manually annotated
labels (right) in 2D on a slice of the cortical sample.
3.8.1
Standardization
The input images shape is standardized to the small squares (patches) and the per-
channel pixel mean is subtracted.
The input image is an RGB image that has 3
channels. From each pixel, the preparation is the subtraction of the mean RGB value
which is calculated on the training data.
3.8.2
Multi-scale
The next transformation is scaling. That is also named ”Multi-scale training” where it
chooses an image scale size for each image randomly. An absolute range is considered
for sampling the image randomly where the minimum size is 256 and the maximum
size is 512. Each image should be re-scaled separately.
Also some other data augmentation techniques are applied on the data and those
are as following:
3.8.3
Normalization
The values of the volume are normalized. When the image becomes normalized the
values are converted to [0, 1].
==PAGE:37==
3.9 Training and Testing Time Augmentation
30
3.8.4
Rotation
The data is rotated in 90 degrees, 180 degrees, and 270 degrees on the x, y, z-axis.
This varies the angles the features appear in the data during training.
3.8.5
Flipping
The data is flipped on the x-axis, y-axis, and z-axis where the voxels rows, columns,
and depth are reverse between (x, y) axis, (x, z) axis, and (y, z) axis. Figure 3.6
shows some examples of data augmentation techniques such as rotation, flipping, etc.
where some of them are applied to our data.
Figure 3.6: Examples of data augmentation (normalized, rotation, Gaussian noise,
and flipping in different axis of x, y, z, 90-degree rotation in z axis).
3.9
Training and Testing Time Augmentation
In order to save time during the training and testing and get the results faster, a few
augmentations are done. Some various image scaling was investigated with the model.
Firstly, the model is trained with the smaller size of the images, and the weights are
retrained in the model, next those are applied as a basic assumption to train a new
model with a bigger image size. But the size is still adjusted. The advantage of this
approach helps to train the model with the larger images much faster. In the paper
[47], their ConvNet model is trained with the image size = 256 for sparing the time
and getting the results quickly with the image size = 384.
Duration of the training time, the ”multi-scale training” approach is evaluated
but there is also another approach for testing time. Different diverse scaled versions
of test images were made. The prediction is done for each and then the mean of
==PAGE:38==
3.10 Training models
31
predictions is calculated for the final prediction. The model is run over the various
re-scaled test images and this performs better than evaluating the model at a single
scale. In general, it is called ”scale jitter”. The advantage of scale jitter is to increase
the performance.
3.10
Training models
For achieving the best performance of the model and highest validation accuracy,
models are trained very carefully with some known and popular parameters such as
ReLU as activation function and ADAM as optimizer. ReLU has an advantage over
some other activation functions since it does not activate all the neurons simulta-
neously, and ADAM is a popular deep learning algorithm because it obtains good
results faster [27].
3.10.1
3D-Unet with VGG16 as its backbone
This model is initialized with the best encoder weights using ImageNet weights [47]
[1]. Some parameters are used in the network: ’ADAM’ optimizer with learning rate
= 0.0001, number of epochs= 150, batch size = 5, activation function inside the vgg16
is ‘ReLU’, an activation function at the end of 3D-Unet model is ‘softmax’. Duration
of the training was 5 hours and 30 minutes.
3.10.2
3D-Unet (without a backbone)
This model starts training from scratch and there is no pre-trained weights. The
total parameters are: 71,230,084 (Trainable params: 71,226,052 and Non-trainable
params: 4,032), ’ADAM’ optimizer with learning rate = 0.00001, number of epochs=
70, batch size = 8, activation function is ‘ReLU’, activation function at the end of
the model is a ‘softmax’ function. Duration of the training was around 4 hours.
The models are saved as HDF5 format in the DTU’s HPC scratch directory.
Saving a model, saves its architecture, weights, optimizer, and its loss and metrics.
3.11
The class weights
Since the data is unbalanced and the volume of features in the volumetric data have
various weights, on gradient updates in order to give all the classes equal importance,
each feature’s weight should be computed for each class separately. This is helpful
to prevent a model from predicting the more frequent feature class more often just
because it is more common.
==PAGE:39==
3.12 Loss Functions
32
Computed class weights for the different classes of background (class 0), blood
vessels (class 1), cells (class 2), and myelinated axons (class 3) are as follows:
class 0: 0.26830417949507634, class 1: 5.844844906427738,
class 2: 10.79654041521119, class 3: 109.00629899431705
The value of background (class 0) is equal to 0.26830417949507634 but this value
is set equal to zero to push the model to predict as many features as possible in
other classes. After the computed class weight for background class is set to zero, the
lowest value of the computed class weight is for blood vessels class since this class
occupies lots of regions of the volumetric data and the highest class weight value
is for myelinated axons class because it occupies few regions of the volumetric data.
Now, the values of computed class weight give all unbalanced classes having equal
importance in the volumetric data.
3.12
Loss Functions
A combination of Dice function and Focal loss is used in the 3D-Unet with VGG16
model for calculating the error. The Eq. 3.1 is the more general form of the dice
loss function.
3.12.1
Dice loss
Dice function [23] is chosen as one measure of loss where it is similar to intersection
over union.
This function calculates the errors and yields a quantification of the
performance of the segmentation by averaging over all available labels.
DiceLoss =
2 ∑N
i Ptrue ∗Ppred
∑N
i P 2
true + ∑N
i P 2
pred
(3.1)
where Ptrue is the probability of the true label and Ppred is the probability of the
predicted label [48].
This function can be written on another simple way as it is shown on Eq. 3.2:
DiceLoss = 2 | X ∩Y |
| X | + | Y |
(3.2)
where X is the predicted label and Y is the actual label and | X∩Y | (X intersection Y)
means the number of the predicted labels X overlap with the actual label Y. Indeed,
==PAGE:40==
3.13 Evaluation Metrics
33
this function measures the similarity between the true labels and the predicted labels.
The value of Dice loss is between 0 and 1, but if two labels are identical then the
coeﬀicient value will be 1, and if the true values and the predicted values do not
overlap and have no common element in them then the coeﬀicient value will be 0.
The Eq. 3.3 calculates the Dice loss function based on precision and recall and
Eq. 3.4 calculates the loss based of Confusion matrix.
L(precision, recall) = 1 −(1 + β2)
precision · recall
β2 · precision + recall
(3.3)
L(tp, fp, fn) =
(1 + β2) · tp
(1 + β2) · fp + β2 · fn + fp
(3.4)
where tp is true positives; fp is false positives; fn - false negatives; and β is a float or
integer coeﬀicient for precision and recall balance.
3.12.2
Focal loss
Focal loss [23] is chosen because it is good for unbalanced data. The Eq. 3.5 calcu-
lates the focal loss function [48].
L(gt, pr) = −gt · α · (1 −pr)γ · log(pr)
(3.5)
where gt is ground truth and pr is prediction and α is integer or float, the same
as a weighting factor in balanced cross-entropy, default 0.25. and γ is integer or float,
focusing parameter for modulating factor (1 −p).
3.12.3
Cross Entropy loss
For the 3D-Unet model without backbone, another standard loss function is chosen
for training the segmentation model to adjust the model weights during the training.
It is called cross-entropy loss function where multi-class cross-entropy loss is chosen
for a multi-class task on visual cortex data and binary cross-entropy loss is chosen for
binary segmentation task on crossing fibre data. This loss is a proxy that is easier to
maximize using back-propagation
3.13
Evaluation Metrics
The core part of building an effective neural network model is evaluating the model
and testing its performance. There are various evaluation metrics, where some popu-
lar ones are selected to evaluate the models carefully with detailed information.
==PAGE:41==
3.13 Evaluation Metrics
34
3.13.1
Confusion Matrix
The confusion matrix 1 is beneficial for measuring Recall (Sensitivity), Precision,
Specificity, and Accuracy. The confusion matrix not only measures the performance
of a predictive model, but also provides some useful information about which classes
are predicted correctly and incorrectly.
3.13.1.1
Sensitivity
The sensitivity is also known as recall, True Positive Rate (TPR), or probability of
detection.
TP
(TP + FN)
(3.6)
3.13.1.2
Precision
TP
(TP + FP)
(3.7)
3.13.1.3
Specificity
TN
(TN + FP)
(3.8)
3.13.1.4
False Positive Rate (FPR)
The FPR is also known as probability of false alarm that is equal with (1 −specificity).
FP
(TN + FP)
(3.9)
3.13.1.5
Accuracy
For classification, a common validation metric is accuracy. It is calculated as:
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(3.10)
where TP - True Positive, TN - True Negative, FP - False Positive, FN - False Neg-
ative. The values of accuracy are between 0 to 1 where 0 is the worst and 1 is the best.
1For the explanations of confusion matrix, please watch my YouTube Machine Learning
Tutorials Channel related to Confusion Matrix: here
==PAGE:42==
3.13 Evaluation Metrics
35
3.13.2
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
In order to evaluate the quality of classification, Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) is a popular evaluation metric that is widely used in medical image analysis
such as automated sub-cortical brain structure segmentation combining spatial and
deep convolutional features [29]. Usually, the TPR is on the y-axis and FPR is on the
x-axis. The ideal points are on the top-left corner of the plot where an FPR rate is
zero, and a TPR rate is one. AUC is the area under the curve that is better to be large
in general. Typically, the ROC curve is used for binary classification tasks, but it is
also possible to use it for multi-class classification tasks, but the multi-class outputs
need to be converted to binary labels. Also, a micro-averaging is a ROC curve that is
considered each element of the label indicator matrix as a binary prediction. A macro-
averaging is another evaluation measure that is used for multi-class classification tasks
that allow equal weight to the classification of each label.
3.13.3
Intersection over Union (IoU)
Intersection over Union is an evaluation metric that measures the extent of two over-
lapping boxes. It uses Jaccard distances [43] and is calculated as:
| A ∩B |
| A ∪B | = Area of overlap
Area of union =
TP
TP + FP + FN
(3.11)
3.13.4
F1-score
The F1 score’s values are from 0 to 1 where 0 is the worst and 1 is the best. It is
calculated as:
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
(3.12)
3.13.5
Matthews Correlation Coeﬀicient (MCC)
The values of Matthews Correlation Coeﬀicient are between −1 and +1, where -1
refers to the absolute opposite correlation between the true label and the predicted
label. Zero is a random result once the predictions are matching. +1 is the value
where every true label and the predicted labels are absolutely matching in positive
correlation. It is calculated as:
(TP × TN) −(FP × FN)
√
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
(3.13)
The MCC metric takes into account all four components of the confusion matrix
where it is well-suited for un-balanced datasets.
The values and plots regarding the training and validation loss, the total accuracy,
training, and validation IoU, mean IoU, F1-score, precision, recall, and MCC are all
available in the following chapter.
==PAGE:43==
3.14 Transfer Learning
36
3.14
Transfer Learning
To avoid training from scratch, save resources and time, and have improved eﬀiciency
when starting training the model, transfer learning technique [52] is used. This tech-
nique is used for the first model which is a model with a combination of 3D-Unet
model and a pre-trained VGG16 as its backbone for extracting the features with the
optimal updated weights for training the model. Transfer learning by using 3D-Unet
model with a pre-trained backbone and ImageNet as encoder weights has already
achieved successes on 3D medical image analysis [56] [10]. This technique allows for a
quick start with optimized weights. It is helpful for the model to extract the features
well and can separate the classes from each other eﬀiciently.
3.15
Self-Training and Improvements of The Manually
Drawn Labels Using CNN Model
The input labels are improved by model’s predicted outputs. Then these outputs are
used as the next input mask into the model for re-train the model. This self-training
technique helps the model to be fed with some better labels to learn the right shapes
of the anatomical features more effectively and eﬀiciently.
In this way, the model is self-trained multiple times. It worked as follows: First,
the 3D-Unet model is trained with manually drawn labels and predicted some good
labels for different classes. Since these predicted labels are much better than the
manual ones, then these predicted labels are used for re-training the model again to
make it able to show its highest performance in predicting each class features correctly.
Figure 3.7 shows an example of the original mask which is drawn manually on the
ITK-SNAP tool and the predicted label by 3D-Unet model which is used as the next
input masks into the model for the next re-training to train the model with better
masks. Especially, self-training is very useful and helps a lot for getting the right
shapes of myelinated axons. As mentioned in Section 2.4.1 manually labeling the
myelinated axons by ITK-SNAP Tool was diﬀicult.
==PAGE:44==
3.16 Quantity analysis of anatomical features
37
Figure 3.7: An example of original mask (manually labelled)
with size (410, 410, 408) with a voxel size 500nm (left),
The improved mask by 3D-Unet with size (384, 384, 384) with a voxel
size 535nm (right).
After self-training is done multiple times on 3D-Unet model without a backbone
and masks are improved then these masks are reused as the input into the 3D-Unet
with VGG16 to improve its predicted labels. The results are illustrated in Section
4.1.7.
3.16
Quantity analysis of anatomical features
Quantity analysis is a procedure of applying statistical modeling to understand the
data better and predict behavior. In this project, some methods such as a principle
axis length, volume, and fractional anisotropy are used to quantify the regions
of interest. The segmented features are quantified to obtain an objective measure-
ment of the visual characteristics. This is necessary because an eﬀicient quantitative
analysis can improve medical care by empowering a more objective interpretation
of anatomical features [24]. In the quantity analysis, the quantity of three different
features is analyzed.
3.16.1
Principal Axis Theorem
Mathematically, a principal axis is a certain line in an Euclidean space which is
related to a hyperboloid or an ellipsoid. The theorem of the principal axis proves
that the principal axes are perpendicular. Indeed, a generalization of the completing
==PAGE:45==
3.16 Quantity analysis of anatomical features
38
the square technique from linear algebra is the principal axis theorem. Completing
the square: convert a quadratic polynomial of the form
ax2 + bx + c
(3.14)
to the form of Eq. 3.15 for some values of h and k.
a(x −h)2 + k
(3.15)
3.16.2
Volume
As it is obvious from the name of the volume, this part measures the volume of each
feature in the brain. The volume is often measured in cubic centimeters whereas, in
this project, it is measured in µm3.
3.16.3
Fractional anisotropy( FA)
It is a scalar value between 0-1 that explains the degree of anisotropy of a diffusion
process. In diffusion imaging, FA is usually used to calculate reflection fiber densities,
myelinations, and axonal diameters in white matter. It is a useful tool for measuring
the connectivity in the brain where it can be obtained from diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) [20].
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This chapter includes some obtained results from 3D-Unet with VGG16, improved
3D-Unet with VGG16, experiments on another data (crossing fibre volume), and
how models perform on it, 3D-Unet (without a backbone), and quantity analysis
of anatomical features. The models are trained on the visual cortex (as the main
data) and all the results shown in this chapter are from visual cortex volume, only
in the Section 4.1.8 the crossing fibre volume is presented and the 3D-Unet model
is trained on it for achieving a new experience and testing the performance of the
model on another similar data.
4.1
Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
This part shows the results and investigations from 3D-Unet with VGG16 and a pre-
trained ImageNet as encoder weights. The center-cropped volume (256, 256, 256) with
(64, 64, 64) small patches with 16 overlapping steps creates 2197 small patches (small-
3D-cube-images with a size (64, 64, 64)) in total, where 1955 of them for training and
245 for validation. A very first model started training on epochs 150 with batch size
5 with (1955 = 391 x 5 (batch size)) training images. In this model, a combination of
dice loss and focal loss with class weights 0.25 for calculating the error and ’ADAM’
optimizer with a learning rate 0.0001 was used. The model obtained the highest vali-
dation accuracy of 94%. Figure 4.1 shows the training and validation loss and IoU.
The loss is decreasing and IoU is increasing desirably as accepted with no overfitting
problem. Since the steps are stable, there is no need to train the model with large
amounts of epochs.
During the training, the model prints out the steps of training loss, Intersection
over Union (IoU) score, F1-score, validation loss, validation IoU, and validation F1-
score from left to right respectively. The last printed steps of the training is available
in Appendix A.3.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
40
Figure 4.1: The training and validation loss (left) and training and validation IoU
(right) with 150 epochs.
But the 3D-Unet model with VGG16 classified the cells and background in the
same class as mentioned in following Section 4.1.1 and illustrated in Figure 4.2.
4.1.1
Misclassification of cells and background
The 3D-Unet model with VGG16 used a center-cropped volume as a training and
validation dataset.
This excluded the background outside the tomographic recon-
struction. To avoid issues with background classification in the entire volume (see
Figure 4.2, left), the data was cropped to include the background and the already-
trained model has trained again on this dataset.
Figure 4.2 shows the background and cells categorized in the same class (the
yellow colors) on the left which is wrong and the right classification after solving the
problem on the right side. The solution for this problem was to upper-left-volumetric
crop the data that includes background outside the tomographic reconstruction and
feed the model with some few examples of this volume (the upper-left-volumetric-
cropped one) and re-train it then the model can recognize the background outside of
the data.
==PAGE:48==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
41
Figure 4.2: Misclassification (left) where cells and background are classified in the
same class. The right classification (right) where the issue is solved and
the model can distinguish the cell class from background class.
4.1.2
The re-trained models results
As mentioned, the first model is the retrained with few examples of upper-left-cropped
volume to solve the misclassification issues and can clearly separate the background
from the cells.
4.1.2.1
Loss and accuracy
Duration of the re-training the model was two hours with a learning rate 0.0001 using
’Adam’ optimizer and the number of epochs equal with 50 with batch size 8. The
model obtained the highest validation accuracy 95%. The validation loss is 0.7594
and the highest validation F1-score is 97%. The exact mean of IoU is 0.9589049.
The last printed steps of the training is available in Appendix A.4.
Figure 4.3 shows the training and validation loss and IoU of re-training of 3D-
Unet with VGG16 model. The loss is decreasing and the steps are stable and IoU is
increasing desirably as accepted. The model has no overfitting problem.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
42
Figure 4.3: The training and validation loss (left) and IoU (right) with 50 epochs.
4.1.2.2
Accuracy of each class separately
The accuracy of each class is printed separately to check how each class performs.
The accuracy for this training are as follows: blood vessels: 99.4%, cells: 97.0%,
myelinated axons: 94.6%, background: 99.8%. The printed accuracy for each class
by model is available in
Appendix A.5. Table 4.1 reports precision, recall, F1-
score and support for each classes of class 0 (background), class 1 (blood vessels),
class 2 (cells), and class 3 (myelinated axons) respectively.
precision
recall
f1-score
support
class 0
1.00
1.00
1.00
57978164
class 1
0.99
0.99
0.99
2266873
class 2
0.97
0.97
0.97
2142238
class 3
0.97
0.95
0.96
752556
accuracy
0.98
63438848
macro avg
0.98
0.98
0.98
63438848
weighted
avg
0.99
0.99
0.99
63438848
Table 4.1:
Classification report of four various classes.
Additionally, the accuracy, macro average 1 , and weighted average 2 is reported.
1A macro-average averages the unweighted mean each class.
2A weighted-average averages the support-weighted mean each class.
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
43
Table 4.2 reports a computed confusion Matrix for the classes to evaluate the
accuracy of the classification where a confusion matrix C is such that Ci,j is equal
to the observations number known to be in group i and predicted to be in group j,
therefore, Ci,i is true positives, Ci,j is false negatives, Cj,i is false positives , Cj,j is
true negatives.
Predicted Classes
Class 0 Class 1 Class 2 Class 3
Actual Classes
Class 0
57884004
11996
22440
55774
Class 1
12547
2254270
14
42
Class 2
40208
20
712266
58
Class 3
64269
41
40
2077799
Table 4.2: Confusion Matrix for four different classes.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
44
4.1.3
Blood vessels
This section analyzes and visualizes blood vessels (class 1) predicted labels by 3D-
Unet model with VGG16 in two and three dimensions.
4.1.3.1
True and predicted labels for blood vessels in 2D
Figure 4.4 illustrates the true and predicted labels of blood vessels from a test set
where the image size is (384, 384, 384). The predicted labels demonstrate that the
model learned the blood vessels completely and is able to fully segment blood vessels
on unseen test data.
Figure 4.4: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) on test data on slice 54 and
154 for blood vessels class by 3D-Unet with VGG16.
A more detailed visualizations of blood vessels on test set is available in Appendix
A.6.
==PAGE:52==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
45
4.1.3.2
True and predicted labels for blood vessels in 3D
Figure 4.5 visualizes the whole volume for blood vessels class in 3D. The left volume
presents the true labels where the right volume presents the predicted labels by 3D-
Unet with VGG16. By comparing the two images carefully, it is obvious that the
predicted labels are more complete than the true labels.
Figure 4.5: True labels (left) and predicted labels (right) of blood vessels class in
3D by 3D-Unet with VGG16. The model demonstrates its success by
fully segmentation of blood vessels class.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
46
4.1.4
Cells
This section visualizes cells (class 2) predicted labels by 3D-Unet with VGG16 model
in two and three dimensions.
4.1.4.1
True and predicted labels for cells in 2D
Figure 4.6 illustrates some visualizations of true and predicted labels on the test
set for cell class on two different slices of 35 and 66 in 2D. The model segments cells
suﬀiciently, but not fully segmented because there are still a few cells that are not
segmented.
Figure 4.6: True labels (left) and predicted labels (right) for cells on test volume
by 3D-Unet with VGG16.
==PAGE:54==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
47
4.1.4.2
True and predicted labels for cells in 3D
Figure 4.7 shows the visualization of the whole volume for cells class in 3D. By
comparing these two 3D volumetric images, it is clearly visible that the model is
able to predict and segment more cells than manually drawn labels. Therefore, it is
concluded that the 3D-Unet model with VGG16 is able to suﬀiciently segment cells.
Figure 4.7: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) of cells in 3D by 3D-Unet
with VGG16. The predicted labels are more than the true labels. Espe-
cially, observing more predicted labels on the test set area is interesting.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
48
4.1.5
Myelinated axons
Class 3 (myelinated axons) predicted labels by 3D-Unet with VGG16 model in 2D
and 3D are analyzed in this part.
4.1.5.1
True and predicted labels for myelinated axons in 2D
Here, some poor examples of predicted labels on the test set for myelinated axons
class by 3D-Unet with VGG16 on various slices are shown on Figure 4.8. The true
labels are on the left sides and predicted labels are on the right sides of the figure.
Even the model predicts labels for this class, but the performance for this class is
low because the model did not feed with some good manually drawn labels to train
and learn. Additionally, the shape of the axons is very narrow in some depth of the
volumetric visual cortex and they are sometimes placed in various directions. This
makes the job even more diﬀicult for the model to successfully predict the labels for
this class.
Figure 4.8: True labels (left) and predicted labels (right) for myelinated axons by
3D-Unet with VGG16 from two different slices.
==PAGE:56==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
49
4.1.5.2
True and predicted labels for myelinated axons in 3D
Figure 4.9 shows the visualization of whole volume for myelinated axons class in 3D.
The performance of the 3D-Unet model with VGG16 for this class is weak, therefore,
the myelinated axon class needs to be improved. The problem can be solved. It is
possible by self-training the model and improving the labels.
Figure 4.9: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) of myelinated axons in 3D
by 3D-Unet with VGG16.
Even the predicted myelinated axons are
smoother shape than the manually drawn labels, but it still needs to be
improved.
4.1.6
Predicted labels for all classes together in 3D
Figure 4.10 shows the predicted labels for all classes in 3D for whole visual cortex
volume by 3D-Unet with VGG16.
The model predicts different features where it
fully segments blood vessels and predicts some cells, but the myelinated axons class
needs to be improved. In this step, the investigations were continuing to improve the
3D-Unet with VGG16 model to be able to predict more cells and improve myelinated
axons.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
50
Figure 4.10: The above three figures show the predicted labels for all classes from
various views in 3D by 3D-Unet model with VGG16 where it starts
from white matter to gray matter. The below two figures show the
predicted labels for all classes from the top in 3D (starts from the gray
matter that involves lots of cells) and predicted labels for all classes
from bottom in 3D (starts from white matter that involves lots of
axons).
==PAGE:58==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
51
4.1.7
Improvements of 3D-Unet with VGG16 model’s results by
self-training
This part shows the results of the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 model by self-
training multiple times to improve masks as explained in Section 3.15.
Here, ’ADAM’ optimizer with a learning rate 0.0001 and the same parameters
(as before) are used. Again, a combination of dice loss and focal loss was used for
calculating the error, but this time class weights are computed for each class. The
3D-Unet with VGG16 model is trained on 80 epochs. The results are very satisfactory.
Firstly, each class is analyzed separately, and later those are shown all together. The
highest validation accuracy is 69% and the F1-score is 70%. Figure 4.11 shows
training and validation loss which is decreasing.
There are a few small spikes in
the validation loss, but it is not a problem because Adam is a stochastic optimizer.
Therefore, the loss value is not necessarily decreasing on every step and as long as the
loss is decreasing overall, it is normal to have some small spikes in the graph. Adding
dropout could remove these spikes, but it is not needed since the spikes are few and
small. The figure also shows training and validation intersection over union. It is
increasing as accepted.
Figure 4.11: Training and validation loss (left), training and validation IoU (right)
by improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 model.
The results of improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 model for each class separately are
illustrated on the following subsections where analysing the image with all possible
different thresholds , its histogram of intensity, median filter on specific layers are
in Appendix A.11 (slice 1), Appendix A.7 (slice 59), Appendix A.15 (slice
112), Appendix A.9 (slice 154), Appendix A.13 (slice 215), and Appendix A.17
(slice 251). Overlay of true labels on predicted labels is in Appendix A.12 (slice
1), Appendix A.8 (slice 59), Appendix A.16 (slice 112), Appendix A.10 (slice
154), Appendix A.14 (slice 215), and Appendix A.18 (slice 251).
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
52
4.1.7.1
Blood vessels
Two random numbers from a test volume are chosen here and the results and con-
fusion matrix overlay and validation metrics comparing predicted label and ground
truth are analyzed. Figure 4.12 illustrates two original images (from slices 59 and
154), their true labels, predicted labels, probability maps, and confusion matrix over-
lay of true labels and predicted labels. A probability map is the predicted probability
of each pixel that belongs to a class. By comparing and analyzing the obtained results
on two various slices and more, it is demonstrated that the improved 3D-Unet with
VGG16 can predict all possible labels for blood vessels class completely and fully seg-
ments this feature successfully. For slice 59, the number of foreground pixels (blood
vessels) is 2352, the number of background pixels are 145104, and validation metrics
comparing the predicted labels and ground truth are accuracy: 0.99, F1-score: 0.94,
and MCC: 0.94. For slice 154, the number of foreground pixels (blood vessels) is
17969, the number of background pixels is 129487, and validation metrics comparing
the predicted labels and ground truth are accuracy: 0.99, F1-score: 0.99, and MCC:
0.99.
Figure 4.12: Image, True label, Predicted label, Probability map, and Confusion
matrix overlay on a mask and predicted labels.
Cyan - True Posi-
tive, Magenta - False Positive, Yellow - False Negative, Black - True
Negative on slice 59 (top) and 154 (bottom).
==PAGE:60==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
53
4.1.7.2
Cells
Two random numbers from a test volume were chosen here and the results and con-
fusion matrix overlay and validation metrics comparing predicted label and ground
truth are analyzed. Figure 4.13 illustrates the original images, true labels, predicted
labels, probability maps, and confusion matrix overlay of true labels and predicted
labels on slices 1 and 215. True positive shows the overlayed true cells with predicted
cells. False positives are the cells that the model predicts more cells, and false nega-
tives are the cells labeled manually, but the model did not predict them. The results
demonstrate that the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 model is able to predict more
cells than the manual labels, but does not fully segment the cell class. This model is
able to learn and predict the cells suﬀiciently. For slice 1, the number of foreground
pixels (cells) is 5127, the number of background pixels is 142329, and validation met-
rics comparing the predicted labels and ground truth are accuracy: 0.97, F1-score:
0.53, and MCC: 0.51. For slice 215, the number of foreground pixels (cells) is 4446,
the number of background pixels is 143010, and validation metrics comparing the
predicted labels and ground truth are accuracy: 0.99, F1-score: 0.86, and MCC: 0.86.
Figure 4.13: Image, True label, Predicted label, Probability map, and confusion
matrix overlay on the mask and predicted labels. Cyan - TP, Magenta
- FP, Yellow - FN, Black - TN on slice 1 and 215.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
54
4.1.7.3
Myelinated axons
Two random number from a test volume which is slices 112 and 251 are chosen here
and the results and confusion matrix overlay and validation metrics comparing pre-
dicted label and ground truth are analyzed.
Figure 4.14 illustrate two original
images, true labels, predicted outputs and overlay of the labels. True positive shows
the overlayed true axons with predicted axons. False-positive are the axons that the
model predicts more axons, and false negative are the axons are labeled manually but
the model did not predict them. The results demonstrate that the improved 3D-Unet
with VGG16 model is able to learn and segment myelinated axons class well and pre-
dict more labels, but it still needs to be fed with good input masks. For slice 112, the
number of foreground pixels (myelinated axons) is 1304, the number of background
pixels is 146152, and validation metrics comparing the predicted labels and ground
truth are accuracy: 0.99, F1-score: 0.59, and MCC: 0.59. For slice 154, the number
of foreground pixels (myelinated axons) is 1341, the number of background pixels is
146115, and validation metrics comparing the predicted labels and ground truth are
accuracy: 0.99, F1-score: 0.76, and MCC: 0.76.
Figure 4.14: Image, True label, Predicted label, Probability map, and Confusion
matrix overlay on mask and predicted labels, Cyan - TP, Magenta -
FP, Yellow - FN, Black - TN on slice 112 and 251.
==PAGE:62==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
55
4.1.7.4
Visualization of myelinated axons in 2D
Figure 4.15 and Figure 4.16 illustrate labels of myelinated axons on two other slices
of 215 and 249 on the ITK-SNAP tool where the left image presents the true labels
and the right side image presents the predicted myelinated axons by the improved
3D-Unet with VGG16. By analyzing these two slices and more, it is concluded that
the model is able to learn the right shape of myelinated axons and predicts those
correctly. But still does not fully segments all possible axons on whole 3D volume.
Figure 4.15: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) in 2D on slice 215
for myelinated axons class by the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16.
Figure 4.16: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) in 2D on slice 249
for myelinated axons class by the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16.
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
56
4.1.7.5
Myelinated axons in 3D
Figure 4.17 illustrates the visualization of the whole volume of myelinated axons in
3D by improved 3D-Unet with VGG16. The predicted edge of axons is more smooth
than the true labels. Also, some more axons are predicted where their shapes are
longer and more correct than the actual ones.
Figure 4.17: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) in 3D
for myelinated axons class by improved 3D-Unet with VGG16.
==PAGE:64==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
57
4.1.7.6
Predicted labels for all classes together in 2D
Figure 4.18 shows the predicted labels for all classes for two different slices by
improved 3D-Unet with VGG16. This figure demonstrates how the model successfully
identifies and segments various anatomical features in the visual cortex.
Figure 4.18: Predicted labels in two different layers
for all classes together class by improved 3D-Unet with VGG16.
4.1.7.7
Predicted labels for all classes together in 3D
Figure 4.19 presents the predicted labels for all classes in 3D for whole visual cortex
volume by improved 3D-Unet with VGG16. The model successfully predicts different
anatomical features in visual cortex. It fully segments blood vessels. It also predicts
cells eﬀiciently and myelinated axons suﬀiciently with their correct shapes.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
58
Figure 4.19: The above three figures show the predicted labels for all classes from a
various views in 3D where it starts from white matter to gray matter.
The below two figures show the predicted labels for all classes from top
in 3D (starts from gray matter that involves lots of cells) and predicted
labels for all classes from bottom in 3D (starts from white matter that
involves lots of axons).
==PAGE:66==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
59
4.1.8
Experiments and results on another dataset (crossing fibre)
The image (”s1-epon-100nm-r1-DS5-GaussKernel5.nii”) is downsampled by a factor
of 5 from an original voxel size of 100nm to 500nm. The crossing fibre data includes
lots of axons that already manually labeled of 58 axons from this region in ”crossing-
pixIdx-segmentation-DS5.nii” file. The minimum value of the data is −106 and the
maximum value of the data is 53. The data type is ′float64′. Figure 4.20 shows an
original image (left) on a slice and its mask. The labeling is done sparsely. Figure
4.21 presents histogram of crossing fibre where the most common value 0.07 belongs
to the background outside the tomographic reconstruction.
Figure 4.20: The data and its mask from left to right respectively.
Figure 4.21: Histogram of crossing fibre.
==PAGE:67==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
60
4.1.8.1
Binary semantic segmentation
The built 3D-Unet model, as it is explained in Section 3.5 is trained on crossing
fibre data to experience how it performs on another data with a different region (but
almost similar). Since the data is binary segmented and it has two different classes of
background and axons, therefore, the binary semantic segmentation task is considered
in this case. Before training, firstly, the data and its mask are center-cropped with a
size of (288, 288, 288) and patch size (64, 64, 64) with step 32. The number of input
channels is 1. The ’Softmax’ activation function is used at the end of the model in
order to predict two binary classes of zero (background) or one (myelinated axons).
The model start training from scratch where an ’Adam’ optimizer with a learning
rate 0.0001 is applied for optimizing and updating the weights during the training in
the back-propagation step. The model trained 4:40:00 hours, with number of epochs
equal with 50, and the batch size is equal to 5 on 245 validation set. The model
achieved a highest validation accuracy of 99%. The last steps of the model’s training
is in Appendix A.19. The computed class weights for this data is as follow for
background (class 0) and myelinated axons (class 1):
Class 0: 0.5171919702003037, class 1: 15.041672483563447
4.1.8.2
Binary Cross Entropy Loss
Since the task is binary here, then a binary cross-entropy is chosen as a loss function.
It produces a criterion that computes the binary cross-entropy between the ground
truth (gt) and the predicted labels (pr). It is calculated in Eq. 4.1:
L(gt, pr) = −gt · log(pr) −(1 −gt) · log(1 −pr)
(4.1)
Figure 4.22 shows the training and validation loss and IoU. Both of plots are
very smooth with no spikes in them.
Figure 4.22: The training and validation loss and IoU by 3D-Unet model.
==PAGE:68==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
61
4.1.8.3
Visualization of true labels and predicted labels in 2D
Figure 4.23 illustrates the true labels (left) and the predicted labels (right) by
3D-Unet model on test data. The results prove that how 3D-Unet model is able to
successfully learn myelinated axons and almost fully segments this anatomical feature
in the crossing fibre data.
Figure 4.23: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) on test data on slice 2
and 20 for axons class by 3D-Unet model on the crossing fibre data.
==PAGE:69==
4.1 Results from 3D-Unet with VGG16
62
4.1.8.4
Visualization of predicted labels of myelinated axons in 3D
Figure 4.24 visualizes the predicted labels of myelinates axon in 3D. It demonstrates
how the 3D-Unet model is able to successfully predict myelinated axons and fully
segment this anatomical feature in the crossing fibre data.
Figure 4.24: Full segmentation of myelinated axons from different views, predicted
by 3D-Unet model in the crossing fibre data.
==PAGE:70==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
63
4.2
Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
This part shows the results from 3D-Unet (with no pre-trained VGG16 model as a
backbone, no pre-trained pre-processing, and no ImageNet as encoder weights). There
is no processing on the predicted labels such as noise reduction, no removed blobs, and
dust, nor morphology such as opening, closing, dilation, erosion on the shown images
to prove the ability and power of the model in predicting different labels clearly and
their shape and positions correctly.
4.2.1
The model’s results:
The model is trained for 5 hours with the same number of training and validation sets
as before with the center cropped image with a number of epochs 70 using ’ADAM’
optimizer with learning rate = 0.00001 where the input shape is (patch size, patch
size, patch size, channels) =(64, 64, 64, 1) to predict 4 different classes of background,
blood vessels, cells, and myelinated axons. The computed class weights for each class
is as follow:
class 0: 0.26830417949507634, class 1: 5.844844906427738,
class 2: 10.79654041521119, class 3: 109.00629899431705
4.2.2
Training/ validation loss and IoU
Multi-class Cross Entropy is used to compute the loss function. Figure 4.25 shows
the results of training and validation loss. The values of loss are stable and decreasing
very well. It also shows the Intersection over Union (IoU) where the values of the
accuracy of increasing but they are a little bit spiky.
Figure 4.25: The training and validation loss/ IoU by 3D-Unet model.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
64
4.2.3
Blood vessels
This section analyzes and visualizes blood vessels (class 1) predicted labels by 3D-
Unet model in two and three dimensions.
4.2.3.1
True and predicted labels for blood vessels in 2D
Figure 4.26 illustrates the true and predicted labels of blood vessels from a test set
where the image size is (384, 384, 384). The predicted labels demonstrate that the
model learned the blood vessels completely and is able to fully segment blood vessels
on unseen test data.
Figure 4.26: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) on test data on slice 20
and 174 for blood vessels class by 3D-Unet model.
Overlapping the true and predicted labels for blood vessels on slice 174 visualized
using ’Nilearn’ tool is available in Appendix A.20 and extra visualizations of
predicted blood vessels labels by 3D-Unet model are available in Appendix A.21.
==PAGE:72==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
65
4.2.3.2
Analysing the blood vessels feature on two specific layers
Two random numbers from a test volume are chosen and the results and confusion
matrix overlay and validation metrics comparing predicted label and ground truth
are analyzed. Figure 4.27 illustrates two original images, their true labels, predicted
labels, probability maps, and confusion matrix overlay of true labels and predicted
labels (on two different slices 59 and 154). By comparing and analyzing the obtained
results on two various slices and more, it is demonstrated that the 3D-Unet model
can predict all possible labels for blood vessels class completely and fully segments
this feature successfully. For slice 59, the number of foreground pixels (blood vessels)
is 2031, the number of background pixels is 145425, and validation metrics comparing
the predicted labels and ground truth are accuracy: 0.99, F1-score: 0.87, and MCC:
0.87. For slice 154, the number of foreground pixels (blood vessels) is 17928, the num-
ber of background pixels is 129528, and validation metrics comparing the predicted
labels and ground truth are accuracy: 0.99, F1-score: 0.99, and MCC: 0.99.
Figure 4.27: Image, True label, Predicted label, Probability map, and Confusion
matrix overlay on the mask and predicted labels by the 3D-Unet model.
Cyan - True Positive, Magenta - False Positive, Yellow - False Negative,
Black - True Negative on slices 59 and 154.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
66
4.2.3.3
True and predicted labels for blood vessels class in 3D
Figure 4.28 visualizes the whole volume of visual cortex for blood vessels class in
3D by the 3D-Unet model. As mentioned before and by comparing the true labels,
predicted labels and analyzing the results carefully, it is proved that the model is able
to fully segment blood vessels.
Figure 4.28: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) of blood vessels in 3D by
3D-Unet model.
==PAGE:74==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
67
4.2.4
Cells
This section visualizes cells (class 2) predicted labels by 3D-Unet model in 2D and
3D.
4.2.4.1
True and predicted labels for Cells in 2D
Figure 4.29 illustrates some visualizations of the true and predicted labels on the
test set for cell class on two different slices of 67 and 215 in 2D. The 3D-Unet model
segments cells very well. It is able to learn the shape of cells and correctly segment
them.
Figure 4.29: True label (top-left) and predicted labels (top-right) on test data on
slice 67. An original image for comparing the true labels with predicted
labels (down-left), its true label (down-middle), and its predicted la-
bels by the 3D-Unet model (down-right) on slice 215 for cells class.
Overlapping the true labels and predicted labels for cells on slices 27 and 215 visu-
alized using ’Nilearn’ tool are available in Appendix A.26 and Appendix A.27.
Some more detailed predicted labels for cells by 3D-Unet model are in appendix
A.28
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
68
4.2.4.2
Analysing the cell features on two specific layers
Two random numbers from a test volume are chosen and the results are analyzed
carefully. Figure 4.30 presents two different images from slices 67 and 221, their
true labels, predicted labels, probability maps, and confusion matrix overlay of true
labels and predicted labels. True positive shows the overlayed true cells with pre-
dicted cells.
False positives are the cells that the model predicts more cells, and
false negatives are the cells that are labeled manually, but the model did not predict
them. By comparing and analyzing the obtained results on these slices and more, it is
demonstrated that the 3D-Unet can identify, predict labels and segments many cells
successfully. For slice 67, the number of foreground pixels (cells) is 5259, the number
of background pixels is 142197, and validation metrics comparing the predicted labels
and ground truth are accuracy: 0.96, F1-score: 0.53, and MCC: 0.52. For slice 221,
the number of foreground pixels (cells) is 4007, the number of background pixels is
143449, and validation metrics comparing the predicted labels and ground truth are:
accuracy: 0.97, F1-score: 0.64, and MCC: 0.64.
Figure 4.30: Image, True label, Predicted label, Probability map, and Confusion
matrix overlay on the mask and predicted labels by the 3D-Unet model.
Cyan - TP, Magenta - FP, Yellow - FN, Black - TN on slices 67 and
221.
==PAGE:76==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
69
4.2.4.3
True labels and predicted labels for Cells class in 3D
Figure 4.31 shows the visualization of the whole volume for cells class in 3D. Test
volumes are almost free from manually drawn labels (the true labels). By comparing
these two 3D volumetric images, it can be concluded that the 3D-Unet model is able
to almost fully segment cells successfully.
Figure 4.31: True label (left) and completely predicted labels (right) of cells in 3D
by 3D-Unet model.
==PAGE:77==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
70
4.2.5
Myelinated axons
This section visualizes and analyzes myelinated axons (class 3) predicted labels by
3D-Unet model in 2D and 3D.
4.2.5.1
True labels and predicted labels of myelinated axons in 2D
Figure 4.32 shows the visualization of myelinated axons class in 2D by 3D-Unet
model on ITK-SNAP tool. The predicted labels are connected and smoother than
the manually drawn labels. The model can identify some more myelinated axons but
it needs to identify more.
Figure 4.32: True label (left) and predicted labels (right) in 2D on slice 247
for myelinated axons class by 3D-Unet model.
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds, its histogram of inten-
sity, median filter on two specific layers is in, slice 67 Appendix A.29, slice 221
Appendix A.31, and slice 250 Appendix A.33, and overlay of true labels on pre-
dicted labels for cells class is in Appendix A.30 for slice 67 and Appendix A.32
for slice 221, and Appendix A.34 for slice 250.
==PAGE:78==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
71
4.2.5.2
Analysing myelinated axons features on a specific layer
A random number from training and test volume which is slice 250 is chosen. The
results and confusion matrix overlay and validation metrics comparing predicted label
and ground truth are analyzed. Figure 4.33 shows an example of axons on a slice
and how the true labels and predicted labels overlay on top of each other. For slice
250, the number of foreground pixels (myelinated axons) are 1189, the number of
background pixels are 146267 and validation metrics comparing the predicted labels
and ground truth are: accuracy: 0.99, F1-score: 0.92, and MCC: 0.92.
Figure 4.33: Image, True label, Predicted label, and Probability map and Confusion
matrix overlay on mask and predicted labels.
Cyan - TP, Magenta - FP, Yellow - FN, Black - TN on slice 250.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
72
4.2.5.3
True labels and predicted labels of myelinated axons in 3D
Figure 4.34 shows the visualization of whole volume for myelinated axons class in
3D by 3D-Unet model. The performance of the model for this class is acceptable.
The shape of the axons is very narrow in some layers and the model learned the right
shape of myelinated axons. But it still does not fully segment this class on the whole
volume.
Figure 4.34:
True label (left) and predicted labels (right) of myelinated axons in
3D by 3D-Unet model.
==PAGE:80==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
73
4.2.6
All classes together in 2D
Figure 4.35 shows the predicted labels for all classes for two different slices by 3D-
Unet model. This figure demonstrates how the model is successful in identifying and
segmenting various anatomical features in the visual cortex data.
Figure 4.35: Predicted labels on two different slices for all classes together class by
3D-Unet model.
4.2.7
All classes together in 3D
Figure 4.36 shows the predicted labels for all classes in 3D for whole visual cortex
volume by 3D-Unet model. The model successfully predicts different features.
It
fully segments blood vessels and successfully predicts labels for cells class. It also
acceptably predicts myelinated axons with their correct shapes.
==PAGE:81==
4.2 Results from 3D-Unet without VGG16
74
Figure 4.36: The above three figures show the predicted labels for all classes from
a various views in 3D by 3D-Unet model where it starts from white
matter to gray matter. The below two figures show the predicted labels
for all classes from top in 3D (starts from gray matter that involves
lots of cells) and predicted labels for all classes from bottom in 3D
(starts from white matter that involves lots of axons).
==PAGE:82==
4.3 Evaluation of the performance of models by using ROC curve
75
4.3
Evaluation of the performance of models by using
ROC curve
The performance of two different models, the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 and
the 3D-Unet model, are evaluated. In Figure 4.37, both plots are showing ROC
curves for improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (left) and 3D-Unet (right).
Each plot
includes ROC curves of micro-average, class 0 (background), class 1 (blood vessels),
class 2 (cells), and class 3 (myelinated axons) respectively. The multi-class labels are
binarized using one-hot-encoding. Also, the values of ROC-AUC scores are for:
• 3D-Unet with VGG16 model (improved): 0.861102 (macro) and 0.921935 (weighted
by prevalence)
• 3D-Unet model: 0.913145 (macro) and 0.972998 (weighted by prevalence)
As mentioned before, in general, the ideal ROC curve is the one when the values
of TPR maximize to become one and the values of FPR minimize to become zero.
Here, both plots indicate that the performances of both models are very good. But by
comparing these two models with details specifically and their graphs and values for
each class carefully, it is concluded that the 3D-Unet model performs the best in this
project. This model can segments blood vessels fully, cells (almost) completely, and
myelinated axons suﬀiciently. Myelinated axons has not obtained its fully optimal
segmentation yet.
Figure 4.37: ROC curve to multi-class for
(improved) 3D-Unet with VGG16 (left) and 3D-Unet model (right).
==PAGE:83==
4.4 Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical features
76
4.4
Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical
features
In this part, the quantity of three different features on three different models (3D-Unet
with VGG16, improved 3D-Unet with VGG16, 3D-Unet with no backbone) is ana-
lyzed where includes a principle axis length, volume, and fractional anisotropy.
4.4.1
Blood vessels quantity analysis from three different models
4.4.1.1
The principle axis length for blood vessels class
Figure 4.38 shows the principle axis length histogram for blood vessels class for
three models as mentioned before. The plots are almost similar since all three models
are very successful in predicting and fully segmenting the blood vessels. By analyzing
the principle axis length in a plot, it is seen that some of the blood vessels have the
same principle axis length.
Figure 4.38: The principle axis length for blood vessels from three different models
(3D-Unet with VGG16 (left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (mid-
dle), 3D-Unet with no backbone (right).
4.4.1.2
Volume for blood vessels class
Figure 4.39 shows the volume histogram in µm3 × 105 for blood vessels class for
three differet models. Again the plots are almost the same and difference is minor.
==PAGE:84==
4.4 Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical features
77
Figure 4.39: The volume for blood vessels from three different models (3D-Unet
with VGG16 (left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (middle), 3D-Unet
with no backbone (right).
4.4.1.3
Fractional anisotropy for blood vessels class
Figure 4.40 shows the fractional anisotropy histogram for blood vessels class for
three models. The plots related to this part illustrates that there are not high con-
nectivity in the feature.
Figure 4.40: The fractional anisotropy for blood vessels from three different models
(3D-Unet with VGG16 (left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (mid-
dle), 3D-Unet with no backbone (right).
In the comparison of the blood vessels features quantity analysis with other fea-
tures such as cells and myelinated axons, this feature has the lowest principle axis
length and volume.
==PAGE:85==
4.4 Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical features
78
4.4.2
Cells quantity analysis from three different models
4.4.2.1
Principle axis length for cell class
Figure 4.41 shows the principle axis length histogram for cells class for three models.
By comparing this features principle axis length with some other features such as
blood vessels and myelinated axon, it is observed that cells have a higher principle
axis than the two other features. Also, by comparing the principle axis length for
cells from three different models, it is observed that the last model (3D-Unet with no
backbone) has a higher and wider principle axis length than the two other ones.
Figure 4.41: The principle axis length for cells from three different models (3D-Unet
with VGG16 (left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (middle), 3D-Unet
with no backbone (right).
4.4.2.2
Volume for cell class
Figure 4.42 shows the volume histogram in µm3 ×105 for cell class for three models.
Again, by comparing this feature’s volume with some other features such as blood
vessels and myelinated axons’ volume, it is observed that cells have more volumes
than the other features. Also, by comparing the volumes for cells from three different
models, it is observed that the two models (the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 and
the 3D-Unet with no backbone) have higher volumes than the first model (3D-Unet
with VGG16). But the 3D-Unet with no backbone is the best one.
==PAGE:86==
4.4 Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical features
79
Figure 4.42: The volume for cells from three different models (3D-Unet with VGG16
(left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (middle), 3D-Unet with no back-
bone (right).
4.4.2.3
Fractional anisotropy for cell class for three models
Figure 4.43 shows the fractional anisotropy for cell class for three models.
By
comparing cell features’ FA with some other features’ FA such as blood vessels and
myelinated axons, it is observed that cells have more fractional anisotropy than the
others. By comparing the fractional anisotropy for cells from three different models,
it is observed that the two models (the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 and the 3D-
Unet with no backbone) have more and higher fractional anisotropy than the 3D-Unet
with VGG16 model. Also, the 3D-Unet with no backbone model is even better than
the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 model.
Figure 4.43: The fractional anisotropy for cells from three different models (3D-
Unet with VGG16 (left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (middle),
3D-Unet with no backbone (right).
==PAGE:87==
4.4 Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical features
80
Demonstrations of why cells have some higher eigenvalues
The reason why the cells have higher eigenvalues is that because the detected cells
are very close to each other and sometimes become connected in the predicted labels
as it is illustrated with a red line in Figure 4.44.
Figure 4.44: An examples of cells that are sticking to each other.
4.4.3
Myelinated axons quantity analysis from three different
models
As mentioned before, the first model did not feed with some nice manually labeled
input masks. Therefore, the predicted labels for myelinated axons were very noisy
and their shapes were not good enough. Hence, the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16
and 3D-Unet models’ quantities are analyzed here.
4.4.3.1
Principle axis length for axons class
Figure 4.45 shows the principle axis length histogram for myelinated axons class for
three models. By comparing the principle axis length for axons from two different
models (the improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 and the 3D-Unet with no backbone), it
is observed that the 3D-Unet with no backbone has a higher principle axis length
than the improved one.
==PAGE:88==
4.4 Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical features
81
Figure 4.45: The principle axis length for axons from three different models (3D-
Unet with VGG16 (left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (middle),
3D-Unet with no backbone (right).
4.4.3.2
Volume for axons class
Figure 4.46 shows the volume histogram in µm3 ×105 for axons class for three mod-
els. With comparing the volumes for axon from two different models, it is observed
that the last model (3D-Unet) has higher volume than the second model (improved).
Figure 4.46: The volume for axons from three different models (3D-Unet with
VGG16 (left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (middle), 3D-Unet with
no backbone (right).
4.4.3.3
Fractional anisotropy for axons class
Figure 4.47 shows the fractional anisotropy for axons class for three models. By
comparing the fractional anisotropy for axons from two different models, it is observed
==PAGE:89==
4.4 Quantity analysis of segmented anatomical features
82
that again the last model has higher fractional anisotropy than the second model.
Figure 4.47: The fractional anisotropy for axons from three different models (3D-
Unet with VGG16 (left), improved 3D-Unet with VGG16 (middle),
3D-Unet with no backbone (right).
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter, some of the findings and their importance are discussed, but there
are more which is explained in the previous chapters.
The developed 3D-Unet models for this project demonstrate their power for the
segmentation of anatomical features in the cortex on 3D synchrotron data. They
show their high ability to learn complex non-linear mappings between the input im-
age and segmentation. Those are not only succeeded in predicting the features on
3D visual cortex volume but also proved their high performance and robustness on
crossing fibre data by fully segmentation of myelinated axons. The developed 3D-
Unet model’s architectures for this project differ from the original U-Net model and
it has specifically developed for this project, but have some common properties such
as the same activation functions as the original one. Selecting some well-known hyper-
parameters carefully, ’ADAM’ optimizer with an adequate learning rate, ’ReLU’ as
activation function, and enough number of epochs for training the model affected
the performance of the models directly. It allowed the model achieves some excellent
segmentation results that will be used for analyzing different brain diseases (read the
following paragraph).
Creating new 3D insights into brain anatomy to map normal features and pathol-
ogy underlying neurodegenerative and inflammatory diseases. Such diseases Multiple
Sclerosis, Alzheimer Disease, etc. attack cell bodies in the cortex which are linked
to the axons in the brain network or vice versa. Hence, with time both cytoarchi-
tecture and brain connectomics will change. This will impact the information flow
between functional brain regions and result in behavioral and cognitive deficiencies
in patients. MRI in combination with biophysical models can detect many of these
microstructural changes, but due to its low image resolution it lacks specificity why
it still has not reached its full potential as a diagnostic tool [3] [15] [30]. However,
if we combine MRI with feature segmentations of ultra-high-resolution synchrotron
data using deep-learning methods, we can increase the specificity of clinical MRI to
detect pathology. Therefore, this project’s output segmentation results of the brain
cortex and analyzed cortical layers which is correlated with changes observed in other
imaging modalities such as non-invasively with MRI will be used.
==PAGE:91==
5 Discussion
84
Starting to use the ITK-SNAP tool for the first time and how the anatomical
features can be drawn/visualize in it, spending time and having some challenges with
drawing myelinated axons in it was a good and interesting experience. In the begin-
ning, making automatically cubic forms problem in the cell’s class by the tool gave
some worries that the models do not learn the right shapes of cells, but the models
learned the correct shapes of cells quickly. Generally, the ITK-SNAP tool works ex-
cellently for the features that have the same intensity in all areas inside of the feature.
But it works worse for the features that have various intensities in their areas. Espe-
cially, for ones that have diverse gray areas with surrounding by black color such as
myelinated axons. The ITK-SNAP tool is the most current and advanced available
tool for drawing the labels manually until now, but it has some limitations. It could
be excellent if it could be able to recognize all possible features shapes while drawing
them on the tool. For instance, if it did not produce cubic forms on the next layer of
the image (next step where it goes to the second, third, etc. slice in the z-axis) for
cells and did not spread the color out in the myelinated axons. Self-training was also
another technique that was very useful to improve our input masks.
One of the best discoveries in this project was the catastrophic interference. It is
also known as catastrophic forgetting. In this project, we figured out that our first
model (3D-Unet with vgg16) is unable to learn multiple tasks sequentially and it
faces catastrophic forgetting. Unlike humans, artificial neural networks can not learn
multiple tasks sequentially [28]. Since the manually labeled myelinated axons were
not good enough and optimal in the data, it is decided to use another data (crossing
fibre volume) to make the model able to learn the correct shapes of axons. This
data was easily labeled before where it has two binary classes of background or axons.
Labeling this data manually was easy on the ITK-SNAP tool because the intensity of
the axons was very clear in the volume. Also, the shape and other properties of axons
are very visible in it. After the first training of the 3D-Unet with VGG16 model is
done and saved, the next step was to re-train the model with the crossing fibre data,
but we found that the model was facing catastrophic forgetting. Catastrophic forget-
ting is a trend that the neural network model abruptly or completely forgets about
the previously learned tasks upon learning a new task. The reason why catastrophic
forgetting happens is that the optimizer gets more eﬀicient and the model tries to
fit new data quickly and eﬀiciently to learn a new task and it almost forgets about
previously learned information. When we re-trained the model with the crossing fi-
bre data, it learned the myelinated axons well but forgot about other classes such
as blood vessels and cells. Here, not only the model and optimizer try to get more
eﬀicient to learn the new task and forget about the previous tasks. Using another
data with different properties was also another cause of the problem. The solution
for this problem was to protect the weights every time. The model is trained and its
weights saved for the other re-trainings.
The models were successful in predicting the labels with almost free of noises.
Therefore, it was not needed to use some image analysis processing techniques such
==PAGE:92==
5 Discussion
85
as removing dust, erosion, and dilation on the predicted labels. In the visual cortex,
the cells are hidden in some layers of the z-axis and by scrawling the data up and
down on the z-axis, those are appearing and disappearing on various slices. There-
fore, when the model predicts the labels for this class, the predicted labels in some
layers seem like noises even those are not noise. Also, the developed models were
never faced with overlapping patches issues. Overlapping patches issues commonly
happen on segmentation models when the volumes are divided into small overlapping
patches. When the model starts predicting the labels, it produces overlapping squares
(noises). Our models predicted the labels very well and were never faced with these
overlapping issues.
In the beginning, using the transfer learning technique helped to save time and al-
low for a quick start without overfitting or underfitting problem. Applying ImageNet
as encoder weights and a pre-trained VGG16 model was good for transfer learning
on medical images [57]. It was useful for feature extracting because it increased the
inference speed and led to accurate results with a high-performance model. But some
previously done pre-processing such as standardization and multi-scaling and using
RGB channels does not allow us to fully control the pre-trained model and change
its parameters as we want. Therefore, even the performance of the 3D-Unet with
VGG16 model is much higher than the 3D-Unet without a backbone, but it can not
predict more anatomical features as the 3D-Unet without a backbone does.
Working with large volumetric images, even they were down-sampled, needed lots
of computational powers to train the models. During the training, we got memory er-
rors multiple times. But DTU’s HPC supported this project with their most advance
and the best possible GPUs to make the models able to train on A100-GPUs1 with
40GB of memory.
We had un-balanced datasets where the weights of the features vary on the vol-
umes.
Therefore, it was very important to compute each class weight to give all
im-balanced classes having equal importance in the volumetric datasets. In the 3D-
Unet with VGG16, the values of class weights for every class are set 0.25. But in the
improved 3D-Unet with VGG16, these class weights were computed and each class
had its unique and suitable weight. This highly affected the performance of the model
in predicting more anatomical features and improved it.
By analyzing the quantities of features from the models, it is demonstrated how
features are predicted and their principle axis lengths, volumes, and fractional anisotropies
are analyzed on three different models. The results indicated how the 3D-Unet model
was the most successful among the models in predicting and segmenting these anatom-
ical features.
1A100 with the Ampere Architecture
==PAGE:93==
5 Discussion
86
Also, the performance of the models and each class are evaluated carefully by
using the ROC curve. Both plots had very high TPRs. The obtained results proved
that the performance of the 3D-Unet model was the best in this project. This model
is able to predict labels very well as explained in the results. There are also other
advanced techniques such as controversial stimuli 2 for comparing and distinction of
the models. A controversial stimulus [19] is a useful method that can elicit distinct
responses between two or more models based on an input image as sensory input.
This is beneficial and gives us a great power to be able to adjudicate among the Deep
Neural Network (DNN) models by gathering human responses to stimuli that are
controversial among the two models. The human responses are assured to produce
evidence against at least one of the DNN models. Because they cannot agree with
both models. This is possible with calculating a controversial score. If the models
strongly disagree on the contents of the sensory input then the score will be high.
If the models are disagreeing then at least one of the models is wrong. The idea is
shown more clearly by calculating the controversial score in Eq. 5.1. Let UA and
UB be two developed different U-Net models for segmentation of two different classes.
Consider ya be axon class and yb be blood vessel class in a medical image x. Then
the image x will be assigned with a high controversiality score, if it is recognized by
model UA as class ya and by model UB as class yb. Then at least one of the models
will be wrong. The controversial score is a minimum function between the estimated
conditional probability that the input image contains a feature of a class according to
a model ( ˆPUA(ya | x)), and the estimated conditional probability that the input image
contains another feature of another class according to another model ( ˆPUB(yb | x)).
It is as follows:
Cya,yb
UA,UB(x) = min{ ˆPUA(ya | x), ˆPUB(yb | x)},
(5.1)
where min is the minimum function. This function assumes that a model can not be
assigned high probabilities to both class ya and class yb in the same image simultane-
ously. In this project, we have all predicted probability maps for each class available
from different models. Therefore, we can estimate the probabilities of the classes
conditional to the image for each model and calculate the minimum function of them
to obtain the controversial score.
It is also considered to perform a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) in this
project. The model will consist of two parts, the generator, and the discriminator.
The generative part is the developed Vox2Vox 3D-Unet model and the discriminator
part will explain how the generated segmentation of the anatomical features looks
realistic i.e. like manually drawn segmentation [12]. The architecture of the model is
shown in Appendix A.35.
2For the explanations of controversial stimuli [19], please watch Conference on Cognitive
Computational Neuroscience: here
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this project, the presented 3D models for the automatic segmentation of microstruc-
tural features in the cortex prove their strong abilities in learning the right shapes and
the exact positions of each feature in different classes and predicting labels. Addition-
ally, achieving accurate segmentation results on 3D synchrotron data from a vervet
monkey brain imaged using Nano X-Ray Holotomography is excellent. It was also
extremely important to feed the model with the right examples of the training labels
to allow the model to learn the features better. The project also shows the power of
the CNN models in learning features to predict more labels successfully on the whole
volume. Because labeling the whole volume manually is very time-consuming and
diﬀicult even the labels are drawn sparsely. Also, the developed models show their
robustness and success on another dataset (crossing fibre volume) and obtain high
accuracy with full segmentation of myelinated axons. By comparing visual cortex
volume with crossing fibre volume, we conclude that visual cortex volume is noisy
and one of the most challenging data than the other datasets. Using the transfer
learning approach, also some suitable parameters, and techniques such as smart 3D
data augmentations, batch normalization helped the models never face overfitting
and underfitting from the beginning until the end, which is annoying and commonly
happens in machine learning and deep learning tasks very often. By comparison of
the obtained results, it is concluded that the 3D-Unet model is the best.
6.1
Future work
Since the shape and directions of myelinated axons are varying in visual cortex vol-
ume, it was a diﬀicult task to model to fully segment all the possible myelinated
axons in the whole volume. The model needs to continue self-training multiple times
in a longer period of time to improve the shape of predicted labels for the myelinated
axons class and then predict every possible feature in this class.
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
The appendix consists of some extra works and analyzes in more details, such as some
extra predicted outputs of training the models. Also, the predicted labels are visual-
ized in a different way using a new medical visualization tool (Nilearn). Analyzing
some specific slices’ thresholds on the visual cortex volume and many more.
==PAGE:96==
A.1 Lobes of the Brain and What They Control
89
A.1
Lobes of the Brain and What They Control
In the cerebrum part, each hemisphere of the brain is divided to four different parts.
Theses parts are called frontal lobe, parietal lobe, temporal lobe and occipital lobe.
Every lobe is responsible for a particular function [53].
The cerebrum is approximately involved of 77% of the central nervous system.
The total percentage of the human cerebral volume are as follow in TableA.1 based
on [54]:
Frontal lobe
41%
Temporal lobe
22%
Parietal lobe
19 %
Occipital
18%
Table A.1: Brain lobes (left) [53] and Statistical percentage of the cerebral cortex
volume (right).
• Frontal lobe is placed in front of the head.
This lobe is the largest lobe
of the brain which controls making decisions, moving, and characterising the
personality. Smell recognition is also an additional responsibility of the frontal
lobe. The ability of speech is controlled by the Broca’s area that is located in
the frontal lobe.
• Parietal lobe is placed in the middle of the head. Recognising objects and
understanding spatial relationships are some responsibilities of the partial lobe.
This lobe also controls touch and pain in the body. Understanding the spoken
language is controlled by Wernicke’s area that is located in the partial lobe.
• Temporal lobe is placed in the sides of the head that controls speech, short-
term memory, rhythm of the musics, and several degree of the recognition of
the smell.
• occipital lobe
is placed in the back of the head that is responsible for the
vision. [53]
==PAGE:97==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
90
A.2
Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with
VGG16 backbone
A.2.1
Results of the predicted labels for per class in 2D
Figure A.1: Blood vessels(left) and myelinated axons(right).
Figure A.2: Background(left) and Cell clusters(right).
Figure A.1 shows the predicted labels for blood vessels and myelinated axons
in 2D from left to right respectively.
Figure A.2 shows the predicted labels for
background and cell clusters in 2D from left to right respectively.
==PAGE:98==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
91
A.2.2
The last steps of very first training
Figure A.3 shows the last steps of the model’s training. During the training the
model prints out the steps of training loss, Intersection over Union( IoU) score, F1-
score, validation loss, validation IoU, and validation f1 score from left to right respec-
tively.
Figure A.3: The last steps of a very first training of the 3D-Unet with VGG16
model.
A.2.3
The last steps of re-training
Figure A.4 shows the last steps of the model’s training.
Figure A.4: The last steps of training of the 3D-Unet with VGG16 model.
==PAGE:99==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
92
A.2.4
Accuracy of each class separately
Figure A.5: The accuracy of each class separately.
==PAGE:100==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
93
A.2.4.1
A more detailed visualization/analysis of blood vessels on test set by
3D-Unet with VGG16 model
Figure A.6 illustrates some more visualization of true and predicted labels on test set
for blood vessels class on four different slices 22, 44, 341, 367 in 2D from grey matter
(two top) to white matter (two bottom) respectively. The results proof that the 3D-
Unet with VGG16 model is able to predict labels for blood vessels class completely
and fully segment this class.
Figure A.6: Four different slices of True labels (left image) and Predicted labels
(right image) on test set by 3D-Unet with VGG16.
==PAGE:101==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
94
A.2.4.2
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its histogram
of intensity, median filter on a slice 59
Figure A.7: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:102==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
95
A.2.4.3
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.8: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for blood vessels class.
==PAGE:103==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
96
A.2.4.4
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its histogram
of intensity, median filter on a slice 154
Figure A.9: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:104==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
97
A.2.4.5
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.10: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for blood vessels class.
==PAGE:105==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
98
A.2.4.6
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its histogram
of intensity, median filter on a slice 1
Figure A.11: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:106==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
99
A.2.4.7
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.12: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for cells class.
==PAGE:107==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
100
A.2.4.8
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its histogram
of intensity, median filter on a slice 215
Figure A.13: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:108==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
101
A.2.4.9
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.14: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for cells class.
==PAGE:109==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
102
A.2.4.10
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its histogram
of intensity, median filter on a slice 112
Figure A.15: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:110==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
103
A.2.4.11
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.16: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for axon class.
==PAGE:111==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
104
A.2.4.12
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its histogram
of intensity, median filter on a slice 251
Figure A.17: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:112==
A.2 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with VGG16 backbone
105
A.2.4.13
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.18: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for axon class.
==PAGE:113==
A.3 Results from 3D-Unet on another data (crossing fibre volume)
106
A.3
Results from 3D-Unet on another data (crossing
fibre volume)
Figure A.19: The last steps of training of 3D-Unet model on crossing fibre data.
A.4
Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no
VGG16 backbone
A.4.1
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.20 shows true labels of blood vessels (first row), predicted labels (second
row), and how true labels and predicted labels are overlapping on top of each other
(third row). Since the 3D-Unet model is able to fully segment the blood vessels class,
therefore, the true and predicted labels are almost fully overlap.
==PAGE:114==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
107
Figure A.20: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for blood vessels class by 3D-Unet.
==PAGE:115==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
108
A.4.2
Predicted blood vessels by 3D-Unet model
Figure A.21 presents some extra visualization of predicted labels by 3D-Unet model
on test set for blood vessels class on different slices in 2D from gray matter to white
matter respectively. The model is able to fully ad completely segment blood vessels.
Figure A.21: Predicted blood vessels labels on test volumes by 3D-Unet.
==PAGE:116==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
109
==PAGE:117==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
110
A.4.3
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its
histogram of intensity, median filter on a slice 59
Figure A.22: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:118==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
111
A.4.4
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.23: True label (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for blood vessels class.
==PAGE:119==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
112
A.4.5
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its
histogram of intensity, median filter on a slice 154
Figure A.24: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:120==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
113
A.4.6
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.25: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for blood vessels class.
==PAGE:121==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
114
A.4.7
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.26 shows true labels of cells (first row), predicted labels (second row), and
how true labels and predicted labels are overlapping o top of each other (third row).
Even there is no manual labels on this slice, but the model can identify cells and
segments those successfully.
Figure A.26: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for cell class.
==PAGE:122==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
115
A.4.8
Overlapping true and predicted labels
Figure A.27 shows true labels of cells (first row), predicted labels (second row), and
how true labels and predicted labels are overlapping o top of each other (third row).
Even the manual labels on this slice is not drawn completely with right shape, but
the model can identify the right shape of cells and segments those correctly.
Figure A.27: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for cells class.
==PAGE:123==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
116
A.4.9
Predicted cells by 3D-Unet model
Figure A.28 some extra visualization of predicted labels by 3D-Unet model on test
set for cells class on some different slices 35, 46, 67, and 346 in 2D from grey matter to
white matter respectively. These results demonstrate the success of 3D-Unet model
in predicting and almost fully segmenting of cells.
Figure A.28: True and Predicted cells’ labels on test volumes by 3D-Unet model.
==PAGE:124==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
117
A.4.9.1
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its histogram
of intensity, median filter on a slice 67
Figure A.29: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:125==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
118
A.4.10
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.30: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for cells class.
==PAGE:126==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
119
A.4.10.1
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds , its histogram
of intensity, median filter on a specific layer (slice 221)
Figure A.31: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:127==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
120
A.4.11
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.32: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for cells class.
==PAGE:128==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
121
==PAGE:129==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
122
A.4.12
Analysing the image with all possible different thresholds ,
its histogram of intensity, median filter on a specific layer
(slice 250)
Figure A.33: Various thresholds, gray scale image and its inverted version, median
filtered image, and gray scale image histogram respectively.
==PAGE:130==
A.4 Extra results and analyse from 3D-Unet with no VGG16 backbone
123
A.4.13
Overlapping the true and predicted labels
Figure A.34: True labels (top), predicted labels (middle), and overlay of true labels
on predicted labels (bottom) for axon class.
==PAGE:131==
A.5 Generative Adversarial Networks Architecture
124
A.5
Generative Adversarial Networks Architecture
Figure A.35: 3D-GANs from [12].
==PAGE:132==
Bibliography
[1]
Nikolas Adaloglou. Deep learning in medical imaging - 3D medical image seg-
mentation with PyTorch. https://theaisummer.com/medical-image-deep-
learning/. 2020.
[2]
Imran Ahmed et al. “Comparison of deep-learning-based segmentation models:
Using top view person images.” In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 136361–136373.
[3]
Daniel C Alexander et al. “Imaging brain microstructure with diffusion MRI:
practicality and applications.” In: NMR in Biomedicine 32.4 (2019), e3841.
[4]
Mariam Andersson et al. “Axon morphology is modulated by the local environ-
ment and impacts the noninvasive investigation of its structure–function rela-
tionship.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117.52 (2020),
pp. 33649–33659. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2012533117. eprint:
https://www.pnas.org/content/117/52/33649.full.pdf. url: https:
//www.pnas.org/content/117/52/33649.
[5]
Mariam Andersson et al. “Does powder averaging remove dispersion bias in dif-
fusion MRI diameter estimates within real 3D axonal architectures?” In: Neu-
roImage 248 (2022), p. 118718. issn: 1053-8119. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118718. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1053811921009903.
[6]
Matthias Bartels. Cone-beam x-ray phase contrast tomography of biological sam-
ples. https://univerlag.uni- goettingen.de/handle/3/isbn- 978- 3-
86395-134-4. 2013.
[7]
Matthias Bartels. Cone-beam x-ray phase contrast tomography of biological sam-
ples. optimization of contrast, resolution and field of view. Vol. 013. Göttin-
gen Series in x-ray Physics. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen, 2013. doi:
10.17875/gup2013-92.
[8]
Walter F. Boron and Emile L. Boulpaep. Medical physiology (Boron). http:
//pi.lib.uchicago.edu/1001/cat/bib/11043545.
[9]
Heather A Carlson and J Andrew McCammon. “Accommodating protein flex-
ibility in computational drug design.” In: Molecular pharmacology 57.2 (2000),
pp. 213–218.
[10]
Sihong Chen, Kai Ma, and Yefeng Zheng. “Med3d: Transfer learning for 3d
medical image analysis.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00625 (2019).
==PAGE:133==
Bibliography
126
[11]
Özgün Çiçek et al. “3D U-Net: learning dense volumetric segmentation from
sparse annotation.” In: International conference on medical image computing
and computer-assisted intervention. Springer. 2016, pp. 424–432.
[12]
Marco Domenico Cirillo, David Abramian, and Anders Eklund. “Vox2Vox: 3D-
GAN for brain tumour segmentation.” In: International MICCAI Brainlesion
Workshop. Springer. 2020, pp. 274–284.
[13]
Jia Deng et al. “ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.” In: 2009
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2009, pp. 248–
255. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
[14]
Tim B Dyrby et al. “Contrast and stability of the axon diameter index from
microstructure imaging with diffusion MRI.” In: Magnetic resonance in medicine
70.3 (Sept. 2013), pp. 711–721. issn: 0740-3194. doi: 10.1002/mrm.24501. url:
https://europepmc.org/articles/PMC4199276.
[15]
Tim B Dyrby et al. “Validation strategies for the interpretation of microstruc-
ture imaging using diffusion MRI.” In: Neuroimage 182 (2018), pp. 62–79.
[16]
Moritz Thede Eckart. “Central Nervous System.” In: Encyclopedia of Behavioral
Medicine. Ed. by Marc D. Gellman and J. Rick Turner. New York, NY: Springer
New York, 2013, pp. 369–375. isbn: 978-1-4419-1005-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-
4419-1005-9_6. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-1005-9_6.
[17]
European Synchrotron Radiation Facility( ESRF). SYNCHROTRON SCIENCE.
https://www.esrf.fr/about/synchrotron-science/synchrotron.
[18]
Tatiana Gabruseva, Dmytro Poplavskiy, and Alexandr Kalinin. “Deep learning
for automatic pneumonia detection.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. 2020, pp. 350–
351.
[19]
Tal Golan, Prashant C. Raju, and Nikolaus Kriegeskorte. “Controversial stimuli:
Pitting neural networks against each other as models of human cognition.” In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117.47 (2020), pp. 29330–
29337. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1912334117. eprint: https://www.
pnas.org/content/117/47/29330.full.pdf. url: https://www.pnas.org/
content/117/47/29330.
[20]
Stuart M Grieve et al. “Cognitive aging, executive function, and fractional
anisotropy: a diffusion tensor MR imaging study.” In: American Journal of
Neuroradiology 28.2 (2007), pp. 226–235.
[21]
Tadi P Huff T Mahabadi N. “Neuroanatomy, Visual Cortex.” In: Proceedings of
the national academy of sciences (2022).
[22]
Vladimir Iglovikov et al. “Ternausnetv2: Fully convolutional network for in-
stance segmentation.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. 2018, pp. 233–237.
==PAGE:134==
Bibliography
127
[23]
Shruti Jadon. “A survey of loss functions for semantic segmentation.” In: 2020
IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence in Bioinformatics and Compu-
tational Biology (CIBCB). IEEE. 2020, pp. 1–7.
[24]
Oscar Jimenez-del-Toro. “Quantitative Analysis of Medical Images: Finding
Relevant Regions–of–Interest for Medical Decision Support.” PhD thesis. May
2017. doi: 10.13097/archive-ouverte/unige:96297.
[25]
Shizuo Kaji and Satoshi Kida. Overview of image-to-image translation by use of
deep neural networks: denoising, super-resolution, modality conversion, and re-
construction in medical imaging. 2019. arXiv: 1905.08603 [physics.med-ph].
[26]
Alexandr A. Kalinin et al. “Medical Image Segmentation Using Deep Neural
Networks with Pre-trained Encoders.” In: 2020.
[27]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimiza-
tion. cite arxiv:1412.6980Comment: Published as a conference paper at the 3rd
International Conference for Learning Representations, San Diego, 2015. 2014.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[28]
James Kirkpatrick et al. “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural net-
works.” In: Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 114.13 (2017),
pp. 3521–3526.
[29]
Kaisar Kushibar et al. “Automated sub-cortical brain structure segmentation
combining spatial and deep convolutional features.” In: Medical Image Analysis
48 (2018), pp. 177–186. issn: 1361-8415. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.media.2018.06.006. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1361841518303839.
[30]
Klaus H Maier-Hein et al. “The challenge of mapping the human connectome
based on diffusion tractography.” In: Nature communications 8.1 (2017), pp. 1–
13.
[31]
V Vishnu Laxmi Manasa, Poluru Manasi, and D Sree Nikitha Reddy. “Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks for Brain Tumour Detection and Analysis.”
In: Perspectives in Communication, Embedded-systems and Signal-processing-
PiCES 4.5 (2020), pp. 93–97.
[32]
Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). MRI. https:
//www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/mri/about/pac-20384768.
[33]
MedlinePlus. White matter of the brain. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/
article/002344.htm. 2022.
[34]
Raghav Mehta and Tal Arbel. “3D U-Net for brain tumour segmentation.” In:
International MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop. Springer. 2018, pp. 254–266.
[35]
Satya Mahesh Muddamsetty. “Spatio-temporal saliency detection in dynamic
scenes using color and texture features.” PhD thesis. Université de Bourgogne,
2014.
==PAGE:135==
Bibliography
128
[36]
Posted by admin in NUCLEAR MEDICINE. Tomographic Reconstruction in
Nuclear Medicine. https://radiologykey.com/tomographic-reconstruction-
in-nuclear-medicine/. 2016.
[37]
Alexandra Pacureanu et al. “Dense neuronal reconstruction through X-ray holo-
graphic nano-tomography.” In: bioRxiv (2019). doi: 10.1101/653188. eprint:
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2019/05/30/653188.full.pdf.
url: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2019/05/30/653188.
[38]
Participant. Princeton Brain. https://www.princetonbrainandspine.com/
resources/learning-center/brain-anatomy/.
[39]
Francis Perez. 3rd Generation Synchrotron Light Sources, Advanced School -
oPAC. https://indico.cern.ch/event/297045/contributions/1658343/
attachments/557292/767843/FPerez_3GLS_AdvanceSchool-oPAC.pdf.
[40]
John PJ Pinel. Biopsychology. Pearson education, 2009.
[41]
The University of Queensland. The Brain Anatomy and Neurons. https://qbi.
uq.edu.au/brain/brain-anatomy/what-neuron.
[42]
Alexander Rakhlin et al. “Breast tumor cellularity assessment using deep neu-
ral networks.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision Workshops. 2019, pp. 0–0.
[43]
Hamid Rezatofighi et al. “Generalized intersection over union: A metric and a
loss for bounding box regression.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2019, pp. 658–666.
[44]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation.” In: International Conference on
Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention. Springer. 2015,
pp. 234–241.
[45]
Mark R Rosenzweig, S Marc Breedlove, and Arnold L Leiman. Biological psy-
chology: An introduction to behavioral, cognitive, and clinical neuroscience. Sin-
auer Associates, 2002.
[46]
P. Sauleau et al. “The pig model in brain imaging and neurosurgery.” In: An-
imal 3.8 (2009), pp. 1138–1151. issn: 1751-7311. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1017/S1751731109004649. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1751731109004649.
[47]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks
for Large-Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
[48]
Roman Solovyev, Alexandr A. Kalinin, and Tatiana Gabruseva. “3D Convo-
lutional Neural Networks for Stalled Brain Capillary Detection.” In: Arxiv:
2104.01687. Apr. 2021.
==PAGE:136==
Bibliography
129
[49]
Roman Solovyev et al. “Bayesian Feature Pyramid Networks for Automatic
Multi-Label Segmentation of Chest X-rays and Assessment of Cardio-Thoratic
Ratio.” English. In: Advanced Concepts for Intelligent Vision Systems - 20th
International Conference, ACIVS 2020, Proceedings. Ed. by Jacques Blanc-
Talon et al. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. International Conference on
Advanced Concepts for Intelligent Vision Systems, ACIVS ; Conference date:
10-02-2020 Through 14-02-2020. Springer, Feb. 2020, pp. 117–130. isbn: 978-3-
030-40604-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-40605-9_11.
[50]
Excillum staffs. Applications and X-ray techniques. https://www.excillum.
com/applications/. 2022.
[51]
P. Suortti. X-Ray, Synchrotron Radiation, and Neutron Diffraction in Ency-
clopedia of Physical Science and Technology (Third Edition). https://www.
sciencedirect . com / referencework / 9780122274107 / encyclopedia - of -
physical-science-and-technology#book-info. 2003.
[52]
Lisa Torrey and Jude Shavlik. “Transfer learning.” In: Handbook of research on
machine learning applications and trends: algorithms, methods, and techniques.
IGI global, 2010, pp. 242–264.
[53]
Johns Hopkins University. Brain, Nerves and Spine. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.
org/health/conditions-and-diseases/anatomy-of-the-brain.
[54]
Washington University. Brain Facts and Figures. https://faculty.washington.
edu/chudler/facts.html.
[55]
Porawat Visutsak and Yan Li. “Autism Spectrum Disorder: Brain Images and
Registration.” In: vol. 10038. Nov. 2016, pp. 136–146. isbn: 978-3-319-48334-4.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-48335-1_15.
[56]
Jonas Wacker, Marcelo Ladeira, and José Eduardo Vaz Nascimento. “Transfer
learning for brain tumor segmentation.” In: International MICCAI Brainlesion
Workshop. Springer. 2020, pp. 241–251.
[57]
Yiting Xie and David Richmond. “Pre-training on grayscale imagenet improves
medical image classification.” In: Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops. 2018, pp. 0–0.
[58]
Wei Yao et al. “Pixel-wise regression using U-Net and its application on pan-
sharpening.” In: Neurocomputing 312 (2018), pp. 364–371.
[59]
Paul A. Yushkevich et al. “User-Guided 3D Active Contour Segmentation of
Anatomical Structures: Significantly Improved Eﬀiciency and Reliability.” In:
Neuroimage 31.3 (2006), pp. 1116–1128.
[60]
Aldo Zaimi et al. “AxonDeepSeg: automatic axon and myelin segmentation from
microscopy data using convolutional neural networks.” In: Scientific Reports 8.1
(Feb. 2018). issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-22181-4. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-22181-4.
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
130
[61]
Shu-Ang Zhou and Anders Brahme. “Development of phase-contrast X-ray
imaging techniques and potential medical applications.” In: Physica Medica 24.3
(2008), pp. 129–148. issn: 1120-1797. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.
2008.05.006. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1120179708000689.
==PAGE:138==
