==PAGE:1==
Automatic Hardware-Near
Optimization of Deep Learning
Solutions
Thomas Byskov Tønder
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The ﬁeld of deep learning has seen an explosion in both development and ap-
plication in recent years and methods from the ﬁeld play key roles in many of
the technologies most visible to the public eye. Training a state-of-the-art deep
model is a very computationally intensive task, taking weeks or even months,
and potentially millions of dollars, to complete. Despite this, the development
of methods of reducing the training time and saving costs has not gotten the
same attention as the development of ever more complex models and techniques.
A number of vague guidelines exist on how to design eﬃcient deep learning
programs, but they are scattered over numerous sources. In addition, precise
information as to when certain methods should be used is rarely given and is
more often based on qualitative statements. I present an Optimization Unit
that takes over the responsibility of optimizing deep learning programs through
automated processes. This unit applies modiﬁcations to training processes by
taking advantage of hardware metrics and is applicable to deep learning pro-
grams varied both in terms of core components and training process methods.
The Unit achieves up to 4.10× improvement in model convergence time and up
to 2.97× improvement in time-to-result.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the DTU HPC team including the support team for an-
swering my questions regarding running my experiments on the HPC. I would
especially like to thank Bernd Dammann, Hans Henrik Brandenborg Sørensen
and Sebastian Borchert for helping me with setting up my working environ-
ment, including providing ample storage space for the datasets. Additionally,
they provided me with additional assistance when I required it, such as giving
me extended access to the GPUs to allow me to ﬁnish my experiments in time.
I would also like to thank my supervisor for providing me with helpful sugges-
tions in terms of the direction to take my research and for helping me keep an
overview of my most pressing tasks.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Hardware Platforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
CPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
GPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Communication Bus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Deep Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.3
Network training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Data Pipelines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Deep Learning Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.1
Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.2
Bottlenecks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4.3
Hardware-Eﬃcient Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.4
Data Pipeline Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.4.5
Training Process Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3
Related Work
49
3.1
State-Of-The-Art Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.2
Hardware Acceleration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.3
Software Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
4
Analysis
61
4.1
Development Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.2
Optimization Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.3
Pipeline Optimization Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3.1
Process Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.3.2
Step 1: Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.3.3
Step 2: Modiﬁcation Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.4
Online Optimization Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.4.1
Modiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.4.2
Logic Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.4.3
Training Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.5
Experimentation Suite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5
Evaluation
91
5.1
Programs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.1.1
CIFAR10 Image Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.1.2
MNIST Image Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.1.3
PascalVOC Image Segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.1.4
KITTI Visual Odometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
5.1.5
horse2zebra Image Translation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
5.2
Modiﬁcations Eﬃcacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6
Conclusion
107
A Appendix A
109
B Appendix B
113
Bibliography
117
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years, the development of deep learning solutions has seen explosive
growth. Deep learning programs are playing key roles in pushing the bound-
aries of modern computing and are the cornerstones of many systems thought
to be the future of modern technology, including facial recognition, self-driving
cars and automated disease diagnostics. Deep learning programs are deciding
the direction of modern development of computer hardware and software and
their impact on society cannot be understated. Deep learning is the ﬁeld of
machine learning concerned with deep neural networks also called deep models.
These are highly expressive mathematical models capable of discovering the im-
plicit trends in data they are exposed to. This expressiveness comes at a cost,
however. Bringing state-of-the-art models to bear on complex datasets involves
a training process with potentially extreme levels of computational complex-
ity. This has fueled the development of more powerful processors to meet the
growing computational demands. These processors have high degrees of energy
consumption and despite their power, are still unable to completely meet the
demands of the high-end models, necessitating they are run for multiple days or
weeks. The long periods of running high-end hardware incur infrastructural and
energy-based costs with monetary values in the millions of dollars for training
a single model. Additionally, the energy consumption is a cause for worry in an
increasingly environmentally aware society and causes doubts about the future
of deep learning from both ﬁnancial and environmental perspectives. Research
has gone into identifying and developing methods of reducing the computational
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
cost through either simplifying the methods used or by reducing the overall run-
ning time. However, optimizing deep learning programs remains more of an art
than a science. Guidelines are vague due to optimizations having diﬀerent lev-
els of eﬃcacy on diﬀerent tasks and hardware platforms.
Additionally, they
are commonly based more on developer experiences, rather than scientiﬁcally
proven facts. There exists no common repository for optimization knowledge,
leading to diﬀering opinions on methods and their importance. Deep learning is
beginning to inspire the next generation of developers and is spreading into new
ﬁelds, with especially companies working with the Internet-of-Things looking
into accessing the power of deep models. The lack of common knowledge of
optimization presents a hurdle for new developers and poses a risk that deep
learning in new ﬁelds will incur undue energy costs.
To prevent this, deep learning requires a standardized method of teaching and
applying methods of optimization. Deep learning programs are not one-size-ﬁts-
all. While mostly similar components are used, each must be designed from the
ground up, for the task at hand. Deﬁning a unifying optimization methodology
is a monumentous task. Rather than writing a compendium of techniques, this
project explores a diﬀerent route. The deﬁnition of an automated method of
identifying correct optimizations to use for a given program. The guidelines
typically describe optimizations based on qualitative metrics. Can they be used
to deﬁne quantitative measurements an automated process can acquire? And
can the breakpoints that deﬁne the correct optimizations be determined? Ad-
ditionally, is it possible for this process to have a short enough execution time,
that the overall computational cost is reduced?
This report details the development of an Optimization Unit that answers these
questions as well as taking them one step further by answering the question:
Can the automated process also apply the identiﬁed optimizations? The Unit
performs Automatic Deep Learning Optimization by capturing hardware and
software metrics during runtime and identifying and applying optimizations to
a given program. The Unit supports 2 lines of optimization: 1) optimizing the
data pipelines and 2) optimizing the training process. Novel algorithms were
developed for both optimization processes, a data-collection algorithm for the
pipeline optimization and a heuristic-based search algorithm for the training
optimization. Both processes utilize quantitative interpretations of qualitative
descriptions of optimization applicability.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter covers the theoretical background of this project. In particular, this
concerns the areas of computer hardware and machine learning that aﬀect the
performance of deep learning programs. An amount of background information
on each topic is provided, followed by how the ﬁelds combine or aﬀect one
another to determine the execution time of a deep learning program. A number
of common methods used in deep learning are also presented with the classic
qualitative descriptions of how they are best used.
The chapter is written in expectation of a reader with little to no experience
in the ﬁelds of computer hardware and machine learning and give a concise
overview of the information required to optimize deep learning programs.
2.1
Hardware Platforms
The design and construction of computers and the software required to run them
are enormous scientiﬁc ﬁelds made up of many smaller ﬁelds focusing on spe-
ciﬁc components, the interplay between them or a combination of both. When
executing a program, a large number of hardware components may be brought
into play for various purposes, such as performing computations, fetching data
==PAGE:12==
4
Background
Core
Core
Core
Core
Cache
Permanent Storage
Core
Core
Core
Core
CPU
GPU
GPU Memory
GPU Cores
Comm.
Bus
Comm.
Bus
Figure 2.1: A sketch of the architecture of a computer limited to the compo-
nents relevant for the execution time of a deep learning program.
or requesting resources. The time it takes from a process is started to when it
completes is referred to as the execution time[HP11]. Each hardware component
used will have an eﬀect on the execution time and small variations in a program
can lead to large diﬀerences due to making poor use of the underlying hardware.
Which components are the most important for deep learning programs? And
how should programs be designed to best make use of them and minimize the
execution time? Figure 2.1 illustrates the components and how they most often
relate to each other in common computer systems. The components include the
CPU and GPU processors (although more focus lies on the GPU), the memory
system and the communication bus. The function that each component serves
in a computer is covered and is related to how programs can be designed to best
utilize them.
2.1.1
CPU
The Central Processing Unit[HP11] (CPU), as the name suggests, is the primary
processor of any computer and is responsible for executing the majority of all
processing tasks. CPUs commonly have between 2 and 18 CPU cores[HP11]
that perform the processing and are able to work on separate tasks. The term
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Hardware Platforms
5
processor may also be used to refer to an individual core. CPUs have a lo-
cal memory system separated into caches[PH16], hardware components in close
proximity to the cores that store instructions and data. CPUs are designed for
versatility and are able to solve almost any computing task eﬃciently. Unless
programmed otherwise, all processes running on a computer are executed by
the CPU. Deep learning programs pose a problem for CPUs as their process-
ing power quickly becomes insuﬃcient. Instead, these program are commonly
executed by one or more GPUs instead. For this reason, CPUs only play a mi-
nor role in deep learning programming, usually limited to being responsible for
carrying out preparation tasks that prepare the system for running the program.
2.1.2
GPU
Graphics Processing Units[HP11] (GPUs) were originally developed by NVIDIA
in the year 2000[Fra21] as powerful processing units highly eﬃcient at performing
image processing operations and manipulating computer graphics. GPUs are a
type of hardware accelerator[HP18] which are components designed speciﬁcally
to perform certain processing tasks very eﬃciently. This added power comes
with a weakness of low versatility. However, current use of computers requires
performing graphical operations often enough that GPUs are one of the few ac-
celerators that are standard inclusions in modern PCs. GPUs are very similar
to CPUs and have the same basic structure with a number of cores and a local
memory system. GPUs, however, contain thousands of cores, compared to the
1-2 digit number in CPUs. This is by design to be able to more eﬀectively per-
form graphics processing tasks. Graphical operations are known for consisting
of large numbers of parallelizable arithmetic operations, often stemming from
matrix multiplication operations. To take advantage of this property, GPUs are
designed with a large number of cores that can perform tasks in parallel.
Through the years, GPUs have had many diﬀerent designs attempting to pro-
vide the optimal utilization of the cores. It is out of the scope of this project
to cover GPU architectures in detail. Put simply, the most common modern
architectures include one or more schedulers[HP11] that manage the processes
run on the GPU and assign tasks to the cores. Tasks are commonly assigned
as SIMD(Single Instruction, Multiple Data) operations[HP11]. These are op-
erations that deﬁne a single task to be performed identically on multiple data
elements and they are instrumental in enabling high degrees of parallelization
as they allow the GPU to initialize work on large numbers of cores at once.
The downside of GPUs is that they have higher latency[HP11] compared to
CPUs. For this reason, GPUs only provide an improvement to tasks that are
highly data-parallelizable. If this is not the case, GPUs are slower.
==PAGE:14==
6
Background
Processor
Max Power
Memory Bandwidth
Intel I9-12900K
795 × 109 FLOPS
41.6 GB/s
NVIDIA V100
14 × 1012 FLOPS
900 GB/s
NVIDIA A100
156 × 1012 FLOPS
1555 GB/s
Table 2.1: Maximum throughput and internal memory bandwidth of state-of-
the-art processors.
Table 2.1 displays the processing power, measured in single precision FLOPS
(ﬂoating point operations per second), and memory bandwidth[PH16] of a few
state-of-the-art processors, 1 CPU and 2 GPUs.
The NVIDIA V100[NVIe],
provides maximum FLOPS almost a factor 20 higher than that of the CPU and
an even larger diﬀerence in memory bandwidth. The NVIDIA A100[NVIc] is a
factor 10 more powerful than the V100 and has 1.7 times the memory bandwidth.
This shows the diﬀerence in raw throughput between state-of-the-art CPUs and
GPUs.
Similarly to graphical operations, deep learning processes also consist of a large
number of parallelizable arithmetic operations. In addition, they often require
far more total operations to be performed. For this reason, GPUs are, in a prac-
tical sense, considered mandatory for running modern deep learning programs.
Optimizing programs to run faster on GPUs requires the developer to design
the operations used to be as parallelizable as possible, so the program uses as
many of the available cores as possible.
2.1.3
Memory
Computer memory systems are layered into a number of storage levels[JNW08]
with diﬀerent access time[HP11] and capacity. The most widely known levels
consist of the permanent storage drives, the Hard Disk Drive[JNW08] (HDD)
and Solid State Drive[MME12] (SSD), and the main memory[HP11] consisting
of the Random Access Memory[HP11] (RAM). These make up the lowest levels
of the hierarchy. The higher levels in the hierarchy consist of the caches on
board the processors. Figure 2.2 shows an example memory hierarchy and the
correlation between access time and capacity. The access time is, among other
things, directly correlated with the physical distance between the processors and
the memory level and the hierarchy also deﬁnes the proximity of the systems
to the processor cores. At the top of the hierarchy are the caches closest to the
cores named with an L and a number designating their level in the hierarchy.
These have the fastest access time but are also the smallest in terms of capac-
ity. Typically, not all of these caches are shared between all the cores of the
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Hardware Platforms
7
L1
L2 Cache
L3 Cache
Capacity
DRAM
SSD
HDD
Access Time
~1 ns
~3 ns
~12 ns
~63 ns
~0.1 ms
~3 ms
DRAM GAP
~1 KB
~256 KB
~1 MB
~32 GB
~200 GB
~2-5 TB
x103
x7
Figure 2.2: Example of the memory hierarchy of a home computer. Access
times and capacity values are from 2020[Uni].
processor. It is common for each core or a small group of cores to have personal
caches and for the lower levels (L2 and L3) to be shared among more cores. The
number of caches and their layout depends on the processor. It is common for
CPUs to have 3 levels of caches and GPUs to have 2.
The access time may also be referred to as the latency[JNW08] and is the time it
takes from a request of data being initiated to the moment the data is retrieved.
3 properties play a role in the time it takes to fetch a chunk of data: the time it
takes to locate the chunk, the size of the chunk and the amount of bytes that can
be transferred over a given time-period. When working with memory systems,
the access time is typically limited to considerations of the ﬁrst property. The
memory system has no control over the size of the fetched data and how fast the
data can be transferred is determined by the bandwidth of the communication
bus. To fetch a data chunk dat, a search through the hierarchy is initiated. The
processor moves down through the hierarchy to determine if dat is present in a
near level. If not found in one of the processor caches, the search is extended
==PAGE:16==
8
Background
to the main memory and in the worst case, the permanent storage. Once dat
is found, it is allocated to the closest level with suﬃcient free memory. Later,
if the same or another processor requests dat, the search will ﬁnd it in the
closer location. In this case, the ﬁrst fetching operation is signiﬁcantly more
time consuming due to the higher access times of the lower levels. The second
fetching operation may be hundreds or even thousands of times faster due to
taking advantage of data reuse[WDCDM98] by locating the previously allocated
dat. Modern memory systems attempt to maximize data reuse by following the
locality principles[JNW08]. These are:
• If a program accesses an address once, it is likely in the near future to
access that address again.
• If a program accesses an address once, it is likely in the near future to
access addresses near that address.
These deﬁne that common computer programs have a tendency to work on
groups of close addresses and a rule of thumb states that 90% of the execution
time of a program is spent in 10% of the code. These principles have lead to
the development of the layered hierarchy as a way of taking advantage of this
behaviour.
Maximizing data reuse is important due to the DRAM-gap[Mac02] as shown
on Figure 2.2. The gap refers to the large diﬀerence in access time that exists
between the processor caches and the RAM on one side and the permanent
storage disks on the other. Reading- and writing operations with the storage
disks are called I/O-operations[JNW08] and are the time-wise most expensive
data transfer operations a computer performs. Table 2.2 shows the maximum
throughput of a few state-of-the-art memory systems.
The table shows the
maximum number of I/O-operations per second (IOPS) of an HDD and a SSD.
HDDs store data on spinning disks and use the read/write head[JNW08] to
access data. The amount of time it takes to spin the disks to the correct positions
is included in the access time. Sequential addresses are neighbors on the disks
and after the ﬁrst operation on a set of sequential addresses, the spinning time
is minimized. For this reason, to get accurate measurements for the maximum
number of IOPS, it is necessary to use randomization. The IOPS are separated
into random read operations and random write operations. RAM does not have
permanent memory and the same type of operations cannot be measured for
it. Instead, the table shows the average latency. The table shows that the SSD
using a solid state memory solution is capable of performing between 650 and
740 times more I/O operations per second. However, the gap in latency time
between the SSD and the RAM is even greater. With a latency of 28ns, the
RAM has an access time approximately 1/100000th that of the SSD. This shows
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Hardware Platforms
9
System
Rand. Read (IOPS)
Rand. Write (IOPS)
Latency
Seagate Exos 2X14 HDD
304
384
4.16 ms
Samsung 980 PRO SSD
224000
248000
3 ms
Corsair CMW32... 8GB RAM
-
-
28 ns
Table 2.2: Maximum throughput of state-of-the-art memory systems, mea-
sured in IOPS (4KB block, queue depth 16) and latency.
the scale of diﬀerence between working with data directly from the permanent
storage and through data reuse.
When designing programs that do not access the permanent storage, it is only
worth manually optimizing them in terms of the memory systems, if they very
frequently access the memory (Such as iterating over very large arrays). On the
other hand, if a program depends on data stored on the disks and must access it
often, properly designing the code to minimize the number of I/O-operations can
reduce the overall time spent waiting for data fetching operations by multiple
orders of magnitude.
2.1.4
Communication Bus
The communication bus is the component facilitating data transfer operations in
and out of the CPU and GPU. It is responsible for supplying the processor with
instructions as well as the data to perform them on. Communication buses are
built directly into modern GPUs with the most common being the 3rd and 4th
generations of the Peripheral Component Interconnect Express[PS] (PCI-e 3.0 /
PCI-e 4.0). PCIe buses provide data-transfer operations through a number of
data-transmission lanes, each of which supports both receiving and transmitting
data. Each lane is treated as an independent connection between the processor
and the memory system and can be run in parallel. Each lane has an individual
bandwidth that deﬁnes the maximum number of bytes that can pass through
the lane per second. The sum of the individual bandwidths deﬁnes the overall
bandwidth of the bus.
Unit
Max Power
Bus Bandwidth
Intel I9-12900K
795 × 109 FLOPS
76.8 GB/s
NVIDIA V100
14 × 1012 FLOPS
32 GB/s
NVIDIA A100
156 × 1012 FLOPS
64 GB/s
Table 2.3: Maximum throughput and bus bandwidth of state-of-the-art pro-
cessors.
==PAGE:18==
10
Background
There is a vast gap between the processing power of state-of-the-art processors
and the bus bandwidth of the attached communication bus. Table 2.3 shows
the maximum processing power of the same processors as Table 2.1 as well as
their bus bandwidths. The NVIDIA V100 GPU can work on a maximum of:
16 bytes × 14 × 1012 = 224000 GB of data per second. Compared with its bus
bandwidth of 32 GB/s, it is obvious that the communication bus is unable to
supply new data for each computation. Similar results are found for both the
Intel CPU and the A100 GPU. This adds to the importance of maximizing data
reuse, especially when working on GPUs
2.2
Deep Learning
Deep learning is the ﬁeld of machine learning concerned with deep neural net-
works, also known as deep models[GBC16]. Deep models are highly expressive
mathematical models that have shown an ability to identify trends in complex
data. For many years, the development of deep learning systems was slow as the
computational load required to use the models was far too high for the hard-
ware at the time. However, in recent years, the processing power of computers
has increased dramatically, especially due to the development and increased
availability of general-purpose accelerators such as GPUs. This has caused the
popularity of deep learning to soar as developers have been able to study and
display its potential. With the power of deep learning on full display, it has
also found its way into other branches of machine learning including generative
networks[RH21] and reinforcement learning[MKS+13].
Deep learning programs commonly utilize data contained in tensors[GBC16].
Tensors are data structures containing typically multidimensional data elements.
For example, a color image with height h, width w and RGB-values for each
pixel would be contained using a tensor with the shape: (h × w × 3), the 3rd
dimension containing 3 values, one for each of R, G and B. Deep models require
being trained on a dataset consisting of multiple data examples. The individual
pieces of data have many names including data examples, data elements and
data points. Unless stated otherwise, the term data example will be used in
this report as each is an example of the data the model works on. The most
common type of machine learning is supervised learning[GBC16] where each
data example is labelled with the corresponding correct answer, that the model
is tasked to learn to compute. The training process is the source of the high
computational complexity included in deep learning programs and its severity
scales with the complexity of the model and the data it is run on.
This section details the structure of neural networks and how they are expanded
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Deep Learning
11
b
k1
k2
w1
w2
r
k0
w0
w4
Figure 2.3: A perceptron with 3 in-going connections and a single out-going
connection.
into deep neural networks. Included is an overview of some of the most pop-
ular structures used in state-of-the-art models. This creates the basis for the
computational complexity of the training process, which, lastly, is covered in
full.
2.2.1
Neural Networks
The core building block of neural networks are perceptrons[GBC16] as illustrated
in Figure 2.3.
Perceptrons are designed to mimic the neurons inside brains
that pass information using electrical signals. This is done through modifying
and passing values and each perceptron has a number of in-going and out-
going connections. Connections have a weight[GBC16] w and the perceptrons
themselves may also have a value called the bias[GBC16] b.
Individual perceptrons take input values k0, k1, . . . , kn through their connections
and compute a single real-valued output r as described by Equation 2.1.
r = f(
n
X
i=0
(wi ∗ki) + b)
(2.1)
f is a non-linear activation function[GBC16] such as the sigmoid[GBC16] func-
tion. Performing Equation 2.1 computation requires n+(n−1)+1 = 2n ﬂoating
point operations (FLOPs), where n is the number of input connections.
A neural network requires at least 3 layers of grouped perceptrons: an input
layer, a hidden layer and an output layer [GBC16] as illustrated on Figure 2.4.
The input layer should have as many perceptrons as there are values in the data
examples of the dataset. The hidden layer can have any number of perceptrons
and the output layer should have as many as the number of output values that
will be useful. The output values of each layer are passed as the input to the
next layer or as the output of the network.
==PAGE:20==
12
Background
Input
Hidden
Output
Figure 2.4: A neural network with an input-, hidden- and output layer.
The collective connection weights and perceptron biases of a network are referred
to as the weights, the variables or the parameters[GBC16] of the network and
the symbol Θ is used to refer to them.
Using the layered structure, neural networks implement a function shown by
Equation 2.2 which takes n input values and outputs m values.
f : Rn →Rm
(2.2)
When trained, the parameters of the network are changed to adapt the function
to solve the task.
The activation function plays a key role in the potential
expressive power of the implemented function. It is essential that it is non-
linear as Equation 2.1 does not contain any other non-linear components. This
means, that if f is linear, the function could only output a linear result.
A classic machine learning exercise consists of identifying iris ﬂowers. A dataset
is given consisting of examples of ﬂowers where the sepal length, sepal width,
petal length and petal width are given for each example. The task is to determine
which of 3 iris ﬂowers each example belongs to. In this case, the neural network
would have 4 inputs n = 4, one for each of the values in the examples and 3
outputs m = 3 each of which denotes the probability that the network believes
the example belongs to the corresponding ﬂower. In other words, the network
implements a function:
f : R4 →R3
An example output is: (0.01, 0.90, 0.09), which means the network believes there
is a 1% change the example belongs to the ﬁrst type of ﬂower, 90% for the second
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Deep Learning
13
and 9% for the third. Using a hidden layer with 4 perceptrons this network
requires:
4 ∗(2n) + 3 ∗(2m) = 4 ∗8 + 3 ∗6 = 50 FLOPs
to compute the output of a single data example.
2.2.2
Deep Neural Networks
A deep neural network is a neural network with at least 2 hidden layers. Adding
more layers and perceptrons increases the complexity of the implemented func-
tion which, in turn, increases the potential expressiveness. In addition, it allows
for creating complex structures over multiple layers that provide special desired
functionality to the network. This complexity comes at the cost of an increased
computational load.
The layers shown previously are called dense layers. Many modern deep learning
tasks are based on either image data or sequential data. Deep networks created
to solve these tasks only utilize dense layers in a limited capacity as other types
of layers with greater expressiveness for this type of data, have been developed.
The layers more commonly used are convolutional layers and recurrent layers.
When each is used in a neural network, they are referred to as convolutional neu-
ral networks[GBC16] (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks[GBC16] (RNNs),
respectively.
2.2.2.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional layers are designed to more eﬀectively extract information from
image data and work on the 2- or 3-dimensional shape commonly used to de-
scribe images:
(height × weight × color channels)
The layers return a feature map[GBC16] with similarly deﬁned dimensions:
(map height × map width × map channels)
This allows for multiple convolutional layers to be included in a model in ex-
tension of each other. The entries in the feature map are computed using the
==PAGE:22==
14
Background
w0 w1 w2
w3
w6 w7
w4 w5
w8
Figure 2.5: An example of a 3 × 3 kernel.
cross-correlation[GBC16] function shown by Equation 2.3.
S(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(i + m, j + n)K(m, n)
(2.3)
The function computes an output at a location in one of the channels deﬁned
by i and j. I is a region of the input channels worked on. K is a kernel[GBC16]
deﬁned by the convolutional layer. Kernels are sets of weights arranged in 2-
dimensional (or in some cases 3-dimensional) structures. A kernel with a set
of 9 weights w0, w1, . . . , w8 arranged in a 3 × 3 grid is illustrated on Figure
2.5. The layer applies the cross-correlation operation on multiple regions of the
input channel. Additionally, a non-linear activation function f is applied to the
output value. The cross-correlation operation and application of the activation
function is written out in detail in Equation 2.4 between the kernel shown on
Figure 2.5 and a local region with the values: i0, i1, . . . , i8.
pi,j =f(w0 ∗i0 + w1 ∗i1 + w2 ∗i2
+ w3 ∗i3 + w4 ∗i4 + w5 ∗i5
+ w6 ∗i6 + w7 ∗i7 + w8 ∗i8)
(2.4)
The result is placed as a value in the corresponding output channel. The ker-
nel starts in the top-left corner of the input data, where the cross-correlation
operation is applied. It is then moved one column to the right and the process
is repeated until the end of the row is reached. At this point the kernel moves
one row down and back to the left side. This continues until the kernel is in the
bottom-right corner of the input data and has been used to compute a value
for every region in the input data. This process is visualized in Figure 2.6. In
the example, computing the result of the convolution operation over a single
channel requires at least 162 FLOPs:
3 cols × 3 rows × (9 mults + 8 adds + 1 func.) = 162
In practice, convolutional layers often work on considerably larger images and
often contain a number of kernels between 64 and 2048. The above computation
is performed over each channel in the input for each kernel, multiplying the
number of channels in the output by the number of kernels.
The size and shape of the kernels, how many columns and rows to move after
each application and whether the input should be padded with extra data to
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Deep Learning
15
w0 w1 w2
w3
w6 w7
w4 w5
w8
w0 w1 w2
w3
w6 w7
w4 w5
w8
w0 w1 w2
w3
w6 w7
w4 w5
w8
p0,1
p0,1p1,1
p0,1p1,1 p1,2
Input Channel
Output Channel
Figure 2.6: The convolution operation with a 3 × 3 kernel over a single row of
a 5 × 5 input channel.
Figure 2.7: An example MNIST digit.
maintain the output shape, are all hyperparameters of convolutional layers that
are chosen by the developer. Convolutional layers are particularly eﬀective at
extracting information from image data as the kernels capture values based on
the local regions. It is rare that every pixel in an input image is important to
determine the correct output. For example, take the handwritten digit shown in
Figure 2.7 taken from the MNIST dataset[Den12]. Using dense layers, the value
from every pixel would be taken into account and carried on to the following
layers, but the completely white pixels in the top-left corner are not important
for determining that the image shows a 2. By only considering local regions the
activation map retains information about which areas of the input image are
important and which can be disregarded.
==PAGE:24==
16
Background
x
x
x
x
σ
σ
tanh
σ
xt
ht-1
ct-1
ct
ht
ht
tanh
Forget Gate
Input Gate
Output Gate
Figure 2.8: An LSTM-cell taking the previous state ct−1, the previous output
ht−1 and a data example xt and computing the next internal state
ct and the output ht.
2.2.2.2
Recurrent Neural Networks
Recurrent layers contain a persistent internal state c. The state is included in
the computations of the output of the layer and each time a data example passes
through the layer, an output, as well as a new internal state, is produced. The
internal state stores information from data examples that pass through the layer.
This allows recurrent neural networks to reason along the sequence of input
data. Recurrent neural networks are designed to perform well on time-series
data where information needs to be inferred based on previous data examples.
For example, predicting the next word in a sentence based on previously said
words. The data examples are commonly grouped into sequences adding another
dimension to the input data.
One of the more popular architectures of recurrent layers are Long Short-Term
Memory[GBC16] (LSTM). Figure 2.8 displays the architecture of an LSTM
Cell[GBC16] which makes up an LSTM layer.
The cell takes 3 inputs: The previous state ct−1, the previous output ht−1 and
the next data example xt. The cell is made up of 3 gates[GBC16] that regulate
how data passes through the cell. Included in each gate is a dense sigmoid-layer
σ and at least one multiplication operation x. The sigmoid layer contains weight
values and when given an input, returns a number of values in the range [0;1].
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Deep Learning
17
By multiplying these values to the various tensors, the gates regulate what data
passes through. If the value is close to 0, then little is let through. If the value
is close to 1, then most of the value is let through. The gates are applied to
the internal state in a speciﬁc order, modifying it along the way. The ﬁrst gate
is the forget gate which determines how much of the internal state should be
forgotten. Next is the input gate which determines how much new information
should be stored in the internal state. The last gate is the output gate which
determines which parts of the internal state should be included in the output
ht. There are multiple variants of LSTMs, but this is the standard structure.
The LSTM-cell includes, in this case, 5 dense layers, 3 sigmoid-layers and 2
hyperbolic tangent layers[GBC16] (tanh). These all interact with the internal
state, which means they must have the same number of perceptrons as there
are values in the internal state. The internal state must be large enough to
contain the important information that should be stored between data examples.
Assuming an internal state with 1000 values, computing the result of passing a
single data example through the cell requires at least 10000 FLOPs.
2.2.3
Network training
The neural network parameters are initialized based on a randomness function
and initially the network outputs completely random noise. The parameters
must be modiﬁed through a training process to properly solve the task. The
parameters are modiﬁed through a series of updates, where the output of the
model for each data example is compared to the correct result. The goal of
the training process is that the model becomes able to generalize over input
data, rather than just learning to recognize previously seen examples. Datasets
cannot contain every possible data example and for the network to function on
data it has not seen before, it must learn to generalize.
Typically, 3 datasets are required for the training process:
• A training dataset
• A validation dataset
• A testing dataset
The training dataset is usually the largest and contains all the examples the
model will train with. This dataset should have a good variance of types of
data examples. The validation dataset is used throughout training to measure
==PAGE:26==
18
Background
the performance of the model on unseen data. The validation dataset must,
for this reason, be completely separate from the training dataset. The testing
dataset serves a similar role to the validation dataset but is only used at the end
of training, to verify that the model has correctly learned to generalize. Either
the validation dataset or the testing dataset may be left out, in which case the
other fulﬁlls both roles.
Training requires a loss function[GBC16] L and an optimizer[GBC16] O. The
loss function deﬁnes how the results of the model are compared to the correct
answers and typically takes 2 inputs: yreal and ypred. These are the correct an-
swer and the output of the model, respectively. The output of the loss function
is a real value called the loss value or just loss [GBC16] of the data exam-
ple. A commonly used loss function is the mean squared error[GBC16] (MSE),
computed between two or more real values as shown in Equation 2.5.
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Yi −ˆYi)2
(2.5)
Here, n is the number of values that should be compared, Yi are the entries of
yreal and ˆYi are the entries of ypred. Returning to the iris ﬂower example, MSE
is a viable loss function where yreal is a tensor with 2 zeroes and 1 one. For
example: (0, 1, 0). The loss value is high when the model gives a high probability
for an incorrect ﬂower. Many diﬀerent functions can serve as a loss function,
the requirement is that it must describe the ability of the model to solve the
task on a given example by being lower on examples where the model is more
correct.
The training process can be formulated as a minimization problem of the loss
function over the training dataset by way of the parameters of the network, as
shown in Equation 2.6.
Θ = argΘmin 1
N
N
X
i=1
L(yreal,i, ypred,i)
(2.6)
Here, N is the total number of examples in the training dataset. By minimizing
the average loss over the examples of the training dataset, the expectation is
that the loss over unseen data is also minimized or at least signiﬁcantly reduced.
The optimizer is used to perform the minimization through a series of small-
scale updates made to the model parameters. The most common optimizers
use a gradient descent[GBC16] technique. Gradient Descent is an optimization
algorithm used to ﬁnd local minima of functions.
Updates are made to the
parameters by taking steps in the opposite direction of the gradient of each
parameter. The gradient is found by traversing backwards through the partial
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Deep Learning
19
derivatives of the gradient of the loss function with the current model parame-
ters. Using Stochastic Gradient Descent[GBC16], each update to a parameter
w has the form shown in Equation 2.7.
w = w −ϵ × ∇L(Yi, ˆYi)
(2.7)
Every optimizer is deﬁned with a learning rate[GBC16] ϵ, that modiﬁes the
size of the updates and typically has a value in the range [0.1; 1 × 10−6]. Put
simply, the gradient of a model parameter indicates how much that parameter
contributes to maximizing the loss. By making updates in the opposite direction,
the parameter will contribute less towards maximizing the loss and more towards
minimizing it. In addition, because the updates scale with the magnitude of the
gradients, the parameters that contribute most towards maximizing the loss
receive the largest updates.
Algorithm 1 shows the algorithm of the training process.
Training is done
Algorithm 1: Training Process
Input: A number of epochs num_epochs
1 for epoch : num_epochs do
2
for example : training_dataset do
3
output ←m.forward(example);
4
loss ←l(output);
5
m.params ←O(loss, m.params);
6
end for
7 end for
through a number of epochs[GBC16] performing the same operations.
Each
epoch consists of iterating over the training dataset once and performing a
forward pass[GBC16] and a backward pass[GBC16] per data example. Line 3
shows the forward pass which consists of computing the result of using the
model on a single data example. In deep learning, this step includes passing
data through a deep model constructed of layers such as the ones presented
above and includes computing the collective number of FLOPs of every layer
in the model. The result is used to compute the loss and the backward pass,
shown on line 5. During the backward pass, the model parameters are updated,
starting with the ﬁnal layers and ending with the input layer. The performance
of the model can be measured throughout the process by extending the epochs
with a step that computes the result of each example in the validation dataset.
State-of-the-art deep models can contain hundreds of layers each with potentially
millions of parameters. Each epoch requires both a forward pass and a backward
pass, both of which include at least one computation with each parameter of
==PAGE:28==
20
Background
the model.
This means that the number of FLOPs required for computing
each iteration quickly rises into the billions. This computation is repeated for
each data example for each epoch, which explodes the number of FLOPs into
the quintillions and the training process becomes very time-consuming even the
most powerful GPUs. There are multiple ways in which the training process can
be modiﬁed to either add a desired function or to become less computationally
taxing. Some of these methods are covered in Section 2.4.
2.3
Data Pipelines
For data-driven programs, the concept of the Data Pipeline[Den21] is key. Data
pipelines are objects handling the software aspects of data delivery processes.
Deep learning programs are deeply data-driven, being programs that modify the
behaviour of mathematical structures to capture the implicit trends of datasets.
One data pipeline is required for each of the datasets to enable their connection
to the processor. During the training process, data must consistently be ingested
and prepared for processing by the model. This is done by the data pipeline
and is referred to as the data preparation or data preprocessing[Den21] step.
The reliance on data preparation places a high priority on properly designing
data pipelines to make them operate as eﬀectively as possible. What must a
deep learning data pipeline include? And how are they best designed?
Deep learning data pipelines ensure 2 properties of data delivery: data movement
and data transformation [Den21].
• Data movement: that the correct data is available where it needs to be.
• Data transformation: that data has the expected form and type(s).
Data movement means ensuring that the correct data examples are made avail-
able to the model. To do this, deep learning data pipelines must support a data
streaming paradigm and be able to fetch exactly the correct example, when re-
quested. Pipelines typically provide this support through a next() (or similarly
named) method that other objects may call. This method retrieves the next
data example from the storage, prepares it for processing and returns it to the
caller.
Datasets can be stored in multiple ways, classic examples include being stored
in a table on a server, in a single ﬁle in the permanent storage or distributed
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Data Pipelines
21
over multiple ﬁles. Data pipelines must be able to properly extract examples
from any storage solution. Deep learning programs rarely work on complete
datasets at once, processing singular or few examples at a time. For this reason,
data pipelines for deep learning are deﬁned using the data streaming paradigm.
Using this paradigm, the next-method can be called at any time and begins the
fetching of a data example. The method is non-blocking and may be called again
before completion. In this case, the pipeline begins fetching another example
and works on preparing both examples simultaneously.
During each epoch of the training process, the entire training dataset must be
iterated through once with no repeats. To ensure this, the pipeline keeps track
of 2 memory locations. The ﬁrst is the dataset location, which indicates the
start of the dataset. The second is a current location that indicates the location
of the data example that should be fetched next time the next-method is called.
This location is incremented each time the method is called and resets to the
dataset location when the end of the dataset is reached, typically giving notice
of this fact by e.g. returning a unique END-value. Maintaining these locations
allows the deep learning process to continually request data examples and be
sure that it is always working on the correct example.
Data transformation is the preparation-part of the pipeline, transforming the
examples to the form and types the model expects. Transformations are com-
monly deﬁned as operations, here called pipeline operations, that are performed
on data as it passes through the pipeline. Pipeline operations can be divided
into two groups:
• Group 1: Operations that work on individual data examples.
• Group 2: Operations that work on aggregates of data examples.
For example, a rescaling operation that transforms all values x in a data example
from the range [0;255] to the range [0;1] by:
x = x/255
belongs to group 1. Operations belonging to group 2 include those that merge
data from multiple sources or shuﬄe the order of the data examples. Most oper-
ations are performed as they make necessary modiﬁcations that enable the deep
learning process. Common operations include those that normalize the data ex-
amples into limited ranges, reducing their variability. However, some operations
are included to improve the execution time of the pipeline by changing how the
underlying hardware is used. Such operations are covered in greater detail in
Section 2.4.4. As stated above, multiple data examples can be in the process
==PAGE:30==
22
Background
of being prepared at once. This commonly means that they are being worked
on by diﬀerent operations and whenever an operation ﬁnishes working on an
example, it may immediately receive another.
Pipelines are commonly executed on the GPU. This is due to 2 reasons. The
ﬁrst is that, if the data examples are already present on the GPU after they
are prepared by the pipeline, the data movement time included in preparing
the examples is minimized. Secondly, the pipeline operations have a number of
properties in common with the layers of deep models. In most cases, both deﬁne
highly parallelizable mathematical operations and their execution times directly
aﬀect the execution time of the program. In other words, the operations are
able to take advantage of the parallelizability provided by the GPU and there is
much to gain from doing so. For example, when performed on a (32×32×3) color
image, the rescaling operation shown above includes a total of 3072 FLOPs.
The value of each pixel, however, can be computed in isolation and thus the
operation can be heavily parallelized. Performing both methods on the GPU
places an additional strain on it, but as Table 2.3 showed, there is a 7000:1
ratio in the maximum number of FLOPS state-of-the-art GPUs can perform
and their bus bandwidths. It is highly unlikely that this additional strain will
cause any slowdown.
If correctness of both data movement and data transformation is not ensured
by the data pipelines, then the program will not work at all. Any deep learn-
ing program must have correct, but not necessarily optimized, data pipelines.
Using knowledge of data pipelines, Algorithm 1 can be modiﬁed to present a
more detailed view of the training process. This is shown on Algorithm 2. The
Algorithm 2: More Detailed Training Process
Input: A number of epochs num_epochs and a data pipeline pipeline
to the training dataset
1 for epoch : num_epochs do
2
next_example ←pipeline.next();
3
while next_example <> END do
4
output ←m.forward(next_example);
5
loss ←l(output);
6
m.params ←O(loss, m.params);
7
next_example ←pipeline.next();
8
end while
9 end for
modiﬁcations include lines 2, 3 and 7. During each iteration, the process di-
rectly requests data examples from the data pipeline until it reads an END
value, at which point the epoch ends. This view allows for pointing to line 2 as
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Data Pipelines
23
the data preparation step and lines 4-7 as the data processing or model train-
ing[Den21] step. The detailed algorithm more clearly shows the importance of
the data preparation step in deep learning programs. Each data processing step
is prepended by a data preparation step and the execution time of the data
pipeline directly aﬀects the overall execution time. The pipeline object has no
eﬀect on the fetching time of data examples. As covered in Section 2.1, this is
dependent on the hardware used. Developers can, however, aﬀect the time of
the data preparation step through the design of the pipeline operations.
The primary aspect of designing a data pipeline is the choice of the operations
to include and their order in the pipeline. Certain guidelines exist on how to
design the fastest pipelines, but there is no standardized methodology. This is
due to every deep learning program requiring uniquely designed data pipelines,
aside from a few standard inclusions. Each pipeline must be designed from the
ground up, presenting a problem for human developers. The correct sequence
to include operations in, is often based on subtle eﬀects that can be diﬃcult to
detect. For example, the data pipeline shown below takes some input data din,
shuﬄes the data examples, resizes them to half the original size, rescales them
to the range [0;1] and returns them as dout.
Operations:
din
→Shuﬄing
→Resize ×1/2
→Rescaling
→dout
Size ratio:
1×
1×
1/2×
1×
1×
The resizing operation, by reducing the size to 1/2, removes half the size of
the overall data.
On the other hand, the rescaling operation is working on
pixel-values in the range [0;255] represented by integers with the data type
int8, taking a single byte per value. Rescaling transforms the values to the
range [0;1], represented by e.g. single precision ﬂoating points: float16. This
datatype takes up 2 bytes per value and the operation doubles the overall size
of the data. Assume another pipeline as shown below, performing the same
operations but in a diﬀerent order:
Operations:
din
→Resize ×1/2
→Shuﬄing
→Rescaling
→dout
Size ratio:
1×
1/2×
1/2×
1×
1×
In this case, the shuﬄing operation works on the same number of data examples,
but with half the total size, moving half the number of bytes when performing
the shuﬄing. The second pipeline is more eﬃcient than the ﬁrst, but implicit
changes to the data types or structure of data examples can be diﬃcult for
humans to detect. Additionally, are the operations that improve performance
as mentioned earlier. These operations modify how the data pipeline utilizes the
underlying hardware and are often necessary for ensuring good performance.
In summary, for developers to design the best data pipelines, they must have
==PAGE:32==
24
Background
both an in-depth understanding of the eﬀect of each pipeline operation as well as
an understanding of how the operations use the hardware. This is a signiﬁcant
hurdle to overcome and pipelines are rarely optimized outside the use of a few
easy-to-apply operations.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
25
2.4
Deep Learning Optimization
As deep learning has grown more popular, so has the complexity of the tasks
that developers seek to solve using it.
This has lead to an increase in the
number of layers and parameters of the model used, progressively increasing the
computational complexity of the training process. Likewise, this increases the
importance of optimizing deep learning programs.
This section covers terms and knowledge required to begin optimizing deep
learning programs, detailing important aspects of how utilization of the hard-
ware aﬀects the execution time and detailing a number of common methods of
reducing model training time.
2.4.1
Performance Metrics
Before deﬁning how deep learning programs may be optimized, it is important
to specify exactly how the performance of a program may be measured. It goes
without saying that the most important metric in deep learning is the ability of
the trained model to solve the proposed task. Methods optimizing other aspects
of a program must not impede this ability, or, at least, must do so very mildly.
In this project, the primary metric considered is the real-time duration of the
training process. The training time of a program is often deﬁned as the time from
the training process is started to when it ends. However, the more signiﬁcant
metric is the time from training starts to when the model is suﬃciently capable
of solving the task. That is, the time it takes the model to reach a certain level
of competence. This is referred to as the convergence time[GBC16] as it signiﬁes
the time it takes the model to converge to an acceptable state. There is no exact
deﬁnition of what it means for a model to have reached an acceptable state, the
best option for choosing when this is, is to deﬁne a threshold loss value that the
model should reach on the validation dataset.
The convergence time is one of the primary performance metrics considered in
this project. The second, is the time-to-result, deﬁned here as the time from any
given starting point until the model is suﬃciently trained. For optimizations to
be useful in most cases, they must reduce the time-to-result. For example, it
is not unreasonable for unoptimized high-end models to take up to a month to
train. In this case, the moment when the training process has been developed
is chosen as the starting point. If the training process is started immediately,
the time-to-result is 1 month. If, instead of starting the process immediately,
a full week is spent on implementing optimizations that achieve a speedup of
==PAGE:34==
26
Background
40%, then the time-to-result is:
7 + 30 ∗(1 −0.4) = 25 days
In other words, the trained model is achieved faster despite a signiﬁcant amount
of time being spent not performing the training process. The second method
includes an amount of optimization time, deﬁned in this report as the amount
of time it takes to apply an optimization. To improve the time-to-result, opti-
mizations must provide larger improvements than their optimization time. In
this case, the improvement of 30 × 0.4 = 12 days is larger than the optimization
time of 7 days.
2.4.2
Bottlenecks
What does it actually mean to optimize a deep learning process? Is it possible to
decide on a set of modiﬁcations out of a universal group and simply apply those?
Unfortunately, no. Deep learning programs can be inﬁnitely varied and there
are no guarantees that a modiﬁcation that improves the convergence time of one
program will also do so for another. Modiﬁcations will only be optimizations
if they in some way alleviate the performance bottleneck[PH16] present in the
system.
In any computer program that includes at least 2 processes that run simultane-
ously, one will always be the slowest. This process is referred to as the bottleneck
and determines the minimum amount of time it takes to ﬁnish execution. Non-
bottlenecking processes will experience some amount of idle time[HP11] wherein
they perform no computations. Figure 2.9 shows 3 parallel processes. The pro-
cesses are given an identical amount of work, the results of which are regularly
collected into a single global result. When this is done, each process must deliver
their local result, receive the global result and receive their new tasks before they
can move on. When all of the processes are working, the program is working
eﬀectively. On the ﬁgure, process 2 is slower than process 0 and 1 and they
experience some amount of idle time. Process 2 is thus bottlenecking the pro-
gram. Figure 2.10 shows 2 scenarios. In the ﬁrst scenario, process 0 is improved
to complete the tasks in less time, in the second scenario, the same is done for
process 2. In the ﬁrst scenario, the overall execution time is not improved as
process 0 ends up experiencing even longer idle time. In the second scenario,
the overall execution time sees a stark decrease, as does the idle time, due to
the processes now working approximately equally fast. In addition, process 0
becomes the new bottleneck.
Any program that includes multiple processes always has a bottleneck and this
should be the main target of optimizations, as any improvement of its perfor-
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
27
Process 0
Process 1
Process 2
Collect Results
Effective work
Idle time
The bottleneck
Collect Results
Figure 2.9: An example of a program bottleneck.
mance will directly improve the overall performance of the program. Meanwhile,
improving any non-bottlenecking process will provide little to no speedup as
that process will simply wait that much longer. As programs are optimized,
the bottlenecking process may change and it is important that the programs
are continuously tested to detect this, so the target of optimization may change
accordingly.
It is also important to consider why a process is acting as the
bottleneck. Bottlenecks in deep learning programs occur due to the presence
of bottlenecks in the utilized hardware. A process will be the bottleneck, if it
utilizes the bottlenecking hardware. To improve performance, it is necessary to
target the bottlenecking hardware rather than trying to improve the process as
a whole. If, for example, a process is the bottleneck because it is performing
a large number of I/O-operations, then it will provide little improvement to
switch to a faster processor.
2.4.3
Hardware-Eﬃcient Deep Learning
As opposed to "standard" programs, where the priority is on versatility, the
priority of deep learning programs is on the convergence time. On top of be-
ing data-dependent, deep learning programs are also hardware-dependent. The
==PAGE:36==
28
Background
Process 0
Process 1
Process 2
Collect Results
Effective work
Idle time
The new bottleneck
Process 0
Process 1
Process 2
Collect Results
Effective work
Idle time
Still the bottleneck
Collect Results
Collect Results
Figure 2.10: The same base program as Figure 2.9. Left: Process 0 is im-
proved and the overall execution time remains the same. Right:
Process 2 is improved and the overall execution time is reduced
and process 0 becomes the new bottleneck.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
29
training process is a set of simple instructions and there is little to optimize,
software wise, in, at least, the data preparation step. Instead, the utilization of
the hardware plays a big role in determining the convergence time of a training
process. The best utilization diﬀers from system to system. For example, a
program might eﬃciently utilize the memory and computational power of one
system, but will struggle if run on another system with half the available mem-
ory.
This section presents what it means to properly utilize hardware platforms,
including how hardware bottlenecks occur and what can be done to alleviate
them. This is, in turn, relates to how the hardware causes software bottlenecks
that are more easily identiﬁed.
2.4.3.1
Platform Constraints
It is not possible to write a single complete guide on how to achieve optimal
convergence time on every platform. The optimal way to run a program on a
given system depends on both the structure of the program and the architec-
ture of the hardware, both of which have inﬁnite variability. Every platform is
diﬀerent in terms of the included components, their numbers and how they are
connected. Rather than following a speciﬁc guide, the performance constraints
of the used components give an indication as to the weaknesses and strengths
of the platform. 4 constraints are important for deep learning programs:
• The maximum processing power of the GPU
• The maximum bandwidth of the GPU communication bus
• The local memory capacity
• The global memory capacity
The available processing power is the maximum FLOPS the GPU can deliver.
The local memory capacity is the capacity of the GPU caches.
The global
memory capacity is the capacity of the entire memory system. The maximum
bandwidth of the communication bus is the maximum number of GB/s that
can be transferred to/from the GPU. These constraints are also referred to
as the maximum capacities of the components. Examples of these capacities
were shown in Section 2.1 and they deﬁne the upper limits of the hardware.
Programs cannot be made to run faster than these limits no matter how well
the code is written or the optimizations used. If one platform has low maximum
bus bandwidth compared to another platform, then it is more likely that the
==PAGE:38==
30
Background
Maximum
Load
Utilization
32 GB/s
27 GB/s
84%
32 GB/s
32 GB/s
100%
32 GB/s
48 GB/s
100% (bottleneck)
Table 2.4: Load-to-utilization correlation.
communication bus will be the bottleneck if running a deep learning program.
As is the case for any of the other constraints. The best method of achieving
good convergence time is using state-of-the-art hardware. If the GPU cannot
provide the FLOPS required to get an acceptable convergence time, the only
option is to run on better hardware. Thus, the ﬁrst and last option a developer
should consider when optimizing deep learning programs, is the quality of their
hardware.
2.4.3.2
Hardware Bottlenecks
2 terms are primarily used to deﬁne how a program utilizes its hardware.
• Load: The amount of work required of a component over a period of
time.[HP11]
• Utilization: The percentage of the maximum performance of a component
that is used over a period of time.[HP11]
The load placed on a component depends on the program being executed. The
utilization of a component depends on the load placed on it. Table 2.4 shows
the idealised correlation between load and utilization when applying 3 diﬀerent
loads on a communication bus with a maximum bandwidth of 32 GB/s. In the
ﬁrst case, the load is less than 32 GB/s and is easily performed. In the second
case, maxed utilization is achieved by the load being equal to the maximum
bandwidth. In the last case, the load is higher than the maximum. This also
achieves maximum utilization, but the bus is unable to move the data, at the
rate it is requested.
The result is that the bus becomes delayed and likely
presents a bottleneck. Why this is idealised is covered later.
Optimal hardware utilization by a deep learning program is when the utilization
of the GPUs processing power is as high as possible, at all times. If most or
all of the cores are constantly working, then the GPU is processing the data
as fast as it possibly can. By far the most computationally taxing part of the
deep learning training process is the data processing step with the forward and
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
31
backward passes through the model. For this step to begin, the data preparation
step must ﬁrst complete. From a hardware perspective, each iteration consisting
of a data preparation and a data processing step works on a ﬁxed cycle:
Step 1:
Fetch a data example from memory.
Step 2:
Save it in the local memory.
Step 3:
Process the data.
Step 4:
Repeat.
The data examples are similar and similar loads are placed on the hardware
components during each iteration. Steps 1 and 2 make up the data preparation
step and step 3 is the data processing step. Step 1 places a load on the com-
munication bus and a small load on the GPU cores in performing the pipeline
operations. Step 2 places a load on the local memory and step 3 places a load
on the GPU cores. Over the course of an epoch, the average load placed on the
GPU cores by step 3 will depend on the execution rate of steps 1 and 2. If they
are executed fast, data is made available faster and the average load is higher.
If they are executed slowly, data is made available slower and the average load
is lower. This results in the following connection being established in how to
achieve optimal hardware utilization:
Fast data preparation −→High processing load −→High processing
utilization −→Optimal utilization.
Fast data preparation, meanwhile, is achieved by placing properly balanced loads
on the local memory and the communication bus during the data preparation
step. Figure 2.11 shows 3 scenarios where the preparation of a data example
places diﬀerent average loads on the local memory and the communication bus.
In the ﬁrst scenario, the communication bus is given a load far higher than its
capacity. The communication bus is the bottleneck of the system and while its
utilization is consistently high, it is unable to provide examples at the rate the
cores process them and their utilization is low. In this case, the utilization can be
improved by shifting some of the load to the local memory. The arrows indicate
that there are multiple methods of shifting the load placed on the components,
many of which are covered in the following sections. If a similar situation occurs
with too large a load being placed on the local memory, the program will instead
most likely crash through trying to allocate more space than is available.
In the second scenario, the load placed on both the communication bus and
the local memory is lower than their maximum capacity. This has the result
that both components will run with mediocre utilization and most likely, the
rate of data is not enough to achieve high utilization of the cores. In this case,
a bottleneck still exists, but the components run at very similar speeds and
==PAGE:40==
32
Background
the bottleneck has a minimal eﬀect on the execution time. Instead, to improve
utilization, higher loads may be placed on both components by e.g. fetching
data examples more often.
The third scenario shows the ideal situation where the loads placed on the
components are approximately equal to their capacity and the utilization of the
GPU cores is high as a result.
Local
Memory
GPU Cores
Comm.
Bus
Load
Scenario 1
Local
Memory
GPU Cores
Comm.
Bus
Scenario 2
Local
Memory
GPU Cores
Comm.
Bus
Scenario 3
Figure 2.11: 3 scenarios for the average load placed on the local memory and
the communication bus by data examples and how it may aﬀects
the load placed on the GPU cores.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
33
The above arguments and scenarios show a simpliﬁed view of how high utiliza-
tion is achieved. In practice, the correlation between the loads on the compo-
nents is not as straightforward. In some cases, it will not be possible to achieve
high utilization. This is often the case when the workload is not parallelizable
enough to provide work for all the GPU cores, such as when the model being
trained is very simple. In this case, e.g. 60% utilization may be the maximum
utilization that can be achieved, regardless of the load placed on the GPU. It
is recommended to test the maximum utilization achievable by the model be-
fore beginning optimization. Alternatively, a program may include a negative
property that makes it impossible to achieve high utilization. For example, if
the data examples are extremely large and take a long time to load, then it may
be impossible to avoid a scenario similar to scenario 1. Lastly, as covered in
Section 2.1, there is a vast gap between the maximum capacities of the GPU
processing power and the bus bandwidth. While increasing the utilization of
the bandwidth will increase the utilization of the cores, there is no guarantee
that maxing the utilization of the bandwidth will also maximize the utilization
of the cores.
The global memory is rarely considered, as for it to be the bottleneck means
that the model and datasets take up more storage space than is available on the
system. This usually only happens when working on extremely limited devices
such as edge devices or raspberry pi’s. There are some methods of alleviating
this bottleneck, however, this is covered in Section 2.4.4.3.
This section has shown that optimal utilization of the hardware means to maxi-
mize the utilization of the GPU cores. Hardware bottlenecks during deep learn-
ing programs occur due to the loads placed on the components during the data
preparation and data processing steps and are most often alleviated by shifting
the loads from one component to another. However, even designing a program
properly is not guaranteed to achieve high utilization. Sometimes a mediocre
utilization is the best that can be achieved with a given program.
2.4.3.3
Platform-targeted Optimization
The platform a deep learning program is developed and tested on is not always
the same platform it will run on post-deployment. This is due to e.g. the pro-
duction platform being an expensive supercomputer that is both time consuming
to start up and expensive to run, making it poorly ﬁt for performing small tests.
In this case, it is important to collect information on both the development and
target platforms during development and to consider the diﬀerences. As stated
above, the optimal way to balance the load of computation, data storage and
communication will depend on the architecture, but if e.g. the target platform
==PAGE:42==
34
Background
has considerably more computational power but similar storage space and com-
munication speed, a shrewd developer may implement ﬂags that, when set, will
serve to balance the load of the program more on the computationally heavy
side. In the end, to achieve the best performance, it will always be necessary to
test on the target platform but achieving a good performance through at least
moderately eﬃcient optimizations is still far preferable to not optimizing at all
and it is common that the time available with the target platform is a frac-
tion of the time available with the development platform, so doing preparation
beforehand is a good way to save time.
Additionally, it is important to consider any external conditions on the target
platform. Is the deep learning program the only thing that will run on the pro-
cessors? Or may they be used for other more or less computationally expensive
tasks at the same time? Is it possible to use the closest memory device? Or
is it reserved for other purposes? These questions should be kept in mind to
avoid causing problems for other developers or customers using the platform.
As these other tasks also consume resources, it might be best that the developed
program is balanced to utilize fewer than the maximum capacity of resources.
2.4.4
Data Pipeline Optimization
As detailed in section 2.3, the speed of data delivery has a direct impact on
the convergence time of training processes.
The data delivery time depends
on the location the data comes from and how the hardware is used as it is
travelling. This section details a number of modiﬁcations that modify the usage
of the underlying hardware by data pipelines to improve the speed of the data
preparation step. Some of the modiﬁcations consist of the usage of a speciﬁc
pipeline operation, others change the order of the operations or properties of
the data examples. Some of the modiﬁcations are innocuous and easy enough
to apply that there is little to no potential downside in using them.
Other
modiﬁcations are designed to deal with speciﬁc negative properties of datasets
and may harm the performance rather than improving it. Each modiﬁcation is
covered by explaining how it works, how it may improve performance and any
potential pitfalls to watch out for.
2.4.4.1
Prefetching
Prefetching[HP11] is a common operation in most systems that deal with pro-
cessing medium to large amounts of data. Prefetching works by oﬄoading the
task of fetching data examples to a parallel background thread.
Instead of
==PAGE:43==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
35
Model
Data Pipeline
Time
Without Prefetching
Execution Time
Model
Data Pipeline
Time
With Prefetching
Execution Time
Figure 2.12: The eﬀect of prefetching.
prepending each forward pass with a data preparation step, the background
thread attempts to prepare data examples before they are required. The thread
is given a limited memory buﬀer in the GPU memory, that it is tasked to keep
full of prepared data examples at all times. While the majority of the GPU
cores are working on the model, the background thread fetches data using the
pipeline. Each time a data processing step ﬁnished, the next data example is
retrieved from the buﬀer. This, in turn, frees up space in the buﬀer and the
background thread fetches the next example. The data pipeline is commonly a
source of idle time for the majority of the GPU cores as only a limited num-
ber are used in performing the pipeline operations. Prefetching reduces this
idle-time by overlapping the data preparation time with the data processing
time. Figure 2.12 visualizes the eﬀect of processing on 5 data example where
the prefetching operation has a buﬀer size of 1. The operation eliminates the
data preparation time from the total execution time.
When the prefetching operation is used, the GPU is enabled to work on the
pipeline and model in parallel. This enables the argument presented in Sec-
tion 2.4.2 about bottlenecks. If prefetching is not enabled, the data preparation
and data processing steps are performed sequentially and no bottleneck exists.
Prefetching is almost universally helpful, as the only downside is the additional
memory required to hold the buﬀer, which is usually very small. Prefetching
==PAGE:44==
36
Background
does also increase the load on the GPU as both the data pipeline operations and
the model passes are performed simultaneously, however this is no downside as
the worst case scenario is that the execution time is the same as the sequential
case. In addition, prefetching takes advantage of the fact that the communi-
cation bus is otherwise unused during the data processing step and places no
additional load on the bus. Prefetching usually shows the smallest improve-
ments in cases where the execution time of either the data preparation or the
data processing heavily outweighs the other. This is because while prefetching
overlaps the execution times, it does not speed up the slower of the two and the
processing time of a single data example is still bound by the slower of the two
processes.
2.4.4.2
Caching
As introduced in Section 2.1, processors contain on-board memory referred to as
caches, where frequently used data is stored for quick access. The GPU memory
has the shortest access time and may be taken advantage of in the design of data
pipelines.
Caching[HP11] is an operation applied to data pipelines that takes direct control
over the data handling of the GPU memory. The operation collects the data
examples during the ﬁrst iteration over the dataset and stores them permanently
(as long as the program is running) in the GPU memory. After caching the entire
dataset, the operation deﬁnes a new dataset location of the data pipeline where
later iterations are started from. This serves 2 purposes: 1) The result of all
preceding pipeline operations are saved and never have to be performed after the
ﬁrst iteration, reducing the computational complexity of the data preparation
step. 2) With the data location moved to the GPU, I/O-operations included
in the preceding operations are eliminated, vastly improving the execution time
of the data pipeline. Optimally, caching is done late in the data pipeline to
reduce the complexity as much as possible. However, it is often the case that
data examples become larger as they move through the data pipeline and the
entire prepared dataset may not ﬁt in the GPU memory. In this case, it may
be possible to identify a point earlier in the pipeline where the examples are
smaller and the dataset ﬁts.
It is important to keep track of the memory available on the GPU. Memory
systems have automatic data handling methods that discard data that is no
longer useful. The caching operation bypasses these methods and exposes the
system to human error. If care is not taken, the situation mentioned in Section
2.4.3.2 may occur where the cache cannot hold all of the model, the cached data
and the data required for the data processing at the same time. In this case the
==PAGE:45==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
37
program will most likely crash. Using caching is one of the most eﬀective ways
of alleviating a bottleneck in the communication bus as a large part of the load
is shifted to the local memory instead. When used correctly, this provides some
of the biggest improvements in the execution time of the data preparation step.
However, if used incorrectly, when the local memory does not have available
room, it is likely to cause crashes instead.
2.4.4.3
File System Caching
In cases where there is much to gain from the caching operation, but the GPU
memory is too limited, an alternative method can be used. Instead of storing
the examples in the GPU memory, they can be stored in a ﬁle in the permanent
memory. In the rest of this report this operation is referred to as fs-caching
(File System Caching).
This method has the same upsides as caching, but
is considerably less eﬃcient due to requiring I/O-operations to load the data
again. This method is most commonly an improvement in situations where the
alternative is to perform even more I/O-operations such as when a dataset is
distributed over a large number of ﬁles. This operation is implemented similarly
to the standard caching operation, by inserting it in the data pipeline. It then
has the same eﬀect of storing the examples during the ﬁrst iteration over the
dataset.
A side eﬀect of this modiﬁcation is that the data stored in the ﬁle may consume
less memory than the original dataset. If available global memory is a concern
in the system, it may be worth performing this operation independently of the
deep learning program.
Both caching operations are particularly powerful optimizations in cases where
the data pipeline is I/O bottlenecked. Otherwise, it is diﬃcult to estimate how
powerful these operations are, as their improvements to the execution time of
the data pipeline depends on the execution time of the eliminated operations.
2.4.4.4
Operations Ordering
The order in which pipeline operations are applied and where they are included
may have an eﬀect on the execution time of the pipeline as a whole. Of course,
developers should never move operations if they are required to be performed
in a set sequence and thus break the functionality of the pipeline. Operations
are usually moved using 1 of 3 methods.
==PAGE:46==
38
Background
The ﬁrst method is based on that, in general, if an operation increases the size
of the data examples, it may increase the execution time of the later operations,
due to the larger amount of data that has to be moved around or iterated over.
If possible, ordering operations based on how little they increase the data size,
may improve performance of the pipeline. The potential gain from this method
is marginal, but so is the potential harm.
The second method relies on the methodology of the framework used. In ef-
fective deep learning frameworks, the parallelization of the pipeline operations
is automatically scaled to the amount of work. A single data example rarely
provides enough work to utilize a signiﬁcant number of the GPU cores.
By
placing operations that increase the parallelizability of the data examples early
in the pipeline, the later operations can take advantage of more of the GPU
cores. Very few pipeline operations increase the parallelizability, the most com-
mon one being the batching operation, covered in Section 2.4.5.1. This is an
eﬀective method of improving the execution time in most cases, as despite the
utilization of prefetching, the GPU cores are still rarely the bottleneck of the
hardware.
The most extreme method of moving pipeline operations is to move them from
the pipeline to the start of the model. As stated earlier, pipeline operations have
a lot in common with neural network layers and a number of them do not need to
be applied during the data pipeline. Speciﬁcally, this concerns operations that
are independent between data examples of the dataset. For example, ﬁltering
or rescaling. These operations are performed on each data example in isolation.
Moving operations to the model is an eﬀective method of taking advantage of the
overlapping introduced by prefetching. By balancing the data preparation time
with the data processing time, the maximum amount of time can be overlapped
and removed from the equation. This means that this method is only available
when prefetching is used.
This method is best used in situations where the
data pipeline is the bottleneck by a wide margin.
A downside of using this
method is that it blurs the line between the data preparation step and the data
processing step and it may be diﬃcult to determine which operations should
be kept in the pipeline and which should be moved.
There are no correct
answers to this question and some developers will probably see it as "nicer"
to keep the two completely separated and not do this at all. There are also
some operations that are independent but where developers should not use this
method.
Operations that include performing I/O-operations and operations
working on the label data should not be moved to the model. Neural networks
are complex structures that can perform a number of diﬀerent operations, but
they implement a mathematical function and should for this reason work on
exactly the data received as input and should not have to extract data from
elsewhere. Operations working on the label data simply cannot be moved to the
model as most models don’t include the label as input.
==PAGE:47==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
39
Ultimately, whether any of the methods should be used depends on the hardware
and where the bottleneck exists. Method 2 is the most recommended option as
it has no downsides and a signiﬁcant potential upside if the utilization of the
GPU cores is not already maxed.
2.4.4.5
Working On Data Stand-ins
Pipeline operations belonging to group 2 deﬁned in Section 2.3 are usually data-
agnostic operations that work on the dataset as a whole and modify the ordering
or grouping of the data examples, rather than their contents. These are opera-
tions such as shuﬄing or batching the data examples. Because these operations
don’t consider the content of the examples, it is not necessary to work on the
actual data. Instead, data pipelines may work on smaller "stand-ins" in place
of the data examples early in the pipeline, that are parsed into the actual exam-
ples later. Doing so has the same eﬀect of reducing the amount of data moved
around, as the ﬁrst method of moving operations. The stand-ins can in essence
be anything that is easily parsed into the corresponding examples, but if the
parsing takes too long, it may invalidate the improvement of this strategy. This
strategy is most commonly used when working with datasets distributed over
a number of ﬁles where each ﬁle corresponds to a single data example. In this
case, the ﬁle names function perfectly as stand-ins and the ﬁle-parsing function
translates the names to the examples.
This strategy involves modifying data pipelines to work on these stand-ins. The
start of an image data pipeline utilizing this technique could look as follows:
1. Load the image ﬁlenames.
2. Using the ﬁlenames as stand-ins, perform group 2 operations.
3. Perform the parsing operations.
4. Perform group 1 operations.
To put the diﬀerence in memory-consumption into perspective, for an arbitrary
ﬁle in the colored KITTI -dataset[GLU12], the size of the full path of the ﬁle
equals ≈0.007% the size of the image data.
This is a very speciﬁc strategy and similarly to the ﬁrst method of moving
operations, the improvement in execution time is often negligible. However, in
some situations, this strategy allows the pipeline to perform certain operations
it otherwise could not. If an operation requires loading the entire dataset, at
==PAGE:48==
40
Background
that point in the pipeline, into memory but there is not enough free space, then
this strategy may be used to reduce the size of the dataset and perform the
operation.
2.4.5
Training Process Optimization
Until now, in this report, the training process has been described as a simple
method of repeating epochs and iterations, that, when started, runs for a set
number of epochs and outputs a trained model that may or may not solve the
given task. This is the simplest way to consider the training process but there
are a number of ways in which it can be stabilized or shortened. This section
covers a number of modiﬁcations used to improve the convergence time and/or
the quality of trained deep models. A number of diﬀerent types of modiﬁcations
are presented. Some change hyperparameters of the training process. Others
dictate the usage of training modiﬁcation methods that add certain functionality
to the process. Yet others are similar modiﬁcations to those presented in the
previous section, that add a speciﬁc operation to the data pipelines. Some of the
modiﬁcations are based on utilizing the hardware more eﬃciently, others provide
optimizations from an algorithmic angle. The methods all have in common that
they speciﬁcally modify the training process. Similarly to the previous section,
not all modiﬁcations will improve performance in every situation and if used
incorrectly, may instead worsen it. Developers must choose which methods to
use and which to disregard. Each modiﬁcation is detailed by how they work,
how they improve performance and any pitfalls and rules for when they should
be used.
2.4.5.1
Batching
In practice, the training process is not run using individual data examples. In-
stead, examples are grouped into batches[GBC16] by adding an outer dimension
to the tensors containing the data examples. For the iris ﬂower dataset, the data
examples have the shape: (4). When put into batches of size 8, they have the
shape: (8, 4). Every method previously covered in this report, that operates
on data examples, is easily extended to work on data batches instead by doing
the same work on each example in the batch. The exception to this is the loss
function which is instead computed as the average loss over the examples.
The goal of using batching is to stabilize the training process by improving
the quality of each update made to the model parameters.
Individual data
examples are not representative of the training dataset as a whole and the loss
==PAGE:49==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
41
value found from a single example only represents the model’s ability to handle
that speciﬁc example. Updating the model based on this value will only make it
better at handling that example in the future. This can have the adverse eﬀect
of making the model worse at handling other examples in the training dataset
and iterations may make opposing updates to the parameters, based on the
example used. This makes the training process unstable and the rate at which
the model improves may be diﬀerent each time the training is run. Batching
stabilizes the training process by applying updates using the average loss over
the examples included in the batches instead. Given that more examples are
included, the average loss value more accurately represents the training dataset
and the model improves at similar rates between runs. Batching is applied using
a pipeline operation and is so common in deep learning that it is considered a
hyperparameter rather than an optimization. As mentioned in Section 2.4.4.4,
placing the batching operation early in the pipeline improves the execution time.
This is due to the later operations automatically parallelizing over the examples
included in each batch.
The problem remains of ﬁnding the correct batch size to use. In theory, the most
correct updates are found by using the average loss over every data example in
the training dataset and set the batch size to the number of examples in the
training dataset. However, research has shown that doing this may actually
harm the performance of the ﬁnal model by harming its ability to generalize
over the data[KMN+16][GG18]. Instead, training is done using batches with
a size only a fraction of the size of the dataset, typically equal to a number
from the binary number series: (2, 4, 8, 16, . . . ). There are no rules for choosing
the correct batch size.
The qualitative solution is: "Larger batch sizes are
better, unless they are too large." In practice, developers use their experience
and testing to determine the correct size.
2.4.5.2
Shuﬄing
Another common practice when training deep models is to shuﬄe the data at
the start of each epoch to avoid any systematic trends present in the order
of the examples. It has been shown on multiple occasions that shuﬄing the
data improves convergence time and may also improve the performance of the
ﬁnal model[RR13][MKR21][KCY18]. For this reason shuﬄing is considered a
standard practice[Sun20].
Minimization problems such as the one solved by the training process have a
classic problem of getting stuck in local minima. Shuﬄing the data is the most
eﬀective method of reducing the probability of this happening. In deep learning,
a common cause of getting stuck in local minima is if the data examples are
==PAGE:50==
42
Background
grouped together in an unfortunate way. To give a simpliﬁed example, assume
a dataset consisting of 16 examples. 6 examples are of type X, that have an
optimal minima diﬀerent from the remaining 10 examples, that are of type Y
and have the same optimal minima as the global minima over the entire dataset.
The examples are grouped into 4 batches of size 4 as given below:
XXXY
XXXY
YYYY
YYYY
In this case, despite having fewer total examples, the average loss over the two
ﬁrst batches will be dominated by the X-examples and updates made using
them will trend towards to local minima. Despite the other two batches making
updates towards the global minima, the model may get "stuck" in the local
minima, if the updates are not large enough to escape it. As there are fewer
total X-examples, if shuﬄing is used, it is unlikely that the batches will be
dominated by the X-examples and the model will more easily escape the local
minima.
Shuﬄing is considered a standard practice, but raises certain requirements for
the hardware. To reduce the chance of creating the same data batches mul-
tiple times, shuﬄing should be done at the start of every epoch and perfect
shuﬄing[Hon] is strongly preferred. Perfect shuﬄing is when the entire dataset
is shuﬄed at once, with every data example having an equal likelihood of be-
ing shuﬄed into any index. Doing this requires loading the entire dataset into
memory at once, which can only be done if there is enough free memory on the
GPU. If this is not the case, imperfect shuﬄing[Hon] must be done, which is less
eﬀective at removing trends. Section 2.4.4.3 covered how this problem may be
overcome. Additionally, shuﬄing also poses a few limitations when it comes to
optimizing the data pipeline. Shuﬄing is often included as a pipeline operation
and must be done before both the caching and batching operations. This adds
an amount of rigidity to the data pipeline with speciﬁc operations having to be
done in a set order.
2.4.5.3
Early Stopping
Most modern deep learning systems include a method for early stopping[GBC16].
Early stopping is a process modiﬁcation method that adds one or more stopping
criteria[GBC16] to the training process, that, when fulﬁlled, halt the training
process. Stopping criteria are designed to address the problem of determining
when a model has been trained exactly enough to avoid underﬁtting[GBC16]
and overﬁtting[GBC16]. Figure 2.13 illustrates these concepts. If a model is
not trained long enough, it will underﬁt the training data, which means that it
==PAGE:51==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
43
Underfitting
Overfitting
Correct fit
Figure 2.13: Underﬁtting, overﬁtting and correct ﬁt.
has not yet learned everything of value from it. If the model is instead trained
for too long, it may overﬁt the training data and will identify inconsequential
details speciﬁc to the training dataset as important information. This has the
eﬀect that the model becomes worse at generalizing to unseen data examples.
To get the best quality model, the training should run for just enough epochs
that neither is in eﬀect.
Good stopping criteria are chosen based on how well the model performs on
the validation dataset as this is the measurement for how good the model is at
adapting to unseen data. The most commonly used stopping criteria are either
based on stagnation or deterioration of the performance on the validation data
over a number of epochs.
Early stopping improves the convergence time and the quality of the trained
model by stopping the training process at the point where the model performs
best. The eﬀect of early stopping depends on the task, the model is designed
to solve and if the training dataset is large, it is less likely that the model
will overﬁt[ZBH+16]. Early stopping has little risk of negatively impacting the
training process.
2.4.5.4
Learning Rate Scheduling
The learning rate of the optimizer is the measure for how large the updates
should be.
At the early stages of training, the model beneﬁts greatly from
large updates that change the model from outputting mostly random noise to
having a basic understanding of the dataset. As training progresses, the worth
of large updates deteriorates as the model needs to learn the ﬁner details of the
==PAGE:52==
44
Background
Optimum
Figure 2.14: A visual representation of the evolution of a model’s ability to
minimize a loss function.
The high learning rate means each
update is too large to hit the optimum and "bounces" back and
forth.
data. If the learning rate is too large as the model is nearing the optimum,
each update may "overshoot" it and "bounce" back and forth past it. A visual
representation of this is shown in Figure 2.14. In this case, the model may either
waste a number of epochs walking around the optimum or it may never reach
it.
Learning rate scheduling or learning rate reduction[Lau] is a modiﬁcation method
that prevents this problem by reducing the learning rate as the training process
progresses. The two most common methods are either reducing the learning
rate in stages, that, when reached, reduce the learning rate or using a reduction
function/decay function[Lau]. The function takes the learning rate and the cur-
rent epoch as input and returns a new learning rate. Alternatively, learning rate
reduction can also be triggered by a stopping criteria. The desired behaviour
of learning rate reduction is shown on Figure 2.15. As the model parameters
near the optimum, the updates becomes progressively smaller and the optimum
is reached easily. In practice, the reduction is much more gradual than shown
here.
Learning rate reduction improves the quality of the trained model and the con-
vergence time by allowing it to reach the optimum more easily. However, the
problem of overshooting the optimum is not present in every deep learning pro-
gram and those that do not have it will not beneﬁt from learning rate reduction.
==PAGE:53==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
45
Optimum
Figure 2.15: A visual representation of a deep learning model’s ability to mini-
mize a loss function. The learning rate gets progressively smaller,
and the model can eventually reach the optimum.
2.4.5.5
Distributed Deep Learning
Using distribution is a classic method of improving the performance of a program
when multiple processors are available. Deep learning programs fall under the
category of embarrassingly parallel problems[Wik].
Problems with extremely
clear methods of parallelization, where it is almost embarrassing if it is not used
in their execution. Parallelization is implicitly used when executing on a GPU as
frameworks handle distributing the computations to the GPU cores. Distributed
deep learning refers to the utilization of multiple GPUs to train the same model.
The question is, how are deep learning programs best parallelized? The two most
common methods are data parallelism[GBC16] and model parallelism[GBC16].
A general rule of using parallelization is to only use it once the sequential execu-
tion time is fully optimized. This is also the case in deep learning and distributed
training should be the last modiﬁcation considered.
Data Parallelism
The methodology of data parallelism is illustrated on Figure 2.16. Each pro-
cessor receives a copy of the complete model before training is started. This
model is called the local model. A splitting operation is inserted at the end of
the data pipeline, which splits the data batches into chunks with equal numbers
of examples and sends one chunk to each of the processors. The global batch
size[Tenb] is the total number of data examples being trained on, the sum of the
==PAGE:54==
46
Background
Processor 0
Processor 1
Processor 2
Model
Batch
Global loss
Micro-batch
Micro-batch
Micro-batch
Pipeline
Figure 2.16: Data Parallelism: The data batches are split between multiple
processors.
chunks. After each processor performs the forward pass, the loss is computed as
the average loss over the global batch size and is distributed to each processor.
The processors use the global loss to apply updates to the local models. As the
processors were given identical models initially and updates are non-random,
the local models are identical after each update.
Data parallelism requires that the model and a micro-batch can ﬁt on each pro-
cessor and improves convergence time by processing data batches signiﬁcantly
faster. The drawback of data parallelism is the amount of communication re-
quired. For each data batch, the data pipeline must send a message to each
processor and a reduction algorithm must be used to collect and distribute the
global loss. If this communication takes longer than the improvement gained
from the distribution, this method will yield little to no improvement. Addition-
ally, the method gets bottlenecked by the slowest processor as the local loss from
each must be computed before work can start on the next iteration. This means
that it may be best to only use the most powerful device(s), even if multiple are
available.
==PAGE:55==
2.4 Deep Learning Optimization
47
Processor 0
Processor 1
Processor 2
Model
Micro-batch
Processed
Batch
Figure 2.17: Model Parallelism: The layers of the deep model are split between
multiple processors
Model Parallelism:
Model parallelism is also referred to as pipeline parallelism. The method is il-
lustrated on Figure 2.17 and is where the model is split between layers and
divided among multiple processors placed in a sequence: p0, p1, . . . , pn, n pro-
cessors long. This method is also used to train models that are too large to
ﬁt on a single GPU. Model parallelism also utilizes micro-batches, but instead
of splitting batches to diﬀerent processors they are used to mimic data stream-
ing for the forward pass. The forward pass is executed similarly to the data
pipelines with each processor beginning work on the next micro-batch as they
are made available or when it is ﬁnished with the previous micro-batch. In this
way, multiple processors can work on diﬀerent parts of the batch at the same
time. The complete batch of results is concatenated at the end of the sequence,
the loss is computed and the backward pass is performed as normal backwards
through the sequence.
The improvement from model parallelism comes primarily from the reduction
in idle time of the layers of the model. The model can be split as wished, which
means that processors can receive an uneven number of layers based on how
==PAGE:56==
48
Background
time-consuming they are. Model parallelism only improves performance if the
time saved by working on the data in a streaming fashion is larger than the time
lost in communicating between the devices. This is most often the case when
models are very deep with a large number of layers. Just like data parallelism,
model parallelism also allows for utilizing larger batch sizes as the complete
batch is only present on the last GPU where the loss is computed.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 3
Related Work
Deep learning is a ﬁeld that has grown quickly and has sprouted various smaller,
more specialized ﬁelds of study. In recent years, a lot of work has gone into the
development of new deep learning methodology and model structures. Signif-
icant work has also gone into developing various methods of optimizing deep
learning programs, often in very low-level or hardware-near ﬁelds.
3.1
State-Of-The-Art Deep Learning
State-of-the-art deep learning models are growing larger and larger. The current
largest Natural Language Processing (NLP) model is the Generative Pre-Trained
Transformer (GPT-3), detailed by Brown et al.[BMR+20] in june of 2020. The
GPT-3 model consists of 175 billion parameters and is the third generation of
a line of NLP models. It is a transformer model which, while similar to RNN
models, have the distinction of not needing to process data sequentially.
In
language tasks such as determining the correct word used in a sentence, this
allows transformers to identify the context that is relevant for determining the
word. In addition, transformers have a higher degree of parallelization as they
can work on each token in the input data in parallel.
One of the current trends in NLP, that has shown promising results, is making
==PAGE:58==
50
Related Work
use of pretrained models and ﬁne-tuning them. Models are trained on large
corpuses of data allowing them to perform a wide variety of tasks and then
ﬁne-tuned based on separate datasets that more speciﬁcally cover the desired
task. The developers of GPT-3 pair this with another recent trend: The trend
of using ever larger transformer models, citing how increasing the number of
parameters has brought about improvements in the ability of models to solve
NLP tasks in various papers ([RN18][RWC+19][RSR+20] among others).
In the GPT-3 paper, the authors study the possibility of doing away with the
ﬁne-tuning process, due to it requiring large speciﬁc datasets for each task,
which may be diﬃcult to obtain. Rather than using ﬁne-tuning, the authors
propose Few-Shot-, One-Shot- and Zero-Shot learning. In the former setting,
the model is given a few demonstrations of the task it is meant to complete,
but is not allowed to make weight updates based on them. In the One-shot and
Zero-shot settings, the model receives one or no demonstrations but also receives
a natural language description of the task to complete. These settings oﬀer a
major reduction in the amount of data required to adapt models to NLP tasks.
The paper shows varying results, being promising in the One-Shot and Zero-
Shot settings and on par with other state-of-that-art models in the Few-Shot
setting. It displays certain Few-Shot settings where it performs poorly such as
natural language inference tasks. Various results are presented in an attempt
to stimulate further study in the topic.
While using the proposed training settings all but removes the training time
required for modifying GPT-3 to a speciﬁc task, the pretrained model itself
still needs to be trained to provide the groundwork for further speciﬁcation.
This training was done using a mixture of 5 datasets totaling 499 billion token.
The paper includes that training the model on a single NVIDIA Tesla V100
GPU would take approximately 10 years. While the exact training time is not
included, it has been estimated that it cost around 5 million dollars to train the
base model. Narayanan et al.[NSC+21] estimate that performing this training
using 1000 of the newer NVIDIA Ampere A100 GPUs would take approximately
34 days. While this training is only required to be performed once, this gives
an idea of the extreme amounts of processing required in state-of-the-art deep
learning.
3.2
Hardware Acceleration
The primary deciding factor of how long it takes to run any program is the hard-
ware it is run on. No matter how eﬃciently the available resources are used,
the execution time of a program cannot be faster than the slowest sequentially
==PAGE:59==
3.2 Hardware Acceleration
51
running process. Training deep learning systems is a simple, but speciﬁc task,
requiring only a few types of operations, but with a number that may rise into
the quintillions over the course of a complete training process. These properties
of deep learning make it an ideal subject for targeted hardware development.
The study of designing hardware speciﬁcally for executing deep learning pro-
grams eﬃciently.
Accelerators
Accelerators are computer components that are designed to speed up the pro-
cessing of one or a few speciﬁc operations. An accelerator can be designed for
any processing task that can be done by the CPU and standard home comput-
ers typically include a few. The hallmark for the performance of an accelerator
is the speed-up gained through distribution of some parts of a program to the
accelerator. Probably the most well-known accelerator is the GPU which was
originally designed to eﬃciently process high-resolution graphics and image pro-
cessing operations. Graphics processing operations require many of the same
operations as deep learning processes and GPUs quickly showed to be eﬀective
accelerators for deep learning programs as well.
NVIDIA[NVIb] is the leading company in developing GPUs for machine learn-
ing purposes. The company has developed the CUDA framework[NVIa], which
allows for running custom code directly on their GPUs, something that common
deep learning frameworks like TensorFlow and Torch automatically take advan-
tage of. In 2018 the company announced the deployment of newly developed
tensor cores in their next line of GPUs, the NVIDIA Tesla V100[NVIe]. Markidis
et al.[MCL+18] detail the architecture of both the new line of GPUs and the
programmability of the tensor cores. The paper studies the impact of utiliz-
ing tensor cores and while they are extremely fast delivering 83 TeraFLOPS,
they do so using mixed ﬂoating point precision. They conclude that because
the cores are able to provide between a 2.5×-12× speed-up compared to using
the older cuda cores, the GPUs will be highly eﬃcient for processing large deep
learning workloads. However, their use in general High Performance Computing
(HPC) may be limited without utilizing further precision-increasing methods.
In 2020, NVIDIA announced their 3rd generation tensor cores: the A100 ten-
sor cores promising performance increases between 2.5× and 20×, based on the
precision.
Another GPU manufacturer, Intel[Inta] is also investing in the development
of GPUs for deep learning. The company has developed Intel©Deep Learning
Boost[Intb], an extension to the instruction set of their existing GPUs that allow
grouping of the most common deep learning operations into single instructions.
Additionally, they have funded research into alternative accelerators. Rodriguez
et al.[RSM+18] among others, study the possiblities in designing FPGAs to take
advantage of performance boosts gained by reducing ﬂoating point precisions
==PAGE:60==
52
Related Work
through physically reducing the data path. The paper cites other research pa-
pers done on the eﬀects of reducing the ﬂoating point precision to achieve faster
convergence times without sacriﬁcing unacceptable amounts of accuracy. They
provide a comparison between a Stratix 10 2800 FPGA[Intc] framework and a
Titan X Pascal GPU [NVId] in the number of images processed per second of
diﬀerent Image Classiﬁcation models. The results show that while the GPU has
the upper hand at higher precisions and larger batch sizes, the FPGA is faster
at lower precisions showing a potential future in employing FPGAs for deep
learning especially in low precision environments.
Aside from FPGAs, other accelerators have also shown an ability to process
deep learning tasks. In 2015 Google completed the development of their Tensor
Processing Units[Cloa](TPU), a type of Application Speciﬁc Integrated Cir-
cuit (ASIC) designed speciﬁcally for deep neural networks that now powers
many of their products such as Translate, Search and Assistant.
Jouppi et
al.[JYP+17] performed a performance comparison between the TPU, an Intel
Haswell CPU [Intd] and a NVIDIA K80 GPU [NVIf], showing that the TPU
achieves both a higher number of TeraFLOPS and does so more electrically-
eﬃcient. In 2022, this study is quite dated, but TPU are still utilized by Google
for computation purposes and in their cloud services.
Developing hardware accelerators requires a large amount of time and resources
and is thus mostly limited to large companies. However recent years have seen
no shortage of companies willing to invest in further development and research
is still branching into using new accelerators.
3.3
Software Optimization
Training a deep learning model is a process which involves iterating over a
dataset and passing chunks of data through the model using a series of well-
deﬁned mathematical operations for both the forward and backward pass. Hav-
ing the execution time be dominated by well-deﬁned arithmetic operations opens
the way for software optimization of deep learning programs through the devel-
opment of various methods of executing or distributing the code. In the right
situation, the correct software strategy can provide large performance boosts.
Batching
The batch size is one of the most important hyperparameters of machine learning
processes and how to choose the optimal size has been studied for many years.
It was originally thought that larger batch sizes would lead to more correct
results as each update made to the model parameters would be based on a
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Software Optimization
53
larger portion of the dataset. In recent years, various studies have shown that
this is not the case [KMN+16][GG18][GZ20] and instead that larger batch sizes
lead to a drop in the generalizability of the model.
Keskar et al.[KMN+16]
investigated the reason behind this drop in quality and found evidence to support
that the drop is due to larger batch sizes converging to sharper minimizers
which show worse generalizablity. Minimizers are deﬁned as the functions that,
through iterative updates, minimize the average loss-function result. Converging
to a ﬂat minimizer means that the resulting function has small variance in a
wide neighbourhood around the optimum, whereas a sharp minimizer results
in a function displaying more rapid changes in values around the optimum.
Testing on 6 diﬀerent networks over 4 diﬀerent datasets revealed that the models
trained with smaller batches achieved higher accuracies across the board in
both training and testing accuracy. Certain methods of potentially remedying
the generalization loss of using large batch sizes are proposed including data
augmentation and adversarial training as well as dynamic sampling. A method
where the batch size is gradually increased during training. The latter of which
is supported by Smith et al.[SKYL18] who also suggest increasing the batch size
as an alternative to learning rate decay.
This continuous wide-spread studying being done on one of the few truly ac-
cepted methods of deep learning shows the diﬃculty inherent in developing
optimal deep learning programs. As a hyperparameter considered by the opti-
mization processes implemented in this project, this knowledge is essential in
properly developing the decision process of when certain modiﬁcations should
be implemented.
Distributed Deep Learning
A classic method of speeding up deep learning is by making use of distribution of
the computations. Deep learning programs are well-suited to being distributed
and it has been shown that there are multiple methods of distributing com-
putations. But given the large quantities of data and values that are moved
through the system as a part of training a model, distribution invariably in-
curs a signiﬁcant communication overhead and the speedup scales poorly with
increases in the number of clusters. This has resulted in the development of
2 branches of methods of reducing the communication overhead. One branch
employs quantization methods to reduce the size of the communicated values
[ZWN+18][WXY+17][MNA+18], the other focuses on developing algorithms
for performing the communication more eﬃciently[WPZ19][SXL+19][HJC18].
Wang et al.[WPZ19] performed a study focusing on improving the scalability of
clusters in a parameter-server setting where a single server maintains the model
parameters and worker-clusters work on the data by requesting the parameters
as required. The paper proposes the usage of iBatch, a communication strategy
based on overlapping the process of communicating parameters with computa-
tions of the forward pass. The idea is similar to the eﬀect of prefetching but
==PAGE:62==
54
Related Work
the added complexity of free control over how much communication to perform
and when, lead to the development of a greedy search algorithm that seeks to
maximize the overlapping time. The algorithm was tested on various models
with various degrees of distribution and achieved a speedup up to 73% that of
the standard parameter server solution.
Deep learning programs are only expected to become more complex and at
one point the only remaining method optimization will be distribution. Dor
this reason, it is good that scientists have already begun considering how to
optimize distribution strategies, especially as this requires a separate group of
scientists than classic deep learning developers.
Deep Learning Compilers
One branch of software optimization studies the development of Deep Learning
Compilers, that is, compilers speciﬁcally designed for deep learning programs,
taking advantage of the parallelizability of the deep learning training process
and the high reliance on the GPU.
Li et al.[LLL+20] performed a study in 2020 on the current state of deep learning
compilers. In it, the common architecture of deep learning compilers is covered
in detail and the commonly used optimization techniques are illustrated. The
paper details how deep learning compilers are commonly separated into a fron-
tend and a backend, both working on an Intermediate Representation (IR) of the
program the compiler is optimizing. The IR is also split into a High-Level IR and
a Low-Level IR which are worked on by a frontend and backend, respectively.
The high-level IR is also known as the Graph IR as it consists of the program
graph which details the control ﬂow of the program and shows the dependency
between operations and data. The compiler frontend performs graph-level opti-
mizations through multiple passes over the graph. Many of these are well-known
optimizations such as Common Sub-Expression Elimination (CSE) and Dead
Code Elimination (DCE). The frontend also applies certain Algebraic Simpli-
ﬁcations which simplify the use of variables in algebraic operations. The Op-
erator Fusion optimization is important for deep learning compilers. Operator
fusion is the act of fusing nodes of primitive operations in the program graph
into composite operations. Among other things, this eliminates the need for
allocating memory for intermediate results and it is cited as "indispensable"
by the authors, due to the high number of sequential arithmetic operations in
deep learning processes. The program graph depends solely on the code as it
is written and is hardware-independent making any optimizations made by the
frontend equally hardware-independent.
The low-level IR is designed for hardware-speciﬁc optimizations.
Unlike the
high-level IR, the best model for the low-level IR is still a topic of discussion.
==PAGE:63==
3.3 Software Optimization
55
Two of the most popular structures are Halide-based which separates the com-
putations and their schedule and Polyhedral-based[Wil93] which uses linear pro-
gramming and aﬃne transformations to achieve better results on deeply nested
loops. To name a few hardware-speciﬁc optimizations that the backend com-
monly applies, they are: Hardware Intrinsic Mapping which transforms new
instructions into previously optimized kernels, Memory Latency Hiding through
reordering operations in the execution pipeline to overlap latency with useful
computation and Loop Oriented Optimizations which perform a long list of op-
timizations such as Loop Fusion, Loop Reordering and Loop Unrolling.
The study concludes with a comparison of the performance of diﬀerent deep
learning compilers, compiling the same deep learning program. The comparison
ﬁnds a diﬀerence in training time of up to 2 orders of magnitude, revealing
that signiﬁcant performance gains exist in utilizing well designed deep learning
compilers. The comparison also shows how diﬀerent compilers perform better
in diﬀerent situations, both in terms of the program they seek to optimize and
the hardware the program is run on.
This signiﬁes that there is a need for
determining the situations where optimizations are best used.
The hardware-speciﬁc optimizations performed by the deep learning compiler
backend has certain similarities to the work on automatic deep learning op-
timization done in this project and was used as an inspiration as well as a
deﬁning line that should not be crossed. There are 2 main diﬀerences in their
purposes: 1) The Optimization Unit developed as part of this project provides
mid-level optimizations and investigates how operations may best be used. It
is program-agnostic whereas compilers are bound the code as it is written and
poorly written code can prevent compilers from applying certain optimizations.
2) The Optimization Unit performs online testing by running the code which it
uses to gather real metrics on the performance of the training process.
Automatic Machine Learning
When talking about automation of machine learning processes, what is most
often the topic is AutoML (Automatic Machine Learning) and if it considers
speciﬁcally deep learning, then its subﬁeld Neural Architecture Search (NAS).
AutoML and NAS are practices based on identifying the best machine learning
model for a given task through an automated process. AutoML did not have its
name when it was ﬁrst introduced in 2013 by Thornton et al.[THHLB13] who
proposed a process based on Bayesian optimization, instead it came later. The
task of ﬁnding the optimal model is famously diﬃcult and machine learning
scientists generally accept that the optimal model is not the goal. The only
way to determine the optimum is through exhaustively testing every model and
every conﬁguration of hyperparameters, however a number of models will yield
acceptable results as they are close to the optimum and utilizing one of these is
generally preferred.
==PAGE:64==
56
Related Work
The original AutoML paper deﬁnes the problem of determining a model and
its hyperparameters as combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter op-
timization (CASH) and sets it up as an optimization problem of minimizing
a function similar to the minimization problem sought to be solved by deep
models. However, in addition to labelled data, the loss-function also takes a
choice of model A and parameter space λ, deﬁning its hyperparameters. An
algorithm Auto-WEKA is proposed which takes a dataset and a choice of search
algorithm, as input and uses the parameters to pick from a suite of potential
models and hyperparameter optinos. The paper shows that the algorithm ﬁnds
the best results using a Bayesian optimization search algorithm which explores
the search space and iteratively gives ideas as to new directions to search and
often out-performed state-of-the-art models on a set of 21 datasets.
Neural Architecture Search, the more popular topic in recent years, was pro-
posed in 2017 by Zoph and V. Le [ZL16] seeking to solve the same problem
as AutoML but with deep learning models rather than non-deep models. At-
tempting to perform the same optimization process on deep models presents a
new issue to overcome. While non-deep machine learning models have a large
number of options for hyperparameters, deep learning models have an inﬁnite
number due to their variable number of layers. This meant that using the same
technique of utilizing a search algorithm that directly explores the search space
is no longer feasible. Instead, the paper proposes the use of a reinforcement
learning approach that utilizes a recurrent neural network controller to deﬁne
models in a number of iterations. The recurrent neural network is responsible
for proposing networks to test. It accepts an input of random noise and de-
ﬁnes layers iteratively by: 1) deciding whether to stop adding more layers, 2)
if another layer should be added then choosing the type of layer, 3) deﬁning
each hyperparameter in a number of steps. 4) Repeat from 1). The proposed
reinforcement learning method is maximization of the expected reward with
updates to the network parameters using Reinforce method rule deﬁned by
Williams[Wil04]. This method is used to train the recurrent neural network to
propose the best deep neural network. Updates to the network are made based
on the reward gained in each iteration. To gain a reward the proposed neural
network is trained to completion and the accuracy on the validation dataset is
used as the reward. The results show performance of the generated models on
par with state-of-the-art models on the CIFAR10 and Penn Treebank datasets.
AutoML and NAS have shown promising results but share some of the most
common problems of machine- and deep learning, namely that the processes
can be extremely time-consuming. This is especially the case for NAS which,
while providing an elegant solution to the combinatorial issue, is dependant on
training a model to completion during each iteration of the algorithm. This
means that it may involve training hundreds of models to train one optimal
model. No current issues in deep learning require the added performance gained
==PAGE:65==
3.3 Software Optimization
57
through such a method if it comes with multiple factors of increased computa-
tional load. However, this problem did not go unnoticed and a year later Zoph,
V. Le et al. released a paper proposing Eﬃcient Neural Architecture Search
(ENAS)[PGZ+18], which, while not removing the problem of added computa-
tional load, lessens the load considerably using transfer learning between the
proposed networks.
The methods utilized in optimizing the performance of deep neural networks
through automated processes unsurprisingly provided signiﬁcant inspiration in
how to develop methods for optimizing the convergence time. Especially one of
the processes developed as part of this project took inspiration in the technique
used by NAS. NAS also showed the pitfalls to avoid in working with automated
processes, speciﬁcally reliance on running training processes to completion.
Cloud Computing
The scale of modern deep learning tasks has increased faster than the power of
the accelerators present in non-supercomputer architectures, adding a certain
barrier of entry for companies and individuals wanting to develop deep learn-
ing solutions. To counteract this, larger companies have begun oﬀering pow-
erful processors for training deep models in the cloud. While not technically
a method of speeding up deep learning, increasing the accessibility of powerful
processors does improve the overall usage of deep learning as smaller companies
and individuals do not have to settle for weaker processors that will take a long
time to execute their programs. These systems work in much the same way as
other cloud-based solutions, but speciﬁcally focus on providing some of the most
powerful hardware on the market.
Google’s Cloud TPU uses the tensor processing units mentioned above to oﬀer
processing time on extremely high-end hardware systems through either Python
Colab notebooks or a REST API. Microsoft oﬀers processing power through the
Microsoft Azure platform and its integration with the Databricks workspace. In
2017 Amazon Web Services also began providing deep learning cloud solutions
which quickly developed into supporting most of the common deep learning
frameworks.
The increased availability of deep learning-capable processors marks a turning
point in the use of deep learning systems.
Smaller software companies that
cannot aﬀord the investment into supercomputer-level processors or a place to
house them can now create deep learning solutions through cloud hosting making
deep learning more much widely utilized. Enabling more widespread usage does
come with the result that a wider array of development and implementation
techniques are being used for deep learning, not all of which are eﬀective. This
further increases the need for standardization of deep learning development and
its optimization.
==PAGE:66==
58
Related Work
Edge computing
The Internet-of-things is one of the newest big-data challenges researchers are
seeking to solve using deep learning. With the numerous smart devices present
in modern society, petabytes of data are being collected every second and it has
been shown that transporting everything to the cloud for processing is simply
not a viable strategy. Instead, some amount of work must be done outside of
the cloud using Edge Computing.
Edge Computing is the act of performing
processing on Edge Devices; the devices that perform the data collection or
ones closely related to them. These devices are typically limited in terms of
processing power and storage space. Constraints that are not uncommon when
developing deep learning solutions, but in this case are considerably more severe
than normal.
In 2020, Samuel Felipe dos Santos and Jurandy Almeida published a study[dSA20]
detailing the development of a neural network capable of training on compressed
image data, working directly on Discrete Cosine Transform Coeﬃcients (DCT
Coeﬃcients) that are used for JPEG compression. This methodology saves the
computational load involved in decoding the image data as well as the storage
space the decoded data would consume. The article expands on the CoViAR
method introduced by Wu et al.[WZH+18] which works on compressed video
data and proposes Fast-CoViAR. A similar method that does not need to decode
image frames and learns directly from the DCT Coeﬃcients. Various compari-
son of performance on diﬀerent datasets and using diﬀerent models are shown.
One is a comparison of methods of implementing the ResNet-50 model. The
comparison shows a lower accuracy for the DCT-based models with a 6.0%
lower accuracy on a version of the ILSVRC12 dataset with 211 classes and
a 2.34% lower accuracy on a version with 12 classes. Another comparison is
made between the CoViAR and Fast-CoViAR methods and their accuracy on
the UCF-101 and HMDB-51 datasets and while the Fast-CoViAR method still
achieves inferior accuracy values it also shows to have only half the computa-
tional complexity. The study gives a look into the ﬁeld of training deep learning
models on alternative data sources and shows that the computational and mem-
ory complexities can be reduced considerably through this.
Other common methods are based on post-training compression, that is, com-
pression deep models after they have been trained. Cheng et al.[CWZZ20] per-
formed a survey in 2020 on state-of-the-art model compression techniques. The
survey details the most popular model compression techniques including quan-
tization and parameter pruning. Quantization is the technique of changing the
datatypes used to represent model parameter to ones with smaller bit sizes.
Any amount of reduction is helpful and in some extreme cases it is possible to
reduce some parameters to 1-bit representations or to binary numbers in other
words. The study states that the intuition that reducing the representation size
will also reduce the accuracy is correct, this is especially true on large convolu-
==PAGE:67==
3.3 Software Optimization
59
tional neural networks, but less so on smaller models. Network Pruning is the
technique of removing model parameters or connections entirely, this may done
beforehand and some studies employ algorithms that prune connections based
on the Hessian matrix of the loss function[HS92]. The more common method is
by observing a trained model and removing the least informative parameters as
explored by e.g. Srinivas and Babu[SB15].
Support for these techniques has recently been developed in TensorFlow with
the release of the TensorFlow Lite library, a light-weight version of the original
library designed for providing methods of running inference on deep learning
models on mobile- and edge devices through post-training compression. Taking
advantage of this library, Google has developed a version of their TPU called
the Edge TPU [Clob] that runs TensorFlow Lite.
The advent of deep learning as an edge computing service has shined a spot-
light on the necessity of considering alternatives to the standard data and on
optimizing models to provide the best accuracy at the smallest memory and
computation costs such that they can be hosted on even the most constrained
devices. Researchers are also taking a more serious look at the option of sacri-
ﬁcing precision in favor of eﬃciency through methods such as quantization.
==PAGE:68==
60
Related Work
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 4
Analysis
The primary goal of this project was the development of an Optimization Unit
performing Automatic Deep Learning Optimization of arbitrary deep learning
programs. This is the application of modiﬁcations to functional programs for
the sake of reducing convergence times, through an automated process. The
development of the Unit was done with certain requirements in mind, to allow
it to be applicable in production settings.
First and foremost is that the Unit is designed to optimize performance of
deep learning programs through the identiﬁcation and application of mid-level
modiﬁcations. Mid-level, in this case, meaning well-studied modiﬁcations higher
than changes to the hardware/software the programs are run on but lower than
changing components such as the model or optimizer. The process of identifying
modiﬁcations is based on sound and proven theory and hardware as well as
software metrics. The process of application must ensure that the convergence
time is never harmed, although it is acceptable if it cannot be improved. The
processes should incur minimal overheads and preferably reduce the overall time
to results. Additionally, care was taken in making the Unit as widely applicable
as possible, supporting various implementation styles and hardware platforms.
This entails that the processes of collecting metrics must be mostly platform-
independent. Lastly, the Unit is designed with ease of use in mind and minimizes
user interaction.
==PAGE:70==
62
Analysis
This chapter details the architecture and processes of the Optimization Unit
and the rules and heuristics that power the ability of its processes to choose
modiﬁcations. The expectation is that after reading this chapter, a reader will
be fully equipped with the knowledge of the Optimization Unit architecture.
4.1
Development Environment
The Optimization Unit requires access to and knowledge of, deep learning pro-
cesses and may be implemented in environments similar to deep learning pro-
grams. When developing a deep learning program, it is highly recommended to
choose a programming language with some amount of support for neural net-
work structures and the learning processes, as they can be incredibly diﬃcult to
implement by hand. Additionally, if the program is any larger than a small toy
program, it is a necessity to run the program on a GPU to get acceptable train-
ing times. The most common machine learning frameworks have been ported
to a number of programming languages, but have some of the best support for
Python[Pyta]. This program was developed primarily in Python with certain
features supported by the Bash[GNU] scripting language or through use of the
JSON [Cro] ﬁle format.
Very few language-speciﬁc methods are utilized and
most features can be implemented in diﬀerent languages.
Python has support for machine learning through multiple powerful libraries and
frameworks such as scikit-learn[sl], TensorFlow[Tenc] and PyTorch[PyTb]. Ten-
sorFlow and PyTorch are the 2 most commonly used deep learning frameworks.
The frameworks provide similar, to the point of being identical, functionality,
diﬀering primarily in implementation speciﬁcs. The frameworks utilize homo-
geneous but distinct data structures as well as diﬀerent compilation techniques,
preventing the use of a combination of the frameworks. For this project, Ten-
sorFlow was chosen to supply the vast majority of deep learning methods. The
choice was made, in part, due to personal preference but also due to the access
to a wider array of customization options and runtime optimizations.
TensorFlow oﬀers methods through a number of APIs, some of which have over-
lapping scopes of functionality. This leads to numerous ways of implementing
the same methods. This oﬀers a width of options for developers in structuring
their programs and a depth of speciﬁcity, providing a choice of how deeply they
want to control the training process. Unfortunately, this is also a hurdle for pro-
grams that wish to build on the TensorFlow framework as they must support
most if not all structures. This is the case for the Optimization Unit and on
certain occasions, more complex solutions were implemented to accommodate
the multiple methodologies.
Additionally, there is a fundamental disconnect
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Optimization Processes
63
between the design of state-of-the-art deep learning frameworks and the de-
velopment of software such as the Optimization Unit. The Optimization Unit
processes require both extracting information that the frameworks normally
hide from the developer and the usage of certain objects in unintended ways.
The current deep learning development methodology is one where developers
implement a working solution, before entering an iterative process of testing
and optimization. In this methodology, large amounts of information are only
required after runs are completed and not during them, as is required by the Op-
timization Unit. This has lead to certain situations during the development of
the optimization processes where it was required to "go around" the framework
or to use it in a suboptimal manner. When this is the case, is pointed out in the
following sections. To give an example, TensorFlow expects that the developer
knows the hardware they are running on and only provides a list of nicknames
for the available GPUs such as: [’/gpu:0’, ’/gpu:1’]. Information on the
number of cores, model or software running on the GPUs is not available and
must be found through external means.
4.2
Optimization Processes
The Optimization Unit itself is primarily a wrapper of its two Optimization
Processes. The Unit only serves to hold certain values required for the processes
or to store computed results, to guarantee their longevity in the program. As
such, it has no architecture to speak of and focus will be on the processes
themselves.
The processes are based on 2 diﬀerent lines of optimizing deep
learning programs: 1) Applying structural data-handling modiﬁcations to the
data pipelines, speeding up the data preparation step. 2) Making modiﬁcations
to the state of the training process, optimizing how it is performed. The two
processes are the following:
• The Pipeline Optimization Process: A process applying structural modi-
ﬁcations to the data pipelines.
• The Online Optimization Process: A process applying both the structural
data pipeline modiﬁcations as well as utilizing a guided search algorithm
to determine eﬀective training process modiﬁcations.
The Pipeline Optimization Process is performed on individual data pipelines.
The process considers the properties of the dataset, the operations of the pipeline
and concrete information on the hardware, to make changes to the pipelines.
The implementation of this process is covered in detail in Section 4.3.
The
==PAGE:72==
64
Analysis
Data
Training
Parameters
Model
Training
Process
Pipeline Optimization Process
Online Optimization Process
Figure 4.1: The 4 primary components of deep learning programs and which
are aﬀected by the optimization processes
Online Optimization Process takes full control of the program training process.
It directly utilizes the Pipeline Optimization Process before executing a guided
search algorithm for the best usage of training parameters and process. The
search is based on short training experiments. The exact methodology is covered
in Section 4.4.
Figure 4.1 shows the primary components of a deep learning program and which
are aﬀected by the 2 optimization processes. The Online Optimization Process
directly includes the functionality of the pipeline process, but neither process
makes modiﬁcations to the model. This is due to model architectures classically
being highly task-speciﬁc and how to make modiﬁcations to deep models to
improve their ability to work on a given task is still mostly unknown.
4.3
Pipeline Optimization Process
The Pipeline Optimization Process is designed to tackle the challenge of design-
ing good data pipelines. Given a dataset and a sequence of pipeline operations,
the process identiﬁes and inserts various operations to improve the execution
time of the pipeline.
The process inserts both necessary operations such as
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Pipeline Optimization Process
65
batching and shuﬄing as well as optimization operations such as caching. The
output of the process is an optimized pipeline that can immediately be used in
a training process.
The process provides versatility in utilization by using pipeline agnostic al-
gorithms.
In other words, the process is able to work on any given dataset
and sequence of (correct) pipeline operations. The process adheres to the rec-
ommended TensorFlow data pipeline methodology, working with TensorFlow
Dataset-objects. This allows the process to be applicable to any program also
utilizing this architecture.
The process runs in 2 steps: 1) A data-collection step where hardware infor-
mation and statistics on the individual pipeline operations are collected. 2) A
modiﬁcation-application step where the collected information is put to use in
choosing a design for the data pipeline.
4.3.1
Process Input
The process operates on individual data pipelines and requires 2 pieces of infor-
mation:
• A "raw dataset"
• A list of pipeline operations
These represent the dataset that the examples belong to and the sequence of
operations of the pipeline. The process operates on individual data pipelines
because the diﬀerent datasets commonly require slightly diﬀerent pipeline op-
erations. Most often, this is the training dataset requiring certain operations,
that the other datasets do not.
Developers can more easily deﬁne diﬀerent
operation-sets and can choose to not optimize some pipelines, if desired.
The raw dataset should be the dataset in its most basic state. This is where
the fewest manipulations have been done and the desired ﬁnal state is reachable
through exclusively pipeline operations.
Manipulations that are required to
enable the data to be used as a dataset, such as collecting the data examples
into a data structure, must be done prior to this point and preferably these are
the only manipulations applied. The process expects a workable dataset and
is only able to utilize the given data pipeline operations. Any manipulations
applied prior to utilizing the process cannot be modiﬁed by it.
==PAGE:74==
66
Analysis
To deﬁne the pipeline operations, a pipeline syntax was created. The syntax
deﬁnes operations as tuples consisting of a name and a dictionary of arguments
as illustrated below:
(< name >, {”arg1” : val1, ”arg2” : val2, . . . })
The <name> is any name chosen by the developer to identify the operation and
can have any value, except for a few keyworded strings. The syntax includes a
base form that is used when an operation is given a non-keyworded name. This
form is shown below:
(< name >, {”fn” : < method object >})
The base form allows developers to deﬁne custom operations that can be applied
using a mapping function, that is, any operation that can be done on a data-
batch or example in isolation. The only argument is the fn-argument, which
must map to a method deﬁning the custom operation. The only requirements
of the operation is that it accepts and returns individual data examples or
batches. Preferably, the operations can accept both batched and non-batched
data, however, this requirement can be loosened.
Together with the keyworded operations, this is designed to provide complete-
ness in the usable pipeline operations and developers can implement any op-
eration, no matter the complexity, that is accepted by the used deep learning
framework. To give an example, a developer may wish to deﬁne an operation
that applies a few typical image preprocessing operations, one after the other.
The developer deﬁnes the random_jitter method below. The method takes an
image as input and performs resizing, random cropping and random horizontal
ﬂipping.
def random_jitter(image):
image = resize(image, [resize_height ,
resize_width])
image = random_crop(image, size=[crop_height ,
crop_width ,
crop_channels])
image = random_flip_left_right(image)
return image
Deﬁning this operation in the syntax looks as follows:
(”random_jitter”, {”fn” : random_jitter})
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Pipeline Optimization Process
67
Operation Name
Dict. Entries
shuﬄe
("buﬀer_size": int or None)
intermediate
none
batch
("size": int)
unbatch
none
cache
none
prefetch
none
repeat
("count": int or None)
<anything>
("fn": <python method object>)
Table 4.1: The complete pipeline syntax and their required arguments.
The keyworded operations are used to deﬁne operations often used in data
pipelines, that cannot be implemented using a mapping function, such as shuf-
ﬂing or batching.
A complete overview of the pipeline syntax including the
accepted keyworded operations and the base form is shown in Table 4.1 along
with their required arguments. It should be pointed out that most of the key-
worded operations are ones applied by the Pipeline Optimization Process and
are not necessary to include. The developer is required to input a functional
dataset and a sequence of operations with matching outputs and inputs. The
process does not modify the given operations, only inserting other operations
into the sequence.
4.3.2
Step 1: Data Collection
Step 1 of the Pipeline Optimization Process is a data-collection step. In this
step, data elements is used to refer to singular pieces of data. This is due to
this step considering data as it moves through the pipeline and the examples
may or may not be batched. The majority of the data collection involves an
original algorithm. The algorithm deﬁnes an alternative way to consider data
pipelines. Instead of data streaming objects where operations are performed on
singular data elements, pipelines are considered as a sequence of datasets. The
sequence starts with the raw dataset, is followed by a number of intermediate
datasets and ends with the fully prepared dataset. Each dataset is the result
of fully executing a single pipeline operation on all the elements of the previous
dataset in the sequence. This redeﬁnition is shown on Figure 4.2.
==PAGE:76==
68
Analysis
Raw Dataset
shuffle
batch
rescale
Prepared
Dataset
Raw Dataset
shuffle
Intermediate
Dataset 1
batch
Intermediate
Dataset 2
rescale
Prepared
Dataset
Redefinition
Figure 4.2: A data pipeline consisting of a number of operations can be re-
deﬁned as a sequence of datasets as the result of applying said
operations.
The goal of this redeﬁnition is to be able to gather statistics of each dataset and
each operation, in isolation. Speciﬁcally, 6 statistics are of interest:
1. The execution time of the previous operation.
2. The number of I/O operations performed during execution of the previous
operation.
3. The shape of a single data element in the dataset.
4. The size of a single data element in bytes.
5. The number of data elements in the dataset.
6. The total size of the dataset in bytes.
These statistics are collected using Algorithm 3. To record the statistics of the
raw dataset, a noop-operation is inserted at the start of the list of pipeline opera-
tions. The algorithm iterates over the list and computes the same operations for
each. First, the execution time and number of IO’s are recorded. This is shown
on lines 4-8. For the raw dataset, these measurements record the statistics of
the manipulations included in deﬁning it. The current time and number of IO’s
is recorded. Then, the dataset is created by applying the current operation. At
the end, the diﬀerence in time and IO’s is computed. A data element is extracted
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Pipeline Optimization Process
69
Algorithm 3: Statistics Collection Algorithm
Input: A raw dataset ds and a list of pipeline operations pipeline.
Output: A list of tuples, each containing the statistics of a single
dataset.
1 stat_list ←[];
2 pipeline ←noop + pipeline;
3 for op : pipeline do
4
t ←time.now();
5
ios ←process.IOs;
6
ds ←ds.apply(op);
7
t ←time.now() −t;
8
ios ←process.IOs −ios;
9
10
e ←ds.take(1);
11
e_shape ←e.shape();
12
e_size ←e.size();
13
if op = noop then
14
len ←ds.length();
15
else
16
if op.name = "batch" then
17
len ←stat_list[−1].length()/step.batch_size;
18
len ←floor(len);
19
else if op.name = "unbatch" then
20
len ←stat_list[−1].length() × stat_list[−1].shape[0];
21
else if op.name = "repeat" then
22
len ←count × stat_list[−1].length();
23
else
24
len ←stat_list[−1].length();
25
end if
26
ds_size ←e_size × len;
27
stats ←(t/len, ios/len, e_shape, e_size, len, ds_size);
28
stat_list.insert(stats)
29 end for
30 return stat_list
==PAGE:78==
70
Analysis
and is used to determine the shape and size, shown on lines 10-12. The length
of the dataset is found in one of two ways. If it is the raw dataset, the length is
drawn directly from it. Otherwise, the length is found through considering the
previous dataset length and the current operation. This is shown on lines 13-25.
It is assumed that only the batching and repeating operations can change the
length of the dataset. If the current operation is one of these, then the length
is calculated by:
Batching: length = floor(previous length/batch size)
Unbatching: length = previous length × previous batch size
Repeat: length = previous length × repeat count
The total size of the dataset is found using the size of individual elements and the
length of the dataset. The per-element time and IO’s are found and the statistics
are collected into a tuple and inserted into a list before the next iteration starts.
When the algorithm is done iterating over the operations, the list of tuples is
returned.
The algorithm introduces a few inadequacies in terms of the requirements of the
Optimization Unit. The ﬁrst is that data examples can have a wide array of
forms and for the process to be versatile, it must be able to accept all of them.
In many cases, data examples are single tensors or a tuple of 2 tensors. The
latter case is especially common when working with supervised learning as the
data examples and their labels are grouped together. However, data examples
can also be nested tuples with complex topologies and these must also be taken
into account. To do this, lines 11-12 are replaced with a recursive method that
iterates over the nested data elements. The shape is recorded as the shape of
the left-most/ﬁrst tensor in the tuple and the size is the total size of all tensors
in the tuple. This provides the correct size and an acceptable shape. The shape
is only required to determine the batch size for the length calculation of the
un-batching operation presented above. Thus, the complete shape of the tuple
is not required.
The second inadequacy comes in working with string data. Strings lengths may
vary wildly and have no maximum. When working on string data, the size of
the string entries is recorded during the creation of the dataset and lines 11-12
are replaced with a method that computes the average size of the string entries.
The average size is used to deﬁne both the shape and the size in bytes.
The end result of the algorithm is a list of statistics for each operation of the
data pipeline.
The statistics collection algorithm is the largest contributing
factor in the optimization time of the Pipeline Optimization Process. The al-
gorithm has a time-dependency on the size of the raw dataset as well as the
==PAGE:79==
4.3 Pipeline Optimization Process
71
time it takes to apply the various operations. Given a long dataset and a large
number of operations, this can be very time-consuming and may conﬂict with
the requirement that the overhead applied by the processes must be minimal.
To resolve this conﬂict, an abstraction is introduced. In practice, only a set
number of data examples from the raw dataset are used by the algorithm. This
vastly improves the execution time, but adds a certain amount of uncertainty
to the result. This is especially true for string datasets as their average size
is recorded over fewer examples. For non-string datasets, the example size is
constant and these calculations are unharmed. However, in many cases pipeline
operations are extremely fast to execute and subject to relatively large ﬂuctu-
ations in their execution time, due to the speciﬁc state of the hardware at the
time. The algorithm works on a large enough number of examples to record the
execution time, but fewer examples means a larger margin of error. This was
seen as a necessary loss in accuracy for the sake of reducing the overhead.
In addition to the statistics collection algorithm, the total size of the GPU
memory is read.
4.3.3
Step 2: Modiﬁcation Application
After the data-collection step, the second step of the Pipeline Optimization
Process utilizes the data to insert the following operations: batching, shuﬄing,
caching and prefetching, at the optimal locations in the pipeline.
Caching-
operations refers to both caching to the GPU memory and fs-caching to the ﬁle
system, as deﬁned in Section 2.4.4.3. The operations can be inserted at any
index between the operations opi of the original sequence of pipeline operations
op0, op1, . . . , opn where n is the length of the sequence. The process attempts to
ﬁnd the optimal index j ∈[0, n+1] for each operation as well as the optimal value
to use for the operation parameters, if any. If one or more of the operations are
already present in the sequence, then they are not inserted again. In addition,
if this is the case, the process will check their order and will output a warning,
if it is detected that a rule of how to properly design data pipelines has been
broken.
The operations are inserted based on 4 rules that cannot be broken without
possibly harming the performance of the training as well as 4 heuristics for how
to design the most eﬀective data pipelines. These are as follows:
• Rule: Shuﬄing must come before batching.
• Rule: Caching must come before shuﬄing.
==PAGE:80==
72
Analysis
Batching
Shuffling
Caching
Prefetching
Data pipeline
Optimized pipeline
stat_list
Updated stat_list
batch
index
shuffling
index
Figure 4.3: The modiﬁcation insertion order.
• Rule: Achieving best possible shuﬄing is more important than saving
time.
• Rule: Caching-operations should be performed as late as possible.
• Heuristic: The processor will rarely be the bottleneck of an un-optimized
program.
• Heuristic: Shuﬄing a smaller amount of data is faster than a larger
amount.
• Heuristic: Memory caching is more eﬃcient than fs-caching.
• Heuristic: The upside of prefetching outweighs any potential downside.
Experiments that back up the heuristics are shown in Section 5.2. The opera-
tions are applied in a speciﬁc order, based on their importance/how they aﬀect
the insertion of the other operations. This order is shown on Figure 4.3. The
order is: batching, shuﬄing, caching, prefetching. Inserting each operation also
updates the list of statistics to reﬂect the insertion. After each of batching and
shuﬄing, the index where the operation is inserted is passed on such that the
rules deﬁned above can be followed. Each following section describes the process
of applying one of the operations.
4.3.3.1
Batching
Batching is the ﬁrst operation considered. This is due to the heuristic that the
processor is rarely the bottleneck of an un-optimized program and one of the
most eﬀective ways to reduce the execution time of a data pipeline is to place
the batching operation early, due to the increased parallelization. To adhere to
this, the method of inserting batching is simple: It should be inserted as early
as possible, to allow as many operations as possible to take advantage of the
added parallelization.
==PAGE:81==
4.3 Pipeline Optimization Process
73
Batching cannot always be inserted ﬁrst, however, as some operations cannot
be performed on a batched dataset. Exactly which operations this includes,
depends on the framework used and how the custom operations are designed.
To give an example, the TensorFlow I/O-API supports I/O-based operations
such as loading data from ﬁles into tensors. Operations from this API are crucial
in data pipelines that include data loading operations. However, TensorFlow
does not allow for operations from this API to be automatically parallelized in
bulk, most likely due to this causing an unknown number of processes to all
use the communication bus at the same time. This presents a problem as the
optimization process cannot detect when this is the case. Instead, the developer
must inform the process, that an operation cannot be batched, through adding
the argument: {batch : False} to the operation deﬁnition as well as all operation
deﬁnitions preceding it in the pipeline.
The batching operation takes a size parameter, if batching is not included in the
original sequence, then the batch size can be passed to either the Optimization
Unit or the process. Batching does not require taking the list of statistics into
account but to maintain correctness of the list, operations following the batching
operation have their shapes and lengths changed to reﬂect the added batching.
4.3.3.2
Shuﬄing
The second operation considered is shuﬄing. The shuﬄing- and caching op-
erations strongly aﬀect each other, with the index where the ﬁrst is inserted
strongly limiting the options for the second. Shuﬄing is inserted ﬁrst to follow
the rule that achieving the best shuﬄing is more important than saving time.
To insert shuﬄing, the index of the batching operation is required, as shuﬄing
must be inserted before it. The range: [0; batch index] deﬁnes the indices where
the shuﬄing operation can be inserted. To choose the index within this range,
the heuristic that it is more eﬃcient to shuﬄe smaller data sizes, is used. The
index in the range with the smallest total dataset size is chosen as the shuf-
ﬂing index. This allows the optimization process to detect methods used in the
pipeline such as initially using data stand-ins and the process will automatically
insert shuﬄing before the elements are parsed.
As shown in Table 4.1, the shuﬄing operation takes a buffer_size argument.
This argument is used to determine the size of the buﬀer to use while shuﬄing.
If left unspeciﬁed, the process will attempt perfect shuﬄing by setting the batch
size equal to the number of elements in the dataset at the shuﬄing index. This
requires that the GPU has suﬃcient available memory to hold the entire dataset
at this index. Whether this is the case is computed by taking into account the
other components that also consume memory on the GPU. If there is not enough
==PAGE:82==
74
Analysis
memory, then the buﬀer size is gradually lowered until a size that ﬁts, is found.
This ensures that the best possible shuﬄing, with the largest possible buﬀer, is
always done.
Computing the free memory is an instance where state-of-the-art deep learning
frameworks hide information from the developer that would be useful in this
case. TensorFlow takes over the memory handling and code execution on the
GPU. It does this by initially allocating a large part, if not all, of the GPU
memory. This prevents the framework from having to do expensive memory-
allocation operations during runtime. However, TensorFlow does not reveal to
the developer, how much of the allocated memory is being used at any given
moment and alternative methods of reading the memory usage are only able to
detect that it is allocated by TensorFlow. The free memory must instead be
determined by ﬁrst computing the total size of the used model(s) and subtracting
this from the size of the GPU memory.
This means, that the developer is
required to also pass either the model(s) or their total size in bytes, to either the
Optimization Unit or the Pipeline Optimization Process. This is an unfortunate
consequence of the methods of the framework.
4.3.3.3
Saving
Third is considered the caching-operations. At most one of the caching-operations
can be included in a data pipeline at once. This is due to both operations pre-
venting previous operations from being executed after the ﬁrst iteration over
the dataset. If a caching operation x is included at index i in a data pipeline
and another caching operation y at index j s.t. 0 ≤j < i, then operation y is
never performed again, after the ﬁrst iteration and its eﬀect is nulliﬁed. In this
case, performing it only serves to add to the overhead of the ﬁrst iteration.
Caching to memory is the more preferable of the two operations and is considered
ﬁrst. As stated by the rules, caching operations give the best performance when
placed as late as possible. The last index i ∈[0; shuffling_index] where the
total size of the dataset is able to ﬁt in memory, is found. This calculation is
done similarly to the calculation determining if there was memory available for
shuﬄing, except that the memory consumed by the shuﬄing buﬀer is also taken
into account.
If no index is found with a small enough dataset, then fs-caching is considered.
The heuristics state that fs-caching is noticeably more expensive in terms of
time and 2 values are deﬁned by the Optimization Unit:
• min_time_save: a minimum number of seconds it must take to execute
==PAGE:83==
4.4 Online Optimization Process
75
the operations before fs-caching.
• min_ios: a minimum number of I/O-operations the previous operations
must make for fs-caching to be useful.
Again, the range [0; shuffling_index] is considered. The process determines
if any index in this range has the property that the previous operations take
at least min_time_save seconds or include at least min_ios I/O-operations.
The last index where either is the case, is chosen. If no such index exists, then
no caching operation is used.
This is included as an option, as it may not
always be beneﬁcial to use the fs-caching solution. This way, the optimization
process ensures that the inserted operations are always used optimally even if
that means not at all. The minimum number of IO’s is considered in case the
execution time measurements are aﬀected by ﬂuctuations.
4.3.3.4
Prefetching
The heuristics state that the extra load from prefetching is so small, that any
potential gain is worth including it for. It is simply always inserted as the last
operation in the pipeline.
4.4
Online Optimization Process
The Online Optimization Process deﬁnes the training state as the combination
of choices that deﬁne how the training process is run. This includes the training
hyperparameters and training modiﬁcation methods. The process receives, as
input, an initial state and a ﬁnite set of modiﬁcations it can make to the training
state. Modiﬁcations are actions such as changing the batch size. The process
uses a guided search algorithm to determine the best state.
Deep learning training processes have inﬁnite variability due to there being an
inﬁnite number of ways to combine the hyperparameters and methods. This
makes it practically impossible to estimate how certain modiﬁcations will aﬀect
the convergence time of a program, without putting them into practice. This
means, that is it necessary to run the training process with the modiﬁcations
to measure their performance. Using this approach, the best training state may
be found using a naive optimization procedure described by Algorithm 4. The
procedure combinatorially deﬁnes the set of all possible training states using
the initial state and the allowed modiﬁcations. This set is tested through an
==PAGE:84==
76
Analysis
Algorithm 4: Naive Optimization Procedure
Input: An initial training state init and a set of allowed modiﬁcations
mods.
Output: An optimal training state.
1 best_time ←MAX;
2 best_state ←null;
3 all_states ←combinatorics(init, mods);
4 label start;
5 if all_states.isempty() then
6
goto end;
7 s ←all_states.pop();
8 time ←train(s);
9 if time < best_time then
10
best_state ←s;
11
best_time ←time;
12 goto start;
13 label end;
14 return best_state;
iterative process shown on lines 4-11. During each iteration, a previously unseen
state is used to train until completion and if the convergence time is better than
the previously best seen time, the state is saved. When all states have been
tested, the best found state is returned. This procedure successfully determines
the optimal state but involves an exhaustive search which includes running the
complete training process an unknown number of times. This quickly becomes
very time-consuming and goes against the requirement that the optimization
processes should incur minimal overheads.
Instead, the Online Optimization Process performs a modiﬁed version of the
naive procedure named Guided Training State Searching Procedure (GTSSP),
illustrated by Algorithm 5.
The procedure searches the training state space
using training experiments to guide the search and limit the search space. The
procedure maintains a current_state, which is measured by the training exper-
iments on line 5. The experiments are mini training processes. They run the
training process for a set number of epochs, at least 2. The ﬁrst epoch is used
as warm-up and the experiments return the average time of the warm epochs
as well as a set of metrics. These outputs are used to determine a single viable
modiﬁcation. This modiﬁcation is used to modify the current state and the
process is repeated as shown on lines 10-14. If a state performs worse than the
previous state, shown on lines 6-9, the modiﬁcation is undone and the previous
state is restored. The modiﬁcation is also disabled for the remainder of the
procedure. The procedure ends when no viable modiﬁcations are found by an
==PAGE:85==
4.4 Online Optimization Process
77
Algorithm 5: Guided Training State Searching Procedure
Input: An initial training state init and a set of allowed modiﬁcations
mods.
Output: An optimal training state.
1 prev_time ←null;
2 mod ←null;
3 current_state ←init;
4 label start;
5 time, metrics ←train_experiment(current_state);
6 if time > prev_time and mod <> null then
7
current_state ←undo(current_state, mod);
8
disable(mod);
9
goto start;
10 mod ←reasoning(current_state, time, metrics);
11 if mod <> null then
12
current_state ←modify(current_state, mod);
13
prev_time ←time;
14
goto start;
15 return current_state
experiment and the current_state is returned. The experiments serve a similar
purpose to the full training processes of the naive procedure, but instead of giv-
ing a result based solely on convergence time, a number of metrics are returned
as well. The experiments are considerably less costly and the procedure can test
a much larger number of states in less time. Additionally, due to modiﬁcations
that do not provide a beneﬁt, being disabled, the state space that must be tested
is reduced.
Figure 4.4 illustrates the complete Online Optimization Process. The primary
functionality is deﬁned by the GTSSP, however the process also executes the
Pipeline Optimization Process beforehand. This is done because there is more
to gain from modifying a training process working on optimized components.
How the pipelines are constructed and their execution speeds in relation to the
model aﬀects which modiﬁcations will be useful.
During the GTSSP, the next modiﬁcation to apply is determined by a Logic
Module. This module is responsible for both collecting the performance met-
rics and for reasoning on them, afterwards. The Logic Module identiﬁes a single
modiﬁcation per experiment and informs the GTSSP to apply it. Doing this will
change the training state and necessitate the redeﬁnition of at least one of the
components of the training process. This coincides with the necessity of clean-
ing the GPU memory between each training experiment to remove cached data
==PAGE:86==
78
Analysis
Online Optimization
Process
Short Training
Process
Logic
Module
Start
metric
collection
Clean GPU
Memory
Finish Training
Implement
Modification
No
modification
Modification
identified
Pipeline
Optimization
Process
GTSSP
Input
Initial State
Final State
Trained
Model
Figure 4.4: The complete Online Optimization Process.
==PAGE:87==
4.4 Online Optimization Process
79
and similar. The result is that, between each experiment, the GPU memory is
ﬁrst completely cleaned, then the modiﬁcation is applied and the components
are redeﬁned. Eventually, the Logic Module fails to identify any further modiﬁ-
cations and the current state becomes the ﬁnal state. The ﬁnal state is used to
run the full training process. This was a design choice made based on how the
various modiﬁcations are applied using the TensorFlow framework. Performing
the training process as part of the optimization process is the safer option to
ensure that the modiﬁcations are used correctly. The process must receive all
information required to run the training process and the developer is required
to provide this information as well as a method of deﬁning the model, the loss
function and the optimizer.
4.4.1
Modiﬁcations
The standard set of allowed modiﬁcations are the following:
• Increase or decrease the batch size
• Enable or disable XLA-autoclustering
• Enable or disable distributed training
• Add early stopping
• Add learning rate schedling
This section covers the application of these modiﬁcations, detailed information
on their best use is covered in Section 4.4.2.
The process uses the batch size modiﬁcation as a method of maximizing uti-
lization of the GPU and to balance the data preparation time and the data
processing time. Making large modiﬁcations to the batch size can incur un-
intended eﬀects, so the process is limited to changing the batch size within
a certain relative range. This also serves the purpose of keep the number of
modiﬁcations ﬁnite. The process assumes that the given batch size is mostly
correct and that changing it in the given range does not aﬀect the outcome of
the training.
XLA (Accelerated Linear Algebra) is a TensorFlow-speciﬁc compilation tech-
nique. It falls under the region of methods of optimizing deep learning through
changing code execution by modifying the compilation techniques. XLA speeds
up the computation of operations on the GPU by using an alternative method
==PAGE:88==
80
Analysis
of packaging the code kernels. The standard TensorFlow compilation technique
packages arithmetic operations into individual kernels. With XLA, operations
are put together into sequences that are packaged into the same kernels. This
reduces the overall number of kernels delivered to the GPU. This technique
comes with increased overhead in identiﬁcation of the sequences, but improves
the execution time of code that is run frequently. To use XLA, the code must be
modiﬁed using the application of an underlying scope. This scoping methodol-
ogy presents another problem in developing the Optimization Unit from the side
of the TensorFlow framework. TensorFlow has a number of underlying scopes
that help deﬁne how objects are initialized. Developers can choose to explicitly
use scopes when creating an object. For example, to create a model using a
speciﬁc scope, a scoping object is created and the model is initialized by:
with obj.scope():
model = ...
Using this methodology, TensorFlow automatically modiﬁes the properties of
the model accordingly. However, after an object is created under a scope, there
are no methods of changing the properties that scope deﬁned. If a change is
made where the scope should no longer be used, it is necessary to redeﬁne all
objects deﬁned under the scope. In a non-automatic development process, this
is a simple task. In the automatic setting of the Online Optimization Process,
this means that components must be redeﬁned between training experiments
and the developer must pass a method of deﬁning the model, rather than the
model itself, to the process.
The process tests the usage of distributed training in the case that multiple
GPUs are present.
Speciﬁcally, the process applies data parallelism, where
the model is replicated to the processors.
This modiﬁcation is also applied
in TensorFlow using the scope-methodology and also requires changing certain
subtle values and properties. The Online Optimization Process removes this
task.
Early stopping and learning rate scheduling are applied based on developer
speciﬁcation rather than automatically. They are often useful, but are either
very complex to apply automatically and pose too great a risk to the quality
of the trained model, to apply automatically. Instead, it is up to the developer
to determine whether they should be included, in which case they are never
removed by the Online Optimization Process. The methods are included for the
sake of completeness, as the Unit should be able to work on programs where
they are necessary.
==PAGE:89==
4.4 Online Optimization Process
81
4.4.2
Logic Module
The Logic Module is responsible for the reasoning process that determines the
modiﬁcations to apply. During the training experiments, metrics are continu-
ously collected and stored as records consisting of 4 values:
• The timestamp
• The GPU-id
• The processing utilization putil
• The memory utilization mutil
This is extracted directly from the GPU as it is executing the training exper-
iment.
The timestamp and GPU-id are used to sort the utilization metrics,
designating which epoch and GPU each record belongs to. The processing- and
memory utilizations are values given in percentages that represent how much
the GPU cores and memory were utilized during a short timespan. Two meth-
ods of collecting the metrics were developed. Both initiate a subprocess that
either writes to a large output buﬀer or to a ﬁle. In either case, at the end
of each training experiment, the module terminates the subprocess and collects
the data where it was written. To decide on a modiﬁcation, the Logic Module
computes the answer to a few questions. The ﬁrst is whether the load on the
GPU memory can safely be increased. The second is whether the pipeline or
the model was the bottleneck during the training experiment.
As opposed to the Pipeline Optimization Process, it is possible to determine the
available memory by observing the mutil throughout the experiment. This value
bypasses the allocation of TensorFlow by looking at how much of the memory
was accessed rather than allocated. If it never reaches 100%, then the load on
the GPU memory can safely be increased.
The bottleneck is determined based on how the putil behaves during the exper-
iment. 3 distinct behaviours are identiﬁed:
1) The utilization is "spiking".
2) The utilization is distributed.
3) The utilization is consistent.
Figure 4.5 visualizes these 3 behaviours. The left plot shows spikes in the uti-
lization, the middle shows distributed utilization and the right shows consistent
utilization. Spiking occurs when the data pipeline is unable to prepare the next
batch as the model ﬁnishes working with the previous batch. In this case, when
==PAGE:90==
82
Analysis
Figure 4.5: The 3 main processing utilization behaviours. Left: spiking be-
haviour. Middle: distributed behaviour. Right: consistent be-
haviour.
==PAGE:91==
4.4 Online Optimization Process
83
both are running simultaneously, the utilization is high but during the periods
where only the pipeline is working, the utilization is low. Distributed utilization
may occur due to diﬀerent reasons. One option is that the model layers are
unable to maintain consistent utilization due to receiving small data batches.
Alternatively, the execution times of the data pipeline and the model are similar
enough that small ﬂuctuations determine the presence of idle time of the model.
Consistent utilization occurs when the model experiences no idle time and the
data batches are large enough to be evenly parallelizable. This is the desired
behaviour that is trying to be reached. To simplify the reasoning process, the
spiking- and distributed behaviours are both recorded as the data pipeline being
the bottleneck, as in either case, the model requires a higher data rate. If the
utilization is consistent, then the model is the bottleneck.
Using the answers to the 2 questions, the reasoning process consists of the
following list of priorities:
1. If the last modiﬁcation did not improve performance:
−→Undo it and save the information to not suggest the modiﬁcation
again.
2. If distributed training has been applied:
−→Only allow for increasing or decreasing the number of GPUs used.
3. If putil is showing that the cores are not being maxed out and the mutil is
showing available room:
−→Increase the load by increasing the batch size.
4. If the data pipeline is the bottleneck:
−→Shift the balance and reduce the load on the communication bus by
decreasing the batch size.
5. If XLA has not yet been tried:
−→Add XLA to speed up the model.
6. If there are multiple GPUs present:
−→Switch to distributed training.
7. If 1-6 are not true:
−→Finish this process
==PAGE:92==
84
Analysis
During the process, the Logic Module maintains a list of disabled operations.
If a step 2-6 is true but the corresponding modiﬁcation is disabled, it is passed
over.
The batch size modiﬁcations are used in a special way.
Increasing or
decreasing the batch size aﬀects both the data pipeline and the model, accord-
ingly. However, in the majority of programs, it aﬀects the execution time of the
pipeline more than the model. This is, among other things, due to changing the
number of I/O-operations performed by the pipeline. This is the reason that
the batch size is reduced, if the data pipeline is the bottleneck. The reduction
decreases the execution time of both components, but as the pipeline is aﬀected
more, this is expected to cause the execution times to become more similar.
This improves the convergences time through increasing the overlap applied by
prefetching.
Distributed training is the last considered modiﬁcation due to the accepted rule
of distributed programming:
A developer should optimize the sequential execution time of a program as
much as possible before utilizing distribution.
Additionally, the best modiﬁcation to apply may change when distribution is
applied and the set of disabled modiﬁcations would have to be cleared each time
a diﬀerent number of GPUs were considered. If the GPUs have diﬀerent max-
imum constraints, then the correct modiﬁcation to make may also be diﬀerent
based on which GPU the reasoning process is working with.
The Online Optimization Process is considerably more time-consuming than
the Pipeline Optimization Process. The execution time of each experiment is
dependent on the execution time of the epochs of the training process. The
exact number of experiments required to determine the best state, is unknown.
In the worst case, this process may require running a signiﬁcant number of total
epochs.
4.4.3
Training Details
This section covers implementation details speciﬁc to the TensorFlow framework
and is not necessary to understand how the Online Optimization Process works.
It serves to give more details on the input parameters the process expects.
TensorFlow has two main methods of implementing a training process: 1) Us-
ing the built-in Keras APIs and 2) Writing a custom process. Generally, the
Keras-methodology is more lightweight and optimized but it also means that
==PAGE:93==
4.4 Online Optimization Process
85
the training process becomes a black box method. This can make it diﬃcult
to detect and ﬁx bugs and unless the developer is very comfortable with Ten-
sorFlow, it may be unclear how certain functionality is executed. The custom
process on the other hand, gives full control over how training is done but is
often diﬃcult to optimize to the level of the Keras-methods. To truly be able
to say that the Optimization Unit is versatile, it is necessary to support both
of these types of implementation. Both methods use pipelines in the same way,
so the Pipeline Optimization Process is unaﬀected. The Online Optimization
Process must be designed speciﬁcally to handle both, however. This was done
such that, similar to TensorFlow, using the Keras methodology for the Online
Optimization Process is easier but it also places certain restrictions on what the
developer is able to include. On the other hand, the custom methodology gives
complete freedom but expects more of the developer. Both types of programs
are supported through the Optimization Units train()-method, which executes
the Online Optimization Process and takes the training-speciﬁc information as
mentioned earlier, in addition to a set of input parameters.
4.4.3.1
Keras Training
The Keras training methodology is deﬁned by using the built-in Keras APIs and
functionality. Primarily, this means using the model.fit()-method to perform
the training and components are deﬁned such that they are available to this
method. As stated above, this is the more lightweight method and it requires
the fewest parameters passed to the optimization process. The most important
parameter is a method: compile_model_fn, deﬁned by the developer, which
must perform the deﬁnitions of the loss function, the optimizer and the model
and compile them using the TensorFlow compile()-method. It is essential that
the compile-method is called on the model, as this prepares it for training using
the fit()-method.
The compile method also hides certain training-speciﬁc
parameters, such as the loss function and the optimizer, in the model object.
Later, when the fit()-method is called, TensorFlow automatically extracts
these and uses them. This means, that the loss function and optimizer need to
only be deﬁned and handled inside this method. A template of this method is
shown in Listing 1.
The method requires 2 inputs: the data example shape called input_shape
and the global batch size global_batch_size, deﬁned when using distributed
training. These values are automatically passed to the method by the Online
Optimization Process but not all implementations require that they are known.
Some models require knowing the input shape and some loss functions require
knowing the global batch size to correctly reduce the average loss over the data
batch. To adhere to the goal of the Optimization Unit being versatile, it was
==PAGE:94==
86
Analysis
def compile_model_fn(input_shape=None, global_batch_size=None):
model = tf.keras.Sequential(...)
# The loss and optimizer are defined here
loss = tf.keras.losses....
optimizer = tf.keras.optimizers....
# And are hidden in the compiled model
model.compile(loss=loss, optimizer=optimizer)
return model
Listing 1: A template of the compile_model_fn method.
decided that it was preferable to provide support for such cases and force the
use of these input parameters rather than limiting the abilities of the optimiza-
tion process. In addition to making it easier to keep track of the objects used
for training, this method also simpliﬁes preparing the system for distributed
training. As stated earlier, distributed training in TensorFlow involves deﬁning
a scope and initializing objects within it. The scope translates to nested struc-
tures within it as well, so all the deﬁnitions under the distribution-scope can be
handled by simply calling:
with distribution.scope():
model = compile_model_fn(...)
Then, TensorFlow takes care of handling the components correctly.
Using the Keras methodology, the Optimization Process is limited to work-
ing with a single model, deﬁned by compile_model_fn, and 2 data pipelines.
Speciﬁcally, it looks for the pipelines called "train" and "val". If these are not
provided, this process cannot be used and pipelines with any other names are
not considered.
During training, making modiﬁcations may also require the
redeﬁnition of the data pipelines. After being deﬁned by the Pipeline Optimiza-
tion Process, their speciﬁcations are stored in the Optimization Unit and are
automatically used to perform this redeﬁnition, when needed.
4.4.3.2
Custom Training
Using custom training, the program is not limited to just a single model and
2 data pipelines. Instead, the developer is responsible for deﬁning most every
component and method required for the training procedure. This includes the
training procedure itself. As before, the optimization process requires being able
==PAGE:95==
4.4 Online Optimization Process
87
def train_fn(epochs, pipelines, models, optimizers, losses):
# Perform the training procedure here.
# To use a model, loss function or optimizer,
# reference them from the dictionaries.
<code><code><code>
Listing 2: The deﬁnition of the train_fn method.
to redeﬁne most of the components and the developer is responsible for allowing
it to do so.
If a compile_model_fn method is not passed to the train()-
method, it instead expects all of the following parameters to be passed:
• pipeline_names: A list of the names of the pipelines to use.
• deﬁne_models_fn:
A method returning a dictionary, mapping model
names to models.
• deﬁne_losses_fn: A method returning a dictionary, mapping loss function
names to functions.
• deﬁne_optimizers_fn: A method returning a dictionary, mapping opti-
mizer names to optimizers.
• train_fn: A method deﬁning the training procedure.
Appendix A shows the complete code deﬁning these methods for the program,
transforming images using CycleGAN [ZPIE17] and how they are passed to the
optimization process.
The process uses the list of pipeline names to access the stored pipelines and cre-
ates a list of them which is passed to train_fn. Each of the model(s), loss(es) and
optimizer(s) are deﬁned by the other methods which must return dictionaries
containing the components. This ensures that they can be deﬁned under scopes
when necessary. The compile()-method can no longer be used, as the custom
training procedure will refer to the losses and optimizers directly. This means
that each has to be explicitly handled. By using dictionaries, the optimization
process is able to support training processes with any number of models, loss
functions and optimizers and each dictionary is also an input to the train_fn
method. The method deﬁnition of train_fn is shown in Listing 2.
The method takes every component required to perform the training, as input
and must deﬁne the entire training procedure and return the trained model.
==PAGE:96==
88
Analysis
To access any of the components, it must refer to their entries in the dictio-
naries given as inputs. By having the developer package their custom training
procedures and deﬁning a speciﬁc method of handling the components used dur-
ing training, any deep learning process may be optimized by the Unit and its
versatility is maximized.
Experimentation Suite
Dataset Loader
Pipeline Constructor
Training Process
Loss
Optimizer
Dataset
Training Input
Model Loader
Model
Trained Model
Config
Figure 4.6: The architecture of the modular Experimentation Suite.
4.5
Experimentation Suite
An Experimentation Suite was developed in parallel with the Optimization Unit.
It serves to provide a framework for deep learning experimentation by enabling
the development of deep learning programs through a simple modular program-
implementation scheme. Similarly to the Optimization Unit, the suite was re-
quired to be easy to use and must enable the development of correct deep learn-
ing programs. The suite should provide an array of deep learning programs to
aid in development and performance testing of the Optimization Unit processes.
The Experimentation Suite implements a modular program-implementation method-
ology by providing the core training loop and a number of abstractions of Ten-
sorFlow APIs. The goal was to enable developers to deﬁne an arbitrary set of
components of a deep learning program and the suite ensures the execution of
the training process. The methodology is provided through a set of modular
==PAGE:97==
4.5 Experimentation Suite
89
components:
• The Dataset Loader creates freely deﬁned datasets.
• The Model Loader creates freely deﬁned models.
• The Pipeline Constructor creates a pipeline from a list of operations.
• The Loss-component deﬁnes a loss-function.
• The Optimizer-component deﬁnes an optimizer.
The architecture of the Experimentation Suite is illustrated on Figure 4.6. A
complete set of choices deﬁning the parameters for each of the components
deﬁnes a training conﬁguration of the suite. The 5 components may be combined
in any way deﬁned by the developer, as long as their connections are properly
managed. The ﬁgure shows the diﬀerent points of contact highlighted in red. It
is up to the developer to ensure that the dataset examples have an appropriate
shape for the ﬁrst operation in the pipeline, that the output of the model must
be one the loss function can be computed over and the output of the pipeline
must have a shape the model can take as input. Together, these components
create an input to the training process, that is controlled by a set of developer-
chosen training process parameters. A conﬁg-ﬁle deﬁnes the conﬁguration and
the training parameters and is the sole input used in the development of a
program.
The individual components of a deep learning programs are complex enough
that they require targeted implementation and the suite-components are only
able to provide functionality that has been speciﬁcally developed. The primary
gain of the Experimentation Suite lies in the replicability of programs. Using
the suite it is possible to keep many similar implementations of many diﬀer-
ent programs on hand without speciﬁcally writing the code for each. To add
to the value of the Experimentation Suite as a standalone product, it was de-
cided that conﬁg-ﬁles should be both human- and machine legible.
For this
reason they were written in json. Each ﬁle has a structure with 4 main ob-
jects: optimization_unit, data_pipeline, model and training. Each object
contains the necessary values for deﬁning at least one of the components and
have room for any implementation-speciﬁc parameters deﬁned in the deﬁnition
of that implementation. The complete schema can be seen in Appendix B. The
conﬁguration objects are passed throughout the Experimentation Suite where
they are needed, e.g. the Dataset Loader gets passed the data_pipeline object.
This enables the diﬀerent implementations to use any number of additional pa-
rameters by simply including them in the corresponding object in the conﬁg-ﬁle.
==PAGE:98==
90
Analysis
The Experimentation Suite was utilized in 2 ways during this project. The ﬁrst
was to provide a Unit-testing style of development where a set of programs were
developed, some with certain edge-case properties and whenever a feature was
implemented in either Optimization Unit optimization process, it was tested
against the set of programs to ensure that core functionality was never broken.
Secondly, the Experimentation Unit was used to provide some of the programs
used to measure the performance of the Optimization Unit as covered in Section
5.
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
To judge the performance of the processes of the Optimization Unit, various
experiments were performed to answer the following questions:
• To what extent is the Optimization Unit applicable to arbitrary deep
learning programs?
• Are the modiﬁcations able to provide signiﬁcant improvements to the con-
vergence time of deep learning programs?
• Do the processes correctly apply modiﬁcations to improve convergence
time?
• Is the Optimization Unit capable of improving the time-to-result?
• Under which circumstances do the processes perform best and worst?
Experiments were done on 5 diﬀerent deep learning programs: 3 implemented
using the Experimentation Suite and 2 clones of Github repositories modiﬁed
to use the Unit. Section 5.1 gives an introduction of each program. Section 5.2
covers experiments done to show the eﬃcacy of the modiﬁcations and Section
5.3 shows the results of utilizing the Optimization Unit on the various programs.
==PAGE:100==
92
Evaluation
To measure the speedup in convergence time of the various experiments, a base-
line experiment of each program was required. What makes a baseline exper-
iment is ambiguous, as every developer will implement the same program dif-
ferently. Depending on the results one wish to show, diﬀerent implementations
can serve as the base version. In this case, the baseline experiment was required
to give a point of comparison for other experiments and to show the speedup
gained through using diﬀerent techniques. For this reason, it was decided that
the experiment should capture the situation wherein a functioning program has
been developed, but no work has gone into optimizing the convergence time.
The aim of the automated processes is to take away the responsibility of go-
ing through a long optimization process and the baseline experiment captures
the initial state of this process. The data pipelines of the baseline experiments
were deﬁned with the required operations including shuﬄing and batching. The
baseline experiments includes early stopping and learning rate reduction where
deﬁned in Section 5.1. Batch size was chosen based on similar implementations
of the programs that have been shown to achieve good results. None of the
baseline experiments include XLA or distributed training.
5.1
Programs
Tables 5.1 and 5.2 show some of the most important statistics for the datasets
and models used by the programs.
For the datasets, this includes the total
number of examples, the number of ﬁles the dataset is spread across as well as
their complete size in bytes. Information on the models includes the number
of parameters present in the models and the number of trainable parameters,
being the parameters that get updates during training. Additionally, the total
size of the model in MB is included. The answer to the question of whether the
Optimization Unit is widely applicable is answered by the varied architectures
and training processes of the programs used, showing that the Unit is applicable
to almost any program.
The following sections give a rundown of each program including properties
that are likely to aﬀect the performance of the Optimization Unit such as the
approximate execution time and the methods used to store the datasets as well
as the motivation for their use in this project.
==PAGE:101==
5.1 Programs
93
Dataset
Storage Format
#Files
Train Examples
Val. Examples
Test Examples
CIFAR10
TFRecord
2
50000
N/A
10000
MNIST
TFRecord
2
60000
N/A
10000
PascalVOC
TFRecord
2
5717
5823
N/A
KITTI
PNG
≈23000
11208
2186
N/A
horse2zebra
TFRecord
4
2401
260
N/A
Table 5.1: Properties of the datasets used in the programs. The storage format
is included as TFRecord-ﬁles are speciﬁcally designed to hold multi-
ple data examples per ﬁle. N/A entries indicate that the validation
dataset and the test dataset are the same.
Model
#Parameters
#Trainable Parameters
Memory Size (MB)
ResNet
58.4 ∗106
58.2 ∗106
467.13
SimpleCNN
27000
27000
0.216
YoloV3 darknet
61.7 ∗106
21.0 ∗106
493.43
DeepVO
149.5 ∗106
149.5 ∗106
1196.05
CycleGAN
28.3 ∗106
28.3 ∗106
226.38
Table 5.2: Properties of the models used in the programs. Includes both the
total number of weights and the number that must be trained.
5.1.1
CIFAR10 Image Classiﬁcation
Image Classiﬁcation is one of the most well-known deep learning tasks consisting
of identifying the main subject of images. Many labelled datasets provide this
task, the one chosen for this program is the well-known CIFAR10 dataset which
consists of 60000 images with 10 diﬀerent labels. Given the popularity of the
dataset, it has been packaged in various ways to increase accessibility. The ver-
sion used in this program takes advantage of a packaged distribution consisting
of 2 TensorFlow TFRecord-ﬁles, one containing the training data, the other the
test data. To properly generalize from the training data, select randomization
operations were included in the training data pipeline, adding a certain depth
and execution time.
The model used is the ResNet50 model[HZRS15a] which belongs to a set of mod-
els designed for solving image-based deep learning tasks including image classiﬁ-
cation and image segmentation. The model uses residual connections[HZRS15b],
improving performance when using a large number of layers. The number in the
name represents the number of layers in the model. The ResNet50 model is the
second largest model, in terms of trainable parameters, implemented as part of
this project.
==PAGE:102==
94
Evaluation
The program runs for 160 epochs with learning rate decay and early stopping.
Without early stopping, the training time is approximately 2.5 hours. The pro-
gram was developed in the experimentation suite with the purpose of providing
a medium-length experiment with a large number of medium length epochs and
to showcase the ability of the Optimization Unit to work with training modiﬁ-
cation methods.
5.1.2
MNIST Image Classiﬁcation
The MNIST dataset is probably the most well-known image classiﬁcation datasets
consisting of 70000 images of handwritten digits and providing the task of de-
termining the correct digit. Similarly to the CIFAR10-dataset, the images have
been packaged into TFRecord ﬁles.
The model implemented to solve this task was a simple CNN with 3 layers: 2
convolutional and 1 dense.
The program runs for 10 epochs taking approximately 30 seconds to complete.
It was developed in the experimentation suite to test the performance of the
Optimization Unit on very short programs.
5.1.3
PascalVOC Image Segmentation
Image segmentation is similar to image classiﬁcation but involves identifying
all subjects present in an image as well as their positions in the image. The
PASCALVOC dataset[EGW+10] comes from a series of tasks in object recog-
nition run from 2005-2012 and contains a large number of images labelled with
every object present plus their bounding boxes. The dataset was downloaded
from an online distribution and packaged into TFRecord ﬁles. After parsing the
data ﬁles, data examples consist of 4 objects: one being the input image and 3
encoding the image label.
The YOLOv3 model[RF18] (You Only Look Once version 3) was used to solve
this task. It uses a novel methodology of dividing input images into regions
and detecting objects in each. The model takes advantage of transfer learning
by using pretrained weights for portion of the model that consists of another
well-known deep learning model: darknet[MSARG17].
The darknet weights
are frozen and are not trained during the process. The darknet makes up a
signiﬁcant portion of the size of the model leaving approximately 21 million
parameters trainable out of the original 61 million.
==PAGE:103==
5.1 Programs
95
The program runs for 20 epochs with learning rate decay and early stopping.
Without early stopping activation the training time is approximately 15 minutes.
The program was forked from a Github repository[Zha] and included to showcase
the ability of the Optimization Unit to work on data pipelines with unorthodox
data examples.
5.1.4
KITTI Visual Odometry
Visual Odometry is the exercise of determining the position and orientation of a
camera by analyzing the images captured by the camera itself. In this program,
this is done by teaching a model how to estimate to motion of a camera given
sequences of frames from a video. The KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite[GLU12]
is one of the de-facto benchmarking suites for evaluation of VO-methods and
includes multiple videos of a car driving around a suburban area. The video
sequences are stored in individual png-ﬁles which means it is required to open
each individually to retrieve a data example. Table 5.1 shows a miss-leading
number of training examples. This is due to the individual frames being grouped
into sequences, each making up a single example. In addition, resampling is used
creating 3 times the number of sequences. The data pipelines use stand-ins of
the data examples with the ﬁle names as stand-ins.
The program seeks to solve this task using the DeepVO model[WCWT17].
DeepVO is an CNN-RNN model combining a convolutional front-end consisting
of a pretrained well-known FlowNet-model[FDI+15] and a recurrent back-end.
The model is the largest tested as part of this project with almost 150 million
parameters.
The program runs for 100 epochs with early stopping. Without early stopping,
the training time is between 10 and 11 hours. It was developed in the experi-
mentation suite to measure the performance of the Optimization Unit on long
training processes as well as the ability to work with pipelines using stand-ins.
5.1.5
horse2zebra Image Translation
Image Translation is the task of transforming the contents of images in some
way. In this case, it is to transform horses in images into zebras and vice versa.
This is facilitated by the horse2zebra dataset consisting of an approximately
equal number of images containing horses and images containing zebras.
Image Generation and Image Translation are tasks commonly solved using Gen-
==PAGE:104==
96
Evaluation
erative Adversarial Networks (GANs). These are networks consisting of both a
Generator-model and a discriminator model. The models are trained through
an adversarial method where the generator learns to create good images through
trying to create images the discriminator cannot distinguish from actual im-
ages. This creates a complex training process involving forward- and backward
passes over multiple models. The model used in this program is the CycleGAN -
model[ZPIE17], which includes 2 generators, one transforming horses to zebras
and the other transforming zebras to horses as well as 2 discriminators, one for
each generator. The training process involves transforming the images back and
forth creating a cycle. All 4 models of CycleGAN must be trained alongside
each other to achieve a good result, which causes the training process to be
more expensive than normal and this training process is the longest out of all
the program despite having the smallest dataset and the models only containing
about 28 million parameters put together.
The program is run for 200 epochs taking upwards of 11 hours to complete.
The program was copied from a TensorFlow tutorial[Tena] and improved using
objects from a separate Github Repository[He].
The program was included
to show the ability of the Optimization Unit to optimize programs with non-
standard training processes.
5.2
Modiﬁcations Eﬃcacy
A number of experiments were run for 2 purposes: 1) To provide backing for the
heuristics used in Section 4.4. 2) To test the eﬀects of the various modiﬁcations
and answer the question of whether they improve the convergence time.
11
experiments were performed:
1. A "baseline" experiment limited to the necessary operations.
2. An experiment with the batching operation moved earlier in the data
pipelines.
3. An experiment utilizing prefetching.
4. An experiment utilizing caching.
5. An experiment utilizing fs-caching.
6. An experiment doubling the batch size.
7. An experiment quadrupling the batch size.
==PAGE:105==
5.2 Modiﬁcations Eﬃcacy
97
8. An experiment reducing the batch size to 1/2.
9. An experiment using distribution with 2 GPUs.
10. An experiment shuﬄing larger data examples
11. An experiment using XLA.
Experiments 2-11 were done with the baseline as the starting point and only the
modiﬁcation mentioned, was applied. Figure 5.1 shows the relative convergence
time of the experiments, performed on 3 of the implemented programs, compared
to the base experiment. Values of 0 indicate that the program did not converge
to an acceptable result. The programs were chosen based on having signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent convergence times.
The heuristics used are reiterated below. The experiments do not serve to fully
prove the heuristics, as this cannot be done. As stated in Section 4.4, deep learn-
ing programs have inﬁnite variability and it is not possible to completely prove
the truth of any statement regarding what improves deep learning programs.
By running thousands of experiments, it may be shown that the heuristics are
most likely true, however this is out of the scope of this project. Rather, these
experiments serve to provide enough backing that the heuristics may be used in
this project.
1)
The processor will rarely be the bottleneck of an un-optimized system.
2)
Shuﬄing a smaller amount of data is faster than a larger amount.
3)
Memory caching is more eﬃcient than fs-caching.
4)
The upside of prefetching outweighs any potential downside.
The diﬀerence in performance between the base experiment and experiment 2
backs heuristic 1 by showing that the data pipeline is the bottleneck in the
un-optimized baseline experiments. This is revealed by the fact that the conver-
gence time is signiﬁcantly reduced through improving the execution time of the
data pipeline by increasing the parallelization. Heuristic 2 is backed by experi-
ment 10 being slightly slower than the base experiment. The diﬀerence is minor
for all 3 programs, however, suggesting that only little improvement is gained
by following this heuristic. The diﬀerence in performance between experiments
4 and 5 aﬃrms that caching to memory is more eﬃcient than caching to the ﬁle
system, although only slightly. All 3 programs see signiﬁcant improvement in
the convergence time of experiment 3 compared to the base experiment. This
backs heuristic 4 as these experiments saw some of the largest improvements
over the base experiments. The experiments support the heuristics, providing
ample backing for their use in this project.
==PAGE:106==
98
Evaluation
Figure 5.1: The convergence times of the 11 experiments performed on 3 of
the implemented programs. The convergence times are given in
relative percentages to experiment 1.
==PAGE:107==
5.3 Results
99
The plots show that most of the experiments run on the programs resulted in
lower convergence times, except for experiment 10, which was designed to be
slower. Aside from these, the only experiments that do not show improvements
are the ones based on either changing the batch size or adding distribution. This
is to be expected, as these properties are far more program speciﬁc than the
other tested modiﬁcations. These experiments also show some of the biggest
improvements in the convergence time, with experiment 6 on the CIFAR10
program being the biggest out of all the experiments. This suggests that the
initial batch size is not optimal. Similar results are seen with experiment 8 on
the KITTI program. All of the programs are unable to properly converge with
quadruple the batch size, however, showing that the initial batch size is not
completely incorrect.
Aside from the batch size experiments, the best results were found using the
prefetching modiﬁcation. This shows that there is much to gain from increasing
the load on the GPUs. Two of the programs also show signiﬁcant improvements
from using the XLA compiler method. However, the CIFAR10 program sees
little improvement. This is to be expected as XLA has pronounced pros and
cons and the CIFAR10 program simply does not beneﬁt as much as the others.
Overall, the results show that all of the modiﬁcations the Optimization Unit
optimization processes consider, have the ability to improve the convergence
time of programs.
5.3
Results
3 experiments were performed on each of the programs, to test the optimization
processes and determine if they are capable of improving the convergence time
and time-to-result of deep learning programs. These experiments consisted of
the baseline experiment as well as 2 experiments using the Pipeline Optimiza-
tion Process and Online Optimization Process, respectively. To measure the
convergence time, a threshold loss value was chosen for each program. 2 mea-
surements of speedup, compared to the baseline experiment, were computed for
each of the experiments using the Unit. The Convergence Speedup is computed
as the speedup of the training process in isolation:
Convergence Speedup =
Baseline Convergence Time
Experiment Convergence Time
The Time-To-Result Speedup is computed including the optimization time:
==PAGE:108==
100
Evaluation
TTR Speedup =
Base Convergence Time
Experiment Convergence Time + Optimization Time
Each of the 3 experiments were run on multiple GPUs to aﬃrm the width of ap-
plicability of the Unit. 3 GPU models were used. NVIDIA Ampere A100[NVIc]
GPUs with 40 GB memory and 6912 cores and two versions of the NVIDIA
Tesla V100[NVIe] GPU with 5120 cores and with 16 and 32 GB memory, re-
spectively. Table 5.3 shows the results of the experiments. Deep learning tasks
are naturally noisy due to the included randomness aspects. To combat this,
the experiments were run multiple times and the table includes the conﬁdence
intervals for the convergence times and optimization times. Table 5.4 shows
the most common training state modiﬁcations chosen during the Online Opti-
mization Process for each experiment on each GPU. These showed very little
variance over the experiment repetitions.
CIFAR10
The results of the CIFAR10 experiments show signiﬁcant speedup in both con-
vergence time and TTR with the highest speedup being gained in the online ex-
periments. The lowest speedup is also higher than 1.9. The online experiments
on this program show the biggest TTR speedups out of all of the programs.
Table 5.4 shows that this is due to them taking advantage of most of the mod-
iﬁcations considered by the Online Optimization Process. In other words, the
time spent testing the modiﬁcations does not go to waste. The only occasion
where the pipeline experiments has the best performance was on the V100-16
GPUs where it was deemed that distribution did not provide an improvement.
The results are due to the CIFAR10 program providing some of the best con-
ditions for the Optimization Unit. The training data pipeline is relatively long,
improving the eﬀect of the pipeline modiﬁcations. Additionally, the program
consists of a large number of relatively short epochs, which means that the On-
line Optimization Process can test a number of modiﬁcations without incurring
unacceptable optimization times.
MNIST
The MNIST experiments show good convergence time speedups across the board,
but have some of the worst time to result speedups, with all the online exper-
iments instead lengthening the TTR signiﬁcantly. This is due to the MNIST
program running over very few epochs. The Online Optimization Process ends
up running tests over more total epochs than there are epochs in the training
process and the optimization time becomes longer than the training time. De-
spite the convergence time of the baseline experiment being extremely short,
both optimization processes manage to ﬁnd signiﬁcant speedups between 1.5
and 3, most likely due to the simplicity of the program making more modiﬁ-
cations applicable. Due to this, the pipeline experiments are able to achieve
minimal speedups in the TTR as they have short optimization time.
==PAGE:109==
5.3 Results
101
Program
GPU
Setup
Conv. Time (s)
Optim. Time(s)
Conv. Speedup
TTR Speedup
CIFAR10
A100
Base
6915.98 ± 172.2
0
1
1
A100
Pipeline
3203.08 ± 442.6
4.81 ± 1.4
2.16
2.16
A100
Online
1685.12 ± 201.0
645.39 ± 46.5
4.10
2.97
V100 16GB
Base
5156.76 ± 137.8
0
1
1
V100 16GB
Pipeline
2646.04 ± 369.3
4.73 ± 1.3
1.95
1.95
V100 16GB
Online
2499.90 ± 393.4
730.8 ± 54.2
2.06
1.60
V100 32GB
Base
5588.89 ± 330.2
0
1
1
V100 32GB
Pipeline
2561.39 ± 265.7
4.62 ± 1.4
2.18
2.18
V100 32GB
Online
1456.19 ± 234.9
591.00 ± 9.7
3.83
2.73
MNIST
A100
Base
29.53 ± 1.8
0
1
1
A100
Pipeline
16.93 ± 2.4
8.04 ± 1.8
1.74
1.18
A100
Online
8.56 ± 2.3
88.03 ± 25.5
3.45
0.31
V100 16GB
Base
29.60 ± 1.7
0
1
1
V100 16GB
Pipeline
15.74 ± 2.0
8.22 ± 1.9
1.88
1.24
V100 16GB
Online
9.40 ± 0.5
73.34 ± 11.9
3.15
0.36
V100 32GB
Base
24.69 ± 2.5
0
1
1
V100 32GB
Pipeline
14.89 ± 0.5
8.15 ± 2.0
1.66
1.07
V100 32GB
Online
7.15 ± 1.6
62.56 ± 13.3
3.45
0.35
PascalVOC
A100
Base
698.32 ± 43.6
0
1
1
A100
Pipeline
544.78 ± 46.2
81.37 ± 17.0
1.28
1.12
A100
Online
427.32 ± 56.1
2968.21 ± 204.7
1.63
0.21
V100 16GB
Base
922.64 ± 171.5
0
1
1
V100 16GB
Pipeline
618.02 ± 125.2
85.74 ± 12.7
1.49
1.31
V100 16GB
Online
349.58 ± 49.6
2370.44 ± 77.2
2.64
0.34
V100 32GB
Base
816.17 ± 83.1
0
1
1
V100 32GB
Pipeline
645.49 ± 17.2
92.12 ± 12.3
1.26
1.11
V100 32GB
Online
403.32 ± 65.0
1556.75 ± 93.0
2.02
0.42
KITTI
A100
Base
35773.52 ± 1244.7
0
1
1
A100
Pipeline
22656.56 ± 287.4
152.78 ± 0.61
1.58
1.57
A100
Online
19460.53 ± 507.6
8935.12 ± 395.7
1.84
1.26
V100 16GB
Base
35284.13 ± 655.4
0
1
1
V100 16GB
Pipeline
32995.11 ± 920.5
164.19 ± 0.1
1.07
1.06
V100 16GB
Online
26084.49 ± 909.1
7226.64 ± 42.1
1.35
1.06
V100 32GB
Base
41785.50 ± 427.9
0
1
1
V100 32GB
Pipeline
33836.24 ± 1635.0
121.24 ± 38.70
1.23
1.23
V100 32GB
Online
15844.66 ± 1966.5
6779.30 ± 510.1
2.64
1.85
horse2zebra
A100
Base
18232.62 ± 310.8
0
1
1
A100
Pipeline
15504.35 ± 953.6
9.21 ± 2.04
1.18
1.18
A100
Online
12765.70 ± 22.0
2548.01 ± 110.8
1.43
1.19
V100 16GB
Base
28738.86 ± 1152.6
0
1
1
V100 16GB
Pipeline
27392.90 ± 162.4
8.72 ± 2.02
1.05
1.05
V100 16GB
Online
17629.59 ± 737.4
2784.98 ± 47.3
1.63
1.41
V100 32GB
Base
30608.68 ± 1538.7
0
1
1
V100 32GB
Pipeline
26520.50 ± 1128.1
9.52 ± 0.2
1.15
1.15
V100 32GB
Online
17342.55 ± 643.5
2738.22 ± 42.3
1.76
1.52
Table 5.3: The time results and speedups of the baseline experiment com-
pared to experiments using the Optimization Units optimization
processes.
==PAGE:110==
102
Evaluation
Program
GPU
Batch Ratio
XLA?
Distribution
Iterations
CIFAR10
A100
2×
Yes
Yes
5
V100 16GB
2×
Yes
No
6
V100 32GB
2×
Yes
Yes
5
MNIST
A100
1×
Yes
No
7
V100 16GB
1×
Yes
No
8
V100 32GB
1/2×
Yes
No
6
PascalVOC
A100
1×
Yes
No
7
V100 16GB
1×
Yes
No
7
V100 32GB
1×
Yes
No
7
KITTI
A100
1/2×
Yes
No
7
V100 16GB
1/2×
No
No
6
V100 32GB
1/2×
Yes
No
6
horse2zebra
A100
1×
Yes
No
4
V100 16GB
1×
Yes
No
4
V100 32GB
1×
Yes
No
4
Table 5.4: Modiﬁcations chosen by the Online Optimization Process for the
various experiments.
PASCALVOC
The results of the PASCALVOC experiments are very similar to the MNIST
experiments. Both optimization processes achieve signiﬁcant improvements of
the convergence time, especially for the Online experiments. However, these also
signiﬁcantly increase the TTR. As Table 5.4 shows, the program is able to take
advantage of few of the modiﬁcations considered by the Online Optimization
Process, however a large number of iteration is still run. This inﬂates the overall
optimization time and it ends up being far longer than the convergence time.
The PASCALVOC program has the second shortest baseline convergence time
and similarly to the MNIST program, is trained over few relatively long epochs.
This is again the reason that the online experiments end up increasing the
TTR. The program is also an example of where the pipeline experiments have
relatively long optimization times. This is due to the method that was used to
store the datasets. The PASCALVOC datasets did not contain information on
their lengths, forcing the Pipeline Optimization Process to loop over the entire
datasets to get their sizes. This harms the ability of the process to improve the
TTR and the speedups of this are minimal as well.
KITTI
The KITTI experiments show very stable results on the A100 and V100-32
GPUs. Both show signiﬁcant speedups in the convergence times between 1.2
and 2 and of the TTR between 1.26 and 1.8. Similarly to the PASCALVOC pro-
==PAGE:111==
5.3 Results
103
gram, the pipeline optimization time is long because the dataset is distributed
over ﬁles and must be iterated over to determine the total length. The pro-
gram shows limited usage of the Online Optimization Process modiﬁcations,
but the signiﬁcant boost in convergence time due to reducing the batch size, is
discovered in every experiment. The KITTI experiments are a case where there
is signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the eﬀectiveness of the modiﬁcations based on the
GPU. This is most likely due to the KITTI program being the largest and one
of the more complex programs. This is also expressed in this programs having
some of the largest conﬁdence intervals. The VO task can be extremely diﬃcult
and in cases where the programs "got lucky" and made good updates early, the
convergence time was considerably lower.
As a method of backing the results found by the experiments, a number of
randomized tests were done using pipelines with operations randomly inserted
and using random training states to test whether a better conﬁguration than
the ones found by the Optimization Unit, could be found.
This is the only
program where a better program was found.
Speciﬁcally the program used
a diﬀerent set of pipeline operations wherein fs-caching was used later in the
pipeline. The KITTI dataset is too large to be stored in the GPU memory and
the given pipeline uses the stand-in method. The pipeline found by the Pipeline
Optimization Process used caching to store the stand-ins. However, the better
pipeline used fs-caching after parsing the stand-ins. Doing so eliminated the
majority of the I/O-operations involved in opening the various image ﬁles. This
experiment was done on the A100 GPU and its results are shown below.
GPU
Conv. Time (s)
Conv. Speedup
A100
10552.12
3.27
This is a signiﬁcantly better result that the ones found by the Optimization Unit
and shows that the Pipeline Optimization Process may struggle when stand-ins
are used, as it is unable to weigh its options for caching properly.
horse2zebra
The horse2zebra program is a special case for multiple reasons. Little to no im-
provement is gained through the Pipeline Optimization Process, but the Online
Optimization Process shows signiﬁcant improvements in both convergence time
and TTR between 1.2 and 1.8. Additionally, there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
the convergence times between the diﬀerent GPUs, with the V100 architectures
being mostly similar and the A100 considerably faster. This suggests that the
program might be better suited to be run on the A100 architecture. Given the
fast baseline convergence time on the A100, the relative eﬀects of the improve-
ments are worse. However, the fastest time reached on the A100 of ≈12800
seconds is 1.38× faster than any other. Table 5.4 shows that the only modiﬁ-
cation made by Online Optimization process is adding XLA. This modiﬁcation
==PAGE:112==
104
Evaluation
alone is able to provide a speedup in the TTR of approximately 1.35 on aver-
age. This is due to where most time is spent during the epochs of this program.
The horse2zebra program has 4 models and runs signiﬁcantly more passes of the
models per data preparation step. For each set of 1 image of a horse and 1 image
of a zebra, the program runs 14 total passes. This repetition of processing is
the best scenario for XLA and is run more eﬀectively on the A100 architecture.
In summary, both optimization processes display an ability to improve the con-
vergence time oﬀall the programs and it is safe to say, that they are able to
identify and apply modiﬁcations that improve convergence time. Results of the
TTR are more mixed and improvements are seen on 5/5 and 3/5 of the programs
for the optimization processes. For the programs where the TTR was reduced, it
was due to them possessing speciﬁc properties that negatively impact the Online
Optimization Process. However, in these programs, the Pipeline Optimization
Process still improves the TTR, which provides the backing to say that the Op-
timization Unit is indeed able to improve the Time-to-result of deep learning
programs. The improvements of both measures are also signiﬁcant, being regu-
larly between 1.5 and 2 for the convergence time and even surpassing 3 in some
experiments. The improvements of the TTR are obviously lower, but values
between 1.1 and 2 are commonly achieved and a result with an improvement of
3 is seen on the CIFAR10 experiments.
The Pipeline Optimization Process has the most stable results, showing no
obvious strengths or damning weaknesses. It never reduces the TTR but also
does not reach the same speedups as the other process. The process performs
slightly better on programs where the data pipelines play a bigger role relative
to the complete convergence time of the program. On the other hand, the Online
Optimization Process is more volatile and subject to both positive and negative
properties. The process performs especially well on programs with long baseline
convergence times that consist of many short epochs.
This allows the most
room for testing modiﬁcations. The process performs poorly on short training
processes, especially if they consist of a small number of long epochs.
The results have identiﬁed clear lines of improvement for the Optimization Unit.
The ﬁrst is to redesign the Online Optimization Process training experiments to
achieve the same information on the program while removing the dependency on
the epoch execution times. This would prevent the process from scaling poorly
and having optimization times longer than the convergence times of short pro-
grams. This is feasible by e.g. performing the experiments by running on a
number of examples instead of epochs. This would require a signiﬁcant amount
of further research to ensure that the gathered metrics would be equally descrip-
tive of the program. A second line of optimization is to increase the complexity
of the Pipeline Optimization Process to be able to detect, for example, the edge
cases where fs-caching is better than memory caching. This is also not infeasi-
==PAGE:113==
5.3 Results
105
ble, but there is a risk that the process itself would have to undergo structural
changes, which poses a risk that the optimization time may no longer be as low
as it is currently. Additionally, the results have revealed an undesirable relation
between the applicable modiﬁcations of the Online Optimization Process and its
optimization time. In certain situations where the reasoning-process does not
rule out modiﬁcations based on the metrics, programs that beneﬁt from fewer
modiﬁcations have to go through a longer optimization process to determine
this. Removing this relation or at least reducing its eﬀect, by e.g. improving
the reasoning-process, would go a long way towards lessening the gap between
optimization times of the two optimization processes.
==PAGE:114==
106
Evaluation
==PAGE:115==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This report has detailed the implementation and experimentation of an Opti-
mization Unit running Automatic Deep Learning Optimization processes. In-
cluded has been an overview of the knowledge required to optimize deep learning
programs and how this was used during the optimization processes. During the
development process, it was discovered that the designs of current deep learning
frameworks limit access to certain information. This placed certain hurdles for
the optimization processes and often required the user to provide information.
This resulted in the processes being less user-friendly than originally intended.
The Unit was tested on various programs in terms of improvement of conver-
gence time and time-to-result and showed impressive results.
A number of
experiments were run, showing that the Unit can both be successfully applied
to programs with varied tasks and architectures and improve the speed of their
training processes. The Unit regularly improved the convergence time to be up
to 2.5 times as fast as baseline experiments. Especially the training optimization
process performed well in this category, showing that to achieve the fastest deep
learning programs, it is not enough to limit optimizations to a single component.
In addition to the convergence time, the Unit displayed an ability to reduce the
overall time to result, meaning that the processes are applicable for one-shot
training scenarios. A few experiments displayed negative results, showing that
automated deep learning optimization still has a way to go. Overall, the results
are an indicator that the automated methodology has a non-insigniﬁcant ability
==PAGE:116==
108
Conclusion
to reduce both the environmental costs and developer hours spent in getting re-
sults from deep models. This suggests that automated methods may be used in
the future to take over the responsibility of optimizing deep learning programs,
freeing up time for more productive work.
The hope is that by showing both the positive and negative results of the au-
tomated approach, it will inspire further study into the underdeveloped ﬁeld in
deep learning of deﬁning concise optimization methods. Additionally, it may in-
spire further development of automated approaches that can potentially change
the modern deep learning workﬂow.
==PAGE:117==
Appendix A
Appendix A
==PAGE:118==
110
Appendix A
def define_losses():
loss_obj = tf.keras.losses.BinaryCrossentropy(from_logits=True)
def discriminator_loss(real, generated):
real_loss = loss_obj(tf.ones_like(real), real)
generated_loss = loss_obj(tf.zeros_like(generated), generated)
total_disc_loss = real_loss + generated_loss
return total_disc_loss * 0.5
def generator_loss(generated):
return loss_obj(tf.ones_like(generated), generated)
def calc_cycle_loss(real_image, cycled_image):
loss1 = tf.reduce_mean(tf.abs(real_image - cycled_image))
return LAMBDA * loss1
def identity_loss(real_image, same_image):
loss = tf.reduce_mean(tf.abs(real_image - same_image))
return LAMBDA * 0.5 * loss
return {"discriminator_loss": discriminator_loss,
"generator_loss": generator_loss,
"calc_cycle_loss": calc_cycle_loss,
"identity_loss": identity_loss}
def define_optimizers():
generator_g_optimizer = tf.keras.optimizers.Adam(1e-4, beta_1=0.5) #2e-4
generator_f_optimizer = tf.keras.optimizers.Adam(1e-4, beta_1=0.5) #2e-4
discriminator_x_optimizer = tf.keras.optimizers.Adam(1e-4, beta_1=0.5) #2e-4
discriminator_y_optimizer = tf.keras.optimizers.Adam(1e-4, beta_1=0.5) #2e-4
return {"generator_g_optimizer": generator_g_optimizer,
"generator_f_optimizer": generator_f_optimizer,
"discriminator_x_optimizer": discriminator_x_optimizer,
"discriminator_y_optimizer": discriminator_y_optimizer}
==PAGE:119==
111
def define_models():
generator_g = ResnetGenerator()
generator_f = ResnetGenerator()
discriminator_x = pix2pix.discriminator(norm_type='instancenorm',
target=False)
discriminator_y = pix2pix.discriminator(norm_type='instancenorm',
target=False)
return {"generator_g": generator_g,
"generator_f": generator_f,
"discriminator_x": discriminator_x,
"discriminator_y": discriminator_y}
def train_fn(epochs, pipelines, models, optimizers, losses):
<Training process definition>
...
...
...
<Training process definition>
models = o_unit.train(EPOCHS,
batch_size=args["batch_size"],
testing_epochs=args["testing_epochs"],
pipeline_names=["train_horses", "train_zebras"],
define_models_fn=define_models,
define_losses_fn=define_losses,
define_optimizers_fn=define_optimizers,
train_fn=train_fn)
Listing 3: The deﬁnitions of the models deﬁning the deep learning objects for
the horse2zebra-CycleGAN program.
==PAGE:120==
112
Appendix A
==PAGE:121==
Appendix B
Appendix B
{
"type ": {
"description ": "The
identifier of how the
configuration
should be run.
Must be 'o_unit ' or 'train '.",
"type ": "string"
},
" optimization_unit ": {
"description ": "The object
defining
the
properties
of the
optimization
unit.",
"type ": "object",
"properties ": {
"mode ": {
"description ": "The mode to run the unit in.
'full ' or 'pipeline",
"type ": "string"
},
"pipeline ": {
"description ": "What to do with the
pipelines.
'static ' or 'optimize '",
"type ": "string"
==PAGE:122==
114
Appendix B
},
"epochs ": {
"description ": "The number of epochs to run in
each
testing
epoch",
"type ": "integer"
}
}
},
" data_pipeline ": {
"description ": "The object
defining
the
properties of
the data
pipelines .",
"type ": "object",
"properties ": {
"dataset ": {
"description ": "Identifier
for the
dataset to utilize .",
"type ": "string"
},
"train_ds_ops: {
"description ": "Array
holding
the
operations of the
training
pipeline .",
"type ": "array",
"items ": {
"type ": "array"
},
},
"val_ds_ops: {
"description ": "Array
holding
the
operations of the
validation
pipeline .",
"type ": "array",
"items ": {
"type ": "array"
},
},
"test_ds_ops: {
"description ": "Array
holding
the
operations of the
testing
pipeline .",
"type ": "array",
"items ": {
"type ": "array"
}
},
<Task
specific
properties >
}
==PAGE:123==
115
},
"model ": {
"description ": "The object
defining
the
properties
of the models .",
"type ": "object",
"properties ": {
"model ": "ResNet50",
<Task
specific
properties >
}
},
"training ": {
"description ": "The object
defining
the
properties
of the models .",
"type ": "object",
"properties ": {
"epochs ": {
"description ": "The number of epochs to run the
training
process .",
"type ": "integer"
},
"loss ": {
"description ": "The loss
function to use.",
"type ": "string"
},
"optimizer ": {
"description ": "The
optimizer
function to use.",
"type ": "object",
"properties ": {
"name ": {
"description ": "The name of the
optimizer .",
"type ": "string",
},
"learning_rate ": {
"description ": "The
learning
rate for the
optimizer to utilize .",
"type ": float
},
}
},
"log_freq ": {
"description ": "The
frequency
with
which to log
==PAGE:124==
116
Appendix B
the
performance of the model
during
the
training
process .",
"type ": "integer"
},
" checkpointing ": {
"description ": "A flag
designating
whether to record
checkpoints .",
"type ": boolean
},
"ckpt_freq ": {
"description ": "The
frequency
with
which to checkpoint
the model
weights",
"type ": "integer"
},
" ckpts_to_keep ": {
"description ": "The number of checkpoints to store a
any given
time.",
"type ": "integer"
},
" model_ckpt_freq ": {
"description ": "The
frequency
with
which to checkpoint
the
complete
model",
"type ": "integer"
},
<Task
specific
properties >
}
}
}
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[BMR+20]
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah,
Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav
Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeﬀrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Lan-
guage models are few-shot learners. CoRR, abs/2005.14165, 2020.
[Cloa]
Google Cloud. Cloud tpu. https://cloud.google.com/tpu. ac-
cessed: 24.01.2022.
[Clob]
Google
Cloud.
Edge
tpu.
https://cloud.google.com/
edge-tpu. accessed: 24.01.2022.
[Cro]
Douglas Crockford. Introducing json. https://www.json.org/
json-en.html. accessed: 26.02.2022.
[CWZZ20]
Yu Cheng, Duo Wang, Pan Zhou, and Tao Zhang.
A survey
of model compression and acceleration for deep neural networks,
2020.
[Den12]
Li Deng.
The mnist database of handwritten digit images for
machine learning research.
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
29(6):141–142, 2012.
[Den21]
J. Densmore. Data Pipelines Pocket Reference: Moving and Pro-
cessing Data for Analytics. O’Reilly Media, Incorporated, 2021.
==PAGE:126==
118
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[dSA20]
Samuel Felipe dos Santos and Jurandy Almeida. Deep learning to-
wards edge computing: Neural networks straight from compressed
data, 2020.
[EGW+10]
Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn,
and Andrew Zisserman. The pascal visual object classes (voc)
challenge, 2010.
[FDI+15]
Philipp Fischer, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Eddy Ilg, Philip Häusser,
Caner Hazirbas, Vladimir Golkov, Patrick van der Smagt, Daniel
Cremers, and Thomas Brox. Flownet: Learning optical ﬂow with
convolutional networks. CoRR, abs/1504.06852, 2015.
[Fra21]
Jake Frankenﬁeld. Graphics processing unit (gpu), Sep 2021.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville.
Deep
Learning.
MIT Press, 2016.
http://www.deeplearningbook.
org.
[GG18]
Evgin Goceri and Ali Gooya. On the importance of batch size for
deep learning. 07 2018.
[GLU12]
Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are we ready
for autonomous driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite. In Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2012.
[GNU]
GNU.org. Gnu bash. https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/.
accessed: 26.02.2022.
[GZ20]
Fengli Gao and Huicai Zhong.
Study on the large batch size
training of neural networks based on the second order gradient,
2020.
[He]
Zhenliang
He.
Cyclegan-tensorﬂow-2.
https://
github.com/LynnHo/CycleGAN-Tensorflow-2/commit/
581e79deaf44241628b962f0ce7dfbed510dc158.
[HJC18]
Sayed Hadi Hashemi, Sangeetha Abdu Jyothi, and Roy H. Camp-
bell. Tictac: Accelerating distributed deep learning with commu-
nication scheduling, 2018.
[Hon]
Shen
Yi
Hong.
The
perfect
shuf-
ﬂe.
https://towardsdatascience.com/
the-perfect-shuffle-aa388ad1ffd1.
[HP11]
John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson. Computer Architec-
ture, Fifth Edition: A Quantitative Approach. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 5th edition, 2011.
==PAGE:127==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
119
[HP18]
Wen-mei Hwu and Sanjay Patel. Accelerator architectures —a
ten-year retrospective. IEEE Micro, 38(6):56–62, 2018.
[HS92]
Babak Hassibi and David G. Stork. Second order derivatives for
network pruning: Optimal brain surgeon. In NIPS, 1992.
[HZRS15a]
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition. CoRR, abs/1512.03385,
2015.
[HZRS15b]
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition, 2015.
[Inta]
Intel.
Intel.
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/
homepage.html. accessed: 05.02.2022.
[Intb]
Intel.
Intel
deep
learning
boost.
https://www.intel.
com/content/www/us/en/artificial-intelligence/
deep-learning-boost.html. accessed: 05.02.2022.
[Intc]
Intel.
Intel®
stratix®
10
sx
2800
fpga.
https:
//ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/products/
210308/intel-stratix-10-sx-2800-fpga.html.
[Intd]
Intel.
Intel®
xeon®
processor
e5-2699
v3.
https:
//ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/products/81061/
intel-xeon-processor-e52699-v3-45m-cache-2-30-ghz.
html.
[JNW08]
Bruce Jacob, Spencer Ng, and David Wang. Memory Systems:
Cache, DRAM, Disk. 01 2008.
[JYP+17]
Norman P. Jouppi, CliﬀYoung, Nishant Patil, David Patterson,
Gaurav Agrawal, Raminder Bajwa, Sarah Bates, Suresh Bhatia,
Nan Boden, Al Borchers, Rick Boyle, Pierre luc Cantin, Clif-
ford Chao, Chris Clark, Jeremy Coriell, Mike Daley, Matt Dau,
Jeﬀrey Dean, Ben Gelb, Tara Vazir Ghaemmaghami, Rajendra
Gottipati, William Gulland, Robert Hagmann, C. Richard Ho,
Doug Hogberg, John Hu, Robert Hundt, Dan Hurt, Julian Ibarz,
Aaron Jaﬀey, Alek Jaworski, Alexander Kaplan, Harshit Khai-
tan, Andy Koch, Naveen Kumar, Steve Lacy, James Laudon,
James Law, Diemthu Le, Chris Leary, Zhuyuan Liu, Kyle Lucke,
Alan Lundin, Gordon MacKean, Adriana Maggiore, Maire Ma-
hony, Kieran Miller, Rahul Nagarajan, Ravi Narayanaswami,
Ray Ni, Kathy Nix, Thomas Norrie, Mark Omernick, Narayana
Penukonda, Andy Phelps, Jonathan Ross, Matt Ross, Amir Salek,
==PAGE:128==
120
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Emad Samadiani, Chris Severn, Gregory Sizikov, Matthew Snel-
ham, Jed Souter, Dan Steinberg, Andy Swing, Mercedes Tan,
Gregory Thorson, Bo Tian, Horia Toma, Erick Tuttle, Vijay
Vasudevan, Richard Walter, Walter Wang, Eric Wilcox, and
Doe Hyun Yoon. In-datacenter performance analysis of a ten-
sor processing unit, 2017.
[KCY18]
Zhi-Lin Ke, Hsiang-Yun Cheng, and Chia-Lin Yang.
LIRS:
enabling eﬃcient machine learning on nvm-based storage via
a lightweight implementation of random shuﬄing.
CoRR,
abs/1810.04509, 2018.
[KMN+16]
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal,
Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Peter Tang. On large-batch
training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima.
CoRR, abs/1609.04836, 2016.
[Lau]
Suki Lau.
Learning rate schedules and adaptive learning rate
methods for deep learning. https://towardsdatascience.com/
learning-rate-schedules-and-adaptive-learning-rate-methods-for-deep-lear
[LLL+20]
Mingzhen Li, Yi Liu, Xiaoyan Liu, Qingxiao Sun, Xin You, Hai-
long Yang, Zhongzhi Luan, and Depei Qian. The deep learning
compiler: A comprehensive survey. CoRR, abs/2002.03794, 2020.
[Mac02]
Philip Machanick. Approaches to addressing the memory wall,
11 2002.
[MCL+18]
Stefano Markidis, Steven Wei Der Chien, Erwin Laure, Ivy Bo
Peng, and Jeﬀrey S. Vetter. Nvidia tensor core programmability,
performance & precision. 2018 IEEE International Parallel and
Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW), May
2018.
[MKR21]
Konstantin Mishchenko, Ahmed Khaled, and Peter Richtárik.
Random reshuﬄing:
Simple analysis with vast improvements,
2021.
[MKS+13]
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves,
Ioannis Antonoglou,
Daan Wierstra,
and Martin A. Ried-
miller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
abs/1312.5602, 2013.
[MME12]
Rino Micheloni, Alessia Marelli, and Kam Eshghi. Inside Solid
State Drives (SSDs).
Springer Publishing Company, Incorpo-
rated, 2012.
==PAGE:129==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
121
[MNA+18]
Paulius Micikevicius, Sharan Narang, Jonah Alben, Gregory Di-
amos, Erich Elsen, David Garcia, Boris Ginsburg, Michael Hous-
ton, Oleksii Kuchaiev, Ganesh Venkatesh, and Hao Wu. Mixed
precision training, 2018.
[MSARG17]
Yassine Maalej,
Sameh Sorour,
Ahmed Abdel-Rahim,
and
Mohsen Guizani.
Vanets meet autonomous vehicles: A multi-
modal 3d environment learning approach. 05 2017.
[NSC+21]
Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, Patrick
LeGresley, Mostofa Patwary, Vijay Anand Korthikanti, Dmitri
Vainbrand, Prethvi Kashinkunti, Julie Bernauer, Bryan Catan-
zaro, Amar Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. Eﬃcient large-scale
language model training on gpu clusters using megatron-lm, 2021.
[NVIa]
NVIDIA.
Cuda.
https://developer.nvidia.com/
cuda-toolkit. accessed: 19.01.2022.
[NVIb]
NVIDIA. Nvidia. https://www.nvidia.com/da-dk/. accessed:
24.01.2022.
[NVIc]
NVIDIA. Nvidia a100 tensor core gpu. https://www.nvidia.
com/content/dam/en-zz/Solutions/Data-Center/a100/pdf/
nvidia-a100-datasheet-us-nvidia-1758950-r4-web.pdf.
[NVId]
NVIDIA.
Nvidia titan x pascal.
https://www.techpowerup.
com/gpu-specs/titan-x-pascal.c2863.
[NVIe]
NVIDIA.
Nvidia
v100
tensor
core
gpu.
https:
//images.nvidia.com/content/technologies/volta/pdf/
volta-v100-datasheet-update-us-1165301-r5.pdf.
[NVIf]
NVIDIA.
Tesla
k80
gpu
accelerator.
https:
//www.nvidia.com/content/dam/en-zz/Solutions/
Data-Center/tesla-product-literature/
Tesla-K80-BoardSpec-07317-001-v05.pdf.
[PGZ+18]
Hieu Pham, Melody Y. Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc V. Le, and Jeﬀ
Dean. Eﬃcient neural architecture search via parameter sharing,
2018.
[PH16]
David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy. Computer Organiza-
tion and Design: The Hardware Software Interface ARM Edition.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1st
edition, 2016.
[PS]
PCI-SIG. Pci-sig. https://pcisig.com/.
==PAGE:130==
122
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Pyta]
Python.org.
Python.
https://www.python.org/.
accessed:
23.11.2021.
[PyTb]
PyTorch.org.
Pytorch.
https://pytorch.org/.
accessed:
23.11.2021.
[RF18]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. Yolov3: An incremental im-
provement. CoRR, abs/1804.02767, 2018.
[RH21]
Lars Ruthotto and Eldad Haber. An introduction to deep gener-
ative modeling. CoRR, abs/2103.05180, 2021.
[RN18]
Alec Radford and Karthik Narasimhan. Improving language un-
derstanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
[RR13]
Benjamin Recht and Christopher Ré. Parallel stochastic gradient
algorithms for large-scale matrix completion. MATHEMATICAL
PROGRAMMING COMPUTATION, pages 201–226, 2013.
[RSM+18]
Andres Rodriguez, Eden Segal, E. Meiri, Evarist Fomenko,
Young-Hyun Jim, Haihao Shen, and Barukh Ziv. Lower numerical
precision deep learning inference and training. 2018.
[RSR+20]
Colin Raﬀel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sha-
ran Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J.
Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-
to-text transformer, 2020.
[RWC+19]
Alec Radford, JeﬀWu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei,
and Ilya Sutskever. Language models are unsupervised multitask
learners. 2019.
[SB15]
Suraj Srinivas and R. Venkatesh Babu. Data-free parameter prun-
ing for deep neural networks, 2015.
[SKYL18]
Samuel L. Smith, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Chris Ying, and
Quoc V. Le. Don’t decay the learning rate, increase the batch
size, 2018.
[sl]
scikit learn. scikit-learn. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/.
accessed: 19.01.2022.
[Sun20]
Ruo Yu Sun. Optimization for deep learning: An overview. Jour-
nal of the Operations Research Society of China, 8(2):249–294,
June 2020. Publisher Copyright: © 2020, Operations Research
Society of China, Periodicals Agency of Shanghai University, Sci-
ence Press, and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer
Nature.
==PAGE:131==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
123
[SXL+19]
Shuheng Shen, Linli Xu, Jingchang Liu, Xianfeng Liang, and Yifei
Cheng. Faster distributed deep net training: Computation and
communication decoupled stochastic gradient descent, 2019.
[Tena]
TensorFlow.
Cyclegan.
https://www.tensorflow.org/
tutorials/generative/cyclegan.
[Tenb]
TensorFlow. Distributed training with tensorﬂow. https://www.
tensorflow.org/guide/distributed_training.
[Tenc]
TensorFlow.org.
Tensorﬂow.
https://www.TensorFlow.org/.
accessed: 23.11.2021.
[THHLB13]
Chris Thornton, Frank Hutter, Holger H. Hoos, and Kevin
Leyton-Brown. Auto-weka: Combined selection and hyperparam-
eter optimization of classiﬁcation algorithms, 2013.
[Uni]
Brown University. Brown university, fundamentals of computer
systems. lab 4:
Caching.
https://cs.brown.edu/courses/
csci1310/2020/assign/labs/lab4.html.
[WCWT17]
Sen Wang, Ronald Clark, Hongkai Wen, and Niki Trigoni.
Deepvo: Towards end-to-end visual odometry with deep recurrent
convolutional neural networks. CoRR, abs/1709.08429, 2017.
[WDCDM98] S. Wuytack, J.-P. Diguet, F.V.M. Catthoor, and H.J. De Man.
Formalized methodology for data reuse: exploration for low-power
hierarchical memory mappings. IEEE Transactions on Very Large
Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 6(4):529–537, 1998.
[Wik]
Wikipedia.
Embarrassingly parallel.
https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Embarrassingly_parallel".
[Wil93]
Doran K. Wilde. A library for doing polyhedral operations. Tech-
nical Report 785, IRISA, December 1993.
[Wil04]
Ronald J. Williams.
Simple statistical gradient-following algo-
rithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine Learn-
ing, 8:229–256, 2004.
[WPZ19]
Shaoqi Wang, Aidi Pi, and Xiaobo Zhou. Scalable distributed dl
training: Batching communication and computation. In AAAI,
2019.
[WXY+17]
Wei Wen, Cong Xu, Feng Yan, Chunpeng Wu, Yandan Wang,
Yiran Chen, and Hai Li. Terngrad: Ternary gradients to reduce
communication in distributed deep learning, 2017.
==PAGE:132==
124
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[WZH+18]
Chao-Yuan Wu, Manzil Zaheer, Hexiang Hu, R. Manmatha,
Alexander J. Smola, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Compressed video
action recognition, 2018.
[ZBH+16]
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht,
and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding deep learning requires rethink-
ing generalization. CoRR, abs/1611.03530, 2016.
[Zha]
Zihao
Zhang.
yolov3-tf2.
https://
github.com/zzh8829/yolov3-tf2/commit/
35858a2bcf23a50296e89f2d44c52324c374f96e.
[ZL16]
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural architecture search with
reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1611.01578, 2016.
[ZPIE17]
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros.
Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent ad-
versarial networks. CoRR, abs/1703.10593, 2017.
[ZWN+18]
Shuchang Zhou, Yuxin Wu, Zekun Ni, Xinyu Zhou, He Wen, and
Yuheng Zou.
Dorefa-net: Training low bitwidth convolutional
neural networks with low bitwidth gradients, 2018.
