==PAGE:1==
Simulation of wave breaking and microplastic
transport using a high-order Boussinesq model
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Simulation of wave breaking and microplastic transport using a high-
order Boussinesq model
Master Thesis
February, 2022
By
Rebekka Skatvedt Dinesen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribu-
tion, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nils Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Fluid Mechanics,
Coastal and Maritime Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Rebekka Skatvedt Dinesen - s163815
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
A Boussinesq wave model implemented in Matlab was modified to correct an error
causing set-down in the surf zone. It was established that the error consisted of an
assumption of constant eddy viscosity made during the derivation of the energy
dissipation term in the dynamic free surface condition, and the turbulent trans-
port equations. Introducing the spatial variation of the eddy viscosity in these
formulations, it was shown that the model was capable of representing a spilling
breaking wave with sufficient accuracy assessed by comparison with experimental
results. Subsequently, a sediment transport module based on the random walk
model was implemented in Matlab as a post-processing module for the results
obtained by the wave model. Through comparison with experimental data, it
was shown that the model is able to accurately predict the particle velocities
of floating particles. The beaching time of floating particles in spilling breaking
waves was determined, and it was found that the model strongly underestimates
the beaching time compared to experimental results. This was attributed to the
different interactions between particle and surface roller observed in the model
and experiment respectively. In the experiment, it was reported that the particles
would be submerged during the passing of a breaking wave and required several
rollers to pass before reaching the beach whereas in the model the particle would
be sucked up by a roller and be carried with it all the way to the beach.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor professor David R. Fuhrman,
and to my co-supervisors postdocs Bjarke Eltard Larsen and Hasan Gökhan
Güler, for their guidance and assistance throughout the project.
Your ideas
and support were especially appreciated at the later stages of the project as each
extension of the wave model brought about new and unforeseen complications.
I would further like to express my thanks to the students occupying the thesis
office of building 413. It has been a pleasure to have company throughout the
project with whom to share both failures and success.
iv
==PAGE:7==
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Symbols
α, β
JONSWAP parameters
αR
Relaxation function
αr
Standard normally distributed random variable
¯T
Average wave period
¯z
Average vertical coordinate
β, β∗, σ, σ∗Closure coefficients
β, χR
Relaxation function parameters
β12, β13, β14, β15 Shoaling optimizing parameters
δ
Phase
∆t
Time step
δx
Grid spacing
δb
Mixing length coefficient
δwdb
Wet-dry boundary threshold
η
Surface elevation
ηt
Vertical velocity of the free surface
η∗
t
Breaking parameter
ηF
t
Cessation of breaking
ηI
t
Initiation of breaking
ˆu∗, ˆw∗Utility velocities
ˆz
Expansion level
∇2
Laplace operator
ν
Kinematic viscosity
νT
Eddy viscosity
ω
Specific energy dissipation rate
ω
Angular frequency
ωp
Peak angular frequency
vi
==PAGE:9==
NOMENCLATURE
φ
Velocity potential
ρ
Density
σ
JONSWAP spectrum variance
σ
Variance of turbulent fluctuations
σk
Diffusion coefficient
σu, σw Variance of turbulent fluctuations
τij
Shear stress
˜u, ˜w
Velocities at the free surface
A
Wave amplitude
B
Breaking ”switch”
BI, BII, B01, B11, B02, B12 Velocity operators evaluated at seabed
c
Wave celerity
Cd
Dissipation coefficient
dp
Particle density
g
Gravitational acceleration
H
Wave height
h
Water depth
H0, h0, k0 Deep water wave parameters
Hs
Significant wave height
JI, JII, J01, J11, J02, J12 Velocity operators
k
Turbulent kinetic energy
k
Wave number
L
Wave length
lm
Mixing length
lt
Length scale
Pb
Buoyancy term
Pk
Turbulence production term
s
Local bed slope
Sη
JONSWAP energy density spectrum
sp
Relative particle density
t
Time
vii
==PAGE:10==
NOMENCLATURE
T
Wave period
T ∗
Transition time
t0
Breaking initiation time
Tp
Peak wave period
tramp
Ramp-up time in relaxation zones
u
Horizontal velocity
ub, wb Velocities evaluated at the seabed
uL
Lagrangian drift velocity
uL0
Deep water Lagrangian drift velocity
up, wp Particle velocities
w
Vertical velocity
ws
Settling velocity
x
Horizontal axis
xp, zp Particle position coordinates
z
Vertical axis
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Model description
3
2.1
Wave model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Governing equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Boussinesq equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Wave breaking model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Numerical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Sediment transport model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Random walk model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Surface roller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Numerical implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Wave model - validation and results
21
3.1
Linear dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Linear shoaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Non-linear progression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Breaking waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Performance of wave model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Particle transport model - validation and results
29
4.1
Period-averaged velocity profiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Non-breaking waves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Breaking waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Particle velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Beaching time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Performance of particle transport model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Conclusion
43
5.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Bibliography
45
ix
==PAGE:12==
CONTENTS
x
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
Pollution of marine environments by microplastic particles is a growing problem,
threatening marine life and ecosystems (Sebille et al., 2020). Presently, the knowl-
edge of particle behavior when exposed to the various hydrodynamic phenomena
occurring in the nearshore region is very limited (Forsberg et al., 2020). Recent
experimental studies on micro-plastic transport in waves have been conducted
by Kerpen et al. (2020), Alsina et al. (2020) and Forsberg et al. (2020) among
others while numerical studies have been conducted by DiBenedetto (2020) and
Bagaev et al. (2017). The studies include both floating and non-floating particles
and covers both deep water and the coastal region.
Alsina et al. (2020) investigated how particles are affected by wave motion de-
pending on the wave period. The experiment included a variety of floating and
non-floating particles to examine the effect of particle size and density. It was
found that the behavior of the particles is heavily dependent on the particle den-
sity relative to the water density. The motion of floating particles was found to
be governed by the Stokes drift. While the floating particles would stay on the
surface, the non-floating particles would sink and travel closer to the seabed at
lower velocities than the floating particles.
Kerpen et al. (2020) focused on the distribution of microplastic particles in the
surf zone.
Particles with varying sizes, shapes, and densities were examined,
the parameters being chosen to match those frequently found in nature. The
accumulation of particles on a sloping sandy seabed exposed to regular waves
was examined, showing that larger particle size and density, would cause the
accumulation point to move into shallower waters. Additionally, the study showed
that buoyant particles would stay floating or be washed up at the beach.
Forsberg et al. (2020) considered the transport of plastic particles in the cross-
shore direction.
The effect of wind and wave conditions was investigated for
particles with different shapes and densities. It was shown that the accumulation
pattern depends on the density of the particles. The accumulation of floating
particles was found to depend on both wind and wave conditions as well as particle
shape while non-floating particles would be deposited in the wave breaking region,
a behavior similar to that of natural sand.
Bagaev et al. (2017) studied the distribution of microplastic particles in the wa-
ter column through analysis of water samples, laboratory tests, and numerical
simulations. The numerical simulations used a basin-scale model and velocity
field data to assess the dispersion of particles throughout the water column. The
vertical mixing was modeled using a buoyancy extended k−ω model. The studies
showed that the particles initially accumulated towards the top and bottom of
the water column depending on their buoyancy but that all particles eventually
sink.
1
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
DiBenedetto (2020) developed an analytical model to describe the vertical distri-
bution of buoyant particles depending on the wave phase in deep water wind and
wave conditions. The analytical model and numerical simulations were utilized
to investigate how monochromatic non-breaking waves affect the horizontal and
vertical particle distribution. The results showed that in the horizontal direction,
the particle concentration would be higher beneath the wave crests and lower
beneath the wave troughs. In the vertical direction, the wave crests and troughs
cause the vertical particle distribution to stretch and compress respectively.
This thesis aims to contribute to the knowledge on microplastic transport in the
nearshore region. In particular, the project will consider the transport of floating
particles in the nearshore region exposed to both breaking and non-breaking
waves. The particle transport will be described by a random walk model while
the flow conditions are represented using a high-order Boussinesq model.
Thesis structure
The thesis is structured as follows.
In Chapter 2, the models are presented,
including both an introduction to the theory as well as a description of the im-
plementation of the numerical model. Chapter 3 concerns the validation of the
wave model implemented by Hybel (2019) and includes a series of test cases cov-
ering linear dispersion, linear shoaling, and non-linear progression. The chapter
is concluded with a simulation of a spilling breaking wave and a discussion of
the model performance. Chapter 4 goes through the test cases verifying the im-
plementation of the sediment transport model, covering both fluid and particle
velocities. Additionally, the results obtained when utilizing the model to pre-
dict the beaching time of microplastic particles exposed to irregular breaking are
presented.
The section is finished with a discussion of the results and model
performance. Finally, Chapter 5 presents the conclusion and future work.
2
==PAGE:15==
2
Model description
In this section, the models used throughout the project are presented. First, the
wave model is described, starting with the basic governing equations followed by
the Boussinesq equations. The issue of the model’s incapability of representing
breaking waves is discussed, and the solution is presented, including the addition
of an energy dissipation term in the dynamic free surface condition, different
breaking closure models, and the breaker trigger mechanism.
Furthermore, a
brief explanation of the numerical implementation of the wave model in Matlab
is given.
Second, the sediment transport model is presented, including a description of the
random walk model as well as a short introduction to the surface roller concept.
Finally, the structure of the sediment transport module implemented in Matlab
is explained.
2.1
Wave model
The wave model describes the temporal evolution of the free surface, fluid ve-
locities, and potentially the turbulent kinetic energy and specific dissipation rate
depending on the breaking closure model chosen.
The description is based on the Boussinesq equations derived by Madsen et al.
(2006).
The equations are modified to accommodate breaking waves through
introduction of an energy dissipation term and a breaking closure model.
2.1.1
Governing equations
In this section, the equations governing the irrotational flow of an incompressible,
inviscid fluid are presented. The description here is limited to a two-dimensional
cross-section of a beach. In general, only 2D problems are considered throughout
this thesis.
To model the problem a two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system is adopted,
in which the x-axis is horizontal and points towards land, and the z-axis points
vertically upwards, is perpendicular to the x-axis and positioned such that z =
0 m is located at the SWL. Hence, the fluid domain is bounded by the free surface
at z = η(x, t) and the seabed at z = −h(x) with the seabed depth h being defined
as positive downwards.
In the interior domain, the fluid is described by the Laplace equation
∂2φ
∂x2 + ∂2φ
∂z2 = ∇2φ = 0
(2.1)
where the velocity potential φ is given through the definition of the horizontal
and vertical velocity, u and w respectively, as
u = ∂φ
∂x,
w = ∂φ
∂z .
(2.2)
3
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
∇2 is the Laplace operator, which for two Cartesian dimensions is defined as
∇2 = ∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂z2 .
(2.3)
A set of boundary conditions are required to complete the description of the flow.
These includes the kinematic bottom condition (KBC) at the seabed and
the kinematic free surface condition (KFSC) and dynamic free surface
condition (DFSC) at the free surface.
The kinematic conditions generally assume that a particle at a boundary will stay
at this boundary. Thus, at the seabed, the KBC ensures that the assumption
of an impermeable seabed is fulfilled.
This corresponds to requiring that the
velocity vector is parallel to the seabed which can be expressed as
∂φ
∂z −∂φ
∂x
∂h
∂x = 0,
z = −h.
(2.4)
At the free surface, a similar condition applies. The KFSC requires that a particle
at the free surface stays at the free surface which can be expressed as
∂η
∂t + ∂φ
∂x
∂η
∂x −∂φ
∂z = 0,
z = η,
(2.5)
η being the free surface and t denoting time. Eq. 2.5 states that the temporal
derivative of the free surface, i.e. the change of the free surface in time, must
equal the vertical velocity and the change in free surface height induced by a
change in the horizontal position.
Finally, the DFSC requires that the external stresses on the free surface are
balanced by the internal stresses immediately inside the fluid. This can be written
as
∂φ
∂t + 1
2(∇φ)2 + gη = 0,
z = η
(2.6)
where g = 9.81 m/s2 is the gravitational acceleration.
2.1.2
Boussinesq equations
Madsen et al. (2006) derived the Boussinesq equations under the assumption that
the expansion level ˆz is slowly varying in space. The description given here is
based on that of Madsen et al. (2006).
Denoting the utility velocity variables at the expansion level ˆu∗and ˆw∗, the
general velocity formulation can be expressed as
u(x, z, t) = JI ˆu∗+ JII ˆw∗
(2.7a)
w(x, z, t) = JII ˆw∗−JI ˆu∗
(2.7b)
where JI and JII are velocity operators. Hybel (2019) assumes slowly varying
bathymetries, in which case the velocity operators simplify to
JI = J01 + δ∇ˆzJ11 + O(δ2)
JII = J02 + δ∇ˆzJ12 + O(δ2).
(2.8)
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Note that Eq. 2.8 is a truncated version of the velocity operators presented in Eq.
16a and 16b of Madsen et al. (2006) which, contrary to Eq. 2.8, allows rapidly
varying bathymetries. The J-operators in Eq. 2.8 are given as
J01 ≡1 +

−ψ2
2 + ˆz2
18

∇2 +
ψ4
24 −ˆz2ψ2
36
+ ˆz4
504

∇4
J02 ≡ψ∇+

−ψ3
6 + ˆz2ψ
18

∇3 +
 ψ5
120 −ˆz2ψ3
108 + ˆz4ψ
504

∇5
J11 ≡ψ∇+

−ψ3
2 −ˆzψ2
9
+ ˆz2ψ
18

∇3
+
ψ5
24 + ˆzψ4
54 −ˆz2ψ3
36
−ˆz3ψ2
126 + ˆz4ψ
504

∇5
J12 ≡

ψ2 + ˆzψ
9

∇2 +

−ψ4
6 −ˆzψ3
18 + ˆz2ψ2
18
+ ˆz3ψ
126

∇4
(2.9)
where ψ ≡z −ˆz. Denoting the variables at the seabed by subscript b, such that
ub and wb is the horizontal and vertical velocities at z = −h and ψb ≡−(h + ˆz),
the KBC given in Eq. 2.4 can be expressed as wb + ∇h · ub = 0. Inserting Eq.
2.8 and 2.9 in the KBC, this can be rewritten as
B01 ˆw∗−B02ˆu∗+ δ∇h(B01ˆu∗+ B02 ˆw∗) + δ∇ˆz(B11 ˆw∗−B12ˆu∗) = O(δ3) (2.10)
where the B-operators are defined as follows:
B01 ≡1 +
 ˆz2
18 −ψ2
b
2

∇2 +
 ˆz4
504 −ˆz2ψ2
b
36
+ ψ4
b
24

∇4
B02 ≡ψb∇+
 ˆz2ψb
18
−ψ3
b
6

∇3 +
 ˆz4ψ4
b
504 −ˆz2ψ3
b
108 + ψ5
b
120

∇5
B11 ≡ψb∇+ β13
 ˆz2ψb
18
−ˆzψ2
b
9
−ψ3
b
2

∇3
+ β15
 ˆz4ψb
504 −ˆz3ψ2
b
126 −ˆz2ψ3
b
36
+ ˆzψ4
b
54 + ψ5
b
24

∇5
B12 ≡β12
 ˆzψb
9
+ ψ2
b

∇2 + β14
 ˆz3ψb
126 + ˆz2ψ2
b
18
−ˆzψ3
b
18 −ψ4
b
6

∇4.
(2.11)
The β-parameters in Eq. 2.11 are shoaling coefficients introduced to optimize the
linear shoaling properties of the model and their values are given as β12 = 0.95583,
β13 = 0.72885, β14 = 0.51637 and β15 = 0.28478.
Defining the velocities directly on the free surface at z = η as ˜u and ˜w, the
dynamic and kinematic free surface condition can be written as
∂˜V
∂t + g∇η + 1
2∇( ˜V · ˜V −˜w2(1 + ∇η · ∇η)) = 0
(2.12)
∂η
∂t −˜w + ∇η · ˜u = 0
(2.13)
where the definition ˜V ≡˜u + ˜w∇η has been invoked.
5
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
2.1.3
Wave breaking model
Since the Boussinesq model by definition is incapable of dissipating energy it
must be coupled with an artificial breaking mechanism to allow simulation of
breaking waves. This section describes how this is achieved by addition of an
energy dissipation term to the dynamic surface condition. Furthermore, three
different breaking closure models are presented, and a description of the breaker
trigger mechanism is provided.
Breaking dissipation term
To facilitate energy dissipation due to breaking, an additional term must be
included in the DFSC in Eq. 2.12.
During this project, it was found that the wrong set-down in the surf zone com-
puted by Hybel (2019) was caused by an invalid assumption in the formulation of
the breaking dissipation term. When deriving the additional term in the DFSC,
Hybel (2019) assumed that the eddy viscosity was constant in space which lead
to the following formulation of the energy dissipation term:
∂τij
∂xj
= νT
∂2˜u
∂x2 .
(2.14)
However, the eddy viscosity in a breaking wave is not constant for which rea-
son the formulation given in Eq. 2.14 insufficient and ultimately resulted in an
incorrect representation of the surface envelope in the surf zone.
The error was corrected by replacing Eq. 2.14 with the following formulation
proposed by Kennedy et al. (2000),
∂τij
∂xj
=
1
h + η
 ∂
∂x

νT
∂
∂x(h + η) ˜V

(2.15)
which accounts for the spatial variation of the eddy viscosity. It can be shown that
the addition of Eq. 2.15 does not affect the overall conservation of momentum in
the DFSC (Kennedy et al., 2000).
This new formulation of the energy dissipating term resulted in a correct repre-
sentation of set-down and set-up as shown in Section 3.4.
Breaking closure models
Regarding the choice of a breaking closure, the model provides three different
options ranging from a simple algebraic zero-equation closure to a more advanced
two-equation model of the k-ω type. The following section describes the three
different breaking closures and explains where the formulations differ from those
given in Hybel (2019).
Zero-equation model
The simplest turbulence model is the algebraic zero-equation model. The zero-
equation model applied here is that proposed by Kennedy et al. (2000), in which
the eddy viscosity is given as the product of the vertical velocity, ηt, and a length
scale defined as, lt = (h + η).
νT = B δ2
b ηt (h + η)
(2.16)
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
The parameter B is a ”breaking switch” controlling the energy dissipation of the
wave. The formulation of this breaking switch is given in Section 2.1.3, but its
role in Eq. 2.16 is to ensure that the eddy viscosity is only different from zero
when the wave is breaking.
δb is a mixing length coefficient, which Kennedy
et al. (2000) set to δb = 1.2. However, Kennedy et al. (2000) noted that the
computations seemed insensitive to the value of this parameter, and varying δb
between 0.9 and 1.5 did not change the results significantly.
One-equation model
The one-equation model is a type of turbulence energy equation model and solves
one of the turbulent transport equations.
The chosen one-equation model is
the Prandtl model which solves the partial differential equation describing the
turbulent kinetic energy. The Prandtl model, (Wilcox, 2006), defines the spatial
and temporal evolution of the turbulent kinetic energy by the following partial
differential equation
∂k
∂t + Uj
∂k
∂xj
= Pk −Cd
k3/2
lt
+
∂
∂xj

ν + νT
σk
 ∂k
∂xj

(2.17)
in which the terms from left to right describe unsteadiness, convection, produc-
tion, dissipation, and diffusion.
Cd is a dissipation coefficient which is set to
Cd = 0.08 and σk is a diffusion coefficient set to σk = 1/σ∗= 1/0.6. The formu-
lation of the production term Pk is adopted from Hybel (2019) who derived the
following expression:
Pk = CPkνT
∂˜ω
∂x
2
(2.18)
The eddy viscosity is now formulated in terms of the turbulent kinetic energy
νT = B
√
k lt
(2.19)
where lt is a length scale that is taken as
lt = h + η
(2.20)
to be consistent with that used in the zero-equation model.
Invoking Eq. 2.19 and 2.20 while neglecting the kinematic fluid viscosity ν as
done in the formulation of the Boussinesq equations, Eq. 2.17 can be rewritten
as
∂k
∂t = Pk −Cd
k3/2
lt
+ σ∗∂
∂xj

νT
∂k
∂xj

−˜u∂k
∂x.
(2.21)
Contrary to Hybel (2019), who assumed the eddy viscosity to be constant thereby
moving it outside the derivative in the diffusion term of Eq. 2.17, the present
formulation 2.21 retains the spatial variation of the eddy viscosity.
7
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Two-equation model
Finally, k-ω model is considered. This two-equation model is another turbulence
energy equation model describing both the turbulent kinetic energy, k, and the
specific dissipation rate, ω, by their respective partial differential equation. Cf.
Wilcox (2006), the transport equation for turbulent kinetic energy reads
∂k
∂t + Uj
∂k
∂xj
= Pk −Pb −β∗kω +
∂
∂xj

µ + σ∗k
ω
 ∂k
∂xj

(2.22)
and the transport equation for the specific dissipation rate is
∂ω
∂t + Uj
∂k
∂xj
= Pω −σd
ω
∂k
∂xj
∂ω
∂xj
−βω2 +
∂
∂xj

µ + σ k
ω
 ∂k
∂xj

.
(2.23)
The terms in Eq. 2.22 and 2.23 from left to right describe the temporal varia-
tion of the turbulent kinetic energy and the specific dissipation rate respectively,
convection, production, buoyancy, dissipation, and diffusion. β, β∗, σ and σ∗are
closure coefficients which are set to β = 0.0708, β∗= 0.09, σ = 0.5 and σ∗= 0.6.
In line with the derivation of the Boussinesq equations, the density is assumed
constant, causing the buoyancy terms in Eq. 2.22 and 2.23 to drop out. Fur-
thermore, the kinematic fluid viscosity is neglected. Invoking these assumptions,
2.22 and 2.23 can be rewritten as
∂k
∂t = Pk −β∗kω + σ∗∂
∂xj

νT
∂k
∂xj

−˜u∂k
∂x
(2.24)
∂ω
∂t = Pω −βω2 + σ ∂
∂xj

νT
∂ω
∂xj

−˜u∂ω
∂x
(2.25)
Similar to the one-equation model, the spatial variation of the eddy viscosity is
preserved in the formulation of the diffusive term of both transport equations,
Eq. 2.24 and 2.25.
The k-ω model defines the eddy viscosity from the turbulent kinetic energy and
the specific dissipation rate as
νT = B k
ω
(2.26)
thereby avoiding the assumption of a length scale as seen in the zero- and one-
equation model.
The production term for the turbulent kinetic energy in Eq. 2.24 is taken from
Eq. 2.18 which is further utilized in the formulation of the production term for
the specific energy dissipation:
Pω = CPω
ω
k Pk.
(2.27)
8
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Breaker trigger mechanism
The Boussinesq equations are incapable of representing the dissipation of energy
due to wave breaking, thereby allowing the wave steepness to increase indefinitely.
This is caused by the irrotational flow assumption preventing the wave crest
to overturn, thus making the Boussinesq model incapable of recognizing when
the waves have reached an unphysical steepness. Therefore, it is necessary to
define a criterion that specifies the initiation and cessation of breaking. This
breaker trigger mechanism can be defined in multiple ways utilizing different wave
parameters to define the limiting values. In Hybel (2019) the vertical speed of the
free surface, ηt, was chosen as the breaking criteria parameter. The advantage
of using ηt is that it is already known from the computations. Furthermore, the
use of ηt makes it easy to define a criterion that ensures the breaking is limited
to the front face of the wave.
The formulation of the breaker trigger mechanism follows that of Kennedy et al.
(2000) who introduced a ”breaking switch”, B, on the energy dissipating term in
the DFSC. The breaking switch B is chosen to vary smoothly from 0 (no energy
dissipation) to 1 (full energy dissipation),
B =





1,
ηt ≥2η∗
t
ηt
η∗
t −1,
η∗
t < ηt ≤2η∗
t
0,
ηt ≤η∗
t .
(2.28)
The smooth initiation and cessation of breaking prevent the emergence of nu-
merical instabilities. In Eq. 2.28 the parameter η∗
t governs the initiation and
cessation of breaking and is defined as
η∗
t =
(
ηF
t ,
t ≥T ∗
ηI
t + t−t0
T ∗(ηF
t −ηI
t ),
0 ≤t −t0 < T ∗
(2.29)
where ηI
t marks the initiation of breaking and ηF
t marks the cessation of breaking.
T ∗is the transition time and t0 is the time at which breaking is initiated, hence,
the age of the breaking event is found as t−t0. The formulation of η∗
t in Eq. 2.29
ensures that breaking is initiated when ηI
t is exceeded but continues until ηt drops
below the final threshold value of ηF
t , which is lower than the initiation threshold.
Kennedy et al. (2000) points out that this is in accordance with observations in
nature which shows that for spilling and plunging waves, breaking is initiated
when the wave overturns but continues until the wave has reached a lower stable
level at which it is reformed.
Further, Kennedy et al. (2000) notes that the
decrease from the initial to the final threshold value is assumed linear, but no
strong evidence exists as to which form the decrease will actually follow.
Kennedy et al. (2000) used the default threshold values and transition time
ηI
t = 0.65√gh, ηF
t
= 0.15√gh and T ∗= 5
q
h
g but caution against consider-
ing these values as general and suggests that they might be specific to the type of
9
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Boussinesq equations used. Instead, it is suggested that the values are tuned un-
til a good fit to experimental results is achieved. This is elaborated in Section 3.4.
2.1.4
Numerical model
The following section explains how the theory given above is implemented in a
numerical model. This includes a brief introduction to the code implemented by
Hybel (2019) and a description of any features that have been added throughout
this project.
Solution of equations
The velocity and kinematic bottom condition given in Eq. 2.7 and 2.10, are now
recast as a system of linear equations of the form
Ax = b
(2.30)
were A is the coefficient matrix, the vector b contains the physical velocities
expressed through the variable ˜V and the vector x contains the utility velocities.
Inserting Eq. 2.7 and 2.10 in Eq. 2.30, the system of equations reads

JI −JII∇η
JII + JI∇η
−B02 + ∇hB01 −∇ˆzB12
B01 + ∇hB02 + ∇ˆzB11
 ˆu∗
ˆw∗

=
" ˜V−→0
#
.
(2.31)
The system of equations given in Eq.
2.31 is solved using the built-in solver
mldivide in Matlab. This provides the utility variables which inserted in Eq.
2.7 yields the physical velocities evaluated at the free surface (or 0 in case of
a linear wave solution). This allows the temporal derivative of the free surface
to be evaluated through the kinematic free surface condition in Eq.
2.13.
If
applicable to the present simulation, the eddy viscosity and temporal derivatives
of the turbulent kinetic energy and specific energy dissipation are now determined.
Finally, the dynamic free surface condition in Eq. 2.12 is evaluated providing the
temporal derivative of ˜V .
The spatial derivatives in the partial differential equations are determined nu-
merically by a finite difference scheme. A centered, seven-point finite difference
stencil is utilized since this is the minimum stencil size required to evaluate fifth-
order derivatives. The finite-difference operators are taken from Fuhrman (2004).
The time integration is performed using a fourth-order, four-stage explicit Runge-
Kutta algorithm. Any additional partial differential equations arising due to the
choice of breaking closure is time stepped by the Runge-Kutta algorithm in the
same manner as η and ˜V .
Numerical dissipation
To ensure numerical stability of the model for cases including non-linearity and/or
varying bathymetries, a method for numerical dissipation is implemented. This is
done by application of a Savitzky-Golay smoothing filter. Introducing a smooth-
ing filter will affect the results and the filter parameters must be chosen carefully
to minimize the distortion while still providing enough smoothing for the solu-
tion to remain stable. The signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio decrease with increasing
10
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
polynomial order and increase with increasing frame length. However, the S/N
ratio is coupled with the distortion of the signal, meaning that increasing the
S/N ratio leads to an increase in the distortion. Generally, a 6th order, 11 point
Savitzky-Golay filter was found to provide a satisfactory degree of smoothing.
Boundary conditions
To solve a system of partial differential equations, a set of boundary conditions
must be prescribed. Two different options are available in the code; fixed bound-
ary conditions or periodic boundary conditions. The former assumes the bound-
aries of the domain to be fully reflective, i.e. the surface elevation and vertical
velocity at the boundary must be constant and the horizontal velocity must be
zero to ensure no flow through the boundary.
In the latter, the value of the
parameters on one boundary is repeated on the opposite boundary.
Initial conditions
To solve the system of equations in Eq. 2.31, a set of initial conditions must be
specified. This includes the free surface elevation and the horizontal and vertical
velocities evaluated at the free surface. For simulation of regular waves, the initial
conditions can be determined using either Stokes’ 1st, 2nd or 3rd order theory or
stream function theory.
In this project, the code was extended to allow irregular waves to be generated.
The motivation was to facilitate comparison with the experimental results for
particle transport obtained by Al-Obaidi (2022) which were based on irregular
waves. Two different options for generating irregular waves were implemented.
The simpler option is to model the irregular waves as linear, bichromatic waves.
The other option is to represent the irregular waves by an energy density spec-
trum, here the JONSWAP spectrum.
Bichromatic waves
The bichromatic wave is obtained by superimposing two linear waves, resulting
in a free surface defined as
η = H1
2 sin (ω1t −k1x) + H2
2 sin (ω2t −k2x)
(2.32)
where index 1 and 2 refer to the wave parameters of the two sinusoidal waves
making up the bichromatic wave. Likewise, the velocity potential is defined as
the sum of the velocity potentials for each of the two waves, i.e.
φ = H1ω1
2k1
cosh (k1z)
sinh (k1h) cos (ω1t −k1x) + H2ω2
2k2
cosh (k2z)
sinh (k2h) cos (ω2t −k2x).
(2.33)
The velocity fields can now be determined from the velocity potential as u = ∂φ
∂x
and w = ∂φ
∂z respectively, resulting in the following formulation of the horizontal
and vertical velocity.
u = H1ω1
2
cosh (k1z)
sinh (k1h) sin (ω1t −k1x) + H2ω2
2
cosh (k2z)
sinh (k2h) sin (ω2t −k2x)
w = H1ω1
2
sinh (k1z)
cosh (k1h) cos (ω1t −k1x) + H2ω2
2
sinh (k2z)
cosh (k2h) cos (ω2t −k2x)
(2.34)
11
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
JONSWAP spectrum
Another, and more realistic, approach to modeling an irregular sea surface is to
base it on an energy density spectrum. An example of such a spectrum is the
JONSWAP spectrum (Hasselmann et al., 1973) which for uni-directional waves
can be formulated in terms of angular frequency ω as
Sη(ω) = αH2
s
2π
ω4
p
ω5 γβ

−5
4
ωp
ω
4
(2.35)
where Hs is the significant wave height, ωp is the peak angular frequency corre-
sponding to the peak wave period Tp, γ is a peak enhancement factor and α and
β are coefficients defined as
α =
0.0624
0.23 + 0.0336γ −0.185
1.9+γ
β = exp

−(ω −ωp)2
2σ2ω2p

.
(2.36)
σ is the variance of the spectrum defined as
σ = 0.07
for
ω ≤ωp
σ = 0.09
for
ω > ωp.
(2.37)
A typical value of the peak enhancement coefficient is γ = 3.3, which will be
utilized throughout this report.
The spectrum presented in Eq. 2.35 is defined in terms of angular frequency
and can be utilized to obtain a time series of the surface elevation at a given
point in space. However, the initial conditions require the surface elevation over
the whole domain at a certain point in time. To obtain the surface elevation
as a space series instead, the first step is to convert the frequency spectrum to
a wavenumber spectrum. Following the approach of Bateman et al. (2012), the
frequency spectrum can be transformed into a wavenumber spectrum through
the relation
Sη(k) = Sη(ω)∂ω
∂k .
(2.38)
Invoking the definition of the linear dispersion relation, the second term in Eq.
2.38 is evaluated analytically.
∂ω
∂k = ∂
∂k
p
gk tanh (kh) = g tanh (kh) + gkh(1 −tanh (kh)2)
2
p
gk tanh (kh)
.
(2.39)
Now the goal is to transform the energy density spectrum given in terms of
wavenumber k to a surface elevation at a certain time through the application
of an inverse fast Fourier transform. To do so, it is utilized that irregular waves
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
can be expressed as a sum of 1st order Stokes’ waves. This allows the surface
elevation to be written as
ηirr(x, t) =
nmax
X
n=1
an cos (ωnt −knx + δn) + bn sin (ωnt −knx + δn)
(2.40)
or in complex notation (Christensen, 2012)
ηirr(x, t) =
nmax
X
n=1
cn exp (−i(ωnt −knx + δn) + ˜cn exp (i(ωnt −knx + δn)
(2.41)
where is δ is the phase and subscript n denotes the individual wave components.
From Eq. 2.40 and 2.41 it is seen that cn = 0.5(an + ibn) and ˜cn = 0.5(an −ibn).
Note that for Eq. (2.40) and Eq. (2.41) to be equivalent c0 = 0. The form of Eq.
2.41 makes it possible to determine the spatial variation of the surface elevation
at time t by application of the IFFT to the coefficients given below:
zn = cn exp (−iωt)
˜zn = ˜cn exp (iωt).
(2.42)
Evaluating Eq. 2.42 requires that the amplitudes an and bn can be determined.
This is accomplished by utilizing the following relation between the energy density
spectrum and the amplitude of the wave components:
An =
q
2Sη(k)δk.
(2.43)
Thus, the amplitudes an and bn can be expressed as
an = An cos (δn)
bn = An sin (δn).
(2.44)
where the phase is taken as a uniformly distributed random variable with values
ranging from 0 −2π.
In practice the JONSWAP energy density spectrum, the random phase compo-
nents and the amplitude components are evaluated once before time-stepping is
initiated. To model the progression of the spatial variation of the surface ele-
vation in time it must be evaluated during each time step where the coefficients
given in Eq. 2.42 are evaluated using Matlab’s inverse Fourier transform function
IFFT.
Similar to the surface elevation, the velocity potential can also be expressed as a
sum
φ =
nmax
X
n=1
−Fn cosh (kn(z + h))(an sin (ωnt −knx + δn) −bn cos (ωnt −knx + δn))
(2.45)
13
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
where
Fn =
ωn
kn sinh (knh).
(2.46)
Invoking the definition of the horizontal and vertical velocity, u = ∂φ
∂x and w = ∂φ
∂z
respectively, results in the following formulations:
u =
nmax
X
n=1
knFn cosh (kn(z + h))(an cos (ωnt −knx + δn) + bn sin (ωnt −knx + δn))
w =
nmax
X
n=1
knFn sinh (kn(z + h))(an cos (ωnt −knx + δn) + bn sin (ωnt −knx + δn))
(2.47)
The procedure for obtaining the spatial variation of the velocities at a given time
follows that for the free surface. The only difference is that instead of basing the
formulation of the coefficients on Eq. 2.40 they are now derived from Eq. 2.47.
Relaxation zones
Relaxation zones are implemented to enable generation and absorption of waves.
Generating waves in the relaxation zone in one end of the domain is an alterna-
tive to specifying an initial wave field over the entire domain. In the relaxation
zone, the solution computed by the model is gradually ramped up to match an
analytical target solution. The gradual ramp-up is achieved by application of the
relaxation function from Jacobsen et al. (2012),
αR(χR) = 1 −exp (χβ
R) −1
exp (1) −1 ,
0 < χR < 1.
(2.48)
The parameter β is set to β = 3.5 which is a typical value of this parameter
(Jacobsen et al., 2012). The relaxation function given in Eq. 2.48 is applied as
a weighting function within the relaxation zone. Thus, the solution φ within the
relaxation zone is computed as
φ = αRφcomputed + (1 −αR)φtarget.
(2.49)
For wave generation, the target value is computed from the chosen analytical
wave solution whereas in the absorption zone the target value is zero.
In the wave generation zone, the target solution is slowly ramped up in time to
avoid instabilities.
φtarget,gen = φanalytic tanh
 πt
tramp

(2.50)
where tramp = O(T) is the time it takes the solution to reach the full analytic
target solution.
14
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Breaking waves
Some bookkeeping is required to keep track of the breaking waves. When wave
breaking is initiated by ηt exceeding ηI
t the wave is flagged as breaking and
added to a list containing all the breaking waves. The flag is kept until cessation
of breaking when ηt drops below ηF
t . The list for storing the breaking waves is
dynamic and updated every time step.
The chosen breaker trigger mechanism ensures that the breaking is detected ap-
proximately at the center of the front face of the wave. The nodes on either side
of this point are marked as breaking provided that they are located on the front
face of the wave by satisfying ηt > 0.
Moving boundary algorithm
In nature, the location of the boundary between water and dry land varies in time
as the waves are washed up on the beach and retract again. To accommodate this,
a moving boundary algorithm based on the extrapolating boundary technique is
implemented. This has previously been done by Fuhrman and Madsen (2008) who
successfully implemented the moving boundary for the Boussinesq equations of
Madsen et al. (2006).
In the moving boundary algorithm, the wet-dry boundary is defined as the grid
point where the total water depth, d = h + η, first exceeds a given threshold
value, δwdb, when searching the domain from one end to the other. Fuhrman
and Madsen (2008) estimated the threshold value δ from the change in vertical
distance between successive grid points in the run-up region. Defining the value
as δwdb = s∆/100, where s is the bed slope, was found to work well in most cases,
however, the authors note that the value of δwdb does not seem to have a significant
influence on the results. Once the wet-dry boundary has been determined, the
two closest points in the wet region are used for interpolation of the time-stepping
variables, η and ˜V , at the wet-dry boundary and into the dry region, overwriting
the previously computed values.
Depending on the choice of breaking closure, the time-stepping variables might
also include k and ω. Since the moving boundary algorithm could potentially
extrapolate these variables to negative values, an alternative solution is chosen.
Instead, a flag is implemented in the PDEs governing k and ω that only allows
the dissipation terms of Eq. 2.24 and 2.25 to be active in the dry region.
Extending the variables into the dry region allows the finite difference scheme
to operate on a continuous, smooth function. Thus, the extension into the dry
region must cover a number of grid points equal to or larger than the size of
the finite difference stencil. For the remaining grid points in the dry region, the
variables are flat-lined.
If the slope of the free surface in the extrapolated region becomes larger than
the slope of the seabed, the two extrapolation points are moved back into the
wet region until the slope of the free surface is smaller than the slope of the
seabed. Otherwise, this would result in large amounts of water being added to
the domain.
15
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
2.2
Sediment transport model
To model the transport of sediment in a turbulent flow a random walk model
is implemented in Matlab, as a post-processing module for the results produced
by the Boussinesq wave model. This section introduces the random walk model
based on the description given in Sumer and Fuhrman (2020).
Additionally,
the concept of a surface roller is explained, as this is relevant for the particle
velocity in the inner surf zone. The section is completed with a description of the
numerical implementation of the model.
2.2.1
Random walk model
The random walk model describes the dispersion of particles in a turbulent flow.
The random walk model describes the motion of a particle from its position
(x(n)
p , z(n)
p ) at time t, corresponding to integer time index n, to its new position
(x(n+1)
p
, z(n+1)
p
) at time t + ∆t, with time index n + 1.
The instantaneous horizontal and vertical particle velocity can be expressed as
up = u + αrσu
wp = w + αrσw −ws
(2.51)
where the first term is the fluid velocity and the second term is the instanta-
neous turbulent fluctuations, in the horizontal and vertical direction respectively.
Further, the vertical particle velocity includes a third term, the settling velocity,
ws.
The contribution from the turbulent fluctuation to the particle velocity is defined
as the product of a standard normal distributed random variable, αr, and the
variance of the turbulent fluctuations, σ. Wilcox (2006) defined the variation of
the horizontal and vertical turbulent fluctuations as a fraction of the turbulent
kinetic energy, k.
σ2
u = 4
9k
(2.52a)
σ2
w = 1
3k
(2.52b)
When the instantaneous particle velocities at the present location of the particle,
(x(n)
p , z(n)
p ), are known, the new location of the particle, (x(n+1)
p
, z(n+1)
p
), after a
time interval ∆t can be determined as
x(n+1)
p
= x(n)
p
+ up∆t
z(n+1)
p
= z(n)
p
+ wp∆t.
(2.53)
The size of the time step is controlled by the ratio of the mixing length, lm, to
the standard deviation of the turbulent fluctuations,
∆t = lm
σ .
(2.54)
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Considering the spatial variation of the mixing length and turbulent kinetic en-
ergy, the size of the time step varies locally and must be determined at the present
particle position.
As the standard deviation is dependent on the direction, cf. Eq. 2.52, the time
step is taken as
∆t = min
lm
σu
, lm
σv

.
(2.55)
The mixing length is defined as
lm =
1
β∗1/4
√
k
ω
(2.56)
where β∗is a closure coefficient which, assuming full turbulence, can be taken as
β∗= 0.09.
Repeating the process outlined above for a number of time steps, the path of the
particle can be mapped.
Considerations regarding the implementation of the method will be discussed in
Section 2.2.3.
2.2.2
Surface roller
For floating particles, traveling on the free surface and in the near region, the
surface roller plays a significant role in the prediction of the horizontal velocities.
The concept of a surface roller was first introduced by Svendsen (1984) and
provides a simple description of spilling breaking waves. The surface roller is a
mass of water located on the front face of the broken wave, traveling with the
wave celerity.
The geometry of the surface roller and its contribution to the
horizontal velocity is illustrated in Fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The surface roller (left) and the resulting horizontal velocity profile
(right).
The surface roller has been incorporated in Boussinesq type equations, for in-
stance by Schäffer et al. (1993) and Skotner and Apelt (1998). To the author’s
17
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
knowledge, this has not been attempted with the Boussinesq equations by Mad-
sen et al. (2006). In principle, modifying the Boussinesq equations to include the
surface roller should be possible, however, it is outside the scope of this project.
A simpler approach is to add the surface roller in the post-processing of the
results from the Boussinesq wave model. This can be done by adding the wave
celerity to the horizontal fluid velocity in a region corresponding to the surface
roller. However, this still requires a definition of the surface roller region.
To simplify further, and utilize the pre-calculated parameters, it was decided to
define the roller area using the breaking switch B and limiting the roller area to
the free surface nodes. The wave celerity is taken as the shallow water celerity
cs = √gh. This is added to the horizontal component of the particle velocity
when the particle is located at the front face of the wave. Thus, the modified
horizontal particle velocity in Eq. 2.51 reads
up = u + αrσu + B
p
gh.
(2.57)
2.2.3
Numerical implementation
The sediment transport module implemented in Matlab consists of a main file
and two supporting functions, VelocityProfiles.m and TrackParticle.m. The
aim of this section is to give a short introduction to the structure of the code and
discuss certain issues including the varying time step and the calculation of the
mixing length.
Inputs
The input file is generated by the Boussinesq wave model and includes the sur-
face elevation, η, the utility velocities ˆu∗and ˆw∗, the turbulent kinetic energy
density, k, the specific dissipation rate, ω, a definition of the domain and the
wave parameters. Note that the two-equation closure is the only closure that
provides both k and ω. If the zero or one equation closure is to be used, this
requires an alternative formulation of the mixing length given in Eq. 2.56, which
will be discussed at the end of this section. In principle, the input file could be
generated by a different wave model as long as it includes the necessary data.
The user defines the number of particles, the initial particle position, the duration
of particle simulation, and how often the particle coordinates are logged during
the simulation.
Fluid velocities
The particle velocity depends on the fluid velocity, cf. Eq. 2.51, which can be de-
termined from the utility velocities through Eq. 2.7. This is done in the function
VelocityProfiles.m which computes the horizontal and vertical velocity at grid
points, x and z, at time t. The velocity operators in Eq. 2.7 can be evaluated
using the existing function VelocityOperators.m by Hybel (2019). Once the
velocity operators are determined, the velocity profiles are easily evaluated and
returned by the velocity profile function.
Considering a fixed number of grid points in the vertical direction distributed
between the lowest point of the seabed and the highest point of the free surface
18
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
it is only necessary to evaluate the velocity operators once. This method was
found to be preferable even though it means that some of the velocity operators
calculated are invalid as the location is either below the seabed or above the
free surface. To ensure that none of the unphysical velocity operators affects the
further calculations, their value is overwritten by zero. Limiting the number of
calls to the velocity operator function significantly reduced the computation time.
Interpolation
The randomness included in the particle motion requires that the fluid veloci-
ties, turbulent kinetic energy, and the specific dissipation rate can be evaluated
at arbitrary points in the domain at any time. This is done by interpolation
functions which are determined once at the beginning of the simulation to avoid
a significant increase in computation time when increasing the number of parti-
cles. The interpolation functions were determined by the built-in Matlab function
GriddedInterpolant.
Furthermore, interpolation functions for the variation of the free surface in the
x-direction and in time and for the variation of the water depth in the x-direction
must be calculated. These are used to evaluate the seabed and free surface at an
arbitrary particle position to determine whether the particle is inside the domain.
Tracking of particle paths
The calculation of the particle path is undertaken in the function TrackParticle.m.
The varying size of the time step means that the number of time steps to cover
the chosen simulation period is unknown when the simulation is initiated. A way
to tackle this is to define a set of time stamps at which the particle coordinates
are saved. Defining an index i which is incremented every time the particle coor-
dinates are saved allows a while-loop to be constructed such that the algorithm
can take as many time steps as needed and the loop is exited when the entire
particle coordinate vector is filled.
Inside the loop, the mixing length for the present particle position is determined
by Eq. 2.56. The turbulent kinetic energy is evaluated which allows the vari-
ance of the turbulent fluctuations to be calculated using Eq. 2.52. Considering
the turbulent conditions at the present particle position, the time step can be
determined from Eq. 2.55. As turbulence is mainly present in the vicinity of the
breaking wave, the time step calculated using Eq. 2.55 outside the breaking re-
gion might become unreasonably large. To avoid this, an upper limit is specified
to ensure a sufficient temporal resolution. The fluid velocity at the present parti-
cle is evaluated, a random number αr is generated to compute the instantaneous
turbulent fluctuations and if the particle is located at the free surface the contri-
bution to the horizontal particle velocity from the surface roller is added. The
particle velocity is then determined from Eq. 2.57 and the new particle position
is determined by Eq. 2.53.
To ensure that the particle stays within the domain a check is performed for each
new set of particle coordinates. First, the horizontal particle position coordinate
must be located somewhere between the left and right boundary of the domain.
In case the particle exceeds the domain boundaries this is resolved by mirroring
the particle back into the domain by reflection about the exceeded boundary.
19
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL DESCRIPTION
Second, the vertical particle position must lie between the seabed and the free
surface. In case the new particle position is below the seabed, this is resolved as
described above, whereas if the particle is above the free surface it is simply put
back down on the water surface.
The process described above is repeated and the particle coordinates are stored
continuously until the particle coordinates vectors are full and the loop is exited.
Mixing length
The mixing length given in Eq. 2.56 requires that both the turbulent kinetic en-
ergy, k, and the specific energy dissipation, ω, is calculated in the wave model. For
the Boussinesq wave model, this requirement is only fulfilled for the two-equation
breaking closure. In case the one-equation closure is applied, only the turbulent
kinetic energy is computed. However, by utilizing the relationship between the
turbulent kinetic energy and the specific dissipation rate, the mixing length can
be formulated in terms of the eddy viscosity νT instead of the dissipation rate ω.
νT = k
ω
(2.58)
For the zero equation closure, neither the turbulent kinetic energy nor the specific
dissipation rate is known and therefore an alternative to the mixing length given
in Eq. 2.56 must be formulated. An option would be to express the mixing length
as
lm = αmlt
(2.59)
where αm is a coefficient and lt is the characteristic length scale given in Eq.
2.20. The downside of this approach is the introduction of a purely empirical
coefficient that needs tuning to provide realistic results.
20
==PAGE:33==
3
Wave model - validation and
results
Before using a model, it is crucial to verify that the model can resolve the govern-
ing physics with sufficient accuracy. In this section, the wave model is validated
through a series of comparisons against theoretical solutions and experimental
results.
The test cases gradually increase in complexity to ensure that any additional
feature included in the code is built upon a solid foundation.
This approach
allowed the search for the error in the original code to be conducted in a stepwise
manner as each test case narrowed down the number of functions that could
include the error.
3.1
Linear dispersion
First, it is examined whether the wave model is able to accurately reproduce the
linear dispersion characteristics of water waves.
For this simulation, the domain was bound by a flat seabed and had a length equal
to one wavelength. An initial wave field given by Stokes 1st order theory was
defined over the entire domain and periodic boundary conditions were prescribed.
The value of the dimensionless wave number, kh, was varied for each simulation
to include both lower and higher wavenumbers.
After each simulation, the wave celerity was computed by analyzing the temporal
variation of the surface elevation. The locations of the peaks were determined
and the period was determined as the temporal distance between the peaks. The
wave celerity was determined as c = L
¯T , using the average value of the computed
wave periods ¯T.
By application of Fourier analysis, Fuhrman (2004) developed the following dis-
persion relation for the Boussinesq equations with slowly varying bathymetries
utilized in this report,
c2
gh =
ω2
ghk2 = 1
kh
sh(kh/2)ch(−kh/2) −ch(kh/2)sh(−kh/2)
ch(kh/2)ch(−kh/2) −sh(kh/2)sh(−kh/2)

(3.1)
where
ch(λ) = 1 + 4
9λ2 + 1
63λ3
,
sh(λ) = λ + 1
9λ3 +
1
945λ5.
(3.2)
The model results were compared to the dispersion relation given in Eq. 3.1 as
seen in Fig. 3.1. In Fig. 3.1 the celerities were normalized by Stokes’ linear
dispersion relation,
c2
Stokes
gh
=
ω2
ghk2 = tanh (kh)
kh
.
(3.3)
21
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. WAVE MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Figure 3.1: Wave celerity computed by the wave model compared to the disper-
sion relation for the Boussinesq euations given by Fuhrman (2004). All celerities
are normalized by Stokes’ linear dispersion relation, Eq. 3.3.
Fig. 3.1 shows that the model is capable of representing linear dispersion with
high accuracy. A minor deviation between the model results and the theoretical
solution given by Eq. 3.1 is seen for the highest non-dimensional wave number
tested, kh = 30. This discrepancy is not surprising, as the dispersive properties
of the Boussinesq model are accurate for kh ≤25 for mildly sloping bathymetries
(Madsen et al., 2006).
The results of the present test case indicate that the implementation of the linear
terms of the Boussinesq equations, the Runge-Kutta time-stepping algorithm,
and the periodic boundary conditions all work as intended.
3.2
Linear shoaling
The model’s ability to represent linear shoaling on a sloping beach is now consid-
ered. This is achieved by considering a wave propagating from deep water over a
sloping bed into shallow water, thereby covering a wide range of wave numbers.
The domain consisted of a seabed with a slope of 1:10 is shown in Fig. 3.2. The
waves were generated by a wavemaker using Stokes’ 1st order (linear) theory in
the left end of the domain and absorbed once they had reached the right end of
the domain. The wave generation and wave absorption zones are marked in Fig.
3.2.
22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. WAVE MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Figure 3.2: Bathymetry utilized for the linear shoaling test.
The wave is characterised by a wave period of T = 1.64 s and is propagated
from deep water with a depth of h0 = 20 m into shallow water with a depth of
hs = 0.058 m, thus covering a range of dimensionsless wave numbers from kh = 30
to kh = 0.3.
Fixed boundary conditions were prescribed and a 6th order, 11 point Savitzky-
Golay filter was applied to ensure that the solution remained stable. The spatial
domain was discretized such that the shallow water wave was resolved by 20 grid
points.
The resulting surface elevation was compared to the linear shoaling envelope
which considering the conservation of energy flux (Svendsen, 2005) can be derived
as
A(x) = 1
2H0
s
tanh (k0h0)(1 + G0)
tanh (k(x)h(x))(1 + G(x))

(3.4)
where
G(x) =
2k(x)h(x)
sinh (2k(x)h(x)).
(3.5)
Fig. 3.4 shows the surface elevation together with the linear shoaling envelope
given in Eq. 3.4. It is seen that the surface elevation produced by the model
is consistent with the linear shoaling envelope given by Eq. 3.4, indicating that
the terms accounting for the sloping bed are correctly implemented and that the
model provides a good representation of linear shoaling.
23
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. WAVE MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Figure 3.3: Model results compared to the theoretical linear shoaling envelope.
Figure 3.4: Linear shoaling test.
3.3
Non-linear progression
So far only the linear terms of the Boussinesq equations, have been verified.
Now the implementation of the non-linear terms is validated by studying the
progression of a non-linear wave over a time span of 50 wave periods.
An initial wave field given by stream function theory is propagated over a flat
seabed a time corresponding to 50 wave periods. The domain length was equal
to one wavelength and utilized periodic boundary conditions. Varying degrees of
non-linearity were obtained by changing the wave steepness, H/L.
The simulation was run for 50 periods and a 6th order, 11 point Savitzky-Golay
filter was applied once every time step to ensure the stability of the simulation.
Fig. 3.5 compares the initial free surface to the free surface obtained after running
the simulation for 50 periods for four different values of wave steepness.
Fig. 3.5 shows that the simulated wave propagates slightly faster than the an-
alytical solution. This becomes particularly evident when the wave steepness is
increased. Further, Fig. 3.5 shows that the shape of the wave is retained indicat-
ing that the filtering process performed during each time step to provide a stable
solution does not flatten the wave crest or through significantly.
The results suggest that the non-linear terms of the Boussinesq equations are
correctly implemented and that the numerical dissipation work as intended.
24
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. WAVE MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Figure 3.5: Normalized surface elevation at t = 0 s and after 50 periods for
different values of non-linearity.
3.4
Breaking waves
The model’s ability to simulate a spilling breaking wave is now examined. The
experiments by Ting and Kirby (1994), involving a spilling breaker, will be used
as a benchmark for the model results.
In the experiment, a wave generator was located in one end of the wave flume
while in the opposite end a plywood board was placed to create a uniform slope
of 1:35. The experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. 3.6.
Figure 3.6: The experimental setup used by Ting and Kirby (1994).
As seen in Fig. 3.6, the water depth in the deep end of the flume was h0 = 0.4 m
and the majority of the slope has a slope of 1:35, except for the kink at the
25
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. WAVE MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
bottom of the slope. The location of the wave maker corresponds to the position
x = 0 m. Regular waves with a wave height of H = 0.125 m and a wave period
of T = 2.0 s were generated using stream function theory.
A 6th order 11 point Savitzky-Golay filter was applied to ensure numerical sta-
bility of the simulation. The spatial resolution of the domain was chosen such
that the shortest wave was resolved by 40 grid points, resulting in a grid spacing
of dx = 0.043 m. The temporal resolution necessary to ensure stability when
introducing the moving boundary algorithm was found to be dt = 0.0023 s.
The simulation time was 100 s corresponding to 50 wave periods after which the
average mean water level, crest and through elevation over the last 5 periods were
determined. The resulting surface elevation using the three different breaking
closure models are presented in Fig. 3.7a-3.7c.
Fig. 3.7 shows that the new formulation of the energy dissipation term leads to a
correct representation of the set-down and set-up. Generally, the surface envelope
matches that of Ting and Kirby (1994) fairly well. There are some discrepancies
in the crest elevation which is overestimated prior to breaking and in the inner
surfzone.
Further examination of 3.7a-3.7c shows that the performance of the zero-equation
breaking closure is superior to the one- and two-equation closures, at least for
computing the surface envelope. The one- and two-equation closure, Fig. 3.7b
and 3.7c, shows larger fluctuations of the crest and through elevation prior to
breaking and overestimates the crest elevation in the inner part of the surfzone.
This is particularly clear for the two-equation closure that further overestimates
the MWL and the through elevation.
Tuning of breaking parameters
Since the breaking parameters, ηI
t , ηF
t and T ∗, proposed by Kennedy et al. (2000)
are empirical they should be tuned to fit the Boussinesq equations by Madsen
et al. (2006) used in this project. The values proposed by Kennedy et al. (2000)
were used as a starting point.
First, the choice of ηI
t , the parameter governing the onset of breaking was inves-
tigated. The value of ηI
t = 0.65√gh utilized in Kennedy et al. (2000) resulted
in lower crest elevation at breaking than that measured in the Ting and Kirby
(1994) experiments. The lower crest elevations are caused by premature break-
ing, preventing the waves from reaching the crest elevation seen in the experi-
ments. By increasing the value of ηI
t , the initiation of the energy dissipation is
delayed allowing the wave heights to increase further prior to breaking. A value of
ηI
t = 0.95√gh was found to provide a satisfactory match between the computed
and measured crest elevation at the breaking point.
The parameter ηF
t governs the cessation of breaking and was originally taken as
ηF
t = 0.15√gh. This resulted in an overestimation of the wave heights in the inner
surfzone which was countered by decreasing the value of ηF
t to ηF
t = 0.05√gh.
However, the results seems rather insensitive to the value of this parameter.
26
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. WAVE MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
(a) Zero equation closure.
(b) One equation closure.
(c) Two equation closure.
Figure 3.7: Wave amplitudes and mean water level for the Ting and Kirby (1994)
spilling breaker.
27
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. WAVE MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Finally the transition time was kept as T ∗= 5
p
g/h as changing this parameter
did not improve the results significantly.
3.5
Performance of wave model
The implementation of the Boussinesq wave model has been verified through a
series of test cases which also lead to the discovery of the error in the original code
by Hybel (2019). Fig. 3.7a, 3.7b and 3.7c proves that changing the formulation
of the energy dissipation term to that proposed in Kennedy et al. (2000) has
resolved the issues concerning the reversed set-up/set-down seen in the results
presented in Hybel (2019) that showed a set-up prior to breaking followed by a
set-down in the surf zone. The new results using the modified formulation of
the energy dissipation term shown in Fig. 3.7a, 3.7b and 3.7c, shows the correct
behavior with a set-down right before breaking succeeded by a setup.
Additionally, it was found that the occasional occurrence of negative values of
the turbulent kinetic energy was eliminated by including the spatial derivative
of the eddy viscosity in the formulation of the diffusion term in the transport
equations for the one and two equation closures. Negative values of the turbulent
kinetic energy does not make sense physically so this correction has improved the
reliability of the results further.
The zero-equation model was found to provide the best fit to the experimental
results. This algebraic model requires no additional partial differential equations
but it is necessary to assume a length scale. The more complex turbulence energy
equation models did not improve the results as might have been inspected since
they limit the amount of assumptions required. The performance of the one-
equation closure that solves the turbulent kinetic energy equation but relies on
an assumed length scale was found to provide a closer match to experimental
results than the two-equation closure were the need for assuming a length scale is
eliminated by including the equation for the specific dissipation rate. Thus, the
tendency found was that the simpler the breaking closure, the better the results.
In conclusion, Section 3.4 demonstrated that the error in the code has been
corrected and thereby the first goal of this thesis has been achieved. The next
step is to set up a model for particle transport and utilize the results from the
wave model as input data. The particle transport model will be presented in the
following section.
28
==PAGE:41==
4
Particle transport model -
validation and results
In this section, the particle transport model is validated through comparison
with analytical solutions and experimental results. This includes checking the
computation of the velocity profiles, the velocity profiles beneath breaking waves
and the particle velocity.
The models ability of predicting the beaching time
of plastic particles in irregular waves is investigated by comparison with the
experimental results of Al-Obaidi (2022). Finally, it is examined how the beaching
time is affected if the irregular waves are not modeled based on the JONSWAP
energy density spectrum but described by bichromatic waves instead.
4.1
Period-averaged velocity profiles
The quality of the particle transport model largely depends on the accuracy of the
fluid velocities used as input for the model. Therefore, this section first verifies
the computation of the velocity profiles from the Boussinesq model against an
analytical solution. Second, the accuracy of the velocity profiles produced by the
Boussinesq model beneath a breaking wave is examined through comparison with
the experimental results of Ting and Kirby (1994).
4.1.1
Non-breaking waves
The Boussinesq model provides the utility velocities computed at the expan-
sion level for each grid point in the x-direction. To obtain the velocities over
the entire water column, Eq. 2.7 is applied. This is handled in the function
VelocityProfiles.m. To verify that the velocity profiles are computed correctly,
the period-averaged horizontal velocity profile is compared to that obtained by
application of the stream function solution.
For comparison, a wave was propagated over a flat bed on a domain with a
length equal to one wavelength. Periodic boundary conditions were applied and
the initial wave field was generated using stream function theory.
After the simulation was completed, the horizontal velocity profiles in a single x-
grid point were computed for each time step using the function VelocityProfiles.m.
Subsequently, the velocity profiles were averaged over 5 periods.
Using the same input parameters, the velocity profiles for each time step in the
x-grid point were calculated using stream function theory. The period-averaged
velocity was determined and plotted together with that from the Boussinesq
model in Fig. 4.1.
Fig. 4.1 shows a good match between the period-averaged velocity profiles, calcu-
lated from stream function theory and the Boussinesq model respectively. Hence,
Fig. 4.1 indicates that the computation of the velocity profiles from the utility
velocities is implemented correctly.
29
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Figure 4.1: Period-averaged velocity profiles beneath a non-breaking wave.
4.1.2
Breaking waves
After verifying the function to obtain the velocity profiles, it is now investigated to
which degree the Boussinesq model is capable of capturing the correct horizontal
velocity beneath a breaking wave and in the surrounding region.
The model
results are validated against the spilling breaker experiment by Ting and Kirby
(1994).
The input parameters and settings for the simulation are described in Section 3.4
which also includes a definition sketch of the experimental setup, see Fig. 3.6.
The simulation time was 100 s corresponding to 50 periods. Once the simulation
was completed, the velocity profiles at the x-positions correspond to the measure-
ment positions in Ting and Kirby (1994) were determined. The period-averaged
velocity profiles at each position were taken as the average over the last 5 simu-
lation periods. The variation of the normalized period-average velocities over the
water column are shown in Fig. 4.2 together with the results presented in Ting
and Kirby (1994).
Fig. 4.2 shows a fairly good agreement between the model results and the ex-
perimental results of Ting and Kirby (1994) near the surface. Most importantly,
Fig. 4.2 shows that the model captures the wave drift which plays a crucial role
in the transport of floating particles. Closer to the seabed, the period-averaged
velocity profiles obtained by the Boussinesq model deviates significantly from the
experimental results by Ting and Kirby (1994).
30
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Figure 4.2: Period-averaged velocity profiles from the Boussinesq model compared
to those measured by Ting and Kirby (1994). The model results are shown as
blue lines while the measurements by Ting and Kirby (1994) are shown as red
circles.
31
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
4.2
Particle velocity
Having investigated the fluid velocity, the plastic particle velocity, computed in
the function TrackParticle.m, is now examined. To verify the computation of
the particle velocity, the model results are compared to the experimental results
of Alsina et al. (2020) which include measurement of the particle velocities for
different types of particles and wave conditions.
In the experiments Alsina et al. (2020) a particle was released into a wave flume
where its motion was tracked by a two-camera system. In the experimental setup
of Alsina et al. (2020) monochromatic regular waves were generated by a piston-
type wave paddle and propagated over a plane seabed. In the opposite end of
the wave paddle, a dissipative beach was placed to reduce reflection of the waves.
The target window in which the particle motion was tracked was located at the
flat part of the seabed.
For the simulation, the domain was simplified by utilizing periodic boundary
conditions, specifying an initial wave field, and limiting the domain length to
one wavelength. These simplifications reduce the computation time and does not
affect the generated wave conditions.
The experiments were performed in the wave conditions given in Table 4.1:
Table 4.1: Generated wave conditions in Alsina et al. (2020).
Wave condition
H [m]
T [s]
h [m]
M1
0.060
0.75
0.30
M2
0.063
1.00
0.30
M3
0.064
1.50
0.30
M4
0.056
2.00
0.30
The properties of the buoyant particles utilized in the study of Alsina et al. (2020)
are given in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Alsina et al. (2020).
Material
dp [mm]
sp [-]
−ws [m/s]
Wax
8.0
0.760
0.132
Wax with additive 1
8.0
0.910
0.080
Polypropylene (PP)
4.0
0.840
0.074
12.0
0.840
0.133
where dp is the particle diameter, sp = ρp/ρ is the relative particle density and
ws is the settling velocity.
The horizontal particle velocity, up, was computed as the distance traveled over
a certain period of time, i.e.
up = ∆x
∆t = x2 −x1
t2 −t1
(4.1)
32
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Generally, Alsina et al. (2020) used a time window of 24 s.
Theoretically, the particle velocity can be determined from the 2nd order La-
grangian drift solution (Alsina et al., 2020) given as
uL = a2ωk cosh (2k(¯z + h))
2 sinh2 (kh)
−a2ω
2h coth (kh),
(4.2)
where a is the wave amplitude and ¯z is the average vertical particle coordinate
over a wave period.
As an initial test of the simulation, a neutrally buoyant particle, i.e. particles
which has a settling velocity of zero, was considered. The particle was released
in a flow characterized by wave condition M1 in Table 4.1 and tracked for a time
period of 24 s. Computing the particle velocity over this time window by use of
Eq. 4.1 and normalizing with the 2nd order Lagrangian drift solution given in
Eq. 4.2 yields up/UL = 0.9689. Thus, the computed particle velocity seems to
be sufficiently close to the theoretical 2nd order Lagrangian velocity.
Next, the floating particles with properties given in Table 4.2 were considered.
Each particle type was tested in all four wave conditions given in Table 4.1. The
simulation conditions and subsequent computation of the normalized particle
velocity was similar to that of the neutrally buoyant particle. The results of this
study are summarized in Fig. 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Normalized particle velocities.
33
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Fig. 4.3 shows that the model results are very close to the theoretical 2nd order
Lagrangian velocity and are within the range of particle velocities measured by
Alsina et al. (2020). It is also noted that the particle velocities computed by
the model seem to be independent of the settling velocity within the range from
ws = 0.074 m/s to ws = 0.133 m/s that was tested. This is not a surprising result,
as all the particles are buoyant and therefore expected to behave similarly.
4.3
Beaching time
Now the particle transport model is applied to predict the particle beaching
time, i.e. the time it takes from the particles are released into the water until it
is washed up on the beach. The beaching time data is compared to experimental
results by Al-Obaidi (2022) to assess the accuracy of the implemented particle
model.
The experiments performed by Al-Obaidi (2022) were conducted in a wave flume
with a wave maker in one end and a sloping sand bed, representing a beach,
in the opposite end.
It was initially attempted to perform the simulation on
a similar setup and include run-up through the moving boundary algorithm.
Unfortunately, simulating irregular waves on this domain leads to highly unstable
solutions in the run-up region.
Several attempts were made increasing or decreasing the spatial and temporal
resolution, increasing the ramp-up time to reduce the initial wave front, and
increase the smoothing by the Savitzky-Golay filter, both globally and locally
around the wet-dry boundary. As none of these attempts proved successful, it
was decided to eliminate the use of the moving boundary algorithm by including
a plateau in the domain. The modified domain is shown in Fig. 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Modified domain representing the setup of Al-Obaidi (2022). The
light blue regions marks the relaxation zones and the horizontal dashed lines
shows the SWL.
Irregular waves were generated based on a JONSWAP spectrum with a significant
wave height of Hm0 = 0.152 m and a peak wave period of Tp = 1.6 s matching that
of Al-Obaidi (2022). The spatial and temporal resolution was set to dx = 0.027 m
and dt = 0.016 s respectively. The one equation closure was chosen as this is the
simplest closure model that still provides information on the turbulent kinetic
energy. A 6th order 11 point Savitzky-Golay filter was applied. To ensure that
the irregular wave field was fully developed, the data collected during the first
34
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
600 s was discarded. This corresponds to the time it takes for the slowest wave
included in the irregular wave series to travel from the wave maker to the beach.
During the experiment of Al-Obaidi (2022), particles were released into the water
at a specified point and as the particles reached the beach they were carefully
picked up using a pair of tweezers after which the process was repeated. The
beaching time, i.e.
the time it takes the particles to travel from the offshore
release point to the beach was recorded.
The simplified domain shown in Fig. 4.4 requires the definition of a ”beaching
point” as the setup prevents a natural beaching of the particles. Extrapolating
the sloping seabed, this point is defined as the intersection of the seabed with the
SWL corresponding to a location of x = 21 m.
Three different particles were used for the experiments, hollow cubes made of
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), spheres made of expanded polystyrene
(EPS), and hollow cylinders made of polyethylene (PE). The particle properties
are summarized in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Particles used in the experiments by Al-Obaidi (2022).
Material
Shape
Dimensions [mm]
ws [m/s]
STD [m/s]
ρp [kg/m3]
ABS
Cube
5 × 5 × 5
0.13
0.01
780
EPS
Sphere
5 × 5 × 5
0.24
0.02
45
PE
Cylinder
5 × 5 × 5
0.07
0.03
918
Al-Obaidi (2022) released the particles at for different points in the wave flume
corresponding to x = 11 m, x = 13 m, x = 15 m and x = 17 m in the setup shown
in Fig. 4.4. For the particle simulation only the most offshore point is used as a
release point for the particles. Since the positions of the particles are recorded at
specified time stamps it is straightforward to determine the beaching time for the
other release points afterwards, thereby saving the time it would take to conduct
additional simulations for the remaining release points.
To gain a detailed overview of the particles’ behavior the data is presented in
multiple ways. First, the beaching time is assessed by considering the probability
density function (PDF), and the cumulative distribution function (CDF). This
is illustrated in Fig. 4.5-4.7 that shows the PDF and CDF at all four release
positions for the ABS cube, PE cylinder, and EPS sphere respectively. The figures
include both model results and the experimental results given in the dataset of
Al-Obaidi (2022).
Fig. 4.5-4.7 shows that the model strongly underestimates the beaching time.
The tendency becomes more apparent as the release point is moved closer to the
beach. Inspection of the CDFs shows that the beaching times predicted by the
model fall into a very narrow range compared to what was seen in the experiment.
This is apparent when considering the slope of the CDF which for the model result
is very steep. Furthermore, the model predicts the same beaching times for all
three particle types.
35
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
(a) Probability density functions.
(b) Cumulative distribution functions.
Figure 4.5: ABS cubes .
36
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
(a) Probability density functions.
(b) Cumulative distribution functions.
Figure 4.6: PE cylinders.
37
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
(a) Probability density functions.
(b) Cumulative distribution functions.
Figure 4.7: EPS spheres.
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Another way to inspect the particle transport is to consider the particle velocity,
Up. The particle velocity is computed as the time it takes the particle to travel a
certain distance as defined by Eq. 4.1. Al-Obaidi (2022) calculated the particle
velocity as the average velocity between two release points using the median
beaching time. The same method is applied to the model results.
Three different representations of the particle velocity is considered. First, the
particle velocity is normalized by the deep water Lagrangian velocity, UL0, which
is calculated by inserting the deep water wave parameters in Eq. 4.2. The particle
velocity normalized by the deep water Lagrangian velocity is depicted in Fig. 4.9
including both model and experimental results for all three particle types.
Figure 4.8: Particle velocities normalized by the deep water Lagrangian velocity.
Alternatively, the particle velocity can be normalized by the local Lagrangian
velocity given in 4.2. This is shown in Fig. 4.9.
Finally, the particle velocity is normalized by the wave celerity. The local wave
celerity between two release points is calculated from the linear dispersion rela-
tion.
c =
rg
k tanh (kh)
(4.3)
The wave period, T, is taken as the peak wave period Tp. The result of normal-
izing the particle velocities with the wave celerity is shown in Fig. 4.10.
Fig. 4.8-4.10 shows that the normalized particle velocities computed by the model
fall within the range of those measured by Al-Obaidi (2022) for all positions and
39
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
Figure 4.9: Particle velocities normalized by the local Lagrangian velocity.
Figure 4.10: Particle velocities normalized by the wave celerity.
40
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
particle types. The model predicts equal particle velocities for all three particle
types. Additionally, the figures show that the particle velocities computed by
the model match the particle velocities measured for the ABS cube.
At the
most offshore position, x = 12 m, both model and experimental results are are
very similar, whereas the experimental results become increasingly dependent on
particle type closer to the beach.
4.4
Performance of particle transport model
Generally, the prediction of beaching times for microplastic particles by the ran-
dom walk model was very poor. This section seeks to explain the deviation of
the model and experimental results by comparing the transport pattern of the
particles from the offshore release point to the beach. Further, the model’s in-
ability to differentiate between particle types is addressed.
Finally, the effect
of the simplification of the domain and the description of the surface roller is
considered.
Inspection of the particle motion in the model showed the following. Prior to
breaking, the particles moved in an orbital motion towards the beach as expected
for floating particles.
However, when wave breaking is initiated, the effect of
turbulence and the surface roller is activated. After breaking is initiated, the
particles are scooped up by the surface roller after which they will stay on the
surface and be carried all the way to the beach riding on the roller. Fluctuations
due to turbulence are observed but seem to cease once the particles are enclosed
in the surface roller. Not all particles are necessarily caught by the first roller
passing by, which might be explained by the fact that the turbulent fluctuations
cause the particles to spread out in the water column. The particles at or close
to the surface will be caught by roller while particles located slightly lower in
the water column will be unaffected by the first roller but due to their floating
properties, they will quickly rise to the surface where they are caught by one of
the subsequent rollers passing. Overall, the surface roller seems to be governing
the particle transport in breaking waves while the turbulent fluctuations play a
minor role.
Al-Obaidi (2022) reported that the passing of a breaking wave would initially
submerge the particles and found that the time it took the particles to rise to
the surface again depended on the particle type. His observations showed that
the particles would either ride on the surface roller be forced down in the water
column. Particles located at the free surface would be pushed onshore by the
rollers passing but contrary to the model behavior, it required multiple rollers to
push the particles all the way to the beach. Therefore, the models’ underestima-
tion of the beaching time might be attributed to the different types of interaction
between roller and particles observed in the model and the experiments respec-
tively.
The implemented transport model for floating particles is incapable of accounting
for the shape, size, and density of the particles which might explain why the
model results were found to be independent of particle type. The insensitivity of
41
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. PARTICLE TRANSPORT MODEL - VALIDATION AND RESULTS
the particle type was seen in both the beaching time and the particle velocities
predicted by the model and are in line with the observations made in Section
4.2. The random walk model only distinguishes the particles from each other by
their settling velocity. As only floating particles were considered in this study,
all particles will rise towards the free surface and their motion will thus depend
on the flow in the near-surface region. As long as the particles stay in the same
region, they are expected to behave similarly prior to breaking. After breaking in
initiated it was expected that the particle motion would to some degree depend on
the settling velocity. That this is not observed, might again be explained by the
dominance of the surface roller once breaking is initiated. Except for the model’s
inability to distinguish between the different particles it is capable of predicting
the particle velocities with sufficient accuracy compared to experimental results.
This is not surprising, as the particle velocity is determined at x = 12 m, x = 14 m
and x = 16 m all of which are located offshore of the wave breaking region which
was first detected around x = 17 m.
Simplifications made in the simulation include the modified domain and the sur-
face roller approximation. The former simplification of the domain is assumed to
have minor influence on the results. In the runup region, the particle transport
will be governed by the surface roller. The presence of a surface roller significantly
increases the horizontal particle velocity. Thus, the time the particle spends in
the runup region before it is washed up on the beach is negligible compared to the
time it takes the particle to travel from the release point to the defined beaching
point.
The crude approximation of the surface roller is unlikely to be the cause of the
poor model results, as a more detailed representation of the surface roller would
increase the size of the region where a contribution to the horizontal particle
velocity from the surface roller is added, thereby decreasing the beaching time of
the particles.
42
==PAGE:55==
5
Conclusion
The first part of this thesis concerned a Boussinesq type wave model based on
the equation derived by Madsen et al. (2006) and the extension of this to accom-
modate breaking waves. The project built upon the work of Hybel (2019) who
implemented the model in Matlab but unfortunately included an error resulting
in a wrong representation of the free surface shown by a set-down in the surf
zone. Validation of the model showed that it was capable of describing linear
dispersion, linear shoaling and non-linear progression with sufficient accuracy. It
was found that the error leading to the wrong representation of the surface el-
evation in the surf zone was caused by the invalid assumption of constant eddy
viscosity made by Hybel (2019). This assumption was made in the derivation of
the energy dissipation term of the DFSC and in the formulation of the turbulent
transport equations. The error was corrected by including the spatial variation of
the eddy viscosity in these equations and the solution was verified by simulating
the spilling breaker of Ting and Kirby (1994). The simulation results showed
that the model was able to capture the experimental surface envelope and that
prediction of the set-down and set-up was correct. The surface envelopes using a
zero-, one- and two-equation breaking closure were compared, and it was found
that the simple algebraic zero-equation closure provided the closest match to the
experimental results. Furthermore, the wave model code was extended to allow
simulation of irregular waves either modeled as bichromatic waves or based on
the JONSWAP energy density spectrum.
In the second part of this thesis, a sediment transport model was implemented
in Matlab as a post-processing module for the results generated by the wave
model. The dispersion of floating particles in a turbulent flow was modeled using
a random walk model.
The implementation of the model was verified and it
was shown that the model computes the correct velocity profiles. Additionally,
it was found that the Boussinesq wave model captures the wave drift which is
important for the transport of floating particles. Comparison with experimental
results showed that the model is capable of computing the particle velocity in non-
breaking waves with high accuracy. Finally, the sediment transport module was
applied to determine the beaching time of floating particles exposed to irregular
breaking waves.
Thorugh comparison with experimental results it was found
that the model severely underestimated the beaching time and is incapable of
differentiating between the particle types. The poor model results was attributed
to the models wrong representation of the interaction between the particles and
the surface rollers.
43
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
5.1
Outlook
It was intended that the study on particle beaching times should include an
investigation of the effect of representing irregular waves by bichromatic waves.
This simplification is often made in CFD-models, as modeling irregular waves
based on an energy density spectrum like the JONSWAP spectrum requires that
a longer period of time is simulated. As CFD-models are computationally heavy,
this might not be an option and instead the periodicity of the bichromatic waves
is utilized. Unfortunately, simulating bichromatic waves on the setup used for
the beaching time study gave rise to instabilities affecting the computed velocities
and turbulent kinetic energy to a degree where the data was found unsuitable for
a particle simulation. Locating the source of the instability and eliminating it,
to therefore be an important extension of this project.
Furthermore, both the wave model and the sediment transport model could be
extended to cover a wider range of problems. The Boussinesq wave model could
be improved by including the full formulation of the equations given in Madsen
et al. (2006) to enable modeling of problems with rapidly varying bathymetries.
This could be achieved by extending Eq. 2.8 and including the additional J-
operators. Further, it would require that the expansion level is uncoupled from
the variation of the bathymetry. To improve the description of the horizontal
velocity profiles close to the free surface, the surface roller could be included in
the formulation of the Boussinesq equations. Finally, the code could be extended
to cover 3-dimensional problems by including a second horizontal dimension. This
might require a switch to a faster programming language than Matlab to account
for the significant increase in computation time when adding a third dimension.
A natural extension of the sediment transport code would be to include the option
to simulate non-floating particles which might be accomplished by calculating the
Morison force and estimating the particle velocity based on this. Like the wave
model, the sediment transport model could also be extended by including the
second horizontal dimension. This would make it possible to study how longshore
currents affect the transport of sediment in the nearshore region.
44
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
Al-Obaidi, M. A. A. (2022). Experimental study of nearshore transport of mi-
croplastic particles. Master Thesis.
Alsina, J. M., Jongedijk, C. E., and van Sebille, E. (2020). Laboratory measure-
ments of the wave-induced motion of plastic particles: Influence of wave pe-
riod, plastic size and plastic density. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans,
125(12):39–47.
Bagaev, A., Mizyuk, A., Khatmullina, L., Isachenko, I., and Chubarenko, I.
(2017). Anthropogenic fibres in the baltic sea water column: Field data, labo-
ratory and numerical testing of their motion. Science of the Total Environment,
599-600:560–571.
Bateman, W. J. D., Katsardi, V., and Swan, C. (2012). Extreme ocean waves.
part i. the practical application of fully nonlinear wave modelling.
Applied
Ocean Research, 34:209–224.
Christensen, O. (2012). Differentialligninger og uendelige rækker. DTU Matem-
atik - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet.
DiBenedetto, M. H. (2020). Non-breaking wave effects on buoyant particle dis-
tributions. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7:148.
Forsberg, P. L., Sous, D., Stocchino, A., and Chemin, R. (2020). Behaviour of
plastic litter in nearshore waters: First insights from wind and wave laboratory
experiments. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 153:111023.
Fuhrman, D. R. (2004).
Numerical solution of boussinesq equations for fully
nonlinear and extremely dispersive water waves. PhD Thesis.
Fuhrman, D. R. and Madsen, P. A. (2008). Simulation of nonlinear wave run-up
with a high-order boussinesq model. Coastal Engineering, 55(2):139–154.
Hasselmann, K., Barnett, T., Bouws, E., Carlson, H., Cartwright, D., Enke, K.,
Ewing, J., Gienapp, H., Hasselmann, D., Kruseman, P., Meerburg, A., Muller,
P., Olbers, D., Richter, K., Sell, W., and Walden, H. (1973). Measurements
of wind-wave growth and swell decay during the joint north sea wave project
(jonswap). Deut. Hydrogr. Z., 8:1–95.
Hybel, L. (2019). Simulation of wave breaking and sediment transport with a
high-order boussinesq model. Master Thesis.
Jacobsen, N. G., Fuhrman, D. R., and Fredsøe, J. (2012). A wave generation tool-
box for the open-source cfd library: Openfoam. INTERNATIONAL JOUR-
NAL FOR NUMERICAL METHODS IN FLUIDS, 70(9):1073–1088.
45
==PAGE:58==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kennedy, A. B., Chen, Q., Kirby, J. T., and Dalrymple, R. A. (2000). Boussi-
nesq modeling of wave transformation, breaking, and runup. i: 1d. Journal of
Waterway, Port, Coastal and Ocean Engineering, 126(1):39–47.
Kerpen, N. B., Schlurmann, T., Schendel, A., Gundlach, J., Marquard, D., and
Hüpgen, M. (2020). Wave-induced distribution of microplastic in the surf zone.
Frontiers in Marine Science, 7:590565.
Madsen, P. A., Fuhrman, D. R., and Wang, B. (2006). A boussinesq-type method
for fully nonlinear waves interacting with a rapidly varying bathymetry. Coastal
Engineering, 53(5-6):487–504.
Schäffer, H. A., Madsen, P. A., and Deigaard, R. (1993). Coastal Engineering.
Sebille, E. V., Aliani, S., Bagaev, A., Bergmann, M., Chubarenko, I., Cózar,
A., Fox-Kemper, B., Kaandorp, M. L. A., Lobelle, D., Martinez-Vicente, V.,
Suaria, G., Law, K. L., Maximenko, N., Delandmeter, P., Egger, M., Garaba,
S. P., Goddijn-Murphy, L., Hardesty, B. D., Hoffman, M. J., Khatmullina, L.,
Koelmans, A. A., Laufkötter, C., Maes, C., Morales, M., Angel, M., Ernesto,
R., Ryan, P. G., Shim, W. J., Thiel, M., Bremer, T. S. V. D., and Wichmann,
D. (2020).
The physical oceanography of the transport of floating marine
debris. Environmental Research Letters, 15(2):023003.
Skotner, C. and Apelt, C. (1998). Application of a boussinesq model for the
computation of breaking waves part 1: Development and verification. Coastal
Engineering.
Sumer, B. M. and Fuhrman, D. R. (2020). Turbulence in coastal and civil engi-
neering. Advanced series on ocean engineering - Volume 51. World scientific.
Svendsen, I. A. (1984). Wave heights and set-up in a surf zone. Coastal Engi-
neering, 8(4):303–329.
Svendsen, I. A. (2005). Introduction to nearshore hydrodynamics. World Scientific,
1st edition.
Ting, F. C. K. and Kirby, J. T. (1994). Observation of undertow and turbulence
in a laboratory surf zone. Coastal Engineering, 24(1-2):51–80.
Wilcox, D. C. (2006). Turbulence modeling for CFD. DCW Industries, Inc., 3rd
edition.
46
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
47
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. (+45) 45 25 19 60
www.mek.dtu.dk
