==PAGE:1==
Master thesis in Physics and Nanotechnology
Site-selectivity and stabilization of lumines-
cent centers in hexagonal boron nitride via
strain engineering
Author: Nicolai Enggren
February 2022
==PAGE:2==
b
Supervisor: Assoc. Prof. Nicolas Stenger
Co-supervisors: Postdoc Moritz Fischer
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Single photon emitters are one of the corner stones in quantum technologies.
To
enable fabrication of high eﬀiciency quantum devices, site selective generation of the
emitters is central. In this thesis we attempt to achieve such site selective generation
of defects in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) which are known to show single photon
emission even at room temperature. This is done by transferring hBN flakes on top of
nano-pillars, thereby introducing localised strain to the flakes. Further treating the
samples with irradiation and annealing was then hypothesised to generate defects in
the strain-induced areas.
During hBN-to-pillar transfers we found that 260 nm tall pillar arrays with 300 nm
diameters and 7.5 µm pitches worked well for strain localization. After treating the
samples with the defect generation method we observed that a color center had formed
on top of a pillar. Measuring a second order correlation dip below 0.5 confirmed that
this was a single photon emitter.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
ii
Introduction
1
1
Theoretical concepts
3
1.1
Photon statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Photophysical measurement of light sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Luminescent centres in solids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Raman scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Defect generation in hBN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Sample fabrication and analysis
12
2.1
hBN exfoliation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Fabrication and Characterization of Nano-pillar samples . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Pillar specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
hBN pillar transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Site-selective defect generation experiments
25
3.1
Experimental setups and specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Experimental results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
Cleaning method 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
Cleaning method 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3
Background signal from annealed hBN . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.4
Pre treatment spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Photophysical characterisation of defects
34
4.1
Experimental setup and specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iii
Conclusion
39
Appendices
41
Appendix A
Appendix A - Sample fabrication
42
A.1 hBN thickness determination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.2 Dark field pictures of transfers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.3 Broken/damaged pillar array
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.4 Transfer success rates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Appendix B
Appendix B - Defect generation method
47
B.1
Raman peak Silicon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B.2
Raman pillar response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
B.3
Pre-treatment samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
B.4
Irradiated samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B.5
Annealed samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B.6
Raman checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.7
Cleaning method 2 - Spectra Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Appendix C
Appendix C - Photophysical measurements
53
C.1 Defect 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
C.2 Defect 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:6==
Introduction:
During the last decades single photon emitters (SPEs) have become a center of atten-
tion in the scientific community due to their importance in realising true quantum-
computing and -communicational devices [1–4].
To achieve eﬀicient and easy-to-
fabricate quantum systems site selectivity, photon indistinguishably, and room tem-
perature applications are all central. SPEs which share all these traits have, however,
proven hard to come by.
Defects in semi conductors have in many years been studied due to their bright
single photon emission properties, but most of these require cryogenic temperatures to
function [5]. The large band gap of hexgonal boron nitride (hBN) allows hBN-defects
to show SPE behavior even at room temperature [6,7]. Defect generation methods in
hBN, using irradiation and annealing, has shown promising result, thereby increasing
the consistency of the defect fabrication process [8]. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
of hBN ontop of nano-pillars has further shown site selective growth of defects [9]
making hBN highly interesting for future fabrication of quantum devices.
In this thesis we study the combination of controlled defect generation and site selec-
tive capturing of the defects. First multilayer hBN flakes are transferred on top of
nano-pillars inducing localised strain to the flakes. When then treating the samples
with oxygen irradiation and annealing it is hypothasized that the defects generated
will show site selective formation towards the strain induced areas. This is motivated
by research showing trapping of excitons via strain [10]. The strain trapping is fur-
ther hypothesised to create more stable states for the defects, decreasing blinking and
bleaching [11] at the same time as creating more consistent lineshapes.
Thesis outline:
The thesis is split into four main sections: Theory, Sample fabrication, Site selective
defect generation method, and Photophysical measurements.
In ”Chapter 1 - General Theory” we explain some of general theory which we will
use though-out the report. Since this is an experimental report we have prioritized
concepts over heavy calculations/derivations.
”Chapter 2 - Sample fabrication” contains in-depth fabricational methods of pillar-
sample fabrication, hBN exfoliation [12] and hBN-on-pillar transfers. These have been
==PAGE:7==
Introduction
2
developed and optimized through-out the project. We also include a discussion of the
sample results for the purpose of optimising future sample fabrications of similar kind.
During ”Chapter 3 - Site selective defect generation method” we present and discuss
the hBN-on-pillar samples during each step of the defect generation process, using
photoluminiscence (PL) mapping [13] to track down defects.
In ”Chapter 4 - Photophysical measurements” we do second order coherence measure-
ments [14] on a defect positioned on top of a nano-pillar and a defect positioned on
flat hBN.
Motivation and project objectives:
This entire project was motivated by results previously obtained by our groups show-
ing what looked like bright site selective defects aligned perfectly with strain induced
areas of hBN [15, 16] (See ”930 nm - Flake 2” in section 3). Through further inves-
tigation the signal was found to origin from Raman scattering instead of being SPE
related. This thesis will therefore lean more into trying to obtain actual SPE signals
from the site selective defect generation method, instead of replication and optimiza-
tion of the pre-project results - which was originally stated in the course/project
objectives.
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Theoretical concepts
In this chapter we present some of the underlying theory behind the measurements
and experimental methods used throughout this thesis. It is meant to give a basic
understanding of the concepts used but will not go into depth with derivations.
1.1
Photon statistics
When considering quantum optical sources the classical wave depiction of light is no
longer suﬀicient to describe the properties of the system [14]. We instead quantify
the electrodynamical waves into single particles called photons. Different light sources
can be characterised according to the statistical behavior of their photon emission. In
this section we consider three of the most important types: Coherent sources, thermal
sources and single photon emitters (SPEs).
Coherent light
Perfectly coherent light has a photon emission pattern that is completely random.
This means that there are no correlations between the photons emitted at different
times 1.1(green). This kind of random behavior follows Poissonian statistics [14],
P(n) = ¯nn
n! e−¯n ,
(1.1.1)
where P(n) is the probability of measuring n photons during a time interval τ, and
¯n is the mean number of photons during the same time interval.
The variance of a Poissonian distribution is given as,
(∆n)2 = ¯n ,
(1.1.2)
and is the lowest possible value which can be achieved by classical mechanics [14].
One of the most common examples of perfectly coherent light is lasers which we will
use for optical excitation during this thesis.
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Photon statistics
4
Figure 1.1: Statistical photon behavior from coherent (green), thermal (blue) and single
photon emission (red) sources.
The left-hand side shows the photon distribution in time and the right-hand side shows
the probability distribution of photons measured during a time τ, with an average photon
number, ¯n = 5.
Bunched light and thermal sources
Bunched light shows periodically changes in photon density with time, see fig 1.1(blue).
This both covers classical phenomena like thermal sources but also some quantum
sources like super radiant emitters.
Thermal sources are present everywhere since this type of light emission occurs due
to heat, i.e. black body radiation1. Since black body radiation is excitation of bosons
(photons) the emission pattern follows the Bose Einstein distribution [14],
Pω(n) =
1
¯n + 1
(
¯n
¯n + 1
)n
,
(1.1.3)
where Pω is the probability of exciting n photons of energy ℏω. This shows Super
Poissonian behavior ((∆n)2 > ¯n) and is therefore in accordance with classical me-
chanics.
1A common example of a bright thermal source is older light-bulbs. A less bright one could for
example be the human body.
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Photophysical measurement of light sources
5
Anti bunched light and single photon emitters (SPEs)
Anti bunching describes light emitted from single photon emitters (SPEs). SPEs are
characterized by only having one available state during excitation, meaning that two
photons can never be emitted at the same time. The photons will be displaced by
the lifetime of the emitter, τ, plus the re-absorption period, see fig 1.1(red). In the
perfect case the photon distribution will follow a Kronecker delta function,
P(n) =
{
1
n = ¯n
0
n ̸= ¯n .
(1.1.4)
Having a variance of (∆n)2 = 0 < ¯n means that single photon emission is purely a
quantum phenomena.
1.2
Photophysical measurement of light sources
Recording the exact statistical distributions of light sources is not possible due to the
finite counting rate of photon detectors. To obtain information about the sources we
instead measure the second order correlation function.
The second order correlation function
The second order correlation function (g(2)(τ)) is a measure of the average overlap
between photon wavefunctions at time t and t + τ divided by the product of the
photon averages at the two times [17],
g(2)(τ) =
⟨
ˆE(−)(t) ˆE(−)(t + τ) ˆE(+)(t + τ) ˆE(+)(t)
⟩
⟨
ˆE(−)(t) ˆE(+)(t)
⟩⟨
ˆE(−)(t + τ) ˆE(+)(t + τ)
⟩,
(1.2.1)
where ˆE(+) and ˆE(−) are the photon creation and annihilation operators and
⟨
ˆO
⟩
=
Tr(ρ ˆO) is the expectation value of an operator ˆO.
When τ becomes much larger than the coherence time of the source the fields at t
and t + τ will commute and the numerator expression can be rewritten into the same
form as the denominator. We therefore get
lim
τ→∞
[
g(2)(τ)
]
= 1,
(1.2.2)
which is used to normalize experimental data.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Luminescent centres in solids
6
Figure 1.2: Theoretical second order correlation function for light coming from perfect
coherent, thermal and single photon sources (Fock state with n=1).
For τ →0 it can be shown that [17]
g(2)(0) = 1
(Coherent source)
(1.2.3)
g(2)(0) = 2
(Thermal source)
(1.2.4)
g(2)(0) = 1 −1
n
(Fock state) .
(1.2.5)
Examples of g(2)-measurements are shown in figure 1.2 for the three types of sources
considered. A bunching term is added to the SPE-curve since many quantum sources
can be modelled as three level systems [18,19].
For n = 1 the Fock state yields g(2)(0) = 0, and for n = 2 it yields g(2)(0) = 1/2.
This means that an experimental value of g(2)(0) < 1/2 proves that a source has a
non-zero projection on the single photon Fock state2 [20].
1.3
Luminescent centres in solids
Optical defects in semiconductors are believed to consist of vacancies, substitute
atoms, or combinations of the two [21]. Many of these show single photon emission
[6, 22]. In this section we go through the theory behind their optical behavior and
spectral response.
2This does however not mean a source can be used as an SPE. g(2)(0) < 1/2 could for example be
obtained for a source which exhibits 2 photon emission 99% of the time and only single photon
emission 1% of the time (if neglecting background noise).
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Luminescent centres in solids
7
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.3: (a) The Franck Condon principle where Q0 is the initial electron-nuclei dis-
placement and Q′
0 is the equilibrium displacement of the excited state. (b) The probability
density of transitions for absorption (blue) and emission (green). Gray denotes the zero
phonon line (ZPL) and exist for both absorption and emission.
Vibronic absorption and emission
To understand the emission/absorption spectra of optical defects the simplifying
Frank Condon principle [21] can be applied.
This considers defects as harmonic
oscillators which has different equilibrium nuclea-electron displacements depending
on the electron state. Approximating the electron excitation as instantaneous and
assuming the relaxation of the electron-nuclei displacement happens much faster than
photon re-emission, the valence and conduction band will be displaced by the differ-
ence in their equilibrium positions, Q′
0 −Q0. The harmonic oscillator approximation
is only valid at the bottom of the bands. To make the model more accurate we use
asymmetric potential wells when displaying the system, see fig 1.3(a). Depending
on the size of the offset the different state transitions become more or less frequent.
A measure of the transition rates between two states, n1 and n2, is given by the
Frank-Condon factor,
In1,n2 = | ⟨n2, Q′
0 | n1, Q0⟩|2 ,
(1.3.1)
describing the spatial overlap of the two states. Examples of emission and absorption
spectra are shown in fig 1.3(b). ZPL stands for ”zero phonon line” corresponding to
a purely optical transition - no phonon emission/absorption. Since the absorption
energy generally is higher than the emission energy the excitation sources can be
filtered out using a long pass (LP) filter during experimental work.
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Raman scattering
8
Single-photon emitters
Modeling defects as 3-level systems allows us to write up a general expression for the
g(2) function as [8]
g(2) = 1 −Ae−|τ|/τ1 + Be−|τ|/τ2 ,
(1.3.2)
where A & B are coeﬀicients and τ1 & τ2 are lifetimes of the bunching and anti-
bunching process, respectively.
This equation can be used as a fit to clarify the
behavior/characteristics from a measured SPE. As described in section 1.2 obtaining
g(2)(0) < 0.5 implies that single-photon emission occurs.
Defects in hexagonal boron nitride
To avoid contamination of the SPE signal host materials with band gaps much larger
than the excitation energy of the defect can be used. Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
has a bandgap of ≈6 eV [23] while the ZPL of the defects lies around 2.1 eV [7, 24].
With an average thermal energy at approximately 25 meV for room temperature,
thermal excition is negligible. This makes high signal to noise ratio (SNR) single
photon emission possible without the need of cooling devices.
1.4
Raman scattering
During optical measurement on SPEs it is important to recognise raman related peaks
so they are not confused for Photoluminiscense3. In this section we go trough the
theory behind raman scattering and list Raman shifts for some materials of interest.
Figure 1.4: The inelastic scattering of a photon of energy E1, on a crystal with optical
phonons of energy Ω. Both phonon absorption (anti Stokes scattering) and emission (Stokes
scattering) can occur.
3Raman peaks can be sharp and bright and easily be mistaken for a ZPL.
==PAGE:14==
1.5 Defect generation in hBN
9
Theory
Raman shifts occur due to inelastic light scattering on molecules [21]. During the
process energy and momentum is split into a scattered light ray and an integer number
of optical phonons, see fig 1.4. Conservation of energy and momentum demands that
E1 = E2 ± nΩ
(1.4.1)
k1 = k2 ± nq ,
(1.4.2)
where 1 and 2 denotes the initial and final light states, Ω& q are the quanta of
energy and momentum of a single optical phonon, and n is the amount of phonons
excited/absorbed. The energy in which the final photon energy varies from the initial
photon energy is called the Raman shift. During photoluminescence measurements
the excitation laser is filtered out with a long-pass filter to avoid burning the CCDs.
The anti stokes scattering processes are therefore filtered out as well. However, in
case our filter cuts at energies higher than E1 −Ωwe will observe a raman peek4.
Since the energy of the excitation laser is included in the calculation of the Raman
peak these types of peaks are easily recognised experimentally by changing the laser
wavelength.
Material
Si
hBN
SiO2
R.S [meV]
64.8 meV
169 meV
57.5 meV
R.S [cm−1]
523 cm−1
1364 cm−1
464 cm−1
Table 1.1: Raman shifts (R.S) for silicon [25], hexagonal boron nitride [26], and silicon
dioxide [27].
Materials of interest
During experiments we work with multiple materials which exhibits strong raman
peaks. Some of the most important raman shift are listed in table 1.1.
1.5
Defect generation in hBN
Low-quality hBN shows more defects after annealing than the high-quality hBN [28].
To achieve results which are both consistent and optimizable, high quality hBN com-
bined with defect provoking methods are, however, preferred instead. This approach
4Theoretically we also get a peak at E1 −2Ω, ”E1 −3Ω” and so on. However the transition rate
goes down with the number of phonons included in the process, and even 2 phonon processes are
often negligible during measurements.
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Defect generation in hBN
10
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.5: Both figures are borrowed from reference [8] (a) Example of crystal structure
of hBN lattice after irradiation, simulated using DFT (b) Characteristic spectral behavior
of Group 1 and 2 hBN defects.
also makes it easier to gain insight in the nature of the different defect species, which
has not yet been fully uncovered.
Generation method and motivation:
For defect generation we consider an irradiation followed by annealing approach which
has already been studied previously by our group [8]. During the irradiation process
the hBN bonds are smashed at the same time as new molecules are introduced to the
system. Annealing courses the hBN to recrystallize, ”repairing” the broken bonds.
Since the lattice recrystallization happens multiple places at once and doesn’t origin
from one place, as if the hBN was chemically grown, mismatches will occur around the
crystal5. These mismatches creates vacancies which, if positioned correctly relative
to the surrounding atoms, can make up defects. An example of lattice structure after
irradiation is displayed in figure 1.5(a).
Using the defect formation approach has been shown to create mainly two types of
defects denoted in reference [8] as group 1 and 2; see fig 1.5(b). Group 1 and 2 defects
have been suggested to consist of VNCB and VB formations, respectively, by the
comparison of experimental data and density functional theory (DFT) calculations [8].
Group 1 defects show a large relative peak for the ZPL position with a small full
width half maximum (FWHM). Group 2 shows a large peak for the phonon sideband
position with a wider FWHM. To obtain single photon emission with high SNRs the
group 1 defects would therefore most likely perform considerably better. The defect
introduction method should, as a result, be performed in a carbon rich environment
to maximise the probability of Group 1 defect formation.
5Mismatches can also occur due to foreign molecules being present in the lattice
==PAGE:16==
1.5 Defect generation in hBN
11
Strain has previously been studied and verified as a method of trapping excitons in
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) [10]. With this in mind our group has
proposed that strain could work as a way of trapping defects as well. In this project
we stack hBN on top of nano-pillars to introduce localised strain to the flake. By
further treating the sample with the defect generation method it is hypothesized that
the defects formation will show site selective behavior in the strain induced hBN areas.
Similar research using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of hBN on nano-pillars has
yielded promising results [9].
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Sample fabrication
and analysis
This chapter is dedicated to the fabrication of the hBN-on-pillar samples. We go
through the experimental methods and theory behind hBN exfoliation, pillar sample
fabrication, and hBN transfer.
The chapter can be used as guide for future experiments for reproducibility.
2.1
hBN exfoliation
In this section we focus on the exfoliation of hBN. Exfoliation is a process where
layered materials are pulled apart resulting in thinner sheets of the same material.
Layered materials consist of monolayer structures bounded together by Van der Walls
forces. The exfoliation method was first shown as a way of obtaining atomically thin
layers of graphite, pulling it apart using tape [29], and was later extended to multiple
other similar structured crystals, like hBN. During our experiments we use blue tape
to transfer the exfoliated flakes on top of Si-SiO2 wafers. These wafers contain gold
or etched-in markers to enable easy navigation of the exfoliations.
Experimental method
The process of exfoliation which has revealed the best exfoliation results are presented
in following subsection. This was optimized through-out the project and some of the
earlier exfoliation therefore have slight variations in some of the steps.
Silicon wafer cutting:
Place a gold or etched marked silicon wafer face-up on a paper cloth. Use a ruler and
a sample-cutter to scratch straight lines in the wafer separated by 1-2 cm. Remove
silicon strips by bending the wafer, breaking away from the backside. Cut the silicon
strips into square pieces by scratching perpendicular to the strips and break apart.
==PAGE:18==
2.1 hBN exfoliation
13
Silicon wafer cleaning:
Put the silicon samples into acetone for 30 minutes. Remember to always cover baths
with aluminium foil if longer than 5 minutes to avoid evaporation. Move samples
directly from the acetone into a water bath and wait 2 minutes. Remove the samples
from the water and wash with IPA followed by nitrogen blowing till dry. If particles
or films are still visible on the samples, sonicate in acetone for 10-15 minutes and
repeat from the water bath step.
hBN exfoliation:
Place an hBN crystal in the middle of a blue tape-strip and fold the tape in different
directions around (but not on top of) the crystal. This is done until the hBN covered
area matches the size of silicon samples.
Stick another piece of tape against the
exfoliation, sticky sides against each other, to make copies. First dublicate the initial
exfoliation and then dublicate the initial exfoliation and the copy once to obtain the
best results1.
hBN-trasfer to silicon samples:
Heat the silicon samples at 200 C
◦for 80 seconds (pre-heat stacker to 80 C
◦). Remove
the samples from the heater and plasma ash for 10 minutes using an oxygen pressure
of < 500 mTorr (Argon is set to 0). Take out a sample and align its surface with
the hBN-filled area on the blue tape. Press down and massage out any air bubbles
that might appear. Using a scalpel, cut a square in the blue-tape a bit wider than
the samples. Put the sample on the pre-heated stacker and leave for thirty seconds.
Turn on the vacuum and use a tweezer to pull off the blue tape. One by one repeat
with the remaining samples keeping the untreated ones in the asher.
Characterization of hBN thickness
Information about flake thickness are central for experimental reproducility since it
is closely related the flexibility of the flakes. To speed up the thickness determina-
tion process we used pictures of hBN flakes and atomic force microscopy (AFM) to
correlate flake colors to their thicknesses. Since AFM measurement are very sensitive
to surrounding vibrations an uncertainty of 1 nm was determined graphically for the
measurements. The color tables created are presented in fig A.1.
To avoid comparing colors by eye we additionally made a graph showing the rela-
tion between the ”brightness” of the flakes and the thickness2; see fig 2.1(a). The
brightness is given as
Bright = 0.2121R + 0.7152G + 0.0722B ,
(2.1.1)
1If no copies are made the flakes will be to thick. If too many are made the flakes will have small
surface areas and be low in densities
2Since thicker hBN flakes appear brighter for the microscope settings we assumed that higher thick-
ness would lead to higher brightness.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 hBN exfoliation
14
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.1: (a) The relation between the calculated flake brightness and the thickness of
the flake for 20x & 100x microscopic images. (b) The hBN thickness etched away during
irradiation (∆z) as a function of the original flake thickness (Pre Thick).
The average
thickness removed is 4.23 nm. (c)-(d) exfoliation areas of interest for small pillars (250-500
nm) and tall pillars (>800 nm), respectively.
where R, G and B are the three RGB-values.
To roughly estimate the uncertainty of the color table, four independent hBN flakes
were used as a test-set. Comparing the table prediction with the results obtained
from AFM yielded variations of up to 1 nm.
When using the table for thickness identification it is important that both the micro-
scope settings and the silicon samples have the same specifications as for the creation
of the table itself. The samples used were Si-SiO2 wafers with a 98 nm oxide layer3.
The microscope specification can be found in section A.1.
3Some of the later batches of samples were done using wafers 102 nm oxide wavers layer introducing
a small uncertainty
==PAGE:20==
2.1 hBN exfoliation
15
hBN flakes of interest
Through previous research we have concluded that the target thickness of hBN flakes
of interest should be 10−16 nm (before treatment). Thinner flakes have a high chance
of getting pierced through when transferring onto pillar samples - especially for taller
pillars. hBN flakes thicker than 16 nm are too rigid to make high strain tent-like
structures.
The oxygen irradiation performed during the defect generation method etches mul-
tiple hBN layers away from the flakes. To investigate how much is removed, AFM
measurements of flakes on flat substrate were performed before and after the irradia-
tion process, see fig 2.1(b). As for the previous AFM measurement an uncertainty of
1 nm was estimated. The plot shows little to no correlation between flake thickness
and hBN layers removed. We therefore expect to lose ≈4.3 nm of hBN during the
defect generation process for all flakes. The flake thicknesses considered must there-
fore be overshot accordingly if wanting a specific end-thickness. The measurements
were not performed on pillar-transferred flakes since these don’t lie flat on the sub-
strate. Some spacial variance from the estimated etching-thickness might occur on
transferred flakes due to hBN orientation and angles/slopes.
Prior to the pillar-transfers we scanned the exfoliated samples for areas of interest
and took pictures using the same microscope settings as for the color table. These
pictures were then both used to re-find the flakes during transfers and for thicknesses
determination. Depending on the pillars considered we prioritized flake thicknesses,
flake areas, or flake densities. For transfers to tall pillars (height of over 800 nm)
flake density is most important since many flakes disappear during the process (see
section 2.3). For transfers to short pillars (height of under 500 nm) surface areas
and thickness were prioritized since most flakes stay4 (depending on on the cleaning
process). Examples of areas of interest for the two transfer ranges are displayed in
figure 2.1(c)-(d).
Important note: The first step in the hBN-to-pillar transfer is to deposit cellulose
acetate butyrate (CAB) on top of the exfoliation. This introduces a color shift, and
the thickness determination therefore won’t work anymore. The scanning process
must therefore be performed before starting the transfer steps.
4Pillars of heights between 500 nm and 800 nm have not been studied and we do therefore not know
which measures should be prioritized during transfers to such samples.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Fabrication and Characterization of Nano-pillar samples
16
2.2
Fabrication and Characterization of Nano-pillar
samples
(All Pillar sample fabrications in this project was performed by Aurimas Sakanas at
DTU’s clean room.)
In this section we briefly describe the process used for the pillar sample fabrication.
We also compare the targeted specification of the pillars to the actual specifications
measured using AFM.
Figure 2.2: The four main steps during fabrication of nano-pillar samples:
1) Prepare clean silicon wafer.
2) Spin-coat wafer with Fluid oxide mixture.
3) Expose
desired pillar-areas to e-beam. 4) Use proper developer to etch away non-exposed areas.
Fabrication method
Clean silicon wafers were first spin-coated with a negative photo-resist. We used a
mixture of a Fluid oxide5 (Fox) and Hydrogen Silsesquioxane (HSQ) which is com-
monly used in electron beam (e-beam) lithography. The thickness of the spin-coating
depends directly on the concentration of HSQ in the mixture which enabled engineer-
ing of the pillar heights. By exposing targeted areas to e-beams of different spot sizes,
followed by the use of a proper developer, pillars of specific diameters were created.
The entire process is depicted in figure 2.2.
2.2.1
Pillar specifications
The first pillars fabricated was targeted to be 930 nm tall with a constant 3 µm
pitch and 3 different diameters, see fig 2.3(a). All other pillar heights were fabricated
in 5×5 pillar arrays with pitches ranging from 1-10 µm (1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 µm) and
diameters from 100-300 nm (100, 150, 200, 250, 300 nm). An example of the 260
5This is a fluedic glass substrate that can be spin-coated
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Fabrication and Characterization of Nano-pillar samples
17
nm pillars are displayed in figure 2.3(b). In table 2.1 we have presented the targeted
pillar specifications together with the actual specifications found using AFM. Some
pillars have a large variation between the targeted and experimentally measured val-
ues (especially the 550 nm pillars) which must be taken into account when drawing
conclusions about optimal pillar heights and diameters.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: (a) Pillar array from the 930 nm pillar samples. Each square-section varies in
diameter (75, 150 & 300 nm) (b) Pillar array from the 260 nm pillar sample. The vertical
lines vary in diameter (from 100 to 300 nm) and the horizontal lines vary in pitch (from 1
to 10 µm).
Target Heights
1025 nm
930 nm
800 nm
550 nm
260 nm
Target Dia.
300 nm
NM
205 nm
NM
237 nm
328 nm
250 nm
BP
BP
NM
190 nm
274 nm
200 nm
BP
BP
NM
133 nm
235 nm
150 nm
BP
%
BP
91 nm
186 nm
100 cm
BP
%
BP
BP
131 nm
Experimental Heights
905 nm
901 nm
745 nm
420 nm
243 nm
Table 2.1: The upper table shows the experimentally measured diameters compared to the
targeted diameters. ”NM”, ”BP” & ”%” stands for ”Not Measured”, ”Broken Pillars” and
”Not Fabricated”, respectively. The lower table shows the experimentally measured pillar
heights.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 hBN pillar transfer
18
2.3
hBN pillar transfer
In this section we go through the process of transferring hBN on top of the nano-
pillars. We use CAB as a transfer medium and a stacker, including a 3D-stage, to
control where the flakes are positioned.
Experimental method
The hBN transfer process is presented in following subsection. This has also been
optimized through-out the project.
Cab deposition:
Place an exfoliated sample in the spin-coater. Use a pipette to spread a layer of CAB6
all over the flake (make sure nothing spills over the edge). If bubbles occur use the
the pipette to gently suck them up. Close the spin-coater lid and turn on vacuum.
Use 1550 rounds per second (RPS) and a 1 min run-time for the coating. In case too
much time is spend before spinning, the CAB can start drying leading to an uneven
coating. If any of the steps goes wrong and the CAB is not spread evenly, clean the
sample using 20-30 minutes ethyl acetate, 20-30 min acetone, 2 min water, wash with
IPA and blow dry; then redo from the beginning. Place the sample on a heater at
120 C
◦for 5 minutes to remove microscopic bubbles in the CAB.
hBN stacking on pillars:
Place the CAB deposited sample on a stacker and turn on the vacuum. Using a scalpel
cut an area in the CAB around the flakes that are being transferred7. Put a droplet
of water on a cutting-edge using a syringe. Use the syringe to lift the sample edges
up until the droplet goes beneath the CAB and separates the cut from the wafer8.
Pick up the CAB sheet with a tweezer and place it face-up on the PDSM-part of a
transfer-slid9. Insert the transfer-slid in the transfer stage and approach the pillars
of interest. When contact has been made, heat the sample to 50 degrees and retract
the transfer slid. Then heat the sample to 60 C◦or until the newton rings on the
sample start disappearing. Do not go too high in temperature since this will course
the CAB to pull together and possibly destroy pillars and flakes.
CAB removal:
The last step of the transfer regards removal of the CAB. This was done in two ways
during the project:
6We use a mixture containing 24 g CAB per 100 mL ethylacetate.
7The bigger the cut the easier the transfer, but the less transfers you can make from each exfoliation.
8If the CAB has gone bad it will crack easily. In that case, remove CAB and deposit from a new
CAB mixture.
9A glass slid which has a small piece of PDSM super-glued close to the edge.
==PAGE:24==
2.3 hBN pillar transfer
19
• Cleaning method 1:
This is a gentle method focusing on a high transfer success-rate.
Place the samples in a bath containing ethyl acetate for 5 minutes. Use a pipette
to slowly suck up the ethyl acetate until the surface level is below the surface
of the samples. Let the samples dry and take them out.
• Cleaning method 2:
This is a rigorous cleaning method focusing on a removing all CAB residues
before the defect generation process is performed.
Place the samples in a bath containing ethyl acetate for 30 minutes. Use a
pipette to slowly suck up the ethyl acetate until the surface level is below the
surface of the samples. Let the samples dry and take them out. Carefully place
the samples in a bath of acetone for 30 minutes holding the samples horizontally
when putting in and taking out. Transfer the samples directly to a water bath
for 2 minutes and remove water using the pipette method before taking out the
sample.
Transfer results
In this section we present and discuss the results and process of the hBN-to-pillar
transfers. We mainly go into the transfers which were further treated with the defect
generation method. These will be labeled with red number for references. The thick-
nesses of all flakes considered are presented in table 2.2. The transfers are ordered
after when they were performed.
930 nm
550 nm
260 nm
Flakes
Flake 1
Flake 2
Flake 1
Flake 2
Flake 1
Flake 2
Thickness
14 nm
%
11 nm
11 nm
15 nm
16 nm
Table 2.2: This table contain the thicknesses of 5 of the flakes chosen for further study.
The thickness of 930 nm - flake 2 is unknown.
Dark field (DF) images are presented for the transferred flakes, in fig A.2. These
make it easier to see the flake positions relative to the pillar positions in some cases.
930 nm pillar samples
The first samples used for transfers were the 930 nm tall pillars samples. When using
the rigorous cleaning method all flakes disappeared after a short time. We narrowed
down the course of the flake disappearance to be flow related both during CAB
dissolvement and when removing the sample from chemicals. This was combated by
only going for a 5 minutes ethyl acetate bath and then using the oxygen irradiation
==PAGE:25==
2.3 hBN pillar transfer
20
step (see section 3) to remove most of the remaining CAB (This is ”Cleaning method
1”). When using the more gentle cleaning process we roughly observed a 1/8 success-
rate10 of the transfers. Figure 2.4(a)-(d) shows pictures of two flake-areas transferred
to the 930 nm pillars. We’ll refer to the succesfully transferred flakes as ”930 nm -
Flake 1 & 2”.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.4: 930 nm pillar transfers, Microscope images.
(a)-(b) Flake 1 before and after transfer. (c)-(d) Flake 2 before and after transfer.
As mentioned in section 2.2 the 930 nm pillar samples were only available with a
3 µm pitch and a 300 nm diameter. The large aspect ratio meant that the pillars
were very fragile and broke in multiple cases during CAB removal; an example is
shown in fig A.3(a)-(b). AFM measurements further showed that some pillars would
break (or partly break) due to the weight of the transferred flakes making it hard
to reproduce the results; see fig A.3(c). On figure 2.4(a) we show an AFM of flake
2 where the pillars have not collapsed.
To achieve localised strain we must have
single tent structures and not pillars connected by ridges, which we primarily see for
flake 2. This hints that the pitch of the samples were to small. The measurements
on flake 2 were done before the color tables had been created, and the thickness is
therefore unknown. From pictures and on-pillar AFM measurements we have however
estimated it to be between 12 and 16 nm thick.
10”Success-rate” describes the percentage of flakes that stays on the pillars through transfer.
==PAGE:26==
2.3 hBN pillar transfer
21
Figure 2.5: AFM measurements on sample ”930 nm - flake 2” after transfer showing many
ridges instead of localized tents. The AFM result is borrowed from previous work by our
group [15].
550 nm pillar samples
The 550 nm pillar transfers were made in two batches using different CAB removal
methods.
The first 550nm transfers were made in extension to the 930 nm transfers, and the
same experimental method was therefore used (”Cleaning method 1”). This yielded
near perfect transfer rates with only a small amount of flake disappearances and
movement; see figure A.4(a)-(b). During experiments with low pitch transfers (1 µm)
we also observed almost no difference in flake positions before and after the transfers;
example in figure A.4(c)-(d). We could therefore conclude that the success rate of
the transfers were closer related to the height of the pillars than the pitch.
On figure 2.6(a)-(b) we have displayed pictures of a flake of interest (”550 nm - flake
1”), before and after transfer. Due to the high transfer success-rate higher quality
flakes were prioritised over quantity. The transfer was made to pillars with a pitch of
10 µm and a diameter of 250 nm.
During transfers to the 550 nm pillar samples we observed multiple arrays getting
damaged which made sense since the pillars was a lot thinner than targeted (see
section 2.2). Through analysis we found that little to no difference appeared regarding
strain localization when varying the pillar diameters in the fabricated range (100-300
nm) for all the different pillar heights. We therefore decided to combat the fragility of
the pillars by solely going for the 300 nm diameter pillars for the following transfers.
The second batch of transfers were done according to ”Cleaning method 2”. Chemical
residues should thereby not block the hBN during the defect generation process, or
create spectral responses visible during photoluminescence mapping (section 3). Since
the new cleaning process introduced a lot more flow, multiple flakes started moving
around/dissapearing for the 550 nm transfers as well; example in fig A.4(e)-(g). The
==PAGE:27==
2.3 hBN pillar transfer
22
rigorous cleaning method was first introduced during the last part of the project and
we therefore don’t have enough data to accurately estimate the transfer success-rate.
On the few samples transferred we, however, observed it to be between 1/2 and 3/4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.6: 550 nm pillar transfers, Microscope images:
(a)-(b) Flake 1 before and after transfer. Cleaning method 1 was used for CAB removal.
(c)-(d) Flake 2 before and after transfer. Cleaning method 2 was used for CAB removal.
Figure 2.7: AFM measurement on sample ”550 nm - flake 2” showing partly broken pillars
beneath the flake.
==PAGE:28==
2.3 hBN pillar transfer
23
Figure 2.6(c)-(d) shows a transfer to the 550 nm pillars (Pitch of 7.5 µm; Diameters
of 300 nm).
On figure 2.7 we have included an AFM measurement showing the
topography of this transferred flake.
We observe that the pillars underneath the
flake are partly broken, which again hints that the pillars are to fragile. Considering
the tent formation, we see localised tents around pillars in multiple places, which
is probably a result of the larger pitch used (compared to the ones for the 930 nm
pillars). Pitches around 7.5 µm were therefore targeted for the following transfers.
260 nm pillar samples:
The 260 nm pillar transfers were only performed using ”Cleaning method 2”. This
pillar height is closer to what have been showcased in similar ”experimental setups”
where site selective defects have been achieved [9].
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.8: 260 nm pillar transfers, Microscope images.
(a)-(b) Flake 1 before and after transfer. (c)-(d) Flake 2 before and after transfer.
Figure 2.8(a)-(d) shows the transfers of two flakes of interest onto the 260 nm pillars
(Pitch of 5-7.5µm and diameters 300 nm). On both transfers the relative position
between the flakes of interest and the small surrounding flakes changes a bit but
within a scale a lot smaller than the array itself. Only slight flake movements was
observed during transfers on other arrays as well. As for the 550 nm pillars more
==PAGE:29==
2.3 hBN pillar transfer
24
transfers must be made to gain accurate information on the success-rate of the 260
nm pillar transfers. However, from the transfers made we estimate it to be between
80-100%. These pillars are therefore preferred fabrication vice (when using ”Cleaning
method 2”).
On figure 2.9 we have shown the topography of the two transferred flakes obtained
using AFM. In both cases the pillars remain intact beneath the flakes and multiple
localised tent formations can be seen. We can therefore conclude that the the 260
nm pillars with a 300 nm diameter are sturdy enough for transfers and that pitches
between 5-7.5µm both can be used for creating tent-like structures. Most of the pillars
are, however, still connected by ridges. To optimize the tent-to-area counts further,
transfers to larger pitch values should be experimented with in the future.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.9: AFM measurements of 260 nm pillar transfers.
(a) Flake 1. (b). Flake 2. Both transfers shows localized tents in multiple areas.
800 & 1050 nm pillar samples:
For both the 800 and 1050 nm pillars we used ”Cleaning method 2”.
Three transfer attempt were made to the 1050 nm pillars and in all cases the flakes of
interest disappeared. This was also expected after the 930 nm pillar transfers failed
with this kind of cleaning procedure.
Most flakes disappeared during transfer to the 800 nm flakes and the remaining ones
moved far away from there initial position.
The 800 nm pillars were very fragile
during transfers and many arrays were destroyed; example in fig A.3(d).
None of these pillar heights are recommended for pillar transfers.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3
Site-selective defect
generation
experiments
In this chapter we present and discuss the results obtained from the defect generation
process, performed on the samples transferred in section 2.3
3.1
Experimental setups and specifications
Oxygen irradiation
Oxygen irradiation was performed using parallel Reactive-Ion Etching (RIE). During
this process positively charged oxygen ions (oxygen plasma) are bombarded at a
sample by negatively charging the surface of the sample-holder.
The specifications used for the measurements are displayed in table 3.1.
Parameters
Etch
Etch flow
VDC
VP P
Time
Pressure
Values
O2
40 sccm
247 V
643 V
500s
30 mTorr
Table 3.1: Specifications used for oxygen irradiation.
Annealing
Two different annealing processes were performed during the duration of the project.
The first batch of samples was argon annealed in a glass holder under constant gas
flow; sample ”900nm - flake 1 & 2” and sample ”500nm - flake 1”. The second batch
of samples used sealed nitrogen annealing in a graphite box; sample ”500 nm - flake
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Experimental setups and specifications
26
2”, and sample ”250 nm - flake 1 & 2”. The graphite box was used to create a carbon
rich environment in hope of increasing the number of group 1 defects (see section
1.5).
Parameters
Presure
Max temp
Heat-up
Baking time
Ar values
59.5 - 62.3 Torr (flow)
850 C◦
20 C◦/min
30 min
N2 values
60.8 - 98 Torr (Seal)
850 C◦
20 C◦/min
30 min
Table 3.2: Specifications used for annealing.
The specifications used for the two annealing processes are displayed in table 3.2,
where ”Heat-up” is the rate at which the system goes from room temperature to the
max temperature, and ”Baking time” is the amount of time the samples are baked
at the maximum temperature.
Photoluminescene mapping
Photoluminescence (PL) mapping is used to study the spectral response of a sample
as a function of position. This is done by raster scanning a selected rectangular area
with a laser and using an inverted microscope to gather the luminescence emitted
from the sample. A long-pass filter is used to remove the laser signal avoiding CCD
saturation/burning. Wavelengths overlapping with, or lower than, the excitation laser
can therefore not be measured. The resolution of the measurement is set by specifying
the stepping size of the sample stage.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the PL setup. DM, LP, L50x and Spec stands for Dichoric Mirror,
Long Pass, 50x Lens, and spectrometer, respectively. The laser is shown as a green line, and
the optical response from the sample is shown as a red line.
We have depicted a simplified version of the PL setup in figure 3.1. Two different
long pass filters have been used during experiments: one that cuts wavelengths below
532 nm and one below 550 nm. The 50x lens has a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.6
and a working distance of 11 mm. The PL measurments were mainly done using a
515 nm continuous wave (CW) laser at 3 mW. During Raman investigation a 523 nm
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Experimental results and discussion
27
CW laser at 1 meV power was used to compare spectral position of peaks as function
of wavelength. The difference in energy between the two lasers is 36.8 meV.
3.2
Experimental results and discussion
In this section we present and discuss some of the important results found during PL
mapping. Spectra will only be visualized up till 2.3 eV to not include the Raman
peak of the substrate, which is a lot brighter than most defect responses; example
given in figure B.1. All spectra are in kilo-counts vs electron volts.
3.2.1
Cleaning method 1
We first consider the samples which went through the gentle cleaning method, de-
scribed in section 2.3 as ”Cleaning method 1”. This considers both of the 930 nm
pillar transfers and sample ”550 nm - flake 1”.
All of these went through argon
annealing during defect generation.
Figure 3.2: (Left) The defect-like spectra obtained for sample ”930 nm - flake 2” after
going through the argon based defect generation process.
(Right) The positions of the
spectra plotted on top of a 2D AFM figure. The sample went through Cleaning method 1
during fabrication.
Before project start our group obtained promising results using the defect generation
method on sample ”930nm - flake 2”, see fig 3.2. Here we see what looks like defects
aligned perfectly with the strain induced areas of the hBN flake, combined with almost
identical line-shapes for all optical responses. To check whether this sample could be
used as a quantum source second order coherence measurements were performed in
multiple locations. These didn’t reveal any signs of anti bunching behavior (g(2)(0)<1)
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Experimental results and discussion
28
which at the given point in time was explained by multi defect excitation; g(2)(0) →1
for n →∞(see Fock state in section 1.2).
During investigation of the defect treatment on clean 550 nm pillar arrays we later
obtained almost identical spectra to the ones shown on flake 2, fig 3.3(a) (the clean
pillar spectra can be seen alone in fig B.2(a)). Due to the high resemblence we could
conclude that the source of emission had to be the same for the two cases. Since hBN
transfers had been done to some of the other regions on the sample containing the
clean pillars the pillar-spectra was first hypothesised to occur due to hBN residues
having spread across the chip, thereby still not disproving the presence of defects.
However, using the 523 nm excitation laser revealed a clear spectral drift from the
515 nm excitation spectra, hinting that the signal was Raman related instead of
PL, see fig 3.3(b). Further analysis of other samples sharing the same fabrication
process all yielded defect-like spectra in areas where no hBN transfers were present;
examples in fig B.2(b)-(c). The signal was narrowed down to be fabrication related
since no such signals was seen when changing up the generation/fabrication method.
We therefore expect the peaks to be either CAB or argon annealing related. As a
result all samples from the first batch was deemed unreliable for defect studies and
were therefore dismissed. New samples using the more rigorous ”Cleaning method 2”
combined with nitrogen annealing was then fabricated (see following sub-section).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: (a) Three spectra from the 550 nm clean pillars plotted together with three
spectra from sample ”930nm - flake 2”. The spectra has been normalized to easier compare
the line shapes (c) Spectral drift of the clean 550 nm pillars response when switching between
a 515 nm and a 523 nm excitation laser.
Studying PL maps of the non-treated flake 2, we observed none of the characteristic
peaks obtained in fig 3.2; see fig B.3(b). This means that the spectra cannot occur due
to CAB alone. If CAB related, it must therefore be a combination of the generation
method and the CAB that makes up the signal. It is however uncertain whether
the spectra generation is then limited to argon annealing alone or if other annealing
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Experimental results and discussion
29
types would produce the same. Since argon annealing and ”cleaning method 1” was
only done in combination with each other it is also possible that the signal is not due
to CAB at all, but purely a result of the argon annealing. Further studies of argon
annealing and the cleaning method should be done in the future to see whether one,
or a combination of the two, generates the signals.
3.2.2
Cleaning method 2
In this section we consider the samples which went through the rigorous cleaning
method described in section 2.3 as ”Cleaning method 2”. This contains both of the
260 nm pillar transfers and sample ”550 nm - flake 2”. All of these flakes were nitrogen
annealing during the defect generation process.
During the irradiation process a different power and irradiation time was used than
described in section 3.1. This lead to removal of more hBN layers than anticipated.
As a results, the 550 nm sample, which was only 11 nm thick, got pierced though by
the pillars; a topography plot can be found in fig B.4(c). Since the pierced flake lied
flat on the substrate we could use it to estimate the thickness etched away to be 6-7
nm. The two 260 nm flakes did not pierce through.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: PL maps of the two 260 nm pillar transfers after going through the nitrogen
based defect generation method. The orange spectra from flake 2 is labeled ”Defect 1” for
future references. Both samples went through Cleaning method 2 during fabrication
On figure 3.4 we show highlighted spectra from the 260 nm pillar samples post defect
generation treatment. A large background signal is observed after annealing, which
we will discuss in following section.
On Flake 1 we see repeating line-shapes showing bumps instead of peaks. Exciting
the sample with the 523 nm laser showed a clear spectral shift, meaning that these
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Experimental results and discussion
30
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a) Spectra of Defect 1 switching between the 515 nm and 523 nm laser for
excitation. No Raman shift is observed. (b) 100x microscope picture of ”260 nm - flake 2”.
The pillar containing Defect 1 has most likely pierced through the hBN (pillar inside red
circle).
features are most likely Raman related; see fig B.6(a). Similar spectra were found on
multiple other samples regardless of pillar height and flake thickness.
For flake 2 we have highlighted three spectra showing peaks of various degrees. The
orange spectra has a very clear ZPL and side-band and is positioned around a pillar.
Exciting with the 523 nm laser showed no spectral drift, verifying that the peaks are
due to PL, see fig 3.5(a). We use this defect for photophysical measurements in the
next chapter and label it as Defect 1 for easier references. On figure 3.5(b) we have
displayed a 100x picture of flake 2. Comparing the pillar containing Defect 1 with the
rest of the sample it seems like it has pierced through. This could be fully confirmed
using AFM, which was however avoided to make sure we would not tear the flake
off [15] before all optical measurements are done. The defect probably lies on top of
the pillar in hBN residues, or on edge of the teared hBN1.
The two other highlighted flake 2 spectra shows peaks aligned with the ZPL and
sideband of Defect 1, and is also placed on top of pillars. The low SNR resulting from
the bright backgrounds signal, however, makes them insuﬀicient as SPEs. Multiple
spectra of similar spectral lineshapes were observed for pillar sites across transfers;
examples in fig B.5(a) & (c). These peaks could both be defects being drowned out
by the background signal or luminescence occurring from the pillars beneath the flake.
In case the signals are actually defect related this would suggest that the site selective
defect generation process does in fact work.
1Defects tend to form on the edges of hBN flakes [30].
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Experimental results and discussion
31
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: (a) Evolution of the hBN background signal during each step of the defect
generation process. All three spectra are measured on the exact same flake position. (b)
Excitation of the Background signal using a 523nm laser and 515 nm laser. A small spectral
shift is observed.
3.2.3
Background signal from annealed hBN
In this section we discuss the background signal appearing after annealing of the hBN
flakes. The flakes considered were processed using ”Cleaning method 1” and nitrogen
annealing.
On figure 3.6(a) we have plotted the background signal during all three steps of the
defect generation method. All measurements were done in the exact same location(on
top of an hBN ridge). We see a huge difference in background signal before and after
annealing, revealing signals over 100 times brighter than for the irradiated and pre-
treated case. To investigate the origin of the peak, different laser sources was used to
excite the same location, see fig 3.6(b). A small spectral drift is observed as function
of excitation wavelength which hints that the signal might be Raman related. When
measuring on flat hBN (between pillars), a small spectral drift is also observed, see
fig B.6(b). This is however not significant enough to confirm the theory.
The background signal could be a direct result of the molecules introduced to the hBN
during the generation method, creating new Raman peaks.
Since inhomogeneous
broadening is known to be more significant in highly impure materials [31] this would
also explain the high FWHM of the spectra. To verify whether the source is indeed
raman related measurements with a larger change in excitation wavelength should be
performed.
On figure 3.7 we have plotted the background signal for a flat and strain-induced hBN
area. The background signal is observed to be greatly enhanced in the strained parts.
Since we study defect generation in these exact areas the huge background signal
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Experimental results and discussion
32
becomes an increasingly large problem. The brightest defect obtained during this
thesis had a ZPL of 10k counts/s. This would give us a SNR of 0.1 in a strained area,
making g(2)-values under 0.5 impossible to obtain2. To prove whether site selective
behavior of the defects does indeed occur the generation of the background signals
should therefore be thoroughly investigated in attempt to minimize it. This could for
example be done by varying gases used during the irradiation and annealing processes
to see whether the signal depends on the atoms introduced to the hBN.
Figure 3.7: Post annealing background signal (BS) plotted for both a strain-induced hBN
area and a flat hBN area. A huge signal enhancement is seen under strain.
3.2.4
Pre treatment spectra
In this section we consider defect-like spectra occurring on a transfer before the defect
generation treatment had started. The optical sources have not been investigated us-
ing g(2) or varying excitation lasers since we first discovered them after irradiation had
been performed3. The sample went through ”Cleaning method 1” during fabrication.
On figure 3.8(left) we have presented defect-like spectra occurring from a (at that
time) non-treated sample. The positions of the defect-like spectra are shown relative
to the flake-topography on figure 3.8(right). We observe a clear site selective behavior
of the highlighted spectra since all 6 of them origin from positions exactly on top of
pillars. Since the pillar areas only make up around 15% of the total flake area, it
is almost statistically impossible4 for the spectra to have originated independently
of the pillars. Studies have shown that making scratches in hBN can lead to defects
creation [32]. The hBN being scratched by the pillars from underneath could therefore
be an explanation. As for Defect 1 the site selective behavior could also be a result
of the pillars having pierced through, even though this is not visible in the AFM, see
2Actually even g(2)-values below 0.9 would be hard to get here.
3PL measurements were taken before the irradiation but first analysed after due lack of time.
4A quick calculation gives us a 0.156 = 1.13 × 10−5 chance of this occurring
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Experimental results and discussion
33
Figure 3.8: (Left) The defect-like spectra obtained for sample ”260 nm - flake 1” before the
defect generation method (post transfer). (Right) The positions of the spectra plotted on
top of a 2D AFM figure. The sample went through Cleaning method 1 during fabrication.
figure 3.8 or 2.9(a). At last the spectra could also be a result of pre-existing non-
luminescent defects which get activated by the strain, as discussed in reference [9].
After irradiation, the on-flake optical responses are severely weakened and most defect-
like spectra are gone; example in figure 3.9. This is also what we would expect since
close to half of the hBN is removed including all defects in this volume. Most of the
pre-treatment defects therefore don’t show up in the post-treatment experiments.
To gain a better understanding of the defect generation method the pre-treatment
spectra should be further studied.
This could for example involve whether pre-
treatment defects and post-treatment defects are likely to form in the same place
or whether the generation method creates more stable defects than for the intrinsic
case. As a bonus, site-selectivity without treatment is not an uninteresting topic to
investigate by itself either.
Figure 3.9: Evolution of defect spectra plotted from pre-irradiation to post irradiation.
Both measurements are taken in the exact same location.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Photophysical
characterisation of
defects
In this chapter we present and discuss the results of photophysical measurements.
To compare defects from pillar transferred flakes (Defect 1) with defects from regular
flat flakes, a non-transferred exfoliation was put through the generation process (using
nitrogen annealing). The sample had never been in contact with CAB and none of
the two cleaning methods were therefore performed. The PL-spectra of the chosen
defect can be found in fig C.2(a). We label it as Defect 2 for easier references. The
two flakes containing defect 1 and 2 were chosen from the same exfoliation batch.
This was done to rule out crystal quality as an explanation for possible difference in
the defect behavior.
4.1
Experimental setup and specifications
To experimentally measure the second correlation function we use a Hanbury Brown
and Twiss (HBT) interferometer.
In this section we will briefly explain the idea
behind such a setup and list the specifications for our own system.
Hanbury Brown and Twiss (HBT) setup
The Hanbury Brown and Twiss interferometer is depicted in figure 4.1, where D1
and D2 are single photon detectors, BS is a 50/50 beam-splitter and TT is a time
tagger. When a beam of light enters the setup the beamsplitter will randomly send
the photons in the directions of the two detectors. After a photon reaches detector
1 the time tagger will start a timer until a photon reaches detector 2. Counts are
==PAGE:40==
4.2 Experimental results
35
then plotted as a function of the time between clicks. Photons arriving at detector 2
before another at detector 1 is counted as negative delay.
Figure 4.1: The Hanbury Brown and Twiss setup used for experimentally measuring the
second order correlation function. BS, TT, D1 and D2 stands for ”Beam Splitter”, ”Time
Tagger”, and ”Detector 1 & 2”, respectively.
Experimental Specifications
Our setup uses two Excelitas SPCM-AQRH-15-FC APDs as single photon detectors.
These have a 22 ns dead time1, and approximately 25 dark-counts per second. A
Swabian Instruments Time Tagger 20 was used for measuring the g(2) clicks. This
has a jitter time2 of around 34 ns.
During g(2)-measurements we used a bin-width of 50 ps. Photon counting measure-
ments were done with a bin-width of 0.1 s.
4.2
Experimental results
In this section we’ll consider second order coherence measurements performed on
Defect 1 and 2.
Defect 1:
The defect spectra obtained before the g(2)-measurements is depicted in figure 4.2(a).
The signal is low in counts and a big slit-width of 20 nm, capturing most of the ZPL,
was therefore chosen to save time on measurements3. The second order correlation
function obtained are presented in figure 4.2(b). A dip going below the 0.5 line is
observed, proving that single photon emission occurs.
The sharp bunching peaks
1This is the time between counts can be made.
2The minimum bin-width for which optimal counting can be achieved.
3In case the signal is bright, using a small slit-width can lead to a higher SNR yielding better g(2).
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Experimental results
36
positioned at τ ≈±20 ns are visible on all low-count measurements and happen due
to hot carrier luminescence4 [33]. To avoid fitting to this the bunching term in the
fit was set to 0. From the fitting we extract a g(2)(0)= 0.45 and a lifetime of 10 ns.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.2: Measurements on Defect 1.
(a) Spectra obtained right before the g(2)-measurement. A slit-width of 20 nm was chosen
for the following results. (b) g(2)-measurement going to 0.45 at τ = 0. (c) 5 minutes snipped
of the detector counts as function of time. The entire counts vs time plot can be found in
fig C.1.
Figure 4.2(c) shows the measurement counts as a function of time. The counts oscil-
lates rapidly between 3.5k and 1k which is recognised as defect blinking. The lower
limit of 1k is the background signal from the hBN flake itself.
Initially the lens focus was set to the flat hBN surface5. After moving the flake out
of focus the defect signal got stronger, see figure 4.3. This is explained by the defect
either being on top of a pillar and therefore going into focus as we move the flake
4A process where remission of light occurs in the APDs coursing none-sample related signal between
the detectors
5The reason why the pillars weren’t initially in focus is that we though the long working distance of
the microscope lens would make 260 nm changes negligible. Also it is hard to know when the top
of the pillars are in focus when focusing by eye.
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Experimental results
37
away, or that the defect position and the laser spot didn’t overlap before increasing
the laser spot size. The defect unfortunately bleached before we could investigate
this. It is important to study this for upcoming experiments since a higher defect PL
could solve some of the low SNR problems mentioned in section 3.2.
Figure 4.3: The spectra of defect 1 in and out of flake focus.
Defect 2:
When revisiting Defect 2 we found that there were actually two defects next to each-
other; see double ZPL on fig C.2(b). It was possible to favor one over the other by
moving the excitation point but not get rid of one completely. Since the left-most
defect was observed to blink a lot, we optimized the signal from the right-most one.
The spectra obtained right before measurement is presented in figure 4.4(a). The
SNR is very low and a small slit-width of 10 nm was therefore chosen6. Figure 4.4(b)
shows the second order correlation plot obtained. By fitting we observe a dip which
goes down to 0.97 at τ = 0.
This is around what was expected due to the bad
SNR and double defect excitation. The ZPL of the targeted defect also fluctuated
significantly in counts during observation of the spectra with time.
On figure 4.4(c) we have shown the detector counts as function of time. These are a
lot higher than for Defect 1, most likely due to the high background signal.
6The low slit-width was also used to try and filter out the other defect ZPL which can be seen as a
bump on the left of the targeted ZPL.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Experimental results
38
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.4: Measurements on Defect 2.
(a) Spectra obtained right before g(2)-measurements. A slit-width of 10 nm was chosen for
the following results. (b) g(2)-measurement going to 0.97 at τ = 0. (c) Detector counts as
function of time.
==PAGE:44==
Conclusion and
outlook
During this thesis we have studied the generation of site selective defects in hBN
flakes. This was done by stacking hBN on-top of nano-pillars introducing localised
strain which was theorised to work as a defect trapping mechanism when combining
with an irradiation followed by annealing defect generation method.
We started out with studying the optimization of localised strain of the hBN-to-pillar
transfers. During this we found that pillars higher than 260 nm were too fragile during
transfers, both regarding damages from CAB and the pressure from carrying hBN
flakes. Since the pillar-diameters were not observed to have any impact on the strain
localization the largest 300 nm pillars-diameters was targeted for the transfers. The
550 nm pillars were fabricated almost 100 nm to thin, and further investigation should
therefore be done on these regarding pillar-strength; when obtaining more accurate
samples. When using a rigorous CAB removal method only the 260 nm pillars showed
a high success rate for the transfers. Strain localisation on pillar sites was observed
for the hBN flakes when going for pillar pitches between 5-7.5 µm. When going lower
an increased number of ridges was formed between the pillars instead. Pillar pitches
above 7.5 µm should be investigated in the future to see whether this optimises the
”localization-to-area” yield even more. From a fabricational point of view we can
conclude that the all around best pillar specifications tested were the 260 nm pillars,
with 300 nm diameters, and pitches larger of 7.5 µm. During future experiments,
which are not focused on further pillar optimization, these specifications should be
used.
After pillar fabrication we studied the defect generation method aplied to the strain
induced hBN samples. Many defect-like Raman signals were observed from pillars
where a gentle CAB removal method had been used combined with argon anneal-
ing. These signals made photoluminescence mapping unreliable for defect detection
and is therefore not recommended for future experiments. Using a more rigorous
CAB removal methods combined with nitrogen annealing we found that the signals
disappeared.
No clear correlations was found between color centers and the strain induced hBN
areas. A very bright background signal was observed from the hBN after the defect
==PAGE:45==
Conclusion
40
generation method had been applied. This was severely enhanced in strain-induced
areas drowning out the PL from any possible defects. Even if a bright defect was
actually observed the low SNR would make it unusable for fabricational purposes.
Further study must therefore be done on the origin of the contaminating signal in
attempt to minimize it for future samples.
A single defect was found on a nano-pillar which had possibly pierced through the
hBN. When performing a g(2)-measurement on the defect a dip below 0.5 was observed
at zero time delay proving that single photon emission occurred. Tracking photon
counts and spectra with time we did however not find any improvement in stability
over defects on flat hBN. After the g(2)-measurement we found that the counts from
the on-pillar defect drastically improved when moving the focus of the lens away
from the flake. We did not get to investigate this since the defect bleached within
minutes. This should, however, be investigated further in the future since it could
help combat some of SNR challenges faced during PL-mapping and the photophyscial-
measurements.
==PAGE:46==
Appendices
==PAGE:47==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A - Sample
fabrication
This appendix contains plots and descriptions associated with ”Chapter 2” of the
main report.
A.1
hBN thickness determination
In this section we display the tools and specifications used for the hBN thickness
determination.
Microscope settings:
To use the color tables the reference images must be taken with our microscope in
building 343 at DTU. Use the microscope settings listed in table A.1. After these
settings have been applied an auto white balance (AWB) must be performed using a
probe in the middle of the screen. The probe should be aligned to a clean silicon (or
SiO2 to be precise) area.
Settings:
Filter
Exposure
LED 100 Pad
Gain
20X pics
None
4 ms
1%
1
100X pics
None
1 Frame
2%
1
Table A.1: Microscope settings used for the 20x and 100x color tables.
==PAGE:48==
Appendix A.1 hBN thickness determination
43
Thickness to color - maps:
The two color-tables showing the correlation between hBN flake thickness and flake
colors are depicted in figure A.1
(a)
(b)
Figure A.1: Maps showing the thicknesses of hBN flakes as a function of color. These
work for the microscope settings presented in the previous subsection (a) 20x microscopic
images. (b) 100x microscopic images.
==PAGE:49==
Appendix A.2 Dark field pictures of transfers
44
A.2
Dark field pictures of transfers
This section contains dark field (DF) images of the transferred flakes in section 2.3.
The pictures are displayed in fig A.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.2: Dark field images post transfer of the 6 flakes considered in section 2.3
(a) 930 nm pillar transfers. No DF pictures were taken of flake 2. (b)-(c) 550 nm pillar
transfers (d)-(e) 260 nm pillar transfers.
==PAGE:50==
Appendix A.3 Broken/damaged pillar array
45
A.3
Broken/damaged pillar array
This section contains pictures of damaged or broken pillars observed during/after
hBN transfers. Fig A.3(a)-(c) considers 930 nm transfers, and fig A.3(d) considers an
800 nm transfer.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.3: (a)-(b) 930 nm pillar array before and after transfer. (c) AFM measurement
showing a flake which has crushed the 930 nm pillars beneath it (this figure is taken from
previous work by our group [15]).
(c) DF picture of an 800 nm pillar array after transfer. The dark-field pillar spots on the
flake doesn’t line up with pillar array suggesting that the pillars beneath the flake are broken
or bend as well.
==PAGE:51==
Appendix A.4 Transfer success rates
46
A.4
Transfer success rates
This section contains 550 nm pillar transfers for ”Cleaning method 1” (fig A.4(a)-(d))
and ”Cleaning method 2” (fig A.4(e)-(g)).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure A.4: (a)-(d) 550 nm pillar transfers - Cleaning method 1:
(a)-(b) A transfer to an entire pillar array pre and post CAB removal. (c)-(d) Exfoliated
flakes before and after transfer to a high pitch pillar-array. Both cases show high transfer
success-rates.
(e)-(g) 550 nm pillar transfers - Cleaning method 2:
(e)-(f) Transfer before CAB removal. From the DF picture it is apparent that the flake is
on the pillars. (g) Same flake post CAB removal. The flake is no longer on the pillars.
==PAGE:52==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B - Defect
generation method
This appendix contains plots and descriptions associated with ”Chapter 3” of the
main report.
B.1
Raman peak Silicon
In this section we consider Raman peaks from the substrate of the pillar samples. On
figure B.1(a) we have plotted the the raman peak together with one of the strongest
defect responses. On figure B.1(b) we have plotted the substrate raman peak on the
substrate, on flat hBN and on an hBN ridge.
(a)
(b)
Figure B.1: (a) The substrate Raman peak relative to a strong defect spectra (b) The
substrate Raman peak obtained on clean substrate, flat hBN and an hBN ridge.
==PAGE:53==
Appendix B.2 Raman pillar response
48
B.2
Raman pillar response
In this section we display some of the defect-like raman spectra obtained after ”Clean-
ing method 1” and argon annealing.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure B.2: Cleaning method 1 + Argon annealing.
(a) 550 nm clean pillar area in an array where no transfers has been made. (b) 930 Pillars
around a hBN flake showing defect like spectra. (c) 930 nm clean pillar area in an array
where no transfers has been made.
==PAGE:54==
Appendix B.3 Pre-treatment samples
49
B.3
Pre-treatment samples
In this section we show highlighted spectra from PL maps pre defect generation
treatment, see fig B.3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure B.3: PL maps Pre defect generation treatment.
(a)-(b) 930 nm pillar samples. (c)-(d) 550 nm pillar samples. (e)-(f) 260 nm pillar samples.
==PAGE:55==
Appendix B.4 Irradiated samples
50
B.4
Irradiated samples
In this section we show some of the samples discussed in section 3.2 after irradiation.
On fig B.4(a)-(b) we show highlighted PL spectra from sample ”260nm - Flake 1” and
sample ”930nm - Flake 2”. On figure B.4(c) we show an AFM measurement of the
pierced-through sample ”550nm - Flake 2”.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure B.4: Post irradiation flakes.
(a)-(b) PL map of sample ”260 nm - flake 1” and sample ”930 nm - flake 2”, respectively.
(c) AFM showing that sample ”260 nm - flake 2” has been pierced through after irradiation.
==PAGE:56==
Appendix B.5 Annealed samples
51
B.5
Annealed samples
In this section we show highlighted spectra from PL maps post defect generation
treatment, see fig B.5.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure B.5: PL maps post defect generation treatment.
(a)-(b) 930 nm pillar samples. (c)-(d) 550 nm pillar samples. (e)-(f) 260 nm pillar samples.
==PAGE:57==
Appendix B.6 Raman checks
52
B.6
Raman checks
In this section show comparisons of optical responses using a 515 nm and a 523 nm
excitation laser, see fig B.6.
(a)
(b)
Figure B.6: Excitation using both a 515 nm laser and a 523 nm laser. (a) Spectra from
sample ”260nm - Flake 1”. (b) Background signal (BS) from treated hBN excited on a flat
flake area (in-between pillar)
B.7
Cleaning method 2 - Spectra Test
In this section we show highlighted PL spectra obtained from an exfoliation which
HAS been in contact with CAB (”Exf A12”) and one which HAS NOT (”Exf B12”),
see fig B.7. ”Exf A12” was cleaning using ”Cleaning method 2”.
(a)
(b)
Figure B.7: Post annealing Exfoliations. (a) PL map of exfoliation which has been into
contact with CAB. (b) PL map of exfoliation that has never been into contact with CAB.
==PAGE:58==
APPENDIX C
Appendix C -
Photophysical
measurements
This appendix contains plots and descriptions associated with ”Chapter 3” of the
main report.
C.1
Defect 1
This sections contains measurements on Defect 1. On fig C.1 we have plotted the full
range of the counts vs. time measurement on Defect 1.
Figure C.1: Full range of counts vs time measurement on Defect 1.
==PAGE:59==
Appendix C.2 Defect 2
54
C.2
Defect 2
This sections contains measurements on Defect 2. On figure C.2(a) we have plotted
the PL spectra obtained for Defect 2. On figure C.2(b) we have plotted a spectra
that shows Defect 2 really consist of 2 neighboring defects.
(a)
(b)
Figure C.2: (a) Initial spectra of Defect 2 from PL map. (b) Defect 2 spectra showing a
double ZPL line peak resulting from neighboring defects.
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[1]
P. Kok, W. J. Munro, K. Nemoto, T. C. Ralph, J. P. Dowling, and G. J. Milburn,
“Linear optical quantum computing with photonic qubits,” Reviews of modern
physics, vol. 79, no. 1, p. 135, 2007.
[2]
H.-K. Lo, M. Curty, and K. Tamaki, “Secure quantum key distribution,” Nature
Photonics, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 595–604, 2014.
[3]
T. Northup and R. Blatt, “Quantum information transfer using photons,” Nature
photonics, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 356–363, 2014.
[4]
A. Kuhn, M. Hennrich, and G. Rempe, “Deterministic single-photon source
for distributed quantum networking,” Physical review letters, vol. 89, no. 6,
p. 067901, 2002.
[5]
I. Aharonovich, D. Englund, and M. Toth, “Solid-state single-photon emitters,”
Nature Photonics, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 631–641, 2016.
[6]
T. T. Tran, K. Bray, M. J. Ford, M. Toth, and I. Aharonovich, “Quantum emis-
sion from hexagonal boron nitride monolayers,” Nature nanotechnology, vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 37–41, 2015.
[7]
T. T. Tran, C. Elbadawi, D. Totonjian, C. J. Lobo, G. Grosso, H. Moon, D. R.
Englund, M. J. Ford, I. Aharonovich, and M. Toth, “Robust multicolor sin-
gle photon emission from point defects in hexagonal boron nitride,” ACS nano,
vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 7331–7338, 2016.
[8]
M. Fischer, J. Caridad, A. Sajid, S. Ghaderzadeh, M. Ghorbani-Asl, L. Gam-
melgaard, P. Bøggild, K. S. Thygesen, A. Krasheninnikov, S. Xiao, et al., “Con-
trolled generation of luminescent centers in hexagonal boron nitride by irradia-
tion engineering,” Science Advances, vol. 7, no. 8, p. eabe7138, 2021.
[9]
C. Li, N. Mendelson, R. Ritika, Y. Chen, Z.-Q. Xu, M. Toth, and I. Aharonovich,
“Scalable and deterministic fabrication of quantum emitter arrays from hexagonal
boron nitride,” Nano Letters, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 3626–3632, 2021.
[10] W. Wang and X. Ma,
“Strain-induced trapping of indirect excitons in
mose2/wse2 heterostructures,” ACS Photonics, vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 2460–2467, 2020.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
56
[11] S. F. Lee and M. A. Osborne, “Brightening, blinking, bluing and bleaching in
the life of a quantum dot: friend or foe?,” ChemPhysChem, vol. 10, no. 13,
pp. 2174–2191, 2009.
[12] Z. Cui, A. J. Oyer, A. J. Glover, H. C. Schniepp, and D. H. Adamson, “Large
scale thermal exfoliation and functionalization of boron nitride,” Small, vol. 10,
no. 12, pp. 2352–2355, 2014.
[13] M. Tajima, “Characterization of semiconductors by photoluminescence mapping
at room temperature,” Journal of Crystal Growth, vol. 103, no. 1-4, pp. 1–7,
1990.
[14] M. Fox, Quantum optics: an introduction, vol. 15. OUP Oxford, 2006.
[15] N. Enggren, “Investigation of transfer methods of two-dimensional materials on
top of silicon dioxide nanopillars,” tech. rep., Technical University of Denmark,
June 2021.
[16] J. Roulund, “Exploration of photophysical properties of quantum emitters in
hexagonal boron nitride,” tech. rep., Technical University of Denmark, June
2021.
[17] C. Gerry, P. Knight, and P. L. Knight, Introductory quantum optics. Cambridge
university press, 2005.
[18] L. Martínez, T. Pelini, V. Waselowski, J. Maze, B. Gil, G. Cassabois, and
V. Jacques, “Eﬀicient single photon emission from a high-purity hexagonal boron
nitride crystal,” Physical review B, vol. 94, no. 12, p. 121405, 2016.
[19] L. Yao-Yi, C. Mu-Tian, Z. Hui-Jun, L. Shao-Ding, and W. Qu-Quan, “Second-
order correlation function of the photon emission from a single quantum dot,”
Chinese Physics Letters, vol. 22, no. 11, p. 2960, 2005.
[20] P. Grünwald, “Effective second-order correlation function and single-photon de-
tection,” New Journal of Physics, vol. 21, no. 9, p. 093003, 2019.
[21] M. Fox, Optical Properties of Solids, vol. 3. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[22] C. Hepp, T. Müller, V. Waselowski, J. N. Becker, B. Pingault, H. Sternschulte,
D. Steinmüller-Nethl, A. Gali, J. R. Maze, M. Atatüre, et al., “Electronic struc-
ture of the silicon vacancy color center in diamond,” Physical Review Letters,
vol. 112, no. 3, p. 036405, 2014.
[23] D. Evans, A. G. McGlynn, B. M. Towlson, M. Gunn, D. Jones, T. E. Jenkins,
R. Winter, and N. R. Poolton, “Determination of the optical band-gap energy of
cubic and hexagonal boron nitride using luminescence excitation spectroscopy,”
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 20, no. 7, p. 075233, 2008.
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
57
[24] N. Mendelson, D. Chugh, J. R. Reimers, T. S. Cheng, A. Gottscholl, H. Long,
C. J. Mellor, A. Zettl, V. Dyakonov, P. H. Beton, et al., “Identifying carbon
as the source of visible single-photon emission from hexagonal boron nitride,”
Nature Materials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 321–328, 2021.
[25] J. P. Russell, “Raman scattering in silicon,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 6, no. 11,
pp. 223–224, 1965.
[26] S. Reich, A. Ferrari, R. Arenal, A. Loiseau, I. Bello, and J. Robertson, “Resonant
raman scattering in cubic and hexagonal boron nitride,” Physical Review B,
vol. 71, no. 20, p. 205201, 2005.
[27] R. ’for Life, “Silicon oxide raman spectrum,” February 2022.
[28] T. Vogl, G. Campbell, B. C. Buchler, Y. Lu, and P. K. Lam, “Fabrication and
deterministic transfer of high-quality quantum emitters in hexagonal boron ni-
tride,” ACS Photonics, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 2305–2312, 2018.
[29] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D.-e. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V.
Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov, “Electric field effect in atomically
thin carbon films,” science, vol. 306, no. 5696, pp. 666–669, 2004.
[30] T. Vogl, M. W. Doherty, B. C. Buchler, Y. Lu, and P. K. Lam, “Atomic local-
ization of quantum emitters in multilayer hexagonal boron nitride,” Nanoscale,
vol. 11, no. 30, pp. 14362–14371, 2019.
[31] I. Renge, “Impurity spectroscopy in glasses and disordered crystals: inhomo-
geneous broadening and electron phonon coupling,” Journal of luminescence,
vol. 128, no. 3, pp. 413–420, 2008.
[32] X. Xu, Z. O. Martin, D. Sychev, A. S. Lagutchev, Y. P. Chen, T. Taniguchi,
K. Watanabe, V. M. Shalaev, and A. Boltasseva, “Creating quantum emitters in
hexagonal boron nitride deterministically on chip-compatible substrates,” Nano
Letters, vol. 21, no. 19, pp. 8182–8189, 2021.
[33] G. Ulu, A. Sergienko, and M. Ünlü, “Influence of hot-carrier luminescence
from avalanche photodiodes on time-correlated photon detection,” Optics Let-
ters, vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 758–760, 2000.
