==PAGE:1==
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random
Number Generation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
Master Thesis
March, 2022
By
Zhengzhong Sun
Technical University of Denmark
Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been working on over five months at DTU Compute of the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark, in fulfilment of requirements for achieving an M.Sc. in Computer
Science and Engineering.
The thesis was conducted during the period between October 2021 and March 2022 with
an assigned workload of 30 ECTS credits.
The thesis was conducted under the supervision of Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor
and Weiyang Chiu, PhD at DTU Compute.
Zhengzhong Sun ­ s192218
Signature
Date
11­March­2022
ii
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Blockchain, originally comes from the Bitcoin, is a distributed ledger technology which
maintains a continuously growing data structure linked by blocks. Due to its decentraliza­
tion, immutability and transparency, this technology has brought revolutionary changes
to peer to peer network. It has been the solution not only for the finance but also for
health, food, business cooperation and so on. The consensus mechanism is the funda­
mental logic for blockchain concerning how the nodes in the distributed network reach
the agreement on block validation and update. Consensus algorithm plays an important
role in scalability, reliability, performance and security and is also a popular direction of
research. The limitation of consensus algorithm could lead blockchain to suffer from low
efficiency, waste of energy, unfairness, etc. There is no any algorithm suitable for all
scenarios. Therefore, this thesis is focused on consortium chain and proposed a new
consensus algorithm. This algorithm is a voting based algorithm, the consensus requires
votes of majority. To reduce the risk of faulty leader node, we separate the rights of block
packing and validation into different roles. Due to the unpredictability and low compu­
tation cost of random number generation, the leader election process will run in a fair
competition environment. Compared to mainstream consortium algorithms like PBFT, it
is more scalable and efficient in message passing. It also provides both crash tolerance
and byzantine tolerance.
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Zhengzhong Sun,MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
I would like to thank my supervisor,Weizhi Meng and his PhD student, Weiyang Chiu for
their help and advice in this project.
I would also thank DTU Compute for providing me sufficient resources and convenience
during the whole MSc programme.
iv
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Blockchain overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Development of Consensus Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Related Work
11
2.1
More derivatives of PBFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Design of RNBFT
15
3.1
Algorithm Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Role Model Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Adversary Model and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Consensus of Leader Election
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Consensus of Term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.6
Consensus of Producing Blocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.7
Crash Tolerance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.8
Byzantine Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.9
Dynamic identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.10 Incentive Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Evaluation and Analysis
29
4.1
Probability Analysis of Random Table
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Communication Complexity and Scalability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Safety and Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Drawbacks and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Blockchain overview
Origin.Since Bitcoin [1] was proposed by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008, the digital cryptocur­
rency has experienced rapidly development in recent years. Compared to the traditional
financial system, it no longer relies on a single third party to store and validate the transac­
tions, which leads to the low efficiency and trust. As the fundamental technology behind
the digital cryptocurrency, blockchain has continuously received intensive attention from
scholars.
Generally, blockchain is considered as specific data structure composed of blocks con­
nected in a chain way and ordered by timestamp. Cryptography is applied to guarantee
the information stored in the blocks will not be tampered and forged. The verification, up­
date, store and transport are based on the distributed network. And the trust relationship
exists between nodes and nodes instead of the third party. Therefore, the decentralization
is achieved. The transaction data stored in blocks is ordered by the time dimension so
that every payment in the system is verifiable and traceable. The verification and update
of new blocks are maintained by all nodes or a group of nodes, and the agreement is
reached by consensus algorithm. Figure1.1 shows a basic framework of blockchain.
Figure 1.1: A basic framework of blockchain
Development.Inspired by Bitcoin and blockchain technology, many variants of cryptocur­
rency have been introduced and released to the public. Ethereum [2] applied a new con­
cept of blockchain called smart contract. It is programmable blockchain where different
small programs could run to manage the the production of digital assets, account control,
etc. Therefore, it is a new blockchain platform based on the blockchain technology and
blockchain assets which allows anyone could build decentralized applications. Similar to
Bitcoin, Ethereum also uses ”Proof of Work” as its consensus mechanism which faces the
same problems:low efficiency and energy consumption. Both of them are public oriented,
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
1
==PAGE:10==
which means the network is dynamic and any person or organization is freely to join and
participate the blockchain activities.
After the popularity of cryptocurrencies, researchers try to explore more potential of blockchain
technology not only in finance but also in many other areas. Hyperledger Fabric [3]is an
open source blockchain project initiated by Linux Foundation with IBM, R3, Intel, etc. It
is a distributed ledger framework intended for developing enterprise applications. Unlike
Ethereum which only supports solidity programming, Hyperledger Fabric supports com­
mon language like Java, Go, Node.js, which means companies could customize their
own smart contract without extra study cost. The consensus mechanism is flexible, for
example, when deployed in a trustworthy environment, byzantine fault tolerance [4] is
considered as unnecessary, crash tolerance is sufficient because of the performance
requirements. Otherwise, PBFT [5] may be a suitable option. However, different from
Bitcoin and Ethereum, nodes need to be authenticated before joining the network, which
is called permissioned network. Nodes in this network are manageable and with iden­
tities, so the incentive mechanism could be eliminated. Nodes do not have to compete
for economic rewards, which is an important reason that the system suffers from network
attack.
As the market value of Bitcoin keeps hitting the new peak in the past two years, cryptocur­
rency has become a hot topic once again among researchers and investors. These digital
currencies are traded and flowed in the online market, but due to their instability, they are
not actually used by the public as a real currency applied in the daily payment. In 2019,
Facebook released their Libra project. They were trying to build a virtual currency pledged
by real world assets. Its credit comes from Facebook and a bunch of financial institutions.
The purpose of Libra is to jump over the traditional payment and combine digital currency
with payment service. Although Libra has not been accepted by the public, it still shows
a possible future of new business revolution.
Categorization.Based on difference of permission mechanisms, blockchain is catego­
rized into three different types. Table 1.1 presents a summary of them.
• Public Chain:Public chain is a fully decentralized chain such as Bitcoin, Ethereum
and other derivatives. It is a permissionless network and open to public, anyone can
join and leave the network freely. The ledger is completely transparent and acces­
sible. Any node can initiate their own transactions and wait until they are written to
the ledger. The validation and update process is finished by all nodes based on the
consensus mechanism. To encourage nodes to maintain the network actively, the
incentive mechanism is applied. Those who makes contribution to community will
be given currencies as their rewards. The consensus algorithms used in this kind
of chain are usually Proof of Work [1] and Proof of Stake.
• Consortium Chain:Consortium chain is considered as ”partially­decentralized”. It
is a permissioned network. Participants are chosen in advance by consortium mem­
bers. The access and update rights are under the rule of the consortium. Relying
on a trustworthy consortium, the extra fee for the transaction will be substantially
reduced. However the data stored in the chain is not complete transparent, which
means privacy of certain information is protected. The net connection is assumed
to be stable so that many high performance consensus algorithms could be applied.
• Private Chain:Private chain is also a permissoned network.The writing permission
is fully under the control of a person or an organization. The reading permission
is open or partially limited. This kind of blockchain is usually applied in internal
2
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:11==
scenarios such as international company, government, etc.
Table 1.1: Blockchain Categorization
Public Chain
Consortium Chain
Private Chain
Centralization
De­Centralized
Muti­Centered
Centralized
Participant
Anyone
Pre_set consortium members
Center controlled members
Consensus
PoW, PoS
PBFT,dBFT,BFT
RAFT
Incentive
Need
Optional
No need
Scale
High
Medium
Low
Application
Bitcoin,Ethereum
R3 Alliance,Hyperledger Fabric
Quorum,Solulab
1.2
Development of Consensus Algorithm
From traditional distributed network to the blockchain, consensus algorithm has always
been a key contribution of research. Given a scenario that nodes are in distributed and
distrust environment, the whole network wants to agree on some value or state to reach
the system consistency, that is the problem solved by consensus algorithm. In blockchain
network, the consensus is more about which node is more qualified to pack and append
new blocks to the chain. Based on this idea, consensus algorithms can be classified as
two different types:Proof­based and voting­based.
Proof­based Consensus Algorithm.The core idea of proof­based algorithm is whenever
a node proposes something in the network in order to reach the consensus, it has to
show something it has or something it has done. There mainly two typical poof­based
algorithms: PoW(proof of workload) and PoS(proof of stake) [6]. PoW was first proposed
by Nakamoto in Bitcoin [1]. In Bitcoin network, nodes keep receiving transactions and
generating new blocks, Bitcoin requires the node to solve a difficult puzzle at the cost
of their computing power. When the new block is ready, there will be some information
stored in the block header including version, pre­hash, Merkle root, difficulty, timestamp
and a nounce as is shown in 1.2. To solve the puzzle, the node has to keep guessing a
nounce so that the SHA256 [7] hash value of the block header should meet the restriction
such as starting with a number of 0s. Due to the mathematical properties of SHA256, it
is extremely hard to guess the correct answer. Therefore, whoever solved the puzzle is
believed to have consumed substantial computing power. As the modern hardware will
gradually become more and more efficient, Bitcoin also designs a mechanism that the
difficulty of the puzzle will increase when more blocks are appended to the chain, which
also requires more consumption of energy. However, it is much easier for other nodes
to verify if the hash value meet the constraint. When a node finds the correct value, it
will broadcast the block to other nodes. The other nodes will stop guessing and verify
the block received. After checking the validity of the block, they will start a new round
of block generation and solve the new puzzle. This is how the nodes in the network
reach consensus on blockchain update and why it is called proof of work. The process of
guessing the nounce is called ”Mining” and the node is called ”miner”. Another importance
part of PoW is the longest chain rule. This situation happens when different nodes find
the correct value before they received the notification of each other. Other nodes will only
accept the first correct block, which leads to different chains in the network known as ”fork
chain”. Then the nodes will keep mining in the fork chains, until one chain is longer than
other chains. The longest fork will be followed as the correct chain.
As a widely accepted and applied protocol in practice, PoW is the most successful algo­
rithm used in public chain. The biggest advantage is its reliability. The incentive mech­
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
3
==PAGE:12==
anism motivates node to work honestly, malicious nodes can not manipulate the chain
unless they have taken more than 51% computing power which is technically possible
but not practical in real life. However, it is also being criticised for its energy waste. After
experiencing blooming development in the past few years, the difficulty of guessing the
correct value has become a very high level, which drives speculators invest more money
on hardware. These high performance devices are wasting billions of dollars of electric­
ity everyday to do ”meaningless” computing. Although Bitcoin is revolutionary financial
innovation, compared to its high market value, it is still considered as a inefficient use of
energy resources [8].
Figure 1.2: Block Header
To address the drawback of energy waste problem, PoS(proof of stake) was proposed. It
represents a class of consensus mechanisms. The basic idea is the chance for a node
to be chosen as the miner is decided by the stake it owns. Whoever has more stake of
currencies will be more possible to win. Different from PoW where new currencies are
exchanged from the energy consumption, PoS is more like using the existing currencies
to produce new currencies. To ensure the fairness, miner nodes will be chosen randomly
after each period of time. The stake seed which decides the possibility is purely based on
the currency stake or together with the ”Coin Age”. ”Coin Age” is how long the coin has
been held by the node.
Although PoS eliminated the energy waste, it also brings new problems. Under this kind
of design, nodes with more coins tend to win more rewards, which means rich nodes will
become richer. Once the super node has more than 51% of coins, it can manipulate the
networks. Therefore the degree of de­centralization is decreased. Another problem is
that no energy waste means no punishment for attack. Without longest chain rule, PoS
can not defend fork problems. If nodes mine new blocks in two different fork chains, both
chains will exist, which leads to more currencies are produced, the value of currency will
decrease. Table 1.2 gives a comparison of PoW and PoS.
Table 1.2: Comparison of PoW and PoS
Consensus
Energy Consumption
Modern Hardware
Fork
Mining Speed
Example
PoW
High
Important
Longest Chain
Low
Bitcoin
PoS
Low
No Need
Hard Chain
Fast
Nextcoin
4
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:13==
There are also some other derivatives based on the proof idea, Vechain [9] introduced
Proof of Authority in its white paper. Proof of Elapsed Time [10] is applied in Hyperledger
Sawtooth project. Dziembowski et al. [11] proposed Proof of Space. In summary, this
group of consensus algorithm all follow the principle that ”miner” node need to prove
something it has or something it has done to other nodes in order to append new blocks
to the chain.
Voting­based consensus Algorithm.On the other hand, voting­based consensus algo­
rithms, follow a completely different idea. To reach the consensus, a proposal will not
be accepted by the system until it is learned by a majority of nodes. This is often imple­
mented by the message passing between nodes. In this situation, the identity of nodes
and stable network connection is very important, which is not suitable for a dynamic and
large scale public chain. Therefore, it is usually applied in a permissoned network. Every
node is involved in the process of consensus. The state change of individual may affect
the consistency of the system. To address this problem, consensus algorithm is designed
to resist two different state change of nodes:
• Nodes may crash
• Nodes may be malicious
Paxos algorithm is the first widely used consensus algorithm and has rigorously proved
to be correct, proposed by Lamport [12, 13]. Nodes in the network are divided into three
roles: Proposers, Acceptor, Learner. A node can have multiple roles.
• Proposer: Make proposal including proposal ID and Proposal Value.
• Acceptor: Receive and vote for the proposal.
• Learner: not involved in voting, only learn the consensus value.
The consensus process includes two phases: Prepare phase and Accept phase. In pre­
pare phase, proposer generates a increased Proposal ID and send to acceptors. Accep­
tors will respond to prepare message and send their promises. Once received majority
of acceptors’ promises, it enters the second phase. Proposer will choose the value of
highest proposal ID and propose the value to acceptors. Acceptors accept the value as
the consensus without breaking the promise and respond to the proposer. At end, when
proposer receives the majority of accept, it will send the value to learners. The whole
consensus process is shown in 1.3
Figure 1.3: Process of Paxos
Due to difficulty to understand and implement of Paxos, Diego et al.[14] proposed RAFT
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
5
==PAGE:14==
algorithm. Unlike Paxos, the consensus is based on replicated state machine. In a cluster
of servers, all the nodes start from the same state and execute the same order of series
of commands. The consensus mainly include two sub processes: Leader Election and
Log Replication. Nodes in the network are also divided to three roles:
• Leader: Leader is responsible for receiving requests from clients and synchronizing
the log replication with followers.
• Follower: Follower accepts and synchronize logs with leader.
• Candidate: Candidate is a temporary role before leader is elected.
The system requires there is only one leader exists, and other nodes are all followers
while system is working normally. The working time is split into increasingly terms. Each
term represents how long has each leader worked. If there is no leader in the term, the
term will end and enter the next term. The leader will send heart beat message regularly
to followers to inform the existence of leader. Once a follower doesn’t receive the heart
beat after a election time period, it will add the current term by one, switch its role as
candidate and initiate a Leader Election process. Candidate first will vote for itself and
sends RequestVote RPC(Remote Procedure Call) [14] to followers. Followers will vote
the first candidate request they received. In this scenario, three situations may happen
as shown in :
• A candidate gets the majority votes of the cluster and become a leader.
• Received other leader’s message and switch its role as follower.
• None of the candidates wins the majority votes, When the election time expires, it
will start another round of leader election.
Figure 1.4: Role State Change in RAFT[14]
Another important consensus process of RAFT is log replication. When the leader starts
working, it will receive the requests from clients. These requests will be stored as log
entries in the leader log. Then leader will send AppendEntry RPC to other severs in
parallel to synchronize the log entries. If one server failed to append the entry, the leader
will keep sending AppendEntry RPC until it eventually replicate the log. After the majority
finishes, leader will execute the log entry in state machine and return the result to the
client. Log Entries are stored with index number and term number. The log replication
ensure two things:
• Any two different log entries with same index and term number stores the same
command. It happens because a leader will create a most one entry a index.
6
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:15==
• Entries are the same before any two different log entries with same index and term
number. It is because the new AppendEntry RPC will include the log entries before
the new entries.
In some rare case like leader crashes may lead to the inconsistency of log replications.
New leader will force the follower to replicate leader’s log to cover its old log. This is
finished by locating where the consistent entry is and cover the log later than that.
Both Paxos and RAFT are widely known and used consensus algorithms, but neither of
them take Byzantine nodes into account. Which means they can only resist node crash
and are not suitable in a network where node may be malicious. “Byzantine General
Problem” is described by Lamport in 1982 [4]. In distributed network, some nodes may
send wrong information, or the message is tampered because of the insecure information
channel, which leads to the nodes get different decisions and break the system consis­
tency.
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance(PBFT) is proposed by Castro et al [5] in 1998. This
algorithm reduces the complexity of original byzantine fault tolerance from exponential to
polynomial, making byzantine fault tolerance applicable in practical systems. Suppose
there are f byzantine nodes in the cluster and the total number of nodes is n, to ensure
the liveness and safety, PBFT requires:n > 3f. Considering that f byzantine nodes may
not send message or send wrong message, the system need to make decisions in n −f
communications, because the system wouldn’t know whether these f nodes are crashed
or byzantine nodes. Since we don’t know how many byzantine nodes are contained in
n −f nodes, we assume it may be the maximum number f. Therefore, to ensure the
decision is made correctly by majority, the good nodes left should be greater than f,
which is n −f −f > f, same as n > 3f. The minimum number of all nodes is n = 3f + 1.
Nodes in PBFT are divided as Primary nodes and Backup nodes. The function of Primary
nodes is similar to the Proposer in Paxos and Leader in RAFT. The process of consensus
mainly include three phases: Pre­prepare, Prepare and Commit. The detailed procedures
can be described as follows(shown in figure 1.5):
• The system choses a primary node in turns(usually based on the index of the de­
vice). Primary node send View­new message to other nodes and synchronize the
information with other replicas.
• The primary receives the request from client, after verification, it will broadcast the
request and send Pre­prepare message to other nodes.
• Backup replicas will verify the validity of Pre­pare message, if it is valid then it will
broadcast Prepare message and store the message in local memory.
• All the nodes will count the Prepare messages of the request, once more than 2f
node finished, it will enter the commit phase and broadcast commit message.
• When received more than 2f commit messages, the state machine will execute the
request and return the result to client.
• If the client received more than f results, it means this request is agreed by the
majority of nodes, the consensus is reached.
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.5: Process of PBFT Consensus[5]
In order to ensure the safety, once primary node has dishonest behaviour and noticed by
the backup node, it will initiate the View­Change process, if the majority(more than 2f)
nodes agree, then the view­change process will be triggered and the new primary node
will be elected. As for the log consistency, different from RAFT which leader will force
followers accept its own logs, PBFT introduces a stable checkpoint mechanism. A stable
checkpoint is a state reached after 2f + 1 nodes has finish the commit phase. When the
primary node went wrong, the new primary node will re­synchronize based on the stable
check point. It also plays an important role in its garbage collection mechanism to save
the storage cost.
Overall, PBFT presents a good solution to byzantine fault tolerance system with n2 com­
munication complexity. It uses encryption techniques including RSA [15], MAC and Mes­
sage Digest to defend spoofing attack and replay attack. The requests from clients are
strictly time sequenced, despite the network change, requests will be execute in time or­
der. However, the bottleneck mainly depends on communication, network delay will affect
the system efficiency. When the nodes are more than 100, the performance will decrease
dramatically, which make it not extensible and not suitable for large scale system.
Table 1.3: Comparison of Paxos, Raft and PBFT
Consensus
Crash Tolerance
Byzantine Tolerance
Scalability
Latency
TPS
Applications
Paxos
Yes
No
High
Low
Medium
Chubby,Zookeeper
RAFT
Yes
No
High
Low
Medium
IPFS
PBFT
Yes
Yes
Low
Low
Low
Hyperledger Fabric
1.3
Contributions
There are mainly three contributions in this thesis:
• Conduct a survey on the state of art of blockchain and consensus algorithms. This
part first comes with the basic introduction of block chain technology including its
origin, development and categorization. Then we presents some of the most clas­
sic consensus algorithms applied in block chain. They are classified as two types:
proof­based and voting­based. Each of them is presented with a short description
with their characteristics.
• Proposed a new consensus algorithm exclusive for perimissioned blockchain.
The new algorithm which we call RNBFT is a voting­based consensus algorithm. It
8
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:17==
is designed for enterprise level block chain solution. The consensus process mainly
includes leader election and block production.
• Evaluated the algorithm ’s scalability, safety and reliability. In this part, we mainly
discussed the random number protocol and communication complexity in mathe­
matical way, which shows it has better performance and scalability compared to
PBFT. Besides, we also assessed the safety and reliability of the algorithm theoret­
ically. In the end, we mentioned the drawbacks and limitations of the algorithm.
1.4
Organizations
The remainder of this thesis organizes as follows:
Chapter 2 presents some further research on consensus algorithms on permissined block
chain.
In Chapter 3, the proposed consensus algorithm based on random number generation is
described in detail.
The evaluations and analysis on this algorithm are presented in Chapter 4.
Chapter 5 conclude the thesis.
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
9
==PAGE:18==
10
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:19==
2
Related Work
2.1
More derivatives of PBFT
dBFT. Delegated Byzantine Fault Tolerant is proposed and applied in NEO blockchain
[16]. As the competitor against Ethereum, NEO’s consensus mechanism is completely
different. dBFT is a derivative of PBFT, and its core strategy is find a balance between
de­centralization and efficiency. The high performance is built at the sacrifice of weak de­
centralization. dBFT divides the nodes into consensus nodes and ordinary nodes. Only
consensus nodes are involved in appending new blocks. n consensus nodes contain a
speaker and n −1 delegates. Delegates take turns to become speaker. The speaker
will propose the new blocks, once at least 2n+1
3
delegates(including speaker) agree the
proposal, the new blocks will be confirmed. The process is irreversible. If the consensus
is not reached or out of time limit, the view change will be initialized.
Normally, the network can reach the consensus efficiently and new blocks have good
finality. However the byzantine tolerance is still n = 3f + 1 among consensus nodes. Its
safety is not as good as PoW(50%). Besides, dBFT is often doubt as too centralized, the
consensus nodes are static and completely controlled by the deployer.
RBFT. RBFT is proposed by Aublin et.al [17] in 2013. It is pointed out the primary replica
which decides the order of processing the request could be smartly malicious. Which
means, the primary node may degrade the performance intentionally while not be de­
tected. RBFT is designed to address this problem and improve the system robustness.
Same as PBFT, the adversary model is n = 3f + 1. Each node runs multiple instances of
BFT protocol in parallel. Each instance has its own primary replica and backup replica.
Among them there is only one instance called master instance will eventually be executed
effectively. The rest instances are used to compare the throughput they achieve to that
achieved by master instance. If the performance of master instance is slow, the primary
node will be considered as suspicious.
Figure 2.1: RBFT overview(f = 1) [17]
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.2: RBFT communication process [17]
As shown in Figure 2.2, an extra round of communication is executed before the pre­
pare phase. The propagate process is to make sure all correct nodes will forwarded the
requests into next phase. Then it will enter a 3­phase PBFT protocol. The monitoring
mechanism is implemented in each node. To detect the malicious of instance, nodes will
compare the throughput counter periodically to a threshold and reset the counter. As a re­
sult, the RBFT improves the robustness and safety of PBFT but sacrifice the performance
and efficiency.
EPBFT. Based on dBFT, EPBFT makes further improvements which is proposed by Li
et.al [18] in 2019. Similar to dBFT, the consensus is also finished by a group of nodes
instead of all the nodes. But unlike the pre­set delegates in dBFT, the consensus nodes is
chosen by a random, secret but verifiable way, which is Verifiable Random function [19].
In each round of view change, the latest block height will become the common input, each
node will generate a random value based on the input and its secret key. If the random
value is less than the threshold, it will become the consensus node in this view. In this
case, not only the fairness, secrecy and verifiability are ensured but also the efficiency of
view change is improved.
Figure 2.3: EPBFT communication process [18]
The communication complexity of EPBFT is also simplified. Li [18] assumes the network
is stable most of time, especially in consortium chain. So the additional round communi­
cation of confirmation could be in ignored unless it is triggered by a timeout. As is shown
in 2.3, in an ideal situation, the consensus of a block could be reached after Prepare­1
and Commit­1 phase. If not, another 2 rounds of communication will run, which is the orig­
12
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:21==
inal PBFT. If the consensus is still not reached before t2, it will initialize the view change
protocol. Through this mechanism, the performance depends on the quality of consen­
sus nodes. As the chance to be elected is fair,if the primary node is byzantine node, the
performance will be punished by extra rounds of communication and timeout, if not, the
performance is better than PBFT.
QPBFT. Proposed by zhang et.al [20] in 2020, QPBFT is more focused on the safety and
reliability of nodes. In stead of simply judge the nodes as trustworthy or not, they proposed
a comprehensive evaluation mechanism to assess the attributes of nodes. The attributes
are mainly quantified in two main dimensions and several second level attributes, Which
is shown in table 2.1. Some of the attributes can be tested and other will be scored after
working for a while. Eventually, each node will have a score, those with low scores will
be isolated from consensus process. In this case, the safety and reliability of the system
is improved by nodes who are assessed as more trustworthy.
Table 2.1: Attribute table [20]
First­level attribute
Second­level attribute
Normalized value
bit error rate A11
a1
Security A1
abnormal data ratio A12
a2
identity fraud ratio A13
a3
transmission success rate A21
a4
Availability A2
available storage capacity ratio A22
a5
processor utilization A23
a6
To improve the performance and scalability of the system, QPBFT also adopted group
strategy. The nodes are divided into four groups:voters, managers, candidates and ordi­
naries. The consensus of block production only includes nodes with higher trust level.
2.2
Comparison
Table 2.2: A Comparison of Voting­Based Consensus
Consensus
Fault Tolerance
Scalability
Throughput
Communication Complexity
Paxos
n = 2f + 1
High
Medium
O(n2)
RAFT
n = 2f + 1
High
Medium
O(n)
PBFT
n = 3f + 1
Low
Low
O(n2)
dBFT
n = 3f + 1
High
High
O(n2)
RBFT
n = 3f + 1
Low
High
O(n3)
EPBFT
n = 3f + 1
High
High
O(n2)
QPBFT
n = 3f + 1
High
High
O(n2)
Table 2.2 presents a basic comparison of all voting­based consensus algorithms men­
tioned in this thesis. In general, there is not a perfect solution to ensure safety, efficiency
and liveness at the same time. Under different conditions, one or two of them will be sac­
rificed to enforce the other. Our goal in this thesis is to propose a balanced consensus
mechanism suitable for enterprise blockchain.
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
13
==PAGE:22==
14
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:23==
3
Design of RNBFT
3.1
Algorithm Motivation
3.1.1
Why we chose consortium chain
Public chain, as a dynamic and fully de­centralized network, is widely used in cryptocur­
rencies. The consensus algorithms of public chain are usually proof based and have
different limitations such as energy waste, inefficiency, unfairness, etc. The low lovel of
trust and complete freedom make it hard applied into business cooperation. Consortium
chain, as a compromise solution, is become more popular in enterprise level applications.
In fact, many financial giants have already join the R3 CEV [21] blockchain, seeking for
the potential of blockchian technology.
3.1.2
What are the problems of voting­based algorithm
The consensus mechanisms used in consortium chains are usually voting­based which
rely on message passing. To defend byzantine nodes, it usually requires multiple rounds
of message communication. Thus the scalability and communication complexity are
often the bottleneck of the performance. To address these two problems and inspired
by Chiu’s idea in his NoPKI [22] project, a new consensus algorithm based on random
generation(RNBFT) is proposed in this thesis.
3.2
Role Model Design
Suppose several companies cooperate together to provide services, there are data like
transaction records shared by all members in the group. They decide to construct a con­
sortium chain to share the data and also provide services to their clients. However, all of
them stands for their own interests. To ensure the safety, nobody is willing to let another
company in control of maintaining the blockchain. Instead, their decide to hire a profes­
sional team to work for them. They work like the ”miners” in Bitcoin which are responsible
for producing blocks. The members of this group are pre­chosen by the companies to­
gether. The writing rights of blocks are handed over from the company members to the
”miners”. But they still have the rights of verifying the blocks. Following this idea, the roles
design of PNBFT can be described as follows:
• Voter: The voters are the nodes representing high trust level nodes which are re­
sponsible for verifying the validity of the blocks. Block will not be appended unless
the majority of voters agrees. Voters also have the rights to initialize the leader
election when perceiving fault behaviours of the leader. If a follower or leader has
dishonest behaviour, the voter could eliminate the node out the next round of con­
sensus. Meanwhile, a new node could participate in follower group under the per­
mission of voters. Which gives the dynamic extensibility of the network.
• Leader: Leader is elected by random number generation protocol from followers.
When it is working, it keeps packing the transaction records from the ”transaction
pool” into blocks and send them to voter. After receiving the majority votes, leader
will append the block to the blockchain and synchronize with other nodes.
• Follower:Follower represents a group of nodes who specialize producing blocks.
They are candidates of the leader. They also maintain the ”transaction pool”. When
the new block is appended, the relevant transactions will be cleared in their pool. As
the peer competitor with the leader, they also monitor the behaviour of the leader.
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
15
==PAGE:24==
The whole follower team are hired to work for the consortium chain, it means the
writing right of block chain is separated into voting and executive rights, which en­
sures the safety and decentralization of the system.
• Ordinary Nodes: Ordinary nodes don’t participate in consensus process, they sim­
ply help forward the message in the network. Thus, they are free to join and exit the
network.
Figure 3.1: Role Model in the network
Figure 3.2: Role design in the network
16
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Adversary Model and Assumptions
In the consortium chain network, As the core nodes in the highest trust level, we assume
that voter nodes are deployed in a safe environment. The devices used are high perfor­
mance and reliable. The information channel between voter nodes are stable. Therefore,
for voters, we assume there will not be byzantine nodes among voters, we only need
to consider the crash tolerance. Because of the reliable information channel, once the
message is sent from a voter to another voter, it will not be lost, eventually it will arrive.
Follower nodes, as an external team hired, their trust level is lower than the voters. We
assume that followers may be attacked and manipulated. Considering the byzantine fault
situation, the follower’s behaviour may be arbitrary. It might send misdirecting information
during the consensus process. The information channel is also not so reliable, so the
message may be lost.
As it is a permissioned network, all the nodes except for ordinary users are with identity.
We assume the cryptography is applied to guarantee the reliability of messages. It is
reasonable to believe all messages will not be tampered. All the assumptions are listed
as follows:
• A1: Voters may crash but not become byzantine nodes.
• A2: Followers(including leader) may crash or be byzantine nodes.
• A3: Messages between voters will not be lost.
• A4: Messages sent by followers(including leader) may be lost.
• A5: All message will not be forged or tampered.
To better illustrate the the algorithm,3.1 shows some notations and their meaning used in
this thesis.
Table 3.1: Notations used in the thesis
Notations
Meaning
N
The number of total nodes in the network
Nf
The number of followers in the network
Nv
The number of voters in the network
No
The number of ordinary users in the network
R
The range of random number generated by followers
Rij
The random number generated by followers i for follower j
rij
New random number calculated by voters based on Rij
S
The random seed used by voter
St
The random seed used in t rounds of consensus
3.4
Consensus of Leader Election
3.4.1
Initialization of Leader Election
Similar to RAFT, the consensus process starts with a leader election. The leader election
is initialized by voters. The existence of leader is sensed through the heart beat sending
to voters. From the perspective of voters, the leader election process will be triggered in
several cases:
• No leader is working;
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
17
==PAGE:26==
• Current leader crashes;
• Leader is not working properly;
• Leader’s term is over;
When any of situations happens and is perceived by the voter, it will broadcast the leader
election message with term number to all followers and other voters. Other voters will not
do the same thing if they receive this message. Noticed according to assumption A4 that
the heartbeat sent to a voter may be lost. If it happens, for a voter, it is reasonable to
believe the information channel is not reliable anymore and it will initialize a new round
of leader election. The messages sent to other voters aims to reduce the communication
complexity, which will lead to the network congestion.
3.4.2
Random Number Generation
All the followers are involved in the leader election. Instead of voting for each other di­
rectly, we proposed a random number generation mechanism to eliminate the possible
circumstance that no one gets the majority votes. Each node only needs to generate a
round of random number, then the leader will be decided. All followers share the same
possibility to be elected as the leader.
In each round of leader election, the random number is generated as following rule: Every
follower generates a sequence of random numbers out of range R for all the followers
including itself. The range R could be a very big number. Thus, each follower is linked to
a specific random number. Then it broadcast the random number sequence to all voter
nodes in the network. Therefore, ideally all the voter nodes will received a table storing
all the random numbers produced by followers. The table size will be Nf ∗Nf.
Algorithm 1 Random Number Generation
1: Initialization:R[Nf]
2: for i = 1 →Nf do
3:
R[Nf] = Random(R)
4: end for
5: return R[Nf]
3.4.3
Choose the Leader
After initializing of the leader election, each voter will set a timer and wait for the random
numbers sent from followers. Noticed that there might be more one voter broadcast the
leader election message before receiving the notification. So all the voters will update their
timer with earliest timestamp. Considering that followers may crash or messages may be
lost(Assumption A2,A4), the random number in the table may be incomplete. When the
voter senses the timer is up, later message will not be accepted. However to keep the
consistency of random table between voters, we ask voters to synchronize the random
table whenever it receives new random numbers. After the timers is up, all the nodes will
make decision. As is shown in figure 3.3
18
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3: Timing to make the decision
Voters together maintain a pre­set sequences of small numbers, we call them the ”Ran­
dom Seeds” notated by S. Random seeds are not known to followers. For each round of
leader election consensus, a random seed St will be picked out of S. After the random
table is determined, voters calculate new random number rij by eq. (3.1):
rij
=
Rij
mod
St
(3.1)
Once has finished pre­processing the random number table, the voters will start to count
the frequency of the appearance of each random number. We define the random number
that a follower generates for itself is the ”vote base”. If any other follower generated the
same random number, the votes for this follower is added by one. Whoever gets the
highest votes will become the leader, as shown in follows:
Algorithm 2 Choose leader in an ideal situation
1: Input: r[Nf][Nf], Nf
2: Initialization:f, leader, V [Nf]
3: for i = 1 →Nf do
4:
for j = 1 →Nf do
5:
if r[i][j] = r[i][i] then
6:
Vi + +
7:
end if
8:
end for
9:
if Vi > f then
10:
Leader = i
11:
f = Vi
12:
end if
13: end for
14: return leader
Table 3.2: An example of random number table
Node 1
3
2
1
3
2
Node 2
1
2
3
3
1
Node 3
2
3
2
2
2
Node 4
1
2
2
3
3
Node 5
2
1
3
3
1
Table 3.2 shows an example of the random number table, which the number of followers
is 5 and the random seed S is 3. In this example, Node 4 gets the highest votes from
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
19
==PAGE:28==
other nodes and will become the leader in this round of leader election. However, it is
the ideal situation. As mentioned above, the random number table may be incomplete.
In this case, the relevant node will get 0 votes and it is impossible to be elected as the
leader. The lost or expired random numbers may affect the election result, but without
them, voters are still able to choose the leader from the remaining table. And the rest
followers still share the same chance to win.
Another important situation to deal with is when there are more than one node get the high­
est votes in the table. In order to reduce the communication complexity, voters still need
to make decisions based on the table without further message passing. Here, we propose
a simple solution to determine the leader: We add up the random numbers generated by
the followers who get the highest votes, and modulo the number of these followers. For
example, there are 3 nodes who get the most votes: node 3, node 8, node 12. Their
random number generated for themselves are 47, 29 and 78.(R is 100). Then we get
result 1 calculated by eq. (3.2). Therefore, node 8 will become the leader. Otherwise, if
the result is 0 or 2 the leader will be node 3 or node 12. Due to unpredictability of random
numbers, random seed and number of followers share highest votes, the fairness to be
elected as leader is guaranteed. Even some nodes may be byzantine nodes, there is
no way for them to raise their chance to be elected as leader through making up some
special random numbers. The possibility of a byzantine node to be elected only depends
on how many byzantine nodes in followers instead of their behaviours during the leader
election process.
(47 + 29 + 78)
mod
3
=
1
(3.2)
Once the leader is determined, voters will send their votes to the leader. Meanwhile the
voter will synchronize with other voters with time when they send their vote. Voters will
receive the time when other voters send their leader votes. When knowing the majority
of voters’ sending time, voter will choose the latest time as the starting time and wait for
the leader’s notification within time Tw. The reason to do that is the follower node who is
chosen as the leader may crash during this period. Voters expect the leader will response
to them after knowing the more than half of voters have sent their votes. However, if the
leader indeed crashes, voters will not receive the response before time Tw expires, it is
believed this round of leader election is not qualified and a new round of leader election will
be initialized. Figure 3.4 and Figure 3.5 show the difference of message passing between
successful leader election and leader crash situation.
20
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.4: Communication of a successful Leader Election
Figure 3.5: Communication of When leader fails during election
3.5
Consensus of Term
Term is used as the logical clock in the network. It is a increasing monotonically number
maintained by all the nodes in the blockchain. Each term starts with a round of leader
election. Notice that some nodes may crash in some time, which lead current term stored
in nodes are different. We require term information is exchanged whenever nodes is
communicating. The nodes with lower term will update to highest term.
Term is also associated with the ”random seeds”, as mentioned the in section 3.3, vot­
ers maintain a sequence of random seeds to pre­process the random number table. The
index of the random seed is the term number. By knowing the term of the leader elec­
tion process, voter will apply the same random seed to decide the election result. The
consistency of leader result in same term is ensured, as is shown in Figure 3.6.
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.6: Term and Random Seed
Since followers are a team which specializes producing blocks. The system have the
performance requirements for them. The leader is required to produce a certain number
blocks of during a time threshold. If the leader is working properly and meet the system
requirements, the voters tend to keep trusting the leader unless the leader do something
wrong or its performance goes down. In this case, the voter will add current term by
one and initialize a new round leader election. Then it is possible that more than one
voter broadcast leader election message with the same term or different terms. All the
nodes are asked to follow one rule: Respond and update the higher term, reject the lower
term than local term. The safety is guaranteed by the assumption that voters are always
trustworthy and the followers have no influence on the term number.
For voters, if a voter receives two different leader election message with the same term
number, then it will set the timer with the earliest timestamp and update its local term. If
it receives a higher term number while the current leader election is not finished, it will
abandon the previous data and enter new leader election process. For followers, they
will not generate random numbers again if it receives multiple leader election messages
with the same term. When a new election message with higher comes, it simply need to
generate random numbers for the new term.
3.6
Consensus of Producing Blocks
After a successful round of leader election, the system reaches a consensus about which
node wins the right to pack blocks. Then the leader starts to produce blocks as the fol­
lowing steps:
22
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.7: The generation process of a valid block
1. All the nodes(except ordinary users) can generate transaction records and send
them to other nodes with their signature. Meanwhile, they also receive transaction
data from other nodes. The will verify the validity of these data. If valid, they will be
maintained in their local ”Transaction Pool” and broadcast to other nodes.
2. Leader keeps taking out the transaction records ordered by timestamp and pack
them into blocks.
3. Leader send the prepared blocks to voters with its signature attached.
4. When Voters receive the blocks from the leader, they will do the final round of ver­
ification of these blocks. If voters believe the block is valid, they will return theirs
signatures of this block to the leader.
5. If the leader collects more than half signatures from voters on a block, it will append
the block to the blockchain and synchronize with all the nodes in the network.
6. All the nodes will verify the new block in the chain by checking the signature list in
the latest block, as is shown in figure 3.8. If it contains the majority of voters, they
accept the synchronization, otherwise it will report the leader’s (Who is not voter but
signed the block) behaviour to voters.
7. After the synchronization of new blocks, all the nodes will remove the relevant trans­
action data in their local ”Transaction Pool”.
8. Repeat from step 1
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.8: block header
Above discussed the process of appending a new valid block to the chain. It is also pos­
sible that the new block is not accepted by the majority of voters. In this case, voters will
record this unsuccessful verification locally. If this happens more than pre­set threshold,
the voter will initialize new a round of leader election. From the perspective of system, it
is tolerable for leader to produce some invalid blocks. However,if it is more frequent than
the threshold, the voters have reason to believe the leader is not working honestly, then
its leader identity will be abolished.
3.7
Crash Tolerance
As mentioned in section 3.2, all the nodes in the network may crash at some time. The
system can be divided to two states: consensus of leader election and consensus of block
generation. Any node is in either state. Therefore the possible situations can be described
as follows:
Follower Crash.
• Follower crashes during the leader election: If a follower crashes at this time, it will
lead to the incomplete random number table. From the perspective of followers, this
behaviour will affect the result which is supposed to be. However, without crashed
follower’s random numbers, voters are still able to make decisions for the left follow­
ers. Therefore, the follower’s crash only eliminate his own chance to be elected as
the leader. According the voters’ decision rule, the normal followers still the share
the same possibility to win the election. From the perspective of the whole system,
the follower’s crash is harmless and will not affect the consistency of the leader elec­
tion. However, this behaviour will be noticed by the voters, for voters, the crashing
node is not trustworthy any more, so its identity will be abolished temporary.
• Follower crashes while leader is working: In this period, followers are not involved
in the consensus of block generation and verification. They may be generating
transaction data, synchronizing the blockchain and forwarding messages. Neither
of them will affect the consensus process of new block generation.
Leader Crash. Leader may only crash when it is working. The connection between voters
and leader is linked by leader’s heart beat. If leader crashes, the it will be perceived by
voters and a new round of leader election will be triggered. New leader will be elected
and the liveness of the system will be not affected.
24
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:33==
Voter Crash.
• Voter crashes during the leader election: If a voter crashes at this time, it will not be
able make the decision on the leader election. As the leader requires the majority
votes from votes to win the election, so the crash of voters may affect the result of
leader election. So the crash tolerance for voters is less than half of the total voters.
• Voter crashes while leader is working: Same as above, the crashing voter also
affects the verification of new blocks. The system consensus will not be broke unless
half of voters are all down.
3.8
Byzantine Tolerance
As we assumed in section 3.2, we need to consider the byzantine nodes possibly existing
in follower nodes. To ensure the safety and defend byzantine nodes, we require follower
nodes to monitor the behaviour each other. For a follower, other followers are its competi­
tors, in order to increase its own chance to become the leader, it is motivated to supervise
the followers’ behaviours. If a follower notice some bad behaviour of another node, it will
report to the voters, if it is confirmed as true, the identity of the follower will be revoked. If
it is leader, new leader election will be initialized.
Here are some potential byzantine situations￿
• Byzantine node becomes the leader. As we designed, leader only own the right
of producing blocks, new blocks still require the verification from voters. So if the
byzantine leader work properly to maintain the leadership, then it is no difference
with the good leader and it is harmless to the system. If the byzantine leader doesn’t
work properly, for example, don’t produce blocks or produce invalid blocks, all these
will be captured by the voters. In this case, its identity as the leader will be revoked.
Therefore, if the byzantine node becomes the leader, it may affect the system per­
formance temporary until a new no­byzantine leader is elected. But the safety and
consistency of blockchain will not be invaded.
• Follower node is byzantine node. During leader election process, all followers
are involved and required to generate random numbers. If the byzantine node don’t
participate in this process, on one hand, it will not be elected as the leader and
its identity will be revoked, on the other hand, the the good nodes’ will have more
chance to win the election. So the byzantine node tend to be involved in leader
election process. The random numbers may be generated intentionally instead of
randomly, however, due to unpredictability of other random numbers and the ran­
dom seed used in this election, it may change the result which is supposed to be,
but it is not in favor of byzantine nodes, the chance to win is still equal to every
follower. Furthermore, byzantine node can not send different random numbers to
different nodes to interfere the consistency of random table, because voters will
keep exchanging the random table information, it is even easier to be recognized
as byzantine node. All these constraints and limitations make it difficult to impact
the leader election process, it is more advantageous to do the ”right” thing, at least
it may have the chance to work as a leader and earn some salaries.
When there is a leader is working, as a follower, byzantine nodes are not involved in
producing blocks. It either act like it is crashed or send dishonest message to other
nodes. As all message are signed, this behaviour may be noticed by other followers
and reported to voters. So the only thing for a byzantine node to do is to become lazy
and passive. It only affects the system performance when a considerable number
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
25
==PAGE:34==
of nodes are lazy byzantine nodes, which will not affect the safety and liveness of
the system.
• Group of byzantine nodes collude together. Suppose a group of byzantine fol­
lowers want to raise the possibility that one of them to be elected as the leader.
They might produce some random number for the same node. For the voters, it is
hard to identify whether the random number from a follower is genuinely random.
To address this problem, the random range R could by set as a very large num­
ber, then the possibility for two nodes to generate the same random number for the
same node could be very high( 1
R2 ). If it did happens, the chance is only raised a
little bit,but the node may be considered suspicious. With the further constraints for
leader, this situation could be ignored.
3.9
Dynamic identities
To prevent the byzantine nodes and crashing nodes to participate the consensus process,
we proposed a mechanism to dynamically change the identities of the follower nodes. As
mentioned above, several situations may lead followers not trustworthy to voters. From
the perspective of voters, if the dishonest or crash events are noticed and confirmed by
the voter, then the identity as a follower will not be accepted by the voter. Meanwhile,
the voter will inform other voters the revocation of follower’s identity. As the voters are
trustworthy, this proposal doesn’t need the approval of the majority.
All the voters will maintain a identity list including all the followers in the network. If the
crash event is confirmed by a voter, the state of follower in its local list will marked as
”crashed”. Then the voter will broadcast this information to all other voters to update their
identity list. If the crash node rejoin the network, it will inform the voters to update their lists
and cancel the ”crashed” mark. If this process happens while a leader is working, then
it makes no difference to the system. However, if it happens during the leader election,
like mentioned above, there will still be a leader elected. The identity list will be updated
though. If the leader crashes, then same thing will be done, but the new round of leader
election will be based on the current identity list, which means only active followers are
allowed to join the leader election. Ideally, without byzantine nodes, voters can make the
decision quickly before the waiting timer expires. Figure 3.9 shows the identity list update
for a node crash and rejoin the network.
Figure 3.9: identity list change for a node crash
26
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:35==
If a byzantine node is found and confirmed by the voter, this node will be excluded in the
network. Not only its identity will be marked in the list, but also the voter will broadcast
to all the nodes in the network, as shown in figure 3.10. Whichever node receives this
information will reject all the messages comes from that node.
Figure 3.10: identity list change for a byzantine node
3.10
Incentive Mechanism
To motivate the follower work honestly and prevent them from acting lazily, an incentive
mechanism should be built. Unlike in some cyptocurrencies that miners are rewarded
with coins for producing new blocks, the followers are granted with salaries. Suppose the
consortium chain is founded by several companies. Each of them is represented by the
voter in the network. They have already invested a lot money on the high performance
device and stable information channel for voter nodes. When the scale of the network
grow larger, it is not economic to invest and maintain more nodes like voter nodes. So
they decide to form a fund together. The followers are employed and paid with salaries.
As only one node will become the leader and produce new blocks, it is not fair to concen­
trate all salary on the leader. That would be a game completely depends on luck. A more
reasonable way is to assess node’s work based on new block. A certain amount of salary
will be reward for a new block. All the nodes including the leader who is the producer and
other nodes who generates transaction data in this block will get proportional shares.
Through this mechanism, both honest nodes and byzantine nodes tend not to be lazy.
Although their laziness may lead to the decrease of leader’s performance and a new
round of leader election, but it doesn’t increase the chance to be elected as the leader to
earn more salary but face the risk of losing the salary of generating transaction data.
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
27
==PAGE:36==
28
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:37==
4
Evaluation and Analysis
4.1
Probability Analysis of Random Table
During the leader election consensus, the leader is determined based on the frequency
of random numbers. It is easy to know that all the followers share the same possibility to
become the leader. However, from the perspective of voters, they don’t care who wins
the election but care if there is any node win. Following the decision rule in section 3.3,
we know eventually there will be a leader to be chosen. But voters want to make the
decision easier, which means we expect there will be only one node wins the random
number competition. The situation more than one nodes get the highest votes happens
less frequently because the voter will have to do extra calculation in this case. So we want
to figure out how much chance these situations may happen. Besides, it also important
for the voters to chose the proper random seeds.
Suppose n nodes are involved in the process, the probability of a follower to become
leader P(L)
PL(i)
=
1
n
,
i ∈n
(4.1)
No matter what random number a node generates for itself, it is counted as one vote for
itself. The total votes is calculated after pre­processing by the random seed, suppose
random seed is m, then there are m different random results, each of them has the same
probability. Then we want to figure out: for a node, what is the chance it gets k votes in a
leader election?
Considering the random numbers generated for one singe node, the length of the se­
quence is n, the possible number for any number is m. So there will be mn different
combinations. A node gets k votes means there will be k −1 other nodes generate the
same random number after pre­processing. These k −1 nodes could be any node chose
from the left node, so there are C(n −1, k −1) options. The random number for the rest
n −k nodes could chose from m −1 values. Therefore, for a node, the possibility for a
node to get k votes is:
Pk(i)
=
m · (m −1)n−k · C(n −1, k −1)
mn
= (m −1)n−k · C(n −1, k −1)
mn−1
i ∈n
(4.2)
After figuring out the chance for a node to get k votes in a leader election, we want to know
the probability of existing a node beat all other nodes. Figure 4.1 includes all possible
states of random table for a node to be the only one wins the election.
Figure 4.1: All possible results of a node wins a election
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
29
==PAGE:38==
So we can get the probability of a node is the only one wins the election is:
Pw =
n
∑
k=2
(m −1)n−k · C(n −1, k −1)
mn−1
· (
k−1
∑
j=1
(m −1)n−j · C(n −1, j −1)
mn−1
)n−1
(4.3)
Since all n nodes could be the only winner, so the probability of existing one node as the
only winner is :
Pe = n ·
n
∑
k=2
(m −1)n−k · C(n −1, k −1)
mn−1
· (
k−1
∑
j=1
(m −1)n−j · C(n −1, j −1)
mn−1
)n−1)
(4.4)
Following the idea, we can conclude a more general probability equation of i nodes get
highest votes at the same time:
Figure 4.2: All possible results of i nodes win a election
Piw = C(n, i)·
n
∑
k=2


((m −1)n−k · C(n −1, k −1)
mn−1
)i
·


k−1
∑
j=1
(m −1)n−j · C(n −1, j −1)
mn−1


n−i

(4.5)
Noticed that all the winning probabilities mentioned above are all at least have 2 votes,
there is another special situation, that each node only gets its own vote:
Pnw =
((m −1)n−1
mn
· m
)n
=
((m −1)n−1
mn−1
)n
(4.6)
Then
n
∑
i=1
Piw +
((m −1)n−1
mn−1
)n
= 1
(4.7)
According to equation 4.4, the probability of one node beat all other nodes Pe depends
on number of nodes n and random seed m. Suppose n is chosen from 5 to 100, and m
is from 2 to 5, table 4.1 shows some results:
30
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.1: Probabilities when m from 2 to 5 and n from 5 to 100
m\n
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
50
60
80
100
2
0.54
0.59
0.62
0.65
0.67
0.68
0.70
0.71
0.73
0.74
0.76
0.78
3
0.55
0.60
0.63
0.66
0.67
0.69
0.70
0.71
0.73
0.74
0.76
0.78
4
0.54
0.59
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.69
0.70
0.72
0.73
0.75
0.77
5
0.52
0.58
0.61
0.63
0.65
0.67
0.68
0.69
0.71
0.72
0.74
0.76
Figure 4.3: Trend graph with node numbers growing
As is shown in the table 4.1 and figure 4.3, we can conclude some basic facts based on
the chosen range. Firstly, when m is fixed, Pe is increasing monotonically with the node
numbers. Which means if the scale of the network becoming larger, it is even easier for
voters to make a decision without extra calculation. Secondly, despite how many nodes
are involved, Pe is always more than 50%. Statistically, one node beat all other nodes
happens more frequent than multiple nodes share the highest votes.
Then we decide to let node number be stable and figure out how Pe will change with
random seeds changing, which is crucial for votes to chose the random seed sequence.
Table 4.2: Probabilities when m from 2 to 100 and n from 10 to 80
n\m
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
20
40
100
10
0.59
0.60
0.59
0.58
0.57
0.54
0.52
0.45
0.41
0.40
40
0.71
0.71
0.70
0.69
0.68
0.65
0.64
0.57
0.50
0.41
80
0.76
0.76
0.75
0.74
0.73
0.71
0.69
0.63
0.56
0.46
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.4: Trend graph with random range growing
The node numbers we chose are 10, 40, 80 for easier calculation and also for reflection
of the scalability change. The random seed ranges are from 2 to 100. We don’t have
to go with very high random seed because in that case, it would be very hard to hit the
same number and get more than node’s own vote. Based on the results shown in table
4.2 and figure 4.4, we can conclude that Pe roughly decreases monotonically with random
seed range. For many numbers of nodes, the value hits the peak when random seed is
3. However, the value doesn’t change dramatically while the random seed increases.
As we already mentioned, the random seeds are a per­set sequence maintained by all the
voters. To ensure the unpredictability to followers, the random seeds should be completely
random and disordered. To optimize the Pe, the random seeds should be chosen from
smallest numbers. However, if the random seed is small and not diverse enough, it may
be guessable. In this case, a group of nodes, even they are honest nodes, could work
together and generate special numbers for their group members. These numbers still look
random to voters. But the special numbers could increase the chance that their member
wins the election.
Therefore, the random seeds should be a compromised result based on the scale, trust
level of followers combined with mathematical optimal option.
4.2
Communication Complexity and Scalability
The bottleneck of voting­based consensus is mainly the communication complexity. The
consensus of the system is relied on message passing between nodes. To support byzan­
tine tolerance, PBFT needs multiple rounds of message passing among all nodes, which
leads performance decrease when the scale is more 100 nodes.
32
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:41==
The proposed RNBFT takes a compromised strategy. Firstly, we don’t expect the com­
munication channels to be stable and high performance between all nodes. Instead, we
decide to let some of the higher performance nodes takes more communication workload,
and the rest of nodes take less. So the communication workload is balanced. Secondly,
the time is split into two phases: leader election and block production. We consider a
node works normally as a common state. So we let the leader election phase take higher
communication complexity and block production takes less, which is also a balanced so­
lution.
4.2.1
Complexity of Leader Election
Figure 4.5: Message passing during a leader election
Figure 4.5 presents the full message during a round of leader election. There are in total
four rounds of the messages between voters and followers:
1. Some voter initialize the leader election, which requires N messages;
2. Followers broadcast their random numbers to voters, the total valid messages are
no more than Nf · Nv;
3. Any voter receive new random numbers will synchronize with other voters, so it
requires at most Nf · Nv · (Nv −1) messages;
4. Voters send their decision to the leader, it takes no more than Nf messages.
Therefore, the total communication complexity O(LeaderElection) of leader election con­
sensus is:
O(LeaderElection) = O(N)+O(Nf·Nv)+O(Nf·Nv·(Nv−1))+O(Nf) = O(Nf·N2
v ) (4.8)
The communication complexity of PBFT is O(N2), which is O((Nf + Nv)2), suppose:
(Nf + Nv)2 < Nf · N2
v
(4.9)
then we have:
Nf
Nv
+ 1 > N
1
2
f
(4.10)
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
33
==PAGE:42==
Although the communication workload is concentrated between voters, RNBFT is still
better than PBFT while the number of voters is much smaller than followers. This is also
consistent with practical situation because the voters are designed to be the minority of
the network.
4.2.2
Complexity of Block Production
Figure 4.6: Message passing during a block production
Shown in Figure 4.6, there are three rounds of message passing:
1. When the new block is ready, leader will send it to all voters, which is Nf messages;
2. If the block is valid, voters will return the block with their signatures. Considering
voters may crash, the total messages are no more than Nv;
3. After receiving the majority agreements from voters, leader will append the new
block and broadcast to all nodes in the blockchain. This process takes N −1 mes­
sages;
Thus, the communication complexity O(BlockProduction) of producing a new block is:
O(BlockProduction) = O(Nf) + O(Nf) + O(N) = O(N)
(4.11)
As the common state of the system, the communication complexity of block production
is greatly simplified. It only requires linear number of messages to verify the new block.
In this case, the performance of producing new blocks will be greatly improved and not
limited by the scale of the network.
Overall, due to the balanced strategy, the RNBFT is proved to be very efficient in producing
blocks but little bit slow in leader election. However, if the system manages to keep voters
as the minority of the network, the leader election process is still efficient than PBFT but
also provides byzantine tolerance.
4.3
Safety and Reliability
4.3.1
Blockchain will not fork
Different from the ”Longest Chain” consensus in Bitcoin, every new block will not be ap­
pended to the chain unless it is signed by the majority of voters. Even byzantine nodes
34
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:43==
may forge and synchronize new branches, but the honest nodes will not accept the these
branches because they don’t contain the relevant signatures from voters. Besides, this
behaviour is suspicious to honest nodes, which will increase the risk to be detected. So
even from the perspective of byzantine nodes, they would not forge branches.
Suppose the network is partitioned into two parts from some reason. Either of them will
contain the majority of voters, which means if the leader is working, only one part of them
can produce new blocks. If the leader is not working, both parts will initialize the leader
election, but as we designed, there will only be one leader existing. It is impossible for
the network to produce more than one valid blockchain even the network is partitioned.
Therefore, the statement is proved.
4.3.2
Byzantine Nodes will not affect safety
As for byzantine nodes, we actually don’t care whether they are malicious but what they
can do to harm the safety.
Technically, the byzantine behaviours are strictly limited and easily detected. In the per­
missioned network, each message a node has sent is undeniable. If byzantine nodes
sends dishonest messages, they can be detected by peer competitors, which means their
identities as followers may be revoked. Whatever they do during leader election will not
be in favor of themselves. As a leader, their work is supervised by voters. As followers,
they are not involved in block production. All these limitations ensures byzantine nodes
will not affect the system safety. Economically, as the existence of incentive mechanism,
even the byzantine nodes are driven to work like a honest node, at least they are offered
salaries.
4.3.3
Liveness requirements are low
RNBFT has low requirements for nodes’ states to ensure the system liveness. On on
hand, both the leader election consensus and block production consensus require the
more than half of the votes from voters. They are highest trust level nodes and have the
final decision rights. Since we already assumed they can not be byzantine nodes, Nv
2 + 1
voters are required to ensure the system’s liveness.
On the other hand, followers are only involved in leader election consensus. After the
leader election is finished, their states may have some influences on system performance
but no harm on system liveness. The block production is mainly finished by the leader
with voters. Even followers may crash during the election, according to our design, voters
can still reach a consensus on a leader. Noticed that both crashing nodes and byzantine
nodes will be eliminated in next round of leader election consensus. So considering the
extreme situation that all followers’ identities are revoked but only one is still working, this
node will eventually become the leader and work with voters. In this case, the network may
become meaningless, but technically the system is still alive and working. Therefore, from
the perspective of followers, only one node is required to guarantee the system liveness.
In summary, of all N nodes in the network, the system liveness only requires Nv
2 +1 nodes
to ensure the system liveness. Considering the Nv is already the minority of total nodes,
our statement is proved.
4.4
Drawbacks and limitations
4.4.1
De­centralization level is not enough
Although we designed the separation of the rights of producing blocks, the consensus of
new blocks are still concentrated on the minority of nodes. Most of the nodes are only
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
35
==PAGE:44==
involved in leader election consensus, once it finishes, only voters and leader participate
the block production process. Therefore, the de­centralization level of this protocol is not
enough.
4.4.2
Computation complexity is ignored
In this thesis, we mainly discussed the communication complexity of the message pass­
ing. However, the computation complexity of leader election is ignored. The computation
includes preprocessing the random table and calculating the frequency. The preprocess
is linear complexity, while the frequency may require O(n2) complexity. As the there is
a short timer during receiving the random numbers, the calculation could be done in par­
allel, therefore this time consumption is ignored in the thesis, however, there might be a
better solution and whether the computation could be ignored still requires test.
4.4.3
Voters may be more vulnerable
The algorithm is designed with the assumption that voter nodes and their channels are
safe. Under this assumption, the voters have the highest trust level and decisive rights in
the block chain. As they are a small group in the network, the malicious attack could be
easily focused on these nodes, which leads the voters to be more vulnerable.
4.4.4
High communication load between voters
As we used the balanced strategy, voters are delivered with more communication load.
The communication complexity is O(Nf ·N2
v ) during the leader election. To be better than
PBFT, the proportion of voter nodes has to be the minority of all consensus nodes. If there
are considerable more voters, the communication complexity will be very high, which may
become new bottleneck that affects the system performance.
36
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:45==
5
Conclusion
In this thesis, we proposed a new consensus protocol which is exclusive for enterprise
consortium chain. Group strategy is used to improve the scalability. Only a group of
nodes with higher trust level are involved the block production consensus. The writing
and verification rights are separated so that the system is not over centralized. To reduce
the communication complexity, we balanced the load on different consensus processes.
Considering the nodes and network are stable most of the time, the block production con­
sensus is designed to be more efficient with only linear communication complexity. The
random number protocol not only ensures a safe and fair environment for the consensus
nodes, but also is defensive to byzantine nodes.
However, the system performance may still suffer from lazy byzantine nodes. Although
the incentive mechanism is mentioned, we didn’t manage to solve this problem genuinely.
Besides, the whole design wasn’t implemented and tested in a real blockchain environ­
ment, all the proofs remain to be theoretically, which could be our future work.
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
37
==PAGE:46==
38
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Satoshi Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A peer­to­peer electronic cash system”. In: Decentral­
ized Business Review (2008), p. 21260.
[2]
Gavin Wood et al. “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger”.
In: Ethereum project yellow paper 151.2014 (2014), pp. 1–32.
[3]
Elli Androulaki et al. “Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating system for permis­
sioned blockchains”. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth EuroSys conference. 2018,
pp. 1–15.
[4]
L LAMPORT, R SHOSTAK, and M PEASE. “THE BYZANTINE GENERALS PROB­
LEM”. eng. In: Acm Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 4.3
(1982), pp. 382–401. ISSN: 15584593, 01640925. DOI: 10.1145/357172.357176.
[5]
M. Castro and B. Liskov. “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance”. eng. In: Operating
Systems Review (1998), pp. 173–186. ISSN: 1943586x, 01635980.
[6]
Sunny King and Scott Nadal. “Ppcoin: Peer­to­peer crypto­currency with proof­of­
stake”. In: self­published paper, August 19.1 (2012).
[7]
Wikipedia. SHA­2. 2022. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-2.
[8]
Anh Ngoc Quang Huynh et al. “Energy Consumption and Bitcoin Market”. eng. In:
Asia­pacific Financial Markets (2021), pp. 1–15. ISSN: 15736946, 13872834. DOI:
10.1007/s10690-021-09338-4.
[9]
Vechain Team. Vechain White Paper. 2018.
[10]
Intel Corporation. PoET 1.0 Specification. 2015. URL: https://sawtooth.hyperledger.
org/docs/core/releases/latest/architecture/poet.html.
[11]
Stefan Dziembowski et al. “Proofs of space”. In: Annual Cryptology Conference.
Springer. 2015, pp. 585–605.
[12]
Leslie Lamport. “The part­time parliament”. eng. In: Acm Transactions on Computer
Systems 16.2 (1998), pp. 133–169. ISSN: 15577333, 07342071. DOI: 10.1145/
279227.279229.
[13]
L. Lamport. “Paxos made simple”. eng. In: Sigact News 32.4 (2001), pp. 51–58.
ISSN: 19435827, 01635700.
[14]
Diego Ongaro and John Ousterhout. “In search of an understandable consensus
algorithm”. In: 2014 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (Usenix ATC 14). 2014,
pp. 305–319.
[15]
RSA. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSA_(cryptosystem).
[16]
white paper. URL: https://docs.neo.org/v2/docs/en-us/basic/whitepaper.html.
[17]
Pierre Louis Aublin, Sonia Ben Mokhtar, and Vivien Quema. “RBFT: Redundant
byzantine fault tolerance”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ International Conference on Dis­
tributed Computing Systems (2013), pp. 297–306. ISSN: 25758411, 10636927.
DOI: 10.1109/ICDCS.2013.53.
[18]
Yixin Li et al. “An extensible consensus algorithm based on PBFT”. eng. In: Pro­
ceedings ­ 2019 International Conference on Cyber­enabled Distributed Computing
and Knowledge Discovery, Cyberc 2019 (2019), pp. 17–23. ISSN: 24757020. DOI:
10.1109/CyberC.2019.00013.
[19]
Verifiable Random Function. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verifiable_random_
function.
[20]
Zhujun Zhang, Dali Zhu, and Wei Fan. “Qpbft: practical byzantine fault tolerance
consensus algorithm based on quantified­role”. In: 2020 IEEE 19th International
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
39
==PAGE:48==
Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications (Trust­
Com). IEEE. 2020, pp. 991–997.
[21]
R3. URL: https://www.r3.com/.
[22]
Wei­Yang Chiu, Weizhi Meng, and Christian D Jensen. “NoPKI­a Point­to­Point
Trusted Third Party Service Based on Blockchain Consensus Algorithm”. In: Inter­
national Conference on Frontiers in Cyber Security. Springer. 2020, pp. 197–214.
40
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
==PAGE:49==
A Consensus Algorithm Based On Random Number Generation
41
==PAGE:50==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
