==PAGE:1==
Master of Science in Engineering
Seizure detection in electroencephalogra-
phy signals using deep learning
Master Thesis
Thea Brüsch (s164238)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological diseases worldwide. Epileptic pa-
tients are at risk of fall-related injuries and face a three times increased risk of prema-
ture death compared to the general population [1]. If the seizures can be monitored,
using for instance electroencephalography (EEG), and detected, relevant personnel
can be alerted, and dangerous situations can be avoided.
UNEEG Medical A/S has developed the 24/7 EEG™SubQ (SubQ); a wearable
EEG device suitable for long-term monitoring of epileptic patients. The SubQ cou-
pled with a machine learning model for seizure detection could provide real value to
epileptic patients. Therefore, this project aims to investigate the potential of a model
for seizure detection in EEG signals.
For this purpose, we implement a convolutional neural network (CNN) developed
by Shamim Hossain et al. [2] that takes raw time series as input. Throughout the
thesis, we seek to document the diﬀiculties of seizure detection in EEG, imposed by
high inter-subject variability and a signficant class imbalance. Furthermore, we aim to
provide a thorough analysis of the model’s results to gain an in-depth understanding
of the necessary steps for developing a seizure alarm.
We initially sought to reproduce the results of Shamim Hossain et al. [2] on a
public dataset, the Children’s Hospital Boston MIT dataset. We achieved an aver-
age sensitivity of 62.36%, specificity of 86.23%, and accuracy of 86.09% using the
leave-one-subject-out method. However, the performance was lower than what was
obtained by Shamim Hossain et al. [2]. We attribute the low performance to the
lack of documentation in the original work. Subsequently, we trained the model on
the largest publicly available dataset for seizure detection, the Temple University
Hospital EEG Seizure Corpus. We achieved a sensitivity of 29.69%, a specificity of
93.27%, a precision of 26.47%, and an F1 score of 27.99% when using window-based
evaluation. We then evaluated the predictions using event-based evaluation apply-
ing post-processing with different probability and duration thresholds. The lowest
thresholds yielded a sensitivity of 52.65% and a false alarm rate of 944 per 24 hours,
while the highest threshold yielded a sensitivity of 25.07% and a false alarm rate of
61 per 24 hours.
Though the model’s performance was not high enough to be deployed in real-life,
our results indicate the potential of CNNs for seizure detection. Furthermore, our
documentation of the process and subsequent analysis of the predictions form the
foundation for the future development of a seizure detection alarm on the SubQ.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Mathematical Modelling and
Computation. The project was carried out in collaboration with T&W Engineering.
It was supervised by Associate Professor at DTU Compute, Tommy Sonne Alstrøm,
Associate Professor at DTU Compute, Tobias Andersen, and Senior Data Scientist
at T&W Engineering, Thomas Ølund.
Kongens Lyngby, March 20, 2022
Thea Brüsch (s164238)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors for their immense support
throughout the project.
Thank you Thomas, for always taking the time to look through my results and give
inputs for my next steps. Thank you Tobias, for your valuable inputs regarding EEG
and for reminding me to be realistic with my time. And finally, thank you Tommy,
for all of your excellent ideas and insights on machine learning. Also a big thanks for
your support during my entire master’s degree and for all of our interesting collabo-
rations. I look forward to continuing our work.
Additionally, I would like to extend a thank you to all of my colleagues at T&W
Engineering. My work at T&W Engineering sparked my interest in EEG signals, and
our discussions at the oﬀice have enlightened me on the problems and opportunities
offered by a seizure detection alarm. I wish you all the best going forward.
Thank you,
Thea Brüsch
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
ABSZ absence seizure. 35, 39, 56, 63
ANN artificial neural network. 19, 20, 23–26
AP action potential. 9, 11
AR average reference. 32
CHB-MIT Children’s Hospital Boston MIT. 2–5, 31, 33, 34, 36–38, 41, 42, 44, 62,
67
CNN convolutional neural network. 3–5, 24, 31, 34, 37, 41, 61, 64, 67, 68
CNS central nervous system. 7, 9
CPSZ complex partial seizure. 35, 39, 47, 49, 56, 57, 63, 75, 76
DL deep learning. 2, 4, 5, 19, 23, 67
EDF European Data Format. 31, 32
EEG electroencephalography. 1–5, 7, 10–18, 21, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35, 49, 54, 57, 58,
62–65, 67, 75
ELU exponential linear unit. 23, 34
EMU epilepsy monitoring unit. 17, 32
EPSP excitatory post-synaptic potential. 9, 11
ER emergency room. 32, 35
FAR false alarm rate. 4, 29, 49, 56, 57, 61–63, 67, 68
FFT fast Fourier transform. 57
FN false negative. 28
FNSZ focal non-specific seizure. 35, 39, 49, 52, 56–58, 63, 64, 75, 76
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acronyms
FP false positive. 28, 49, 50, 63
GMM gaussian mixture model. 38
GNSZ generalized non-specific seizure. 35, 39, 47, 49, 52, 56, 57, 63, 75, 77
ICU intensive care unit. 32
IPSP inhibitory post-synaptic potential. 9, 11
LE linked ear reference. 32
LOSO leave-one-subject-out. 3, 4, 21, 22, 36, 37, 42, 72
LSTM long short-term memory. 3, 4, 64
MYSZ myoclonic seizure. 35, 39, 56, 63
OR operation room. 32, 35
OVLP method any overlap method. 28, 30, 47
PPV positive predictive value. 29
PSP post-synaptic potential. 9, 11
ReLU rectified linear unit. 23
RF random forest. 2, 3
SPSZ simple partial seizure. 35, 39, 56, 63
SVM support vector machine. 2–5
TCP temporal central parasagittal. 32–34
TCSZ tonic clonic seizure. 35, 39, 47, 48, 50, 53–57, 63, 64, 72–75
TN true negative. 28
TNSZ tonic seizure. 35, 39, 47–49, 56, 63
TP true positive. 28, 50
TPR true positive rate. 28, 29
TUSZ Temple University Hospital EEG Seizure Corpus. 2, 4, 5, 17, 18, 22, 30–34,
36–39, 41, 43–45, 48, 57, 58, 61–63, 65, 67
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Proposed method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
EEG and the brain
7
2.1
The human brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
EEG signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Epileptic Seizure Detection
15
3.1
Epilepsy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Machine learning for seizure detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Evaluation of seizure detection models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Experimental setup
31
4.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
CNN architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Training setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Results
41
5.1
The CHB-MIT dataset results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
The TUSZ dataset results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Discussion
61
6.1
Choice of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Results on the CHB-MIT dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.3
Results on the TUSZ dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
6.4
Development of a seizure detection alarm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.5
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Conclusion
67
A
Appendix
69
A.1 Hyperparameters on the CHB-MIT dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.2 Additional analysis of tonic clonic seizures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3 Plots of seizures from revised model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.4 Additional spectral perturbation maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Around 50 million people suffer from epilepsy globally, making it one of the most
common neurological diseases in the world [1]. However, the World Health Organi-
zation (WHO) estimates that around 70% of epileptic patients could live seizure-free
if adequately treated, and that a documented etiology of the electroencephalography
(EEG) is paramount in accurate prediction of the risk of seizure recurrence. Further-
more, cheap electroencephalography (EEG) equipment and wearable EEG devices are
becoming increasingly available [3, 4], and with them, so is the amount of EEG data.
Therefore, the need for eﬀicient algorithms for analyzing the data is more present
than ever [5].
One such device is the 24/7 EEG™SubQ, developed by UNEEG medical A/S,
a wearable EEG device designed for long-term monitoring. The device consists of a
subcutaneously inserted implant and an external logger. It allows for monitoring of
epileptic patients over long periods outside of the clinic [6]. Long-term monitoring
results in large amounts of data, and, therefore, many resources are required if profes-
sionals have to manually look through the data for seizures. An algorithm that can
remove background data and point to areas of interest is thus essential for optimum
use of the device. Furthermore, the device offers real-time monitoring of seizure activ-
ity, and the development of a seizure alarm could provide value to epileptic patients.
An alarm could alert health care professionals or relatives in the event of seizures and
thus, help prevent dangerous situations. For such an application to benefit, it should
detect as many seizures as possible and give few false alarms.
Previously, subject-specific algorithms have been developed for seizure detection
(for instance [7], [8] and [9]), but it is a time-consuming and expensive process to
develop subject-specific algorithms. Therefore, an excellent cross-subject performance
is essential for a model to be easily applicable. However, the inter-subject variability
in EEG is high, which complicates the development of cross-subject seizure detection
models.
This thesis aims to develop a seizure detection model that works well in a cross-
subject setting. The models developed for this thesis are trained on public datasets,
but the end goal is to develop a seizure detection alarm for implementation in real-
time on the subcutaneous EEG recorded by the 24/7 EEG™SubQ. Therefore, we
seek to understand the diﬀiculties faced when developing a seizure detection model
and to lay out the ground work for future development of a real-time seizure alarm.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Research questions
The thesis centers around the following research questions:
• Can we reproduce the results of a machine learning model for cross-subject
seizure detection from the literature that takes raw time series as input?
• Can we use this model to develop a seizure detection alarm for a dataset based
on the Temple University Hospital EEG Seizure Corpus (TUSZ) database?
• Can we analyze and understand the results of the model?
• Based on the results and subsequent analysis, can we identify the necessary
steps before deploying a potential model in the real world?
1.2
Related works
This literature review aims to uncover the applications of machine learning for seizure
detection found in the literature.
The early works on seizure detection mainly focused on subtracting different fea-
tures from the segmented EEG signals and using support vector machines (SVMs)
[7, 10] or other traditional methods such as random forest (RF) [11, 12] for classifying
seizure and non-seizure segments. Over the last years, the focus has shifted into a
deep learning (DL) oriented era [5, 8, 13–15]. DL has proven to be a powerful tool for
learning high-level representations. In addition, DL has already been proven superior
to more traditional models in other EEG-driven tasks such as sleep staging [16].
The use of different datasets in the literature on seizure detection makes direct
comparison between different studies challenging. Therefore, this review focuses on
models evaluated on the Bonn dataset [17], the Children’s Hospital Boston MIT
(CHB-MIT) dataset [7], and the Temple University Hospital EEG Seizure Corpus
(TUSZ) [18] and is divided by dataset. Each dataset will be introduced shortly to
give the reader a sense of its limitations and strengths.
Besides the fact that the different studies evaluate their models on different
datasets, several other discrepancies in the literature further complicate direct com-
parison. For example, some studies under-sample the background class to balance
both the train and the test sets (e.g., in [15]), making both the specificity and accu-
racy challenging to compare to other work on the same data. In other studies, the
authors report the best validation error as their final result (e.g., in [19]), making the
algorithm’s ability to generalize questionable. Furthermore, the strategy for segment-
ing the test data and selecting the test data typically differs between different studies.
The community could benefit from a standardization of the reported results. Stan-
dardization could be achieved through a single benchmarking dataset and a unified
evaluation method, allowing a more precise comparison of new methods against old
methods.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Related works
3
1.2.1
Related works on the Bonn dataset
The Bonn dataset consists of five sets (set A, B, C, D, and E), each comprising 100
single-channel EEG segments with a duration of 23.6 seconds. Sets A and B contain
scalp EEG from healthy subjects with eyes open and eyes closed, respectively, and sets
C, D, and E contain intracranial EEG from epileptic patients. While set E consists
of ictal (seizure) segments, sets C and D consist of inter-ictal (non-seizure) segments
recorded using an electrode outside and inside the epileptogenic zone (the site of the
epileptic focus in the brain), respectively. The sets are often combined in different
ways, resulting in different classification tasks.
The reported performances on the Bonn dataset are high, with the application
by Hussein et al. [20] achieving 100.0% specificity, sensitivity, and accuracy using a
long short-term memory (LSTM) model for four different tasks (set AvsE, ABCD-
vsE, AvsCvsE, and AvsBvsCsvDsvE). Lin et al. [21] applied a stacked sparse autoen-
coder and achieved 98.7% sensitivity, 93.8% specificity, and 96.0% accuracy averaged
across the different combinations of binary classification tasks. Li et al. [8] used a
squeeze-and-excitation neural network and achieved an accuracy of 94.6% classifying
AvsBvsCsvDsvE. In addition, Chen et al. [19] achieved an accuracy of 99.3% classi-
fying CDvsE, and Kumar and Kolekar [10] achieved an accuracy of 98.0% classifying
CvsE, both using SVMs. Similarly, Hussein et al. [12] obtained accuracies in the
range 90.0%-100.0% using an RF for different combinations of tasks.
The Bonn dataset does not accurately represent a real-life setting where noisy
EEG and long recordings are inevitable. Furthermore, since all epileptic segments are
recorded using single channel intra-cranial EEG, which is qualitatively very different
from scalp EEG [22] and rarely available, the results do not easily translate to other
settings.
1.2.2
Related works on the CHB-MIT dataset
In contrast to the Bonn dataset, the Children’s Hospital Boston MIT (CHB-MIT)
dataset [7] contains 23 pediatric subjects with 916 hours of data and closely resembles
a long-term monitoring setting. Due to a large amount of data for each subject, a lot
of the literature focuses on patient-specific applications.
In the patient-specific setting, Kaleem et al. [9] achieved excellent results using an
SVM (99.8% sensitivity, 99.6% accuracy, 99.6% specificity). Li et al. [8] obtained a
sensitivity of 92.4%, specificity of 96.1%, and accuracy of 96.0% using a squeeze-and-
excitation neural network. At the same time, Shamim Hossain et al. [2] obtained a
sensitivity of 100.0% and a specificity of 99.3% using a convolutional neural network
(CNN).
Due to the large inter-subject variability in EEG signals, an algorithm with a
high subject-specific performance does not necessarily generalize well to new subjects.
Therefore, we mainly focus on the cross-subject setting. In the cross-subject setting,
the model is trained on one set of subjects and evaluated on another set of subjects.
One way of evaluating the model is through leave-one-subject-out (LOSO) cross-
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
validation.
In the LOSO setting, Raghu et al. [23] showed good results using an
SVM (a sensitivity of 97.3% and a false detection rate of 0.57/hour). Thodoroff et al.
[24] combined a CNN and an LSTM and achieved a sensitivity of 85% and a false
alarm rate (FAR) of 0.8 per hour. While most of the studies use handcrafted features
as input to the respective models, both Shamim Hossain et al. [2] and Yao et al. [15]
take raw time series as input. Shamim Hossain et al. [2] used a CNN for classification
resulting in a sensitivity of 90.0% and specificity of 91.7%. In contrast, Yao et al. [15]
used an attention LSTM and achieved a sensitivity of 87.3% and specificity of 88.3%.
Though the CHB-MIT dataset represents a more complex problem than the Bonn
dataset, Shah et al. [18] state that the results still do not translate to a clinical setting,
and, therefore, they introduced the TUSZ database.
1.2.3
Related works on the TUSZ database
The TUSZ database was first published in 2018, and the original version contained 315
subjects for training and validation [18]. The most recent version (v.1.5.2) contains
642 subjects. The database contains clinical EEG data with channel-wise annotations
of seizure activity. Furthermore, the database is annotated for the seizure type.
Some work on the database aims to classify the different seizure types instead of
classifying seizures vs. non-seizure segments. For example, on the latest version of
the database (v1.5.2), Roy et al. [25] obtained a weighted F1 score of 56.1% using
XGBoost for classifying seizure types, and Asif et al. [26] obtained a weighted F1
score of 59.2% using a CNN. The task of seizure type classification is arguably easier
than seizure detection due to the removal of background data.
There is also some, although limited, work dealing with seizure detection on the
TUSZ database. However, since the data is recorded in a noisy clinical setting, the
results produced on this database are generally lower than those obtained on the
CHB-MIT and the Bonn datasets [5]. The results on the TUSZ database are diﬀicult
to compare, since a lot of the work is evaluated on different versions or subsets of the
database. For example, Zhang et al. [27] applied adversarial representation learning
using a CNN on 14 of the subjects and achieved an average accuracy of 80.5%. Zhang
et al. [13] also used a CNN and obtained a sensitivity of 59.1% and a specificity
of 89.7%, while Golmohammadi et al. [5] compared several DL-based models to a
Hidden Markov Model. Golmohammadi et al. [5] obtained a sensitivity of 39.5% and
a specificity of 95.2% using an LSTM. All of this work is done on earlier versions
(than v1.5.2) of the database.
Since the TUSZ database contains a rich amount of data, especially in the number
of subjects, it is an obvious choice for investigating inter-subject generalization of
seizure detection models. Furthermore, the TUSZ database contains more noisy data
than the Bonn and CHB-MIT datasets, making it a more realistic representation of
real-life data. Therefore, we choose to evaluate our model on the TUSZ database.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Proposed method
5
1.3
Proposed method
When reviewing the literature, good results are found across datasets using both SVM
and DL models. SVMs, however, rely heavily on the kernel and the features used for
computing the distances. For instance, Chen et al. [19] showed that their results were
susceptible to both the type of wavelet and the level of decomposition used in their
feature extraction. On the other hand, some DL models can be trained end-to-end,
eliminating the need for handcrafted features. We hypothesize that a model can be
trained to automatically extract features from the raw time series, and for that task,
a DL model is the natural choice.
The aim is to train a model on the TUSZ database, but none of the work on the
TUSZ database uses raw time series as inputs. Shamim Hossain et al. [2], however,
take raw time series as input to their CNN, and the model performs very well on the
CHB-MIT dataset. The work of this thesis is therefore centered around the model
presented by Shamim Hossain et al. [2]. We aim to reproduce the results reported on
the CHB-MIT dataset and subsequently train the model on the TUSZ database.
Chapter 2 introduces the relevant theory on the human brain and the genera-
tion of EEG signals. Chapter 3 gives an overview of epilepsy and epileptic seizure
patterns in the EEG, and the machine learning theory used to implement the model.
Chapter 4 outlines the experimental setup used for training and evaluating the
model, while Chapter 5 presents the results on both datasets. Finally, Chapter 6
discusses the results, and Chapter 7 concludes the work presented in the thesis.
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
EEG and the brain
Epilepsy is a neurological disease, and electroencephalography (EEG) is one of the
essential tools used for understanding it [1]. In order to properly analyze the patterns
relevant for seizure detection, it is essential to understand the mechanisms of the
brain and how they affect the generation of EEG signals. This chapter covers the
basics of the brain’s anatomy and physiology and the principles of EEG generation
and measurement. The aim is to form a solid foundation for analyzing and classifying
seizures in the EEG.
2.1
The human brain
The human brain and the spinal cord constitute the major organs of the central
nervous system (CNS). The primary roles of the brain are to receive and interpret
sensory information from inside or outside the body, control motor function, regulate
homeostasis, and facilitate mental activity [28]. The theory in this section is based
on [28] unless otherwise referenced.
2.1.1
Anatomy
The brain is divided into four major regions: the brain stem, the cerebellum, the
diencephalon and the cerebrum. This section will primarily focus on the cerebrum
since it is the primary source of measurable EEG signals [22].
The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain. The cerebrum is divided into the left
and the right hemisphere, separated by a longitudinal fissure. Each of the hemispheres
is divided into four lobes: the frontal lobe, the parietal lobe, the occipital lobe, and
the temporal lobe. Figure 2.1 shows the division. Each lobe contains several different
subcortices responsible for different functions of the brain. For example, the frontal
lobe holds the premotor cortex and the primary motor cortex. The somatosensory
cortex, responsible for processing sensory inputs from the skin, is located in the
parietal lobe.
The temporal lobe is vital for long-term memory and contains the
primary auditory cortex, while the occipital lobe holds the visual cortex. However, the
entire brain participates in several complex functions involving memory, perception,
and consciousness.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 EEG and the brain
Figure 2.1: Division of the cerebral cortex into lobes. The figure is from [28] and is
used with permission.
The cerebral cortex is a 2-4 mm thick layer covering the entire cerebrum surface
[22, 29].
The cortex comprises gray matter, whereas the inside of the cerebrum
consists of white matter. The white matter appears white since it mainly contains the
connections between neurons (the cells responsible for communication in the brain),
insulated by a specialized type of fat called myelin sheaths. On the other hand, the
gray matter appears gray since it mostly holds the neurons’ cell bodies. In addition,
the folding of the cortex into gyri (the folds) and sulci (the grooves) increases the
surface area considerably.
To understand the communication between different areas of the cortex, it is
also necessary to mention the thalamus.
The thalamus is the largest part of the
diencephalon, and it is responsible for relaying and regulating sensory inputs to the
cerebral cortex.
Furthermore, the thalamus helps control the level of interaction
between substructures of the cortex by synchronizing and desynchronizing activity
[22]. Communication in the nervous system takes place through specialized nervous
cells, neurons, that receive and transmit electrical and chemical signals. The following
subsection briefly describes the communication between neurons.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The human brain
9
2.1.2
Physiology
Neurons are the cells responsible for processing and transmitting information in CNS.
Most of the neurons in the brain are pyramidal neurons [22]. Figure 2.2 shows the
anatomy of a pyramidal neuron.
The neurons maintain a carefully monitored imbalance of positively and nega-
tively charged ions on either side of the cell membrane resulting in a negative resting
membrane potential (voltage difference across the cell membrane). The resting mem-
brane potential is approximately -70 mV, i.e., the inside of the cell is more negatively
charged than the outside. The membrane contains gates that can open upon certain
stimuli, which creates an influx of positively charged ions and an efflux of negatively
charged ions, an electric current. The electric currents enable communication between
neurons.
Figure 2.2: Anatomy of the neuron. The figure is under open license from [30].
At the dendrites, the neuron receives information that propagates to the cell body,
where the stimuli are integrated. The stimuli can either be inhibitory by making the
membrane potential more negative, known as polarization, or excitatory by making
the membrane potential less negative, called depolarization. When the membrane po-
tential reaches a certain threshold, an action potential (AP) is triggered. Figure 2.3
shows the change in membrane potential during an AP. When an AP is triggered,
stimuli travels down the axon to the synapse, where it causes the release of stimuli
to the next neuron. This stimuli is called a post-synaptic potential (PSP) because it
passes information to the post-synaptic neuron. The PSP can be an inhibitory post-
synaptic potential (IPSP), inhibiting excitation of the post-synaptic neuron. PSP can
also be an excitatory post-synaptic potential (EPSP), exciting the post-synaptic neu-
ron [22]. The APs and PSPs are, therefore, the signals responsible for communication
in the brain.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 EEG and the brain
Figure 2.3: The change in membrane potential over the course of an action potential,
which lasts about 1 to 2 milliseconds [22]. The figure is from [28] and is used with
permission.
The pyramidal neurons are organized in columnar structures perpendicular to the
cortical surface. These columnar structures are called macro-columns. The macro-
columns often show similar behavior, effectively acting like a small cohesive unit [29].
Each macro-column can contain up to 1000s of mini-columns, each consisting of up
to 100 neurons [22].
Each cortical macro-column can act independently of other
macro-columns, and the brain can sustain many parallel processes. According to [22],
studies suggest that one of the central roles of the thalamus is to coordinate behavior
between columns by either synchronizing or desynchronizing different processes. The
different levels of synchronization allow the brain to either engage a large number of
columns in one task or run many parallel processes. The thalamus synchronizes and
desynchronizes the columns through rhythmic impulses used to modulate the activity
in different brain regions [22].
All of the brain’s processes are associated with a high level of regulation and
complexity. Under normal circumstances, the brain carefully monitors and controls
these processes, but there are some diseases for which the complicated connections
and balances malfunction. Epilepsy is one such disease, and the nature of the disease
is explained in Chapter 3.
2.2
EEG signals
EEG is an essential tool for diagnosing and understanding epilepsy [22]. Over the
last years, the availability of low-cost consumer EEG headsets has increased, making
EEG measurements easily accessible [3]. Furthermore, several new wearable devices
==PAGE:23==
2.2 EEG signals
11
have emerged, such as Ear-EEG [31] and the subcutaneous device 24/7 EEG™SubQ,
enabling long-term monitoring and real-time seizure alarms. EEG is, therefore, an
obvious choice for the monitoring of epilepsy. The theory in this section is based on
[22] and [29] unless otherwise referenced.
2.2.1
Generation of EEG signals
Electroencephalography translates to “an electrical recorder of what is inside the
head” [22, p.20]. The transmission of signals through electrical currents from neuron
to neuron gives rise to current dipoles. The dipoles sum to form electrical potentials
measurable through EEG equipment, and the measured signals provide an insight
into the brain’s activity. EEG is typically measured using electrodes placed on the
scalp (scalp EEG) or intracranially (intracranial EEG).
The signal produced by one neuron is too small to measure, but when many
neurons are synchronized, it is possible to measure the sum of the electrical potentials
projected onto the scalp. As discussed in the previous section, cortical neurons are
organized in macro-columns that act as cohesive units when processing information.
It is the average across multiple macro-columns that produces measurable signals.
The electrical activity in the brain consists of APs and PSPs. APs occur at the
scale of 100 mV in amplitude but only have a duration of around 1-2 milliseconds.
PSPs have amplitudes of around 10 mV, with EPSPs lasting about 10 to 30 millisec-
onds and IPSPs lasting up to 80 to 100 milliseconds. EEG signals are dominated by
the amount of synchronous activity and not the amplitude of activity. Therefore, due
to the short time scales, APs are not likely to be seen in the EEG, and PSPs are the
main contributor to the measurable EEG signals.
Figure 2.4 shows the layout of the pyramidal neurons in the cortex. The pyramidal
neurons are all oriented perpendicular to the cortical surface. The structured layout
creates an open distribution, and, therefore, the pyramidal neurons are the primary
source of EEG signals. EEG is mainly sensitive to the electrical signals from the
convexial cortex (i.e., in the gyri), since it contains the neurons located closest to the
scalp. However, stronger deep currents also contribute.
If a large area of the cortex is activated, entire sulci and gyri are active simulta-
neously. The synchronous activity will cause most of the activation from within the
fissures to cancel out almost entirely. Most subcortical structures form closed dis-
tributions with randomly distributed current dipoles. The closed distribution causes
most of the signals from within these structures to cancel out, and they do typically
not contribute to the EEG measured on the scalp.
The electrical potential has to travel through the cerebrospinal fluid, the skin,
and the skull to reach the electrodes placed on the scalp. These mediums all have
different electrical conductivities, and as a result, the electrical signals are attenuated
and smeared across the scalp. Therefore, the spatial resolution of scalp EEG is not
very high. These issues are not as apparent with intracranial EEG, but due to the
procedure’s invasiveness, intracranial EEG is rarely used. Scalp EEG constitutes a
==PAGE:24==
12
2 EEG and the brain
Figure 2.4: An example of the orientation of currents with respect to the cortical
surface. The arrows represent cortical currents that result in current dipoles. The
figure is inspired by Figure 2.8 in [22] and Figure 1.6 in [29].
non-invasive, low-cost tool for looking inside the brain with a high temporal resolution
but a low spatial resolution. The following subsection describes the instrumentation
of scalp EEG.
2.2.2
Instrumentation of scalp EEG
A typical way of placing the electrodes on the scalp is according to the International
10-20 system, shown in Figure 2.5. The system places 21 electrodes according to
anatomical landmarks of the skull. The letters of the names refer to the position
on the scalp: pre-frontal (Fp), frontal (F), temporal (T), parietal (P), occipital (O),
and central (C). Even numbers enumerate the electrodes on the right side, while odd
numbers enumerate the left side. The electrodes are spaced along the nasion-to-inion
line and between the ears by 10% or 20% of the total distances. A similar, more dense
system is the 10-10 system where all electrodes are spaced by 10%, resulting in 81
electrodes. Additional electrodes can be placed on the earlobes (A1 and A2) and the
mastoids (M1 and M2).
Often the electrodes are already embedded in a cap or a mesh, which allows for
easy placement of the electrodes in the specified positions. The physicians mainly need
to ensure a low impedance between the electrodes and the skin using a conductive
gel. It is essential for proper signal amplification that the impedance is comparable
across electrodes since loose electrodes can cause artifacts in the signal.
EEG is
generally very prone to artifacts from both physiological sources (eye movements,
chewing, face muscles, and heartbeats) and non-physiological sources (powerline noise
and electrical noise from surrounding equipment). The potential sources of artifacts
==PAGE:25==
2.2 EEG signals
13
Figure 2.5: Electrode placement according to the International 10-20 system. The
figure is from [32] and is used with permission.
and the generally high level of activity in the brain make EEG a signal with a low
signal-to-noise ratio.
Since EEG measures electrical potentials, i.e., the voltage difference between two
electrodes, the EEG will look different depending on the chosen reference electrode.
The typical choice of a single reference is an electrode on the midline, such as Cz,
earlobes, mastoids, and the nose. It is also possible to physically or mathematically
link the earlobes or mastoids and use the link as a reference. When dealing with
epilepsy, it is often preferred to use a bipolar referencing system by measuring the
difference between neighboring electrodes in a specified configuration. The popularity
of bipolar references in epilepsy can be attributed to the fact that it can increase
spatial resolution. Post-acquisition, the signals can be digitally re-referenced to an
average reference by removing the average from all electrodes. One can also digitally
apply a bipolar montage after acquisition.
2.2.3
The 24/7 EEG™SubQ device
UNEEG medical A/S1 has developed a subcutaneous system for long-term EEG mon-
itoring called the 24/7 EEG™SubQ (henceforth referred to as the SubQ). The system
consists of an implant and an external recorder, which can be seen in Figure 2.6(a).
The implant is inserted subcutaneously and consists of three leads (two active leads
and one reference), yielding two bipolar channels. Figure 2.6(b) shows an example of
how the implant can be oriented. The implant is inserted under local anesthesia by a
surgeon. The procedure takes 15-30 minutes, and the recording can begin around 1-3
weeks after implantation. The external logger is placed on the skin above the implant
1Webpage for UNEEG medical A/S: https://www.uneeg.com/
==PAGE:26==
14
2 EEG and the brain
(a) Figure of the implant and the logger.
(b) Example of how the device can be im-
planted to cover the temporal lobe.
Figure 2.6: The UNEEG 24/7 EEG™SubQ device. The figures are from [33].
using adhesive pads. The logger powers the implant and stores the data through an
inductive link connection. The fact that the device is minimally invasive, wearable,
and can be used for more than a year makes it the obvious choice for long-term
monitoring of epileptic patients.
The main drawback of the device is the low spatial coverage compared to 10-20
scalp EEG. However, if the epileptogenic zone is approximately known prior to im-
plantation, the device can be placed accordingly.
Another potential issue is that
the data is recorded in the real world and not in a controlled clinical setting. The
real-world setting makes the EEG signal more exposed to artifacts. Artifactual sig-
nal combined with low spatial coverage increases the risk of masking some seizures
completely.
Despite the potential diﬀiculties, the device still offers the possibility to monitor
epileptic patients in their everyday lives, providing an insight that is not currently
available with other EEG devices on the market. A seizure detection alarm on the
SubQ could alert health care professionals and relatives of potentially dangerous
situations in real-time. Furthermore, studies have shown that the device can give a
more accurate insight into seizure patterns compared to for instance seizure diaries
[4, 6]. Overall, monitoring of seizure activity with the SubQ could benefit the patients,
both in terms of real-time alarms and in subsequent analysis of the patterns of seizure
activity.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Epileptic Seizure
Detection
Machine learning focuses on the automatic discovery of patterns in data to perform
specific tasks such as classification [34]. The purpose of this introduction is to use
machine learning to classify EEG segments into seizure and non-seizure automatically.
The first part of this chapter describes epilepsy and some of its known patterns in
the EEG. The second part introduces the machine learning methods used to develop
a seizure detection model.
3.1
Epilepsy
Epilepsy is associated with recurrent unprovoked seizures originating from underly-
ing physiological abnormalities [22]. The neurons become hyperactive and excitable
during a seizure and fire rapidly and synchronously. The firing spreads to other brain
regions such that an extensive network of neurons participates in the synchronous
activity. The seizures result from underlying physiological abnormalities, but what
causes the abnormal brain activity is not well-understood [22]. It is, however, safe to
assume that the seizures stem from an imbalance in the systems that typically keep
the functions in the brain closely regulated [22].
The manifestation of the seizure varies depending on the seizure type and the
location of the onset. Therefore, an essential step in understanding the disease is
knowing how to classify the different types of seizures that a patient may experience.
3.1.1
Seizure Types
The physical manifestation of a seizure is dependent on the region of the brain affected.
Therefore, one attempt to classify the seizures into subcategories is the International
Classification of Seizure Types from 1981, which classifies the seizures based on the
clinical manifestation and not the pathology that causes the seizures [35]. The clas-
sification system divides the seizures into partial (or focal) seizures and generalized
(or non-focal) seizures, defined by whether the seizure activity is localized or involves
both hemispheres.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Epileptic Seizure Detection
The partial seizures originate in one area in one hemisphere, and the symptoms
are dependent on the location [22]. The partial seizures are subdivided into simple
partial seizures, with no impaired consciousness, and complex partial seizures, which
involve impaired consciousness. Simple partial seizures can evolve into complex par-
tial seizures, and a partial seizure (both a simple and a complex) may evolve into a
generalized seizure. Consciousness refers to the patient’s ability to respond normally
to external stimuli, and seizures involving impaired consciousness are associated with
a reorientation phase after the seizure [35].
The generalized seizures typically cause impaired consciousness.
Generalized
seizures are subcategorized into absence seizures (sometimes called petit mal), typi-
cally without motor symptoms, and four different types of seizures implicating motor
symptoms [35]. These four types are myoclonic seizures associated with sudden body
jolts, clonic seizures resulting in rhythmic, repetitive movements, tonic seizures asso-
ciated with stiffening of muscles, and tonic clonic seizures, sometimes referred to as
grand mal. Tonic clonic seizures start with a loss of consciousness, progress into the
tonic phase, and end with clonic cramps.
If a seizure continues for more than 5 minutes, it is classified as status epilepticus
[36]. Both partial and generalized seizures can evolve into status epilepticus, which is
a dangerous condition. Due to depletion of metabolic resources, patients undergoing
status epilepticus are at risk of brain damage and death [22].
Due to the localization of partial seizures, they are typically only visible in some
of the EEG channels. On the other hand, generalized seizures will commonly show
in all EEG channels. The patterns differ between seizure types and patients, but the
following subsection describes some of the patterns qualitatively.
3.1.2
Seizures in the EEG
During an epileptic seizure, the neurons of a small or large area fire rapidly and
synchronously, and this behavior will typically be visible in the EEG. Typical changes
seen in the EEG are [22]:
• Synchronization between a few or more EEG channels near the site of seizure
activity.
• Increase in amplitudes either due to the increased synchronization or the larger
number of neurons involved.
• Increased oscillatory behavior typically occurs when a large area of the brain is
involved in the seizure.
Seizure EEG is, however, associated with a high degree of variation. The variation
occurs between subjects, between different seizures within the same subject, and even
within the same seizures. There is no guarantee that the EEG exhibits all or any
points mentioned above. [22]. The changes are often apparent due to a sudden change
in the EEG, and neurologists typically label the data by observing the background
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Epilepsy
17
data and recognizing the changes in the same subject [22]. The labeling process in
the clinic typically involves shifting between different digital montages of the scalp
EEG and looking at spectrograms of the signals [37]. If the EEG is recorded at the
epilepsy monitoring unit (EMU), video footage of the patient typically accompanies
the EEG, and observations of the clinical manifestations can assist the electrographic
observations.
Figure 3.1 shows an example of a tonic clonic seizure from the TUSZ database in
10 of the available channels. The orange background indicates the annotated seizure,
and the time on the x-axis is relative to the beginning of the record. Since the seizure
is generalized, the seizure activity is visible in all channels. The seizure is easy to
detect for the untrained eye as the EEG visibly changes, especially after 20 seconds.
After 20 seconds, the amplitudes increase, and the signal becomes dominated by high
frequencies. Around 15 seconds, there are clear synchronized oscillations, especially
in Fp1-F7, F7-T3, T5-O1, Fp1-F3, and F3-C3.
Figure 3.1: Tonic clonic seizure from subject 0630 of the TUSZ database, record
s002_t001. All channels are plotted on the same range of the y-axis. The orange box
marks the part of the EEG that is annotated as seizure.
Figure 3.2(a) shows an example of a complex partial seizure from the TUSZ
database. Again, the orange background indicates the annotated seizure, but it is
not present in all channels since the seizure is partial. The channels are annotated
separately, and the start time of the seizure differs between channels. The plot only
shows 10 channels for simplicity, but the seizure was also visible in channels T5-O1
and P3-O1. In Figure 3.2(a), it is clear to see that the amplitude changes, especially
in T6-O4 and P4-O2. Similar changes are also visible in T4-T6 and C4-P4 but to a
smaller extent. Figure 3.2(b) only shows 10 seconds of signal, making it easier to see
the synchronization between the channels.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Epileptic Seizure Detection
(a) Longer range of the signal to show the temporal changes.
(b) Shorter range of the signal to show the synchronization between channels.
Figure 3.2:
Complex partial seizure from subject 13407 of the TUSZ database,
record s001_t013. All channels are plotted on the same range of the y-axis. The
orange box marks the part of the EEG that is annotated as seizure. Since the seizure
is partial, the channels are individually labeled.
The two examples show what a seizure can look like in the EEG, and the section
describes some of the observable changes during seizures qualitatively. For a mathe-
matical model to automatically classify seizure and non-seizure segments, the charac-
teristics need to be quantified by features to compute an optimal decision boundary.
The optimal decision boundary can be found using machine learning techniques.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Machine learning for seizure detection
19
3.2
Machine learning for seizure detection
Traditional seizure detection models typically rely on manual feature extraction prior
to classification. The extracted features need to be suﬀiciently rich to describe the
seizure characteristics. Typically, no single feature is suﬀicient in characterizing a
seizure, and a combination of features is needed to build a robust detector [22].
Often, the primary handcrafted features used for seizure detection are features ex-
tracted in the frequency domain. Time-domain features can be used complementary
but rarely yield suﬀicient insight when used alone [22]. Handcrafted features are lim-
ited by preliminary knowledge and may restrain the insights that could be contained
in the discarded parts of the time series. Given an adequately flexible model and
enough data, learning an even more informative feature space directly from the raw
time series might be possible.
Deep learning (DL) is a method of learning used for training artificial neural
networks (ANNs). An ANN is a machine learning model that is useful for learning
complex decision boundaries directly from data [38]. ANNs can be trained directly
on raw data through powerful modules for automatic feature extraction. The first
part of this section is dedicated to general machine learning theory, and the next part
to DL and ANNs more specifically.
In the entire section, a single vector of dimension RD1×D2···×Dx is denoted by
lowercase bold letters, e.g., xn. If xn is a scalar, it is denoted xn, i.e., not in bold. A
concatenated matrix of N vectors (for instance all input samples from a training set)
is denoted by capital bold letters, e.g., X, which has dimension RN×D1×D2···×Di.
3.2.1
Supervised learning
The theory of this subsection is based on [34] unless otherwise referenced. Tradi-
tionally, machine learning can be divided into unsupervised learning and supervised
learning. In supervised learning, the objective is to learn a mapping F, tn = F(xn),
from a training set of size N denoted D = {(x1, t1) , (x2, t2) , . . . , (xN, tN)}. The train-
ing set consists of the set of input vectors X = {x1, x2, . . . xN}, xn ∈RD1×D2···×Dx,
and their corresponding targets T = {t1, t2, . . . tN}, tn ∈RDt. If the target is a
continuous number it is a regression task. On the other hand, if the target is discrete
it is classification task. This project deals with binary classification, since the aim is
to classify a segment xn with C channels of duration T, xn ∈RC×T , as either seizure
or non-seizure, tn.
The model F is parametrized by θ and the aim is to find the set of parameters
such that Fθ best describes the relation between the inputs X and the targets T .
The degree to which the parameters θ describe the relation can be translated into
the posterior probability of the parameters given the training set, p (θ|D). Under this
formulation, the aim is to find the θ that maximizes the posterior probability. Using
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Epileptic Seizure Detection
Bayes theorem, the posterior probability can be factorized as follows:
p (θ|D) = p (D|θ) p (θ)
p (D)
.
(3.1)
Here, p (D|θ) is called the likelihood, describing how likely the data is given the
parameters θ, p (θ) is the prior likelihood over the parameters, and p (D) is the
distribution over the training dataset, independent of θ. Since p (D) is independent
of θ, it can be omitted from the expression.
Assuming that the prior is relatively flat in the neighborhood around the peak of
the likelihood the expression is reduced to p (θ|D) ∝p (D|θ). The posterior probabil-
ity then only depends on the likelihood. If the likelihood is maximized with respect to
θ, the resulting set of parameters, θ∗, are also the ones that maximize the posterior
likelihood. This is called maximum likelihood estimation.
A typical choice of the likelihood for binary classification is the Bernoulli likelihood.
The likelihood factorizes across the dataset if the targets are assumed independent
given the inputs. The Bernoulli likelihood across the dataset can then be written as:
p (T|θ, X) =
N
∏
i=n
ytn
n (1 −yn)1−tn ,
(3.2)
where T = {t1, . . . , tN} are the actual targets taking the value of either 0 or 1, and
yn = p (C1|Fθ (xn)) ∈[0, 1] is the probability of class 1 under the model parametrized
by θ.
In practice, it is more convenient to consider the logarithm of the likelihood. Tak-
ing the logarithm of a product becomes a sum, and summing is typically less com-
putationally expensive. Furthermore, multiplying many numbers between 0 and 1
can result in a very small output. Additionally, most optimization algorithms do
minimization as opposed to maximization. One can quickly turn the problem into a
minimization problem by negating the term, resulting in a loss function based on the
negative log-likelihood:
L(T, Fθ (X)) = −ln p (T|θ, X) = −
N
∑
i=1
(tn ln (yn) + (1 −tn) ln (1 −yn)) ,
(3.3)
which is called the cross-entropy loss.
The loss function can be minimized using
several different models for modeling the probability, such as logistic regression and
ANNs.
3.2.2
Cross-validation methods
The theory in this subsection is based on [39] unless otherwise referenced. In machine
learning, the goal is not to find the best model for the training set. Instead, the
actual goal is to find a model that generalizes well to unseen examples. It is therefore
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Machine learning for seizure detection
21
of interest to estimate the generalization error. The generalization error is the true
estimate of the expected error of the model, Fθ, on all possible future examples:
Egen = E(Xf ,Tf )
[
L (Tf, Fθ (Xf))
]
,
(3.4)
where {Xf, Tf} are all possible future input values and targets.
In reality, it is
impossible to test all future values, and one has to rely on a test set for estimating
the generalization error.
The main issue is to divide the dataset and choose an
appropriate method for evaluation, such that the chosen model overfits to neither the
training set nor the test set.
The computationally least expensive way of doing so is to use the hold-out method,
where the full dataset, D, is split into a subset for training and one for testing:
D = Dtrain ∪Dtest.
(3.5)
The training set is used to train the model and for model selection, and the test set
is used to evaluate the final model. If the test set is large enough, the hope is that
the test error is a close estimate of the true generalization error.
Another way to evaluate a model is to split the data into K sets:
D = D1 ∪D2 ∪· · · ∪DK,
(3.6)
holding out each of the K sets one at a time, while training the model on the remaining
K −1 sets. The generalization error is then estimated by averaging over the K test
errors.
Such an approach is called K-fold cross-validation.
Figure 3.3 shows an
illustration of a 5-fold cross-validation.
Figure 3.3: Figure showing how the data is split into 5 folds of training and test
sets.
When dealing with EEG data in a cross-subject setting, one cannot naively split
the data into train and test sets. In order to obtain a true estimate of how the model
would behave on new, unseen subjects, it is important to ensure that the subjects
used for testing are not also used for training. One way of ensuring this is to do LOSO
cross-validation. One subject is held out for testing in LOSO, while the remaining
subjects are used for training and validating the model. If the dataset contains 10
subjects, this method results in 10 folds. LOSO is illustrated in Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Epileptic Seizure Detection
Figure 3.4: LOSO cross validation splitting for 10 subjects. Each subject contains
10 samples of data.
Another technique is to split the data into fewer folds than the number of subjects
while still ensuring that each subject only occurs in either the train set or the test set.
If the dataset is very unbalanced regarding classes, securing an approximately equal
distribution of classes in the training and test sets is essential. If the data is split
randomly, the model might be trained on some classes and evaluated on others. If
the class distributions are considered during splitting, it is called stratified splitting.
This approach is illustrated on a dataset in Figure 3.5. The splitting process still
ensures that each subject is only present in either the training set or the test set. In
this project, stratified splitting is used to stratify the splits from the TUSZ database
based on the seizure types present in the dataset.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of stratified splitting where the subjects are only present
in one either train or test. Each subject contains 10 samples of data. There are 35
samples from the blue class, 35 samples from the yellow class and 30 samples from
the brown class.
The approaches above solve the issues of splitting the data into train and test sets.
If, however, the chosen model requires tuning of hyperparameters or any other type
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Machine learning for seizure detection
23
of model selection, it is essential to have a separate validation set for choosing the
optimal model. If one uses a validation set for model selection, the test set(s) can still
be used to give an unbiased estimate of the generalization error. Ideally, one would
perform 2-level K-fold cross-validation, where each of the K training sets is again
split into K∗folds for training and validation. Each of these K∗validation splits is
then held out of training using the remaining K∗−1 splits for training. The error
is then estimated on each of the held-out validation splits and averaged, after which
the model producing the lowest error is chosen. The best model is then retrained on
all training and validation sets and tested on the held-out test set. The process can
then be repeated for all K test sets. The error averaged across the test sets is used
as an estimate for the generalization error.
The process mentioned above can, however, be computationally costly. There is
typically both a computational budget and a time budget to consider in practice.
Therefore, the practical solution needs to balance the budget with a solution that
produces reliable results.
3.2.3
Artificial neural networks and deep learning
Over the recent years, DL has outperformed a lot of the traditional models by opti-
mizing feature extraction along with a complex decision boundary. The joint opti-
mization allows the models to discover new patterns in the data optimized for the task
at hand. The theory in this subsection is based on [38] unless otherwise referenced.
Perceptrons represent the original version of an ANN and consist of layers of
neurons that are all interconnected.
Non-linear activation functions separate the
layers for more complex decision-making. An example of a 4-layer perceptron can be
seen in Figure 3.6. The output z of neuron m in layer l, receiving K inputs, xk, from
Figure 3.6: Example of a 4-layer perceptron. Figure inspired by [38].
the previous layer, with weights wj = [w1,j, . . . , wK,j] and bias bj is given as:
zm,l = σ
(
bj +
K
∑
k=1
wk,jxk
)
,
(3.7)
where σ is a non-linear activation function. Popular activation functions include the
rectified linear unit (ReLU), exponential linear unit (ELU), the softmax function, and
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Epileptic Seizure Detection
the sigmoid function. When training an ANN from scratch, the weights and biases
are randomly initialized and subsequently updated to find the optimal configuration
for the task at hand.
If the task of the network is to classify between C classes, the output of the
final layer L is a C-dimensional vector zL = [y1, . . . , yC], which is translated to the
probability of each class through the softmax function. The softmax function is given
as:
pc =
exp yc
∑
c exp yc
,
(3.8)
where pc is the probability of class c. The loss can then be computed using, i.e., the
cross-entropy loss function seen in (3.3), and each weight, w, of the network can be
updated using gradient descent:
wnew = w −η∇wL(w),
(3.9)
where η is the learning rate. The gradient for all individual weights can be eﬀiciently
computed by backpropagating the error through the network using the chain rule
for differentiation. In practice, the data is divided into mini-batches. For each mini-
batch, the loss is computed and backpropagated, and the weights are updated using
(3.9). This approach is known as stochastic gradient descent.
3.2.3.1
Convolutional neural networks
While perceptrons work well for unstructured inputs, they can extract neither spatial
nor temporal structures in the data. Perceptrons require manual feature extraction,
through which the structural information can be incorporated. Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) solve this problem through local receptive fields, weight sharing, and
pooling by replacing the fully connected layers with convolutional layers. This section
focuses on 2D convolutions, but similar theory can be extended to 3D convolutions
or 1D convolutions.
A CNN typically consists of interchanging convolutional layers and pooling layers.
The convolutional layers extract localized features in an image without interconnect-
ing all of the neurons in neighboring layers. This is done by sliding a local receptive
field, commonly referred to as the kernel, across the input. Furthermore, CNNs ex-
ploit the idea that the optimal kernel is likely to be shared across the entire input,
leaving fewer parameters to be optimized. An illustration of how the convolutions
work is given in Figure 3.7.
The input to each convolutional layer is a 3D input xn with Cin images of height
H and width W, xn ∈RCin×H×W . The convolutional layer has Cout filters of weights,
W ∈RCout×Cin×L×K, and a bias, b ∈RCout. For each filter in the convolutional layer,
the output image, Zcout, is given as:
Zcout = bcout +
Cin
∑
cin=1
wcout,cin ⋆xn,cin,
(3.10)
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Machine learning for seizure detection
25
Figure 3.7: Example of the structure of the first convolutional layer of a convolu-
tional network. A local receptive field is slid across the image, at each point producing
one output. The weights of the kernel are unchanged across the entire image. The
figure is under open license from [38].
where ⋆denotes the cross correlation operator. The cross correlation operator is the
sliding dot product and simply means that the kernel wcout,cin is slid across the input
image with a certain stride, at each point producing a single output. The output,
zcoutm,n , at each position m, n in the input image, xn,cin, is thus given as:
zcoutm,n = bcout +
Cin
∑
cin=1
L
∑
l=1
K
∑
k=1
wcout,cinl,k xn,cinm+l,n+k .
(3.11)
The input can be zero-padded before the convolution to ensure that the output size
is equivalent to the input size. Since each layer consists of Cout kernels, it can be
seen as a filter bank extracting different features. The pooling layers use the same
idea of local receptive fields but do not contain any weights. Instead, they perform a
simple pooling operation across the receptive field, for instance, the maximum or the
average. The pooling operation helps the network down-sample the input and only
extract information relevant to the task at hand.
The network can extract high-level features through stacked convolutional layers
and pooling layers. The final features are typically used as inputs to one or more fully-
connected layers that produce the final classification. Therefore, the convolutional
layers replace the manual feature extraction otherwise used for traditional machine
learning models.
3.2.3.2
Regularization in DL
The number of parameters in an ANN quickly becomes very large, and complex
models are prone to overfit to training data. There are several ways to regularize an
ANN, which can improve the performance of the model on test data. Weight Decay
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Epileptic Seizure Detection
is well known from models such as linear regression.
It relies on the smoothness
assumption, stating that data points close to each other in the input space should
produce similar outputs. A way to do so is to encourage the ANN’s weights to be
small, which one does by adding a term, Lpenalize, to the loss function, Loriginal, that
penalizes large weights. The modified loss function then looks as follows:
L(T, Fθ(X)) = Loriginal(T, Fθ(X)) + λ · Lpenalize(θ),
(3.12)
where λ determines the amount of regularization. A popular metric for penalizing
large weights is L2, where the sum of the squared weights is added to the loss function.
If the network has Nθ parameters, the penalization term becomes:
Lpenalize(θ) =
Nθ
∑
i=1
θ2
i .
(3.13)
For binary classification with the cross-entropy loss shown in (3.3), the loss function
is thus given as:
L(T, Fθ(X)) = −
N
∑
n=1
(tn ln (yn) + (1 −tn) ln (1 −yn)) + λ ·
Nθ
∑
i=1
θ2
i .
(3.14)
While weight decay encourages the network to have smaller weights, Dropout
directly alters the architecture during training. Dropout randomly zeroes out some
of the outputs throughout the network with probability p [40]. This is illustrated in
Figure 3.8 with p = 0.5.
Figure 3.8: Illustration of dropout with dropout probability p = 0.5. Inspired by
[38].
Dropout encourages sparsity in the extracted features and reduces co-adaptation.
Co-adaptation refers to the interdependency of neurons in the same layer, where some
neurons may be optimized to fix the behavior of other neurons. If co-adaptation is
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Evaluation of seizure detection models
27
reduced, each neuron is forced to not rely on a specific set of other neurons but
instead find optimal features on its own that work well in different contexts [40].
Since different nodes are constantly zeroed out, it effectively corresponds to training
an ensemble of models, a technique known to give more robust results [39].
The
learned weights are averaged across all units during evaluation to give a deterministic
prediction.
A final type of regularization is Batch Normalization [41], which is a way to
reduce covariate shifts between layers. The idea is to learn how to normalize the
features between the layers, increasing the speed of convergence. Like the remaining
optimization, the normalization is learned on mini-batches of data. A mini-batch
consists of N samples with C feature maps of size H × W, X ∈RN×C×H×W . Each
feature map, Xc, is standardized across the mini-batch with respect to its mean and
variance:
ˆXc =
Xc −E[Xc]
√
Var[Xc] + ϵ
,
(3.15)
where ϵ is chosen as some small value to ensure stability in case of small variances
[41]. To preserve the representation power of the network, the standardized features
of each feature map are then scaled and shifted with trainable parameters γc and βc
[41]:
Zc = ˆXc · γc + βc.
(3.16)
The transformation makes sure that the inputs to each layer stay within the dynamic
range of the non-linearities around 0. Furthermore, it helps regularize the network
by inducing noise through the transformation since each input to the subsequent
layer will look slightly different between epochs when the batches are shuffled. Fi-
nally, the mean and variance across the entire training set are estimated and used for
normalization during evaluation.
3.3
Evaluation of seizure detection models
To build a good model for seizure detection, defining what constitutes a good model
is necessary. A model’s performance is typically measured through several metrics,
and this section describes the evaluation methods used for this project. Additionally,
the section describes the post-processing methods used on the raw model predictions.
3.3.1
Evaluation of performance
Accuracy is often the chosen metric for evaluation in classification tasks. However,
the task of classifying between seizure and background is typically very unbalanced
(usually records used for seizure detection contain 95% non-seizure data or more
[22]). Therefore, accuracy is not a very descriptive metric, and other metrics should
be considered instead.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Epileptic Seizure Detection
The metrics used for quantifying the performance of classification tasks are typ-
ically calculated based on the number of true positives (TPs), false positives (FPs),
true negatives (TNs), and false negatives (FNs). These metrics are not always straight-
forward to define in time series classification. Typically the time series are segmented
into windows for training and evaluation, associating each window with a label. One
way of counting TPs, FPs, TNs, and FNs for time series classification is to count how
many of the windows that are correctly or wrongly classified within each class. This
approach will be referred to as window-based scoring.
However, the seizure annotations of the time series are given in terms of start
and stop time of the events. Since the seizures vary in length, short seizures will
be represented by fewer windows than longer seizures, which can inflate the metrics.
Therefore, an alternative way of computing the metrics is to convert the window-based
predictions into predicted events. The metrics can then be computed by counting the
number of true events that coincide with the predicted events.
The metrics can, for instance, be computed using the any overlap method (OVLP
method) [5]. Using the OVLP method, TPs are counted if the true seizure event
overlaps with one or more predicted seizure events. If a predicted seizure event does
not overlap with a true seizure event, it is counted as an FP. Reference seizure events
that do not overlap with any predicted events count as FNs, and background events
that overlap with background predictions count as TNs. Figure 3.9 illustrates the
OVLP method.
Figure 3.9: Example of the OVLP method. Since two of the predicted seizure events
fall within the duration of the actual seizure event and one is before, there is 1 TP
and 1 FP. Since the background events before and after the seizure both overlap with
a predicted background event there are 2 TNs.
Once the TPs, FPs, TNs and FNs have been counted, a number of metrics can
be computed. Clinically, it is of interest to know how many of the seizure events
are recognized as seizure by the model. The sensitivity, also referred to as the true
positive rate (TPR), is a measure of this. It is also of interest to know how likely it
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Evaluation of seizure detection models
29
is that a seizure alarm produced by the model is actually a seizure [22]. This can be
reported using the precision, also referred to as the positive predictive value (PPV).
The TPR and the PPV are calculated as follows [39]:
Sensitivity (TPR) =
TP
TP + FN ,
(3.17)
Precision (PPV) =
TP
TP + FP .
(3.18)
The harmonic mean of the sensitivity and the precision is called the F1 value:
F1 = 2 · (Sensitivity · Precision)
Sensitivity + Precision ,
(3.19)
which is a useful tool for measuring the trade off between the two. Another popular
metric in epileptic seizure detection is the specificity, or the true negative rate (TNR):
Specificity (TNR) =
TN
TN + FP .
(3.20)
Finally, a metric typically reported for seizure detection is the false alarm rate
(FAR), typically reported as the number of false alarms per 24 hours [5].
For comparison, Haider et al. [42] evaluated the sensitivity of trained professionals
given a combination of extracted EEG features and raw EEG signals. The study found
that the professionals achieved a sensitivity in the range of 63%–68% and a FAR of
0.5 per hour. Wilson et al. [43] also assessed the performance of trained professionals
but on raw EEG signals and found a sensitivity of 92% and an FAR of 0.12 per hour.
These numbers could be used as a benchmark to work towards. For a seizure detection
alarm, it would, however, never be an option to have professional monitoring of the
EEG around the clock, and presumably a model with a lower sensitivity and a higher
FAR could still add value to the everyday life of an epileptic patient.
3.3.2
Post-processing of predictions
In order to convert the model’s windowed predictions to events, we apply three types
of post-processing. The post-processing follows the same procedure as in [5].
Initially, we filter the predictions using probabilistic filtering such that only win-
dows predicted as seizures with probabilities over a certain threshold are kept (for
instance, p = 0.70). We then filter the predictions using a duration filter, such that
only seizure events above a specific duration are kept (for instance, dur = 2 s). Finally,
we aggregate seizure events shortly after each other. This is done by calculating the
padding factor w(d) = −0.0083d2 +0.45·d−0.66, where d is the duration of the event.
We then add the padding to the endpoint of the event, and if the modified endpoint
overlaps with another seizure event, we group the two events into one. Figure 3.10
shows the post-processing workflow.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Epileptic Seizure Detection
Figure 3.10: post-processing of predictions with the probability threshold set to
p = 0.70 and the duration threshold set to dur = 2 s. Figure inspired by [5].
After post-processing the predictions, we can compute the performance using the
OVLP method described in section 3.3.1. We apply no post-processing when reporting
metrics using the window-based method. We then simply take the class with the
highest predicted probability as the prediction.
During tuning of the model, we report the results using the window-based method,
since it gives a more accurate representation of the actual performance of the model
including the agreement on start and end time of the annotations.
For the final
evaluation on the TUSZ dataset, we convert the predictions to events and report the
results using the OVLP method.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental setup
This chapter covers the details of the experiments run in this project. The initial
part of the chapter is dedicated to a description of the two datasets, the CHB-MIT
dataset and the TUSZ dataset. Subsequently, we describe the architecture of the
CNN used for seizure detection. Finally, we report the training setups for the two
datasets separately.
4.1
Datasets
We use two datasets for training and testing the model. The CHB-MIT dataset is
used for validating the model since the chosen model was initially developed for this
dataset [2]. However, the real aim is to develop a model for a subset of the TUSZ
database v1.5.2. We chose the TUSZ database since it contains the highest number of
subjects (652 subjects in total) among the publicly available datasets, deeming it most
relevant for exploring the issue of cross-subject learning. Furthermore, the CHB-MIT
dataset only contains pediatric patients, whereas the TUSZ database contains data
from patients of all ages (ranging from 0 to 91 years of age). The primary goal is to
develop models for adult patients. Since the ages of the patients are listed, a dataset
containing only adult patients can easily be constructed from the TUSZ database.
4.1.1
The CHB-MIT dataset
The CHB-MIT dataset consists of scalp EEG recordings from 23 pediatric patients1
suffering from intractable epilepsy [7]. Each subject contains several records (between
9 and 42) stored in European Data Format (EDF) files. Most of the files consist of 1-
hour recordings, while a few have a duration of 2 or 4 hours. The dataset is sampled at
256 Hz with 16-bit resolution and recorded using an 18-channel bipolar montage with
electrode positions according to the 10-20 system. Figure 4.1(a) shows the bipolar
montage. Some of the records contain channels based on two extra electrodes, FT10
and FT9, but since these electrodes are typically not available, we do not include the
extra channels.
1The dataset is grouped into 24 cases where case 21 contains data from the same subject as case
1, but the data was recorded 1.5 years after the initial recordings. We group the data from these
two cases into subject 1.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Experimental setup
Three of the records from subject 12 are recorded using a different montage. We
re-reference these records to the same montage as the remaining records2. Table 4.1
gives an overview of the data included for each subject. The seizures in the dataset
have an average duration of 60 seconds, with the shortest seizure lasting 6 seconds
and the longest seizure lasting 752 seconds.
4.1.2
The TUSZ dataset
The TUSZ database is a subset of the Temple University Hospital EEG Data Corpus,
the world’s largest publically available EEG resource [45]. The TUSZ database was
first released in 2018 and contains EEG records annotated for seizure activity [18].
A few different versions of the corpus exist since it is continuously updated. This
work is based on the newest version, v1.5.2 (as of March 2022). The TUSZ database
consists of two sets available for download: a training set and a development test set.
Table 4.2 gives an overview of the two sets.
The patients in the dataset are divided into categories depending on the hospital
unit to which they were admitted. The units are different subdivisions of the intensive
care unit (ICU), the epilepsy monitoring unit (EMU), other inpatient divisions (such
as the emergency room (ER) or operation room (OR)), outpatient recordings, or
unknown locations. Many patients admitted to the ICU, OR, or ER were under the
influence of sedatives or other medications. In addition, some of the patients may
have been in a coma during recording. Sedative influence and comatic states are both
conditions that will influence the EEG [29]. When developing a seizure alarm to be
used in everyday life, it is not very likely that the patients wearing the device will be
under the influence of sedatives or in a coma. We therefore exclude sessions recorded
at an ICU, burn unit, OR, ER, or unknown location from the dataset. Furthermore,
we exclude all patients under the age of 15. The revised dataset has a total of 401
subjects. Out of the 401 subjects, 128 subjects contain seizures with an average of 12
seizures, a minimum of 1 seizure, and a maximum of 187 seizures per seizure subject.
The remaining 273 subjects do not contain any seizures. Each of the included subjects
contains between 1 and 122 records stored in EDF files that vary from 11 seconds
to approximately an hour. For some subjects, all records were recorded on the same
day, while the maximum duration between two records from the same subject is more
than 9 years.
The seizures are subdivided into seizure types, and Table 4.3 gives an overview of
the frequency and duration of each seizure type.
The recordings contain between 20 and 128 channels, each recorded using a 16-bit
A/D converter. The sample frequencies vary between 250 and 1024 Hz [5]. The raw
signals are recorded using either an average reference (AR) or a linked ear reference
(LE) [37]. The authors state that a typical way of re-referencing the dataset is the
bipolar TCP montage, also known as the double-banana montage [5].
The TCP
montage can be seen in Figure 4.1(b).
2The records are chb12_27.edf, chb12_28.edf and chb12_29.edf.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Datasets
33
Subject
No.
seizures
Total
dura-
tion (h)
Seizure dura-
tion (s)
Pct.
seizure
data (%)
1
11
73.38
641
0.24
2
3
35.27
172
0.14
3
7
38.00
402
0.29
4
4
156.07
378
0.07
5
5
39.00
558
0.40
6
10
39.00
15
0.06
7
3
67.05
325
0.13
8
5
20.01
919
1.28
9
4
67.87
276
0.11
10
7
50.02
447
0.25
11
3
34.79
806
0.64
12
27
20.69
989
1.33
13
12
33.00
535
0.45
14
8
26.00
169
0.18
15
20
40.01
1992
1.38
16
10
19.00
84
0.12
17
3
16.01
293
0.51
18
6
35.63
317
0.25
19
3
29.93
236
0.22
20
8
27.60
294
0.30
22
3
31.00
204
0.18
23
7
26.56
424
0.44
24
16
12.00
511
1.18
Table 4.1: Overview of the data from each subject in the CHB-MIT dataset.
Dataset
No.
pa-
tients
No.
seizures
Total
dura-
tion (h)
Seizure dura-
tion (h)
Pct.
seizure
data (%)
Train
592
2377
753
47
6.26
Test
50
673
170
16
9.53
Table 4.2: Overview of training set and test set of the TUSZ database.
Initially, we re-reference all records in the TUSZ dataset to the TCP montage. We
then resample the records to 250 Hz using polyphase filtering. Finally, we shuffle the
dataset across the original train and test set, and use different types of cross-validation
methods during the training of the different models.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Experimental setup
(a) 10-20 montage with the 18 longtudi-
nal bipolar channels common to the CHB-
MIT dataset marked with red lines. The
bipolar montage has already been applied
to the dataset upon download.
(b)
10-20
montage
with
the
bipolar
channels used for the temporal central
parasagittal (TCP) montage marked with
red lines. We apply the TCP montage to
the TUSZ database after download.
Figure 4.1: The channels used for the anaysis of the CHB-MIT data set (left) and
the analysis of the TUSZ dataset (right). One might notice that the channels referred
to as T7, T8, P7 and P8 on the left montage are referred to as T3, T4, T5, T6 on the
right montage. This is because the naming is not consistent between the two dataset
as they use two different conventions, but the channel locations are the same [44].
4.2
CNN architecture
The choice of architecture the CNN is the architecture presented by Shamim Hossain
et al. [2]. All models for this project are implemented in Python using PyTorch3 [46].
The model takes an imaged version of the EEG signal as input. The number
of EEG channels constitutes the height of the image, and the number of samples
constitutes the width. Figure 4.2(a) shows an example of an imaged EEG segment.
Figure 4.2(b) shows the same input segment, but with the time series plotted sepa-
rately.
The first convolution is a pseudo-1D convolution across each time series. The
following convolution is a pseudo-1D convolution across channels. These first two
convolutions aim to extract the information from each time series and across the
channels separately. We then apply a non-linear function and perform a max-pooling
operation across time. Subsequently, we include two layers of convolutions, non-linear
functions, and max-pooling operations. We use the ELU as the non-linear function
in between layers. Figure 4.3 shows the model’s architecture. We perform all of the
convolutions with a stride of 1. Depending on the chosen setting, we either zero-
pad the input images in the temporal direction, resulting in no reduction during
3The code is available at https://github.com/theabrusch/semi_active_seizure.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 CNN architecture
35
Seizure Type
No.
events
Mean
dur. (s)
Min.
dur. (s)
Max.
dur. (s)
Focal non-specific seizure (FNSZ)
1079
68.51
1.85
2379.65
Generalized non-specific seizure (GNSZ)
164
95.60
3.01
2448.00
Simple partial seizure (SPSZ)
11
74.19
45.60
97.06
Complex partial seizure (CPSZ)
217
99.87
4.96
1303.00
Absence seizure (ABSZ)
2
7.34
5.07
9.60
Tonic seizure (TNSZ)
45
17.55
4.74
40.62
Tonic clonic seizure (TCSZ)
19
70.18
11.54
211.62
Myoclonic seizure (MYSZ)
1
19.11
19.11
19.11
Table 4.3:
Overview of seizure types in the data included for this project.
We
exclude session recorded at any division of the OR, ER, the burn unit or of unknown
location. We only include subjects over the age of 15. The numbers are accumulated
across the train set and the development test set.
(a) Example of an imaged EEG segment with
amplitude as the depth, channels as height
and time as width.
(b) A plotted version of the image EEG seg-
ment shown to the left. All of the y-axes are
scaled with y ∈[−500µV, 500µV ].
Figure 4.2: Example of one input segment to the network. To the left, the imaged
version with the amplitude of the signal as the depth of the image. To the right, the
same segment is shown, where the signals are plotted individually.
convolution, or we apply no padding in the temporal direction. We always zero-pad
the image in the vertical (EEG channel) direction such that no reduction occurs
across channels. Since no max-pooling is done across EEG channels, the max-pooling
operations have stride 1 × 2.
Depending on the chosen configuration, we flatten
the output of the final layer, or apply global average pooling. Finally, a linear layer
produces the final prediction from the learned features.
Shamim Hossain et al. [2] state that dropout and batch normalization were used in
the network. Unfortunately, they do not report where the layers were inserted. They
also do not mention which dropout probability was used. We, therefore, assume that
batch normalization was applied after all convolutional layers and that the original
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Experimental setup
work only used dropout before the final layer. We apply this convention when tuning
the model on the CHB-MIT dataset.
There is, however, some work showing that dropout between convolutional layers
can improve performance [47, 48], mainly when no data augmentation is applied [47].
Therefore, when tuning the model on the TUSZ dataset, we optimize the dropout
probability applied in between convolutions separately from the dropout probability
of the final layer. We optimize the model using the RMSprop optimizer [49].
4.3
Training setup
We optimize the model on the two different datasets using slightly different setups.
This section, therefore, initially describes the training setup for the CHB-MIT dataset
and, subsequently, for the TUSZ dataset.
4.3.1
Training setup on the CHB-MIT dataset
The initial aim is to reproduce the results on the CHB-MIT dataset reported by
Shamim Hossain et al. [2].
The data is segmented into 2-second windows in the
original work. We use the same convention throughout our experiments.
The seizures in both datasets are annotated with a start and an end time. There-
fore, if records are segmented into windows from start to end, there is a risk that some
windows may contain both background and seizure data. We, therefore, segment the
training records based on the start and end time of the annotations to get as clean
samples for training as possible. This way, the seizure class can also be up-sampled
by using a low stride when segmenting seizure events. We tune the stride used for seg-
menting the seizure class as a hyperparameter called seizure stride. We segment the
background samples similarly, but since the dataset contains more background data
than seizure data, we always set the stride to 2 seconds. We down-sample the back-
ground class during training according to a specified ratio of background to seizure
samples to counter the significant imbalance in the dataset. The ratio is also tuned
as a hyperparameter and referred to as the background rate.
Following the original work, we report the results using LOSO cross-validation
(described in section 3.2.2).
We segment the test data with no overlap between
windows to mimic a real-time alarm setting.
The test records are segmented by
sliding a window from start to end of the record. We set the true label to seizure if
any seizure is present in the window and background otherwise.
We need to tune the hyperparameters not mentioned in the original work. The
hyperparameters include the learning rate, the dropout probability, weight decay, and
the balance between classes in the training set. We set the dropout probability of the
two dropout layers between the convolutions to p = 0 and only tune the final dropout
probability.
Shamim Hossain et al. [2] sample the entire CHB-MIT dataset using a stride of 1
sample ( 1
256 = 0.0039 seconds). This strategy results in a total of 889, 396, 238 seg-
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Training setup
37
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the CNN model inspired by [2]. C refers to the number
of channels in the input, T is the number of samples.
ments across the entire dataset (5, 506, 930 segments if the background segments were
down-sampled to create a balanced dataset). The lowest stride that we experiment
with is 0.05 seconds, 12 samples, for which the training already takes at least 12 hours
per subject. We therefore also tune the stride as a hyperparameter.
We hand-tune the hyperparameters on a subset of the subjects to get a sense
of how the results respond to different choices of hyperparameters.
We tune the
hyperparameters through qualitative assessment of the learning curves. The learning
rate is adjusted by assessing whether the loss function converges, and we tune the
remaining parameters according to the final sensitivity and specificity on the test set.
We run the experiment on all subjects if the results look promising. Finally, we report
the best results across all subjects.
There are a few issues with this approach. First of all, we tune the hyperparame-
ters on the test set. However, the aim is only to reproduce the results of the article,
which bears no mention of validation methods.
The second issue is that there is
no guarantee that the chosen combination of hyperparameters gives the best overall
results since only a few subjects are used for tuning. Again, this is an issue of practi-
cality since a complete LOSO cross-validation optimization requires much time and
computational resources. Since we only aim to reproduce the results of the original
work, we make these practical choices and resort to looking into the results of just a
few subjects and running a final model using LOSO. Following Shamim Hossain et al.
[2], we report the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy on the CHB-MIT dataset.
4.3.2
Training setup on the TUSZ dataset
Initially, we run model from the CHB-MIT dataset on the TUSZ dataset. We split
the TUSZ dataset into five folds of test and training sets using the stratified splitting
method described in 3.2.2. We stratify the splits based on the number of seizures from
each seizure type while ensuring that the same subject is only present in the training
set or the test set. The stratified splitting ensures an approximately equal distribution
of seizure types between the different splits. More than half of the subjects in the
dataset do not have any seizures, and we split these subjects randomly into five folds.
We segment the test sets using a 2-second window with no overlap and no down-
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Experimental setup
sampling of the background class. We then compute and report the results on each
of the five splits. Table 4.4 shows the distribution of seizure types across the different
splits.
We hold out a fixed test set of training for the remaining experiments. In an
attempt to choose a representative test set, we compute the performance over each
test set using the final configuration from the CHB-MIT tuning. We then choose test
split with the median performance to hold out for testing. We use the F1 score as a
single measure of performance.
4.3.2.1
Hyperparameter optimization
The aim is to find the best model for the TUSZ dataset. It is therefore essential to
find a good combination of hyperparameters. For this purpose, the hyperparameters
are optimized using the Python package Optuna [50]. Optuna is a framework that
allows for automatic hyperparameter optimization through an eﬀicient sampling of
the hyperparameter space.
Initially, one defines distributions from which to sample the hyperparameters. Op-
tuna samples one set of hyperparameters for each trial. The default sampler is the
Tree-structured Parzen Estimator algorithm which fits one gaussian mixture model
(GMM), l(x), to the set of parameters that produced the best fit and one GMM,
g(x), to the remaining sets of hyperparameters. The suggested parameters for the
next run are the parameters that maximize the ratio l(x)/g(x). The sampling strat-
egy eliminates the need for a complete grid search. Furthermore, Optuna allows for
pruning of unpromising trials such that experiments that have worse results from the
beginning than previous experiments are not trained to completion. One trial refers
to sampling of one set of hyperparameters and training of the model with the sampled
hyperparameters.
As previously mentioned, we hold out one set for testing, which is, therefore, not
included in the optimization. It is then necessary to choose an appropriate validation
set on which to optimize the hyperparameters. Again, we consider the five original
folds when choosing the validation set. We run the optimization twice, once using the
split with the second-largest F1 score for validation and once using the split with the
second-lowest F1 score for validation. The results on the splits may differ numerically,
but we assume that the optimal combination of hyperparameters will be stable across
splits.
We set a budget of one week, running the optimization over each validation split
simultaneously. Table 4.5 shows the hyperparameters used for optimization. Even
though the training dataset is sampled differently depending on the chosen hyperpa-
rameters, we keep the validation set fixed by using a stride of 2 seconds to segment
the dataset (i.e., no overlap) and evaluate on all background data. The optimizer is
set to maximize the F1 score of the validation set. We use the average F1 score of
the two final epochs to encourage hyperparameters that cause less volatile behavior
in the performance curves. At any given epoch, the average F1 score of the current
and previous epoch is referred to as F1avg.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Training setup
39
Split
Seizure type
0
1
2
3
4
FNSZ
216
216
216
215
216
GNSZ
33
33
33
32
33
SPSZ
0
0
8
0
3
CPSZ
37
36
49
59
36
ABSZ
2
0
0
0
0
TNSZ
0
1
0
44
0
TCSZ
2
3
3
9
2
MYSZ
0
1
0
0
0
Total
290
290
290
359
290
No. subjects
81
82
80
76
82
Table 4.4:
Overview of the distribution of different seizure types as well as the
number of subjects in the different splits of the TUSZ dataset.
Hyperparameter
Sampler
Range
Seizure stride
Categorical
{0.5, 1, 1.5, 2}
Bckg. rate
Categorical
{1, 2}
Conv. dropout prob.
Uniform
[0, 0.7[
FC dropout prob.
Uniform
[0, 0.7[
Global Average Pooling
Categorical
{True, False}
Padding
Categorical
{True, False}
Weight decay
Uniform
[10−5, 10−1[
Learning rate
Loguniform
[10−6, 10−2[
Table 4.5: The hyperparameters that are optimized over during Optuna optimiza-
tion.
”Seizure stride” refers to the stride with which the seizures in the training
set are segmented. ”Bckg. rate” refers to the background to seizure ratio. ”Conv.
dropout prob.” refers to the dropout probability of the first two dropout layers. ”FC
dropout prob.” refers to the dropout probability of the last dropout layer before the
linear layer. ”Global Average Pooling” refers to whether the features are flattened
or global average pooling is applied prior to the final linear layer. ”Padding” refers
to whether the input to the convolutional layers is padded in the temporal direction
(horizontal) or not.
During optimization, we use the pruner called the MedianPruner. The MedianPruner
prunes trials if the F1avg score is lower than the median F1avg score of all previous
runs at the end of a given epoch [50]. The pruner is not turned on until after the
completion of 5 trials. Furthermore, no trials are pruned before having completed at
least 10 epochs.
==PAGE:52==
40
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This chapter reports the results of the CNN for seizure detection. The first section
focuses on the results on the CHB-MIT dataset and the aim is to reproduce the results
from the original work. The aim of the project is, however, to develop a model for
seizure detection on the TUSZ dataset. Therefore, the major part of this chapter is
dedicated to the TUSZ dataset and analysis of these results.
5.1
The CHB-MIT dataset results
We report the initial results on the CHB-MIT dataset. We train the model using the
following hyperparameters: we segment the seizures with a 0.1 s stride (resulting in
1.9 s overlap between subsequent segments) and down-sample the background class
to create a balanced dataset. We use a learning rate of 1e-5 and a batch size of 1024.
For regularization, we set the weight decay to 0.01 and the dropout probability of
the final dropout layer to p = 0.6. We do not use dropout between the convolutional
layers. Additionally, we train the model for 150 epochs for each test subject and
report the results for one run - i.e., we use no multi-start. Finally, we sample the
test datasets with 2 seconds stride (i.e., no overlap) and do not down-sample the
background class during testing. Table 5.1 shows the test results for each subject.
It is clear from Table 5.1 that the results do not match the ones reported in the
original work. For most subjects, both the sensitivity and specificity are lower than
the results reported by Shamim Hossain et al. [2] and, consequently, the accuracy. For
some subjects, the sensitivity is lower but the specificity is higher - for instance subject
17, with a sensitivity of 85.03% vs. 92.61% and specificity of 91.34% vs. 82.35%. For
other subjects, the results are lower but still in the same range - for instance, subject
7 has a sensitivity of 90.24% vs. the reported 100.0% and a specificity of 95.86% vs.
the original 99.12%. Finally, for some subjects, the final results achieved in this work
are much lower than the results in the original work. For example, subjects 13 and
14 have lower sensitivities and specificities than those reported by Shamim Hossain
et al. [2].
As earlier noted, we evaluate the model on all of the data from the subject held out
for testing. Due to the significant class imbalance in the dataset, most of the evaluated
instances are background samples. The imbalance means that the accuracy mainly
reflects the specificity of the model. When looking at the results produced for this
work, it is evident that the accuracy is very close to the specificity for all subjects.
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Results
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Accuracy (%)
Subject
This work
Hossain
et al.
This work
Hossain
et al.
This work
Hossain
et al.
1
70.46
96.88
97.36
84.13
97.29
98.23
2
74.71
99.73
97.72
93.50
97.69
98.99
3
48.77
83.34
99.37
96.68
99.22
97.51
4
62.30
99.49
91.86
96.20
91.84
97.32
5
95.04
59.36
56.10
67.57
56.25
96.25
6
32.53
74.27
78.68
99.18
78.65
99.99
7
90.24
100.00
95.86
99.12
95.85
99.76
8
22.94
68.26
93.68
89.36
92.77
99.54
9
97.87
75.18
48.98
94.65
49.04
99.59
10
83.33
100.00
96.59
59.57
96.56
89.25
11
90.10
100.00
92.47
97.75
92.46
97.16
12
43.22
80.35
72.95
97.95
72.55
97.49
13
12.13
97.20
58.28
96.34
58.07
98.66
14
11.11
88.45
66.56
99.39
66.45
97.48
15
44.68
89.35
94.30
98.15
93.61
96.45
16
68.89
100.00
81.68
83.17
81.67
99.83
17
85.03
92.61
91.34
82.35
91.31
99.99
18
42.33
86.67
97.92
98.29
97.78
98.55
19
79.17
99.90
98.80
99.57
98.75
98.65
20
58.28
98.00
88.41
94.24
88.32
99.56
22
93.33
87.65
96.02
99.69
96.02
99.57
23
67.13
99.67
96.55
89.56
96.42
96.45
24
60.84
93.42
91.91
91.49
91.53
98.95
Mean
62.36
90.00
86.23
91.65
86.09
98.05
Table 5.1: Results of the LOSO training strategy on the CHB-MIT dataset. The
results produced for this work are listed alongside the results from the article by
Shamim Hossain et al. [2] that we were trying to recreate.
However, Shamim Hossain et al. [2] achieve a sensitivity of 100.00% and a specificity
of 59.57% for subject 10, but an accuracy of 96.56%. This discrepancy between the
specificity and accuracy does not match the findings from this work. It, therefore,
seems that the results in the original work may not be evaluated in the same fashion
as in this work, making the results diﬀicult to compare directly.
Furthermore, since many details regarding both the training and evaluation are
unclear from the article, it seems unlikely that the results could be reproduced. I made
several attempts to contact the authors, but with no success. We, therefore, keep the
results as is. However, it is concerning that the model produces low results for some
of the subjects. To test the robustness of the results with respect to initialization, we
==PAGE:55==
5.1 The CHB-MIT dataset results
43
run a multi-start experiment in the following section. The experiments are run on
subjects 7 and 14 since they represent some of the highest and lowest performances.
5.1.1
Robustness of results
Neural network optimization is a non-convex problem and due to stochastic opti-
mization methods, results differ depending on the specific initialization. One can,
therefore, use a strategy called multi-start to examine the robustness of the results
with respect to initialization. Multi-start refers to the retraining of the network with
the same setting but with a new random initialization. We do this four times (in-
cluding the initial run) for subjects 7 and 14. Table 5.2 shows the results for each
of the four runs using subject 14 for testing. The table shows that the initial run
reported in the previous section (run 1 in Table 5.2) has a sensitivity above the aver-
age. However, the specificity, and as a result also the accuracy, of the initial run is
below the average. The table also shows that the standard deviation of the specificity
and accuracy is relatively high. However, the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy
are still all below the average across subjects reported in Table 5.1 and much below
the results reported in the article.
Table 5.3 shows the results on subject 7. The table shows that for run 1, the
sensitivity is slightly above the average across the four runs. However, the specificity
and accuracy are below the average across the four runs.
It also shows that the
sensitivities for runs 2 to 4 all end up at 87.80%, and the table generally shows that
the standard deviations are very low compared to subject 14.
The low standard
deviations indicate that the results for subject 7 are less sensitive to initial conditions
than the results for subject 14.
Therefore, the multi-start experiment confirms that the results for subject 14 are
much lower than for the remaining subjects and that the performance on subject 7
is high. A more thorough investigation of the effect of stride, balance and dropout
probability is found in Appendix section A.1. We accept the results and move on to
the TUSZ dataset instead.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Results
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Accuracy (%)
Run 1
11.11
66.56
66.45
Run 2
10.00
71.18
71.06
Run 3
5.56
88.65
88.49
Run 4
10.00
69.57
69.46
Mean
9.17
73.99
73.87
Std
2.13
8.62
8.62
Table 5.2:
Results from the multi-start experiment using subject 14 as the test
subject.
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Accuracy (%)
Run 1
90.24
95.86
95.85
Run 2
87.80
97.80
97.78
Run 3
87.80
96.41
96.40
Run 4
87.80
96.52
96.51
Mean
88.41
96.65
96.63
Std
1.06
0.71
0.71
Table 5.3:
Results from the multi-start experiment using subject 7 as the test
subject.
5.2
The TUSZ dataset results
Initially, we run a model with the final hyperparameters from the CHB-MIT dataset
on the TUSZ dataset using 5-fold cross-validation. Section 4.3.2 describes the method
used for splitting the dataset. The TUSZ dataset contains more data than the CHB-
MIT dataset (32 hours of seizure vs. 3.1 hours of seizure) resulting in roughly 10
times longer trainings. We therefore increase the seizure stride to 1 s instead of 0.1 s
to reduce the training set. None of the other hyperparameters were changed.
Table 5.4 shows the results on the five folds. The results vary between the splits,
even though we split the data in a stratified manner. The number of seizure segments
varies between splits since we stratify the splits based on the number of seizures, not
the seizure length. As stated in section 4.3.2, we choose the set with the median
F1 value to hold out for testing for the remainder of the experiments. We use the
sets with the second-lowest and the second-highest F1 value as validation sets for
the Optuna optimization. Thus, we hold out set 4 for testing and sets 1 and 3 for
validating the optimization.
We run two optimizations in parallel, one on each validation set. We run both
optimizations for one week, and each trial is run for 100 epochs with a batchsize of 512.
The optimization on set 1 has 15 completed trials and 19 pruned trials. Meanwhile,
the optimization on set 3 consists of 34 completed trials and 21 pruned trials. The
total number of runs differs between the two optimizations because the training time
==PAGE:57==
5.2 The TUSZ dataset results
45
CV fold
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
F1
Seiz.
Bckg.
segments
segments
1
81.71%
76.72%
11.00%
19.39%
5,407
153,508
2
75.68%
90.25%
33.85%
46.78%
10,511
148,033
3
54.53%
90.19%
36.67%
43.85%
15,858
152,268
4
30.70%
92.62%
25.35%
27.77%
17,128
209,861
5
45.23%
86.37%
11.13%
17.86%
9,616
229,772
Mean
57.57%
87.23%
23.60%
31.13%
11,704
178,688
Std
18.94%
5.62%
10.89%
12.10%
4,292
34,214
Table 5.4: Initial results on the 5 different folds of the TUSZ dataset.
depends on the sampled stride and background rate.
Table 5.5 shows two tables with the five best runs for sets 1 and 3, respectively.
The tables show that the optimization increases the F1 score for set 1 and slightly
decreases the F1 score for set 3 compared to the initial results reported in Table 5.4.
However, the initial model is trained on all data (except each test set), while we also
hold out set 4 when running the Optuna optimization. Furthermore, we train the
initial models for 150 epochs, whereas we only run the models for 100 epochs during
Optuna optimization.
When looking at the best combination of hyperparameters for each of the two
sets in Table 5.5, it is apparent that the optimization has ended up in two somewhat
different minima. Both sets favor a dropout probability of around 50% for the final
dropout layer. However, the best run on set 3 has a dropout probability of 9.67%
between convolutions, while the best run on set 1 has a convolutional dropout proba-
bility of 32.45%. Furthermore, there are differences in the learning rate, background
rate, stride, weight decay, and whether to use global average pooling or not.
In the best-case scenario, the two optimizations had ended up with similar hy-
perparameters. Therefore, to choose the final combination, we train a model using
the best hyperparameters tuned on set 1 and evaluate on set 3, and vice versa. We
choose the set of hyperparameters that produces the best overall results for the final
model. Table 5.6 shows the results on sets 1 and 3 when training with the two final
sets of hyperparameters. The table shows that, the final hyperparameters from set
3 yield higher sensitivities on both sets than those for set 1. However, the precision,
especially for set 1, is lower and thus the final F1 scores are lower. Consequently, we
choose the best set of hyperparameters from the optimization on set 1 for training
the final model.
We then group sets 1, 2, 3 and 5 into one set for training the final model, which
we test on set 4. Since we do not know the optimal number of epochs for training,
we choose a small validation set to do early stopping. We split the training set using
stratified splitting into 7 folds and randomly choose one of the folds for training and
validating. We segment the validation set in the same fashion as the test set with
no overlap between consecutive windows and no down-sampling of background data.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Results
F1avg
Sens.
Spec.
Prec.
F1
DOconv
DO
LR
Bckg.
Stride
WD
Pool.
Pad.
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
1
37.72
43.46
97.26
34.79
38.65
32.45
47.09
4e−6
1
0.5
6.1e−3
False
True
2
34.07
60.23
94.12
25.64
35.97
31.93
56.62
6e−6
2
0.5
8.8e−3
False
False
3
33.96
59.63
94.43
26.50
36.69
25.30
57.17
6e−6
2
0.5
9.0e−3
False
False
4
33.90
66.26
90.87
19.63
30.29
20.87
69.19
4e−6
2
0.5
1.56e−2
False
False
5
29.52
68.42
90.83
20.08
31.04
18.90
67.88
4e−6
2
0.5
1.43e−2
False
False
(a) Results on set 1.
F1avg
Sens.
Spec.
Prec.
F1
DOconv
DO
LR
Bckg.
Stride
WD
Pool.
Pad.
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
1
40.33
48.03
91.73
37.00
41.81
9.67
50.92
1.51e−4
2
1.5
4e−4
True
True
2
39.87
63.52
83.55
28.08
38.94
15.11
52.51
6.9e−5
2
1.5
5e−5
True
False
3
39.53
52.39
89.26
33.03
40.52
9.43
50.31
1.49e−4
2
1.5
7.6e−3
True
False
4
38.43
60.98
85.89
30.42
40.59
10.44
46.63
1.54e−4
2
1.5
1.3e−3
True
False
5
38.41
61.62
83.41
27.30
37.84
41.21
41.31
6.3e−5
1
1.5
2.44e−2
True
True
(b) Results on set 3.
Table 5.5: The five best Optuna runs using set 1 and 3 for validation respectively. F1avg is the average F1 value of
the two final epoch, over which the optimization is run, whereas F1 is the final F1 value. DO refers to dropout and the
dropout between the convolutional layers is referred to as DOconv. WD refers to weight decay, Bckg. to the background
to seizure ratio in the training set, stride to the stride with which the dataset is sampled, Pool. to whether global average
pooling is applied or not, Pad. to whether the input to the convolutional layers is padded in the temporal direction or
not.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 The TUSZ dataset results
47
Best hyperparameters, set 1
Best hyperparameters, set 3
Val. Split
F1avg
F1
Sens.
Prec.
F1avg
F1
Sens.
Prec.
Split 1
37.72
38.65
43.46
34.79
29.73
36.15
54.78
26.98
Split 3
40.03
40.60
44.03
37.66
40.33
41.81
48.03
37.00
Mean
38.88
39.63
43.75
36.23
35.03
38.98
51.41
31.99
Table 5.6: Results on set 1 and 3 when training the model with the final parameters
from the two optimizations. All of the results are listed in percent.
We train the model for 200 epochs and save a checkpoint at the end of each epoch.
We then choose the best model based on the F1 score of the validation set. Table 5.7
shows the final results on the test set.
The table shows that the final results have not changed much from the initial
results. The F1 score is slightly higher, but presumably not significantly. The sensi-
tivity has dropped slightly but the precision and specificity have increased.
5.2.1
Event-based scoring
The results reported so far are window-based. This section converts the results to
event-based scoring by applying the post-processing described in section ?? and scor-
ing the test set using the OVLP method described in section 3.3.1. We vary the
probability and duration threshold used in the post-processing procedure and com-
pare the results.
Table 5.8 shows the results using different thresholds. The table shows that the
precision and specificity are generally lower than with the event-based scoring. How-
ever, the sensitivity is higher for most choices of thresholds. It is also clear that the
low precision and specificity result in many false alarms. When only keeping predic-
tions with probabilities above p = 0.90 and predicted events with duration above 4 s,
the model detects 25.05% of the seizures and gives 61 false alarms per 24 hours. This
setting yields the highest F1 score of 23.43%.
Based on Table 5.8, it seems beneficial to apply a larger threshold than p = 0.50
and to filter out some of the shorter events.
Though the filtering with p = 0.90
results in the highest F1 score, we apply a probability threshold of p = 0.70 for the
remainder of the analysis. This setting is chosen to allow a slightly higher sensitivity
for the subsequent analysis and to provide a better intuition of the model’s actual
predictions. We then take a closer look at how the results change when varying the
duration threshold. First, we analyze the sensitivity for each seizure type, and the
results are shown in Table 5.9.
Table 5.9 shows that the sensitivity for the TCSZs decreases when the duration
filter is applied, indicating that it is diﬀicult for the model to consistently classify
consecutive windows for the TCSZs.
On the other hand, the sensitivities for the
GNSZs and CPSZs stay more constant, which shows that it is easier for the model to
consistently predict these seizures. The sensitivity is very low for the TNSZs across
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Results
Sensitivity (%)
Precision (%)
F1 (%)
Specificity (%)
29.69
26.47
27.99
93.27
Table 5.7: Window-based evaluation of the final model on the TUSZ test split.
p
dur (s)
Sensitivity
(%)
Specificity
(%)
Precision
(%)
F1
(%)
FAR (per
24 h)
0.50
0
52.65
18.32
3.67
6.85
944
0.50
2
39.28
36.83
6.86
11.68
364
0.50
4
35.93
51.57
10.96
16.80
199
0.60
0
48.19
20.14
3.77
6.99
840
0.60
2
37.05
46.67
7.55
12.55
310
0.60
4
33.15
56.82
12.29
17.94
161
0.70
0
45.13
22.76
4.10
7.22
721
0.70
2
34.54
45.35
8.43
13.55
256
0.70
4
31.20
62.01
14.05
19.38
130
0.80
0
41.23
26.34
4.52
7.88
594
0.80
2
30.92
51.95
9.69
14.76
197
0.80
4
27.86
68.88
16.53
20.75
96
0.90
0
36.77
34.00
5.73
9.92
413
0.90
2
27.58
63.13
13.15
17.81
124
0.90
4
25.07
77.63
21.79
23.32
61
Table 5.8: Event-based results on the test set after post processing for different
probability thresholds and duration thresholds. For each of the different thresholds,
we keep seizure predictions with pseiz > p and with durseiz > dur.
p
dur (s)
GNSZ
FNSZ
CPSZ
TCSZ
TNSZ
0.70
0
50.00
38.60
91.53
88.89
2.27
0.70
2
40.63
26.98
84.75
22.22
2.27
0.70
4
40.63
23.26
79.66
22.22
0.00
Average duration (s)
151.09
105.03
87.82
20.75
17.02
Table 5.9: Sensitivity (%) for the different seizure types using a probability threshold
of p = 0.70 and different duration filtering settings. The bottom line shows the average
seizure duration across the test seizures for each seizure type.
all duration thresholds. If we look at Table 4.4, the table shows that the test set
(set 4) contains 44 TNSZs, and that only one other TNSZ exists in the dataset. The
poor representation of TNSZs could explain the low performance. Furthermore, the
test set is also the one that holds the most TCSZs, which could also be part of the
explanation of the model’s diﬀiculty of predicting TCSZs.
All of the TCSZs and
==PAGE:61==
5.2 The TUSZ dataset results
49
TNSZs in the test set come from the same subject. Furthermore, all of the CPSZ in
the dataset also come from the same subject. Finally, the sensitivity for FNSZs is
not very high for either of the duration thresholds.
Next, we examine the distribution of FPs for seizure and non-seizure records.
The results are shown in Table 5.10. The table shows the difference in FAR per 24
hours and the average number of FPs per record, divided into the records containing
seizure and the ones that do not.
Again, we show the results for three different
filtering settings. The table shows that, for dur = 0 s and dur = 2 s the FAR of the
records without seizure activity is lower than those with seizure activity. However,
when filtering with dur = 4 s, the FAR is slightly higher in the non-seizure records
than the seizure records. The FPs in the seizure records have less impact since they
are probably close to a seizure event. In contrast, many consecutive alarms in records
with no seizure activity would be quite a nuisance. If the FPs group together in the
same records, many of them are avoidable if we turn off the model for a fixed duration
of time after an alarm. This approach could, however, also result in masked seizures.
Therefore, we look into how many of the records contained no FPs. We find that
when dur is 0 s, 64% of the non seizure records and 61% of the seizure records have
no FPs. Furthermore, when dur is 2 s, 80% of the non seizure records and 75% of
the seizure records have no FPs. Lastly, if dur is 4 s the numbers are 87% and 81%,
respectively. It is thus evident that most of the records do not contain any FPs. In the
next section we look at how the predictions change throughout some of the records.
5.2.2
Plotting the predictions
We examine the results across some records with poor results and some with good
results. In all cases, we show five EEG channels, the predicted seizure probability
with a dashed line marking the threshold at p = 0.70, and the binary classification
after filtering with p = 0.70 and dur = 4 s.
Figure 5.1 shows two files that only contain background. In Figure 5.1(a), the
seizure probability is almost constantly high, and as a consequence, even after filtering,
there are 47 false alarms throughout the record. Figure 5.1(b) shows a different case,
where the seizure probability has a short spike around 100 s into the record. However,
since the prediction duration is short, the false alarm is removed when filtered, and
there are no false alarms.
Figure 5.2 shows two records with seizure activity (GNSZ and FNSZ, respectively).
In Figure 5.2(a), it is clear that the seizure probability follows all of the seizures quite
closely. Thus, when the prediction is filtered, five of the six seizures are correctly iden-
tified, and the post-processing removes the potential false alarm around 150 s. Before
filtering, the model also detects the fifth seizure, but the post-processing removes the
prediction since the prediction is short. When filtering on the duration, there is a
risk that we may not detect short seizures. In this case, however, it is probably not
an issue that no alarm is given for the fifth seizure since the relevant personnel would
already have been alerted during the first four seizures. In Figure 5.2(b), the model
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Results
Records w. no seizure
Records w. seizure
p
dur (s)
FAR
Avg. FPs
Avg. dur.
(s)
FAR
Avg. FPs
Avg. dur.
(s)
0.70
0
713
4.6
557
743
6.0
693
0.70
2
251
1.6
557
271
2.2
693
0.70
4
132
0.9
557
125
1.0
693
Table 5.10:
Distribution of false alarms for a probability threshold of p = 0.70
and different duration filtering settings. The table shows the FAR per 24 hours, the
average duration of records and the average number of FPs per record. The results
are shown for records contain no seizures and records that contain seizures.
has one prediction above 0.70 during the seizure, but it is removed during filtering
due to the prediction’s short duration. Instead, the model gives a false alarm at the
record’s beginning.
Finally, in Figure 5.3, we show some of the records containing TCSZs.
Fig-
ure 5.3(a) shows a record containing one of the correctly classified seizures.
It is
clear from the seizure probability that the model detects a lot of seizure activity
throughout the record. However, since all events outside the seizure are short or have
a lower probability than 0.70, they are removed during filtering. The seizure event
is therefore correctly identified although only towards the end. In Figure 5.3(b), on
the other hand, a lot of seizure activity is still present according to the model, but
during the actual seizures, the probability is low. Consequently, none of the seizures
are correctly identified, and the model gives a false alarm just before the second
seizure. One could argue that the false alarm’s short proximity to the seizure makes
it a TP. However, the low seizure probability during both seizures is still concerning.
Therefore, we take a closer look at some of the TCSZs in the next section.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 The TUSZ dataset results
51
(a) Example of record containing only background data with a lot of false alarms. The
binary prediction shown is filtered with p = 0.70 and dur = 4 s, and with this setting the
record contains 47 false alarms. All y-axes are plotted with y ∈[−200, 200].
(b) Example of record containing only background data with one false alarm when no
filtering is applied and no false alarm when filtered. The binary prediction shown is filtered
with p = 0.70 and dur = 4 s, and with this setting the record contains 0 false alarms. All
y-axes are plotted with y ∈[−300, 300].
Figure 5.1: Examples of two records containing only background data with many
and few false alarms respectively. The dashed blue lines on the seizure probabilities
is at p = 0.70.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Results
(a) Example of record containing 6 seizures (GNSZ), where the seizure probability follows
the seizures quite closely and 5 out of 6 seizures are detected when in the binary prediction.
The binary prediction shown is filtered with p = 0.70 and dur = 4 s, and with this setting
the record contains no false alarms, five true positives and one false negative. All y-axes are
plotted with y ∈[−1000, 1000].
(b) Example of record containing one seizure (FNSZ), which is not detected when the
filtering is applied. The binary prediction shown is filtered with p = 0.70 and dur = 4 s, and
with this setting the record contains one false alarm and one false negative. All y-axes are
plotted with y ∈[−500, 500].
Figure 5.2: Examples of two records containing seizure data where the seizures are
quite accurately detected and not detected at all, respectively. The dashed blue lines
on the seizure probabilities is at p = 0.70.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 The TUSZ dataset results
53
(a) Example of record containing one seizure (TCSZ), where the seizure is detected and a
lot of false alarms are removed by the filtering. The binary prediction shown is filtered with
p = 0.70 and dur = 4 s, and with this setting the record contains no false alarms and one
true positive. All y-axes are plotted with y ∈[−500, 500].
(b) Example of record containing two seizures (TCSZs), both of which are not detected
when the filtering is applied. The binary prediction shown is filtered with p = 0.70 and dur
= 4 s, and with this setting the record contains one false alarm and two false negatives. All
y-axes are plotted with y ∈[−500, 500].
Figure 5.3: Examples of two records containing TCSZs. The dashed blue lines on
the seizure probabilities is at p = 0.70.
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Results
5.2.3
Analysis of results on tonic clonic seizures
Since the model’s sensitivity for TCSZs is relatively low, we look at one of the TCSZs
in the test set. Furthermore, we compare it to one of the TCSZs in the validation
set. To better understand the data that the model sees, we now look at 10-second
windows of the EEG. Initially, we look at the detected seizure in the record already
shown in Figure 5.3(a).
Figure 5.4(a) shows 10 seconds of data from the detected seizure. The dashed
vertical lines indicate the windows passed through the model for classification. In
the plot, we see characteristic seizure spikes in the EEG, especially in the channels
shown at the top. Furthermore, we see that some of the channels have significant
low-frequency baseline shifts.
It is evident that the model does not detect the seizure before the last seizure
window. It is, therefore, natural to wonder what the difference is between this window
and the previous ones. It is clear that the spikes are present in all windows, and it
must therefore be other characteristics that dominate the model’s decision.
One
possible explanation could be that the baseline shifts are less apparent in the window
with t ∈[198, 200] than in the previous windows.
In the previous windows, the
baseline shifts are especially seen in channels T5-O1 and P3-O1. We saw the same
high amplitude, low frequency oscillations in all of the TCSZs in the test set.
To better understand why the model does not recognize the seizures in test set, we
look at one of the two TCSZs in the validation set. Both seizures in the validation set
are correctly identified by the model. Although we should be mindful that the model
was chosen based on the validation set, the seizures may still provide insight into
possible explanations. The plots of the records in full length are moved to Appendix
A.2. Appendix A.2 also shows one other TCSZ from the test set and the second
TCSZ from the validation set.
Figure 5.4(b) shows 10 seconds of seizure activity from the first TCSZ in the
validation set. Now, the model consistently predicts a high seizure probability. In
addition, the seizure activity is apparent in almost all of the channels, with the bottom
channels exhibiting synchronized oscillations and all channels showing clear rhythmic
bursts of spikes. The seizure has no baseline shifts in any of the channels.
In conclusion, both seizures show similar, rhythmic bursts of spikes in at least
some channels. However, the slow baseline drifts in the test TCSZ seem to dominate
the model’s prediction. It, therefore, seems that the low sensitivity on TCSZs in
the test set can be prescribed to an issue of representation. However, if the model
could direct its attention to the channels without baseline drifts, it could presumably
classify the windows correctly. In the following section, we remove the minor seizure
types from the dataset and retrain the model to see if a more uniform seizure class
changes the model’s predictions.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 The TUSZ dataset results
55
(a) A closer look at the detected seizure in Figure 5.3(a).
The bottom line shows the
predicted seizure probability, which is low throughout most of the seizure, but increases
towards the end. All y-axes are plotted with y ∈[−500, 500].
(b) A closer look at the first TCSZ in the validation set.
The bottom line shows the
predicted seizure probability, which is high throughout the seizure. All y-axes are plotted
with y ∈[−200, 200].
Figure 5.4: One TCSZ from the test set and one TCSZ from the validation set. The
vertical lines indicate the windows that the model sees. The dashed horizontal lines
are at y = 0 for each channel.
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Results
5.2.4
Training a revised model
Since the model evidently struggles to classify the TCSZs and TNSZs in the test set,
we train a model only including the GNSZs, FNSZs and CPSZs. These are the three
largest seizure types in the dataset.
We create the new training set by including all non-seizure subjects, and only
including the seizure subjects that have at least one seizure from the three seizure
types. Some of the seizure subjects also contain other seizure types than GNSZ, FNSZ
and CPSZ. Therefore, we only include records that are either purely background
or contain at least one of the included seizure types. If any of these records also
contain one of the excluded seizure types, we do not include the windows that contain
excluded seizure activity. We use the same validation set as previously, but use the
same strategy as described for the training set to include subjects and records. We
randomly sample twice as many non-seizure subjects to include in the validation set
to ensure that the background to seizure balance is similar to the original validation
set. Finally, we use the same test set as previously, but we do not evaluate on the
windows that contain excluded seizure activity. We still evaluate on all of the original
background windows to make sure that the specificity, precision and F1 scores can be
directly compared. We train the model using the same hyperparameters as previously.
The window-based results on the revised test set are shown in Table 5.11 along
with the original results from the full model. The table shows that the sensitivity and
F1 score are higher than for the general model, while the specificity and precision are
lower.
Again, we use the post-processing to produce an event-based evaluation.
Ta-
ble 5.12 shows the sensitivity for each seizure type and the FAR per 24 hours when
keeping p = 0.70 and varying the duration filter. For easier comparison, the results
from the full model are reiterated in the table. The table shows that the sensitivities
are generally higher for the revised model. Particularly, the sensitivity for GNSZ is
higher than for the original model. However, the sensitivity for FNSZs is still low
compared to the two other seizure types. The table also shows that the FAR is higher
for the revised model.
The group of seizures removed from the training and validation set consists of 13
generalized seizures (of types ABSZ, TNSZ, TCSZ, and MYSZ) and 11 partial seizures
(of type SPSZ). Even though only 24 seizures out of a total of 1160 are removed, the
large increase in sensitivity for the GNSZs indicates that the model benefits from a
more uniform representation of seizure types in the training set. In Appendix A.3,
we plot some of the seizures detected by the revised model, but not by the original
model.
The revised model manages to detect more seizures with a higher FAR when
removing some of the smaller seizure classes. The results, therefore, indicate that
a seizure alarm could benefit from being trained on a more specialized training set.
When implementing epileptic patients with the SubQ device, the type of epilepsy
will typically be known prior to implantation. Thus, it could be possible to choose a
specialized model based on a patient’s seizure type. This type of implementation does,
==PAGE:69==
5.2 The TUSZ dataset results
57
Sensitivity (%)
Precision (%)
F1 (%)
Specificity (%)
Revised model
35.83
23.29
28.23
90.66
Full model
29.69
26.47
27.99
93.27
Table 5.11: Window-based evaluation of the revised model on the TUSZ test split
only containing the three major seizure types. The table also shows the results from
the full model.
GNSZ
FNSZ
CPSZ
FAR
p
dur (s)
Rev.
Full
Rev.
Full
Rev.
Full
Rev.
Full
0.70
0
71.88
50.00
37.21
38.60
96.61
91.53
873
721
0.70
2
71.88
40.63
27.91
26.98
88.14
84.75
322
256
0.70
4
65.63
40.63
24.19
23.26
86.44
79.66
177
130
Table 5.12: Sensitivity (%) for the different seizure types using a probability thresh-
old of p = 0.70 and different duration filtering settings. The FAR is given per 24
hours. The results are shown for the revised model (Rev.), trained only on GNSZ,
FNSZ, and CPSZ, and for the full model (Full).
however, limit the application on seizure types with less data, such as the TCSZs in
the TUSZ dataset. In addition, we see that the sensitivity for FNSZs is still low. Other
measures are therefore needed to increase the sensitivity of this seemingly diﬀicult
seizure type.
5.2.5
Spectral pertubation tests
For the final part of the analysis, we aim to understand which parts of the EEG are
essential for the model’s prediction. Due to the low sensitivity for FNSZs, we focus
our analysis on these seizures. We analyze the results of the revised model.
We carry out the analysis through spectral perturbation tests similar to Schirrmeis-
ter et al. [51]. Thus, we investigate the correlation between changes in the power
spectrum and changes in the model’s prediction.
Specifically, we group each sub-
ject’s seizure data and background data and convert it to the frequency domain using
fast Fourier transform (FFT). We then add random noise from a Gaussian distribu-
tion with mean 0 and variance 1 to the amplitudes in the frequency domain and use
the inverse FFT to transform the perturbed data back into the time domain. We
then pass the perturbed samples through the model and compute the difference be-
tween the original and the perturbed prediction before the softmax layer. Finally,
we compute the correlation between the spectral perturbations and the difference in
outputs. We do this 200 times for each subject’s seizure and background data and
average across the all iterations. The correlation maps highlight which spectral bands
in which channels correlate with an increase in the model’s prediction of either seizure
or background.
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Results
We focus the analysis on subject 6546 and subject 7234. Looking at the window-
based predictions, the sensitivity of the FNSZs for subject 6546 is 69.98% and 0.30%
for subject 7234. The model correctly classifies 61.30% of the background samples
from subject 6546 and 40.65% from subject 7234.
The TUSZ database contains medical records in free-form text for all subjects[52].
The record for subject 6546 holds the following description for the subject’s seizure ac-
tivity: “left parietal beta discharge that spreads over the posterior temporal leads and
over the left hemisphere increasing in amplitude and decreasing in frequency.” The
medical record for subject 7234 states that the seizure is characterized by “rhythmic
repetitive theta frequency activity” in the “right posterior quadrant.” We, therefore,
examine the correlation maps averaged within the theta (4-7 Hz) and beta (14-30 Hz)
bands, respectively [29].
Figure 5.5 shows the correlation maps between the spectral perturbation and
the seizure prediction for the seizure samples of the two subjects.
Figure 5.5(a)
and Figure 5.5(c) show the correlation maps for subject 6546.
The report states
that the seizures were characterized by a “left parietal beta discharge”.
Looking
at Figure 5.5(c) it is evident that there is a strong positive correlation between the
amplitude in the beta band of C3-P3 and P3-O1 and an increase of the seizure output.
In Figure 5.5(a), the theta band correlation is strong in C3-P3 and Cz-C4. However,
the plot also shows a more widespread theta band correlation over F3-C3. These
observations are in-line with the record stating that the seizure activity spreads “over
the left hemisphere increasing in amplitude and decreasing in frequency.”
Figure 5.5(b) shows the theta band correlations for subject 7234. The plot still
shows a high correlation with increased amplitudes in C3-P3, and a more widespread
correlation on the right hemisphere. Figure 5.5(d) shows the beta correlations that
again are similar to the ones seen in subject 6546. However, these observations do not
match the reported characteristics of “rhythmic repetitive theta frequency activity”
in the “right posterior quadrant.”
For comparison, we show the correlation maps between the spectral pertubations
and an increase in the background prediction for the background samples in Figure 5.6.
The plots show that the background probability is negatively correlated with an
increase in amplitude. Since seizures can be associated with increased amplitudes,
these findings are not surprising. The plots also show that the background probability
is highly correlated with a decrease activity in C3-P3.
We found similar patterns across all subjects with FNSZs in the test set. The
visualizations indicate that the model has learned to associate seizure activity with
increased activity in specific areas. The epileptic focus for subject 6546 coincides with
these areas, and, consequently, the window-based FNSZ sensitivity for subject 6546
is high. In contrast, the epileptic focus for subject 7234 does not coincide with the
learned areas, and, as a result, the sensitivity is very low. The correlation maps for
the remaining EEG bands for the two subjects are shown in Appendix A.4.
It is important to note, that a high correlation does not necessarily indicate that
the samples would have been correctly classified if the activity was increased in a
certain band and channel.
They only indicate whether the seizure probability is
==PAGE:71==
5.2 The TUSZ dataset results
59
(a) Theta band of subject 6546.
(b) Theta band of subject 7234.
(c) Beta band of subject 6546.
(d) Beta band of subject 7234.
Figure 5.5: Correlation maps between spectral perturbations to seizure windows
and the model’s seizure prediction. A dark red color indicates that perturbations in
this frequency band in the given area is associated with a high increase in the seizure
output of the model. On the contrary, the blue color is associated with a decrease in
the seizure output. The outputs are the prediction logits, i.e., the output just before
the softmax operation. We find the highest correlation value, max(corr), across all
frequencies across the seizure and the background logit.
The colormaps are then
scaled between [−max(corr), max(corr)].
positively or negatively correlated with the increases in certain bands and channels.
The model may also have learned other temporal or spatial patterns in the data that
are not reflected in the spectral perturbations. Furthermore, the correlations could
have been examined in a number of ways. For example, we could have chosen to only
look at either correctly or wrongly classified examples. We could also have computed
the correlation between spectral perturbations in background samples and increases
in the seizure prediction or vice versa. Consequently, the analysis is not exhaustive,
but it provides a preliminary diagnostic of the model’s behavior.
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Results
(a) Theta band of subject 6546.
(b) Theta band of subject 7234.
(c) Beta band of subject 6546.
(d) Beta band of subject 7234.
Figure 5.6: Correlation maps between spectral perturbations to background win-
dows and the model’s background prediction. A dark red color indicates that pertur-
bations in this frequency band in the given area is associated with a high increase in
the background output of the model. On the contrary, the blue color is associated
with a decrease in the background output. The outputs are the prediction logits, i.e.,
the output just before the softmax operation. We find the highest correlation value,
max(corr), across all frequencies across the seizure and the background logit. The
colormaps are then scaled between [−max(corr), max(corr)].
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Choice of model
We selected the chosen CNN because it fulfills two criteria: it takes raw time series as
input, and the authors report a good performance in a cross-subject setting. Further-
more, it seemed that the authors reported results on the entire dataset and not on a
down-sampled version, as seen in [15]. Evaluating on the entire unbalanced dataset
is essential for a seizure alarm since the precision and FAR depend on the balance
in the dataset. However, it turned out to be challenging to reproduce the results as
many details were not reported in the article. The lack of details became clear dur-
ing implementation, and attempts were made to contact the authors, unfortunately
without success.
The model’s architecture makes sense for seizure detection, as the first layer should
allow the network to extract temporal and spectral features. Additionally, the sub-
sequent layer allows for the extraction of spatial features. The final two layers can
then extract the global features necessary for classification. Therefore, we decided to
move on with the architecture and attempt to recreate the article’s results. Further-
more, we wished to explore whether the model could be tuned to the TUSZ dataset.
Frequently, deep and complicated neural networks are used for classification (for in-
stance, in [5], [8], and [53]), and it was, therefore, of interest to see if this relatively
shallow neural network would be able to extract the necessary features.
6.2
Results on the CHB-MIT dataset
Despite many attempts at configuring the model from the article, through adjusting
the unreported hyperparameters, the final results did not match the original work
[2]. There might be many explanations for this mismatch, either related to the ar-
chitecture or the sampling of the dataset. As previously mentioned, the stride used
for sampling this project’s data is higher than the stride used in the original work.
Shamim Hossain et al. [2] use a stride of 1 sample resulting in 256 segments per second
of data (minus the window length at the end of each record). The low stride would
have resulted in very long training times, and we decided not to experiment with
strides below 0.05 seconds ≈13 samples. Furthermore, Shamim Hossain et al. [2]
do not mention how the original work deals with the significant imbalance between
==PAGE:74==
62
6 Discussion
classes. Thus, in this project, we primarily experimented with models where the back-
ground class was down-sampled to create a balanced dataset for training. Details such
as learning rate, dropout probability, weight decay, and location of batch normaliza-
tion layers and dropout layers were also not reported. All of these hyperparameters
were therefore also determined experimentally. Since a full cross-validation of hyper-
parameters was not run for the CHB-MIT dataset, it is diﬀicult to tell whether it
might have been possible to recreate the results within the considered hyperparame-
ter space. It would have been easier to reproduce the results if all hyperparameters
were listed in the original work or if the source code was available.
Finally, we discovered late in the process that the description of the model archi-
tecture is similar to the description of the model by Schirrmeister et al. [51]. We,
therefore, suspect that Shamim Hossain et al. [2] have used the same architecture as
Schirrmeister et al. [51]. If that is the case, some details regarding the convolutions
are slightly different from our interpretation of the description by Shamim Hossain
et al. [2]. If the model is inspired by Schirrmeister et al. [51], it is not mentioned by
Shamim Hossain et al. [2]. Consequently, it was merely coincidental that we discov-
ered the resemblance. If time had permitted, we would have implemented the models
by Schirrmeister et al. [51] to see whether this would have brought us closer to the
results reported by Shamim Hossain et al. [2].
6.3
Results on the TUSZ dataset
Despite the lower results on the CHB-MIT dataset, we moved on to the TUSZ dataset.
We optimized the hyperparameters using Optuna on two different validation sets.
Unfortunately, even though the F1 score increased for the validation sets, it did not
increase for the test set. The F1 score was, however, not decreased on the test set
either. The final setting resulted in higher specificity and precision than the initial
run but slightly lower sensitivity. These results show that it is diﬀicult to choose
a representative validation set when dealing with EEG data.
We tried to create
representative sets by stratifying on the seizure types, but the results indicate that
the inter-subject variability is also an important component.
Even though a specificity of 93.27% was reached when evaluating on window-
basis, the false alarm rate was too high to apply in a real-life setting. Furthermore,
the sensitivity droppd rather quickly when the results were filtered on probability and
duration of events. The drop in sensitivity indicates that the results were not very
consistent between consecutive windows. When filtering with p = 0.90 and dur = 4
s, the sensitivity was only 25.07% and the FAR was 61 per 24 hours. In contrast, the
sensitivity was 52.65% and the FAR was 944 per 24 hours when filtering with p = 0.50
and dur = 0 s. Golmohammadi et al. [5] state that the FAR is the most important
metric for a model deployed in a clinical setting. Consequently, it is diﬀicult to see
the benefit of a model with 944 false alarms per day irrespective of the sensitivity.
However, it should be noted that the seizure records in the TUSZ database are heavily
pruned. The longest records only have a duration of approximately one hour, and
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Results on the TUSZ dataset
63
thus the data contains a lot of post-ictal EEG. It is, therefore, unlikely that we could
ever achieve a FAR that is within an acceptable range when evaluating on the TUSZ
database.
When examining the prediction behavior across different records, there are a few
cases where the algorithm performs very well (for instance, in Figure 5.2(a)), but
also some cases where the prediction is far from reality (for instance, in figure Fig-
ure 5.1(a)). We also found that the FPs were often grouped together in the same
records with more than half of the records containing no FPs. One could imagine
a post-processing where the device is turned off for a fixed duration after a seizure
alarm. Such an application could decrease the number of false alarms, but would also
be at risk of masking actual seizures.
Furthermore, the sensitivity to TCSZs quickly decreases when shorter events are
filtered away.
TCSZs can be associated with falls and, thus, fall-related injuries.
Therefore, it is an issue for a seizure detection alarm that TCSZs are detected with
such a low sensitivity. To understand the cause of the low sensitivity, we compared
the TCSZs in the test set to the TCSZs in the validation set. We found that the
TCSZs in the test set are associated with a slow baseline drift throughout the seizures.
Additionally, we do not see a similar trend in the TCSZs in the validation set. These
findings led us to believe that these low-frequency oscillations dominate the model’s
decision.
However, we also found rhythmic bursts of spikes in some of the EEG
channels in the test TCSZs. If the model can direct its attention to these channels,
it might be able to detect the seizures correctly.
Additionally, we trained a model on a training set that excluded all minor seizure
classes (TCSZs, TNSZs, SPSZs, MYSZs, and ABSZs).
The revised model had a
slightly higher FAR per 24 hours, but the sensitivity of the GNSZs increased a lot. In
contrast, the sensitivities of the FNSZs and CPSZs were closer to the ones obtained
with the entire dataset.
The takeaway from this experiment was two-fold.
First,
the FNSZs are generally challenging to detect. Second, the results indicate that the
model potentially can benefit from a more uniform seizure distribution. A uniform
seizure distribution could be achieved by training specialized models for each seizure
type. However, this solution would require large amounts of data to get enough data
from each seizure type.
Finally, we examined correlation maps between spectral perturbations and the
model’s predictions for the FNSZ in the test set. The maps indicated that the model
had learned to recognize seizures in specific regions of the brain. Consequently, the
model had a high sensitivity for seizure samples from the patient with an epileptic
focus coinciding with this region. In contrast, the sensitivity was low for the subject
with an epileptic focus in a different region. These findings underline that the model
seems to focus on specific channels.
The model could, therefore, benefit from an
architecture that can filter out some of the channels that do not provide relevant
seizure information. This could be achieved through an attention layer in the model.
We elaborate on this in section 6.5.
==PAGE:76==
64
6 Discussion
6.4
Development of a seizure detection alarm
Generally, the results presented throughout this work show the diﬀiculties associated
with seizure detection. The diﬀiculties arise from the significant imbalance between
classes and the large variability in EEG. The variability is seen between subjects and
seizure types and makes it challenging to choose an appropriate validation set.
For a seizure alarm to be deployed in real-time, the results would need to be
improved from those achieved here. Even the lowest FAR achieved (61 per 24 hours) is
too high for the device to be practical. Furthermore, the highest sensitivity achieved
is 52.65% which also leaves something to be desired.
Further development would
therefore be needed and could include deeper neural networks or maybe longer input
windows.
As previously mentioned, choosing a model in the literature is made diﬀicult by
the discrepancies in evaluation between existing work. Some work has been done
attempting to bridge this gap, for instance, by Golmohammadi et al. [5] and most
recently by Lee et al. [54].
I firmly believe that a standardization in evaluation
could greatly benefit the seizure detection community. Standardization in evaluation
could enable a more straightforward comparison of different works and more eﬀicient
development of new models. Hopefully, such an effort could move seizure alarms from
academia into reality and benefit the patients suffering from epilepsy.
6.5
Future Works
Only a tiny corner of seizure detection was touched upon in this project, since the
datasets and the models turned out to be more complicated to fit than expected. The
possibilities for future work are, therefore, almost endless. Nevertheless, this section
will mention a few ideas that arose from working with seizure detection.
Initially, there are a lot of possible expansions to the implemented CNN that have
not yet been explored. One could imagine that the model performance could be im-
proved with additional layers or, as mentioned, a longer input window. A longer input
window might enable better extraction of temporal features. The temporal depen-
dencies could also be further exploited through an LSTM. For example, when seizure
data is annotated in the clinic, the clinicians typically look at 10-second windows,
scrolling back and forth between segments. To give the model the same information,
one could use an LSTM to extract the temporal information between consecutive
2-second windows.
Further extensions could include attention layers to help the model weigh the
importance of the different EEG channels, such as in [15] or [53]. The model had
diﬀiculties detecting the TCSZs and the FNSZs in the test set. Our analysis indicated
that the low sensitivity could be prescribed to the model focusing on the wrong chan-
nels. Attention layers could direct the model’s attention to the channels crucial for
seizure detection based on the information of the given input window. Furthermore,
==PAGE:77==
6.5 Future Works
65
the attention layers could give a better insight into which channels were essential to
the model’s decision.
Finally, a recently released preprint article by Lee et al. [54] compares several
different DL models on the TUSZ database. It would be natural to implement the
best model from [54] and compare the results to ours.
Additionally, looking into machine learning methods beyond traditional supervised
learning strategies might also improve performance. The original aim of this project
was to consider methods for dealing with the issue of cross-subject analysis more
directly, and a few ideas were considered in the process. Ideally, it would be interesting
to see if the subject-specific component of the EEG could be separated from the
seizure-specific component. Such a solution could be beneficial for many problems
dealing with EEG analysis.
One idea is to look into different ways of normalizing or aligning the EEG from
each subject. Xu et al. [55] used an online pre-alignment strategy considering Rie-
mann geometry to improve the cross-subject performance on multiple brain-computer
interface datasets. A similar strategy might also be beneficial for seizure detection.
One concern regarding the TUSZ dataset could be that each subject does not hold
enough data to be adequately normalized. Additionally, it would be necessary to look
into how the method would be affected by varying amounts of seizures in the data
used for normalization. However, the method could be ideal for long-term monitoring
of epileptic patients where unlabeled data is abundant.
Another approach is to transfer the model onto unseen subjects through super-
vised, semi-supervised, or unsupervised methods. Since the seizure detection alarm
is meant for a long-term setting, where the patients wear a device for more than a
year, it would be a viable solution to collect data for two weeks and use the data
to improve the model for the specific patient. If a small portion of data is labeled,
semi-supervised transfer learning would be an ideal choice. In semi-supervised trans-
fer learning, the pre-trained model is transferred onto the target subject using a few
labeled samples while utilizing the unlabeled data to learn the subject-specific dis-
tribution. Such a method was developed by Abuduweili et al. [56], but has to our
knowledge not been implemented on EEG data.
Finally, we need to train a model that can be used in a two-channel setting. The
SubQ only records 2 EEG channels, and as such, we would need a new model for
this. The two-channel setting could give rise to more challenges, such as seizures that
are not visible in all channels. However, the two-channel setting could also eliminate
some of the challenges. For example, it might be easier for the model to focus on
relevant activity in the EEG with fewer available channels. In general, a lot of work
is still needed to create a seizure detection alarm that can be applied in a real-life
setting. Nevertheless, the work in this project has shed some light on the necessary
steps to get there.
==PAGE:78==
66
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This project aimed to develop a DL model for seizure detection. Due to the high
flexibility of DL models, we hypothesized that it was possible to train a model to
extract features directly from the raw EEG data. We described three public datasets:
the Bonn dataset, the CHB-MIT dataset, and the TUSZ database. After reviewing
the literature on each dataset, we decided that our final model would be evaluated on
the TUSZ database. Our literature review found a general lack of standardization and
proper documentation of methods in the seizure detection community. Nonetheless,
we chose a CNN implemented by Shamim Hossain et al. [2], originally evaluated on
the CHB-MIT dataset, as our model.
We implemented the model by Shamim Hossain et al. [2] and tried to reproduce
the results. However, in the process, we discovered that many details needed to train
the model were not reported in the article. As a result, we could not reproduce the
results reported by Shamim Hossain et al. [2]. While the results for some subjects
were close to the ones in the original work, the performance on other subjects was
much lower. However, the average sensitivity of 62.36%, specificity of 86.23%, and
accuracy of 86.09% showed that the model learned features from the data that could
generalize to unseen subjects.
We then trained a model for the TUSZ dataset. The hyperparameters were op-
timized on two different validation sets using a framework called Optuna. The final
sensitivity of 29.69%, the precision of 26.47%, the F1 score of 27.99%, and the speci-
ficity of 93.27% showed that the TUSZ database poses a more diﬀicult challenge for
seizure detection than the CHB-MIT dataset. Subsequently, we converted the predic-
tions to events and computed the event-based results. Finally, we post-processed the
events by filtering on the probability produced by the model and the events’ duration.
Additionally, we aggregated nearby seizure events. We compared different probability
and duration thresholds. For example, when filtering with p > 0.50 and applying no
duration filter, we achieved a sensitivity of 52.65% and a FAR of 944 per 24 hours. In
contrast, when we filtered with p > 0.90 and only kept seizure events with a duration
above 4 seconds, we achieved a sensitivity of 25.07% and a FAR of 61 per 24 hours.
The results demonstrate that seizure detection in EEG is not an easy task. It
is a task associated with a high degree of inter-subject variability.
Furthermore,
the background class is always significantly over-represented, creating an imbalance
between classes in real-time EEG data. Due to the notable imbalance, the precision
must be exceptionally high to yield a suﬀiciently low FAR for a real-time application.
==PAGE:80==
68
7 Conclusion
Golmohammadi et al. [5] claim that the FAR is the single most important feature
when evaluating a seizure alarm. The alarm will presumably cause more troubles
than benefits for the patients if it gives 61 false alarms per day. Future work should
therefore focus on decreasing the FAR.
As of now, the performance of our model is not good enough to be applied in
a real-life setting. However, the results do show that the CNN has the potential to
learn meaningful features for discriminating seizure data from non-seizure data. We
believe that the future steps should focus on an attention mechanism to direct the
model’s focus to relevant channels using a longer window to extract temporal features
better. Even though the model’s performance is not there yet, the project has shed
some light on the necessary steps for developing a seizure detection model. Hopefully,
this thesis has paved the road a little further towards a real-time seizure alarm that
can promise a better future for epileptic patients.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Hyperparameters on the CHB-MIT dataset
During the initial model tuning, a number of experiments were run. We experimented
with the learning rate, the seizure stride, the balance in the dataset, the weight decay,
the dropout and the padding. This section shows a systematic investigation of the
seizure stride, the balance and the dropout probability. The experiments are run on
subject 7 and subject 14, since they have one of the best and worst performances.
Since the specificity is highly correlated with the accuracy, we only examine the
sensitivity and specificity in this section.
The experiments presented in this section are all run for 100 epochs using a learn-
ing rate of 1e-5, weight decay of 0.01, and a batch size of 1024. In the experiments,
we hold these parameters constant while varying the seizure stride, the training set’s
class balance, and the dropout probability. We keep the test set constant for all exper-
iments by sampling the data with a 2 s stride - i.e., no overlap - and no down-sampling
of the background class.
A.1.1
Varying the stride
Initially, we experiment with the seizure stride used for segmenting the training set.
We keep the dropout probability fixed at p = 0.6 and train on a balanced dataset. A
lower stride means a larger overlap between subsequent samples and consequently the
seizure class is up-sampled. Figure A.1 shows the changes in sensitivity and specificity
on the test subjects during training.
The two plots at the top show the sensitivity and specificity for subject 14. The
plots show that especially the specificity looks very different depending on the stride,
indicating a high sensitivity to this parameter. We notice that when the stride is 1
s, both the sensitivity and the specificity are highly volatile. The model trained with
a stride of 1 s ends up in the highest sensitivity but the second-lowest specificity. In
contrast, the model trained with stride 0.1 s has the highest final specificity but the
lowest final sensitivity.
The results for subject 7 in the two bottom plots are slightly different. The plots
show that the final results are more constant for different strides. All models end up at
approximately the same sensitivity and specificity values. This time, the experiment
using a stride of 0.05 s shows higher volatility than the remaining strides, which is
==PAGE:82==
70
A Appendix
Figure A.1: Sensitivity and specificity for subject 14 and 7 when using different
strides for windowing the seizure class. The lower the stride, the more seizure samples
are created. The background class in the training set is down-sampled to create a
balanced dataset and the dropout probability is set to 0.6.
apparent in the sensitivity and specificity. Overall, subject 7 seems to be less sensitive
to stride changes than subject 14.
A.1.2
Varying the balance
In order to test how to best deal with the significant class imbalance, we experiment
with different class balances in the dataset. We use a class-weighted loss when the
training set is not balanced. We compare a balanced dataset to a dataset with a
ratio of 20:1 background samples to seizure samples for stride 1 s and stride 0.1 s.
Figure A.2 shows the results.
When looking at the sensitivity for subject 14, the unbalanced datasets yield a
slightly higher sensitivity, though the difference is less apparent between the runs
with stride 0.1 s. The specificity differs more between strides and balance. There is a
tendency for the unbalanced datasets to obtain a higher specificity than the balanced
version, especially when the stride is 1 s. Similarly, for the sensitivity and specificity
==PAGE:83==
A.1 Hyperparameters on the CHB-MIT dataset
71
Figure A.2: Sensitivity and specificity for subject 14 and 7 when training on bal-
anced and unbalanced datasets respectively. The unbalanced datasets have a ratio of
1:20 between seizure and background samples. The dropout probability is set to 0.6.
for subject 7, there seems to be a slight tendency for the balanced datasets to reach a
higher sensitivity and for the unbalanced datasets to reach a slightly higher specificity.
A.1.3
Varying the dropout
Finally, we experiment with the dropout probability of the network. A higher dropout
probability means a higher degree of regularization. We set the stride to 0.1 s and
use a balanced training set. Figure A.3 shows the results on the two subjects. The
sensitivity and specificity for subject 14 are diﬀicult to decipher since the curves
overlap. It is, however, evident that while the experiment using a dropout probability
of p = 0.6 ends up at the lowest sensitivity, it also ends up at the highest specificity. In
general, however, the dropout probability does not seem to to affect the final results
==PAGE:84==
72
A Appendix
Figure A.3:
Sensitivity and specificity for subject 14 and 7 when training with
different dropout probabilities. The stride is set to 0.1 s and the background class is
down-sampled to create a balanced training set.
extensively. Again, the results for subject 7 are more stable than for subject 14, and
the dropout probability seems to have little influence on the final results.
Overall, the results on subject 14 show a much higher sensitivity to initial settings
and initialization than subject 7. It seems possible that some combination of parame-
ters exists, which would yield better results on subject 14 than the ones presented in
Table 5.1. However, it is also apparent that careful tweaking of the hyper-parameters
would be needed to find them.
Furthermore, it would require a full LOSO cross-
validation to ensure that the hyperparameters accommodate the results of all other
subjects as well.
A.2
Additional analysis of tonic clonic seizures
This appendix shows the two records in the validation set that contain TCSZs. The
model correctly identifies both seizures. Figure A.4 shows a seizure that is easily
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Additional analysis of tonic clonic seizures
73
identified by the untrained eye due to the clear increase in amplitude.
There is,
however, also a part of the annotated seizure in the beginning which is not as clearly
different from the background. It is the part of the seizure with increased amplitude
that the model recognizes as seizure. Figure A.5 shows a more noisy signal. The
model recognizes the seizure and gives one false alarm.
Figure A.4: First TCSZ in the validation set.
All y-axes are plotted with y ∈
[−500, 500].
Figure A.5: Second TCSZ in the validation set. All y-axes are plotted with y ∈
[−500, 500].
Additionally, we also show 10 seconds of seizure activity from another TCSZ from
the test set and the second TCSZ in the validation set. Both of these are shown
in Figure A.6. Figure A.6(a) shows the first undetected seizure from Figure 5.3(b).
The plot shows a similar pattern to the test TCSZ shown in Figure 5.4(a). The top
channels have a rhythmic burst of spikes, whereas the bottom channels have large
baseline shifts. The baseline shifts are even more profound in this seizure compared
==PAGE:86==
74
A Appendix
(a) A closer look at the first undetected seizure in the record shown in Figure 5.3(b). The
bottom line shows the predicted seizure probability, which is low throughout the seizure.
(b) A closer look at the second TCSZ in the validation set with y ∈[−500, 500]. The bottom
line shows the predicted seizure probability, which is high throughout most of the seizure.
Figure A.6: One undetected TCSZ from the test set and the second TCSZ in the
validation set. The vertical lines indicate the windows passed to the model. The
dashed horizontal lines are at y = 0 for every channel
==PAGE:87==
A.3 Plots of seizures from revised model
75
to the seizure in Figure 5.4(a). We also see that the seizure probability is low for all
of the frames.
Finally, Figure A.6(b) shows the second seizure in the validation set. The EEG is
more chaotic than in the previous seizure. Furthermore, the model fails to recognize
the two first windows. It is not trivial to see why these windows are not classified
as seizure, but there could be a baseline drift in channels C3-Cz, FP2-F8, and FP2-
F4. In general, the EEG during this seizure has higher amplitudes than the other
validation TCSZ, but the frequencies are higher than the slow baseline drifts seen in
the test set.
A.3
Plots of seizures from revised model
In this appendix, we plot some of the seizures that are detected by the revised model
but not by the full model. Figure A.7 shows one FNSZ and one CPSZ. For both
seizures, the seizure probability pattern predicted by both models look rather similar.
The major difference between the two models is that the revised model predicts the
seizures with a higher certainty. As a result the FNSZ in Figure A.7(a) is detected.
Figure A.7(b) shows four consecutive CPSZs. Both models fail to predict the two
seizures in the middle. However, it is still evident that the revised model has a higher
seizure probability during these two seizures.
The final seizure is predicted with
higher certainty by the revised model and as a result, the model detects the seizure.
Finally, Figure A.8 shows two GNSZs. Figure A.8(a) shows the same seizure that
was plotted in Figure 5.2(a). The plot shows that the revised model also detects the
second to last seizure that is undetected by the full model. Furthermore, the plot
shows that the revised model detects a larger portion of the remaining seizures in the
plot as well. Figure A.8(b) shows the second GNSZ. We see that the full model did
not detect a lot of the seizure activity in the record. On the contrary, the revised
model predicts seizure with a relatively high probability throughout the seizure. In
this case, the probabilities predicted by the full and the revised model, respectively,
look very different from each other.
==PAGE:88==
76
A Appendix
(a) Example of record containing a FNSZ that was not detected by the full model, but that
the revised model detects.
(b) Example of record containing a CPSZ that was not detected by the full model, but that
the revised model detects.
Figure A.7: Two seizures that were not detected by the original model but are
detected by the revised model. The revised model detects the seizures with a higher
certainty, but the pattern in the seizure probabilities looks similar for both models
on both seizures. All y-axes are plotted with y ∈[−300, 300].
==PAGE:89==
A.3 Plots of seizures from revised model
77
(a) First example of a GNSZ that is detected by the revised model.
(b) Second example of a GNSZ that is detected by the revised model
Figure A.8: Example of two GNSZs that were not detected by the full model but
are by the revised model. The pattern in the seizure probability differs between the
models. All y-axes are plotted with y ∈[−500, 500].
==PAGE:90==
78
A Appendix
A.4
Additional spectral perturbation maps
This appendix shows the perturbation maps of the frequency bands for subject 6546
and 7234 that are not shown in section 5.2.5. The remaining frequency bands are the
delta band (< 3 Hz), the alpha band (8-13 Hz) and the gamma band (> 30 Hz) [29].
Figure A.9 shows the perturbation maps for the seizure samples from the two
subjects. The correlation maps for the alpha and gamma bands show similar patterns
to the plots in section 5.2.5. There is a high positive correlation between an increase
in the seizure prediction and increase in alpha and gamma activity in the posterior
left hemisphere. Figure A.9(c) also shows a positive correlation over C3-Cz and the
frontal left hemisphere. Finally, the positive correlations in the delta band are more
sparse. There seems to be a negative correlation between increase in delta activity in
T3-C3 and Fp1-F3 and the seizure prediction.
Figure A.10 shows the plots for the background samples. Again, the correlation
maps generally show that an increase in the background prediction is correlated with
a decrease in amplitude across most channels and frequency bands. The plots for the
delta bands look slightly different. These plots show a positive correlation in T3-C3,
and to some extent the posterior right hemisphere the frontal electrodes.
==PAGE:91==
A.4 Additional spectral perturbation maps
79
(a) Delta band of subject 6546.
(b) Delta band of subject 7234.
(c) Alpha band of subject 6546.
(d) Alpha band of subject 7234.
(e) Gamma band of subject 6546.
(f) Gamma band of subject 7234.
Figure A.9: Correlation maps between spectral perturbationions in the delta, alpha
and gamma bands to seizure windows and the model’s seizure prediction for subject
6546 and 7234. A dark red color indicates that perturbationions in this frequency
band in the given area is associated with a high increase in the seizure output of the
model. On the contrary, the blue color is associated with a decrease in the seizure
output. The outputs are the prediction logits, i.e., the output just before the softmax
operation.
==PAGE:92==
80
A Appendix
(a) Delta band of subject 6546.
(b) Delta band of subject 7234.
(c) Alpha band of subject 6546.
(d) Alpha band of subject 7234.
(e) Gamma band of subject 6546.
(f) Gamma band of subject 7234.
Figure A.10: Correlation maps between spectral perturbationions in the delta, al-
pha and gamma bands to background windows and the model’s background prediction
for subject 6546 and 7234. A dark red color indicates that perturbationions in this
frequency band in the given area is associated with a high increase in the background
output of the model. On the contrary, the blue color is associated with a decrease in
the background output. The outputs are the prediction logits, i.e., the output just
before the softmax operation.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization (WHO). Epilepsy, 2019. URL https://www.who.
int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/epilepsy. Accessed: 01/10/2021.
[2]
M. Shamim Hossain, Syed Umar Amin, Mansour Alsulaiman, and Ghulam
Muhammad. Applying deep learning for epilepsy seizure detection and brain
mapping visualization. Acm Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Commu-
nications and Applications, 15(1s):10, 2019.
[3]
John LaRocco, Minh Dong Le, and Dong-Guk Paeng.
A systemic review of
available low-cost eeg headsets used for drowsiness detection. Frontiers in Neu-
roinformatics, 14, 2020.
[4]
Sigge Weisdorf, Jonas Duun-Henriksen, Marianne J. Kjeldsen, Frantz R. Poulsen,
Sirin W. Gangstad, and Troels W. Kjær. Ultra-long-term subcutaneous home
monitoring of epilepsy—490 days of eeg from nine patients. Epilepsia, 60(11):
2204–2214, 2019.
[5]
Meysam Golmohammadi, Vinit Shah, Iyad Obeid, and Joseph Picone. Deep
learning approaches for automated seizure detection from scalp electroencephalo-
grams. Signal Processing in Medicine and Biology, pages 235–276, 2020.
[6]
Pedro Viana, Line Sofie Remvig, Jonas Duun-Henriksen, Martin Glasstetter,
Matthias Dumpelmann, Ewan Nurse, Isabel Pavao Martins, Andreas Schulze-
Bonhage, Dean Freestone, Benjamin Brinkmann, Troels Wesenberg Kjaer, and
Mark Richardson. Signal quality and power spectrum analysis of remote ultra
long-term subcutaneous eeg. Epilepsia, 62:127–127, 2021.
[7]
Ali Hossam Shoeb,
John V. Guttag.,
Harvard University-MIT Division
of Health Sciences, and Harvard University-MIT Division of Health Sciences. Ap-
plication of machine learning to epileptic seizure onset detection and treatment.
PhD thesis, 2009.
[8]
Yang Li, Yu Liu, Wei Gang Cui, Yu Zhu Guo, Hui Huang, and Zhong Yi
Hu. Epileptic seizure detection in eeg signals using a unified temporal-spectral
squeeze-and-excitation network. Ieee Transactions on Neural Systems and Reha-
bilitation Engineering, 28(4):782–794, 2020.
==PAGE:94==
82
Bibliography
[9]
Muhammad Kaleem, Aziz Guergachi, and Sridhar Krishnan.
Patient-specific
seizure detection in long-term eeg using wavelet decomposition. Biomedical Sig-
nal Processing and Control, 46:157–165, 2018.
[10] Abhishek Kumar and Maheshkumar H. Kolekar. Machine learning approach for
epileptic seizure detection using wavelet analysis of eeg signals. 2014 Interna-
tional Conference on Medical Imaging, M-health and Emerging Communication
Systems, Medcom 2014, pages 412–416, 2014.
[11] P. Fergus, A. Hussain, David Hignett, D. Al-Jumeily, Khaled Abdel-Aziz, and
Hani Hamdan. A machine learning system for automated whole-brain seizure
detection. Applied Computing and Informatics, 12(1):70–89, 2016.
[12] Ramy Hussein, Mohamed Elgendi, Z. Jane Wang, and Rabab K. Ward.
Ro-
bust detection of epileptic seizures based on l1-penalized robust regression of eeg
signals. Expert Systems with Applications, 104:153–167, 2018.
[13] Zhe Zhang, Yun Ren, Nabil Sabor, Jing Pan, Xiaona Luo, Yongfu Li, Yucai Chen,
and Guoxing Wang.
Dwt-net: Seizure detection system with structured eeg
montage and multiple feature extractor in convolution neural network. Journal
of Sensors, 2020:3083910, 2020.
[14] Catalina Gómez, Pablo Arbeláez, Miguel Navarrete, Catalina Alvarado-Rojas,
Michel Le Van Quyen, and Mario Valderrama. Automatic seizure detection based
on imaged-eeg signals through fully convolutional networks. Scientific Reports,
10(1):21833, 2020.
[15] Xinghua Yao, Xiaojin Li, Qiang Ye, Yan Huang, Qiang Cheng, and Guo Qiang
Zhang. A robust deep learning approach for automatic classification of seizures
against non-seizures. Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, 64, 2021.
[16] Luigi Fiorillo, Alessandro Puiatti, Michela Papandrea, Pietro Luca Ratti,
Paolo Favaro, Corinne Roth, Panagiotis Bargiotas, Claudio L. Bassetti, and
Francesca D. Faraci. Automated sleep scoring: A review of the latest approaches.
Sleep Medicine Reviews, 48, 2019.
[17] Ralph G. Andrzejak, Klaus Lehnertz, Florian Mormann, Christoph Rieke, Peter
David, and Christian E. Elger. Indications of nonlinear deterministic and finite-
dimensional structures in time series of brain electrical activity: Dependence on
recording region and brain state. Physical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear, and
Soft Matter Physics, 64(6 I), 2001.
[18] Vinit Shah, Eva von Weltin, Silvia Lopez, James Riley McHugh, Lillian Veloso,
Meysam Golmohammadi, Iyad Obeid, and Joseph Picone. The temple university
hospital seizure detection corpus. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 12, 2018.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
83
[19] Duo Chen, Suiren Wan, Jing Xiang, and Forrest Sheng Bao. A high-performance
seizure detection algorithm based on discrete wavelet transform (dwt) and eeg.
Plos One, 12(3), 2017.
[20] Ramy Hussein, Hamid Palangi, Rabab K. Ward, and Z. Jane Wang. Optimized
deep neural network architecture for robust detection of epileptic seizures using
eeg signals. Clinical Neurophysiology, 130(1):25–37, 2019.
[21] Qin Lin, Shu Qun Ye, Xiu Mei Huang, Si You Li, Mei Zhen Zhang, Yun Xue,
and Wen Sheng Chen. Classification of epileptic eeg signals with stacked sparse
autoencoder based on deep learning. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (in-
cluding Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics), 9773:802–810, 2016.
[22] Andrea Varsavsky, Iven Mareels, and Mark Cook. Epileptic Seizures and the
EEG. Taylor Francis, 2011.
[23] S. Raghu, Natarajan Sriraam, Shyam Vasudeva Rao, Alangar Sathyaranjan
Hegde, and Pieter L. Kubben. Automated detection of epileptic seizures using
successive decomposition index and support vector machine classifier in long-
term eeg. Neural Computing and Applications, 32(13):8965–8984, 2020.
[24] Pierre Thodoroff, Joelle Pineau, and Andrew Lim.
Learning robust features
using deep learning for automatic seizure detection. arXiv, 2016.
[25] S. Roy, U. Asif, J. Tang, and S. Harrer. Seizure type classification using eeg
signals and machine learning: Setting a benchmark. 2020 Ieee Signal Processing
in Medicine and Biology Symposium, Spmb 2020 - Proceedings, 2020.
[26] Umar Asif, Subhrajit Roy, Jianbin Tang, and Stefan Harrer. Seizurenet: Multi-
spectral deep feature learning for seizure type classification. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 12449:77–87, 2020.
[27] Xiang Zhang, Lina Yao, Manqing Dong, Zhe Liu, Yu Zhang, and Yong Li. Ad-
versarial representation learning for robust patient-independent epileptic seizure
detection. Ieee Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 24(10):2852–2859,
2020.
[28] Cinnamon VanPutte, Jennifer Regan, and Andrew Russo. Seeley’s essentials of
anatomy and physiology. McGraw-Hill Education, 9th edition, 2016.
[29] Riita Hari and Aina Puce. MEG-EEG Primer. Oxford University Press, New
York, NY, 2017.
[30] Lumen Learning.
Anatomy and Physiology I, Module 11: The Nervous Sys-
tem and Nervous Tissue.
Lumen Learning, 2022.
URL https://courses.
lumenlearning.com/austincc-ap1/chapter/nervous-tissue-2/.
Accessed:
07/03/2022.
==PAGE:96==
84
Bibliography
[31] Yousef Rezaei Tabar, Kaare B. Mikkelsen, Mike Lind Rank, Martin Christian
Hemmsen, Marit Otto, and Preben Kidmose. Ear-eeg for sleep assessment: a
comparison with actigraphy and psg. Sleep and Breathing, 25(3):1693–1705, 2021.
[32] Jaakko Malmivuo and Robert Plonsey.
Bioelectromagnetism: Principles and
Applications of Bioelectric and Biomagnetic Fields, p. 368. Oxford University
Press, 2012.
[33] Uneeg
products.
URL
https://www.uneeg.com/en/news-press/media/
products. Accessed: 10/01/2022.
[34] Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer,
2009.
[35] Jean Bancaud, Olaf Henriksen, Francisco Rubio-Donnadieu, Masakatsu Seino,
Fritz E. Dreifuss, Chairman, and J. Kiﬀin Penry. Proposal for revised clinical
and electroencephalographic classification of epileptic seizures. Epilepsia, 22(4):
489–501, 1981.
[36] Johns
Hopkins
Medicine.
Status
epilepticus,
2022.
URL
https:
//www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/status-
epilepticus. Accessed: 05/03/2022.
[37] Sean Ferrell, Vineetha Mathew, Matthew Refford, Vincent Tchiong, Tameem
Ahsan, Iyad Obeid, and Joseph Picone.
The temple university hospital eeg
corpus: Electrode location and channel labels. Temple University, 2021.
[38] Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press,
2015.
[39] Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine
Learning and Data Mining, Lecture Notes. Technical University of Denmark, 1.1
edition, 2019.
[40] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Rus-
lan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from
overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15:1929–1958, 2014.
[41] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep net-
work training by reducing internal covariate shift. In Francis Bach and David Blei,
editors, Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 448–456, Lille,
France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR.
[42] Hiba A. Haider, Rosana Esteller, Cecil D. Hahn, M. Brandon Westover,
Jonathan J. Halford, Jong W. Lee, Mouhsin M. Shafi, Nicolas Gaspard, Susan T.
Herman, Elizabeth E. Gerard, Lawrence J. Hirsch, Joshua A. Ehrenberg, and
Suzette M. La Roche. Sensitivity of quantitative eeg for seizure identification in
the intensive care unit. Neurology, 87(9):935–944, 2016.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
85
[43] Scott B. Wilson, Mark L. Scheuer, Cheryl Plummer, Bryan Young, and Steve
Pacia. Seizure detection: Correlation of human experts. Clinical Neurophysiology,
114(11):2156–2164, 2003.
[44] Clinical Neurophysiology Society American. Guideline 5: guidelines for standard
electrode position nomenclature.
American Journal of Electroneurodiagnostic
Technology, 46(3):222–225, 2006.
[45] Iyad Obeid and Joseph Picone. The temple university hospital eeg data corpus.
Frontiers in Neuroscience, 10(May), 2016.
[46] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gre-
gory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga,
Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Rai-
son, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai,
and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[47] Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q. Weinberger.
Densely connected convolutional networks. Proceedings - 30th Ieee Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Cvpr 2017, 2017:2261–2269, 2017.
[48] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Edwin
R. Hancock Richard C. Wilson and William A. P. Smith, editors, Proceedings
of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), pages 87.1–87.12. BMVA
Press, September 2016.
[49] Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky.
Neural networks for
machine learning: Overview of mini-batch gradient descent, 2012.
[50] Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori
Koyama. Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework.
In Proceedings of the 25rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, 2019.
[51] Robin Tibor Schirrmeister, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Lukas Dominique Josef
Fiederer, Martin Glasstetter, Katharina Eggensperger, Michael Tangermann,
Frank Hutter, Wolfram Burgard, and Tonio Ball. Deep learning with convolu-
tional neural networks for eeg decoding and visualization. Human Brain Mapping,
38(11):5391–5420, 2017.
[52] V. Shah, M. Golmohammadi, S. Ziyabari, E. Von Weltin, I. Obeid, and J. Picone.
Optimizing channel selection for seizure detection. 2017 Ieee Signal Processing
in Medicine and Biology Symposium, Spmb 2017 - Proceedings, 2018-:1–5, 2017.
==PAGE:98==
86
Bibliography
[53] Ye Yuan, Guangxu Xun, Kebin Jia, and Aidong Zhang.
A multi-view deep
learning framework for eeg seizure detection. Ieee Journal of Biomedical and
Health Informatics, 23(1):83–94, 2019.
[54] Kwanhyung Lee, Hyewon Jeong, Seyun Kim, Donghwa Yang, Hoon-Chul Kang,
and Edward Choi. Real-time seizure detection using eeg: A comprehensive com-
parison of recent approaches under a realistic setting. 2022. Preprint.
[55] Lichao Xu, Minpeng Xu, Yufeng Ke, Xingwei An, Shuang Liu, and Dong Ming.
Cross-dataset variability problem in eeg decoding with deep learning. Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience, 14, 2020.
[56] Abulikemu Abuduweili, Xingjian Li, Humphrey Shi, Cheng-Zhong Xu, and De-
jing Dou. Adaptive consistency regularization for semi-supervised transfer learn-
ing.
2021 Ieee/cvf Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(cvpr), pages 6919–6928, 2021.
