==PAGE:1==
Modelling and Optimization of Heat Pump
Coupled with an Advanced Thermal Energy
Storage
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Modelling and Optimization of a Heat Pump Coupled with an Advanced Thermal
Energy Storage
Thesis subtitle
Master’s Thesis
January 21, 2022
By
Rajat Sridhar
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical engineering, Building 403, Section of
Thermal energy , 2800 Kgs. Lyngby,Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for over six months at the Section of Thermal Energy,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng). It is assumed
that the reader has a basic knowledge in thermodynamics.
Rajat Sridhar - s193033
Signature
Date
ii
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
21-01-2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis addresses the important issue of improving the energy efficiency of residential
homes in cold countries. The work addresses the space heating and hot water require-
ment, which are two energy intensive components of residential energy consumption. It
is well known that heat pumps play a central role in the decarbonization of the heating
sector. Therefore, an improvised heat pump system is adopted in this work to provide hot
water and indoor comfort to single family homes with a minimum operational cost.
Research work has been carried out on modelling and optimization of a heat pump cou-
pled with an advanced thermal energy storage system. The simulation has been carried
out using commercial DYMOLA software, which simulates annual domestic hot water and
space heating requirement of an individual residential household in Denmark.
The simulation work demonstrates the operation of heat pump system for a complete year,
both as stand-alone mode and a coupled system with a thermal storage unit. Furthermore,
the energy savings in optimized mode of operation has been demonstrated to be 7%.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This Master’s thesis was carried out from February 2021 to December 2021 at the Sec-
tion of Thermal Energy, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Technical university of
Denmark in collaboration with Suntherm ApS, Denmark.
The project was carried out under the supervision of Brian Elmegaard, Professor and
Head of Section of Thermal energy and Nasrin Arjomand Kermani, Post-Doctoral Re-
searcher, both being the internal supervisors and Morten Veis Donnerup, CEO, Suntherm
ApS, being the external supervisor.
I would like to express my deep gratitude to Brian Elmegaard and Nasrin Arjomand Ker-
mani for their valuable guidance and feedback through this project. I would also like to
thank Erasmus Damgaard, Senior Researcher, who initially supervised my project.
I would like to thank Valentin Salgado Fuentes, PhD student at DTU, Arun Kumar Narasimhan
and Anand Pitchaikani of Modelon for their valuable help in addressing queries related to
Dymola software. Most importantly, I would also like to thank Morten Veis Donnerup for
giving me a wonderful opportunity to carry out my Master thesis at Suntherm ApS.
[Rajat Sridhar], [Modelling and Optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an Advanced
Thermal Energy Storage], [M.Sc Sustainable energy (Thermal energy)]
iv
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
System description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Thesis outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review
8
2.1
Types of heat pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Recent developments in heat pump modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Electric heaters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Residential Demand-side management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Dymola Modelling tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Heat pump characterization
22
3.1
General theory of heat pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2
Numerical model of the heat pump . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Operational model of heat pump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.4
Heat pump control using a Proportional -Integral (PI) controller . . . . . . . 36
4
Heat Demand modelling
42
4.1
Methods for heat demand modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Modelling of the thermal energy storage system
46
5.1
Sizing of the TES system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.2
Unit Electricity Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.3
Operating strategy of the TES system along with heat pump based on elec-
tricity prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Results
49
6.1
Heat pump characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Control parameters using Ziegler Nicholson method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.3
Superheat control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.4
Variable speed control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6.5
Heat demand modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.6
Power Consumption of the Electric heater . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6.7
Energy flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.8
Electricity cost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6.9
Optimization of electricity cost for the coupled mode of operation . . . . . . 70
7
Discussion
73
8
Conclusion
75
Bibliography
76
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
v
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
81
A.1 Heat pump component selection catalogues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
A.2 Dymola modelling of heat pump without TES and with TES
. . . . . . . . . 87
vi
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Increase in worldwide human population has led to the increase of fossil-fuel usage around
the globe. The use of fossil fuels leads to the deadly greenhouse gas emissions leading
to global warming. The rise in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has forced people to
rethink about reduction in fossil-fuel usage.
The reason for the GHG emissions mainly include carbon dioxide which in its chemical
form is a greenhouse gas and is natural, odorless and colorless [1]. According to an article
by NASA, it is understood that once this gas is added to the atmosphere, it remains in the
atmosphere for around 300-1000 years [2]. Carbon dioxide makes up approximately 0.04
per-cent of the atmosphere, which is about 412 parts per million (ppm) and is increasing.
It is an important gas because plants use it to produce carbohydrates in a process called
photosynthesis [1]. Also, animals depend on plants for the survival and on the other hand
humans depend on animals as well as plants for their survival. Hence, it is essential that
an acceptable amount of carbon dioxide is present for proper balance of ecosystem for
earth’s survival [1] .
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is important for survival if present in small quantities. It is known
that there are a finite number of plants, and they have a fixed capacity of removing carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere [2]. Once the CO2 content exceeds this capacity, it turns
out to be a disadvantage as the entire carbon dioxide content cannot be neutralized [2].
Too much of these greenhouse gases in the atmosphere causes the earth’s atmosphere
to trap more and more heat causing the earth to warm up [2].
The climate change is the biggest problem that we encounter in the present era, and
it must be given utmost priority. Therefore, techniques are being developed by many
researchers around the globe to minimize the amount of CO2 to the maximum possible
extent by switching to renewable sources of energy and phasing out the use of fossil fuels.
Thus, various European agencies and governments have widely been making efforts to
introduce policies aiming at decarbonization. One of them is energy strategy 2030 direc-
tives, whose key targets laid out by the European Union state that the GHG emissions
must be reduced by 30 per-cent compared to the 1990 levels, the fact that the share of
renewables should be increased to at least 27% and energy efficiency of at least 27%
should be achieved [3]. So, in order to accomplish this it is highly important that the en-
ergy efficiency of the present buildings be improved. The following section represents the
statistics of the end- energy consumption across the various sectors in the EU [4].
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Graph of the final energy consumption data of EU in 2019 [5]
1.1.1
Final energy consumption in the EU
The Figure 1.1 represents the energy consumption share in each sector, such as the
households, industry, services sector, agricultural , transport as well as the other sec-
tors respectively in the year 2019 [5]. From this graph, the household sectors have the
second-largest consumption of 26,3%, and this includes the energy usage in residential
homes including single-family as well as multi-family houses. Hence, there must be a high
focus onto increasing the energy efficiency of the households, which means that energy
consumption has be reduced [5]. The below section analyzes the various sources which
have been employed for energy consumption in households.
1.1.2
Energy consumption in households
It is observed from the Figure 1.2 that space-heating is largely responsible for most of the
energy consumption, followed by water heating [5]. So, the target must be to increase
their energy efficiency, which is discussed in this thesis. In order to increase their energy
efficiency, the fuels currently used must be analyzed. This has been presented through a
pie-chart in Figure 1.3.
2
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Graph of the end-use energy consumption through various household activi-
ties in 2019 [5]
Figure 1.3: Fuel Sources used for households in 2019 [5]
The Figure 1.3 describes the various fuel sources used for energy consumption in the
year 2019. It is seen that natural gas has been largely used for energy consumption,
followed by electricity [5]. Jaoa et.al from the Technical university of Lisbon, stated in his
document that fossil fuel systems, not only are hazardous to nature, but also operate with
limited efficiency. Hence, in order to achieve higher efficiencies, it is important to switch to
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
3
==PAGE:12==
renewable sources of energy. As shown from the data earlier, in a household, the energy
consumed for space and water heating being the largest, one of the most efficient means
of supplying heat using electricity is through heat pump. This system could be made
more efficient by coupling with a Thermal energy storage (TES), a technology that stores
thermal energy by heating of a storage medium so that the stored energy can be used at a
later time for heating application. So, modelling of such coupled energy system has high
relevance for the optimizing its performance. This thesis deals with dynamic modelling of
heat pumps coupled with a thermal energy storage system for satisfying the household
heat demand, which is discussed in detail in the further sections.
1.2
System description
This thesis mainly compares a system without thermal energy storage as the base case
scenario, with a system integrated with the Thermal storage tank (Charging and discharg-
ing configurations for summer and winter). The system configurations are shown in Fig-
ures 1.4,1.5 and 1.6 respectively.
Figure 1.4: Base Case Configuration without Thermal Energy Storage
Figure 1.5: Storage Scenario (Charging Configuration )
4
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.6: Storage Scenario (Discharging Configuration )
In the first case, the heat from the condenser exits the heat pump through the condenser,
which is connected to a three way directional control valve as shown in Figure 1.4. The
valve directs the flow of the liquid medium in two directions. One of these is a stream
where the hot water is stored in a tank for domestic hot water, needed in homes for tap
water and for various daily needs. The other stream is for the space heating purpose.
The hot water enters the radiators, thorough which the room is heated according to the
indoor requirement. This is followed by cooling the water and both streams are cooled
according to the hot water and space heating demands . The cooled water either enters a
cooled water store, or re-enters the condenser inlet, or else flow bidirectionally as shown
in the Figure 1.4 and this depends on the condenser output with respect to the demand.
On the other hand, in the storage scenario,there is another three-way directional valve
connected to the space heating stream . Here, two scenarios exist,which is based on the
electricity prices. When the electricity prices is low,the heat pump charges the TES tank
, which would be used at later stages when the electricity prices are at its peak .When
the prices is high(during winter), the TES tank gets discharged , thereby supplying the
heat to the radiators . The thesis aims to analyze the efficiency of the storage integration
scenario with respect to the base case scenario.
1.3
Thesis Statement
In order to conclude the thesis, it is necessary to answer some questions for which this
research is aimed for. The main question addressed in the thesis is as follows:
• How is it possible to provide hot water and indoor comfort to single-family
homes with a minimum operational cost?
This question,is followed by the below sub-questions which addresses the modelling and
control of the heat pump, and also introduces the Thermal Energy Storage which provides
desirable load shifting for a minimum operational cost. The questions are listed as below:
• What results are obtained after modelling the heat pump system? How does the
parameters such as temperature, pressure and enthalpy vary with time? How does
the COP vary?
• How is the control system of the heat pump modelled?
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
5
==PAGE:14==
• How is the hot water tank modelled? How is it connected to the heat pump? How
are the heat demands integrated?
• What is the operating strategy of the heat pump and the storage system?
• What is the electricity cost for running the heat pump system and when is it eco-
nomical to use the storage system?
• How efficient is the designed system compared to a stand-alone heat pump?
1.4
Thesis outline
This thesis starts with an introduction on the need for optimizing the energy consumption
for household purpose. The layout of this thesis is depicted in the below flowchart.
6
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.7: Method used for modelling of the heat pump and further integration of the
Thermal Energy Storage system and optimization of the operational cost
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
7
==PAGE:16==
2
Literature Review
From Chapter 1, it can be understood that one of the energy sources for sustainable
heating of buildings is to use a heat pump. Heat pumps is considered as one of the
most efficient heating and cooling system. According to the Directive 28/2009/EC the
various forms of energy captured from these appliances is considered as the energy from
renewable energy resources (RES). From the previous years , several researchers from
around the globe have made put immense efforts in understanding as to how a heat pump
works. This chapter gives an insight into the types of heat pumps used and the works
published by various researchers in the past.
2.1
Types of heat pumps
Heat pumps are classified into two types, according to their source. They are :
1. Air Source Heat pumps (ASHP)
2. Ground Source heat pumps (GSHP)
The two types of heat pumps are explained in the sub-sections below.
2.1.1
Air Source heat pumps
Air Source heat pumps are divided into two categories based on their source, either draw-
ing heat from the outside air or from below the ground. Air Source heat pumps as shown in
Figure 2.1 have become common in many countries,as they are easier to install in regions
where there is a limited surrounding area.
Figure 2.1: Example of an Air Source Heat pump developed by Alpha Innotec [6]
There are two types of ASHP, which are the air-to- air heat pumps (AAHP) and the air
to water heat pumps (AWHP) . AAHP directly heat the air of the room using a slim wall
mounted box [7]. Using a multi split system, it is possible to connect more than one indoor
unit to a compressor thereby enabling more than one room to be heated [7]. Most air-to-
air heat pumps are reversible air conditioning units, which means they can be used for
heating as well as cooling purposes [7]. However, the main disadvantage of these types
of heat pump is that the refrigerant loop must be properly connected as they have a risk
of leaking, which is an environmental hazard [7]. On the other hand, the AWHP have a
factory sealed refrigerant loop, which eliminates the risk of leakage [7].
8
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:17==
Air to water heat pumps are usually integrated with a hydronic system in order to address
two issues: to provide space heating as well as hot water [7]. Split systems require a
compact heat exchanger and a control unit in addition to an compressor in order to transfer
heat to the medium from the refrigerant [7]. Howewer, Mono-block systems integrate
these units together with the compressor giving a slightly larger outdoor unit [7]. These
units are more common in countries in Northern Europe, due to the need for hot water
heating [7]. They are known to be more developed than the split system counterparts and
Suntherm heat pump is also a Monobloc system. Hence, the Monoblock system is used
in the thesis for analysis .
2.1.2
Ground Source heat pumps
Ground Source heat pumps(GSHP) , or in other words ,Geothermal heat pumps use either
copper or plastic tubes buried deep underground as an external heat exchanger [7]. The
fact that water has a higher heat capacity than that of air allows GSHP to exploit a lot
of heat, but the disadvantage is that their construction becomes very expensive. This
makes GSHP not a very good choice of use compared to ASHP ,although GSHP offer
less variability in their performance. The GSHP are divided into two categories. They are
:
1. Open loop System
2. Closed loop system
Open loop systems extract water directly from and reject them back to rivers or ground-
water sources like springs or aquifers [7].They provide a stable temperature range of 5-10
◦C and are generally expensive to harness. However, there is a limitation of resources
available, and also factors such as acidity and the presence of various harmful impurities
can lead to corrosion of the components [7]. Also, some countries have complex regula-
tions regarding to exploitation of groundwater [7].
Closed loop systems, on the other hand are more common than the open loop systems
and extract heat from the surrounding soil through the help of a sealed loop [7]. The closed
loop systems have two configurations, namely the Direct Expansion (DX) systems and the
indirect systems. In case of the DX systems, the refrigerant is directly circulated from the
compressor through copper tubes. On the other hand, the indirect systems circulate the
water and the antifreeze through plastic tubes via an additional heat exchanger [7]. The
fact that this additional step can be avoided in case of the DX systems shows that they
are more efficient. However, DX systems have become less popular in the recent years
due to tightening of rules related to refrigerant leakage [7].
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the closed loop GSHP [8]
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
9
==PAGE:18==
As shown in the Figure 2.2 , the closed loop systems require laying down of underground
pipes in trenches of 1-2 m depth [7]. The amount of pipe that must be laid depends on
the type of soil due to the variation in the thermal conductivities [7].
However, one of the disadvantages of the closed loop system is the fact that the installers
can sometimes underestimate the required size of the heat collectors in an attempt to cut
down costs [7]. The heating output is directly proportional to the size of the underground
collector. Therefore, pipes which are undersized can lead to loss of thermal comfort during
winter [7]. This over a long term can lead do reduction in the efficiency of the pump [7].
Therefore, on understanding the characteristics of the different types of heat pumps, it is
understood that the air-to-water heat pump is best suited for use .
2.2
Recent developments in heat pump modelling
Researchers around the globe have published works regarding the modelling methods of
various heat pump models. In 2003, Morrison.et.al simulated an air-source heat pump
unit for domestic hot water using the TRNSYS simulation package [9]. This heat pump
showed a coefficient of performance (COP) of 2.0 for an ambient temperature of 15◦C
and the hot water was produced at a temperature of 55◦C [9].
In 2010, Kinab.et.al developed a reversible heat pump model for seasonal performance
optimization [10]. The refrigerant used in this study was R410A [10]. Results showed that
when the heat pump operated at full load conditions between an ambient temperature of
0 and 5 ◦C, the system COP was between 1.8 and 2.2 [10].
Research from Dongellini.et.al and Tangwe.et.al suggested that the seasonal coefficient
of performance (SCOP) strongly depends on the source and sink temperatures, relative
humidity, heating demands and control system [11] . In 2015, Dongellini.et.al modelled
an electric air to water heat pump for domestic hot water and radiant floor heating [11].
Here different kinds of heat pumps were analyzed such as mono compressor on/off heat
pumps, multi-compressor heat pumps and inverter heat pumps [11]. Results showed that
for an on-off heat pump the SCOP resulted in a value of 3.8 for a hot water temperature of
35 ◦C [11]. Further, the on/off Heat pump presented a optimal bivalent temperature which
was higher than the multi -compressor and inverter heat pump types for a fixed thermal
load [11].
Several research studies have been conducted to analyze the effect of SCOP due to each
of the abovementioned parameters. Morini.et.al conducted a study to analyze the effect of
the outdoor conditions on air -source heat pump performance [12]. This was done by de-
velopment of a simplified model which relates to the outdoor condition [12]. The research
also highlighted that the hourly COP was reduced by 20 per-cent due to defrosting and in
the case of SCOP, there was a decrease of 13 per-cent [12] .
Madonna.et.al studied the annual performance of air-to water heat pumps in small resi-
dential buildings [13]. From this piece of research, they concluded that a weather compen-
sation strategy allows to improve the seasonal performance upto a value of 23 per-cent
and annual performance upto 19 per-cent [13]. In 2017, Pitarch.et.al developed a heat
pump model consisting of a recovery heat exchanger to find the optimal sizing of the sys-
tem for sanitary hot water (SHW) purposes [14]. The Figure 2.3 shows the flow diagram
10
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Heat pump developed by [14]
of the model. From this work, it was proven that the heat pump combined with a recovery
heat exchanger has a great potential to substitute conventional technologies, such as the
boiler.[14]
Based on the work done by the previous researchers , Correa.et.al developed an ad-
vanced air to water heat pump for residential heating purposes for the Chile region [15].
They modelled a heat pump for heating and domestic hot water similar to Morrison.et.al’s
work. A single family household consisting of 4 people was considered in the Santiago
and the Concepcion area [15] . Here, the heating demand was modelled using the TRN-
SYS simulation package, and a heating demand of 4388 kWh and 7883 kWh was obtained
for the Concepcion and Santiago areas respectively [15] .
The domestic hot water demand was obtained from a typical domestic hot water consump-
tion profile, and was used as input to the heat pump model for developing a simulation on
an hourly basis [15] . The heat pump consisted of an evaporator, compressor with on/off
control, and a condenser and the seasonal coefficient of performance was found to be
between 2.54-2.6 [15] .
In order to get better modelling results, it is good to use the semi-empirical approach.
Many researchers such as Royapoor.et.al and Kinab.et.al have used this approach to
simulate heat pumps. Royapoor.et.al performed a parametric evaluation on the air-to
water domestic heat pumps [16]. They developed a model whose parameters can be
easily be taken from catalogue or experimental data [16]. The most important part of the
modelling was the compressor, which used an exponential function with four parameters.
Furthermore , this model was able to obtain results with an error of around 10 per-cent
[16] .
Similarly, Kinab.et.al also developed a model of a heat pump, including a expansion valve
and also the heat exchangers [10]. The model parameters could be easily accessed from
the catalogue data . The polynomial laws were used to model the compressor isentropic
and volumetric efficiencies [10]. It was very interesting to observe that the model was
able to achieve a COP with an error less than 8 per-cent, which showed that Kinab.et.al’s
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
11
==PAGE:20==
model was more efficient[10].
Thus, the above section gave a clear insight about the methods used by various re-
searchers for modelling and optimizing the heat pump . The below section explains about
the conditions when the heat pump cannot satisfy the targeted heat demand.
2.3
Electric heaters
A more recent emerging method for periods when the heat pump is not able to satisfy the
building heat demands or the hot water demand is to use a electric heater . Paul.et.al [17],
Nehrir.et.al [18] and Chen.et.al [19] proposed new control strategies for switching on or
off the heating elements in order to reduce the peaks associated with water heating. This
basically involved the prediction of the time slots when there would be demand for hot wa-
ter and starting to preheat the water before the demand [17] [18][19]. One other way to do
the same could also be through increasing the set point for use during the off-peak times,
thereby storing additional energy for use during peak periods [17] [18][19]. This method
is of great interest especially during the night times, where the electricity consumption is
lowest , subsequently after which there is a high consumption of water during the day.
Several studies have also been carried out by researchers such as Molina.et.al , where
they designed devices which work by heating up high intensity bricks during the off-peak
periods and the heat is released variably based on the space heating demand [20]. These
kind of devices are being designed by the utility provider, Nova Scotia Power[20] .
2.4
Residential Demand-side management
2.4.1
Introduction to thermal energy storage and its necessity
As stated in the introduction , it is important to increase the energy efficiency of the house-
holds, in order to contribute to a fall in the percentage of the greenhouse house gas emis-
sions. For this to take place, there must be a change in the energy systems through
adoption of advanced energy technologies.
While renewable sources of energy are eco-friendly, they have a disadvantage with re-
spect to its security of supply [21]. There remains a mismatch between the renewable
energy supplies and user demand which is currently a major barrier. Hence, the need
for an advanced energy storage system becomes very important . An important technol-
ogy which can be environmentally friendly and also increases the energy efficiency is the
thermal energy storage (TES) [21] .
Thermal energy storage, is basically defined as the process of temporary holding of ther-
mal energy for a required amount of time, either in the form of hot or cold substances for
a later utilization [22]. This involves the use of renewable energy sources or also other
energy sources [22]. The classification of the thermal energy storage systems are briefly
explained in detail in section 2.4.6.
2.4.2
Benefits of using Thermal energy storage
It is to be noted that TES systems are operated on a daily basis, occasionally, or season-
ally.The systems achieve benefits by fulfilling the below criteria [23].
1. Increase generation capacity : Demand over a given time is not always constant
[23] . So, by using a TES system, it is possible to charge a TES system during pe-
12
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:21==
riods when there is an excess generation during low demand [23] . Hence, smaller
production unit can be installed and purchasing of additional units can be prevented
[23].
2. Shifting energy purchases to low cost periods: Allows energy consumers who
are subjected to time-of-the-day-pricing to shift energy purchases from periods of
high cost towards low cost periods. [23]
3. Increases system reliability : Any form of an energy storage system, ranging from
a constant power supply of a personal computer to a large pumped energy storage
system increases system reliability. [23]
2.4.3
Technical criteria for TES
While TES is beneficial in managing the uncertainity in demand, it is important to under-
stand the Technical criteria involved in selection of an appropriate TES system. They are
as listed below [23].
• Storage capacity
• Lifetime
• Size
• Cost
• Use of resources
• Efficiency
• commercial viability
• Safety
2.4.4
Sizing criteria of TES
Analysis of various reports involving TES design reveal various undersized as well as
oversized TES designs [23] . The issue with undersizing is that it leads to poor levels
of indoor comfort. On the other hand, oversizing can lead to expenditure of initial costs
which would be more than necessary [23]. Also, there would be wastage of electricity due
to the excess energy being stored [23]. Therefore, by using properly designed equipment,
appropriate amount of energy can be used, which is lesser than that of the conventional
heating equipments.
2.4.5
Energy savings due to TES
TES systems are an important source of energy savings in the industry today. For many
years, Researchers have been conducting studies on TES and they have been proven
to be efficient [24]. The development of such a basis for comparison of different systems
has been receiving lot of attention in the recent days. One of the most powerful ways of
analyzing the thermal performance is by using the exergy analysis technique, which is
based on the second law of thermodynamics [24] . This method takes into consideration
the quality of the energy transferred [24] . Energy savings from TES can be achieved in
many ways as below [24] :
• Reducing consumption of purchased energy : The consumption of the pur-
chased energy can be reduced by storage of the surplus thermal energy for use
at later times.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
13
==PAGE:22==
• Reducing the demand for electrical energy : The demand for purchased thermal
energy can be reduced by storing the heat during off-peak periods in order to meet
the demands during the peak hours. For example : A TES can store heat which can
be used during periods of peak electricity prices, thereby reducing the electricity
costs.
• Avoiding purchase of additional equipment and equipment downsizing: When
a TES is used, the purchase of additional equipment can be deferred and equipment
can be downsized. This is because a storage system such as a TES can make up
for the additional capacity, thus saving cost.
In order to show how much energy savings are achieved by a TES system, a case is
presented below from ANOVA Verzekering Co., where they installed an electric heat pump
for hydronic heating and cooling of buildings and also a groundwater aquifier TES system
[23]. It was estimated that the primary energy savings amount to around 44 per-cent and
also there is a fall in the carbon dioxide emissions of 43 per-cent , which suggests that
TES systems are highly beneficial [23] . The data is presented in the Table 2.1.
Sl no
Annual emissions
Conventional
System
TES System
Reduction
1
Primary Energy(m^3)
322000
179000
143000(44%)
2
Carbon Dioxide (kg)
608000
346000
262000(43%)
3
NOx, SO2
-
-
-
Table 2.1: Table representing the reduction of emissions by ANOVA Verzekering Co.
2.4.6
Classification of thermal energy storage systems based on storage
mechanism
As explained in the previous section, due to the variation of the supply of the renewable
energy energy sources, the thermal energy storage systems has found its place. The
TES not only reduces the differences between the demand and supply, but also improves
performance and thermal reliability of the system. The classification of TES is shown
below in the form of a flowchart.
Figure 2.4: TES classification based on storage mechanism
As shown in the Figure 2.4 , there are three main types of thermal energy storage systems.
They are :
14
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:23==
1. Sensible heat storage
2. Latent heat storage
3. Thermochemical heat storage
The above storage systems are briefly explained below.
Sensible heat storage (SHS)
Sensible heat storages are energy storage systems where the energy is either stored or
released by the heating/cooling of a storage medium through the process of heat transfer
as shown in Figure 2.5 [25]. The amount of energy input to the system depends on the
mass of the storage material, the specific heat capacity as well as the the difference of the
temperature between its initial and final temperatures [25]. This statement is expressed
below through an equation.
Q = mCp∆T
(2.1)
where m is the mass of the storage material and the ∆T is the temperature difference
between the two states. The advantages of using the SHS type of storage is due to the
fact that they are very cheap and they have no risks associated with the use of toxic ma-
terials. Some examples of materials which are used as a storage medium in this case
include water, sand,molten salts or rocks.
In 2002, Ibrahim Dincer conducted a technical review on the various types of TES and
its application in buildings. Ibrahim Dincer verifies the fact that water is cheap to use for
the SHS as a storage material and also is chemically stable [23]. Also, a disadvantage of
water to be used as a storage medium is due to the fact that the system would have to
be pressurized if water is employed at a temperature above 100◦C, which adds tremon-
dously to the costs [23] .An alternative to this would be to use heat resistant oils available
in the market. Howewer, water has a high specific heat capacity of 4.18 kJ/kgK, which is
higher than most of the oils [23] .
Figure 2.5: Plot of temperature of SHS with respect to stored heat
Latent heat storage(LHS)
Latent thermal energy storage, also called phase change storage is the type of storage
system where in release or absorption of energy takes place with change in physical state
as shown in Figure 2.6. [25]. Here, the energy storage density increases and the volume
is reduced [25] . The heat is usually stored in the phase –change process [25] . The main
advantage of latent thermal energy storage over sensible thermal energy storage, is the
fact that they are able to store heat at a similar temperature range [25]. Also, materials
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
15
==PAGE:24==
initially behave like SHS but their temperature rises linearly with system enthalpy [25] .
The heat stored by a latent energy storage system is calculated by the below equation:
Q = mL
(2.2)
where m is the mass of the phase change material (PCM) and L is the specific latent heat.
Some of the disadvantages of phase change storage include the thermal stability of stor-
age materials and limitations on the container sizes [25]. Moreover it has a lower phase
change enthalpy, lower thermal conductivity and inflammability, which makes it unsuitable
for use as a good energy storage system [25].
Figure 2.6: Plot of temperature of LHS with respect to stored heat
Thermochemical energy storage(THS)
Thermochemical energy storage or THS is a method where there is utilization of the heat
of reaction released by the reversible chemical reactions [25] . An illustration of this type
of reaction is the chemical compound of the type A-B reversibly split into species A and
B [25].
A −B −→A + B
(2.3)
∆H + MCl2(NH3)x −→MCl2 + xNH3
(2.4)
Where ΔH represents the heat absorption in the forward direction and heat desorption in
the backward direction.
Types of thermochemical storage systems
There are two types of thermochemical storage systems which are as follows:
• Open system
• Closed system
These systems have two operating modes which are the charging and the discharging
mode. Open systems work at atmospheric pressure in contact with the environment,
where are closed systems are in hermetical closed loops and not in contact with atmo-
sphere. A closed system generally consists of a sorption reactor, a condenser and a
evaporator. During the charging process, heat must be supplied to the storage material
at high temperature. The desorbed water vapour has to be cooled down in a condenser,
where the heat is rejected to the environment [25]. When heat is needed the evapora-
tor and the reactor are turned on and this initiates the discharging mode [25]. During
the discharging process, the heat is supplied to the fluid in the evaporator. The resulting
steam is transferred to the adsorber carrying heat [16]. Adsorption is a process which is
completely reversible, and heat supplied during adsorption is equal to the heat released
16
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:25==
during desorption [25].
2.4.7
Recent developments in the field of thermal energy storage
In the previous sections, the classification of the TES has been widely understood. Based
on the range of application for this thesis and also for the need of simplicity, the sensi-
ble thermal energy systems have been selected for the purpose of modelling. However,
it is also important to understand the previous works done by various researchers for
modelling the sensible TES. Researchers around the globe have been conducting inves-
tigative studies on the modelling techniques of the sensible storage systems. They have
considered two configurations of modelling the system, which are listed below.
1. Stratified tank sensible TES
2. Two tank sensible TES
One of the common ways for storing heat would be through the use of stratified tanks.
Tank stratification is a method of having a temperature gradient through the height of a
tank, with the hottest temperature zone at the top of the tank and the coldest temperature
at the bottom. The use of stratified tanks have been studied by many researchers, such
as Dickinson.et.al as well as Lightstone et.al. Dickenson.et.al performed an exergy anal-
ysis of the multi-tank thermal storage system for solar heating applications [26] and the
latter conducted the numerical simulation of the charging process of liquid storage tanks
[27]. The results of the research conducted by them showed the effectiveness of using
a stratified thermal energy storage in solar thermal systems. Though there are benefits
using stratified tanks, there could be limitations. One of earlier works [28] cite that mixing
could cause capacity loss in stratified tanks [28]. Heat transfer between hot and cold wa-
ter through the thermocline causes loss of thermal storage capacity and is also a major
cause of stratification degradation in TES systems. Karim [28] investigated the effect of
flow rates on storage efficiency and showed that storage efficiency decreased at higher
flow rate due to increased mixing.
Mukrimin Guney proposes a two tank sensible TES system in his article published in the
year 2016 [29]. Here, he proposes a two tank direct system for storing thermal energy,
where one tank is kept at a higher temperature and the other at a lower temperature
after the heat is extracted [29]. Similarly, the SolarOne project for modelling of a large
thermal energy storage system also uses the similar approach as Mukrimen Guney [29].
The advantages of a two tank direct system compared to a stratified system as stated by
Oleson.et.al is that the they have a reduced installation cost and also less engineering
costs [22]. This model configuration as shown in Figure 2.7 can also be applied to a heat
pump .
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.7: Two tank TES configuration by [29]
It is important to correctly design a TES system to ensure its good performance. It is
important to accurately size a TES system to avoid the undesirable effects as stated in
2.4.4. Although researchers have found methods to size a TES system in case of boiler
plants, there has been no simple method which has been found to optimally size a TES
which maximizes benefits when integrated with a heat pump [30] . Andersen.et.al stated
that the design of TES systems varies from case from case, which meant that the previous
sizing works had been done with extensive modelling techniques [31]. Also, researchers
such as Tossios.et.al developed certain complex algorithms using mathematical program-
ming [32]. There were many simple methods which did not consider factors such as the
case specific interactions between demands and operation [33]. However, Sragovic.et.al
developed a practical method for designing and predicting the operating performance of
a high temperature sensible TES [34]. They developed two computer codes, based on
the steady state and transient analyses , through which they were able to predict the
performance and design of the system [34] . In order to design the system, a tubular
configuration was considered [34].
Similarly, Franco.et.al conducted a study of the integration of the low capacity heat pumps
with a thermal energy storage [35]. In this study, a storage tank of 70 litres for each kW of
nominal heating capacity was suggested [35]. The study mainly compared a stand-alone
heat pump with the same integrated with a TES system for a dwelling in Italy [35]. The re-
sults of this study showed that number of daily on-off cycles in case of a heat pump could
reduce to a large extent and also one-third of the energy can be saved which suggested
that the integration of the heat pump with the TES system was a very energy efficient
method [35].
In 2014, Fischer.et.al investigated the thermal storage operating strategies with the heat
pump integration for German multi-family houses [36]. In order to predict the optimal stor-
age operation, the model predictive control (MPC) approach using quadratic programming
was used [36]. Here, the influence of the tank storage size with the system performance
was analyzed [36]. It was concluded that the increase of the tank storage size increases
the flexibility of the operation [36]. The method for the same included the investigation of
18
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:27==
five different scenarios containing different storage options. They were presented below
in the form of a Table [36]:
Use
1
2
3
4
5
DHW
0.5
2
3
0.5
5
Space heating
0.5
2
3
5
0.5
Table 2.2: DHW and Thermal Energy Storage tank size (m3) choices by [36]
The above Table explains the various combinations of the DHW and thermal energy stor-
age tanks used by Fischer.et.al and tells as to which of the above mentioned combination
is recommended for increasing the system efficiency. Here, they represents five scenar-
ios (1-5) and also the various tank sizes chosen in m3. On observation, it was concluded
that an increased storage size for space heating is more favoured over Domestic Hot Wa-
ter (DHW) [36]. So, option 4 was considered to be the most favourable option. However,
the adverse effect of this is that increased storage size also leads to additional storage
losses, which would overcompensate the benefits of having flexibility during operation
[36].
The sensible TES system is capable of reducing the electricity costs of running a stan-
dalone heat pump. In 2016, Schellenberg.et.al conducted a case study involving the
optimization of the heat pump-sensible TES system using genetic algorithm [37]. The
genetic algorithm was used in order to schedule the heat pump according to the local
weather conditions and the day ahead prices. Results of this study showed that the op-
erational cost reductions of 12 per-cent are achieved [37]. However, it was observed
that the model consumed more electricity, lowering the seasonal performance factor [37].
Also, there were storage losses due to storage at high temperature which could be mini-
mized by more insulation [37] . Jung.et.al investigated the various heat pump operational
strategies with the TES system in 2017 [38]. Here, three methods are used, which are
the thermal storage priority method , heat pump priority method and the region control
method [38] .
Thermal storage priority method is a process in which the thermal storage handles the
load when the heating load initially increases beyond a certain reference capacity, the
heat pump handles the load [38] . Here, the reference is defined as the discharged heat
rate when the heat from the TES is fully discharged steadily [38] . On the other hand,
the heat pump priority method does exactly the opposite i.e the heat pump satisfies an
amount of the heating load and the storage load operates above the limit [38] .
However, the region control method combines the advantages of both of the above two
methods [38] . Here, the heating load is divided into five control regions [38] . Also, the
heat pump and the thermal storage are operated according to their respective heating ca-
pacities [38]. The results of this study by Jung.et.al showed that the region control method
was most efficient in reducing the electricity costs as compared to the other two methods
by approximately 8 per-cent [38] .
Therefore, to summarize as a whole, an small-scale air to water heat pump is to be mod-
elled with a coupled two tank sensible TES system for providing domestic hot water as
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
19
==PAGE:28==
well as space heating to single family houses using the Dymola Modelling tool. The de-
tails of the heat pump modelling and the sensible TES, along with the operation strategy
are described in the further chapters.
2.5
Dymola Modelling tool
Dymola, Dynamic Modeling Laboratory, is a complete tool for modeling and simulation of
integrated and complex systems for use within automotive, aerospace, robotics, process
and other applications. It is software tool developed by Dassault Systems.
Dynamic modelling of thermodynamic systems are required to develop evaluate and opti-
mize their response times, or in order to develop and test new control strategies [39]. The
Modelica language is useful for modeling thermodynamic system such as refrigeration
systems and heat pumps through several libraries. Some of them include the TIL Library
and AirConditioning library for HVAC systems [39].
However, not all of them are open-access, and all of them are not able to handle non-
conventional working fluids such as refrigerants[39]. One of the ways to model thermody-
namic systems while requiring external computation of the refrigerant working fluid prop-
erties is by using the TIL library[39]. TIL is a commercial library which is used to compute
the steady and transient state simulations of the thermodynamic simulations. The ther-
modynamic properties of the refrigerant, heat source and the medium are found out from
the TIL Media [39]. This can be done in three possible methods , for example by using a
custom high performance equations of state (EOS), or by using a fast table based bicubic
spline interpolation, or by using an external interface such as REFPROP [39]. The TIL
library consists of a list of thermodynamic components such as heat exchangers, com-
pressors, pump etc as shown in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Various Components available in TIL
20
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:29==
2.5.1
Library Structure
The TIL library is divided into different sub-packages including the following :
1. Components : It is the central part of the library. There are components for each
phase i.e liquid , gas and also a Vapour-Liquid Equilibrium (VLE) phase. The VLE
fluid phase is used for modelling compressible two phase fluids, such as the refrig-
erants. On the other hand , there are also heat exchanger models of each type
which can be extracted while performing a simulation.
2. Examples : This contains examples of simulation models, where an idea can be
obtained regarding the interconnection of two or more components . This includes
models of a heat pump cycle using the R407C refrigerant , air-handling units and so
on.
3. Functions : This section consists of the emperical correlations used to perform
certain mathematical calculations and also some characterization of the models.
4. Interfaces: This contains the connectors which are used for connecting the various
library components.
5. Media : The TILMedia contains a list of fluids to choose from while performing the
system calculations.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
21
==PAGE:30==
3
Heat pump characterization
3.1
General theory of heat pumps
According to thermodynamics, if there are two mediums put together at different temper-
atures, heat always gets transferred from a region of higher temperature to the region at a
cooler temperature. The second law of thermodynamics states that heat cannot sponta-
neously flow from a cold reservoir region to a hotter reservoir. Here, work must be added
to achieve this phenomenon. The heat pump works according to the second law of ther-
modynamics and its main function is to extract heat from a cold reservoir, known as the
source in thermodynamic terminology and supplies heat to a hot reservoir, known as the
sink as shown in Figure 3.1 .
Figure 3.1: Basic diagram of heat pump principle
One of the examples of this concept is in homes, where a heat pump is used to heat up
the indoor area of a house by taking heat from the outdoor air. Usually,a refrigerant is
used to transport heat throughout the heat pump.
3.1.1
Vapour compression cycle
The main components of the heat pumps are as follows :
• Evaporator
22
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:31==
• Compressor
• Condenser
• Expansion Valve
The path of the refrigerant is generally a cycle which is as long as the heat pump is turned
on and flows continuously. The flow diagram of the heat pump cycle is shown in the Figure
3.2 .
Figure 3.2: Heat pump cycle
The above figure represents the flow diagram of the heat pump. Throughout the heat
pump cycle, the refrigerant undergoes phase changes. The refrigerant enters the evapo-
rator as a liquid-vapour mixture along with the heat source. The pressure at the evaporator
is at a level resulting in the saturated temperature of the the fluid being lesser than the
corresponding fluid temperature. The temperature of the heat source reduces at the exit
of the evaporator as the heat from the heat source is transferred to the refrigerant. Thus,
on absorption of this heat by the refrigerant, the refrigerant starts to boil and enters into
saturated vapour state.
The saturated vapour now enters the compressor, where work is done in the form of
compression . The refrigerant leaves the compressor as a superheated vapour. The re-
frigerant then enters the condenser, which in thermodynamic terms is called as the heat
sink. The condenser usually reacts with a medium, which in this thesis is the Domestic
Hot Water (DHW) and Space Heating (SH). The pressure inside the condenser would
be at such a level that the saturation temperature in the condenser is greater than the
temperature of the medium. Thus, this means that there is a transfer of heat from the
superheated vapour to the water , thus rising its temperature. The temperature of the
refrigerant thus cools down and enters into a saturated liquid state.
The saturated liquid from the condenser now enters the expansion valve , where the
refrigerant undergoes isenthalpic expansion. Here, the pressure of the refrigerant de-
creases,and the saturated vapour leaves the expansion valve as a two-phase mixture.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
23
==PAGE:32==
3.1.2
Efficiency of the heat pump
In order to calculate the efficiency of the heat pump, it is important to know the heat output
of the sink, the heat output of the heat source and the work done by the compressor as
the energy inputs. The efficiency of the heat pump is calculated mathematically by the
below equation.
η =
Qsink
Qsource + WCompressor
(3.1)
However while analyzing from an energy system point of view, the heat from the heat
source is generally not considered while calculating efficiency . The main reason lies due
to the fact that the energy is not taken from the fuel, but is taken from the surroundings,
such as air in case of ASHP and groundwater in case of GSHP. So , the heat from the sink
and the work done by the compressor are the only energy inputs taken during calculation
of the efficiency. This is termed as the coefficient of performance (COP) and is stated
mathematically as below.
COP =
Qsink
WCompressor
(3.2)
The purpose of the heat pump is to add temperature to the heat sink. The work done
done by the compressor can be substituted as the difference of the heat rejected by the
condenser( QH) and the heat taken by the heat source( Qc).
Wnet = QH −QC
(3.3)
On substituting this in 3.2, the following equation is obtained .
COP =
1
1 −( Qc
QH )
=
1
1 −( Tc
TH )
(3.4)
As ( Tc
TH ) is always less than 1, the COP of a heat pump is always greater than 1. This
means that the energy obtained from the sink side is always greater than the energy which
is added as work in the compressor. This strongly explains as to why heat pumps are
useful , due to the reason that the heat output from the sink is greater than the work input
to the compressor in the form of compression. In order to calculate the maximum COP of
a heat pump, the carnot relation is used. The Carnot relation takes the temperatures of
the hot sink and the temperature of the cold sink as inputs and is shown mathematically
in the equation below.
COPCarnot =
1
1 −Tcoldsink
Thotsink
(3.5)
So from the equation 3.5, it can be observed that as the difference between the temper-
ature of the hot and the cold sinks decreases, the Carnot COP proceeds towards infinity.
The equation 3.5 represents the ideal conditions of the COP of the heat pump. But in
reality, there are many factors which can affect the COP, such as friction. In this thesis,
the electricity is the only considered source for the compressor and the heat output from
the condenser would be more than the amount of electricity supplied .
24
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:33==
3.1.3
Need for internal heat exchangers
Internal heat exchangers are used to transfer heat between the low pressure and high
pressure circuits of a heat pump. Through this process, they have been highly instrumen-
tal in increasing the COP of the system, as they help in subcooling the refrigerant after
exiting the condenser and also superheating the refrigerant before entering the compres-
sor.
Several researchers have conducted studies around the globe to investigate the feasibil-
ity of the inclusion of internal heat exchangers in a heat pump system . Some of them
were Lin.et.al from the University of Illinois,where they examined the role of internal heat
exchangers in air conditioning systems [1]. It was concluded that the presence of internal
heat exchangers provides extra heat transfer from the hot liquid from the condenser and
the cold vapor from the evaporator. This increases the capacity of the condenser and
also improves the heating COP of the system.
Meanwhile in 2019, the influence of using an internal heat exchanger (IHX) on the oper-
ation of a CO2 direct expansion ground source heat pump was studied by Nguyen et.al.
Here, the benefit of this integration was showcased throughout a 4-month simulation pe-
riod for a residential house in Canada. The results showed that the efficiency of the system
increased upon this integration, as this counters the thermal short circuiting of the bore-
hole as well as ground surface temperature variations [2].
Meanwhile Idris.et.al conducted a study on the influence of the internal heat exchangers
on the energy savings. The design of the system was similar to the Suntherm’s heat hump
developed in this thesis and is shown below .
Figure 3.3: Heat pump developed by Idris.et.al[40]
Through development of this system, it was observed that the energy savings and the
COP increased about 28 per cent and 38 per-cent respectively.
These studies give sufficient evidence that introduction of a internal heat exchanger is
feasible and could increase performance of the heat pump.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
25
==PAGE:34==
3.1.4
Modified design of the heat pump used in this thesis
Figure 3.4: Modified version of the heat pump [41]
The Figure 3.4 represents the modified version of the heat pump, integrated with an inter-
nal heat exchanger. In this system, The refrigerant enters the evaporator as a saturated
liquid-vapour mixture along with the heat source. The pressure at the evaporator is at
a level resulting in the saturated temperature of the the fluid being lesser than the cor-
responding fluid temperature. The temperature of the heat source reduces at the exit of
the evaporator as the heat from the heat source is transferred to the refrigerant. Thus,
on absorption of this heat by the refrigerant, the refrigerant starts to boil and enters into
saturated vapour state.
The refrigerant present in the saturated vapour state then moves from the evaporator to
the internal heat exchanger, where the refrigerant gets slightly heated. It then moves
to the compressor, where work is done upon the compressor in the form of compressor
isentropically. The refrigerant leaves the compressor as a superheated vapour. The re-
frigerant then enters the condenser, which in thermodynamic terms is called as the heat
sink. The condenser usually reacts with a medium, which in this thesis is the hot water for
Domestic Hot Water (DHW) and Space Heating (SH). The pressure inside the condenser
would be at such a level that the saturation temperature in the condenser is greater than
the temperature of the medium. Thus, this means that there is a transfer of heat from the
superheated vapour to the water , thus rising its temperature. The temperature of the re-
frigerant thus cools down and enters into a saturated liquid-vapour state in the condenser.
It then re-enters the internal heat exchanger, where it gets further sub-cooled. The sub
cooled refrigerant then enters the expansion valve, where the pressure of the refrigerant
decreases to the evaporation pressure . The refrigerant now re-enters the evaporator and
the process starts over again.
26
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Numerical model of the heat pump
From Figure 3.5, the process which a heat pump undergoes are presented as follows :
1. Process 6-1 Evaporation
2. Process 1-2 Internal Heat exchanger
3. Process 2-3 Compression
4. Process 3-4 Condensation
5. Process 4-5 Internal Heat Exchanger
6. Process 5-6 Throttling
The Elec-to heat Teoretisk undersøgelse af varmepump article [41] by the technology Insti-
tute consists of the datasheet used by the heat pump manufacturer Alpha Innovotec con-
sisting of the evaporation temperature, condensation temperature , isentropic efficiency
of the compressor and the effectiveness of the internal heat exchanger. This heat pump
is being used by Suntherm Aps and hence used in this thesis for analysis. The param-
eters and their values are presented in the below Table [41] and the implementation is
explained in the cycle calculations.
Sl no
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
1
Evaporation Temperature
Te
-5
C
2
Condensation Temperature
Tc
65
C
3
Superheat
Tsh
7
K
4
Subcooling
Tsc
3
K
5
Isentropic Efficiency
η
0.6
-
6
Effectiveness
ϵ
0.3
-
7
Condenser Capacity
˙Qc
9
kW
8
Quality at evaporator
xe
1
-
Table 3.1: Heat pump input values by [41]
From the given data, it is important to identify the temperatures, pressure as well as en-
thalpies of the state points of the heat pump process. In order to find out the unknowns
the below methodology is used and implemented in Dymola using the TIL library .
Cycle calculations
For performing the cycle calculations to analyze the various state points, it is important
to initially mention the assumptions chosen for the heat pump . The various assumptions
for the cycle calculations are listed below :
• The kinetic and potential energy is neglected
• The pressure drop is considered to be zero
• The compressor heat loss is neglected
As we know from the given parameters as stated above, the evaporation temperature
given from the Suntherm report is -5 [C] . The pressure at this point , is calculated as the
saturated pressure at the evaporation temperature .
Pe = Psat(′R134a′, T = Te)
(3.6)
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
27
==PAGE:36==
Similarly, the pressure at condensation is entered as follows :
Pc = Psat(′R134a′, T = Tc)
(3.7)
Firstly, the temperature after the evaporator(point 1) is calculated as the sum of the evap-
oration temperature and the superheat . Mathematically, it can be written as below :
T1 = Te + Tsh
(3.8)
The pressure at this point is equal to the evaporation pressure.
P1 = Pe
(3.9)
The enthalpy at this point is calculated with the function of the pressure and temperature
.
h1 = enthalpy(′R134a′, T = T1, P = Pe)
(3.10)
As stated in the above table , the effectiveness of the internal heat exchanger is 30% or
0.3 . The equation for calculating the effectiveness of the internal heat exchanger is as
follows.
ϵ = T2 −T1
T4 −T1
(3.11)
where ϵ is the internal heat exchanger effectiveness. The temperature at state point 4 is
equal to the difference of the condensation temperature and the subcooling temperature
.
T4 = Tc −Tsc
(3.12)
The pressure at point 4 is equal to the condensation temperature.
P4 = P3
(3.13)
The temperatures at T1 and T4 are entered in the effectiveness equation and T2 is calcu-
lated. Also, the pressure at point 2 is equal to the pressure at point 1 .
P2 = P1
(3.14)
The enthalpy at state 2 is calculated as a function of the pressure and temperature at that
point.
h2 = enthalpy(′R134a′, T = T2, P = P2)
(3.15)
Here, entropy s2 is also calculated. In order to model the compressor, we apply the given
isentropic efficiency of 0.6. The efficiency of the compressor is given by the equation
below.
ηis = h3s −h2
h3 −h2
(3.16)
The compression process has been assumed to be isentropic. This means that the en-
tropy at the entry and exit points of the compressor are the same.
s3s = s2
(3.17)
The pressure at point 3 is equal to the condensation pressure.
P3 = Pc
(3.18)
28
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:37==
In order to calculate the enthalpy at point 5 , an enthalpy balance has to be performed .
h2 −h1 = h4 −h5
(3.19)
The temperature at point 5 is calculated as a function of pressure and enthalpy at the
same point respectively.
T5 = Temperature(′R134a′, P = P5, h = h5)
(3.20)
The flow through the valve is an isenthalpic process. This means that the enthalpy at the
entry and exit points of the valve are equal.
h6 = h5
(3.21)
The temperature at state 6 is equal to the evaporation temperature.
T6 = Te
(3.22)
The pressure at point 6 is equal to the evaporation temperature as the point lies on the
low pressure of the valve.
P6 = P1
(3.23)
Also, the entropy of point 6 is calculated as the function of enthalpy and pressure of the
same points.
s6 = entropy(′R134a′, h = h6, P = P6)
(3.24)
3.2.1
Calculation of heat pump parameters
From the given parameters in the above table, it is known that the capacity of the con-
denser in 9 kW. The capacity of the condenser is defined the product of the mass flow rate
and the difference of the enthalpies of the inlet and exit of the condenser. Mathematically,
this can written as :
˙Qc = ˙m[h4 −h3]
(3.25)
The compressor power is defined as the product of the mass flow rate and the difference
of the enthalpies of the inlet and exit of the compressor.
˙W = ˙m[h3 −h2]
(3.26)
The Coefficient of performance in terms of the enthalpies can be redefined from 3.2 and
can be written as below.
COP = h4 −h3
h3 −h2
(3.27)
3.3
Operational model of heat pump
The purpose of doing the operational model of the heat pump is to use real industry -
grade components , in order to analyze the choice of the component on our design cycle
conditions. The procedure used for the operational or off-design model of the components
is according to the below flowchart.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.5: Heat pump modelling strategy
The above flowchart represents the modelling strategy used for the heat pump. In the
operational model, a catalogue is chosen of a capacity similar to the calculated design
value and its UA value is calculated.This UA value is implemented into the dymola model
and the software calculates the new temperatures.
For the control of the system, A PI controller is used to control the effective area of the
valve by taking the superheat sensor of the controller as the input value.
3.3.1
Compressor
In order to transform from the design model to the operational model, the theoretical com-
pressors must be replaced with real compressors from a manufacturers catalogue. How-
ever, the compressor efficiency will be different from the assumed value . In order to select
a real compressor, the Bitzer online software is used [42]. The software selects the ap-
propriate compressor by selecting the evaporation temperature, condensing temperature
as inputs. The efficiencies and the displacement rates are given as outputs. The main
parameter used for selecting the type of compressor is the condenser capacity and the
30
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:39==
evaporator capacity , and in this case the given capacities for the design cycle matches
the catalogue. The compressor polynomial and the constants are presented below.
y = c1+c2∗to+c3∗tc+c4∗t2
o+c5∗to∗tc+c6∗t2
c+c7∗t3
o+c8∗tc∗t2
o+c9∗to∗t2
c+c10∗t3
c (3.28)
The constants c1 to c10 in the equation 3.28 are presented in the below Table and are
extracted from the Bitzer software [42].
Sl.no
Constant(ci )
˙Q (W)
˙W(W)
˙m(kg/hr)
1
c1
18425.2
726.6483
313.666
2
c2
743.5297
-52.5084
11.7386
3
c3
-160.472
74.42918
-0.78963
4
c4
11.13064
-1.67004
0.163333
5
c5
5.78742
2.649235
-0.02429
6
c6
0.2092
-0.31547
-0.00419
7
c7
0.059615
-0.01242
0.000947
8
c8
-0.07041
0.024865
-0.0003
9
c9
0.000724
-0.00608
1.21E-05
10
c10
0.001978
-0.00058
-2.8E-05
Table 3.2: Constants c1 to c10 used from the Bitzer Software
The initial evaporation temperature( to) and condensation temperature (tc)are calculated
by solving the two equations as below .
• Evaporator capacity
˙Q = c1,Q+c2,Qto+c3,Qtc+c4,Qt2
o+c5,Qtotc+c6,Qt2
c+c7,Qt3
o+c8,Qtct2
o+c9,Qtot2
c+c10,Qt3
c
(3.29)
• Compressor Power
˙W = c1, ˙W +c2, ˙W to+c3, ˙W tc+c4, ˙W t2
o+c5, ˙W totc+c6, ˙W t2
c+c7, ˙W t3
o+c8, ˙W tct2
o+c9, ˙W tot2
c+c10, ˙W t3
c
(3.30)
The evaporator capacity is calculated by the equation below.
˙Q = ˙m[h1 −h6]
(3.31)
The compressor power is calculated according to 3.26. These values are compared to a
catalogue compressor and an appropriate compressor is chosen.
Sizing of the compressor
The displacement volume of the compressor is calculated by using the equation below.
Vdisp = π
4 d2sz N
60
(3.32)
where d is the bore , s is the stroke , z is the number of cylinders and N is the speed in
rpm. The displacement volume is usually expressed in m3
s .
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
31
==PAGE:40==
3.3.2
Condenser
Heat exchanger sizing
The type of heat exchanger used for the condenser in this thesis is a parallel plate heat
exchanger as proposed by Suntherm Aps . However, it is also important to understand
the method used for sizing the heat exchanger. It is known that the heat flux across the
condenser can be calculated as the product of the mass flow rate and the specific heat
capacity and the difference of the temperatures across the inlet and exit.
So, The heat flux balance across the refrigerant and water can be written as below :
˙Qref = ˙Qwater
(3.33)
Here, the heat dissipated by the refrigerant is equal to the heat gained by the water
medium , assuming that there is no heat loss in the condenser. In 3.33, ˙Qref is the heat
transfer rate by the refrigerant.
Substituting the expressions on the LHS and RHS in 3.33, the mass flow rate of water is
obtained.
˙mref[h4 −h3] = ˙mwaterCp,water[Twaterout −Twaterin]
(3.34)
Through implementation of this equation, the mass flow rate of water can be found out
and is expressed in kg
s .
The condenser heat flux is equal to the product of the overall heat transfer coefficient(U),
the heat transfer area(A) and the mean temperature difference (∆Tm).
˙Qcondenser = UA∆Tm
(3.35)
The overall heat transfer coefficient (U) is found out by the individual reciprocals of the
refrigerant(href) and water(hw) heat transfer coefficients.
1
U =
1
href
+
1
hwater
(3.36)
The individual heat transfer coefficients are selected from a catalogue software. The
∆Tmis calculated by the LMTD method. Here, the LMTD assumes constant specific heat
despite the Here LMTD assumes constant specific heat despite the condition of refrigerant
being single-phase and two-phase through condenser and evaporator respectively.
LMTD = ∆T1 −∆T2
ln( ∆T1
∆T2 )
(3.37)
The LMTD profile of a condenser is presented in the profile 3.6. Here, ∆T1 is the difference
in temperature of the inlet stream of the cooling loop (Tr1) and the heating loop (Tw1) where
r represents the refrigerant and w represents the water loops . Similarly, the ∆T2 is the
difference in temperature of the exit stream of the cooling loop (Tr2) and the heating loop
(Tw2).
∆T1 = Tr1 −Tw1
(3.38)
∆T2 = Tr2 −Tw2
(3.39)
Thus, from equation 3.35, the heat transfer area of the condenser is calculated and is
compared to the catalogue. The most similar catalogue condenser in terms of area is
implemented into the Dymola software.
32
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.6: Temperature profile for condenser
3.3.3
Evaporator
Heat exchanger sizing
The type of evaporator used in this thesis is a finned tube evaporator as proposed by
Suntherm Aps . This section mainly describes the method of sizing the evaporator. The
evaporator sizing is done similarly to that of the condenser.
The heat flux balance across the refrigerant and air can be written as below :
˙Qref = ˙Qair
(3.40)
Here, the heat dissipated by the cooling of the air inside the evaporator is equal to the
heat gained by the refrigerant, assuming that there is no losses in the energy balance of
the evaporator. For calculating the mass flow rate of air, the below equation is used and
is the expansion of 3.40.
˙mref[h6 −h1] = ˙mairCp,air[Tairout −Tairin]
(3.41)
The evaporator heat flux is equal to the product of the overall heat transfer coefficient ,
the heat transfer area and the mean temperature difference. Just like the condenser, the
LMTD method is used here for computing the mean temperature difference.
˙Qevaporator = UA∆Tm
(3.42)
The temperature profile for the evaporator is presented through the profile 3.42. Here, Tr
and Ta represents the temperature of the refrigerant and air respectively and the subscript
1 and 2 represent the inlet and exit temperatures respectively. From the equation 3.42,
the UA value is calculated by dividing the evaporator capacity( ˙Qevaporator) with the mean
temperature difference (∆Tm). From the UA value, the heat transfer coefficient of the re-
frigerant (href) is calculated through the below equation. and the heat transfer coefficient
of air (hair) is assumed.
In order to calculate the heat transfer coefficient of the refrigerant, the below equation is
used.
1
UA =
1
hrefAref
+
1
hairAair
(3.43)
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.7: Temperature profile for evaporator
where Aref and Aair is the heat transfer area of the refrigerant side and the air-side re-
spectively. In order to calculate the area of the refrigerant side , the internal heat transfer
area of the pipe where the refrigerant is flowing is considered.
Vinternal = π
4 D2L
(3.44)
where D is the diameter of the tube and L is the length of the tube. The volume and
diameter of the tube is taken from the catalogue of the same capacity as the calculated
˙Qref , and hence the length of the tube is taken. The length of the tube obtained from
equation 3.44 is inserted into the below equation.
Aref = πDL
(3.45)
On the other hand, the area of the air-side is equal to the sum of area of the tube and the
area of the fins.
Aa = Atube + Afin
(3.46)
So, the surface area as presented in the catalogue is taken as the area of the air side.
The heat transfer coefficient is normally in a range between 100-150
W
m2K . This value is
assumed within the presented normal range and the same parameter for the refrigerant
is calculated. The refrigerant heat transfer coefficient is normally in the range of 2000-
3000 W
m2K .
3.3.4
Internal heat exchanger
Sizing of the internal heat exchanger
From the section 3.1.4, it is understood that the internal heat exchanger slightly heats the
incoming saturated vapour from the evaporator side and also slightly cools the saturated
liquid from the condenser side. So, by energy balance the heat gained in the process 1-2
is equal to the heat lost during the process 4-5 , assuming that there is no heat losses .
Mathematically,
Q1−2 = Q4−5
(3.47)
From 3.47,
˙Q1−2 = ˙mref(h2 −h1)
(3.48)
34
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:43==
The Q1−2 gives the calculated heat flux for the internal heat exchanger and is also denoted
as QIHX. This calculated heat flux, like the condenser and the evaporator, is equal to
the product of the overall heat transfer coefficient, the heat transfer area and the mean
temperature difference.
QIHX = UA∆Tm
(3.49)
The mean temperature difference is calculated using the LMTD method. The plot of the
temperature profile across the the heat exchanger is shown in the figure 3.8 .
In order to calculate the LMTD, on looking up to figure 3.8 , the Tb1 and Tb2 denote the
temperatures of the cooling loop of the IHX respectively from the condenser side . The
temperatures Ta1 and Ta2 denote the heating loop from the evaporator side respectively
The LMTD for the IHX is calculated using the same equation as 3.37. Here, ∆T1 is the
difference in temperature of the inlet stream of the cooling loop (Tb1) and the heating loop
(Ta1). Similarly, the ∆T2 is the difference in temperature of the exit stream of the cooling
loop (Tb2) and the heating loop (Ta2).
∆T1 = Tb1 −Ta1
(3.50)
∆T2 = Tb2 −Ta2
(3.51)
These equations are used as input to 3.37 and the LMTD is calculated. Now, in order to
select a real component , it must be sized properly. From equation 3.49, the UA value can
be found out by dividing the IHX capacity with the LMTD . The relation between the overall
heat transfer coefficient and the individual heat transfer coefficients is shown below , and
is similar to 3.36.
1
U =
1
href,heatingloop
+
1
href,coolingloop
(3.52)
The individual heat transfer coefficients are found using a catalogue. The catalogue takes
the capacity ,outlet and inlet temperatures of the IHX and gives a list of heat exchangers to
select. In order to select the most appropriate heat exchanger, the area must be calculated
and the component with calculated area which is most similar to the given area is selected
and implemented into Dymola.
3.3.5
Hot water tank
It is known that the price of the electricity fluctuates throughout the day. One of the ways
in which a heat pump can be operated most efficiently would be by using a hot water
tank. This enables the production of the heat at times when the electricity prices are low.
Usually, the hot water tanks used for residential heating are sized at 200 litres. Some-
times, tanks are sized with a higher capacity or have an additional buffer tank in order to
have an advantage over the varying electricity prices throughout the day. Hot water tanks
are generally made of steel and these are very common in case of residential systems.
According to the Danish Energy Agency’s recommendations, the minimum temperature
of storage must be 45◦C . Also, the temperature of the full storage is assumed to be 60
◦C. The volume of the tank required is calculated according to the below equation.
E = V ρCp∆T
(3.53)
where E is the energy stored in kWh, V is the volume of the tank and ∆T is the temperature
gradient between and maximum and minimum temperature of storage.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.8: Temperature profile for Internal heat exchanger(IHX)
3.4
Heat pump control using a Proportional -Integral (PI)
controller
3.4.1
Proportional Integral Control theory
Process controls are generally necessary for the design of safe productive plants [43] .
Some of them can manipulate processes which are simple and also the most effective.
They are basically instruments which are used to control a particular parameter, such
as temperature and pressure.In this thesis, there are two PI controller which controls the
effective area of the expansion valve and also the speed of the compressor of the heat
pump respectively, as in Figure 3.9 [43] .
In this process, a controller attempts to correct an error between a process variable and
set point by calculating the difference and then performing a corrective action [43]. The PI
controller adjusts two parameters; Proportional gain(Kc) and integral (I). On tuning these
parameters, their effect on the process is easily adjusted. The error signal between the
measured and set point signal is defined mathematically through the equation below.
e(t) = SP −PV
(3.54)
where SP is the setpoint and PV is the process variable (measured). The Proportional
gain (Kc) is defined as the ratio of the change in the output to the change in input.
Kc = ∆Output
∆Input
(3.55)
The proportional gain is mentioned as a steady state parameter[43]. It does not give
any knowledge about the dynamics of the process and also does not take into account
the design and the operating variables [43]. The gain can have a sign which either be
either positive or negative [43]. A positive sign shows that the output signal increases
with increase in the input signal[43]. However, the negative sign of the gain shows that
the output signal decreases with the increase in the input signal [43].
3.4.2
Types of control
PI controllers are a type of continuous controllers. This is because they continuously ad-
just the output , depending on the measured input signal . An illustration of the control
36
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.9: Simple PI control flowchart [43]
system is shown in the Figure 3.11.
Here , the controller controls the output variable, for example the temperature of water
inside a tank [43]. The sensor labelled in as the Process Variable (PV) measures the
temperature of the input variable to be measured[43] . Then, the difference of this value
is computed from the set point value and thus the error is calculated. Based on this error,
the controller sends an actuating signal to the measured sensor, to adjust the value of the
input variable appropriately [43].
The type of process control which is explained here is an error-based control technique.
This is because of the fact that the actuating signal is dependent on the error signal. There
are various types of process controls which are the Proportional(P),Integral (I), Deriva-
tive(D) , Proportional-Integral(PI), Proportional Derivative (PD) and Proportional Integral
Derivative(PID) controllers(PID).
However in this thesis, the Proportional Integral (PI) controller is used .
Proportional Integral(PI) control
PI controllers are a type of feedback control as described previously in this section. This
system is slightly faster than the I control due to the introduction of the proportional term.
There is less fluctuations observed in the PI controllers , thus enabling the system to return
to their set point. In order to tune the PI controllers, it is extremely important to understand
their working. The PI control gives a relationship between the controller output to the error
signal and the process gain. They are described mathematically in the below equation.
c(t) = Kp(e(t) + ( 1
Ti
∫
e(t)dt)) + C
(3.56)
where
• Ti is the time constant
• e(t) is the error
• c(t) is the controller output
• C is the inital value
3.4.3
Superheat control
The superheat control of the heat pump is realized by controlling the effective area of the
expansion valve. This method of control is required in order to control the mass flow rate of
the refrigerant entering the evaporator according to the fixed superheat requirement, and
at the same time also throttles the liquid at the condensation pressure to the evaporation
pressure.
One of the methods to control the area of the expansion valve would be set the evapora-
tor superheat temperature to a desired set point by using a PI controller. Also, in 2012,
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
37
==PAGE:46==
Tenawittayakorn.et.al [44] conducted an investigation of the heat efficiency improvement
through the superheat control method. In this work, a thermostatic expansion valve(TXV)
is used to control the superheat temperature of the evaporator [44].
However,in this thesis a simple expansion valve is used and the same method is used
in the control as in 3.10. The measured signal and the set point of the superheat is used
as the input value of the controller and the output is directed to the effective area port of
the expansion valve.
The minimum and maximum value of the controller are determined imperatively and the
proportional gain is determined according to the below equation.
youtput,max = e(t)Kp
(3.57)
where the e(t) is the error signal, youtput,max is the maximum output of the controller and
Kp is the proportional gain .
Figure 3.10: Control of the effective flow area of the expansion valve used by [44]
3.4.4
Capacity control of heat pump
In the EU, the current trend is to do the sizing of the heat pump in order to cover a par-
ticular heat demand. This trend is given by the fact that the energy efficiency has to be
increased . So, it is better that heat pumps operate on part load at all times and the
power consumption is very efficient. There are two types of capacity control , and they
are On/off control and Variable speed control. Edward compared the different control
methods for HVAC systems, such as the on/off control method, throttling, bypassing and
variable speed control. The relative power consumption on a flow rate of 70 percent is
taken into account. It was observed that the variable speed control had the lowest power
consumption , followed by on-off control.Also, variable speed controllers can adjust the
speed in such a way that the appropriate demand is exactly covered at the particular time
, thus avoiding undersupply or excess supply. This shows that variable speed control is
38
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.11: Variable speed control of the compressor
more preferable than the on-off controllers.
The below section explains in detail about the method used for modelling the controller in
TIL.
Variable speed control
Variable speed controllers generally use an intelligent drive system in order to constantly
meet the demand, such as the heat demand of the house in this thesis. The drive con-
trols the speed of the compressor, specified in RPM. So, as the heat demand reduces,
the compressor demand reduces and also the power consumption also reduces. In this
thesis, a controller is connected to a compressor in order to vary its speed.
There are many benefits of using variable speed controllers in heat pumps. They are
as listed below [45].
1. Reduced costs
2. Reduced power surges
3. Minimized system leaks
4. Energy savings of about 30 per-cent
In this thesis, a PI controller is set up by connecting the output signal to a compressor in
order to control the speed. An illustration of the PI connection has been described in the
figure below.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
39
==PAGE:48==
Controller
Input
Output
PI
1. Temperature difference between inlet and outlet of condenser
2. Set point of the temperature difference from the heat demands
Compressor Speed
Table 3.3: PI Controller Input and output
As known , the heat gained by a medium such as water in this case is given by
Q = ˙mCp∆T
(3.58)
So, computing the temperature difference, the equation is slightly modified.
∆T =
Q
( ˙mCp)
(3.59)
where ∆T is the difference of temperatures between the exit and the inlet of the con-
denser.
So, the temperature difference is used as an input for the controller . This measured value
is compared with the heat demand of the house, and the controller adjusts the required
speed accordingly .
3.4.5
Determination of controller parameters using tuning methods
There are numerous rules for tuning a PI controller, depending on the information provided
about the controlled process. However, many tuning methods depend on the information
about the model of the process. From the parameters found, the controller parameters
can be easily calculated. One of the effective techniques of tuning the controller is the
Ziegler Nicholson tuning method.
Ziegler Nicholson tuning method
The Ziegler-Nicholson’s method is one of the heuristic methods of tuning a PI controller
[46]. Ziegler Nichols proposed some rules of tuning a PI controller. There are two methods
described by him, which are the traditional tuning method and modified tuning method.
However in this thesis, only the traditional method of tuning has been considered [46].
The traditional method of tuning applies to situations where the unit step response from
the output gives an S-shaped curve with no overshoot. This S-shaped curve is called as
the reaction curve [46]. Therefore, by using this method, the open loop reaction of a pro-
cess to a change in control variable output can be easily analyzed. The typical response
curve for this method is shown in 3.12.
Traditional Ziegler Nicholson’s Method
This method is used on the step response of the plant and is also called as the step
response method. This is carried out by applying two constants delay time (L) and Time
constant(T) [46]. These constants can be calculated by drawing a tangent on the inflection
point of the curve . This is followed by finding the intersection of the tangent line with
the steady state line and the time axis [46]. When the constants delay time(L) and time
constant(T) are calculated, the controller parameters Kp and Ti can be easily calculated
through the equations below [46] .
Kp = 0.9T
L
(3.60)
Ti = L
0.3
(3.61)
40
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.12: Response curve using Ziegler Nicholson’s method [46]
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
41
==PAGE:50==
4
Heat Demand modelling
In order to supply heat and hot water to the houses, it is important to understand the heat-
ing demand. This chapter illustrates the methods used for determining the space heating
and hot water demand for the houses. The method used for the analysis of the demands
is similar to Thomas.et.al ’s work with techno-economic evaluation of small scale and
Large scale heat pump in collaboration with Suntherm Aps. In this study, they compare
the heat demands between the single family homes and multiple family homes. As the
present scope of study in this thesis is the supply of the hot water and space heating for
residential homes of a single family consisting of four people, therefore this method has
been adopted in the current research work.
4.1
Methods for heat demand modelling
The two main methods for heat demand modelling include the standard Load Profile (SLP)
approach and the IDA-ICE approach and are described below.
• SLP approach
The SLP approach was developed by the German Federal Assocation BDEW [47].
This approach was developed for the gas providers in Germany to analyze the gas
consumption of the heating of their consumers houses [47]. This was done for a
better understanding of the aggregate demand, in order to supply the right amount
of gas to their client’s homes [47].
• IDA-ICE approach
The IDA-ICE approach is a method of analyzing the heating demand of homes using
the IDA software, which takes into input the design and size of the building and
computes the indoor climate and heating of the building required [47].
The IDA-ICE approach required a lot of input data with regard to specific building used
which was difficult to obtain. So, the SLP approach has been used for modelling the heat
demand in this thesis.
4.1.1
Standard Load profile approach
The understanding of the SLP method is obtained from the cases presented by the Ger-
man agencies BGW and BDEW and from the usage described in the When2HeatDataset
[47]. The SLP approach involves the calculation of the demand factors for daily consump-
tion of heat. These factors are then multiplied by the annual consumption of heat in order
to obtain the actual daily heat consumption. [47] .
The data taken into consideration to calculate the demand factors are as follows :
1. Type of buildings ( Based on the number of people living in the house)
2. Age of buildings (New, if built after 1978 , otherwise old)
3. Windiness of the Geographical location (–,-,o,+,++) where – indicates the least windy
conditions , o as the standard wind condition and ++ as the most
4. Annual heat consumption of the building
5. Daily mean temperature data
42
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:51==
For determining the daily demand factor, the following equation is used :
h(v) =
A
1 + (
B
v−vo )c + D
(4.1)
where A, B , C represent the type of buildings,Age of buildings and location respectively.
The parameter D is the domestic water and is considered to be 0 for now [47] . Also,
the parameter v represents the daily reference temperature and the vo represents the
upper temperature limit which is set to 40 ◦C. In order to calculate the daily reference
temperature , the weighted mean of temperature of the present day and three previous
consecutive days are taken into account [47] .
v = vd + 0.5vd−1 + 0.25vd−2 + 0.125vd−3
1 + 0.5 + 0.25 + 0.125
(4.2)
The coefficients A, B and C used for computing the daily demand factors are listed in the
Table 4.1 below :
Sl no
A
B
C
1
2.927
-37.35
5.847
Table 4.1: Coefficients used for calculating the Daily Demand Factors
Using equation 4.1 and plotting the graph between the daily temperature range of -10 to
30 ◦C, the effect of the increasing temperature with the daily demand factor can be seen.
Figure 4.1: Plot of the daily average temperature Vs Daily demand factor
The final part of the calculation of the daily demand would be to to use the annual heat
consumption of the house and the demand factors as inputs. Mathematically, they are
calculated using the equation below :
Qdaily = h(v)kW
(4.3)
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
43
==PAGE:52==
Here, kW is the annual heat consumption of the house with the Qannual and the sum of
the demand factors as inputs.
kW = Qannual
∑n
1 h(vi)
(4.4)
4.1.2
Domestic Hot water Demand
In the previous section, the method for calculating the heat demand for the house was
illustrated. However, the residential hot water demand was left out and will be described
in this section. The DHW use of a household varies by the time of the day and also
seasonally. According to literature, Domestic hot water consumption is strongly influenced
by user behavior. Times and durations of DHW consumption as well as temperature
settings depend on the individual preferences. This aspect became well evident from the
online datasheet accessed from Suntherm [48]. The data represented below is for that
of a single-family household. The consumption data of the hot water from Suntherm [48]
is presented below in Figure 4.2 for the winter, for a three different days for the month of
January 2021.
Figure 4.2: Hot Water Consumption of a single family household in Winter [48]
From the above figure, it can be seen that the demand for hot water varies throughout
the day. It can be observed that the variation through the day is not the same for all
the days. The data for three different days, which includes one week-end, shows the
hot water consumption is not consistent and therefore it is difficult to establish a definite
hourly hot water consumption pattern for a particular month/season. Similarly, the hot
water consumption for summer season is shown in Figure 4.3. The point to be observed
is that the consumption of hot water during the summer is lower and also less frequent than
44
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:53==
during winter season, due to need for lower quantity of hot water due to the higher outdoor
temperature. Likewise, it is difficult to establish a definite hourly hot water consumption
pattern for summer season too.
Figure 4.3: Hot Water Consumption of a single family household in Summer[48]
It can be seen in the above Figure that the demand for hot water during summer is ex-
tremely low and unrealistic. In the light of the above, it was difficult to get a realistic
demand for hot water consumption through out the year to incorporate in the current sim-
ulation work. So a recourse was done where pattern for DHW was taken from the litera-
ture [49]. In one of the recent works, Fischer.et.al conducted an analysis to determine the
DHW use in German households [36]. In their work, Fischer.et.al determined the mean
consumption of DHW to be 576 kWh/person/year [36]. This was for single household
consisting of four occupants. So, extrapolating the entire family would consume 2304
kWh/year. This would translate to a demand of 0.26 kW/hr. For the current modelling
study, this data for the demand for hot water in considered as the climatic condition in
Denmark is similar to that of Germany. However, to account for uncertainty, the hot wa-
ter demand obtained per hour is multiplied by the monthly demand factor. The monthly
demand factor is defined as the ratio of the average hot water consumption of the month
to the average consumption of the entire year. This is expressed mathematically below:
MF = DHWi
DHWa
(4.5)
where the DHWi represents the average domestic hot water consumption for the month
i and the DHWa represents the average consumption for the entire calendar year [49].
With the help of the monthly demand factor, the hot water demand can be easily calculated
with the help of the below equation.
˙QDHW = MFi. ˙Qannual
(4.6)
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
45
==PAGE:54==
5
Modelling of the thermal energy storage
system
The previous chapters in this thesis deals with the modelling of the heat pump and control-
ling the heat pump according to the heat demands. This serves as the base case scenario
for this thesis. Furthermore, the heat pump is considered to be coupled to a Thermal En-
ergy Storage system in order to optimize the energy consumption. The presence of a
sensible TES tank enables the heat to be stored for Space heating at times when the
electricity prices are low. The Sensible TES tank supplies the heat to the radiators when
the prices are high. So, it is important to determine the optimum size of the tank which
should be used, and also the following three cases where :
1. Heat pump satisfies the heat demand alone
2. Heat pump and TES together satisfy the demand
3. TES system satisfies the demand alone
5.1
Sizing of the TES system
It is of utmost importance to properly size the TES tank in order to ensure its efficient
functioning. The TES considered in this work is a fully mixed one, without any stratification
effect. So, for sizing the TES, the volume of heat energy that can be stored, by virtue of
rising the temperature is given by the below equation.
Q = mCp∆T
(5.1)
where m is the mass of the water stored in the TES, Cp is the specific heat and the ∆T
is the temperature difference of the water (Th- Tc) with Th being the temperature of the
hot water and Tc being the temperature of the cold water. In other words , 5.1 can be
expressed as in the equation below.
Q = mCp(Th −Tc)
(5.2)
The volume of the tank which is required in order to store a certain amount of heat is
calculated by the equation below.
V = m
d
(5.3)
where m represents the mass of the water going into tank and the d represents the density
of the water. The volume of the tank can also be represented in terms of the amount of
thermal energy which is being stored (E) in kJ through the below equation.
V =
E
dCp∆T
(5.4)
5.2
Unit Electricity Prices
This model uses the dynamic electricity costs from the leading European electricity mar-
ket, Nordpool and contains the market electricity prices with taxes and levies included [50].
Here, the unit cost of electricity varies every hour . The unit cost of electricity depends
on the seasonal variations of the temperature throughout the year. During the winter, the
46
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:55==
need for indoor heating is very high and the supply is less than the demand. This is the
reason why there are peak unit electricity prices in winter. On the other hand, during the
summer seasons the need for indoor heating is very minimal and the supply meets the
demand. So, the unit electricity prices are low in summer. The typical dynamic electricity
price for one month in Winter and Summer Season is represented in Figure 5.1. The
maximum, minimum and the average electricity prices for different months in a year is
shown in Table 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Typical seasonal unit Electricity Price (December and July)
Sl.no
Month
Maximum
Minimum
Average
1
January
1.88
1.38
1.58
2
February
1.91
1.3
1.52
3
March
1.86
1.30
1.53
4
April
1.81
1.06
1.51
5
May
1.83
1.27
1.52
6
June
2.50
1.35
1.60
7
July
1.82
1.38
1.57
8
August
2.48
1.47
1.68
9
September
2.87
1.39
1.67
10
October
2.10
1.32
1.58
11
November
3.27
1.37
1.65
12
December
3.16
1.37
1.65
Table 5.1: Maximum,Minimum and the Average electricity prices ( DKK
kWh )for a complete
year
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
47
==PAGE:56==
5.3
Operating strategy of the TES system along with heat
pump based on electricity prices
The above Figure illustrates the integration of the heat pump with the TES. From this
figure, it can be observed that the Sensible TES tank is integrated into the heat pump
by means of a three way valve. Here, the condenser heats up the water and gets split
into two streams , one for domestic hot water and the other for space heating as already
explained in the thesis statement. However, for the space heating , there is a three direc-
tional valve which controls the flow of water either directly to the radiator , or for charging
the TES.
One of the main strategies to avoid high electricity prices for the heat pump would be to
implement the use of a TES. The operation of the integrated TES and heat pump takes
place through load shifting. This is a highly efficient technique which is necessary in order
to avoid peak pricing of electricity and flattens the supply curve. This is achieved through
shifting a certain amount of heat generation during the off-peak times , storing it using
the sensible TES and using this heat during peak periods. Hence, the storage system
is a key asset to this strategy. In 2016, Espagnet.et.al conducted a techno-economic
analysis of TES integration into low temperature district heating networks. In this work,
the system also uses the load shifting strategy to optimize the use of the TES [51]. The
results of this study showed that the load shifting was possible in the colder periods of
the year . This meant that the TES system and the heat pump together would contribute
to satisfying the space heating demand in the winter season. On the other hand, due to
the fact that the electricity prices are very low in the warmer seasons of the year, due
to the low production of heat owing to the low heat demands of the house. Therefore in
lieu with Espagnet.et.al, in this thesis the heat pump charges the TES system when the
electricity prices are below a certain threshold value , and the TES system discharges and
contributes to the space heating demand along with the heat pump when the electricity
prices are above the threshold.
48
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:57==
6
Results
In this chapter, the results of the heat pump coupled with TES for meeting the energy
demands for Space heating and DHW will be presented. The results are presented in
three parts as follows.
1. Characterization of heat pump and its components
2. Heat Demand to meet Space heating and DHW
3. Electricity cost incurred in two configurations : a) Heat pump standalone mode b)
Heat pump coupled with TES
6.1
Heat pump characterization
The heat pump performance is analyzed for a period of one year and their results are
presented below. The correct selection of a heat exchanger involves the calculation of
the state points in order to calculate the capacities for their correct selection. So, the
state point parameters involving the pressure, enthalpy and temperatures are calculated
for each state point.
6.1.1
Determination of the state point parameters
Figure 6.1: P-h Diagram of the heat pump
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.1 shows the pressure, enthalpy and temperature at each state point according to
the system configuration shown in Figure 3.4. It can be observed that there is a tempera-
ture and enthalpy increase when the refrigerant exits the evaporator. This is because the
refrigerant gets heated up in the evaporator from a saturated liquid to a saturated vapour
state. The increase of the refrigerant temperature at a constant pressure also increases
the enthalpy.
When the refrigerant exits the internal heat exchanger at process 1-2, there is a small
temperature increase of 18 K observed and a similar small temperature drop is seen in
process 4-5, at the exit of the internal heat exchanger from the condenser side. This
change in temperature in both loops of the internal heat exchanger is due to the fact that
cooling loop of the heat exchanger where the temperature drop has occurred transfers
the heat dissipated to the heating loop in process 1-2.
In the compressor , the pressure of the refrigerant increases by around eight fold com-
pared to the initial pressure of the refrigerant. The temperature as well as the enthalpy of
the refrigerant decrease at the outlet of the condenser, as the refrigerant cools down in
the condenser. Thus, the state point parameters obtained in the Figure 6.1 is according
to the working theory of the heat pump and hence the values obtained are justified.
6.1.2
Heat pump parameters
The previous section validated the values of the state point parameters obtained with the
working theory. However, it is importance to understand the performance of the designed
heat pump, by the capacity of the condenser and the work done by the compressor. The
mass flow rate of the refrigerant was found to be 0.052 kg
s from the energy equation and
the work done by the compressor was found to be 3.56 kW . Furthermore, through the
given condenser capacity of 9 kW and the work done by the compressor as inputs, the
Coefficient of performance (COP) was found to be 2.52 for the design cycle. Thus, the
heat pump parameters which were calculated are summarized in the Table 6.1.
Sl.no
Output parameter
Value
Unit
1
Mass flow rate ( ˙m)
0.052
kg
s
2.
Work ( ˙W)
3.56
kW
3
Condenser capacity ( ˙Q)
9
kW
4
COP
2.52
-
Table 6.1: Summary of the Heat Pump Parameters
6.1.3
Operational model of the heat pump
The operational model is used to introduce real life components and analyze the choice
of the component on the designed temperatures of the heat pump cycle. One of the
most important choices to consider while selecting a heat exchanger is to select the most
appropriate size based on the calculated area. The results for the heat exchanger selected
and their working is described in the various subsections below.
Evaporator
The first component to select is the evaporator. The capacity of the evaporator is calcu-
lated to be 6 kW by the product of the mass flow rate and the enthalpy difference between
the exit and the inlet of the evaporator. So, from the Kelvion Select RT online catalogue,
the evaporator Kelvion SPBE 45-F32 HX32 model is selected and is of 5.79 kW capac-
ity. Since the capacity of the catalogue evaporator is almost the calculated evaporator
50
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:59==
capacity, it is implemented into the model. From the capacity of the evaporator, the mass
flow rate of air is found out to be 0.85 kg
s using the energy balance equation.
The evaporator capacity, which is 6 kW, is equated to the product of the overall heat
transfer coefficient, heat transfer area and the logarthmic mean temperature difference.
The LMTD was obtained to be 2.075 by using equation 3.37. By dividing the capacity
with the LMTD, UA value of the evaporator is found out to be 2.89 kW
K . The area of the
refrigerant side and the air side must be calculated using equation 3.43. The area of the
tube is found to be 1.9 m2 and the area of the fins is 32.9 m2. This approximately sums
up to the desired surface area of the chosen heat exchanger , which is 33.4 m2.
Sl.no
Parameter
Value
Unit
1
Evaporator Capacity ( ˙Qevap)
5.79
kW
2
Air mass flow rate ( ˙mair)
0.85
kg
s
3
LMTD
2.075
K
4
UA
2.89
kW
K
5
Heat transfer coefficient of air ( hair )
130
W
m2K
6
Heat transfer coefficient of refrigerant (href )
2325
W
m2K
Table 6.2: Summary of the chosen Evaporator parameters
The area of the refrigerant side is calculated according to equation 3.45 . The heat trans-
fer coefficient of air is assumed to be 130
W
m2K . This assumption seems to be valid as the
heat transfer coefficient of air lies between 100 - 150
W
m2K . The heat transfer coefficient
of the refrigerant is calculated from equation 3.43 and found to be 2325 W
m2K . The evap-
orator parameters are summarized in Table 6.2.
The values of the specifications of the evaporator are presented in the Table 6.3 .
Sl.no
Parameter
Value
1
Finned tube length
3.2 m
2
Number of serial tubes
4
3
Serial tube distance
21.65 mm
4
Number of parallel tubes
6
5
Parallel tube distance
25 mm
6
Fin thickness
0.14 mm
7
Tube inner diameter
7.94 mm
8
Tube wall thickness
0.3 mm
9
Fin spacing
8 mm
Table 6.3: Specifications of the chosen Evaporator
The above evaporator was considered and the heat pump was modelled using the Dymola
TIL library. The performance of the evaporator is shown in Figure . The variation of the
enthalpies of the inlet and the exit of the evaporator is shown in Figure 6.2.
Internal Heat exchanger (IHX)
The internal heat exchanger is used for the heat recovery purposes. The capacity of
the IHX is calculated to be 0.8 kW. The internal heat exchanger was selected from the
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.2: Plot of the enthalpy gain in the evaporator (Time t=0 is the 1st of January)
catalogue software based on the method described in 3.3.4. The Danfoss HEXACT online
selection software was used for the selection [52]. For calculation of the heat transfer area,
the equation 3.49 was used. The LMTD was obtained to be 44.6. The calculated area
was obtained to be 0.02 m2. Hence, the B3-012-6-H heat exchanger was selected as the
most appropriate one and has an area of 0.05 m2. The heat transfer coefficient on the
heating loop on the evaporator side is 1736.1
W
m2K and the cooling loop is 2381.2
W
m2K and
is found from the catalogue for the IHX selected in this case [52]. The values used for the
modelling of the internal exchanger is summarized in Table 6.4. The specifications of the
heat exchanger are obtained and satisfying the above results are presented in Table 6.5.
The Figure 6.3 represents the variation in the IHX output throughout the year. From this
Figure, it is observed that the peak of the output is in the winter season and the lowest
output is in the summer. This is due to higher heat recovery during winter than in summer.
Sl.no
Parameter
Value
Unit
1.
LMTD
44.6
K
2
Heat transfer coefficient of heating loop(hheatingloop)
1736.1
W
m2K
3
Heat transfer coefficient of the cooling loop (hcoolingloop)
2381.2
W
m2K
Table 6.4: Summary of the chosen IHX parameters
52
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.3: Yearly variation in the IHX output
Sl.no
Parameter
Value
1
Number of plates
36
2
Length
186 mm
3
Width
72 mm
4
Pattern angle
37
Table 6.5: Specifications of the chosen IHX
Compressor
In the operational cycle, a real compressor that matches the design condenser and evap-
orator capacity as calculated was chosen from the Bitzer software [42]. The chosen com-
pressor model was the EES-4Y model [42].
By using the above compressor, the enthalpy gain is seen across the compressor for a
complete year as seen in Figure 6.4. It is evident from the figure that the enthalpy gain in
winter is higher compared to summer in order to meet the heat demand.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.4: Plot of the enthalpy gain across the compressor
The work done by the compressor depends on product of the difference of the enthalpies
of the exit and the inlet of the compressor and the mass flow rate of the refrigerant. In
order to meet the variable heat demand, the speed of the compressor is controlled using
a PI controller, whose performance is explained in section 6.2. The variation of the mass
flow rate of the refrigerant in the heat pump is shown in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Mass flow rate of refrigerant
From the figure, it is seen that the mass flow rate of the refrigerant decreases as the
summer approaches and increases during winter season. These days are during June-
August which are during the summer season. Likewise is the power consumed by the
compressor as shown in Figure 6.6.
54
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.6: Compressor power variation throughout the year
Condenser
The condenser is used in order to subcool the refrigerant and use the heat dissipated in
order to heat up the water. The design capacity of the condenser is given to be 9 kW. The
condenser is selected from the Danfoss HEXACT software, by setting the design speci-
fications as input [52]. The model which is selected for use in this thesis is the Danfoss
H30-C36 heat exchanger [52]. From the energy balance equation, the mass flow rate
of water was calculated to be 0.3 kg
s . The sizing of the heat exchanger depends on the
UA value and the logarithmic temperature difference. So, the LMTD was calculated to be
16.83 and the UA value to be 0.535 KW/K. From the various choices of heat exchang-
ers available, the heat transfer coefficient available in the catalogue were taken and the
overall heat´transfer coefficient was calculated. This was inserted in the UA value and
the area was calculated . The Danfoss H30-C36 had a overall heat transfer coefficient of
1384.98
W
m2K . This give a calculated area of 0.4 m2 which was similar to the catalogue
area of 0.9 m2 [52]. The various parameters used in the model are summarized in Table
6.6. The specifications of the compressor are obtained and satisfying the above obtained
parameters. They are shown in Table 6.7 below.
Sl.no
Parameter
Value
Unit
1
Catalogue Area (Acat )
0.9
m2
2
Mass flow rate of water ( ˙mwater)
0.3
kg
s
3
Overall heat transfer coefficient (U)
1385
W
m2K
Table 6.6: Summary of the chosen condenser parameters
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
55
==PAGE:64==
Sl.no
Parameter
Value
1
Number of plates
36
2
Length
300 mm
3
Width
95 mm
4
Pattern angle
37
Table 6.7: Specifications of the chosen Condenser
The state point parameters such as enthalpy change dynamically. The variation of en-
thalpy with time is shown in Figure 6.7. From this figure, it is observed that the condenser
output, varies throughout the year and this is based on the heat demand. During the win-
ter, the condenser output is very high, owing to the high heat demand. On the other hand,
the condenser output drops in the summer season as the heat demand is low.
Figure 6.7: Variation of the condenser outlet enthalpy throughout the year
Expansion valve
The expansion valve is required to cool the refrigerant from the saturated liquid state in the
condenser side to a saturated vapour state at the evaporator side. The opening degree
of the valve would have to be controlled so that the heat pump operates efficiently. This
is done by employing a PI controller . The results obtained by employing the PI controller
are shown in the section 6.2.
56
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:65==
Heat pump system performance
Figure 6.8: Pressure-Enthalpy Diagram for days 90 (red) and 180 (green)
The P-h diagram shown in Figure 6.8 provides a graphical representation of states of fluid.
The plot provides overview of behavior under different conditions. Data has been plotted
for two instances in a year, the cycle plot in red color is on day - 90, i.e. during winter,
similarly the cycle plot in green color represents for day- 180 i.e. during summer.
Coefficient of performance is the ratio of the condenser output with respect to the work
done by the compressor. This parameter measures the performance of the heat pump.
The Figure 6.9 shows the variation of the COP with time . From the Figure, the heat pump
has a peak COP in summer. During the winter, it is observed that the COP decreases to
3.5 and then starts to slowly increase.
It is known that the work done by the compressor is inversely proportional to the coefficient
of performance. During the winter, the heat demand is very high. So, the speed of the
compressor is the highest, and hence the work done is also very high. As the work done
by the compressor increases in January, the COP decreases. This is the reason as to
why the COP decreased from 5 to 3.5 in January. As it approaches June, it is seen that
the work done by the compressor decreases, as the heat demand starts to decrease. So,
the COP steadily increases and peaks in June. The peak in June is due to the fact there
is minimal heat demand in June, being the most hottest period in Summer and hence the
compressor runs at very slow speeds.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.9: Variation of the coefficient of performance throughout the year
6.2
Control parameters using Ziegler Nicholson method
Zeigler Nicholson’s method is one of the control methods which is used for controlling
certain parameters such as the effective area of the valve and compressor speed con-
trol which are shown in sections 6.3 and 6.4. For tuning , some parameters such as
proportional gain and the time constant are important factors . There are two important
parameters known as the delay time (L) and time constant (T) which are important for
tuning of the controller. For the superheat controller, the delay time (L) is found to be
of 3s. Also the time constant is 10−6 seconds. Substituting this in the equations 3.60
and 3.61 respectively, a proportional gain of 3 ∗(10−7) and time constant of 10 seconds
are obtained . On the other hand, for controlling the speed of the compressor, the delay
time is calculated to be 1.5 seconds and time constant T is 3.33 seconds. This gives a
proportional gain (Kp) of 2 and a time constant (Ti) of 5 seconds.
58
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:67==
6.3
Superheat control
Figure 6.10:
Plot of the variation of the temperature difference across the expansion
valve
Figure 6.11: Plot of the variation of the expansion valve effective area
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
59
==PAGE:68==
The Figure 6.10 represents the variation of the temperature difference across the expan-
sion valve. The Figure 6.11 represents the variation of the effective area of the expansion
valve in m2 with time, measured in days. The working of the expansion valve is to direct
the flow of the refrigerant from the liquid line to the evaporator. In the expansion valve,
there is a sensing bulb which detects the temperature and is generally placed higher than
the temperature of the evaporator. The expansion valve detects the temperature differ-
ence between the inlet and exit of the valve, and controls the opening degree of the valve
accordingly to allow the appropriate amount of refrigerant to flow through the valve. Dur-
ing the winter season, it is observed that the temperature drop across the expansion valve
is very high. So, the valve area is highest during the winter. However, during the summer,
it is observed that the temperature drop is the lowest . Hence, this is the reason as to why
the opening area decreases during summer.
6.4
Variable speed control
Figure 6.12: Variation of the compressor speed throughout the year
The above figure represents the variation of compressor speed throughout the year, with
the time represented in days and the compressor frequency in Hz. The speed of the
compressor is regulated according to the demands of the house. In order to interpret the
variation of the compressor speed, it is important to understand the heat demand profiles
presented in Figure 6.13. From Figure 6.13, it was understood from the heat demand
analysis that the heat demand is the highest during the winter season followed by the
summer where the heat demand is minimal.
The compressor speed is directly proportional to the heat demand. This means that the
compressor speed is at its lowest when the heat demand is low, that is during the summer
season and vice versa during the winter season. This is displayed in the Figure 6.12.
60
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.13: Plot of the heat demand throughout the year
6.5
Heat demand modelling
In the previous section, the results for the simulation of residential heat pump have been
presented. However, the heat pump is designed to cover a particular load pattern through-
out the year. It is known that heat has to be supplied into the building, through a source
such as a heat pump in order to compensate for the building heat loss. In Denmark, the
standard size of the houses according to Dansk Fjervarme is 130 m2 and have a heat loss
of 18100 kWh/year. This can be generalized to a house of varying area as 140 kWh/yr/m2.
The daily heat demand throughout the year as shown in Figure 6.13 was generated as
explained in Chapter 4. It is seen that the heat demand during the months of June-August
is very low, whereas on the other hand there is a peak demand during the last two months
of the year. This translates to the fact that the summer season in Denmark ranges fairly
from June- August and there is not much requirement for the houses to be heated. The
months of November, December and January are relatively cold, with December and Jan-
uary being the coldest months of the year. So, more heat will be needed to keep the indoor
space at a comfortable temperature. While the daily demand for the entire year has been
analyzed, it is also important to analyze the hourly heat demand at different temperature
ranges. The plot of the time, in hours and percentage of the daily demand at that time is
shown in Figure 6.14 using the same procedure as for the daily demand.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.14: Variation of the daily demand for different days in Summer and Winter
6.5.1
Domestic hot water
Figure 6.15: Seasonal variation of the hot water demands in one year
62
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:71==
The Figure 6.21 represents the domestic hot water demand throughout the year, for a sin-
gle family house consisting of four people.This data is based on daily water consumption
accessed from Suntherm’s Live heat pump data as explained in chapter 4 in section 4.1.2
. Here, it can be observed that the hot water demand has a marginal variation throughout
the year and the demand is higher in winter compared to the summer season. This data
is implemented as an input for the simulation of energy consumption in the TIL library.
6.6
Power Consumption of the Electric heater
Figure 6.16: Variation of electric heater power throughout the year for Base case (Time
t=0 refers to 1st January of a year)
The Figure 6.16 represents the variation of power consumed by the Electric heater for
heating water in the Hot Water Tank for DHW application . The hot water tank was sized
according to the method presented in section 3.3.5. The Danish energy Agency’s recom-
mendation was implemented and an optimum size of 0.5 m3 was chosen. Here, 55 ◦C
was chosen as the threshold to turn on/off the electric heater. For modelling the on/off
controller in Dymola (TIL), the below condition is set:
1. If the temperature inside the tank goes less than 328 K,then the electric heater is
switched on and the heater heats up the water to 333 K.
2. If the temperature inside the tank is above 328 K, then the electric heater turns off
When the temperature goes below 328 K, the electric heater automatically switches on
to heat the water to 333 K. The Figure 6.16 shows the on/off control of the electric heater
throughout the year. Here, the power consumed by the electric heater is negative , due
to the sign convention that the heat flowing inside the tank is negative, and positive if the
heat flows out of the tank.
In this thesis, the hot water demand of the house is satisfied by the heat pump, in some
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
63
==PAGE:72==
cases the combination of heat pump and electric heater and only electric heater in some
other cases. In reality, the electric heater would be needed to be turned on when the heat
pump alone cannot entirely satisfy the heat demand.
QDemand = QHP + Qel
(6.1)
During the peak periods of winter which is January, the heat pump cannot entirely cater
to the hot water demand . So, the electric heater and heat pump have to jointly contribute
to the demand. However, during the summer seasons, the heat pump does not produce
enough heat as the hot water demand and the space heating demand is relatively lesser
and the compressor runs at a minimal speed, due to minimizing the operational costs.
The threshold of 328 K (55◦C) is selected because of the Danish Agency regulations that
the minimum temperature of the hot water should be at 55 ◦C to avoid the consequences
of the legionella bacteria.
6.7
Energy flow
6.7.1
Base Case Scenario
It is known that the heat pump is required to cover a designated heat demand profile over
the year. This section shows that the heat pump, along with the electric heater satisfies
the hot water and space heating demand. This is shown in the Table 6.8. The variation of
the demand and supply throughout the year is shown in Figure 6.17. From this Figure, it
is seen that there is an overlap of the heat supply and demand for a complete year, which
implies that the heat demand is totally met by the Heat pump and the electric heater.
The purpose of using electric heater is to meet the energy deficit at times of higher DHW
demand when the heat pump capacity is low. This scenario could happen more in summer
when the heat pump is operating at lower speed/capacity, when the space heat demand
is low but demand for DHW remaining unchanged.
Sl.no
Component
Demand/Consumption (kWh)
%
Heat Demand (Annual)
1
Space heating
18222
89
2
DHW
2305
11
Total
20527
100
Heat supply (Annual)
1.
Condenser
20451
99.98
2
Electric heater
3
0.02
Total
20454
100
Difference (Heat demand - Heat supply)
73
0.35
Table 6.8: Table representing the Demand-Supply Energy Balance
64
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.17: Graph to show the satisfaction of the heat demand by the heat pump and
electric heater over a complete year
6.7.2
Influence of the storage size on the operational cost
As explained earlier, the hot water for DHW purpose is stored in the hot water tank. In
this thesis, the influence of storage size on the operational cost of the system is analyzed.
This was analyzed by using storage tanks of various sizes. Fisher.et.al compared the
influence of the hot water tank sizing on the cost of operation of the heat pump. Here,
five different sizes of the tank were taken , such as 0.5 m3, 2m3 , 3m3 and 5m3 and
these sizes were taken into consideration for comparison. From the section 6.8, it is seen
that the market electricity prices are influenced by three components which use electricity,
namely the compressor , electric heater and the pump. For the electric heater, the above-
mentioned sizes were taken into account and the simulation was run for a period of one
year. It was observed that the power consumption marginally increases with the increase
in tank size. However, there is no change in the power consumption of the compressor
and the pump in this aspect. So, it is observed that the tank sizing has a negligible impact
on the operational cost of the heat pump.
6.7.3
TES coupled Scenario
In the case of coupled heat pump - TES system, the demand side energy required for
space heating and DHW remains the same, like the base case. However, this energy
requirement is met by sum of energies from heat pump + heater + energy stored in the
TES. The energy requirement for DHW is met by heat pump + electric heater, whereas
for space heating it is met by heat pump + heater + energy stored in the TES.
The TES is operated in a manner that during events when the electricity prices are lower,
then the TES gets charged by heat pump with hot water and during events when electric-
ity prices are higher, then the hot water stored in TES is utilized for meeting the energy
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
65
==PAGE:74==
required for space heating. During events when TES energy is utilized for space heat-
ing purpose then the net energy flow from the heat pump accordingly reduces thereby
reducing the electricity consumed by the compressor. This reduction is made possible
by regulating the speed or frequency of the compressor using a PI controller that was
explained in Section 3.4.4. The frequency variation is represented in Figure 6.20., com-
pared against compressor speed in base case. Even though there is continuous speed
fluctuation, the compressor speed is marginally lower in coupled mode, thus providing the
benefit of lower power consumption. The energy consumed by the compressor is 6105
kWh in coupled mode against energy consumption of 6565 kWh in the base case scenario.
Figure 6.18: Comparison of the compressor frequency (Hz) for Base case and Coupled
case
Thus, TES system is operational through out the year by the way of either charging or dis-
charging of hot water depending upon the instantaneous electricity price. The Figure 6.19
shows the charge/discharge of TES in accordance with the electricity price. The reference
price considered here the annual average price of 1.6 DKK/kWh. It is evident from this
figure that TES utilization for space heating is more pronounced in winter than summer
due to higher electricity price. In winter the number of instances of discharge from TES is
higher due to higher electricity price whereas, the trend is other way in summer.
66
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:75==
Figure 6.19: Charge/Discharge operation of the TES in summer (top) and winter (bottom)
The hot water temperature in the TES varies from about 30 to 55◦C during the entire year
based on the heat pump performance. The energy stored in the TES for the entire year
is shown in Figure 6.20
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 6.20: Energy stored in TES over a complete year
6.8
Electricity cost
The previous sections presented the results of modelling the heat pump and the hot wa-
ter storage system. However, for efficient operation of the heat pump system, it is also
important to analyze the market electricity costs. In this thesis, the electricity costs are
calculated by the product of the market prices from the Nordpool and the power consump-
tion of the compressor, electric heater and the water pump as shown in equation 6.2. The
market electricity price is based on recent historical data, the electricity price is inclusive
of taxes etc. The electricity price varies through out the day and over a complete year, a
sample data for 24-hour duration is shown in Figure 5.1.
Price(DKK) = PricesNordpool ∗(PCompressor + PElheater + PPump)
(6.2)
6.8.1
Base case - Heat Pump alone mode
The electricity price incurred by an individual household for a complete year for a base-
line operation i.e. heat pump without TES is shown in Figure 6.21. It is evident from the
figure that the cost incurred in higher in winter as compared to summer season due to the
need for higher space heating and DHW.The highest amount incurred is seen in Decem-
ber.During the summer, it is observed that the electricity cost is lower and this is because
of significantly lower heat demand.
68
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:77==
Figure 6.21: Electricity Cost over a year for Base case Operation
6.8.2
Heat pump coupled with TES system
The volume of the TES system was sized for a single day according to Section 5.1 based
on the thermal energy stored (kJ) and the peak space heating demand (kW). From this
data, the volume of the tank was sized to be 2.38 m3. When the Heat Pump was cou-
pled with the TES system, the strategy that was employed for usage of the TES was that
whenever the hourly electricity price was lower than the average annual price, the TES
was charged to store hot water and whenever the hour electricity price was lower than
the average annual price, the TES was discharged, which means the hot water stored in
the TES was utilized for augmenting the space heating need along with the heat pump.
The electricity cost incurred in the TES mode is shown in Figure 6.22.
The Figure 6.23 shows the comparison of electricity cost in both the modes of operation.
It is evident that in coupled mode of operation, the electricity cost incurred reduces sub-
stantially during winter – particularly between October to December, as compared with
data from January to March. Whereas during summer, there is a marginal reduction in
electricity cost . The saving in electricity cost worked out to about 5% on annual basis as
compared to stand-alone heat pump mode.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 6.22: Electricity Cost over a year for coupled mode of operation
Figure 6.23: Comparison of Electricity costs for both modes of operation
6.9
Optimization of electricity cost for the coupled mode of
operation
With the electricity price being dynamic and varying through the day and over the year,
operating the heat pump is not ideal during the times when electricity price being high.
During such instances of high electricity price, it would be prudent to utilize the energy
stored in the TES for meeting the space heating demand. The energy in the TES would
have to be stored earlier, at instances when the electricity price was lower. This strategy
of utilizing the energy stored in TES during the times when electricity price is at peak has
70
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:79==
the potential to lower the annual electricity cost.
In the previous section, the operation strategy of comparing the hourly electricity price
against the annual average electricity price was utilized for charging and releasing of
energy stored in the TES. This approach was able to lower the annual electricity cost by
5%. In this section, a few more strategies were employed for optimization of the annual
electricity cost. The optimization strategy involved comparison of the current electricity
price (historical annual data) against the following:
1. Electricity price averaged over a month (days in a month)
2. Electricity price averaged over a day (hours in a day)
3. Electricity price peak over a day
Sl.no
Configuration
Electricity pricing
Annual Electricity cost(DKK)
Saving(%)
1.
Base case
-
10500
-
2.
Coupled mode
Annual Average
9900
5
3
Coupled mode
Monthly Average
9750
6
4
Coupled mode
Hourly Average
9700
7
5
Coupled mode
Daily peak
9700
7
Table 6.9: Comparison of the savings obtained from the various mentioned optimization
strategies
The results of the optimization is presented in Table 6.9. As evident from the Table 6.9,
the least electricity cost was incurred with operating strategy of hourly average and daily
peak electricity price . The saving was to a tune of 7%. Furthermore analyzing on the
monthly electricity costs, it is evident from Figure 6.24 that the saving in electricity cost
is dominantly visible in the earlier winter months (October to December), when the peak
electricity price encountered was higher against other months. On the other hand, the
electricity cost reduction between February to August is marginal. The possible reason
for higher optimization during early winter is due to the fact that the number of instances
encountered with peak electricity prices is higher when compared to later part of winter and
summer season. This observation corroborates with the data represented in Figure 5.1.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 6.24: Electricity Cost over a year for coupled mode of operation
72
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:81==
7
Discussion
In this work the results of the simulation of the standalone heat pump and the heat pump
coupled with TES system has been demonstrated. With respect to heat pump perfor-
mance, it has been observed that COP increases in the summer due to less compres-
sor work and decreases in winter. Also, the heat output of the heat pump decreases in
summer and has its highest output in winter according to the heat demands. This result
corroborates with Chen.et.al ’s work, wherein a numerical simulation of a thermal heat
pump resulted in a COP between a minimum of 2 and a maximum of 7.
While the results obtained are as expected, it is also necessary to understand the meth-
ods which could be used to improve the energy efficiency of the heat pump. In 2017,
Willem.et.al conducted a review of the performance of heat pump water heaters and gave
some recommendations on how the energy efficiency could be increased using a multi-
fold strategy [53]. Their recommendations on the possible energy efficiency improvement
strategies are illustrated and include the following:
1. Defrost strategies to boost performance under low or extreme ambient conditions
2. Considering suitable refrigerants, their application in Heat pump water Heaters, and
alternatives to vapor compression technology
3. Introducing smart control strategies which optimize energy use based on water use
schedule
4. Applying advanced materials and components to increase capacity of energy (heat)
storage
The defrost and adopting suitable refrigerant strategy has been well addressed by several
authors [53] [54] [55] [56] [57], which has aided in improving the efficiency.
Smart control strategy is one other method to optimize the energy use according to the
heat demands. In this thesis, one of the strategies includes the inclusion of an electric
heater to heat up water when the heat pump cannot satisfy the heat demand, for example
at low ambient conditions. Also, some other control methods which have been adapted
are the superheat control method to control the opening degree of the expansion value
and variable speed control to optimize the speed of the compressor.
The approach of using components to increase capacity of energy storage includes adopt-
ing of different thermal energy storage solutions, of which using sensible heat storage for
efficiency improvement has been demonstrated. But as evident in the current work, the
improvement in performance in terms of energy savings or savings in the electricity cost
is less than 10%. In this thesis the stratification dynamics in the TES has not been con-
sidered. But stratification is an important aspect in heat and mass transfer analyses,
occurring due to temperature variation in the tank during charging and discharging oper-
ation. Thus, it is possible to improvise the efficiency of TES by considering this effect,
this aspect has been highlighted in the review paper [58], that cost effective water tank
storage system’s efficiency can be improved by ensuring optimal water stratification in
the tank apart from using highly effective thermal insulation. In some of the recent works
[59], the energy savings in TES due to stratification effect is shown to further increase
by 5.5%. Perhaps by adopting other energy storage methods such as latent heat and
Thermochemical energy storage, it might be possible to attain higher savings.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
73
==PAGE:82==
With respect to the electricity cost optimization, a work has been published by Schellen-
berg.et.al , where the operational optimization of a heat pump coupled with a sensible
thermal energy storage using Genetic Algorithm has been demonstrated [37]. Here, op-
erational cost reduction of 12% has been identified. This was achieved by using the
optimization algorithm from the Evolver Tool from the Palisade Decision suite [37].
As a future work, considering stratification effect in TES and by adopting advanced opti-
mization methods, it could be possible to enhance the energy savings of the heat pump-
TES system modelled in this work.
74
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:83==
8
Conclusion
The Master degree thesis has addressed the space heating and hot water requirement,
which are two important components of residential energy consumption. Research work
has been carried out on modelling and optimization of a heat pump coupled with an ad-
vanced thermal energy storage system. The simulation has been carried out using com-
mercial DYMOLA software, which simulates annual domestic hot water and space heating
requirement of an individual residential household in Denmark.
The modelled energy system consisted of basic heat pump system with industrial grade
components for evaporator, compressor, internal heat exchanger and condenser sub-
systems. For thermal energy storage, a 2.3 m3 insulated tank was integrated with the
heat pump system. A PI controller was adopted for control of the compressor’s speed
and also the super heat to optimize on the performance of the system.
The simulation successfully demonstrated the coupled heat pump and TES system in
meeting the space heating and hot water demand requirements. The strategy of lower-
ing the electricity cost by utilizing the stored energy in TES during peak electricity prices
was successfully demonstrated and the annual electricity cost was optimized based on
averaged hourly and daily peak electricity prices. By this approach a savings of 7% in the
annual electricity cost has been achieved.
Thus, this research work was able to demonstrate the energy savings that one could
achieve by utilizing a thermal storage system, taking advantage of the dynamic pricing of
electricity.
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
75
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1]
.” The Gale Encyclopedia of Science. . Encyclopedia.com. 25 Oct. 2021 . Nov. 2021.
URL: https://www.encyclopedia.com/science-and-technology/chemistry/compounds-
and-elements/carbon-dioxide.
[2]
What Is the Greenhouse Effect? URL: https://climatekids.nasa.gov/greenhouse-
effect/#:~:text=Burning%20fossil%20fuels%20like%20coal,causes%20Earth%20to%
20warm%20up.
[3]
Gorazd Krese et al. “Thermochemical seasonal solar energy storage for heating
and cooling of buildings”. eng. In: Energy and Buildings 164 (2018), pp. 239–253.
ISSN: 03787788, 18726178. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.12.057.
[4]
Matthias Schmidt and Marc Linder. “A Novel Thermochemical Long Term Storage
Concept: Balance of Renewable Electricity and Heat Demand in Buildings”. eng.
In: Frontiers in Energy Research 8 (2020), p. 137. ISSN: 2296598x. DOI: 10.3389/
fenrg.2020.00137.
[5]
Energy statistics - an overview - Statistics Explained. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php?title=Energy_statistics_-_an_overview#Final_energy_
consumption. (Accessed on 11/19/2021). Sept. 2021.
[6]
Jak začít topit tepelným čerpadlem? | Solarex. https://www.solarex.cz/jak-zacit-
topit-tepelnym-cerpadlem/. (Accessed on 11/20/2021). Sept. 2021.
[7]
Iain Staffell et al. “A review of domestic heat pumps”. eng. In: Energy and Envi-
ronmental Science 5.11 (2012), pp. 9291–9306. ISSN: 17545706, 17545692. DOI:
10.1039/c2ee22653g.
[8]
How Much Space Do You Need For a Ground Source Heat Pump? | Thermal Earth.
https://www.thermalearth.co.uk/blog/how-much-space-for-a-ground-source-heat-
pump. (Accessed on 11/20/2021).
[9]
G. L. Morrison, T. Anderson, and M. Behnia. “Seasonal performance rating of heat
pump water heaters”. eng. In: Solar Energy 76.1-3 (2004), pp. 147–152. ISSN:
14711257, 0038092x. DOI: 10.1016/j.solener.2003.08.007.
[10]
Elias Kinab et al. “Reversible heat pump model for seasonal performance optimiza-
tion”. eng. In: Energy and Buildings 42.12 (2010), pp. 2269–2280. ISSN: 18726178,
03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2010.07.007.
[11]
Matteo Dongellini, Claudia Naldi, and Gian Luca Morini. “Seasonal performance
evaluation of electric air-to-water heat pump systems”. eng. In: Applied Thermal
Engineering 90 (2015), pp. 1072–1081. ISSN: 18735606, 13594311. DOI: 10.1016/
j.applthermaleng.2015.03.026.
[12]
Pamela Vocale, Gian Luca Morini, and Marco Spiga. “Influence of outdoor air con-
ditions on the air source heat pumps performance”. eng. In: Energy Procedia 45
(2014), pp. 653–662. ISSN: 18766102. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2014.01.070.
[13]
Francesco Madonna and Francesca Bazzocchi. “Annual performances of reversible
air-to-water heat pumps in small residential buildings”. eng. In: Energy and Buildings
65 (2013), pp. 299–309. ISSN: 18726178, 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.
06.016.
[14]
Estefanía Hervas-Blasco et al. “Optimal sizing of a heat pump booster for sanitary
hot water production to maximize benefit for the substitution of gas boilers”. eng.
In: Energy 127 (2017), pp. 558–570. ISSN: 18736785, 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.
energy.2017.03.131.
76
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:85==
[15]
Fabián Correa and Cristian Cuevas. “Air-water heat pump modelling for residential
heating and domestic hot water in Chile”. eng. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 143
(2018), pp. 594–606. ISSN: 18735606, 13594311. DOI: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.
2018.07.130.
[16]
C. P. Underwood, M. Royapoor, and B. Sturm. “Parametric modelling of domestic
air-source heat pumps”. eng. In: Energy and Buildings 139 (2017), pp. 578–589.
ISSN: 18726178, 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.01.026.
[17]
Liam Paull, Howard Li, and Liuchen Chang. “A novel domestic electric water heater
model for a multi-objective demand side management program”. eng. In: Electric
Power Systems Research 80.12 (2010), pp. 1446–1451. ISSN: 18732046, 03787796.
DOI: 10.1016/j.epsr.2010.06.013.
[18]
M. H. Nehrir, B. J. LaMeres, and V. Gerez. “Customer-interactive electric water
heater demand-side management strategy using fuzzy logic”. eng. In: Ieee Engi-
neering Society, Winter Meeting 1 (1999), pp. 433–436. DOI: 10.1109/PESW.1999.
747494.
[19]
Zhi Chen, Lei Wu, and Yong Fu. “Real-time price-based demand response man-
agement for residential appliances via stochastic optimization and robust optimiza-
tion”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Smart Grid 3.4 (2012), pp. 1822–1831. ISSN:
19493061, 19493053. DOI: 10.1109/TSG.2012.2212729.
[20]
A. Molina et al. “Electrical Thermal Storage modeling: A tool to evaluate new op-
portunities and bids for residential users in a deregulated market”. eng. In: 2003
Ieee Bologna Powertech - Conference Proceedings 4 (2003), p. 1304783. DOI:
10.1109/PTC.2003.1304783.
[21]
Devrim Aydin, Sean P. Casey, and Saffa Riffat. “The latest advancements on ther-
mochemical heat storage systems”. eng. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 41 (2015), pp. 356–367. ISSN: 18790690, 13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.
2014.08.054.
[22]
Georgi Krasimiroy Pavlov and Bjarne W. Olesen. “Building Thermal Energy Storage
- Concepts and Applications”. eng. In: Proceedings (2011).
[23]
Ibrahim Dincer. “On thermal energy storage systems and applications in buildings”.
eng. In: Energy and Buildings 34.4 (2002), pp. 377–388. ISSN: 18726178, 03787788.
DOI: 10.1016/S0378-7788(01)00126-8.
[24]
Ibrahim Dincer, Sadik Dost, and Xianguo Li. “Thermal energy storage applications
from an energy saving perspective”. eng. In: International Journal of Global Energy
Issues 9.4 (1997), pp. 351–364. ISSN: 17415128, 09547118.
[25]
Girolama Airò Farulla et al. “A review of thermochemical energy storage systems for
power grid support”. eng. In: Applied Sciences (switzerland) 10.9 (2020), p. 3142.
ISSN: 20763417. DOI: 10.3390/app10093142.
[26]
Julián Osorio et al. “Exergy analysis of discharging multi-tank thermal energy stor-
age systems with constant heat extraction”. In: Applied Energy 154 (Sept. 2015),
p. 333. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.05.018.
[27]
MF LIGHTSTONE, GD RAITHBY, and KGT HOLLANDS. “NUMERICAL-SIMULATION
OF THE CHARGING OF LIQUID STORAGE TANKS - COMPARISON WITH EX-
PERIMENT”. eng. In: Journal of Solar Energy Engineering-transactions of the Asme
111.3 (1989), pp. 225–231. ISSN: 15288986, 01996231. DOI: 10.1115/1.3268311.
[28]
Energies | Free Full-Text | Investigation of Stratified Thermal Storage Tank Perfor-
mance for Heating and Cooling Applications | HTML. https://www.mdpi.com/1996-
1073/11/5/1049/htm. (Accessed on 01/20/2022).
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
77
==PAGE:86==
[29]
Mukrimin Sevket Guney. “Solar power and application methods”. eng. In: Renew-
able and Sustainable Energy Reviews 57 (2016), pp. 776–785. ISSN: 18790690,
13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.055.
[30]
“06/01692 Optimal design of thermal-energy stores for boiler plants”. eng. In: Fuel
and Energy Abstracts 47.4 (2006), p. 259. ISSN: 18737161, 01406701. DOI: 10.
1016/S0140-6701(06)81698-X.
[31]
Giedre Streckiene et al. “Feasibility of CHP-plants with thermal stores in the Ger-
man spot market”. eng. In: Applied Energy 86.11 (2009), pp. 2308–2316. ISSN:
18729118, 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2009.03.023.
[32]
K. C. Kavvadias, A. P. Tosios, and Z. B. Maroulis. “Design of a combined heat-
ing, cooling and power system: Sizing, operation strategy selection and parametric
analysis”. eng. In: Energy Conversion and Management 51.4 (2010), pp. 833–845.
ISSN: 18792227, 01968904. DOI: 10.1016/j.enconman.2009.11.019.
[33]
S. Martínez-Lera, J. Ballester, and J. Martínez-Lera. “Analysis and sizing of thermal
energy storage in combined heating, cooling and power plants for buildings”. eng.
In: Applied Energy 106 (2013), pp. 127–142. ISSN: 18729118, 03062619. DOI: 10.
1016/j.apenergy.2013.01.074.
[34]
D SRAGOVICH. “TRANSIENT ANALYSIS FOR DESIGNING AND PREDICTING
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE OF A HIGH-TEMPERATURE SENSIBLE THERMAL-
ENERGY STORAGE-SYSTEM”. eng. In: Solar Energy 43.1 (1989), pp. 7–16. ISSN:
14711257, 0038092x. DOI: 10.1016/0038-092X(89)90095-9.
[35]
Alessandro Franco et al. “Optimal operation of low-capacity heat pump systems
for residential buildings through thermal energy storage”. eng. In: Sustainability
(switzerland) 13.13 (2021), p. 7200. ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/su13137200.
[36]
D. Fischer et al. “Investigation of Thermal Storage Operation Strategies with Heat
Pumps in German Multi Family Houses”. eng. In: Energy Procedia 58 (2014), pp. 137–
144. ISSN: 18766102. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2014.10.420.
[37]
Christoph Schellenberg, John Lohan, and Laurentiu Dimache. “Operational optimi-
sation of a heat pump system with sensible thermal energy storage using genetic
algorithm”. eng. In: Thermal Science 22.5 (2016), pp. 2189–2202. ISSN: 23347163,
03549836. DOI: 10.2298/TSCI171231272S.
[38]
Wangsik Jung et al. “Investigation of heat pump operation strategies with ther-
mal storage in heating conditions”. eng. In: Energies 10.12 (2017), p. 2020. ISSN:
19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en10122020.
[39]
ThermoCycle.pdf. https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/89473967/ThermoCycle.pdf.
(Accessed on 12/31/2021).
[40]
Room air conditioning performance using liquid-suction heat exchanger retrofitted
with R290 - ScienceDirect. https: / / www . sciencedirect. com / science / article /pii /
S2214157X18300704. (Accessed on 01/21/2022).
[41]
ELEC-TO-HEAT Teoretisk undersøgelse af varmepumpe (6).pdf. file:///C:/Users/
s193033/Downloads/ELEC-TO-HEAT%20Teoretisk%20unders%C3%B8gelse%20af%
20varmepumpe%20(6).pdf. (Accessed on 12/12/2021).
[42]
BITZER Software. https://www.bitzer.de/websoftware/Calculate.aspx?cid=1639315246383&
mod=HHK. (Accessed on 12/12/2021).
[43]
9.2: P, I, D, PI, PD, and PID control - Engineering LibreTexts. https://eng.libretexts.
org / Bookshelves / Industrial _ and _ Systems _ Engineering / Book % 3A _ Chemical _
Process_Dynamics_and_Controls_(Woolf)/09%3A_Proportional-Integral-Derivative_
(PID)_Control/9.02%3A_P%2C_I%2C_D%2C_PI%2C_PD%2C_and_PID_control.
(Accessed on 12/12/2021).
78
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:87==
[44]
Wasan Tanawittayakorn, Paisarn Phrajunpanich, and Supot Siwapornphaisarn. “Heat
Pump Efficiency Improvement by Discharge Superheated Control”. In: 2012.
[45]
A Brief Guide to Variable-Speed Heat Pumps. https://www.arcadiahvac.com/blog/
brief-guide-variable-speed-heat-pumps. (Accessed on 12/12/2021).
[46]
Islam 2013 - Modelling and Control System design to control Water temperature
in Heat Pump.pdf. file : / / /C : /Users / s193033 / Downloads / Islam % 202013 % 20 -
%20Modelling%20and%20Control%20System%20design%20to%20control%20Water%
20temperature%20in%20Heat%20Pump.pdf. (Accessed on 12/12/2021).
[47]
BSc Project- s183566 s174209 s183562.pdf. file:///C:/Users/s193033/Downloads/
BSc%20Project-%20s183566%20s174209%20s183562.pdf. (Accessed on 12/12/2021).
[48]
Suntherm. Suntherm - Questions & Answers. https://www.suntherm.dk/support.
(Accessed on 12/12/2021).
[49]
DOMESTIC HOT WATER CONSUMPTION AND ITS IMPACT ON SYSTEMS WITH
CIRCULATION - Project Library, Aalborg University. https : / / projekter . aau . dk /
projekter/en/studentthesis/domestic- hot- water- consumption- and- its- impact- on-
systems-with-circulation(20e59ee1-645a-41e7-bf84-bdac5e0b81af).html. (Accessed
on 12/30/2021).
[50]
Statistics | Eurostat. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/nrg_pc_204/
default/table?lang=en. (Accessed on 01/21/2022).
[51]
espagnet techno-economic analysis of thermal energy storage - Google Search.
https://www.google.com/search?q=espagnet+techno- economic+analysis+of+
thermal+energy+storage+&sxsrf=AOaemvJf2qzyFvJiuhjaSNDGXCfDvZPyDQ%3A1642524659395&
ei=8-_mYZetF6uFxc8PgZCL8A4&ved=0ahUKEwjX8u2W4bv1AhWrQvEDHQHIAu4Q4dUDCA4&
uact=5&oq=espagnet+techno-economic+analysis+of+thermal+energy+storage+
&gs_lcp=Cgdnd3Mtd2l6EAM6BwgjEOoCECc6BQgAEJECOgUIABCABDoLCC4QgAQQxwEQowI6Cw
sclient=gws-wiz. (Accessed on 01/19/2022).
[52]
Hexact | Heat exchanger design software | Danfoss. https://www.danfoss.com/en/
service-and-support/downloads/dcs/hexact/. (Accessed on 12/12/2021).
[53]
Review of energy efficiency and system performance of residential heat pump water
heaters - ScienceDirect. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0378778817304760. (Accessed on 12/15/2021).
[54]
Optimisation of Defrost Strategy for an Air-to-Water Heat Pump.pdf. https://projekter.
aau.dk/projekter/files/198457703/Optimisation_of_Defrost_Strategy_for_an_Air_
to_Water_Heat_Pump.pdf. (Accessed on 12/16/2021).
[55]
Alternative Defrost Strategies for Residential Heat Pumps. https://docs.lib.purdue.
edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2897&context=iracc. (Accessed on 12/16/2021).
[56]
The modelling of reverse defrosting cycles of air-to-water heat pumps with TRN-
SYS. file:///C:/Users/User/Downloads/The_modelling_of_reverse_defrosting_
cycles_of_air-.pdf. (Accessed on 12/16/2021).
[57]
A Small Power Recovery Expander for Heat Pump COP Improvement. file:///C:
/Users/User/Downloads/A_Small_Power_Recovery_Expander_for_Heat_Pump_
COP_.pdf. (Accessed on 12/17/2021).
[58]
(PDF) A Comprehensive Review of Thermal Energy Storage. https://www.researchgate.
net / publication / 322757998 _ A _ Comprehensive _ Review _ of _ Thermal _ Energy _
Storage. (Accessed on 01/19/2022).
[59]
Optimal schedule and temperature control of stratified water heaters - PubAg. https:
//pubag.nal.usda.gov/catalog/7341068. (Accessed on 01/19/2022).
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
79
==PAGE:88==
80
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:89==
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
81
==PAGE:90==
A
Appendix
A.1
Heat pump component selection catalogues
A.1.1
Evaporator
AIR COOLER DIRECT EXPANSION | SPBE 45-F32 HX32
Old item number: 44ߪ3.45-32 + V3.10
BASIC DATA
AIR DATA
Air volume ﬂow
11.2ߪ0 m³/h
Ext. static pressure
0 Pa
Air throw
35 m
Altitude
0 m
Air outlet rel. humidity
91 %
 
 
HEAT EXCHANGER
Surface
33,4 m²
Fin spacing
7 mm
Internal volume
9,9 dm³
Liquid temp.
31,5 °C
Superheating temp.
-1,߬°C
Max. operating pressure
32 bar
MATERIALS
Tubes
Copper
Fins
Alu
End plates
Alu
Casing
Alu, galvanised steel
Finish
powder coated, white (RAL 9010)
 
 
FAN(S)
2 PIECE(S): 230V/1PH/50-ߪ0HZ;
IP54
Fan diameter
450 mm
Range of temp.
-25,0 to ߪ0,0 °C
Sound power LwA
߬3 dB(A)
Sound pressure LpA (3m) 
ߪ1 dB(A)
Optional controller, on site 
-
ErP
2015
SELECTED SPEED DATA (PER FAN) 
Operation mode
EC - S1
Speed
1310 rpm
Power input
305 W
Operating current
2,0 A
 
 
Energy eﬃciency class EEC
D
FAN SET SERIAL PLATE DATA (PER
FAN)
Operation mode
EC
Speed
1300 rpm
Power input
345 W
Current draw
2,2 A
Protector
Built in protector, connected
internal
CONNECTIONS 
Inlet
Cu 15 mm
Outlet
Cu 35 mm
Refrigerant distribution
Venturi
 
 
WEIGHT 
Dry weight
߬2 kg
Weight incl. packing
1ߪ5 kg
 
 
 
 
DEFROST
Electric defrost
400V-3/N/PE-50/ߪ0Hz
Coil
3,1߬kW
Drip tray
1,59 kW
Total
4,77 kW
Capacity [kW]
5,79
Air inlet temp. [°C]
0,0
Rel. humidity [%]
߬5
Air outlet temp. [°C]
-1,2
Evaporation temp. [°C]
-5,0
Refrigerant
R134a
Operation mode
EC
DATASHEET
Kelvion Select RT
(2)
(5)
(3)
(4)
Fi
A 1
D t
h
t
f th
Ch
E
t
82
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:91==
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
83
==PAGE:92==
A.1.2
Internal heat exchanger
Figure A.2: Datasheet of the Chosen IHX
84
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:93==
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
85
==PAGE:94==
A.1.3
Condenser
 
Danfoss Hexact(v5.5.10) 
Heat pump - Condenser - Micro Plate Heat Exchanger: H30-C-36 
 
Customer:  
Date: 01-01-2022 
Reference:  
Danfoss ref:  
Design conditions 
 
Flow type 
Co-current 
Heat load 
kW 
: 
 
9,50 
 
 
side 1 
 
side 2 
Inlet temperature 
°C 
: 
91,54 
 
56,21 
Condensing temperature(Dew) 
°C 
: 
65,00 
 
 
Condensing temperature(Bubble) 
°C 
: 
65,00 
 
 
Subcooling 
K 
: 
2,00 
 
 
Outlet temperature 
°C 
: 
63,00 
 
60,00 
Mass Flowrate 
kg/s 
: 
0,056 
 
0,600 
Volumetric Flowrate 
L/min 
: 
- 
 
35,979 
Fluid condensed 
kg/s 
: 
0,056 
 
 
Inlet / Outlet quality 
 
: 
1,000/0,000 
 
 
Max pressure drop 
kPa 
: 
300,00 
 
200,00 
Abs.Saturation pressure 
bar 
: 
18,90 
 
 
 
Properties of fluid 
 
Fluid 
 
: 
R134a 
 
Water 
Reference temperature 
°C 
: 
64,00 
 
58,11 
Liquid 
- Dynamic viscosity 
mPa-s 
: 
0,1167 
 
0,4820 
 
- Density 
kg/m^3 
: 
1031,2 
 
985,0 
 
- Heat capacity 
kJ/kg-K 
: 
1,710 
 
4,182 
 
- Thermal conductivity 
W/m-K 
: 
0,064 
 
0,648 
Gas 
- Dynamic viscosity 
mPa-s 
: 
0,0139 
 
 
 
- Density 
kg/m^3 
: 
97,6 
 
 
 
- Heat capacity 
kJ/kg-K 
: 
1,461 
 
 
 
- Thermal conductivity 
W/m-K 
: 
0,019 
 
 
 
- Latent heat 
kJ/kg 
: 
133,51 
 
 
 
Micro Plate Heat Exchanger 
 
Total area 
m^2 
: 
 
0,92 
 
Heat flux 
kW/m^2 
: 
 
10,349 
 
LMTD 
K 
: 
 
8,08 
 
H.T.C. 
W/m^2-K 
: 
 
1353,7/1280,0 
 
Pressure drop 
- Total 
kPa 
: 
1,02 
 
26,09 
 
- Channel 
kPa 
: 
1,09 
 
24,36 
 
- In port 
kPa 
: 
-0,07 
 
1,73 
Channel velocity 
m/s 
: 
0,20 
 
0,37 
Port velocity 
m/s 
: 
0,19 
 
2,15 
Reynolds number 
 
: 
 
 
1528 
Film coefficient 
W/m^2-K 
: 
1491,7 
 
19359,2 
Ave. wall temperature 
°C 
: 
58,65 
 
58,99 
Port hole diameter 
mm 
: 
19,0 
 
19,0 
Channel number 
 
: 
17H 
 
18H 
Number of plates 
 
: 
 
36 
 
Surface margin 
% 
: 
 
5,8 
 
Fouling factor 
m^2-K/kW 
: 
 
0,042565 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:95==
A.2
Dymola modelling of heat pump without TES and with
TES
A.2.1
Heat pump without TES
Figure A.4: Base Case model of the Heat Pump
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
87
==PAGE:96==
A.2.2
Heat Pump with TES
Figure A.5: Heat pump integrated with the Sensible TES
88
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
==PAGE:97==
Modelling and optimization of Heat Pump coupled with an advanced Thermal Energy Storage
89
==PAGE:98==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Alle , Bygning 403
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk
