==PAGE:1==
Hierarchical deep generative
modelling of protein sequences
Andreas Egelund Mortensen
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Proteins are large molecules present in all organisms, responsible for a large
number of activities. Life as we know it would be unthinkable without proteins,
as they are essential for almost any task being carried out at a cellular level.
Due to their central role in living organisms, proteins have long been studied,
and with the increase of computational power and advances in bioinformat-
ics, research has moved from studying single proteins at a time to performing
computational predictions for function of thousands of proteins at a time.
Proteins are built of strings of amino acids, and these strings determine the
form and function of the proteins. The relationship between the sequence of
amino acids and function is not fully understood, and is actively researched in
biology, biotechnology and medicine. Predicting how changes to the amino acid
sequences, mutations, aﬀect the function of the protein is central to this thesis.
The goal of this thesis is to investigate how well hierarchical variational auto-
encoders with multiple latent layers, trained on homologous sequences (se-
quences representing proteins with common function and ancestors), can predict
change in protein function following single amino acid mutations. This is done
by learning a a set of latent representations of the part of sequence space these
homologous sequences inhabit, and then using how likely the model tells us the
mutated sequence is to be represented by the latent distributions as a direct
predictor for protein functionality.
The results from the thesis suggest that protein function could not be predicted
better by increasing the number of latent layers. The latent layers, however, did
seem to learn structured representations of the homologous sequences.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the
requirements to obtain a Master’s degree in Mathematical Modelling and Com-
putation at the Technical University of Denmark. The project is assigned a
workload of 30 ECTS points, handed in on the 10th of April 2022.
The product of the project is the extensive codebase and reporting of results
from analyzing predictive performances of hierarchichal variational auto-encoders
on mutated protein sequences.
The project was supervised by Jes Frellsen from the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science at DTU.
Lyngby, 10-April-2022
Andreas Egelund Mortensen
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Jes for the patience and support during
the project. Writing a thesis can be a dragging endeavour, but less so when
supervision is high-spirited and productive.
On the same note, a huge thank you to Wouter Boomsma, head of the BioML
group at the Univiserty of Copenhagen and Marloes Arts, PhD student at ditto.
For diﬀerent ideas and perspectives and for your readiness to always help out.
Finally, a thank you to friends and family for being there and supporting a
sometimes frustrated MsC student writing his thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Prior work with using neural networks for protein stability pre-
diction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory and core concepts
6
2.1
Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Multiple sequence alignment and deep mutational scans . . . . .
7
2.3
The basis of Neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Building Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Model training with backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Variational Autoencoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Ladder VAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.8
Spearman’s Correlation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Data presentation
24
3.1
Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Sequence weighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
4
Models
28
4.1
Baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Sparsity prior and protein dictionary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Ladder VAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Transfer learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
34
5.1
Baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Sparsity prior and protein dictionary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Ladder VAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.5
Other results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Reﬂections on methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Reﬂections on results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Conclusion
47
A
48
Bibliography
50
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Proteins are large, complex molecules that play a critical part in a host of pro-
cesses in not only humans, but in all living organisms.
The function of the
proteins vary widely, including but in no way limited to everything from anti-
bodies binding to foreign particles as part of the immune system, to messenger
proteins transmitting signals within cells, tissues and organs, to proteins acting
as structural components, having more of a mechanical role.
Since all living organisms are so heavily dependent on countless proteins to do
the functions already mentioned, and even many more, there has always been
reason to seek to understand proteins better. With the rise in computational
power unlocking strong methods for reading and analyzing vast amounts of
sequential, biological data, a demand for models and frameworks that seek to
understand this data naturally also arises.
Today, it is possible to eﬃciently read the components making up proteins.
These components are called amino acids, and it is the arrangement of these
which make up proteins and determine their structure and function. Under-
standing how these arrangements of amino acids translates to a protein with a
very speciﬁc function in the organism is the focus of a lot of research, and is in
a sense also the core motivation of this thesis.
Making sense out of amino acid sequences is highly non-trivial, as the sequence
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Research question
2
space quickly becomes astronomically large, with 20 diﬀerent amino acids and
typical sequence lengths in the hundreds.
Furthermore, not all parts of the
sequence are equally important for the function or structure of the protein [1],
making inferring protein characteristics from a given amino acid sequence even
more diﬃcult.
In recent years, high-throughput technologies have been developed to asses ef-
fects of mutations for some proteins. This is of course only exploring a tiny
part of the total sequence space, but it allows us to better understand which
sequence parts play crucial parts for speciﬁc protein. Technologies such as mul-
tiple sequence alignment and deep mutational scans are the prerequiste for a
project such as this to be possible to make.
Dealing with the large sequence space can be tackled in multiple ways. Recent
work has assumed only single amino acids or amino acids with close proximity
can inﬂuence the protein. However, this simplifying assumption has been made
more out of necessity than out of a wish to be truthful to reality. A recent
approach, which has shown promising results, is to use neural networks to con-
struct variational autoencoders (VAEs). The neural networks allow us to pick up
long-range dependencies between amino acids, and the VAE helps to compress
the unmanageably large sequence space into a lower dimensionality representa-
tion. The authors of DeepSequence [22] have already achieved state-of-the-art
of better results using VAEs. This approach will be central to this thesis, and
a large part of it will be used to describe the architecture of the network, its
theoretical foundations and presentation and discussion of the results it yields.
VAEs have already been used to model protein function from amino acid se-
quences. The novelty of the approach in this thesis will to be explore whether
allowing for hierarchical system of latent variables instead of just one single layer
of latent variables will improve predictions. In any case, having multiple layers
of latent representations will hopefully allow each layer to represent diﬀerent
features of the protein. The hierarchical VAEs in this thesis will be based upon
the framework of Ladder VAEs [25].
1.1
Research question
To make it clear what this project seeks to answer, in this question a research
question is presented as well as the hypothesis tested to help answer the research
question.
The research question sounds like so:
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Prior work with using neural networks for protein stability prediction
3
• Do extending variational auto-encoders to hierarchical varia-
tional auto-encoders yield better performance in relation to pre-
dicting protein stability?
And the hypothesis we test like so:
• Is the evidence lower bound (ELBO) produced by hierarchical
models a better estimator for protein ﬁtness than the ELBO
produced by non-hierarchical models?
• Does linear regression on latent representations of protein se-
quences from hierarchical models estimate protein ﬁtness better
than on non-hierarchical models?
1.2
Prior work with using neural networks for
protein stability prediction
As alluded to in the previous section, understanding how mutations impact the
function of proteins is not a new problem. It has also generally been understood
that leveraging evolutionary sequence conservation is one of the strongest mea-
sures available for predicting the eﬀect of mutations in proteins. This is still the
case and is also extensively used in this project. Early work in the ﬁeld of under-
standing genetic variation would typically be limited to consider mutations very
locally. In its simplest form, predicting whether a single amino acid mutation
would be beneﬁcial, damaging or neutral for some measure of the performance
of the protein, one would quantify how often this mutation has been conserved
across individual sequence variant of the same protein, measuring evolutionary
signal [1]. For example, if for some protein family, both alanine (A) and aspartic
acid (D) were commonly observed at some point in the amino acid sequence,
the prediction would be that a mutation substituting A with D or D with A
would not be damaging for the protein.
The problem with this approach is
that the information from the rest of the protein sequence is not utilized, and
therefore this kind of model puts no weight on epistasis; the dependency on
genetic background for mutations. Epistatis, as a phenomenon, has been under-
stood to be important for the eﬀect of mutations for a long time, but it remains
diﬃcult to model its eﬀects in practice. In a 2017 paper by Hopf [10], the ef-
fects of mutations were predicted in a context-dependent framework, reaching
state-of-the-art or better performance for predicting eﬀects of mutations.
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Contributions
4
Tools currently being used to predict which amino acid changes that aﬀect pro-
tein function include freely available tools such as SIFT [18] and PolyPhen-2 [1].
Both of these tools give the user the option to input some amino acid sequence
and a single mutation. Then, an algorithm searching for similar sequences will
provide a multiple sequence alignment with the original protein sequence as
target sequence. Both tools work strongly on the assumption that amino acid
variations at conserved positions are the most likely to cause functional changes,
given that we assume evolutionary pressure has forces these sites to be conserved.
These tools have been shown empirically to work, such as SIFT predicting 69%
of mutations known to cause disease in humans to be "damaging", while this
number only was 25% when run on a database of neutral mutations. Further-
more, as databases continue to grow, the sequence alignments used should also
become of better quality, which could mean these predictions become better
with time.
1.3
Contributions
The ﬁrst contribution, and an integral part of this project, was to make a re-
liable baseline model with which results from other models could reasonably
be compared to. As the idea for the project in large part is about continuing
or analyzing results from the DeepSequence paper [22], it seemed natural to
make a baseline model resembling their model. The original paper used a code-
base written in Theano, so the baseline model was simpliﬁed to some extent
and re-written from scratch in pytorch, but heavily inﬂuenced from the original
Theano code. The most important changes to the original code are exclusion
of ensembling (which according to ablation studies boost performance by quite
a lot), a global inverse-temperature parameter and some minor changes to the
learning rates and batch sizes used.
The idea then, is to test networks with similar structure but with a hierarchi-
cal set of latent layers (instead of the standard single latent space, eg. as seen
in DeepSequence) against this baseline. We expected the hierarchical models
to outperform the baseline, but probably not to outperform DeepSequence it-
self, although this of course would be the best case scenario. Extending the
DeepSequence-like model to a hierarchical one was done by adding to the code
base which was already written, as speciﬁed by the Ladder VAE paper [25].
The work from here would have to depend on the intermediary results from the
models. We ended up analyzing the latent spaces themselves, trying to see if
all latent spaces would learn anything meaningful. This both meant looking at
lower-dimensionality representations of the latent spaces, but also trying to do
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Contributions
5
some transfer learning on the models. In this case, it meant applying a linear
regression to the latent variables of the models.
To conclude the project, we discuss the results of our models and whether using
hierarchical variational auto-encoders to this kind of problem is something worth
pursuing.
As this project was prepared partially in parallel with Marloes Arts and Wouter
Boomsma who are writing a research paper on a similar subject, the codebase
used now is shared between us and is therefore a shared product. I have con-
tributed to the codebase by writing up the early version of the baseline model
as well as the ladder extension. Marloes has helped out by cleaning up and
streamlining the code and correcting minor mistakes, and is at the time of writ-
ing this using the codebase for said research paper. All code used in the project
I feel conﬁdent in saying I have had a major part in developing. The code used
in this project is available at GitHub1.
Additionally, it should be noted that the backbone of this code was written from
the period 9th of August 2021 to the 9th of January 2022, and this has been
reused for the current project spanning from the 10th of January to the 10th of
April.
1"https://github.com/mearts/LadderVAE"
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Theory and core concepts
2.1
Proteins
Proteins are responsible for a vast amount of functions on a cellular level, rele-
vant for all living organisms. Almost no actions inside cells are taken without
a protein is responsible. This could be catalyzing cellular reactions, mediating
signaling, act as stabilizing scaﬀolding for the cells and exerting control over
gene expression [2]. Any living organism, even in the simplest form, would be
inconceivable without them.
A protein is made up of a sequence of amino acids, of which there are 20. The
speciﬁc sequence of amino acids, which can vary in length, deﬁnes the spatial, or
3-dimensional, structure of the protein, which in turn is directly related to the
function of the protein. As there is a direct link between the sequence of amino
acids and function of the protein, even small changes in the sequence might
aﬀect the function of the protein. Any protein at its current state, deﬁned by
its amino acid sequence, is a results of evolution through mutation and selection
over time.
Predicting how folding is aﬀected by some mutation to the amino acid sequence
is highly non-trivial, and by extension how function is aﬀected. There is, for
example, no guarantee that only mutations happening near the active site of
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Multiple sequence alignment and deep mutational scans
7
a protein has an impact on function [9]. Learning and understanding which
mutations will have an impact on the ﬁtness, or stability, of the protein in
question, is of interest for medical reasons but also for any industry or research
centered around protein applications.
2.2
Multiple sequence alignment and deep muta-
tional scans
In order to get a good feeling of what will be analyzed in this project, an under-
standing of the concepts Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) and Deep Muta-
tional Scans (DMS) are warranted. Especially for the reader mostly grounded
in the computational aspect of this interdisciplinary ﬁeld, it will help to get a
better intuition for the bioinformatics related concepts used.
In order to learn lower order representations of the mutational landscape of
some protein, we will need data representing this protein. For some well-studied
proteins, we have access to large number of sequences, and to work eﬃciently
with them, MSA is needed to align them [5]. In Figure 2.1, a visualization shows
one instance of such an alignment. Diﬀerent algorithms for aligning sequences
have been proposed, and heuristics for ﬁnding the alignments might depend
on the protein at hand as well as what the alignment is used for [5]. Suitable
algorithms must both be computationally cheap and align sequences well.
Figure 2.1: Example visualization of multiple sequence alignment. Image from
[6]
Depending on which purpose is intended for the multiple sequence alignment
data, diﬀerent scoring functions can be used to determine how well two sequences
are aligned. Often, it is either evolutionary, functional or structural relationships
we wish to express with the alignment [5]. Due to evolutionary factors, proteins
in the same family, which we wish to align, can have quite diﬀerent looking
sequences due to insertions and deletions. This is overcome by putting in "gaps"
in the alignments, represented with hyphens.
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Multiple sequence alignment and deep mutational scans
8
For this project, the starting point will be, for some chosen proteins, a set of
aligned sequences. How the sequences used in this project are aligned will not
be investigated in-depth, but the important point is that the sequence variant
serving as data points for our models have been aligned by some method, and the
choice of method might have an impact on model performance. The argument
has been made that the community in general has overlooked the importance of
choosing an alignment method appropriate for the task at hand [5].
To summarize, the models in this project will be trained on sequence variants
of a protein, which from now on will be referred to as evolutionary data. Each
data-set consists of number of sequences of one speciﬁc protein belonging to
some protein family, in some way aligned as discussed above. Members of these
families, believed to often share a common ancestor and often share function as
well[19], are all a bit diﬀerent sequence-wise, while still having the same overall
function.
Sequences used to evaluate the models will not be a product of evolution or nat-
urally occurring in the same sense as the aligned sequences mentioned above, as
the data will be generated with a technique called deep mutational scans. The
development of this technique has tackled the problem of getting to know the
functional implication of every single possible mutation for a sequence variant
(called the target sequence) for some protein[8], or even extending into two, three
or more mutations. Generating these huge data sets has a huge implication in
how it is possible to tackle analyzing and understanding mutations in protein
sequences. Instead of identifying speciﬁc sites of interest in the protein, and
then analyzing a handful of mutations only, it is now possible to exhaustively
analyze all possible mutations. This both allows saving resources that would
have otherwise been spent on qualitatively studying and identifying active sites
of proteins, and makes it possible to discover the unexpected - sometimes, amino
acids far from the active sites in proteins are still important for for example the
stability of the protein[9], meaning seemingly irrelevant mutations may lead to
decrease in activity. Looking at Figure 2.2, an illustration dense with informa-
tion, a small excerpt of a protein and the functional implication of all possible
mutations in this speciﬁc site of the protein is represented.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 The basis of Neural networks
9
Figure 2.2: Heatmap of mutations and eﬀect on protein function over a 25-
residue portion of a sequence. Image from [8]
DMS supply us with data which makes it possible to see how well our model
generalizes, so this technique is integral to the writing of this thesis. It also
stresses the complexity of the problem at hand well: With current technology,
it is possible to measure the impact on protein function of all single, and maybe
even double or triple mutations, for some protein. However, beyond this, the
mutational landscape explodes, and this serves as motivation as to why mod-
els working in lower dimensional latent spaces hopefully can help us to better
understand the implications of mutations in proteins.
2.3
The basis of Neural networks
Neural networks (NNs), or Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs), are computa-
tional models built with inspiration from neurons in the human brain.
The
building-blocks, or artiﬁcial neurons, making up the ﬁrst Neural Networks are
called perceptrons, and were ﬁrst proposed in 1957 by Frank Rosenblatt [23]. In-
terestingly, Rosenblatt in the introduction of the paper explains how his idea of
a mathematical abstraction of real neurons come from personal interest in psy-
chological physiology. He also explains how early computer scientists had tried
to draw inspiration from real neurons to help make machines able to "generalize
==PAGE:18==
2.3 The basis of Neural networks
10
from experience". While modern neural networks use other artiﬁcial neurons,
they are not that dissimilar to the ones proposed by Rosenblatt.
While artiﬁcial neurons are still the basic entity of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks,
today, they often work a bit diﬀerently than Rosenblatt’s original perceptrons.
However, an argument can be made that the perceptron is just a special case of
the general architechture of artiﬁcial neuron. Still motivated by the function of
the brain, conceptually an artiﬁcial neuron would look like in Figure 2.3
Figure 2.3: (Left) Mathematical depiction of a neuron.
(Right) Simpliﬁed
depiction of a neuron. Image from [7]
The ﬁgure shows how the inputs, represented by x1 to xn or in its vectorized form
x together with a set of corresponding weights w1 to wn, or similarly vectorized
w, are summed together and with a scalar value b, which is the bias of the
neuron, compromise the "inside", or the argument of the activation function, of
the neuron. Before getting to the output y of the neuron, an activation function
φ is applied to the inside of the neuron. Without this activation function, which
should be non-linear, the neuron is entirely linear and reduces to the linear
discriminant function [7]. Rosenblatt’s original artiﬁcial neuron used the step-
function called the Heaviside function, but today other activation functions are
more commonly used. The argument of the activation function is often referred
to as z, while the output of the neuron will be called y. Respectively, they are
given by [7]:
z = wT x + b
(2.1)
y = φ(z) = φ
 wT x + b

(2.2)
The most suitable activation function will largely be dependent on the problem
at hand, and none of them perform universally better than others. As long
as they introduce non-linearity into the model, a lot of diﬀerent functions will
work. In this project, the Sigmoid (S(x)) and ReLU (R(x)) activation functions
==PAGE:19==
2.3 The basis of Neural networks
11
will primarily be used inside the neural networks, while the Softmax (SM(x))
will be used to assign probabilities in the output layer of the model. These are
given by [7]:
S(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.3)
R(x) = max(0, x)
(2.4)
SM(xi) =
exi
Pn
j exj
(2.5)
And a ﬁgure of the mapping of the Sigmoid ans ReLU activation functions can
be seen in Figure 2.4
Figure 2.4: Sigmoid and ReLU activation functions. Image from [28]
For now, we shall not go further into the intricacies of using diﬀerent activation
functions and continue with how artiﬁcial neurons can be connected to form
artiﬁcial neural networks. However, there already exists a large body of scholarly
work going into implications for the network when choosing diﬀerent activation
functions.
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Building Neural Networks
12
2.4
Building Neural Networks
The building blocks of artiﬁcial neural networks are the artiﬁcial neurons de-
scribed in the previous chapter. Combining these into neural nets are an ex-
traordinarily powerful modeling tool, so much so that in 1991, it was proved
that a neural net with a single hidden layer could approximate any function, as
long as this layer could hold an arbitrarily high number of neurons [11]. This
is called the universal approximation theorem. Of course, in practice we are
limited to a ﬁnite number of neurons bounded by computing power, but often,
this is enough for useful results. Neural networks, in practice, often have mul-
tiple hidden layers despite the universal approximation theorem guaranteeing
a single layer is enough - however, deeper networks with more than one layer
might perform better than single later networks with a ﬁnite number of artiﬁcial
neurons. Also, the universal approximation theorem still holds for the networks
with more than a single layer.
Now, taking another look at the artiﬁcial neuron in Figure 2.3, this neuron can
be put in connection with other neurons, making up a network. This will be
represented in Figure 2.5, where two neural nets, with 1 and 3 hidden layers
respectively, are shown.
Going for a connected network represents a larger
model, with many more weights to consider.
Figure 2.5: Neural networks with (Left) 1 and (Right) 3 hidden layers. Image
from [7]
The networks with multiple neurons and hidden layers compute their outputs
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Model training with backpropagation
13
like so [7]:
f(x) = φ(2) 
W (2)φ(1) 
W (1)x + b(1)
+ b(2)
(2.6)
Computing this output is not that diﬀerent from the single neuron model pre-
sented earlier. In this notation, the superscripts represent the layer of the net-
work, such that in the inner paranthesis, the ﬁrst layer is computed, then the
ﬁrst activation function is applied, and these values become the input to subse-
quent layers of the network. It should be noted now that with multiple neurons
in each layer, the weights W are represented as matrices and the biases b are
vectors to accommodate the extra dimension.
Now the architecture is in place, we shall look at how to learn the weights of
the network.
2.5
Model training with backpropagation
In order to learn the weights and biases (from now on, both of these will be
referred to as just "weights") of the network, we ﬁrst deﬁne a loss function E(∗).
The exact cost function is not important for understanding model training with
error propagation, so for now it remains an arbitrary error function, but it is
important that there is some quantitative measure of model performance to
optimize.
Backpropagation will shortly be described here, as even though it is well within
the scope of introductionary deep learning courses, it is so integral to learning for
neural networks so it warrants a quick go-through. For any method of optimizing
a network using gradient descent, backpropagating gradients is really the engine
to get there.
The backpropagation algorithm was ﬁrst described in 1986 [24]. We are looking
for an eﬃcient way of learning how to nudge the weights of a network such that
the loss function, E(∗) is minimized. Going back to Equation (2.6), we will
ﬁrst consider how the weights of the last layer in the network inﬂuences the
error function. For the sake of completeness, the superscripts which before were
assigned numbers to correspond to an actual network, we will generalize these
to be represented by L for the last layer of the network, L −1 for the second to
last layer of the network and so forth.
==PAGE:22==
2.6 Variational Autoencoders
14
Sticking to the notation from Equation (2.1) and (2.2), the output of the last
layer will then be called yL, the argument of the activation function zl and the
weights (including the biases) with which zL is computed for wl.
Let’s start oﬀby considering how the cost function changes with the weights,
as ultimately we want to know how changing the weights changes the error
function, of the last layer and denote this ∂E/∂wL. Due to yL’s dependence on
zl, and zl’s dependence on wl, applying the chain rule gives us
∂E
∂wL = ∂zl
∂wL
∂yl
∂zL
∂E
∂yL
(2.7)
Iterating the chain rule backwards through the network allows to compute the
gradient for all weights in the system.
Of course, with larger networks, the
weight space becomes larger, making the gradient very high-dimensional, which
comes with its own set of challenges when it comes to training the network, such
as getting stuck in local minima.
When training the network in practice, a stochastic gradient-based optimizer
is often used [4][7]. Gradient descent is typically an eﬃcient way of optimizing
models as computing the derivatives of the weights of the model is of the same
computational complexity as evaluating the network itself. It has been shown
that the optimisation process can become even more eﬃcient when introducing
stochasticity when computing the gradients [4]. This is done by partitioning
the training data X into m batches or mini-batches. Partitioning X randomly
into X1, X2...Xm and learning the gradients of the mini-batches and training
on those require less memory and gives faster convergence while being a good
enough approximation of the true gradient of the whole training set. Training
the model based on batches can be done multiple times, each time with a random
partitioning of the data. Each time this process is repeated is called an epoch
and the number of epochs will either be predetermined or stopped at conversion.
In this project, optimizing will be done using the adam optimizer [15], which is
a stochastic optimization method performing well on large parameter spaces by
modifying the learning rate while training.
2.6
Variational Autoencoders
Variational autoencoders were ﬁrst proposed by Kingma and Welling [16] and
Rezende et al. [21] in 2014. In these papers, they showed how latent variables
can be incorporated into probabilistic models by presenting a lower bound es-
timator of the variational lower bound through reparametrization. They also
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Variational Autoencoders
15
showed how to do posterior inference by ﬁtting an approximate inference model
to compute these latent variables, using their proposed lower bound estimator.
This works with standard stochastic gradient ascent techniques, which means it
slots in nicely to the existing body of neural networks if the inference model cho-
sen itself is a neural network. If this is the case, the model in question becomes
a variational auto-encoder.
In this section, we will have a look under the hood of the variational auto-
encoder. Playing an important role in this project, it is important to make sure
the inner workings of this type of model is well-understood and can be reasonably
expected to be a reasonable choice for the problem at hand. However, we will
leave for later sections the exact implementations of the models for our speciﬁc
problem, and here focus on the general theory behind this family of models.
To start oﬀ, some motivation for the variational auto-encoder for the general
case. To argue why the variational auto-encoder is interesting, it might be a
good idea to understand what neural networks are good at. In a dense neural
network, which has been described earlier, some data is put into the model,
and with the help of backpropagation, the weights of the network are chosen
such that some error function is minimized. If the problem were the popular
task of classifying images, the network would ideally learn hidden attributes
of the data, that is, ﬁnding some latent structure in the image which can be
quantiﬁed and lead to predicting the class of the image.
How present these
latent structures are in this way represented by real values. These models can
be lumped into a family of models called deterministic models, which means
there are no elements of randomness - after the network has been trained, the
output will be the same each time if the same input is run through the model
multiple times. However, the deterministic models do not take into account
the level of certainty there is of some attribute being present in the data input
- in an image classiﬁcation setting, this could result in the model consistently
wrongly ﬁnding some attribute, like whether a person in a picture is smiling, to
be present. Quantifying this uncertainty can be done by describing some of the
hidden variables in the network in probabilistic terms, which comes with two
huge beneﬁts: Being able to quantify the uncertainty of a prediction, and for
the case of the variational auto-encoder, sample hidden variables from the latent
space to generate samples similar, but not identical, to the input data. This
means the model becomes a generative model, which variational-autoencoders
are examples of. Also, it makes the latent space more interpretable - future
data, diﬀering from data already trained on, will also be represented in the
probabilistic latent space, which it would not be in a deterministic one.
An assumption from here on will be that whatever data is being worked with
can be represented in a space of latent variables. The space in which the latent
variables exist cannot be observed, but must be inferred from the seen data.
==PAGE:24==
2.6 Variational Autoencoders
16
Performing this inference is what the variational auto-encoder does.
A little ﬂow diagram can help understanding the architecture of the model.
Figure 2.6 shows how the observed data, x, is used to infer the distribution of
latent variables, z. The dotted lines from x and φ to z represents the variational
approximation to the distribution of z, qφ(z | x). The true distribution will be
denoted pθ(z | x), but doing variational approximation is needed in the case
where the marginal likelihood, pθ(x) is an intractable integral, which is the case
for neural networks with non-linear activation functions. Therefore, q is chosen
from a parametric distribution family which is simple enough that the marginal
likelihood is tractable, but broad enough that the true posterior pφ(z | x) can
be approximated reasonably.
As the wish is to approximate the the true posterior distribution pθ(z | x) with
qφ(z | x), there is a need of a way to quantify the similarity of distributions.
For this purpose, we will ﬁnd the Kullback–Leibler divergence useful. This is
also called relative entropy, was proposed in 1951 [14] and is a distance measure
between probability distributions.
Figure 2.6: Relationship between the input x and latent representation z. Im-
age from [16]
Now, with some intuitive understanding of how the variational auto-encoder
works, we can formalize the model. For reference, we will refer to Figure 2.7 for
an illustration of the general case of a variational auto-encoder.
==PAGE:25==
2.6 Variational Autoencoders
17
Figure 2.7: Variational auto-encoder. Image from [13]
Figure 2.7 shows a neural network (the encoder) mapping the input x to the
latent state representation z, and another neural network (the decoder) mapping
z to x.
The encoder qφ(z | x) produces a Gaussian distribution where the
parameters are learnt by a neural network, so we can write this distribution as:
qφ(z | x) = N
 z | µ, σ2I

(2.8)
where µ, σ2 = gφ(x and gφ represents the neural network of the encoder. The
deocoder pθ(x | z) is a categorical distribution, parameterized by another neural
network, fθ, where the neural network is designed such that it outputs proba-
bilities directly.
Remembering that the goal is to infer the intractable posterior distribution of
a latent variable z, we can write out the problem as such:
pθ(z | x) = pθ(x | z)pθ(z)
pθ(x)
(2.9)
where the left-hand side is the true posterior density of z. This becomes in-
tractable when the marginal likelihood of x, pθ(x), is intractable, which will
generally be the case when the encoder of the variational auto-encoder is chosen
to be a neural network with non-linear activation functions.
A tractable distribution is chosen to approximate the intractable pθ(z | x).
This is referred to as qφ(z | x), and should be, as mentioned earlier, be chosen
==PAGE:26==
2.6 Variational Autoencoders
18
from a family of distributions such that it has the required ﬂexibility to be a
good approximation but at the same time remain tractable. The approximation
should be understood as a probabilistic encoder, as it produces a distribution
over z for each data-point x which is fed into the model.
The problem now becomes that of ﬁnding the distribution qφ(z | x) which as
closely as possible resembles the exact conditional distribution pθ(z | x) [3]. This
can be written out as the problem of minimizing the KL-divergence between the
distribution like the following optimization problem:
q∗
φ(z | x)) = arg min KL(qφ(z | x))∥pθ(z | x))
(2.10)
where we optimize with respect to the variational parameters φ and generative
model parameters θ.
The KL-divergence can be written out on the form (with all expectations being
with respect to q(z)):
KL(qφ(z | x)∥pθ(z | x)) = E[log qφ(z | x)] −E[log pθ(z | x)]
(2.11)
The last term can be expanded like this (where subscripts are omitted for the
sake of readability):
KL(q(z | x)∥p(z | x)) = E[log q(z | x)] −E[log(p(z, x)p(x))]
(2.12)
= E[log q(z | x)] −E[log(p(z, x) log p(x))]
(2.13)
= E[log q(z | x)] −E[log p(z, x) + log p(x)]
(2.14)
= E[log q(z | x)] −E[log p(z, x)] + log p(x)
(2.15)
This still has the problem of being dependent on log pθ(x), which, as mentioned
earlier, is often intractable. Now, we introduce the variational lower bound, or
the evidence lower bound (ELBO), which is the negative of the ﬁrst two terms
of the above expression:
ELBO(q) = E[log pθ(z, x)] −E[log qφ(z | x)]
(2.16)
==PAGE:27==
2.6 Variational Autoencoders
19
The ELBO-term can substituted into equation 2.15 to give the following expres-
sion:
log pθ(x) = KL(qφ(z | x)∥pθ(z | x)) + ELBO(q)
(2.17)
This way of writing the marginal likelihood of x in terms of this KL-divergence
and the ELBO gives two interesting and useful insights. They both follow from
the fact that the KL-divergence is non-negative and approaches 0 as qφ(z | x)
becomes more similar to pθ(z | x) [17]. The ﬁrst insight is that by maximizing
the ELBO, the KL-term is minimized due to this term being non-negative and
log pθ(x) being independent of q. The second is that the ELBO lower bounds
the marginal likelihood of x, again due to the non-negativity of the KL-term.
So we have log pθ(x) ≥ELBO(q). This results was ﬁrst shown by [14] using
Jensen’s inequality. Due to the properties listed above, the ELBO is used as
the (negative) loss function to minimize when modelling with variational auto-
encoders.
To understand the ELBO better, it can be further written out like so:
ELBO(q) = E[log pθ(z)] + E[log pθ(x | z)] −E[log qφ(z | x)]
(2.18)
= E[log pθ(x | z)] −KL(qφ(z | x)∥pθ(z))
(2.19)
As the wish is to maximize the ELBO, the model is urged to ﬁnd an approxi-
mation q close to the prior of p. This KL divergence will often be computable
analytically, such as if both distributions in this KL-divergence are assumed
Gaussian. This will be the case in this project, and this gives the following
analytical solution [16]:
−KL(qφ(z | x)∥pθ(z)) = 1
2
J
X
j=1

1 + log

(σj)2
−(µj)2 −(σj)2
(2.20)
where µ and σ are simply the output of the encoder neural network, where J is
the dimensionality of the latent space.
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side of Equation 2.19 tries to maximize the
likelihood of the data given the latent variable, and depends on the decoder
chosen.
For variational auto-encoders, the decoder will be a neural network
==PAGE:28==
2.7 Ladder VAE
20
and output either a Bernoulli or Gaussian distribution, depending on the data.
In this project, we let p(x | z) be a multivariate Bernoulli, and this gives the
following term for the likelihood of the data:
log p(x | z) =
D
X
i=1
xi log yi + (1 −xi) · log (1 −yi)
(2.21)
where yi is the output of the decoder neural network run through an element-
wise sigmoid function. Now, we have everything needed to calculate the ELBO.
The ﬁnal brick needed to succesfully train a VAE is the reparameterization trick.
This trick is needed because the decoder model samples from a distribution
with parameters given by the encoder model. However, the backpropagation
mentioned earlier cannot go through a random sampling process. Therefore,
the randomness of the sampling process is put into an auxiliary variable, ϵ.
Assuming p(z|x) is Gaussian, we can reparameterize to z = µ + σϵ where ϵ is
a normal Gaussian. This allows the model to learn µ and σ, the distributional
parameters of the latent space, while the randomness stays outside of the model
[22].
2.7
Ladder VAE
The Ladder VAE [25] as a model framework was developed with inspiration
of the Ladder Network [20]. Previously, models with multiple layers of latent
variables could face diﬃculties learning representations in all layers at a time,
which is the main obstacle the Ladder VAE tries to overcome. Therefore, the
implementation of the Ladder VAE used in this project will follow closely the
one proposed in the Ladder VAE paper.
==PAGE:29==
2.7 Ladder VAE
21
Figure 2.8: Ladder VAE framework. Image from [25]
Variational auto-encoders with multiple layers of latent variables have tradition-
ally been implemented in a hierarchical fashion, as visualized in Figure 2.8 a).
This means higher latent layers are conditioned only on previous latent layers,
which can lead to the higher layers in the inference model being diﬃcult to train.
To get around this, we add a top-down stream of information to go from higher
to lower latent layers, while also adding a bottom-up layer meant to model ap-
proximate likelihoods of the latent variables. These layers are denoted as the
d’s in Figure 2.8. Sharing the parameters between the generative model and the
inference model as well as latent variables higher in the hierarchy working as pri-
ors for those lower in the hierarchy and the correcting of latent variables by the
data dependent bottom-up layers results in the Ladder variational auto-encoder
in use here.
Each deterministic upward pass is composed of fully connected neural networks
with 2 layers, outputting approximate likelihoods for the latent variables, which
we denote ˆµq,i and ˆσq,i, like so:
ˆµq,i = Linear (di) , i = 1 . . . L
(2.22)
ˆσ2
q,i = Softplus ( Linear (di)) , i = 1 . . . L
(2.23)
Meaning the outputs of the bottom-up neural networks are both used as input
to compute approximate likelihoods further up the hierarchy as well as used
as input for a single-layer neural network (represented as "Linear" in the above
==PAGE:30==
2.8 Spearman’s Correlation
22
equations) outputting ˆµq,i and ˆσq,i conveying information to the latent variables
of the generative model. First, the parameters for the top generative distribution
is calculated, and as this does not depend on the downward pass from another
generative distribution, this can simply be ﬁxed as the approximate distribution
from the upward deterministic pass, giving
µq,L = ˆµq,L
(2.24)
σ2
q,L = ˆσ2
q,L.
(2.25)
For the rest of the generative distributions, the approximate likelihoods are
used as well as top-down information from previous latent layers. This top-
down information will be described by ˆµp,i and ˆσp,i and is, as ˆµq,i and ˆσq,i,
computed with a single layer neural network, giving
ˆµq,i = Linear (zi+1) , i = 1 . . . L −1
(2.26)
ˆσ2
q,i = Softplus ( Linear (zi+1)) , i = 1 . . . L −1
(2.27)
Now, the generative distribution can be described with the approximate likeli-
hood components and top-down information, which is calculated as a precision-
weighted combination of the two:
σq,i =
1
ˆσ−2
q,i + σ−2
p,i
(2.28)
µq,i =
ˆµq,iˆσ−2
q,i + µp,iσ−2
p,i
ˆσ−2
q,i + σ−2
p,i
(2.29)
which in the end deﬁnes the generative Gaussian distribution
qφ (zi | ·) = N
 zi | µq,i, σ2
q,i

as a combination of the approximate likelihood of
the bottom-up pass and Gaussian priors from the stochastic top-down pass.
2.8
Spearman’s Correlation
Spearman’s (rank) correlation will be used when any model is evaluated in
the project. This correlation is used to measure the strength and direction of
==PAGE:31==
2.8 Spearman’s Correlation
23
association of two variables that can be ranked, ﬁnding correlations between the
rankings instead of directly on the values. Spearman’s correlation coeﬃcient,
ρ, takes values from -1 to 1, with -1 representing a perfect reversed correlation
of ranks, 1 representing a perfect correlation of ranks, and 0 representing no
correlation of ranks within the two variables.
ρ is calculated as such, assuming no ranks are tied:
ρ = 1 −
6 P d2
i
n (n2 −1)
(2.30)
where the summation is over the observations, and d2
i represents the diﬀerence
in rank between the variables of observation i, and n is total number of obser-
vations.
This way of calculating a correlation has the advantage of not assuming a linear
relationship between the variables as Pearson’s correlation, instead assuming a
monotonic relationship. For this project in particular, it will mean that models
will be evaluated on how well they predict mutated protein sequences perform
relative to other mutated protein sequences, rather than estimating how large
performance change is in absolute numbers.
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3
Data presentation
3.1
Proteins
The data used in this project has all been analyzed quite extensively already,
so conﬁrming the models are working and comparing our models to earlier
work is possible. Previous work in this ﬁeld has been tested on broad selec-
tions of sequence alignments for diﬀerent proteins, but in this project, 3 dif-
ferent alignments for 3 diﬀerent proteins have been chosen. All 3 are available
from the DeepSequence oﬃcial at GitHub 1 and will also be available from the
codebase attached to this project. The three data sets will be referred to as
BLAT_ECOLX, DLG4_RAT and PABP_YEAST.
The 3 protein alignments are used to train models in an unsupervised fashion.
To test how well the models predict the eﬀect of mutations, we will need 3
mutation data sets. The mutation data sets are experimental assays presenting
some measurable protein feature for all possible single amino acid mutations
with respect to the target sequence for a given protein, generated by a deep
mutational scan. Like the protein alignments, these "test sets" can be found on
the oﬃcial DeepSequence github or in the codebase provided with this project.
Table 3.1 should give an overview of the proteins used in this project. Beta-
lactamase is by far the longest protein, but also has fewer sequences for us to
1"https://github.com/debbiemarkslab/DeepSequence"
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Data processing
25
train the model on, while the two other proteins are much shorter but with
far more sequences for us to train on. We will not go too much into detail on
the measurements used for each protein as such, as an entire ﬁeld of study is
dedicated to ﬁnding ﬁtting measurements of eﬀects of mutations [26]. In general
terms, the CRIPT measure is a measure of peptide binding, while 2500 and log
are measures of protein growth.
Data set
Protein
Length
N
Measurement
BLAT
Beta-lactamase
263
7772
2500
DLG4
Postsynaptic density protein 95
101
102233
log
PABP
poly(A)-binding protein
82
151496
CRIPT
Table 3.1: Protein data sets
3.2
Data processing
The protein sequences is readily available in a quite clean format, so there is
no need for lengthy and cumbersome data engineering. However, some steps
must be taken in order to ready the protein sequences to go into the variational
auto-encoder, as well as a bit of quality checking to make sure the sequences are
valid protein sequences.
The protein sequences are available as sequences of single-letter strings. Due to
how the sequence alignments are generated, these strings will either be a letter
representing an amino acid or a "-" representing an insertion, which does not
represent a speciﬁc amino acid but are put in to better align the rest of the
characters. These might represent sequences of amino acids, but for modeling
purposes, they are no diﬀerent than any of the actual amino-acids.
In this
project, the "alphabet" ACDEFGHIKLMNPQRSTVWY- is used. This means
the accepted amino acids are represented as the 20 letters of the alphabet, and
it is also accepted that a sequence has the 21st character, the insertion "-". If
a sequence has any character not represented in this alphabet, the sequence is
discarded.
After any bad sequences are discarded, each sequence is one-hot encoded such
that instead of having 21 possible variables for each position, each position is
ﬂattened to 21 positions, one for each possible character from the alphabet.
This makes the length of eg. the sequences from the BLAT data set 263*21
= 5523 long, with binary values in each place. Processing the data this way
both makes it clear the true huge dimensionality of the data with an enormous
possible amount of mutations, as well as how this sequence should be modelled
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Sequence weighting
26
as a multivariate Bernoulli distribution.
3.3
Sequence weighting
The distribution of the data sequences for each alignment is biased due to
both human and evolutionary sampling [22]: Some evolutionary paths might be
more rigorously documented by researchers, and some sequences might be over-
represented due to adaptive radiation [27], where multiple mutations rapidly
happen from the same ancestor.
To accommodate this, a weight πs is attached to each sequence for each protein.
The goal is to increase the weight for sequences farther away from the majority
of sequences in the alignment. The distance between two sequences is measured
with the Hamming distance. After the one-hot encoding of the sequences, the
Hamming distance between two (binary) sequences is computed by summing the
number of positions with diﬀering values. In practice, we compute the distance
as a matrix product between X and XT , where X is the matrix containing all
one-hot encoded sequences of the alignment. This outputs a matrix containing
the reverse Hamming distances between all sequences. For each sequence, we
count how many sequences are above some similarity threshold, θID, and the
reciprocal of this sum becomes the weight of the sequence.
So, the reverse Hamming distance between two one-hot encoded sequences are
essentially their dot-products. Then, we normalize this distance by the length
of the sequence, given us the reverse Hamming distance between two sequences:
DRH

x(s), x(t)
= x(s) · x(t)
L
(3.1)
Then, to get a weight πs for each sequence, the number of other sequences in
the alignment similar (according to the similarity threshold θID) is counted and
the reciprocal becomes the weight, like so:
πs =
 N
X
t
I
h
DRH

x(s), x(t)
> θID
i!−1
(3.2)
The similarity threshold is put to 80%, so θID = 0.8.
The weights will be
used when training the model, such that sampling sequences for training will be
proportional to their weights.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Sequence weighting
27
When implemented, these weights will be calculated in batches of a 1000, such
that the weights will represent similarity to not the whole data set, but rather a
subset of a 1000 sequences. This is of course done with the assumption that the
subset well represents the whole data set well and therefore still gives a decent
approximation to the true weights.
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4
Models
This section will focus on the kinds of models employed in the project. The
theory chapter should give the necessary building blocks to let the models be
concisely described. The models were developed and implemented in an incre-
mental way as presented here. That is, ﬁrst of the code for a baseline model was
written and tested and then additions were built on top of this. Accordingly, the
baseline model will be described ﬁrst, then a section on implementing a sparsity
prior follows, which makes the model similar to the DeepSequence model. Then,
the implementation of the Ladder variational auto-encoder is described.
4.1
Baseline model
The ﬁrst model, which will be referred to as the base or baseline model, we go
through is quite a standard implementation of variational auto-encoder. Having
a baseline model is important to have in order for us to ﬁgure out if whatever
else is put into the model enhances performance. The overall structure of this
neural network is showed in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Baseline model
29
Figure 4.1: Baseline model
In this model, all layers are dense layers, so everything is fully connected. A one-
hot encoded representation of a protein sequence is the input of the model, so
the input size varies from proteins. The input layer is connected to the encoder
model, which models the approximation of the posterior distribution qφ(z | x).
This is the red part of Figure 4.1. The encoder model outputs a 30x2 vector,
with which the 30-dimensional latent space is constructed. We recall from the
theory chapter that this can be written as:
qφ(z | x) = N
 z | µ, σ2I

(4.1)
So the 30 latent variables are sampled from a normal distribution with diagonal
variance.
Similarly to the encoder model, the decoder is a fully connected dense neural
network.
This model outputs a vector of the same dimensions as the input
sequence, and between the last layer and the output, the Softmax function
is applied over each position of the protein, such that the the output for each
position in the sequence sums to 1 over the amino acids, reﬂecting the conﬁdence
the model has in predicting which amino acids is at a given position.
The
Softmax function is given by
Softmax (xi) =
exp (xi)
P
j exp (xj).
(4.2)
When evaluating the model, to get a measure of the favorability of the mutations
of a sequence relative to the focus sequence, the log-ratio of the likelihoods of
the mutant sequence and the focus sequence are used, which is deﬁned as such
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Baseline model
30
[22]:
log pθ
 x(Mutant )
pθ
 x(Wild-type )
(4.3)
This measure can be interpreted as how likely the mutated sequence is to be
generated from the generative model relative to how likely the focus sequence
is. This, as covered earlier, is intractable to compute, so the log probabilities
are approximated with the ELBO measure for the focus sequence and mutated
sequence, giving the following measure of change of functionality of a mutation:
∆E

x(Mut), x(Wt )
= ELBO

x(Mut)
−ELBO

x(Wt )
(4.4)
A higher value for the eﬀect prediction we expect to correlate with higher exper-
imental measurements, if the model succeeds in learning a representation of the
proteins where the structures important for protein functionality are learned.
Between each of the layers except for the output layer, we apply Batch Nor-
malization [12] to the outputs followed by a Leaky ReLU activation function.
Batch normalization has shown to make models less sensitive to initialization,
and works as a way to regularize the model internally, similar to for example
Dropout. The Leaky ReLU activation function is similar to the normal ReLU
activation function, but adds a small slope to the otherwise constant part of the
function, giving
LeakyReLU (x) = max(0, x) + 0.01 ∗min(0, x)
(4.5)
This model is trained on the protein data sets, using the adam optimizer with
learning rate set to 0.0001 and a batch size of 32. Using the reparameterization
trick introduced earlier, the model is trained with back-propagation to maxin-
imize the ELBO-term (eq. 2.18). Furthermore, the model is trained ﬁrst as a
deterministic auto-encoder, but gradually turns into a variational auto-encoder
through a process called warm-up, with the warm-up parameter set to 20. As the
model training iterates through the ﬁrst 20 epochs, the weight of the KL-term
(second term on the right hand side of (eq. 2.18)) is epoch
20 . For the remaining
epochs, the weight remains 1 giving exactly the ELBO term as presented in eq.
2.18
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Sparsity prior and protein dictionary
31
4.2
Sparsity prior and protein dictionary
After implementing the baseline variational auto-encoder, we add some restric-
tions as proposed in the Deepsequence [22]. These restrictions are biologically
motivated, and are applied to the ﬁnal weight matrix, just before outputting
the protein sequence. The three assumptions leading to these restrictions on
the model are the following:
• Hidden factors, represented by the last layer of the model, inﬂuence only
part of the protein sequence, rather than the entire sequence.
• Correlation of amino acid substitutions: Some amino acids are more likely
to substitute each other without the protein losing functionality.
• Strength, or "temperatures", of the constraints should vary as mutations
may be more or less driven by random mutations and selection, respec-
tively.
Working these assumptions into the model, instead of computing the output
directly as in the baseline model, the output at each position i in the protein
sequence is parameterized as such:
W(i) = λC ˜
W(i) diag (Si)
(4.6)
The left-hand side can be thought of as the weights of a new output layer, as
W(i) represents a [21 × 2000] matrix mapping the 2000 weights of the previous
ﬁnal layer to 21 logits (amino acids) for each position in the sequence. The
C matrix represents the amino acid correlations, corresponding to the second
assumption, and is of dimension [21×E], with E being a hyperparameter we ﬁx
to 40. This learns the correlation of amino acid usage by taking into account the
local predictions around each position, with E deﬁning how local the correlations
should be.
˜
W(i) represents the underlying weights for each position, which are
learned to apply the restrictions on and is of dimension [40 × 2000]. The ﬁrst
assumption is modelled by the S matrix, which is gating which neurons in the
ﬁnal layer can have an inﬂuence on which is of dimension [2000 × L], with L
being the sequence length of the particular protein. To be able to optimize S
with gradient descent, it is initialized as unconstrained parameters, but with 4
blocks of [500 × L] matrices tiled on top of each other, which means S is made
up of 4 blocks of identical weights. Furthermore, the sigmoid function is used
on S to ensure sparsity, by working as a way to gate whether the neurons can
pass on information or not to certain positions in the sequence.
==PAGE:40==
4.3 Ladder VAE
32
In this project, λ will be treated as a constant 1, but it represents the third
assumption above, the temperature parameter.
In Figure 4.2, a graphical depiction on how the implementations on the biological
assumptions aﬀect the last layer is shown:
Figure 4.2: Eﬀect of group sparsity and protein dictionary on the output layer
In this example, the group sparsity, consisting of 3 groupings, is put on 9 neurons
connected to an arbitrary position of the sequence (represented by the red circle,
with the 4 yellow circles representing the 21 amino acids). As each grouping of
neurons share the structure of whether or not they can convey information for
this given position, the model has in eﬀect been introduced to group sparsity.
The connection between the yellow circles represent the correlation between
amino-acids. In reality, the neighbouring positions and their amino acids will
also have an eﬀect on this.
4.3
Ladder VAE
The DeepSequence model showed best results when the sparsity prior, pro-
tein dictionary and temperature parameter were all implemented together with
learning distributions over all weights of the model, giving access to an inﬁnite
ensemble of networks, and then averaging predictions over the a subset of the
networks in this ensemble. As an alternative to learning an ensemble of net-
works, we will implement a deeper network structure with multiple layers of
latent layers instead of a single one, and see if this is an alternative way to reach
similar performance boost for the model.
We will be testing Ladder VAE’s with 2 and 3 latent layers. The version with
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Transfer learning
33
one layer is equivalent to the baseline model, and sparsity prior and protein
dictionary can either be added or not. The 2-layered Ladder VAE will have a
32-dimensional latent space (closest to the output) and a 16-dimensional latent
space (farthest from the output). The 3-layered version will have 32, 16 and 8-
dimensional latent spaces. The ﬁrst bottom-up pass is a neural network similar
to that of the baseline model, that is a 1500-1500 dense neural network. For
the 2-layered Ladder VAE, there is an additional 250-250 neural network in the
deterministic upward pass, and for the 3-layered version, the 3 upward pass is
a 125-125 dense neural network.
From the bottom latent distribution, the output of the model is computed in
the same way as for either the baseline model or the baseline model with the
sparsity and protein dictionary extension.
4.4
Transfer learning
Transfer learning is usually formally deﬁned as using information from models
trained on data from one domain to learn something about data from a diﬀer-
ent, but usually similar, domain [30][31]. The ﬁeld has come from the real-world
problem of data scarcity in scenarios where data may be diﬃcult of costly to
obtain. The domains are referred to as source and target domains, respectively.
In this project, the evolutionary data will be considered to source domain and
the mutational data the target domain. We would like to "transfer" informa-
tion from the latent distributions of the models to ﬁnd out if a simple, linear
regression on the latent space can predict the eﬀect of mutations. How these
linear regressions perform should not be directly compared to the performance
of the fully unsupervised models, as the regressions are supervised, but rather
serve as a tool to compare the latent spaces to each other.
In practice, once a variational auto-encoder has been trained on the evolutionary
data, we divide the corresponding mutational data set into a test and a training
set with a 60/40 ratio. To avoid data leakage, the splits are performed such
that sequences generated from mutations at a given position in the sequence
can only be present in either the test or training data set.
This is a very
rough split, as the unsupervised variational auto-encoder is not subject to this
constraint. A linear regression is ﬁtted to the test set by extracting the set
of µ’s describing each latent layer of the generative model qφ (zi | xtrain) and
predicting on their known performance measurements. The test set is then used
to predict performance measurements directly, and the Spearman Correlation
is used as the performance metric for the transfer learning.
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5
Results
In this section, the results from the models will be presented. The most impor-
tant results to look at from the perspective of this thesis will be how well the
models "learn", represented by learning curves, the structure of the latent space
of the models after they have been trained, and lastly, how well the ELBO of
the single-mutation test data can be used to predict ﬁtness of the proteins with
the Spearman Correlation.
5.1
Baseline model
The Baseline, implemented as described in the Models chapter, is very much a
standard Variational Auto-encoder with a warm-up term. Training this model
on the BLAT_ECOLX data set for 100 epochs produces the learning curve and
running Spearman Correlation seen in Figure 5.1
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Baseline model
35
Figure 5.1: (left) Learning curve and (right) Spearman correlations. Baseline
model trained for 100 epochs
Here, the Spearman correlation is calculated with 10 samples and for every 10
epochs, meaning the ELBO measure is the average of the output of putting
the input through the model 10 times. The correlations become higher as the
number of samples are increased, but 10 samples should be enough to show the
general trend.
The interesting notion here is that the highest correlation is seen at a very early
point in training the model, even though the ELBO has barely converged after
the ﬁrst 100 epochs. The model has no regularizing on the weights, so the model
could be overﬁtting.
To get a more precise idea about how the model behaves early on in the training,
we train a model for 20 epochs and with a higher number of samples when
calculating the correlation and calculating the correlation at every epoch Also,
the model is only trained on a subset of the full data set allowing for a hold-out
data set for evaluating the model. These results are represented in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: (left) Learning curve and (right) Spearman correlations. Baseline
model trained for 20 epochs and with hold-out data set
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Sparsity prior and protein dictionary
36
Looking at the results, it does seem like there could be some overﬁtting happen-
ing, even though the hold-out error only seems to increase some epochs after
the correlation starts to decrease.
To get an idea if this framework for the model learns a meaningful representation
in the latent space, we train a model with the same parameters as above, but
with a 2-dimensional latent space instead of a 30-dimensional. This plot can be
seen in Figure 5.3. This plot shows that there is deﬁnitely some structure which
the latent space catches, at least for the 2-dimensional case.
Figure 5.3: 2 Dimensional latent layer for the baseline model
The latent representation and the quite high Spearman correlations should give
some conﬁdence that the model overall works as expected.
5.2
Sparsity prior and protein dictionary
In this section, we test models similar to the ones from the previous section,
but add the sparsity prior and protein dictionary to see how this eﬀects how
the model trains, how well it predicts mutation eﬀect on the proteins, and the
latent representation.
Training a model with a 30-dimensional latent space and with warm-up for 100
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Sparsity prior and protein dictionary
37
epochs on the BLAT_ECOLX data produces the learning curve and running
Spearman correlations presented in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: (left) Learning curve and (right) Spearman correlations. Model
with 1 latent layer, sparsity and protein dictionary, trained for
100 epochs
This plot reveals a much slower learning compared to the similar model without
the sparsity and protein dictionary. The ELBO term seems closer to stabilizing,
and the correlations also seem more stable, suggesting less overﬁtting. Again,
with a hold-out test set and a higher number of samples for the Spearman
correlations, we can get a more accurate view into the training process, see
Figure 5.5
Figure 5.5: (left) Learning curve and (right) Spearman correlations. Model
with 1 latent layer, sparsity and protein dictionary with a hold-
out test data set.
Again, the learning curve is less steep and there seems to be no to little over-
ﬁtting, both considering the ELBO of the hold-out data set as well as the
spearman-correlations, even over 150 epochs.
The predictive performance of
this model, however, seems to be similar to the simpler model, at least if the
simpler model is stopped before overﬁtting sets in.
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Ladder VAE
38
Training a version of this model with a 2-dimensional latent space produces the
latent representation seen in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: 2 Dimensional latent layer for a model with sparsity and protein
dictionary
While the space is still structured, the clusters seem larger and less well-deﬁned.
5.3
Ladder VAE
In this section, we will have a look at the results for the models with a ladder
structure with 2 and 3 latent layers stacked on each other. The sparsity prior
and protein dictionary will be kept in all of these models. In Figure 5.7, we can
see how the training of the models unfold.
The training curves seem very similar to the model with sparsity prior and
protein dictionary with only a single latent layer. Also, the correlations seem
to reach a stable point quite early on even though the ELBOs do not converge.
The correlations soar quickly, even with the higher number of latent layers, and
the correlations seem stable even though the model continues to ﬁt better to
the data.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Ladder VAE
39
Figure 5.7: (Top): Learning curve and correlations for 2-dimensional Ladder
VAE, (Bottom): Learning curve and correlations for 3-dimensional
Ladder VAE
As other hierarchical VAE’s have shown diﬃculty in training layers at the top,
it could be these similar performances come from failure in learning anything
in the top layers in this case. Therefore, as before, a 2 and 3-layer Ladder VAE
with same structure but 2-dimensional latent spaces are trained over 30 epochs,
with results presented in Figure 5.8. For the 2-dimensional model, some clear
structure is seen in layer 1, and both dimensions seem to carry some information.
The top layer of the model still has some structure in it, but it is becoming less
sharp and looks close to collapsing into a normal distribution. The 3-dimensional
model has some structure in the ﬁrst layer resembling that of the 2-dimensional
model, with the second middle layer also carrying information, but now the top
layer has completely been reduced to a normal distribution. This supports the
notion that higher layers in the model should act like priors to layers below, so
this result in and of itself is not unexpected.
==PAGE:48==
5.3 Ladder VAE
40
Figure 5.8: (Top):
Latent space of 2-dimensional Ladder VAE, (Bot-
tom):Latent space of 3-dimensional Ladder VAE
Rounding oﬀthe results from the Ladder VAE, we can take a look at how the
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Transfer Learning
41
correlations for our models compare to the results from the DeepSequence paper
for 3 select proteins. The BLAT model is trained for 100 epochs with a batch size
of 32, while the two other proteins are trained for only 30 epochs with a batch
size of 128. The DeepSequence numbers are both reported with and without
their ensembling method in Table 5.1, and represent their best performances
from an ablation study.
Layers
1
2
3
DS
DS + Ensemble
BLAT
0,606
0,650
0,661
0,61
0,74
PABP
0,570
0,615
0,580
0,64
0,66
DLG4
0,505
0,531
0,532
0,56
0,59
Table 5.1: Spearman correlations for 3 diﬀerent protein sequences
While the latent spaces seem to be able to carry information, this does not
translate to any direct performance boost on the models, at least not to the
extent ensembling boosted the performance of the DeepSequence model.
5.4
Transfer Learning
This section will give an overview of the results from the transfer learning anal-
ysis as outlined in the transfer learning section in the models chapter. Table 5.2
shows the results from the transfer learning for the three proteins.
Layers
1
2
3
BLAT
0,06
[0,11;0,07]
[0,18;0,06;0,115]
PABP
0,07
[0,12;0,08]
[0,28;0,00;0,01]
DLG4
0,46
[0,37;0,068]
[0,10;0,27;0,31]
Table 5.2: Spearman correlations for transfer learning for 3 diﬀerent protein
sequences. For 2 and 3 layered models, the ﬁrst numbers reported
ﬁrst are at the top layer and the last at the bottom
From these results, it seems to be very hard to conclude that some layers learn
more than others, at least in general and when considering the linear relationship
between the latent space and the protein ﬁtness measures. It seems diﬀerent
layers learn more or less useful latent representations depending both on protein
and hierarchical depth of the model.
==PAGE:50==
5.5 Other results
42
5.5
Other results
Some results not directly related to answering the questions posed in this thesis
are included in Appendix A. Figure A.1 and A.2 show that even the Ladder
VAEs still suﬀer from overﬁtting if sparsity prior and protein dictionary are not
implemented. Figure A.3 Shows a sparse model with very low correlations -
it shows why weighting the sequences are very important for learning a model
with good performance.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This thesis set out to investigate whether current known models based on varia-
tional auto-encoders could be improved by using a hierarchical framework with
multiple latent layers instead of a single one. Additionally, the latent repre-
sentations of the protein Beta-lactamase were investigated. In this discussion
chapter, the methods used will be discussed, what the results produced tell
us about whether these methods are suitable for the problem, as well as what
future steps with multi-layered variational auto-encoders can be taken.
6.1
Reﬂections on methods
The underlying assumption of why using auto-encoders on amino acid sequences
is a worthwhile endeavour is that some positions in the sequence are more im-
portant than others, and we might not know which positions are important
before training the model. Therefore, unsupervised models such as variational
auto-encoders have their merit. Compressing the high-dimensional sequences
into smaller, latent spaces forces the model to learn dependencies between the
positions, such that the model can take into account multiple mutations at once,
as it is hypothesized that the eﬀect of mutations on the ﬁtness of the protein
are also dependant on each other.
==PAGE:52==
6.1 Reﬂections on methods
44
The evolutionary data used to train the models contain protein sequences which
are quite diﬀerent from each other, meaning the latent spaces the models learn
are quite extensive compared to any single or even multiple mutation sequence
might inhabit. This was of course the same problem which the original DeepSe-
quence model faced, and both their results and ours show that the diﬀerences
in the ELBO’s even for a test set only taking up a small part of the latent space
can be used to predict protein ﬁtness. However, it is challenging to ﬁnd the
structure in latent spaces for small diﬀerences in amino acid sequences when
this structure mostly arises out of the evolutionary data, where sequences are
much more diﬀerent.
This leads to some diﬃculty in evaluating the models with multiple layers - of
course, the correlations can be compared, which is ultimately the most impor-
tant metric for the models. Meanwhile, diagnosing the models with the kind of
data used in this project is diﬃcult compared to for example generative models
trained on images. Here, it is much easier to eyeball test samples generated
from the prior of the model - a protein sequences generated from a model is
not immediately something we can look at and judge if the sequence is indeed a
reasonable protein sequence, which can be done and is routinely done with pop-
ular benchmarking data sets such as CelebA HQ [29] where the model generates
something that can be qualitatively accessed by a human.
Even though sampling from the latent space has not been a part of this thesis,
this is of course possible and could probably lead to interesting results, but will
ultimately be left to future work. What we did instead was to do a kind of
transfer learning on mutational data sets by applying a linear regression on the
latent space in the generative model. The initial idea was to compare this simple
linear regression model on the latent space to doing a linear regression directly
on input data, to get an idea of information carried in the latent layers. Doing
a linear regression on one-hot encoded input data, where all data points are
similar but at one point (representing the single mutation of each sequence in
the mutation data), leads to extreme over-ﬁtting. The solution for this was to
apply the rough train/test split by sequence position, as discussed in the transfer
learning section in the methods chapter, which on the other hand meant that
the linear regression on input data had zero predicting power and thus became
trivial to compare to. This lead to the transfer learning part to become a bit
self-referential, in that we compare the predictive powers of the layers to each
other, rather than to some meaningful baseline.
==PAGE:53==
6.2 Reﬂections on results
45
6.2
Reﬂections on results
In the results section, we reported learning curves for models with and without
sparsity and protein dictionaries, as well as their Spearman correlation perfor-
mances after a certain amount of epochs, and some visuals of latent spaces.
The baseline model was a fast learner, and prone to over-ﬁtting. Scoring very
high correlations early on in the training, it is actually surprisingly hard to beat.
Of course, the model cannot simply be stopped at the epoch with the highest
correlation, as this would make the model supervised. However, using a hold-out
test set to calculate a test ELBO measure for each epoch could work as a way
to stop the model early, before over-ﬁtting sets in. The learning plots for the
2 and 3-layer Ladder models seem to behave very similarly - this could lead to
believing that the generative model has collapsed and the higher latent layers
do not learn anything, but the plots of the models with 2-dimensional latent
layers indicate that this is not the case.
So some features are learnt, which
don’t seem to resemble the ones in the ﬂat VAE, but it is not immediately clear
what features this represents. In any case, the predictive performance of the
models don’t improve when adding more layers.
It could be that the Ladder models learn some long-range dependencies, which is
one of the reasons variational auto-encoders are used in the ﬁrst place. However,
the test data available to us only changes at one position at a time, which could
potentially restrict any performance boost we might have seen from learning
such dependencies. This is an inherent problem with the data we are working
with, and a more diverse set of test data than is available to us at the current
time might reveal that deeper models perform better.
6.3
Future work
Given the results produced in this thesis, 3 points of future work could be
considered:
• Sampling quality
• More diverse test data
• Rigorous latent space investigation
Sampling from the generative models and investigating these samples would be
==PAGE:54==
6.3 Future work
46
an obvious next step. The immediate thing to look for here would be whether
samples generated resemble any particular protein sequences in the data set,
and then see what these have in common.
Getting access to more diverse test data might not be feasible at the current
moment, but if it becomes possible, this could address the problem of learning
a vast latent space from evolutionary data, and then only utilizing small parts
of it for predictions.
A more in depth investigation of the latent space could include more advanced
models than simple linear regression on the latent variables. This could include
some kind of clustering methods to learn formally which groupings are learnt in
the latent space.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to investigate whether hierarchical models could im-
prove on predicting protein ﬁtness when build on top of existing well performing
frameworks such as DeepSequence. It was also the hope that the latent distri-
butions of the hierarchical models could better represent the protein sequences
compared to their ﬂat counterparts.
We found that training models with two or three latent layers on data sets con-
taining sequence variants from the same protein was possible. The latent layers
do not collapse and seem to have internal structures. However, no immediate
change in predictive performance could be found when using test sets with sin-
gle mutations, both when using the ELBO as a predictor for protein ﬁtness and
when doing transfer learning. It is possible that sampling from the hierarchical
models produces higher quality protein sequences, or that the structure found
in latent layers can be used in future work.
==PAGE:56==
Appendix A
Figure A.1: Learning curves for 2-layer Ladder VAE without sparsity prior
and protein dictionary
==PAGE:57==
49
Figure A.2: Learning curves for 3-layer Ladder VAE without sparsity prior
and protein dictionary
Figure A.3: Learning curves for sparse model without sequence weighting
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1] Adzhubei, I. A. A method and server for predicting damaging missense
mutations. Nature methods. 7, 4 (2010-04-01).
[2] Ahern,
R.,
and
Tan.
BIOCHEMISTRY
Free
For
All
ver-
sion 1.3.
Oregon State University,
2018,
ch. Structure and func-
tion.
https://biochem.oregonstate.edu.prod.acquia.cosine.
oregonstate.edu/sites/biochem.oregonstate.edu/files/2022-04/
Biochemistry%20Free%20For%20All%201.3_compressed.pdf(visited
2022-04-08).
[3] Blei, D. M., Kucukelbir, A., and McAuliffe, J. D.
Variational
inference: A review for statisticians. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 112, 518 (Apr 2017), 859–877.
[4] Bottou, L. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent.
In Proceedings of COMPSTAT’2010 (Heidelberg, 2010), Y. Lechevallier
and G. Saporta, Eds., Physica-Verlag HD, pp. 177–186.
[5] Chatzou, M., Magis, C., Chang, J.-m., Kemena, C., Bussotti, G.,
Erb, I., and Notredame, C. Multiple sequence alignment modeling :
methods and applications. 1009–1023.
[6] Edgar, R. C., Drive, R. M., and Valley, M. MUSCLE : multiple
sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput. 1792–1797.
[7] Emmert-Streib, F., Yang, Z., Feng, H., Tripathi, S., and Dehmer,
M. An Introductory Review of Deep Learning for Prediction Models With
Big Data. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence 3, February (2020), 1–23.
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
51
[8] Fowler, D. M., and Fields, S. Deep mutational scanning : a new style
of protein science. 801–807.
[9] Freeman, A. M., Mole, B. M., Silversmith, R. E., and Bourret,
R. B. Action at a Distance : Amino Acid Substitutions That Aﬀect Binding
of the Phosphorylated CheY Response Regulator and Catalysis of Dephos-
phorylation Can Be Far from the CheZ Phosphatase Active Site . 4709–
4718.
[10] Hopf, T. A., Ingraham, J. B., Poelwijk, F. J., Schärfe, C. P. I.,
Springer, M., Sander, C., and Marks, D. S. A n a ly s i s Mutation
eﬀects predicted from sequence co-variation. Nature Publishing Group 35,
2 (2017).
[11] Hornik, K. Approximation Capabilities of Multilayer. 251–257.
[12] Ioffe, S., and Szegedy, C.
Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift. 32nd International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2015 1 (2015), 448–456.
[13] Jordan, J. Variational autoencoders. https://www.jeremyjordan.me/
variational-autoencoders/, 2018. [Online; accessed 9-April-2022].
[14] Jordan, M. I., Ghahramani, Z., Jaakkola, T. S., and Saul, L. K.
An Introduction to Variational Methods for Graphical Models. Learning
in Graphical Models 233 (1998), 105–161.
[15] Kingma, D. P., and Ba, J. L. Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion.
3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2015 - Conference Track Proceedings (2015), 1–15.
[16] Kingma, D. P., and Welling, M.
Auto-encoding variational bayes.
2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014 -
Conference Track Proceedings, Ml (2014), 1–14.
[17] Kullback, S., and Leibler, R. On Information and Suﬃciency. The
Annals of Mathematical Statistics 22, 1 (1951), 79–86.
[18] Ng, P. C., and Henikoff, S. SIFT: Predicting amino acid changes that
aﬀect protein function. Nucleic Acids Research 31, 13 (2003), 3812–3814.
[19] Orengo, C., and Bateman, A. Protein Families: Relating Protein Se-
quence, Structure, and Function, 1st ed.
John Wiley
Sons, Ltd, 2014,
ch. Introducti, pp. i–xv.
[20] Rasmus, A., Valpola, H., Honkala, M., Berglund, M., and Raiko,
T.
Semi-supervised learning with ladder networks.
In Proceedings of
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
52
the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems - Volume 2 (Cambridge, MA, USA, 2015), NIPS’15, MIT Press,
p. 3546–3554.
[21] Rezende, D. J., Mohamed, S., and Wierstra, D. Stochastic back-
propagation and approximate inference in deep generative models.
In
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on International Con-
ference on Machine Learning - Volume 32 (2014), ICML’14, JMLR.org,
p. II–1278–II–1286.
[22] Riesselman, A. J., Ingraham, J. B., and Marks, D. S. Deep gener-
ative models of genetic variation capture the eﬀects of mutations. Nature
Methods 15, 10 (2018), 816–822.
[23] Rosenblatt, F. The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information
storage and organization in the brain. Psychological Review, 65(6) (1957),
386–408.
[24] RUMELHART, D., HINTON, G., and WILLIAMS, R.
Learning
representations by back-propagating errors.
NATURE 323, 6088 (OCT
9 1986), 533–536.
[25] Sonderby, C. K., Raiko, T., Maaløe, L., Sønderby, S. K., and
Winther, O. Ladder variational autoencoders. Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 0, Nips (2016), 3745–3753.
[26] Stiffler, M. A., Hekstra, D. R., and Ranganathan, R. Evolvability
as a Function of Purifying Selection in TEM-1 β-Lactamase. Cell 160, 5
(2015), 882–892.
[27] Stroud, J. T., and Losos, J. B. Ecological opportunity and adaptive
radiation.
Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 47, 1
(2016), 507–532.
[28] Thakur, D.
ML Basics 4: Replace Negatives with Zeros!
https://
dhruvs.space/posts/ml-basics-issue-4/, 2021.
[Online; accessed 9-
April-2022].
[29] Vahdat, A., and Kautz, J. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational au-
toencoder, 2020.
[30] Weiss, K., Khoshgoftaar, T. M., and Wang, D. D. A survey of
transfer learning, vol. 3. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[31] Zhuang, F., Qi, Z., Duan, K., Xi, D., Zhu, Y., Zhu, H., Xiong, H.,
and He, Q. A Comprehensive Survey on Transfer Learning. Proceedings
of the IEEE 109, 1 (2021), 43–76.
