==PAGE:1==
Intrusion
detection-enabled
blockchain
based vehicular navigation map system
Master Thesis
DTU Compute Engineering
Computer Science and Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
Master Thesis
March, 2022
By
Ej Fornavn Bodi
Technical University of Denmark
Building 324, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been working on over five months at DTU Compute of the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, in fulfilment of requirements for achieving an M.Sc. in Computer
Security.
The thesis was conducted during the period between October 2021 and March 2022 with
an assigned workload of 30 ECTS credits.
The thesis was conducted under the supervision of Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor at
DTU Compute.
Ej Fornavn Bodi - s192186
Signature
28-March-2022
ii
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With the rapid development of mobile Internet, cloud computing, Internet of Things, ma-
chine learning and other technologies, the network security environment is becoming
more and more complex. In recent years, with the sufficient development of autonomous
driving technology, the security of the Internet of vehicles has received much more at-
tention. The traditional security defense strategies are not enough to cope with the risks
faced by the Internet of vehicles. This paper focuses on vehicular navigation map and pro-
poses to build an intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map
system. It can detect suspicious nodes that exist in the blockchain so that it can ensure
the integrity of navigation map data when uploading data, to avoid the security problems
caused by vehicle uploading forged geographic information, location information and so
on.
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ej Fornavn Bodi, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
First of all, I’d like to thank my supervisor,Weizhi Meng, and his PhD student, Wei-Yang
Chiu, for their help and suggestions for my work.
I also would like to thank DTU for providing me with a good study environment and re-
sources to successfully complete my master’s program.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents for supporting my study abroad.
iv
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Organization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related work
3
2.1
High definition Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Blockchain based IDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
System prototype design
6
3.1
Scope of the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
System design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Implementation
19
4.1
Implementation of Smart contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Conclusion and future work
28
Bibliography
30
A Title
33
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
In recent years, with the rapid development of wireless communication, artificial intelli-
gence, Internet of Things and other technologies, the world has gradually entered the era
of so-called Industry 4.0. Almost all industries are trying to use new technologies to carry
out technological revolution. In the field of transportation, some countries are preparing
for the construction of intelligent transportation system(ITS). Our concern is about the
security of the ITS. Next we will introduce the idea and central components of our design.
According to the design requirements of the intelligent vehicles, on the basis of using more
sensors to make the vehicle more intelligent, the concept of vehicle to everything (V2X) is
added as a supplement of sensors to make the vehicle have a more accurate perception of
the surrounding environment.[1] The V2X technology include the vehicle to vehicle (V2V),
vehicle to infrastructure (V2I), vehicle to pedestrian (V2P)and vehicle to network (V2N)
communications[2]. However, more parties in a system means the risk that the system
will be attacked getting higher. In[3], the author mentioned the interface that V2X uses
during the communication brings risks to the whole system. The V2X interface could allow
an attacker to launch a remote attack to hack the vehicle, gain control of the vehicle or the
data stored in the vehicle and so on. Meanwhile mature V2X communication protocols
such as C-V2X and 802.11p are not widely deployed because they have not reached
consensus among telecom operators, vehicle manufacturers, and even governments[4].
The information in V2X network is decentralized stored and shared between the vehicles
and infrastructures. Some of the researchers proposed the combination of bloackchain
and vehicular network to ensure the confidentiality and privacy of the data and secure
the system. In this paper[5], the author noticed that the risk is coming with the intelligent
transportation system (ITS) increasing towards centralized system. The blockchain tech-
nology ensures the decentralization of the system and also the integrity/ confidentiality
of the data. It will lead the evolution trend of the ITS. Though blockchain can solve the
decentralization issue of the system. It still will face the risks or attacks which belongs
to the blockchain. Because the ITS serves public infrastructure, it must be highly secure
and subject to some degree of third-party oversight. In this scenario, we don’t want too
many unknown users to join this network who might be malicious users, the consortium
blockchain or the private blockchain could be the appropriate choice for it. In [6] this article,
the author compared the private blockchain with consortium blockchain. He mentioned
that the private blockchain and the consortium blockchain both can set an enrollment
mechanism for the users but private blockchain only allow one organization to handle the
access control, consortium blockchain allow more organizations to take the response of it.
Hence in this scenario, the consortium blockchain will be the best choice. The consortium
blockchain can achieve multi-parties governance and fulfill the decentralization.
Due to the concept of multi-parties governance of the consortium blockchain, it may not
easily happen the 51%attack as in public blockchain. However, there is no sense of per-
fect system to counter all kinds of attack. In[7], they put forward that with the increase
of nodes in the consortium blockchain, the risk of internal data leakage of nodes also in-
creases, and it may happen that all information in the consortium blockchain can be leaked
by one malicious node. In our scenario we will focus on the detection of the malicious node
in the blockchain based ITS network. Our key idea to detect the malicious nodes is based
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
1
==PAGE:10==
on all nodes that must maintain consistent the same map in the ITS system. This is be-
cause when the attacker takes the control of some nodes, they may download the wrong
map or share the wrong map to the other nodes via the V2X network. In this situation,
the wrong map may lead to traffic congestion, poor user experience and even traffic ac-
cidents. In[8], the author showed the importance of the High-definition(HD) map to the
auto-driving cars. We believe that keeping map consistent will become an important se-
curity standard in the future ITS. Therefore, we will design an intrusion detection-enabled
blockchain based vehicular navigation map system to keep the identity and security of the
HD-map.
1.2
Contributions
The contributions of this paper is shown as follows:
• Conduct survey: We conducted a survey in the fields of vehicular network, blockchain
technology, High-definition(HD) map mostly around the threats exist in those areas.
• Scope of the system: Based on the technologies we surveyed, we analyzed the
risks and challenges facing our system. We decided to utilize the consortium blockchain
to build the vehicular network and design an IDS which is inspired by the specification-
based IDS to detect malicious node in our system.
• Implementation of the system: According to the design of the IDS, we use the
Fabric platform to simulate the consortium blockchain-based vehicular network and
implement the logic of intrusion detection by smart contract. Moerover, we designed
an experiment to study the system’s scalability.
• Analysis: We analysed our system performance from the accuracy of the result
and scalability of the system. And we got the limitations of current situation and the
future trend of the system.
1.3
Organization
The paper is organized as follows:
In chapter 2, we show others related work in the field of blockchain-based ITS, intrusion
detection scheme, the security of the HD map.
In chapter 3, we analysed the scope of the system firstly. Then we compared the different
type of blockchain and IDS schemes to select the proper technology we would use in this
system. Then We designed the system overview and the intrusion detection process.
In chapter 4, we showed the process of detecting and analyze the accuracy of the results.
Moreover, we did an stress test to the system to study the scalability of it.
In chapter 5, we did a conclusion of our work and presented current limitations of the
system and the possible work trend in the future.
2
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:11==
2
Related work
In this chapter we will introduce others work around the navigation system of blockchain
enabled vehicular network and how they inspired us. As we mentioned in the above sec-
tion, with the rise of massive data, edge computing, Internet communication technology,
how to ensure the security of the vehicular network has become a hot topic. The current
solutions for keeping the security of the vehicular network such as C-V2X and 802.11p
are not widely deployed. Both of them are based on the public key infrastructure(PKI).
Hence, in a global context, it is hard to achieve consensus among multi-parties to deploy
such a centralized system. In[9][10][11], they both proposed that the combination of the
decentralization of blockchain technology and the vehicular network is a major trend of the
development of ITS in the future, and described it in detail in the article. In[12], the author
mentioned the centralized systems’ drawback which is single point of failure. It means that
the central of the system will face more attackers over it. On top of this downside, the au-
thor purposed a concept of self-management vehicular ad-hocs network(VANET) based
on Ethereum blockchain. In the same year, Yuan and Wang[5] purposed, the practitioners
gradually shift the research and development directions of the intelligent transportation in-
dustry to how to design more intelligent vehicles or other application scenarios, but neglect
the most critical and fundamental safety guarantee for the transportation field. Hence they
purposed a conceptual model of 7 layers blockchain-enabled ITS system which is pretty
similar to the ISO reference model[13].
2.1
High definition Map
In the development of ITS, the intelligent vehicles is undoubtedly one of the hot topics,
and its intelligent embodiment has been introduced in the first chapter. Back to the 2000,
in[14], the author has proposed the concept of Vehicle-automation system(VAS). VAS
includes the auto-driving of the low speed, the interaction with the closed vehicles, the
interaction with the nearby infrastructures and so on. It is no doubt that it is strategic for
the author to put forward such a view when the relevant technology was not yet mature.
In current state of the art, how to let vehicle to ”locate itself” is one of the challenges in
auto-driving. The typical solution for solving this problem is the cooperative work among
GPS, sensors and a High Definition map(HD map)[15]. HD map as a central component
of the auto-driving vehicle, it can provide so called ”lane-level definition” service to the
auto-driving car. It is used to help the intelligent vehicle to gain accurate surrounding
information when the sensors on it can not fell the environment perfectly in some situa-
tions. In[16], the author provided a HD map framework for the automotive vehicle. He
mentioned that compared with the countryside, the complex environment in downtown
should provide more detailed, so called ”lane-level”, information on the HD map and the
function of evaluation the data to serve the automated vehicles. As a fact, the HD map
brought the significant improvement to the automated vehicles. It can not only bring the
information services but also mitigate the attacks to the sensors. As we mentioned before,
the GPS, sensors, HD maps are performing a cooperative work to keep the vehicle secu-
rity. For example, one of the sensors is hacked and send fraud data to the vehicle(speed
or location etc.), the HD map can provide the correct location data to detect whether the
data from sensor is right or not. However, the HD map itself could be attacked.
In[17], the author provided a research about launching a Sybil attack to the vehicular
navigation system. They trained 15 bots to simulate the vehicles on road. They let the
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
3
==PAGE:12==
bots sent fraud speed data to the server, as they are driving on a road with 2-8km/h speed.
Hence, they found that it caused a traffic jam which is showed on the navigation appli-
cation. In common strategy of the navigation application, the system will recommend the
road which is not having jam to the users. In such a situation, if the attacker could tam-
per with and falsify map data, which may lead to huge security incidents. Besides, the
attacker could track other users who used the same application via the malicious vehi-
cles/fake bots. In[18], the author introduced another attack form which is named Message
Falsification Attack. Instead of sending real-time fake data to modify the HD map like the
Sybil attack did, the Message Falsification attack upload forged vehicle locations/events to
update the HD map. It is pretty like writing dirty data to the database. In[19], the author in-
troduced the concept of possible counter measurements of the attacks mentioned above.
Those measures include protecting the collection, updating and storage of data and all
mention the need for a secure platform to do this. In our opinion, the blockchain could
provide a safe and robust platform to solve those concerns. However, the blockchain also
has its drawback, in the next section we will introduce others work around the blockchain
and their counter measures.
2.2
Blockchain based IDS
In the previous sections, we introduced the blockchain could bring decentralized, security,
privacy to the ITS. In general, the concept of the blockchain is usually divided into three
types: public blockchain, private blockchain, consortium blockchain. In the ITS field, no
matter how, the consortium blockchain is the most proper scheme to achieve the security
and privacy goals. However, as we mentioned above that the blockchain has its short-
comings. In[7], the author proposed a viewpoint that if there exist one node without the
correct configuration in a blockchain network, it can leak all the data. Hence, he designed
an experiment which is based on the reverse-engineered from the so called incorrect con-
figured node of the blockchain. In their experiment, they choose one of the most popular
platform, Ethereum. As the result, they found that in some networks, they could keep
track of the stakeholders. For other networks, they could only identify the users/organiza-
tions by their cryptographic addresses. In conclusion, they do find the node with incorrect
configuration to leak the internal data. It turns out that when we look at the whole system
from the inside, we can’t guarantee that every single node is honest and reliable. In this
case we need a robust intrusion detection system(IDS) to help the system to find out the
malicious node.
Intrusion detection system(IDS) as one of the most effective ways to detect malicious op-
erations in a system has been developed many years. In the beginning, IDS was divided
into two categories according to its deployment location: host-based IDS and Network-
based IDS. However with the development of the decentralized networks, the traditional
IDS is not enough to handle current problems due to the single point deployment. In this
situation, the collaborative intrusion detection system has been proposed. In[20], the au-
thor purposed an idea that the combination of the blockchain and collaborative IDS. They
introduced and explained the background on blockchain/ collaborative IDS in detailed.
Based on it, they got the major challenges in collaborative IDS which are data sharing
and trust management. Hence, they suggested utilizing the nature of Blockchain tech-
nology which includes the decentralization, without a requirement of trusted-3rd party,
enhanced security by the cryptography and so on, to counter current challenges in col-
laborative IDS. Other researchers also purposed the similar idea. Moreover, in[21], the
author classified the intrusion detection system by different methods: Signature-based
IDS, Anomaly-based IDS, Trust-based IDS, Specification-Based IDS. In his article, he in-
dicated the specification-based IDS is based on monitoring the member/system whether
4
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: An example of Intrusion Detection System
is operating properly according to the policy specified by the system. Any behaviors be-
yond the policy will be regarded as malicious. This type of IDS has not been integrated
with Blockchain in practice, which brings us some inspiration to our project. In[22], they
analyzed the challenges to collaborative IDS and focused on the data consistency during
the node sharing attack signatures or features. They utilize the consortium blockchain
technology to achieve the distributed signatures/features storage and sharing in prac-
tice. Basically, they set 3 entities in their system: authorized nodes, unauthorized nodes,
database. The authorized nodes have right to validate transactions which include the sig-
natures/features that the IDS detected from the attack. Unauthorized nodes do not have
right to validate or publish transactions or add transactions to the exist chain. Hence, they
achieve the malicious nodes(unauthorized nodes) can not inject poisoned signatures/fea-
tures to the IDS database.
However, we have not found that someone did work related to blockchain-based vehicular
navigation IDS which can provide the detection of the malicious nodes in vehicular network
and keep the integrity of the map data. Fortunately, during the survey of the related work
we were inspired by their work. That is, we decide to use the idea of specification-based
IDS and utilize the consortium blockchain to construct an consortium blockchain-enabled
vehicular navigation IDS.
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
5
==PAGE:14==
3
System prototype design
In this chapter we will propose our system prototype design, as it is designed to enhance
the infrastructure service and we have not kept in touch with some organizations to co-
operate with. Hence, we can only purpose a system prototype and prove it can be im-
plemented in our simulated environment. Our system is aimed at detecting the malicious
node who is trying to forge HD maps data and share false map data with other vehicles in
a consortium blockchain-based vehicular network. Basically, the intrusion detection of the
malicious nodes is achieved that relies on the consortium blockchain and smart contract.
In our scenario, the consortium blockchain provided an enrollment mechanism to avoid
a mass of potential malicious nodes to join the network. Hence, we assume that in cur-
rent network there are only a few number of malicious nodes that are hacked at random
time. Then our work is focusing on detecting the existing malicious nodes in our network
which is based on the consistency of the HD map and voting by smart contract. We utilize
the Ethereum-based consortium blockchain, smart contract, the concept of specification-
based intrusion detection system(S-IDS) to achieve our goal. We will design a two-round
vote detection and freeze the malicious node program which is implemented by the smart
contract. We believe that the system can identify potential attacks according to the speci-
fied behavior defined by us, and freeze the malicious nodes to ensure the security of map
data and the system.
3.1
Scope of the System
Before we purpose our system prototype design, we will analyse the potential threats to
the system and introduce the technologies being used in our system and explain why we
choose them.
3.1.1
Security analysis
As we mentioned in previous chapter, the navigation system on a smart car is facing var-
ious threats in practice.In[17], the author launched a sybil attack that manipulates trained
15 bots to pretend the on-way vehicles and send tampered traffic jam data to the server.
It lead to a fake traffic jam displayed on other vehicles navigation system and forced the
navigation system modify their paths. However this is only one of the potential attack
happened to navigation system. We conclude some potential attacks that could happen
in a vehicular navigation system as follows:
• Fake data injection This is a kind of attack on road condition information. In essence,
the attacker injects forged road data into the server after taking the control of some
navigation client(vehicles), so that the server can update the fake data to other vehi-
cles. It may lead to paralyzing the traffic, navigation system and even endanger the
drivers. For example, in the previous mentioned sybil attack, attacker manipulate
bots to pretend a fake traffic jam to the server. In addition, in HD maps, they can
report more fake information such as road/lane trafficability, road accident, speed
limitation and so on. All of those fake data will destroy the users’ experiences, even
their lives.
• GPS spoofing attack The Global Positioning System(GPS) is playing an important
role in real-time navigation system, it can provide accurate position service of a client
for the navigation system. However, some researchers purposed attack approach to
the GPS[23, 24]. They found that the GPS is without encryption and easy to produce
6
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:15==
a spoofer to hijack some high-value devices. However, in a vehicular navigation
system, it’s hard to hijack a vehicle as a drone by spoofing GPS signal. It can be
used to generate wrong navigation route to bring traffic jam or lead the specific driver
to the wrong destination. In addition, the GPS spoofing can influence the safety of
the autonomous vehicles. As reported in this article[25], there are 3 scenarios that
the GPS spoofing can endanger the safety of the AVs:
1. Leaving the highway before reaching an exit during the normal driving.
2. Driving under an incorrect speed limit.
3. Breaking into the opposite lane.
• Man-in-the-middle attack This kind of cyber attack could happen in any Client/Server-
architecture based system. In navigation system, the attackers may track the user’s
location, send false location data to the server, false the navigation data and send it
to users. All of the potential consequences could happen once the attacker launch
the MITM attack successfully.
• Distributed Denial of Service Attack It could bring troubles during the update of
the map in navigation system. Most of the navigation application support real-time
navigation service which means that the data as the traffic jam, traffic accident, navi-
gation route must update periodically. Once the attackers control a number of clients
and launch the DDos attack to the server, the result is that no map data and asso-
ciated updates can be sent to the vehicle, which would be disastrous. Especially to
the autonomous vehicles. The typical DDos attacks are shown as follows:
1. SYN Flood: Using the principle of TCP protocol, this attack method is the most
effective classic DDos method. Before the establishment, TCP channel needs
three handshake, so the attacker can forge a large number of TCP handshake
requests to exhaust server resources.
2. HTTP Flood: For each Web page, or resource, or Rest API of the system.
Attacker use a large number of zombie bots to send a large number of HTTP
requests.
3. Low-speed attack: In the HTTP protocol, the request ends with /r /n /r /n to
indicate the end of the client.Attackers open an HTTP 1.1 connection, set the
Connection to keep-alive, hold the long connection of the server.Then never
send /r /n, write some meaningless data streams every few minutes, and drag
the machine.
According to the above potential threats, we can notice that except the GPS spoofing at-
tack is caused by the false data source, others are traditional cyber attacks but happened
in navigation scenario. Hence, we can utilize the blockchain technology to mitigate the
other attacks. For the fake data injection attack, we can utilize the nature of the blockchain:
under the blockchain consensus mechanism, there is no need for a third party to trust the
platform, and the written data can only be recorded with the consensus of most nodes in
the network. Therefore, an attacker must control at least 51% of the nodes in the whole
network to forge or tamper with data, which greatly increases the cost and difficulty of the
attack. It makes the attackers hard to inject false map data to the server/client.
For the Man-in-the-middle attack, In[26, 27], both of them mentioned the blockchain can
mitigate the man-in-the-middle attack. Since most PKI implementations rely on a cen-
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
7
==PAGE:16==
tralized trusted third party certification authority (CA) to issue, activate and store user
certificates, hackers can attack PKI to impersonate users or read encrypted information.
Publishing keys on the blockchain can prevent the spread of fake keys, and the application
can also identify the real identity of the communicating party. In recent years, some tech-
nology company has purposed some blockchain-based approch that can mitigate MITM
attack. Pomcor recently released an alternative blockchain PKI implementation approach:
retain a certification authority that stores the hash value of issued and activated certifi-
cates on the blockchain. This approach allows users to authenticate certificates with a
decentralized and transparent source, while improving network performance by authenti-
cating keys and signatures locally based on blockchain-based copies. Another distributed
ledger-based technology project is IOTA, which uses Tangle, a lightweight scalable block-
less distributed ledger, as the back end backbone for millions of iot devices to interact and
authenticate each other point-to-point, without relying on third-party authentication cen-
ters.
The Distributed Denial of Service(DDos) attack is still the easiest and low-cost weapon
for the hacker to bring down a large network in nowadays. The method of blockchain to
mitigate DDos attack is that, since the nodes of the blockchain are distributed, each node
has a complete copy of blockchain data, and can verify the data validity of other nodes.
Hence, if the attacker breaks a node, the remaining nodes can also maintain the entire
blockchain normally, which can effectively mitigate the DDos attack.
Although the blockchain technology can mitigate the above mentioned cyber attack that
happens in the traditional network. However, the blockchain is not 100% secured tech-
nology. It also has its own drawbacks when it faced to the complicated network environ-
ment. In[28], the author purposed a detailed survey of the attack surface of the blockchain
technology from the architecture of the blockchain, the architecture of the P2P network,
the blockchain-based applications. From other reports or news, we can know that in
recent years, there have been many attacks against blockchain networks, which have
caused huge economic losses and bad impacts. For instance, on 17th June 2016, a
group of hackers attacked a decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) network and
stole about 3.64 million Eth.On the same day, the price plunged 50% losses in the price of
ETH.The Ethereum team has implemented hard fork on July 20 to save the loss, so there
are two chain ETCs (Ether Classics) and Eth (Ethers)[29]. Some other attacks such as
51% attack, double-spending attack, sybil attack, dusk attack happened in past years[30,
31]. As the author conclude in[28], with the increasing need of the decentralized system to
implement superior application and the data tamper-prevention management. Blockchain
has bacame more and more popular. Before choosing to use blockchain technology to
improve the security of traditional applications, people should carefully consider the ben-
efits and risks to decide whether blockchain should be adopted or not. As mentioned in
above chapter, the ITS servers the public infrastructure and it has already been a future
trend. Traditional PKI solutions or any centralized solutions are not enough to handle the
incoming threats to the future ITS, AVs and so on. In our scenario, we are focusing on
enhancing the confidentiality and integrity of the map data and ensuring the consistency
of the map data among a vehicular network. We believe that the blockchain do bring
advantages to enhance the current security model. In our scenario, we will design our
system based on consortium blockchain which we will introduce later. In addition, we will
design an intrusion detection scheme to detect malicious nodes in our network which is
based on specification and implemented by the smart contract.
8
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:17==
3.1.2
Blockchain-based approach
Blockchain was first purposed in 2008 by a man claiming to be Satoshi Nakamoto[32].
The blockchain’s data structure is shown as fig: 3.1. In shortly, the data structure of the
block helps the blockchain can resist the manipulation of the data. As we can see in fig:??,
each block stores the previous block’s hash value. Only one block has been confirmed
by the consensus of the most nodes, it can been linked to the previous block. Hence,
if an attacker tries to manipulate the data in one block, he has to manipulate all subse-
quent blocks’ hash value. It is almost impossible to achieve that. With the cooperation of
the consensus protocol and the unique data structure design of blockchain, it greatly in-
creases the difficulty for attackers to tamper with the data so as to achieve security goals.
Since then, a large number of researchers around the world have been attracted to the
idea of decentralized distributed ledgers. Blockchain technology came into being with
the creation of Bitcoin, and its initial scope of application focused entirely on digital cur-
rencies.Influenced by digital currencies, people are beginning to expand the application
of blockchain technology to other fields such as : notarization, arbitration, audit, domain
name, medical, authentication, voting and other fields, the application scope has been
extended to the whole society[33].
Figure 3.1: An overview of Blockchain
With the ongoing research and innovation on blockchain technology, the blockchain has
been diveded into three main categories according to the network scope: Public chain,
Private chain, Consortium Chain:
• Public Chain: It is completely open to the whole network, anyone can be used ar-
bitrarily, without the setting of authority, there is no identity authentication for the
joining users.It is completely open and transparent. For instance, the Bitcoin is a
public chain system. When you use the bitcoin system, you only need to down-
load the corresponding software client, create wallet address, transfer transaction,
mining and other operations. These functions can be used freely. However, the
excessive freedom and lack of regulation also bring great security risks. In the envi-
ronment of public chain, the number of nodes is not fixed, whether the node is online
or not can not be controlled, and even whether the node is a malicious node can not
be guaranteed. As we analysed above, in ITS field, the extreme open network can
not provide security guarantee for our system. So the public blockchain can not be
adopted as our solution.
• Private Chain: The private chain is a concept that is opposite to the public chain.
The so-called private means that it is not open to the whole network. It is only used
inside the organization, such as corporate bill management, accounting auditing,
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
9
==PAGE:18==
supply chain management, or some government management system. The private
chain usually provide a registration system, that is, the users need to submit identity
authentication to join the private chain. In a private chain environment, the number
of nodes and the state of nodes are usually controllable, so user is generally no
need to compete for billing rights through intense mining. Though the private chain
can provide enrollment mechanism to avoid most of the malicious node joining the
network. But the private chain can not allow multi-agents to manage the system￿it
brings the difficulty for the governance. In our scenario, the ITS system has to been
monitored and managed by government departments, telecom operators, vehicle
manufacturers and other organizations. Hence, the private chain also can not been
selected as our solution.
• Consortium Chain: The consortium blockchain is defined as a system form be-
tween the public chain and the private chain. It is usually controlled by multiple
agents, and several organizations cooperate to maintain a blockchain. The use of
the blockchain must be restricted access with permissions, and relevant data will
be protected. The typical characteristic of the consortium chain is that each node
usually has corresponding entity. Only with the approval of the related organiza-
tions can it join or quit the system. All the institutions and organizations with related
interests cooperate closely on the blockchain and jointly maintain the healthy and
stable development of the system. Hence, there are some consortium blockchain
projects have been implemented in many fields. For instance, founded in Septem-
ber 2015, the R3 blockchain is the most typical consortium chain, which has been
joined by dozens of international banks and financial institutions[34]. In our sce-
nario, the consortium blockchian can provide a robust security model that ensures
the confidentiality, integrity and security of the data and allows multiple organiza-
tions to manage and oversee the system.
We did a survey of the blockchain technology and compared the main categorizes of the
blockchains, we will select consortium blockchain to construct the vehicular network and
enhance the security of the data sharing among the network. Our intrusion detection
system will also be built on the consortium chain to detect the malicious nodes within the
system, and the logic of intrusion detection will be implemented by the smart contract[35,
36].
The smart contract was first purposed in 1994. It was defined as a transaction protocol
to implement the content of contract by computer. In the context of blockchain, the smart
contract is defined as follows:
1. Stored and replicated on distributed platforms (blockchain).
2. Execute on blockchain network.
3. It could trigger ledger updates (payments in cryptocurrencies, etc.).
4. Prewrite logic (computer code).
Basically, the smart contract is a program that execute on the blockchain network. Smart
contracts must perform the same results on each node of the blockchain network, so
that any node can verify that the results of the smart contract are correct in the current
block. Ethereum provides an EVM(Ethereum Virtual Machine) to execute the bytecode of
a smart contract. A smart contract is compiled to EVM bytecode. When the smart contract
is deployed on blockchain, a contract address will be assigned based on the deployer’s
address and the address’s nonce. The format of the contract address is the same as that
10
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:19==
of the account address. To use the contract, the only way is to call the public function of the
contract. In other words, the contract can not be executed actively, it can only be invoked
by an external account. In our project, we will design a smart contract to implement vote
function, we will identify the malicious nodes via the results of the vote.
3.1.3
Intrusion detection scheme
”Intrusion detection” was first purposed in 1980 by James P. Anderson, he defined ”intru-
sion attempt” and ”threats” as the operations that could access the system illegally and
might damage system even bring down the system. Today, the IDS are divided into two
major categories according to their deployment position in their network[37]:
• Host-based IDS: The system is typically deployed on a host that is focused, and its
data source comes from the host, such as log files, auditing records, and more. The
system can detect intrusion by monitoring the above files in the host. Whether it can
be acquired to the above file is one of the key points of these systems. Because
intruders will use the host’s auditing subsystem as an attack target to avoid IDS.
• Network-based IDS: It uses the original network package as a data source. It usu-
ally monitors and analyzes all communication services through the network using
an adapter running in a random mode. Its attack identification module typically uses
four common technologies to identify attack markers: mode, expression, or byte
match, frequency and so on. Once the attack is detected, the response module
provides a variety of options to notify, alarm, and taking a corresponding response
to the attack.
In addition, according to the methodology that the IDS uses. The IDS can be generally
divided into:
• Anomaly-based IDS: Anomaly-besd IDS is based on such an assumption and
premise, the user activity is regular, and this principle can be effectively described
and reflected by data; The subset of anomalous activity at the time of an intrusion
is clearly distinguishable from the normal activity of the user abnormal monitoring
system through a learning phase. The outline of the normal behavior becomes its
prior knowledge, and the system compares the data obtained and preprocessed by
the information acquisition subsystem with the normal behavior pattern, if the dif-
ference is not beyond the preset threshold, it is considered to be normal. If appear
bigger difference is more than the threshold , then it is judged to be invaded.
• Signature-based IDS: Signature-based IDS works by comparing the collected in-
formation with the signature database which stores the known attack’s feature. If
the data is found to be consistent with the signature database, the event is defined
as an intrusion. However, this scheme can not detect the unknown attack. Hence,
current solutions prefer to combine the Signature-based intrusion detection with the
Anomaly-based intrusion detection. It’s also known as the Hybrid IDS methodology.
• Specification-based IDS: Specification-based IDS can be regarded as the optimi-
sation of the Anomaly-based IDS. Because the Anomaly-based IDS will treat all of
the abnormal(but correct) activities/behaviors to be malicious, which can generate
a number of false alert. On the contrary, the specification-based approach is based
on pre-defined program legal activities. It means that it will detect malicious behav-
ior by identifying whether it’s legal or not. It will not generate the false alert like the
Anomaly-based IDS. However, the issue is that how to characterize legal behavior
of the program[38].
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
11
==PAGE:20==
In our project, we will design our intrusion detection methodology based on the specification-
based intrusion detection scheme. We will define the legal behavior in our system and
show how to detect the illegal behavior in the system design process.
3.2
System design
The system design is divided to two parts, we will design the blockchain-based vehicular
network firstly, then we will introduce our intrusion detection approach secondly.
3.2.1
System framework design
Since our main purpose is to introduce our intrusion detection scheme, we will only pur-
pose the system overview design in this section to support the intrusion detection sce-
nario. Basically, there are five main assets in our system shown as fig3.2:
Figure 3.2: System overview
• Consortium Blockchain: In our system, consortium blockchain ensures the in-
tegrity and confidentiality of the data and also provide the implementation of the in-
trusion detection scheme by the smart contract. Moreover, the consortium blockchain
provide multi-parties maintenance of the system.
• Certificate authority: Certificate authority (CA) realizes the enrollment mechanism
of the system. Only authorized nodes can connect to the blockchain network. It pre-
vents a large number of malicious nodes from randomly connecting to the network.
• Intelligent Vehicle: Intelligent vehicles join the blockchain network as edge nodes
with certain computing power. It can calculate the hash value of a map/track and
upload the data to the blockchain system. So that we can use the generated data
to detect malicious nodes within the system.
12
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:21==
• Road side unit: Road side unit (RSU) is a device that communicates with OBU
(On Board Unit), which can realize identify and communicate with vehicles, receive
and forward data and other functions. In our system, the RSU mainly provide the
communication interface for the vehicles to publish and confirm transactions in the
blockchain.
• Track recording unit: The track recording unit is a kind of OBU which can record
the vehicle’s track path based on GPS. The track path will be output as a JSON file
for use or storage. In our system, we will use the track path as a parameter of the
intrusion detection scheme which can prove the vehicle do pass some places.
As the system overview showed, there is a CA in the system to handle the access control
of the system. All members of the system must be registered in the CA to join the consor-
tium blockchain. Hence, in a particular area, for example, a cross road. The RSU (traffic
light, camera. etc) and intelligent vehicle will validate each other’s identity. After finishing
validation, the vehicle will join the consortium blockchain network as an authorized node.
The vehicle will upload map data with its track recording as a proof on blockchain through
the closest RSU. Other nearby vehicles confirm the transaction by validating the signa-
ture, if the signature is correct then confirm the transaction. To sum up, we have built
a consortium blockchain-based vehicular network within a limited area, where vehicles
can upload real-time map data (road conditions, congestion, etc.) and all the data will be
stored in blockchain. The intrusion detection scheme will be purposed and analyzed in
next section.
3.2.2
Intrusion detection Approach
We regard the consistency of HD-map in the vehicular network as the most important
safety factor, because HD-map has become one of the most important factors to ensure
the safety situation of autonomous vehicles. Therefore, if someone maliciously shares
forged map data, the driving safety of normal vehicles will be seriously affected. Our cri-
teria for intrusion detection will be based on the consistency of maps. Meanwhile, inspired
by the idea of specifications-based IDS, we will define normal users and malicious users
in the system according to the legitimacy of uploaded data, so as to achieve the purpose
of malicious users detection. The intrusion detection approach will be implemented by
smart contracts deployed on the blockchain.
• Detection rule In our system, we assume that the vehicles are using the same
brand’s HD-map. Hence, we stipulate that the legal behaviors and malicious be-
haviors are based on the consistency of the HD-map in each intelligent vehicle as
follows:
Legal node
Malicious node
Map version
Latest Official Version
Unknown/Old Version
Road condition
report
Correct
False
Traffic report
Correct
False
POI report
Correct
False
Traffic signs report
Correct
False
Vote
Vote yes for the correct result
Vote No for the correct result
Table 3.1: Node Behaviors
In our scenario, the malicious node is similar to the bot node which means that
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
13
==PAGE:22==
external attackers gain control of some nodes by means of single point attack, and
users themselves do not know that they are attacked. Hence, The attacker might
share/upload forged data with other nodes in the network to affect the driving safety
of normal users.
To ensure the consistency of the HD-map in our system, every legal node must
maintain the latest official version map locally. The malicious node might use a
forged map or a old version’s map to influence the consistency of the map. The
traffic report, road condition report, point of interest(POI) report, traffic signs report
belong to the real-time map data. The legal node must share the correct report
which is verified by other legal nodes. It means that, each kind of map data must be
reported and published as a transaction on blockchain. Therefore, how to identify
the reported data is correct or not becoming the key to distinguish the legal node
with the malicious node. Based on the current situation, we decide to design a smart
contract to realize a double-vote function to verify the uploaded data’s integrity.
Figure 3.3: Smart Contract Design
• Detection logic As mentioned before, we decide to utilize the smart contract to
implement the intrusion detection. The detection flow chart is shown as fig:3.3.
14
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:23==
Parameter
Description
Hash
Node’s local map version’s hash
Real-time map data
Sender
Node’s unique identifier
IsOrNot
Vote yes or not
Error
Error report of the specific map data
MyHash
Node’s track record hash
Table 3.2: Parameter Description
As the figure shows, there is a trigger to start the intrusion detection. In the process
of intrusion detection, there are mainly the following steps:
1. Initiate: One node initiates the vote process by hashing his local stored map
and publish his Hash and Sender to call the vote smart contract. It means that
a node publish a transaction on blockchain, other nodes know who initiates a
voting process and the transaction detail. We want it to be a real-name voting,
in order to avoid someone uploading malicious data, the system can not trace
the source of malicious node.
2. FirstRoundVote: Once a node starts the voting process, the other nodes
should join it. The other nodes should input their own Hash and vote yes or
no by comparing local map’s hashes with published Hash. If the hash is the
same then vote yes, vise versa. Meanwhile, each node also should input their
unique identifier in the transaction to achieve real-name voting. Once the sys-
tem finishes the first round vote, the system achieves the consistency check
of the local map data of the nodes in the network. Therefore, the nodes are
divided into at most three groups:
(a) Vote Yes: Nodes have the same hash value as the Hash in initiate step.
It means that those nodes are using the same map or uploading the same
data as the vote originator.
(b) Vote No: Nodes have the different hash value to the Hash in initiate step.
It means that those nodes are using the different map or disagree with the
uploaded data from the vote originator.
(c) Nonvoters: Nodes that do not join the vote process due to unknown rea-
sons. They might have internet connection issues or not join vote on pur-
pose.
According to the detection rule, the malicious nodes will upload false real-time
map data or use a non-latest official map. We only need to check the correct-
ness of the initiated Hash, then the system can identify which group’s nodes
are malicious.
3. SecondRoundVote: The second round vote is the process that other nodes
should verify the correctness of the initiated Hash. For the both consistency of
map version’s detection and real-time map data detection, other nodes should
verify the information by themselves and vote they agree or not. Therefore, the
nodes are divided into at most three groups:
(a) Vote Yes: Nodes that agree with the initiated Hash, they have verified
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
15
==PAGE:24==
the initiated Hash and there is no error need to be reported. They attach
the track record as the verification proof. Nodes should input their unique
identifier in the transaction to achieve real-name voting.
(b) Vote No: Nodes that disagree with the initiated Hash, the result failed to
pass the node verification and the node reported an error. They attach
the track record as the verification proof. Nodes should input their unique
identifier in the transaction to achieve real-name voting.
(c) Nonvoters: Nodes that do not join the vote process due to unknown rea-
sons. They might have internet connection issues or not join vote on pur-
pose.
For instance, if the initiated Hash is the map’s version, then other node should
verify current version’s map is usable or not. If it is unusable such as, road
missing, roads impassable, destination incorrectly located and so on. Then
node votes no to the initiateHash and attaches the verification node’s track
record as a proof. The track record is regarded as the proof of verification, it
claims that the node do pass a path on map to verify the uploaded data. It is
the same solution when the initiated Hash is the real-time map data.
Till now, we have already finished the detection process. In the two rounds
of voting, the results of each round divided the nodes into three groups, we
divided the relationships into two cases as the fig:3.4 shows.
Figure 3.4: Venn of Nodes
16
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:25==
As the previous security analysis mentioned, there are only a few number of
malicious nodes in the system. Our voting detection mechanism is based on
the principle of majority rule. Once the initiated Hash is proved to be authen-
tic, it can counter deduce which groups of nodes are good and which ones are
malicious from the first round vote vice versa. However, there are some non-
voters during the voting process. There are only two scenarios in which such
nodes do not vote, one is for network reasons, and the other is deliberately
done by malicious nodes. Our current work does not consider how to deal with
nonvoters, and we will discuss possible solutions in the future work.
4. Freeze: In this system, the counter-measure we designed against malicious
nodes is freeze. After the second round vote, the system will freeze the nodes
so that they cannot participate in blockchain transactions. Hence, it can avoid
the malicious nodes keep influence the consistency and integrity of the system.
This design does not take nonvoters into account because it may freeze legal
nodes that fail to vote due to network issues. Therefore, in the future work we
will discuss about how to deal with the nonvoters in the system.
• Detection Scenario As the fig:3.3 shows, there is a trigger to start the detection
process. According to the different triggers we divided the detection into two cases,
one is the consistency detection of map version, the other is the consistency de-
tection of data uploaded by nodes. The trigger’s description is shown as follows:
Trigger
Map Version
Map Data
Time
When the map company
releases the new version
A node reports information about road conditions
(traffic jam, accident, POI .etc )
Area
Limited Area
Limited Area
Initiate Hash
Map version’s hash
Reported information’s hash
Table 3.3: Trigger description
1. Map version: For the first scenario, when the map company releases the latest
map update, the system should select a random node to start the detection
process in a limited area (city, a few blocks .etc). It means that only the nodes
within the area can join the detection process. It can avoid nodes outside the
area, unable to provide proof of presence and disrupt the voting results.
2. Map data: For this scenario, when a node wants to report the information
about the issues on road, it triggers the detection process in a limited area
(cross road, main road .etc). Normally it happens when a node meets a traffic
jam, accident, new POI report and so on. Therefore, the initiate Hash will be
the real-time map data.
To sum up, in this section, we first compared different types of blockchain, and de-
cided to choose the consortium blockchain as the basis of building the vehicular
network. Then we analyze three intrusion detection methods and got inspiration
from the specifications-based intrusion detection. According to it, we proposed the
framework design of the consoritum blockchain-based vehicular network, and give
the design of the intrusion detection system. In the design of intrusion detection, we
defined the behaviors of legitimate nodes and malicious nodes in the system so as
to develop detection rules. Based on the detection rules, we designed two rounds
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
17
==PAGE:26==
of voting. The first round of voting is to detect the consistency of the data uploaded
by the voting node, and the second round is to detect the integrity of the uploaded
data. Through two rounds of voting, we divided the nodes into three roles, and froze
the malicious nodes. However, there are some nonvoters in the system. It is hard
to discern the legitimacy of non-voters. We will discuss about the nonvoters in the
future work.
18
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:27==
4
Implementation
In this chapter, we will introduce the implementation of the smart contract and show the
simulation of the vote process. We will also analyse the results of the simulation to eval-
uate our detection scheme. In addition, considering the scalability of the blockchain sys-
tem, we will stress test the smart contract we designed to evaluate the performance of
the system in real-world deployment.
4.1
Implementation of Smart contract
In this section, we will show the simulation of the system and the workflow of the vote pro-
cess. We created a network with three nodes to simulate the implementation of the voting
process, with two legitimate nodes(Node 0, Node 1)and one malicious node(Node 2).
We simulated the four processes of Init, FirstRoundV ote, SecondRoundV ote, Freeze.
The malicious node operated according to the illegal behavior defined before. Finally, we
realized the detection and freezing of the malicious node.
4.1.1
Environment
The system environment and software used are shown in the table:4.1
Evironment
Hardware
Software
CPU
AMD Ryzen 9 3900XT
12-Core Processor 3.80 GHz
Virtual Machine
Ubuntu 18.04
Storage
Force MP600 SSD
Blockchain
platform
Hyperledger Fabric 1.4.4
Memory
32GB DDR4 2660
Smart Contract
Chaincode
Network
Vmware Virtual Network
Container
Docker,Docker-compose,curl
Table 4.1: System Environment
4.1.2
Simulation of the system
• Init Based on the system design, when an event triggers the intrusion detection
system. There is a node will initiate the voting process. It only needs to upload the
hash of data(map version/real-time map data) with its address. Hence, each node
in the blockchain network will know who initiates the vote process and what is the
voted information. The initiate process is shown in the fig:4.1
Figure 4.1: Initiate Vote Process
• FirstRoundVote Once a node initiate a vote process, the other node should join the
vote process. The voting of each node is invoking a smart contract, and the voting
process will be regarded as a transaction and recorded on the chain. The process
of a node participating in the first vote is shown in the figure below:
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.2: First Round Vote
The part circled is the parameters entered by nodes when they invoke the firstV ote
function in the smart contract. The parameters and descriptions are shown in the
table:3.2. The node invokes the ”firstVote” function and vote for the Hash repre-
senting data. It shows that Node 1 agree with this map and Node 2 disagree with
the initiated data. Both of the nodes are active. Moreover, it attaches its address to
achieve real-name voting. To avoid malicious node revote in first round vote, we im-
plemented a function to ensure that each node can vote only once, which is shown
as fig:4.3
Figure 4.3: Avoid revote in 1st round
At this point, the system has completed the first round of voting. The system records
the address, ballot and node status of all nodes participating in the first round vote.
Function: firstVote
Parameter
Value
Description
Addr
64 bits Hash
Hash of voting node’s address
IsOrNot
0,1
0 = node votes no to the init Hash
1 = node votes yes to the init Hash
AddrStatus
0,1
0 = node is frozen
1 = node is active
Table 4.2: Parameters of firstVote
• SecondRoundVote As we designed above, when a node completes the first round
of voting, it begins to examine the information being voted. The system assumes
that the proportion of malicious nodes is a small part of all nodes in the system.
Hence, we only need to count the results of a large number of nodes on the cor-
rectness of the voted information to get whether the initialized information is correct.
The process of nodes participating in the second round vote is shown in the fig:4.4
20
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.4: Second Round Vote
When the node completes the correctness check of the voted information, the node
will invoke the secV ote function of the smart contract and input parameters as ta-
ble:4.3 The node should attach its address as the first round vote to achieve the
real-name voting. It should vote yes or not about whether it agrees with the voted
information. No matter it agrees with the voted information, it should upload the
error report and its hash of track record as a proof. As the fig:4.5 shows. Similar to
the first round vote, we also set up a protection mechanism to prevent the malicious
nodes from voting multiple times.
Figure 4.5: Avoid revote in 2nd round
Function: secVote
Parameter
Value
Description
Addr
64 bits Hash
Hash of voting node’s address
IsOrNot
0,1
0 = node votes no to the init Hash
1 = node votes yes to the init Hash
Error
0,1
0 = There is no error in voted information
1 = There is an error in voted information
MyHash
64 bits Hash
Hash of node’s track record
Table 4.3: Parameters of secVote
• Freeze According to the fig:3.4 defined. It’s no matter that whether the malicious
node or legal node initiates the vote process, based on the consistency of the vot-
ing data, the system considers the nodes that oppose the mainstream opinion as
malicious nodes in the two rounds of vote. The system will take frozen measures
to deal with malicious nodes after two rounds of voting. It means that the node can
not join the future vote process or share data with other nodes till it’s unfrozen. The
freeze process is shown in fig:4.6.
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6: Freeze malicious node
As the figure shows, nodes 0 and 1 are legitimate nodes in the system because they
maintain the consistent data and have confirmed the correctness of the voted data.
Whereas node 2 is inconsistent with them and the system set the node 2’s status to
”frozen”. From the perspective of ensuring the security of the system, the operation
of freezing malicious nodes can prevent malicious nodes from further doing evil to
a large extent. However, as we have analyzed above, we can not freeze nonvoters,
because it will accidentally hurt some legal nodes that cannot vote due to network
issues. Hence we suggest to design a mechanism of node credit management in
the future, which will be discussed in the future Work.
4.1.3
Evaluation
For any kind of intrusion detection system, we need to evaluate the accuracy of its de-
tection to know whether it is usable or not. We will analyze how to evaluate the results of
detection combine with the detection rule (table:3.1) by using metrics shown in fig:4.7
Figure 4.7: Evaluation metrics
22
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:31==
• True Positive TP means that the system has found the malicious nodes through the
vote process. As we discussed earlier, blockchain system is a fault-tolerant system.
So we believe that only a small percentage of the nodes in the system are malicious.
Otherwise, the premise of the blockchain system would be destroyed. Combined
with the consistency of maps and related data held by each node in the Internet of
cars, a small number of nodes that go against the prevailing view during a vote will
be considered malicious.
• True Negative TN means that the legal nodes in the system and some legal nodes
that can not vote due to network issues or other reasons. Behaviorally, neither of
these types of nodes are malicious.
• False Positive FP means that some original legitimate nodes are wrongly judged as
malicious nodes for some reasons. In our system design, if the blockchain platform
is working properly, then there will not be such a situation.
• False Negative FN means that malicious nodes in the system should have been
detected by the detection system, but in fact they are not detected by some means or
the defects of the detection system itself. In our scenario, there are some nonvoters
during the voting process. We believe that there are some malicious nodes hiding
in the nonvoters. In current design, the system can not handle the hiding malicious
nodes, but in the future we can design a credit management system to handle this
situation.
Normally, we are concerned about the accuracy of intrusion detection, and the calculation
formula of the accuracy is as follows:
Combined with the calculation formula of accuracy and system detection design, we can
find that as long as the node is doing illegal operations, it will be detected by the system,
and it will not produce FP. Hence, we can achieve a high accuracy of the detection. But
in fact there are some other issues that should be concerned. For the FN, that is, the
part of the malicious nodes that are nonvoters, we can’t deal with them in current design.
However, as we mentioned above. We can design a node trust management system to
counter the nonvoters in our system which we will discuss in the future work. We can
combine the intrusion detection system with the trust management system to counter
malicious nodes in the whole network.
4.2
Scalability
Scalability is a important metric when we evaluate a system’s performance. The scalabil-
ity challenges of our system are mainly due to the number of nodes, the number of con-
tract invokes (number of transactions) executed concurrently within the system. Hence,
we designed an experiment to stress our system to study the scalability of the system.
The experiment environment is as the table:4.1 described. However, the Hyperledger
Fabric platform works different from the Ethereum, Bitcoin .etc. Because the nodes in
Fabric are permissioned to join the blockchain, the consensus of nodes in Fabric is based
on deterministic consensus algorithm. Due to space constraints, we will not expand the
consensus algorithm for Fabric. We choose Solo[39] which is provided by Hyperledger
Fabric to achieve the consensus in our experiments. In addition, we choose to use the
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
23
==PAGE:32==
Tape[40] to simulate the multi-node transaction process and test the tps, duration of the
transactions.
4.2.1
Assumption
In order to design reasonable experimental solutions, we need to make a reasonable
assumption on the application environment of the system. Based on our assumption, the
design of experimental data can be obtained. Because our detection scenario is based on
data exchange between vehicles and blockchain network, our detection does not require
high response speed like traditional host-based intrusion detection. It means that we allow
the detection finishde in several minutes. In addition, our detection is conducted in phases
(two-round vote) so that we can find the relationship between the maximum transaction
volume to be processed by all nodes within the current blockchain network in a given
period of time. The derivation is as follows:
• One node: During a detection process in the system. One legal node will at most
initiate three transactions in limited time: init, FirstRoundV ote, SecRoundV ote.
• n nodes: We assume that in the current blockchain network, there are n legal nodes
that can join the vote process. Hence, if one node initiate a vote process, the transa-
cions in the system will be as follows:
• Worst case: The worst case in the detection process is that all nodes in the system
are initiating vote process concurrently. Then each node should initiate three trans-
actions in limited time. The transaction volume in this case will reach the system
peak:
So far, we have obtained the relationship between the number of nodes and trans-
action volume in the worst case of the system. We can design the stress test exper-
iment of the system according to the relationship so that we can study the perfor-
mance of the system when the number of nodes increases and find the performance
bottleneck of our current system.
4.2.2
Experiment
• Data set: Based on the relationship that we found between the numbers of nodes
and transaction volume before. We designed ten different sets of data to simulate
the maximum transaction volume faced by the system. For each data set, the num-
bers of nodes is different and the maximum transaction in that network is different
either. We will use tape to simulate the process of multi-node transaction packaging
and loaded in blockchain network, and obtain the generation time of each block and
the duration to complete the transaction. The data set is shown in the fig:4.8
24
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.8: Data set
As the visulized data set shows, as the number of nodes in the network increases,
the t ransaction volume increases exponentially, which will bring great challenges
to our system.
• Result: The experiment is shown in the fig:4.9. Once we launch the experiment,
tape will help us to simulate the configured nodes to execute invoking specific smart
contract function. It will complete the process of transaction packaging into block
and upload block on chain so as to realize the simulation of the system in the real-
world environment. We can get the duration of completing all transactions and the
transaction per second(tps) as the result.
Figure 4.9: Result of Group 1
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
25
==PAGE:34==
The experiments result is shown as fig:4.10 and fig:4.11 . Once we finished the
10 groups of experiments, we got the trend of duration and TPS as the number of
nodes and transactions increases.
Figure 4.10: Duration trend
Figure 4.11: TPS trend
4.2.3
Analysis
As the results we get from the experiments, we can conclude the following points:
1. As the number of nodes increases,TPS shows a slight decreasing trend, but the
decreasing value does not affect the performance of the system.
26
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:35==
2. Since there is no significant change in TPS, it can be considered that the speed of
transaction processing by the system does not change. Therefore, as the number
of nodes increases, the amount of transaction will increase, the time of transac-
tion processing by the system will increase significantly, and the change of duration
increase exponentially as the increase of transaction volume.
As we mentioned before, we designed IDS to require a system response speed that would
be acceptable if a detection was completed within a few minutes. And the consensus al-
gorithm we used in the simulation is Solo provided by Fabric, which is a lab-level algorithm
with lower performance than the algorithm applied in actual production (Kafka,PBFT,Raft).
From this point of view, the duration we get is acceptable.
However, the reality and the simulation still have certain difference. For example, in the
simulation of the nodes in the first and second vote is seamless. But in reality, after
the first round vote, nodes need time to verify the voted data. Once the data pass the
validation, the node can vote for the second round and attach its track record as the proof.
Otherwise, our simulation does not take into account the computing power of nodes and
the communication ability of nodes with RSUs. In this situation, we expect that if we put
our system into a real-world environment, the system will accommodate up to 50 nodes
and beyond that, it will probably take too long to finish the detection. For example, as
the group 10’s data shows in fig:4.10. In the simulation environment, the worst case
for the 100 nodes is that the system needs 190.7 seconds to deal with. In real-world
environment, if we take consider of the network connection quality, transaction payload
size, vehicle completion of the verification of voted data, the IOT generated vehicle track
record and other factors. It probably makes the system use 10 more minutes to finish the
detection process. Imagine which vehicle will stay in a cross road over 5 minutes?
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
27
==PAGE:36==
5
Conclusion and future work
This chapter will summarize our work in this paper and discuss the limitations of the current
work and the future work of this system.
• What we achieved
1. First of all, we conducted a survey on the current field of the combination of
blockchain and vehicular network, and found that consortium blockchain is very
suitable for the solution of it, and it can resist most attacks. During the research,
we noticed that the map security is an important field of the vehicular network
especially in the field of the intelligent vehicle/autonomous driving. However,
we did not find any research related to map security on the blockchain-based
vehicular network. It brought us some inspiration for our work.
2. Our solution is to design an intrusion detection system for the consortium blockchain-
based vehicular network, so as to ensure the security of map data in the vehic-
ular network, and avoid the tampering of map data or malicious upload of error
information. Based on our comparison of classical intrusion detection methods,
we are inspired by the specifications-based intrusion detection. Combined with
our understanding of the HD map in the vehicular network, we defined the legal
operation and malicious operation of users in the system, so as to design our
detection rules.
3. We implemented the logic of detection by designing smart contract to achieve
Two-round vote process. Then we implemented a blockchain network with
three nodes to verify the availability of our detection system. We analyzed
the accuracy of the system detection results and obtained the possible inter-
ference factors, and we concluded that the system would not produce false
positive detection. In order to study the real-world scalability of the system, we
designed a stress test experiment on the system. We found the relationship
between the number of nodes and the transaction volume, based on which we
designed the experimental data set and finally we concluded that the system
could accommodate at least 50 nodes in real deployment environment.
• Limitations and future work
1. The biggest flaw in our system right now is the inability to resolve malicious
nodes that deliberately do not participate in the vote. When analyzing the ac-
curacy of the system, we purposed that there might be nonvoters in the sys-
tem. Since the processing method we set for malicious nodes is to freeze, if
we freeze nonvoters, it is very likely that the system will freeze legal nodes that
cannot vote due to network reasons accidentally. It will reduce the number of
legal nodes in the system and undermine the premise of a blockchain system.
Hence, in the future, we will design a new punish mechanism to take the place
of freeze. The basic idea is that we design a credit management system, each
node will have a credit attribute and if the node votes and the majority of the
nodes agree with the result, then its credit will increase, and vice versa. If the
node does not vote, the credit of the nonvoter will decrease. The credit of the
nodes will be taken into account in the voting process, and we can carry out
the weighting calculation, so that the votes of the nodes with high credit will
28
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:37==
be more important in the final result. On the other hand, even if a legal node
fails to participate in one vote for some reason, its credit is reduced and its
credit will increase in the next vote. Through the credit management system,
we can better weaken the influence of malicious nodes in the system to limit
its malicious behaviors.
2. In order to better simulate the real environment, we should conduct the ex-
periment of system scalability on the platform using commercial consensus
algorithm to study the influence of different consensus algorithm in the future.
Moreover, we should provide a more realistic network environment for simula-
tion, so as to explore the impact of network’ speed on system scalability.
3. The current transaction payload is relatively simple. Since we have no actual
data source, we only require nodes to upload the hash value of relevant data
in the current transaction. If we can cooperate with map manufacturers in the
future, we will redesign the transaction payload. We should study how the track
record of nodes can be regarded as a proof. This means whether there should
be an audit process in the subsequent system, and the audit object is the track
record provided by nodes in the second round vote.
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
29
==PAGE:38==
Bibliography
[1]
Karthikeyan Ganesan et al. “5G V2X Architecture and Radio Aspects”. In: 2019
IEEE Conference on Standards for Communications and Networking (CSCN). 2019,
pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/CSCN.2019.8931319.
[2]
Syed S. Husain et al. “Ultra-High Reliable 5G V2X Communications”. In: IEEE Com-
munications Standards Magazine 3.2 (2019), pp. 46–52. DOI: 10.1109/MCOMSTD.
2019.1900008.
[3]
Yanja Dajsuren et al. “Security for V2X”. In: Automotive Systems and Software En-
gineering State of the art and future trends. Springer, 2019, pp. 283–294.
[4]
Isaac Agudo, Manuel Montenegro-Gómez, and Javier Lopez. “A Blockchain Ap-
proach for Decentralized V2X (D-V2X)”. In: IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Tech-
nology 70.5 (2021), pp. 4001–4010. DOI: 10.1109/TVT.2020.3046640.
[5]
Yong Yuan and Fei-Yue Wang. “Towards blockchain-based intelligent transportation
systems”. In: 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC). 2016, pp. 2663–2668. DOI: 10.1109/ITSC.2016.7795984.
[6]
Geroni Diego. Private blockchain vs consortium blockchain. Sept. 2021. URL: https:
//101blockchains.com/private-blockchain-vs-consortium-blockchain/.
[7]
Adrian Hofmann et al. Security implications of consortium blockchains: The case of
ethereum networks. Dec. 2021. URL: https://www.jipitec.eu/issues/jipitec-12-4-
2021/5453.
[8]
Harsha Vardhan -. HD Maps: New age maps Powering Autonomous vehicles. Oct.
2019. URL: https://www.geospatialworld.net/article/hd-maps-autonomous-vehicles/.
[9]
Ahmad Hammoud et al. “AI, Blockchain, and Vehicular Edge Computing for Smart
and Secure IoV: Challenges and Directions”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Magazine
3.2 (2020), pp. 68–73. DOI: 10.1109/IOTM.0001.1900109.
[10]
Elisabeth Uhlemann. “Time for Autonomous Vehicles to Connect [Connected Ve-
hicles]”. In: IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine 13.3 (2018), pp. 10–13. DOI:
10.1109/MVT.2018.2848342.
[11]
Vasiliy Elagin et al. “Technological Aspects of Blockchain Application for Vehicle-to-
Network”. In: Information 11.10 (Sept. 2020), p. 465. DOI: 10.3390/info11100465.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390%2Finfo11100465.
[12]
Benjamin Leiding, Parisa Memarmoshrefi, and Dieter Hogrefe. “Self-Managed and
Blockchain-Based Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct.
UbiComp ’16. Heidelberg, Germany: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016,
pp. 137–140. ISBN: 9781450344623. DOI: 10.1145/2968219.2971409. URL: https:
//doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/2968219.2971409.
[13]
N. Modiri. “The ISO reference model entities”. In: IEEE Network 5.4 (1991), pp. 24–
33. DOI: 10.1109/65.93182.
[14]
R. Bishop. “Intelligent vehicle applications worldwide”. In: IEEE Intelligent Systems
and their Applications 15.1 (2000), pp. 78–81. DOI: 10.1109/5254.820333.
[15]
Andi Zang et al. “Accurate Vehicle Self-Localization in High Definition Map Dataset”.
In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSPATIAL Workshop on High-Precision Maps
and Intelligent Applications for Autonomous Vehicles. AutonomousGIS ’17. Re-
dondo Beach, California: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017. ISBN: 9781450354974.
DOI: 10.1145/3149092.3149094. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/
3149092.3149094.
30
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:39==
[16]
Fabian Poggenhans et al. “Lanelet2: A high-definition map framework for the future
of automated driving”. In: 2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (ITSC). 2018, pp. 1672–1679. DOI: 10.1109/ITSC.2018.8569929.
[17]
Meital Ben Sinai et al. “Exploiting Social Navigation”. In: CoRR abs/1410.0151 (2014).
arXiv: 1410.0151. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.0151.
[18]
Stamatis Karnouskos and Florian Kerschbaum. “Privacy and Integrity Considera-
tions in Hyperconnected Autonomous Vehicles”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 106.1
(2018), pp. 160–170. DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.2017.2725339.
[19]
Qian Luo et al. “Localization and Navigation in Autonomous Driving: Threats and
Countermeasures”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications 26.4 (2019), pp. 38–45.
DOI: 10.1109/MWC.2019.1800533.
[20]
Weizhi Meng et al. “When Intrusion Detection Meets Blockchain Technology: A Re-
view”. In: IEEE Access 6 (2018), pp. 10179–10188. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.
2799854.
[21]
Nahom Aron Dawit, Sujith Samuel Mathew, and Kadhim Hayawi. “Suitability of
Blockchain for Collaborative Intrusion Detection Systems”. In: 2020 12th Annual
Undergraduate Research Conference on Applied Computing (URC). 2020, pp. 1–
6. DOI: 10.1109/URC49805.2020.9099189.
[22]
Oluwaseyi Ajayi, Obinna Igbe, and Tarek Saadawi. “Consortium Blockchain-Based
Architecture for Cyber-attack Signatures and Features Distribution”. In: 2019 IEEE
10th Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics Mobile Communication Conference
(UEMCON). 2019, pp. 0541–0549. DOI: 10.1109/UEMCON47517.2019.8993036.
[23]
Yurui Cao, Qian Luo, and Jiajia Liu. “Road Navigation System Attacks: A Case
on GPS Navigation Map”. In: ICC 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC). 2019, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/ICC.2019.8761439.
[24]
Stephen C. Stubberud and Kathleen A. Kramer. “Threat assessment for GPS nav-
igation”. In: 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Innovations in Intelligent Sys-
tems and Applications (INISTA) Proceedings. 2014, pp. 287–292. DOI: 10.1109/
INISTA.2014.6873632.
[25]
Roi Mit. Two years since the Tesla GPS hack. Sept. 2021. URL: https://www.
gpsworld.com/two-years-since-the-tesla-gps-hack/.
[26]
Imam Riadi et al. “Block-hash of blockchain framework against man-in-the-middle
attacks”. In: Register: Jurnal Ilmiah Teknologi Sistem Informasi 8 (May 2021), p. 1.
DOI: 10.26594/register.v8i1.2190.
[27]
More Content by Chad Cox. Blockchain: The key to IOT cybersecurity. Feb. 2021.
URL: https://www.insight.tech/content/blockchain-the-key-to-iot-cybersecurity.
[28]
Muhammad Saad et al. “Exploring the Attack Surface of Blockchain: A Comprehen-
sive Survey”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials 22.3 (2020), pp. 1977–
2008. DOI: 10.1109/COMST.2020.2975999.
[29]
David Siegel. Understanding the dao attack. June 2016. URL: https://www.coindesk.
com/learn/2016/06/25/understanding-the-dao-attack/.
[30]
Griffin Mcshane. What is a 51% attack? Oct. 2021. URL: https://www.coindesk.
com/learn/what-is-a-51-attack/.
[31]
Bit2Me Academy. What is a sybil attack? Jan. 2022. URL: https://academy.bit2me.
com/en/what-is-a-sybil-attack/.
[32]
Satoshi Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system”. In: Decentral-
ized Business Review (2008), p. 21260.
[33]
Sam Daley. 34 blockchain applications and real-world use cases disrupting the sta-
tus quo. Aug. 2021. URL: https://builtin.com/blockchain/blockchain-applications.
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
31
==PAGE:40==
[34]
Avinandan Banerjee. Everything you need to know about consortium blockchain.
Nov. 2021. URL: https://www.blockchain-council.org/blockchain/everything-you-
need-to-know-about-consortium-blockchain/.
[35]
Joshua minimalsm. Introduction to smart contracts. Jan. 2022. URL: https://ethereum.
org/en/developers/docs/smart-contracts/.
[36]
Jake Frankenfield. Smart contracts: What you need to know. Feb. 2022. URL: https:
//www.investopedia.com/terms/s/smart-contracts.asp.
[37]
Hung-Jen Liao et al. “Intrusion detection system: A comprehensive review”. In: Jour-
nal of Network and Computer Applications 36.1 (2013), pp. 16–24.
[38]
Prem Uppuluri and R Sekar. “Experiences with specification-based intrusion de-
tection”. In: International Workshop on Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection.
Springer. 2001, pp. 172–189.
[39]
Github .etc. The ordering service¶. 2020. URL: https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.
io/en/release-2.2/orderer/ordering_service.html.
[40]
David Liu. Hyperledger-TWGC/tape: A simple traffic generator for Hyperledger Fab-
ric. Nov. 2020. URL: https://github.com/Hyperledger-TWGC/tape.
32
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
==PAGE:41==
A
Title
Intrusion detection-enabled blockchain based vehicular navigation map system
33
==PAGE:42==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
