==PAGE:1==
Constructing and Updating Multivariate Probability Distribution
Models based on a Regional Soil Database
Orestis Zinas
==PAGE:2==
Arbeit zur Erlangung des Grades eines Master of Science (M.Sc.)
Technischen UniversitГӨt MГјnchen - Denmarks Tekniske Universitet
Constructing and Updating Multivariate Probability Distribution
Models based on a Regional Soil Database
Referent:
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Roberto Cudmani,
Ordinarius fГјr Grundbau, Bodenmechanik,
Felsmechanik und Tunnelbau
Supervisor:
Andreas Witty, M.Sc.
Co-supervisor:
Associate Prof. Dr.-Ing Varvara Zania, DTU
Author:
Orestis Zinas
Aschauer Str. 22
81549 MГјnchen
orestis.zinas@gmail.com
MГјnchen
31.03.2022
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the potential of multivariate probabilistic models
based on a compiled regional soil database, to characterize the correlation behavior between
laboratory measured soil parameters, and to provide support in site-specific design decisions.
To do this, the study adopts basic principles of statistical and Bayesian inference, but also
implements state-of-the-art methods and simulation techniques as these are proposed in
(Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019; Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020), to construct
site-specific multivariate probability distributions, by utilizing real-life soil data, under
Multivariate, Unique, Sparse, Incomplete and potentially Corrupted (MUSIC) characteristics.
The adopted hybridization approach (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019), keeps a balance between
two multivariate models: a regional multivariate distribution, and a site-specific distribution
constructed from sparse site measurements. The Bayesian approach of Ching, K. K. Phoon,
Khan, et al., 2020, is based on an improved regional multivariate model that reduces the
uncertainty when conditioned on site observations. Both models rely solely on data, i.e. they
belong to Machine Learning methods, while they operate under the Bayesian framework,
allowing strict characterization of uncertainties. Simulation results from both models, showed
that it is possible to capture, localise and reduce uncertainties in correlations between design
parameters and soil index properties, even when few and sparse measurements are available
at the site. Both methods provide updated marginal distributions that allow site-specific
predictions, while updated marginal statistics, computed from a large number of simulated
soil samples, indicated that most coefficients of variation (CoVs), fall within recommended
ranges of published guidelines.
i
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
A brief introduction to Reliability Based Design in geotechnical engineering
.
3
2.1.1
Reliability in Design codes and standards
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Uncertainties in geotechnical engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Geotechnical Site Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Regulatory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Sources of geotechnical uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.4
Value of Information in Site investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Probabilistic site characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Bayesian Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Multivariate distribution of dependent random variables
. . . . . . . .
16
2.3.3
The Multivariate distribution conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.4
Bayesian Machine Learning: The baseline model
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.5
Recent advancements in Data-driven Site characterization . . . . . . . .
21
3
Methods Description
23
3.1
Learning parameters of probability distributions from data
. . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Method of Moments (MoM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3
Bayesian estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.4
The Predictive distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Selection of probability models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Joint distribution of dependent random variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
The inversion method: generating samples of a single random variable
32
3.3.2
Coupling random variables through copulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.3
Gaussian Copula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.4
The Nataf model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.5
Illustration: Sampling joint lognormal distributed variables . . . . . . .
38
3.4
Constructing a Multivariate distribution with JohnsonвҖҷs marginal distributions
45
3.4.1
The JohnsonвҖҷs system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.4.2
JohnsonвҖҷs member selection and estimation of distribution parameters
47
3.4.3
Hypothesis testing: The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
3.4.4
The multivariate distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.5
Bayesian framework for Multivariate distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.5.1
The multivariate distribution conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.5.2
Conjugate priors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.5.3
The Gibbs Sampler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.5.4
The predictive distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.5.5
Predictive PDF of the generic database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.5.6
Site-specific predictive PDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.5.7
Hybridization of Site-specific and Generic Multivariate PDFs . . . . . .
67
4
Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
70
4.1
Regional Database overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.1.1
Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.1.2
Descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.1.3
TUM-TRX_CLAY_22 Regional Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5
Results
87
5.1
Constructing a regional multivariate model with different marginal distributions 87
5.1.1
Identifying the best-fit marginals for the shear strength parameters
. .
87
5.1.2
The multivariate regional distribution based on the Nataf model . . . .
94
5.2
Constructing a site-specific Multivariate probability distribution for triaxial
testing parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.2.1
The regional multivariate distribution based on JohnsonвҖҷs marginals . . 101
5.2.2
The quasi-Site-specific model based on Bayesian updating with conju-
gate priors and Gibbs Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
5.2.3
Marginal distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
5.3
Constructing a site-specific Multivariate probability distribution for the undrained
shear strength from UC tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
5.3.1
The regional multivariate distribution based on JohnsonвҖҷs marginals . . 123
5.3.2
The quasi-Site-specific model based on Bayesian updating with conju-
gate priors and Gibbs Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
5.3.3
Marginal distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
6
Summary and conclusion
134
6.1
Thesis contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
6.2
Future improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
6.3
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
List of Figures
138
List of Tables
142
Bibliography
144
iii
==PAGE:6==
1 Introduction
Reliability methods in geotechnical design are gradually gaining more attention among the
geotechnical community over the recent years. Design standards and codes continuously
introducing and revising parts targeting to incorporate probabilistic methods in geotechical
practice, as an effective means to account for uncertainties that unavoidably arise in every
stage of a geotechnical project. Site investigation is located on the basis of geotechnical RBD.
A sound geotechnical analysis necessitates the systematic uncertainty quantification in the
inputs of geotechnical models, which can only be achieved through the application of more
rigorous probabilistic methods for analyzing efficiently site investigation products. Determin-
istic approaches that neglect uncertainties lead to overestimation of failure probabilities in
geotechnical structures and consequently to increased design costs and not sustainable solu-
tions. Simplistic statistical methods are not sufficient to characterize uncertainties associated
with the inherent variability of the soil material and the limited amount of data collected in
typical site investigation programs.
The complexity of the soil material is reflected in the measured properties and derived
parameters from laboratory and in-situ tests. Soil data are by nature difficult to handle and
special treatment is needed to extract valuable information from incomplete soil databases.
This study investigates the potential of multivariate probabilistic methods applied on a soil
database compiled entirely from laboratory testsвҖҷ measurements, to providing meaningful
insights on the behavior and statistical dependence of soil properties in a regional geograph-
ical scale, with ultimate goal the effective support of site-specific predictions in real-life
geotechnical applications.
Topics studied in this thesis include the compilation of a multivariate regional database, the
Bayesian framework to compute distributions of soil parameters based on measurements, the
construction of flexible multivariate distributions of correlated test indices, and the application
of the Bayesian framework along with advanced sampling algorithms to simultaneously
update several soil parameters based on site-investigation data. The thesis is arranged into 5
parts:
Chapter 2 starts with a brief introduction to the main principles of geotechnical RBD.
The importance of site investigation is highlighted and its main aspects are discussed in
detail. Extended literature review on design standards, and expertsвҖҷ opinions on uncertainty
quantification associated with site investigations, and geotechnical engineering in general, is
cited. Subsequently, an introduction to the Bayesian framework and its main elements, for
learning and updating parameters of distributions is provided. The role of soil databases and
the importance of constructing multivariate distributions of soil parameters is highlighted,
and the basic theoretical principles and assumptions are discussed. The chapter ends with
an introduction to the methods proposed in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; Ching and
1
==PAGE:7==
1 Introduction
K. K. Phoon, 2019; Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020), that allow effective updating of
multivariate probabilistic models, based on the Bayesian framework and advanced sampling
techniques.
Chapter 3 presents the mathematical framework of the adopted methods in this study.
Starting with the basic terminologies of Statistical inference, the chapter builds progressively
towards the construction of joint distributions with the Nataf model and the Gaussian
copula assumption. Detailed illustrative examples are provided with analytical computations
and Python coding, and the basic methodology for simulating samples from multivariate
distributions is given. Subsequently, the multivariate distribution construction based on pre-
described JohnsonвҖҷs marginals, as proposed in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014) is presented,
and an illustrative example explaining the conventional updating process of the distribution
based on a set of site investigation measurements is provided.
In the following stage,
the chapter introduces the proposed methods by (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019; Ching,
K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020), that provide an effective means to handle and extract
valuable information from soil databases, and explains the theoretical basis for constructing
"Site-specific" multivariate models, able to characterize the uncertainty in cross-correlations
between soil parameters, and to allow site-specific predictions. The basic principles of the
methods, conjugate priors, advanced sampling techniques such as the Gibbs Sampler, and
predictive distributions are explained with the assistance of Python coding.
Chapter 4 provides an overview of the constructed regional database, containing laboratory
measurements on triaxial testing parameters, and undrained shear strength from unconfined
compression tests. The basic assumptions and the preparatory data processing steps are
noted down in detail. Descriptive statistics of the regional database, along with Pearson
sample correlation coefficients are provided, and potentially correlated soil parameters are
identified to be used in the analysis.
Chapter 5 presents the results of this study. A regional multivariate Nataf distribution is
constructed based on best-fit marginal distributions. Confidence intervals for bivariate corre-
lations are provided based on simulated samples from the joint distribution. Subsequently,
a 11-parameter regional Nataf distribution is constructed based on triaxial testing measure-
ments and pre-described JohnsonвҖҷs marginals. A site-specific multivariate distribution is then
constructed from sparse measurements from a target local site. The hybridization framework
is adopted to obtain a quasi-site-specific model and simulation of soil samples is performed
to characterize cross-correlations and assist predictions at the site. Bayesian Analysis with
conjugate priors and Gibbs sampling is adopted, as well, to obtain a quasi-site-specific model.
The results of the two approaches are compared and updated Confidence Intervals for lo-
calised bivariate correlations are computed. Updated marginal distributions are provided
along with point estimates of useful marginal statistics form the simulated samples. The same
modeling approach is adopted to investigate the cross-correlations between the undrained
shear strength and soil index properties.
Chapter 6 is a summary of the most relevant results and conclusions of this thesis, and
provides recommendations for improvements in future applications.
2
==PAGE:8==
2 Theoretical Background
2.1 A brief introduction to Reliability Based Design in geotechnical
engineering
In a design approach that follows reliability principles, uncertain components of a system,
such as loads and soil strengths and model uncertainties are modelled as random variables,
through probability distribution functions pdfs. Figure 2.1 provides a simplified illustration of
the general stochastic problem according to K. K. Phoon, 2008.
Figure 2.1: General stochastic problem, based on K. K. Phoon, 2008
The main objective of RBD codes is the determination of the failure probability, with the
term failure referring to the case where one or a set of performance requirements are not
fulfilled. Since geotechnical RBD evolves from structural reliability, it can be useful to briefly
present the main elements of the general reliability problem from a mathematical point of
view. A failure mode of an engineering system, can be represented by a limit state function
g(X), where X = [X1; X2; ...; Xn] is the vector of all uncertain parameters included in the
analysis of the problem. These variables can be divided into resistance variables which may
be represented as function of a number of uncertain geotechnical parameters, e.g. friction
angle, undrained shear strength of a clay, and variables that represent the loads. In the case
of a complex system, e.g a geotechnical structure, in which different mechanisms can lead
to failure, multiple limit state functions must be constructed to capture the system behavior.
3
==PAGE:9==
2 Theoretical Background
In the simple case of one failure mode, the failure event corresponds to a domain в„ҰF in the
outcome space of X and is defined as (Straub, 2014a),
F = {g(X) вүӨ0} = в„ҰF.
(2.1)
The probability of X taking any value that falls in the domain в„ҰF corresponds to the probability
of failure, and thus it can be derived as the integral of the joint probability density function f (x)
of X, over в„ҰF,
Pr(F) =
Z
в„ҰF
f (x) dx1 dx2 ... dxn.
(2.2)
The reliability index can be expressed as,
ОІ = вҲ’ОҰвҲ’1 [Pr(F)]
(2.3)
where вҲ’ОҰвҲ’1 the inverse standard normal cumulative distribution function (CDF). In most
real problems, the integral of equation 2.2 cannot be evaluated analytically, e.g. for non-linear
limit state functions. It may even not be possible to use numerical integration or simplified
Monte Carlo methods when a large number of uncertain variables are involved due to high
computation cost. Considering also cases where the resistance components are derived
through Numerical analysis, e.g. Finite Elements method, the need for a more effective
computation methods can be recognized. In these cases advanced sampling techniques
should be considered to address the problemвҖҷs complexity (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2012).
2.1.1 Reliability in Design codes and standards
Design codes such as the Eurocode 7 (EN 1997-1:2004: 2004; EN 1997-2:2007: 2004), or other
standards such as Geocode 21 (Honjo et al., 2009) (Japanese Geotechnical Society), Annex
D of ISO2394: 2015 (ISO2394:1973/1986/1998/2015, 2015; K. K. Phoon and Retief, 2016),
provide the basis for implementation of probabilistic methods in geotechnical engineering. In
the European standard for geotechnical design (EN 1997-1:2004: 2004), limit state concepts and
reliability based approaches for geotechnical design (RBD) are introduced. The two design
situations, i) Ultimate Limit State, ii) Serviceability Limit State that are proposed, are based on
characteristic values and/or partial factors for the loads, capacities and soil properties. In
(EN 1997-1:2004: 2004) it is stated that "Soil variability is described via probability distribution
within the framework of uncertainty quantification instead of constant safety factors".
Calibration of partial safety factors
The approach of using partial factors in geotechnical engineering, considering ultimate
limit state, suggests that the design value is determined by dividing the characteristic value
of a geotechnicial property (e.g undrained shear strength) with a partial factor, and the
geotechnical capacity based on this design value should be larger than the design load.
According to the Eurocodes, the calibration of these partial factors can be performed using
deterministic, semi-probabilistic or full probabilistic approaches, as can be shown in Figure
4
==PAGE:10==
2 Theoretical Background
2.2. In the traditional deterministic approach, empirical rules and methods can be used to
calibrate the partial safety factors.
The probabilistic approach provides the basis for accounting for uncertainties in the model
inputs. It can be divided into two subcategories, the semi-probabilistic approach and the full
probabilistic approach, which can be adopted depending on the problem complexity, time
limitation and available resources. In the first approach, reliability methods, such as design
point methods (see First Reliability Method (FORM), SORM) (e.g. K. K. Phoon and Retief,
2016; Straub, 2014a; Honjo et al., 2009) or the Quantile Value Method (QVM) (K. K. Phoon
and Ching, 2016) can be used to calibrate resistance or partial factors and achieve a required
reliability index. In the full-probabilistic approach, reliability is derived by the probabilistic
calculation of the failure probability, the random variables are represented by probability
distributions, and more sophisticated analysis methods are utilized, i.e. simulation techniques,
e.g. Monte Carlo and subset simulation methods, and optimization with relevant to the
problem constraints. Honjo et al., 2009 summarizes the accuracy levels that can be achieved
with reliability methods, by classifying RBD into three classes as shown in table 2.1.
Level
Basic variables
Reliability evaluation
verification
III
Random variables
& probability distribution
Failure probability
Acceptable reliability level,
optimisation Economical,
environmental, etc
II
Random variables
& moments (i.e. mean,
standard deviation)
Reliability index
Target reliability index
I
Deterministic variables
Partial safety factors
Verification formula
Table 2.1: Reliability Levels according to Honjo et al., 2009
Figure 2.2: Partial factor calibration approaches according to EN 1997-2:2007: 2004
5
==PAGE:11==
2 Theoretical Background
Characteristic values of geotechnical properties
According to Orr, T. L. and Farrell, E. R., 1999, there are three main stages in the
determination of a characteristic value for a geotechnical parameter: 1) measured value, 2)
derived value and 3) characteristic value, which are illustrated in Figure 2.3a.
(a) EC7 according to Orr, T. L. and Farrell, E. R., 1999,
based on Honjo et al., 2009
(b) Geocode 21, adapted from Honjo et al., 2009
Figure 2.3: Characteristic and design values in design standards
вҖў measured value: measured properties from site investigation in field and laboratory tests
вҖў derived value: parameters derived from transformation model (geotechnical correlation)
applied on the measured values
вҖў characteristic value: In (EN 1997-1:2004: 2004) it is stated that "characteristic values of soil
and rock properties shall take account of the variabilities of the property values". Cautious
estimate: This is a part of the guidelines in (EN 1997-1:2004: 2004) that gives rise to
many questions on how to select such values
вҖў design value: Parameters to be used in design, derived from division of characteristic
values with an associated safety factor
Despite the fact that the Eurocode guidelines point to the direction of considering statistical
methods in geotechnical applications, it is acknowledged that there is lack of detailed guidance
on how to achieve that with actual data. This is one reason that Eurocode 7 is currently
6
==PAGE:12==
2 Theoretical Background
undergoing revision, aiming to include a more detailed documentation for the facilitation of
reliability and statistical based methods in practice. The reader is referred to Orr, 2017 for
extended discussion on the selection of characteristic values and the current advancements in
the Eurocodes.
This tendency towards probabilistic analysis and adoption of reliability principles is in-
creasingly promoted by the regulators. A detailed characterization of the geological site
supported by a more in-depth probabilistic analysis can provide the basis for optimizing
design decisions in major projects and complex ground conditions. (A. Huang and Wand,
2003) highlights the significant contribution of the construction sector to the CO2 production,
as it accounts for 23% of the total emissions, sourcing from economic activities in a global
scale. More sustainable solutions, in terms of balancing safety, economic, environmental risks
and design costs, can be achieved by quantifying and maximizing the value of the information
associated with site investigation.
2.2 Uncertainties in geotechnical engineering
2.2.1 Geotechnical Site Investigation
Three types of models are typically considered in a geotechnical analysis.
The use of
engineering models is important for identifying, understanding and communicating the
critical parameters, factors and interactions typically involved in a geotechnical project.
Several representations of these models can be found in the literature (Burland, 1987;
Keaton, 2013; Sullivan, 2010; Knill, 2003; H. C. Juang, 2019) and one of these is illustrated
in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Geologic model, ground model and geotechnical model, adapted from (Keaton,
2013; H. C. Juang, 2019)
In Figure 2.4 the geologic model represents the involved site-specific geologic conditions. The
7
==PAGE:13==
2 Theoretical Background
ground model contains the geological information and the embedded engineering parameters,
which are collected during a site investigation. The geotechnical model is based on the geological
and the ground model with the derived design parameters, and it is used to estimate the
performance of the project related geotechnical structure. In (Parry et al., 2014), (IAEG)
these three models constitute the engineering geological model used for the scope of the site
geotechnical project. Keaton, 2013 emphasizes on the role of the engineering geology and
consequently the geologic model in a geotechnical site characterization study.
Preliminary geologic studies and reports on the local or regional ground conditions provide
the initial hypothesis of the site geology, which is expressed by the geologic model. These
activities can be described by the term exploration (Baecher and Christian, 2003). The
hypothesis can be revised as additional information is collected, and the initially favorable
locations for soil boring and sampling for laboratory tests can be decided through this
process. Thereafter, the additional information obtained during site-investigation can be
utilized to test and refine the engineering geologic model. In (Parry et al., 2014; Sullivan,
2010; Baynes, 1999; Stapledon, 1982; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2012) the importance of
obtaining additional information and continuously testing the model throughout all stages of
the project, including the construction and post-construction phases, known as monitoring, is
emphasized. According to Baecher and Christian, 2003, the site characterization process
contains three main stages:
вҖў reconnaissance: desk study for collecting information about the site geology
вҖў preliminarily investigation: collection of quantitative information mainly through con-
ducting a limited number of borings and geophysical surveys. The goal is to test the
qualitative hypotheses in the first stage
вҖў detailed investigation: more accurate information is obtained by intensive boring pro-
grams, detailed maps and in-situ and laboratory tests. This information is then used to
test the quantitative hypotheses of the preliminary investigation stage
Examples of sources of prior information that can be utilized during the desk-study and
site reconnaissance based on (Trautmann and F. Kulhawy, 1983; Clayton et al., 1983), are
summarized in Table 2.2.
2.2.2 Regulatory
The geological complexity of the site and the objectives of the project are the critical factors
that should be considered for the choice of the detail level in the model. The decision on the
model complexity should be in line with the general framework of promoting reliability and
ensuring an acceptable safety level. The current guidelines (EN 1997-1:2004: 2004) provide
recommendations for three main geotechnical categories:
вҖў Small and relatively simple structures (Geotechnical Category 1): Risks are considered
negligible, engineering experience and qualitative site characterization can be utilized
8
==PAGE:14==
2 Theoretical Background
Type
Source
Geology
Geological maps
Geological reports
Geological publications
Regional guides
Air photographs
Soil survey maps and records
Geotechnical properties
Geotechnical reports
Academic journals
Previous ground investigation reports
Groundwater conditions
Topographical maps
Air photographs
Well records
Previous ground investigation reports
Table 2.2: Sources of prior information in the desk-study and site reconnaissance stages,
adapted from (Cao, Y. Wang, and D. Li, 2016)
вҖў Conventional structures and foundations, e.g. Embankments and earthworks (Geotech-
nical Category 2): quantitative site investigation through routine borings, field and
laboratory tests and analysis should be carried out for testing the design requirements
вҖў Major civil engineering projects in complex ground, e.g. deep excavations, tunnels in
soft ground (Geotechnical Category 3): Larger amount of information should be derived
through extensive site investigation and high level of detail should be incorporated into
the models, more sophisticated analyses
2.2.3 Sources of geotechnical uncertainty
It is acknowledged that every stage in a site characterization process, and every model in
Figure 2.4 is associated with a degree of uncertainty. The latter can be classified into two
general groups (Straub, 2020; Baecher and Christian, 2003):
вҖў Aleatory uncertainty: Uncertainties of this type cannot be reduced even as knowledge
in site investigation process. Characteristic example of uncertainty of this type in
geotechnical engineering, is the inherent variability of the soil material.
вҖў Epistemic uncertainty: The uncertainties that belong to this class can be reduced as the
state of knowledge improves. Examples of uncertainty categories that belong to this
class are the measurement error, transformation uncertainty, statistical uncertainty, knowledge
uncertainty.
Figure 2.5 was compiled from several uncertainty representations in the literature (K. K.
Phoon and F. H. Kulhawy, 1999; K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015; Baecher and Christian,
2003; Honjo et al., 2009; Cao, Y. Wang, and S. K. Au, 2011), to illustrate the main sources
ofgeotechnical uncertainty and its various subcategories.
9
==PAGE:15==
2 Theoretical Background
Figure 2.5: Propagation of geotechnical uncertainty, modified from (K. K. Phoon and F. H.
Kulhawy, 1999; K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015; Baecher and Christian, 2003;
Honjo et al., 2009; Y. Wang, Cao, and D. Li, 2016; Huber, M., 2013)
Uncertainties in the geologic model are typically associated with the limited site specific in-
formation and the knowledge, experience and ability of the responsible engineering geologist
to sufficiently identify a set of concepts that could possibly affect the specific project (Muller
and Fecker, 1979; Baynes, 1999), by utilizing regional or local maps and sections, reports and
data (Keaton, 2013; Grigoriu et al., 1987; Spry et al., 1988). Such influence factors could
be for example, the ground composition, the materials and the main geological units, the
geological history and the geological and groundwater conditions at the site. (Parry et al.,
2014; Bock, 2006; Hoek, 1999; Einstein and Baecher, 1982).
The ground model, or observational engineering geological model is dependent on the information
produced during the site-specific investigation and the quality of the proposed geologic model.
This information is constrained by the the amount and quality of the available observations
and measurements obtained from the site investigation, which are furthermore affected by
the 3D spatial and temporal fluctuations of the ground materials. Hence, this model can be
significantly affected by measurement errors and inherent soil variability, as can be seen in
Figure 2.5.
The geotechnical model most often results as a simplification of the ground model, which
involves engineering judgement and assumptions about the geological conditions, soil layers,
10
==PAGE:16==
2 Theoretical Background
soil classification and geotechnical parameters in absence of sufficient and good quality
data, resulting to additional uncertainty (transformation and statistical uncertainty) in the
engineering geological model (Keaton, 2013; Parry et al., 2014; Jaksa et al., 2003).
The standard indicator of uncertainty of a geotechnical property X can be represented by
the coefficient of variation. (K. K. Phoon and F. H. Kulhawy, 1999) pointed out that the COV
in a design parameter must be a function of the natural variability of the site, measurement
error related to the performed test type, transformation uncertainty associated with the
geotechnical correlation used to relate the site observations to the design parameter. The
statistical uncertainty that arises due to possible limited amount of site data can be considered
as an additional component of the total COV, as (LГӨnsivaara et al., 2021),
COV2
X = COV2
inh,X + COV2
err,X + COV2
trans,X + COV2
stat,X.
(2.4)
Different representations of the total COV can be found in the literature (e.g. Orr, 2017). In
(EN 1997-1:2004: 2004) the first three components of 2.4 are considered explicitly.
2.2.4 Value of Information in Site investigation
Geotechnical engineering relies heavily on "site-specificity." Sound geotechnical practice
necessitates the analysis and evaluation of site data. Design codes around the world are
continuously introducing parts that are targeting on the effective exploitation of the site
investigation products. Probabilistic Decision analysis based on site data (measurements and
observations), for quantifying the value of information that is associated with a site investigation
strategy, can be utilized to optimize the type, number, and location of observations, support
with quantitative measures the decision making (Straub, 2014b; Straub and Welpe, 2014;
Straub, 2020; Baecher and Christian, 2003).
In (ISO2394:1973/1986/1998/2015, 2015; K. K. Phoon and Retief, 2016) site investigation
is recognized as the basis for applying reliability methods in geotechnical engineering. A
through site-investigation program can provide good quality information in geotechnical
analysis and it can lead to significant reduction in the uncertainties of soil parameters, e.g. in
terms of COV reduction. K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015; Ching, D. Li, et al., 2016 suggest
that site investigation should be addressed merely as an investement item, rather than cost
element in a geotechnical projects. According to Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2012 design savings
are linked to the site investigation efforts and these are related to two typical approaches for
introducing additional information:
вҖў Quantitative increase of information by conducting several independent tests (e.g. field
CPT, SPT and laboratory tests). This approach allows cross-validation of the estimated
parameter (Cao, Y. Wang, and D. Q. Li, 2016). Uncertainties can also be reduced by
linking field and laboratory test data using existing geotechnical correlations in the
literature, e.g. (F. Kulhawy and P. Mayne, 1990; K. K. Phoon and F. H. Kulhawy, 1999;
P. W. Mayne et al., 2001; Djoenaidi, 1985). This aspect is particularly important in
case of strong dependencies between parameters, where a decision on measuring an
additional parameter can be supported by the quantification of the investment value, in
terms of COV reduction (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014).
11
==PAGE:17==
2 Theoretical Background
вҖў Qualitative increase of the information, by increasing the number of sampling/testing
locations in a specific test type. This approach can enhance precision in the estimation
of geotechnical parameters.
In addition, a good strategy should also reflect a balance between performing different
tests in different locations and conducting different tests in the same location (Ching, D.
Li, et al., 2016; K. K. Phoon, 2020). While the first approach gathers more data on the
inherent variability of the siteвҖҷs ground, the second approach introduces information about
the cross-correlation between the various test indices.
2.3 Probabilistic site characterization
Since these practices are simultaneously performed in a typical site investigation, the resulting
data usually include observations/measurements for multiple parameters. For instance,
data from boreholes often include SPT-N values and simple laboratory tests can provide
measurements for Atterberg limits. On the other hand, it is also common that a usual site
investigation program in small and medium sized projects does not provide a large number of
measurements. In addition, the collected samples correspond only to a very small proportion
of the total soil volume at the site. Limited number of laboratory tests can be performed
on the soil samples as well, due to the available budget constraints (Ching, K. K. Phoon,
Khan, et al., 2020; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; Baecher and Christian, 2003; Nawari
and Liang, 2000; Y. Wang, S. Au, et al., 2010).
One can argue that it is not possible to obtain meaningful statistics, such as ranges for
the mean values with confidence, which for example can be used for the determination of
characteristic values according to (EN 1997-1:2004: 2004). An experienced engineer may be
able to combine information from literature and data from other sources, which can judge as
similar to the site at hand, to extend the limited site-specific information (K. K. Phoon and
Retief, 2016). As pointed out, the soil data are in general not independent (K. K. Phoon and
Retief, 2016; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2012), and thus in geotechnical practice, correlations
(transformation models) for the derivation of a design parameter are adopted, such as for
instance, derivation of friction angle of sand from SPT-N values. However, in the absence of
sufficient and good quality site investigation data, it is very difficult to create local correlations
with confidence. In this context global correlations from literature are usually utilized.
The connection between the various uncertainties sources in Figure 2.5 and these usual
practices is evident:
1. Every performed test is associated with errors, which are reflected in the measured
properties.
2. Significant statistical uncertainty arises if one relies on limited measurements to obtain
reliable statistics
3. It is not a trivial task to identify and incorporate in the study information from com-
parable sites. Advanced engineering geology background may be needed to identify
comparable ground conditions in different published studies and data.
12
==PAGE:18==
2 Theoretical Background
4. One has to be very cautious when applying generic correlations (e.g. (F. Kulhawy and
P. Mayne, 1990; K. K. Phoon and F. H. Kulhawy, 1999), since they are usually based
on databases compiled from many sites with various soil types and conditions and
they can introduce a large amount of transformation uncertainty (Ching, K. K. Phoon,
Khan, et al., 2020; EN 1997-1:2004: 2004).
5. Construction of local correlations based on limited site specific data can introduce a
significant amount of statistical uncertainty.
6. Soils are naturally variable not only between different locations at a site but even in
the same homogenous layers, as well (Baecher and Christian, 2003). The spatial
variability cannot be quantified with simplified methods
2.3.1 Bayesian Framework
The systematic quantification of uncertainties in every stage of a geotechnical project necessi-
tates the adoption of more rigorous probabilistic analyses. Bayesian Analysis is increasingly
gaining attention among researchers and practitioners, as it provides the framework to effec-
tively incorporate and update prior engineering knowledge and information about ground
parameters, using site investigation products (measurements, data) to draw inferences from
them and explicitly quantify and possibly reduce the involved uncertainties. Apart from
parameters updating from sampling/measurements, known as Bayesian Inference, many
studies have shown that Bayesian methods can be applied to effectively update geotechnical
models, (Bayesian model updating) (Straub, 2020), while they are powerful tools in assessing
the performance of geotechnical systems (e.g. (Papaioannou and Straub, 2012; L. Zhang,
2004; J. Zhang et al., 2012; L. Wang et al., 2012; J. Zhang et al., 2009; Cheung and W. H. Tang,
2005; L. Zhang, 2004)) and well suited for Inverse Analysis to utilize observations collected
through monitoring (Straub, 2020).
Two approaches can be adopted in the Bayesian framework for modeling spatially variable
parameters. In the first method the parameter is modeled by a random variable through a
probability distribution function (PDF). The PDF of the soil parameter reflects the inherent
variability at any location within an assumed statistical homogenous area, i.e within a
homogenous soil layer. Based on prior information and site data it is possible to estimate
and update the statistical moments of the distribution and possibly reduce the statistical
uncertainty, in terms of COV reduction. On the other hand, the spatial dependence between
different locations in the area of interest is not explicitly modeled and the inherent variability
cannot be reduced (e.g. (Straub and Papaioannou, 2015; Papaioannou and Straub, 2012;
Y. Wang and Cao, 2013).
Explicit characterization of the inherent variability can only be achieved with the random
field approach (Papaioannou and Straub, 2012; Straub, Papaioannou, and Betz, 2017;
Y. Wang, Cao, and D. Li, 2016). Considering the basic case of 1-D spatial fluctuation (i.e.
vertical direction), the variable parameter is modeled by a random field X(z) at each location
z, e.g. (Straub and Papaioannou, 2015; Baecher and Christian, 2008; Papaioannou and
Straub, 2017). The random field consists of discrete set of spatially correlated random
13
==PAGE:19==
2 Theoretical Background
variables at each location, which are represented by a marginal PDF and its parameters, and
a correlation function with a scale of fluctuation parameter, is used to describe the spatial
dependence structure. Figure illustrates the main elements of the Bayesian framework in the
site characterization process, as summarized in (Y. Wang, Cao, and D. Li, 2016).
Figure 2.6: Bayesian updating of a soil parameter, adapted from (Y. Wang, Cao, and D. Li,
2016)
Let fX(x|Оё) denote the PDF of an uncertain geotechnical parameter X dependent on the
unknown distribution parameters Оё. The main components of the Bayesian framework, shown
in 2.6 can be briefly summarized in the following points:
вҖў Prior distribution: The prior distribution can be denoted as (Straub, 2020),
f вҖІ(Оё) = f (Оё)
(2.5)
where Оё corresponds to the vector of the uncertain parameters of the model. Desk-study
and site reconnaissance provide the prior knowledge which is reflected in a quantitative
manner in this distribution. Hence, the prior distribution reflects the uncertainty in
the parameters Оё prior to any site investigation. When the quality and/or amount of
information about the parameter is low, weakly or non-informative priors are selected,
which reflect the large statistical uncertainty (e.g. Cao, Y. Wang, and D. Q. Li, 2016. As
information increases, more sophisticated types of distributions can be utilized.
вҖў Likelihood function, denoted by
Li(Оё) = fX(xi|Оё),
(2.6)
14
==PAGE:20==
2 Theoretical Background
where xi, i = 1, ..., n corresponds to a measurement of the continuous quantity X. The
likelihood function is essential element of the Bayesian framework. It describes the
probability of the measurement/observation outcome, or in other words, it defines
"how likely" is a measurement or observation xi conditional on the possible state of the
uncertain parameters of a probabilistic model Оё (e.g. statistical moments in PDF, scale
of fluctuation in auto-correlation function) (Straub, 2020; Papaioannou and Straub,
2017). If n independent measurements are obtained, the total likelihood is defined as the
product of individual likelihoods (Straub and Papaioannou, 2015),
L(Оё) =
n
вҲҸ
i=1
fX(xi|Оё).
(2.7)
The formulation of the likelihood function depends on i) the type of the probabilistic
modeling approach (random variable or random field), which reflects the inherent
variability of the geotechnical parameter and ii) the deterministic transformation model
used to derive the parameter, in case this was not directly measured in a field/lab test
(Cao, Y. Wang, and D. Li, 2016). The latter is subjected to transformation uncertainty.
вҖў Posterior distribution of Оё, given the measurements x = (x1, ..., xn), denoted by
f вҖІвҖІ(Оё) = f (Оё|x),
(2.8)
Using the Bayes rule, the posterior distribution is proportional to the likelihood function
and the prior distribution,
f вҖІвҖІ(Оё) = cL(Оё) f вҖІ(Оё)
(2.9)
where c is a proportionality constant which ensures that the posterior distribution in-
tegrates to 1, i.e. it is a valid PDF. The posterior distribution quantifies the influence
of the site data to the uncertain soil parameters of the model. In low dimensional
problems, the proportionality constant can be calculated with numerical integration. In
the special cases where conjugate priors can be used to describe the prior distribution of
the parameters, analytical formulation of the posterior distribution is feasible. However,
in problems that involve many parameters, sampling methods are used for calculating
the posterior PDF.
If more data are obtained in a later stage of site investigation, or by monitoring (e.g. mea-
surements of deformations) in construction and post-construction phases (Straub and Pa-
paioannou, 2015), it is possible to sequentially update the prior information. In this case
the posterior PDF derived in the previous step serves as prior PDF for the next updating
process. Several studies have investigated the benefits of Bayesian methods for constructing a
site-specific probabilistic model to estimate a single design soil/rock parameter (e.g. (Y. Wang
and Cao, 2013; Y. Wang, S. Au, et al., 2010; X. Feng and Jimenez, 2014; Cao and Y. Wang,
2014)
15
==PAGE:21==
2 Theoretical Background
2.3.2 Multivariate distribution of dependent random variables
When multivariate data are available in a sufficient quantity, one should consider the con-
struction of a multivariate distribution for the site (e.g. (K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2013;
Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015). A multivariate probabilistic
model offers extended capabilities to site characterization, since it can include information
from all relevant test indices produced in site investigation. Motivations for constructing a
multivariate distribution for practical applications can be for example:
вҖў The estimation of the statistical moments of a design parameter, given multivariate
information (more than one measured parameters) from site investigation
вҖў The consistent modeling of the dependency between soil parameters (e.g. cross correla-
tion), which adds more information than the univariate distribution statistics (mean,
variance, COV). New strong correlations may be discovered, while generic transforma-
tion models can be "localized" to provide more realistic information about the site at
hand. Calculation of updated Confidence Intervals (CI) for the localized "bivariate"
models can reduce the transformation uncertainty in design parameters (e.g. (Ching
and K. K. Phoon, 2014)).
Hence, a multivariate probabilistic model can allow the approximation of the true behavior of
the ground parameters at the site, as closely as possible. However, this comes not without
cost, since constructing a multivariate model is more complex task than defining marginal
distributions.
The most common method to construct a multivariate distribution makes use of the
Gaussian copula concept (e.g. (Embrechts et al., 2001; Nelsen, 2006; Straub, 2014a)). When
the dependent random variables can be described by a Gaussian copula, the Nataf model
(Nataf, 1962; P. L. Liu and Der Kiureghian, 1986) or "translation method" (D. Q. Li, S. B. Wu,
et al., 2012) can be used to construct the multivariate distribution. The initial step in this
method is the marginal transformation of all uncertain parameters to from their physical space
to standard normal space. Let Yi denote an uncertain, non-Normal soil parameter. This can
be translated to an equivalent standard normal variable Xi with the following transformation:
T : Yi вҶ’Xi = ОҰвҲ’1 [FYi(yi)] ,
(2.10)
where Fi denotes the known cumulative distribution function (CDF) of Yi and ОҰвҲ’1 corresponds
to the inverse standard Normal CDF. The set of the transformed variables are correlated
and they assumed to be jointly Normal (Gaussian) distributed. One reason for making this
assumption is that it allows to take advantage of the computationally beneficial properties of
the multivariate Normal distribution. In reality it should be not expected that all geotech-
nical properties are indeed jointly normal distributed, even if they have been marginally
transformed to the normal space. However, by assuming joint normality, the underlying
multivariate normal distribution can be entirely defined for given marginal distributions, i.e.
distribution function of single parameters, and a symmetric correlation coefficient matrix,
let it denoted by RYY, which is usually calculated directly from the data. The most popular
16
==PAGE:22==
2 Theoretical Background
statistic for dependence is the Pearson correlation coefficient which provides a measure of
linear dependency between the uncertain parameters.
The pairwise correlation coefficients in the correlation matrix CXX of the transformed
variables Xi are not identical with the corresponding ones of the Yi (Straub, 2014a) variables
in original space. The Nataf model involves the decomposition of the correlation matrix RXX,
known as the Cholesky decomposition. This is not trivial and the method can collide for
strongly correlated parameters or in high dimensional problems, due to positive-definite
matrix (positive eigenvalues) restriction (e.g. (Lebrun and Dutfoy, 2009b; Trefethen and
Bau, 1997; Lyche, 2020; Straub, 2014a)).
Other transformation methods do exist, such as the Rosenblatt (Rosenblatt, 1952; Hohen-
bichler and Rackwitz, 1981; Lebrun and Dutfoy, 2009a; F. Wang et al., 2017; X. Z. Wu,
2013a) and the Hermite polynomials transformation (Lemaire, 2009; K. K. Phoon, 2006),
which can be applicable in more complex dependency types of variables. Applications of the
latter transformation method can be found in (e.g. (Sudret, 2015; Sudret, 2008; Tsilifis et al.,
2019)).
Apart from the Gaussian copulas, other types such as t, Frank, Clayton, Gumbel, and
Plackett copulas have been proposed in geotechnical engineering literature, to address cases
where the Gaussian copula type cannot adequately describe the dependence structure between
the parameters (e.g (X. Z. Wu, 2013a; X. Z. Wu, 2013b; X. S. Tang et al., 2013; Uzielli and
P. W. Mayne, 2011; D. Q. Li, L. Zhang, et al., 2015; X. S. Tang et al., 2013; D. Q. Li, X. S. Tang,
et al., 2013; D. Q. Li, S. B. Wu, et al., 2012). However, most of the studies focus on bivariate
since these copulas are mainly used for modeling bivariate dependence (pair copulas). More
recently, the promising for geotechnical applications, vine copula model has been applied to
multidimensional problems (e.g. (Jiang et al., 2015; LГј et al., 2020)). Vine copulas can be
obtained as products of conditional pair copulas (Aas et al., 2009).
An advantage of copulas is that they can provide dependent simulated samples from the
joint distribution of the parameters of interest. The selection of marginal distributions for
the input geotechnical parameters is important for constructing the multivariate distribution
with copulas. They can accommodate not only the well known in geotechnical practice,
normal and lognormal distributions, but the uncertain parameters can follow different types
of distributions. An identification of the best-fit marginal distribution can be carried out
before applying the copula theory. A best-fit copula step can be then performed to select the
copula type which better describes the multivariate dependence structure (e.g. (D.-Q. Li and
X.-S. Tang, 2015)).
2.3.3 The Multivariate distribution conditioning
Bayesian updating methods can be even more effective and powerful when implemented
within the context of a multivariate model. Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014 describe three
levels of updating that can be achieved in site characterization:
вҖў Level I: Common practice of estimating the mean value of a design parameter
17
==PAGE:23==
2 Theoretical Background
вҖў Level II: Includes the uncertainty characterization of a single uncertain parameter with
estimation of the marginal distribution and its parameters (see section 2.3.1)
вҖў Level III: Construction of the conditional multivariate distribution of the measured and
design parameters.
Even when the measured data are weakly dependent, the uncertainties in design parameters
can be reduced when they are conditioned on a larger number of test indices (K. K. Phoon
and Retief, 2016). The combination and coupling of multiple parameters in a systematic
way, is based on a multivariate distribution model constructed from a soil database. This
model can serve as "prior" distribution, and can be updated by utilizing site investigation
data. The result would be a site-specific multivariate posterior distribution which can then be
used for more realistic design approaches, resulting to more design savings and supporting
geotechnical RBD (e.g (K. K. Phoon and Retief, 2016)).
K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2013 proposed the construction of a multivariate model based on
the Nataf model, by making use of the JohnsonвҖҷs family of distributions as marginals for the
input parameters. The advantage of using these distributions is that they provide a closed
form expression of the transformation of the random variables into the standard normal
space, Equation 2.10 (and the inverse to original space), and they maintain their distribution
type when they are conditioned to some site investigation data (conditional distribution).
This is important since it ensures that the constructed Multi-normal distribution, will be again
Multi-normal when conditioned on some site investigation data. The conditional distribution
can provide more precise confidence intervals. Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014 proposed a
sampling method, called bootstrap, for generating correlation coefficient pairs that can address
the positive-definite correlation matrix restriction in the Nataf transformation, while also
accounting for the statistical uncertainty in the correlation coefficients.
2.3.4 Bayesian Machine Learning: The baseline model
As pointed out in section 2.3, site investigation data present some relative unique features
to geotechnical site characterization. K. K. Phoon, 2018 describes the site investigation data
attributes using the acronym MUSIC:
вҖў Multivariate (M): Measurements and observations for multiple parameters are typically
collected in site investigation. A multivariate data-set can be viewed for example as a
table in an Excel spreadsheet containing N columns that correspond to the measured
soil parameters at M locations (e.g. several depths).
вҖў Unique (U): This aspect is related to the relative uniqueness of each site characteristics,
which is reflected in the collected data.
вҖў Sparse (S): In the sense that field and laboratory tests are conducted at limited depths
and few locations, and hence, limited amount of data are usually obtained
18
==PAGE:24==
2 Theoretical Background
вҖў Incomplete (I): This characteristic refers to the absence of simultaneous information on
every soil property in a data-set. This could be imagined as a matrix MxN with missing
(or NaN) entries in several positions.
вҖў possibly Corrupted (C): This attribute refers to possible bad measurements and outliers
in the data-set.
These data attributes pose significant difficulties to every data-driven site characterization
methods. (K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015) describes this as the "ugly data challenge".
K. K. Phoon and Retief, 2016; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014 suggest that a sound practice
in site-characterization should attempt to exploit in an effective way all available multivariate
information, including both site investigation data and published data in literature. Such
an approach could be effective to dealing with MUSIC site investigation data, by utilizing
typically abundant published data that are not directly related to the site at hand (K. K.
Phoon, 2018). (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2020a) refer to these data as "Big Indirect Data" to
underscore that the data sparsity problem is associated only with a local site. Types of BID
can be for instance (Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020):
вҖў A municipal database containing measurements and observations on soil properties
from sites located in the same city
вҖў A regional database containing data from sites that belong to the same geographical
area. This region can extend from different towns to a few neighboring countries (e.g.
Germany, Austria, Switzerland)
вҖў A global database that contains data from a large number of sites from many geograph-
ical regions.
Utilization of BID necessitates the adoption of more demanding data analysis methods for
handling large databases. Engineering judgement cannot be effective in extracting all relevant
to the site information, that may be hidden in large multivariate data-sets. Simplified data-
driven methods cannot be effective in exploiting and quantifying the value of information in
BID. (K. Phoon et al., 2021) refers to this aspect as the "Site Recognition challenge".
A Bayesian Machine Learning method, i.e based solely on data, was proposed recently
(Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) for the construction of a multivariate PDF based on a clay
soil database, containing a large number of sites with measurements on CPT parameters and
index properties. The method evolves from previous studies of the authors (K. K. Phoon
and Ching, 2013; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014) and introduces a baseline probabilistic
site-specific model that can be effective under MUSIC data constraints. The method is based
again on the multi-Normal assumption. (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; Ching, K. K. Phoon,
Khan, et al., 2020) proposed a Bayesian updating framework under which a quasi-site-specific
model can be constructed with a hybridization of a generic multivariate distribution (from
BID) and a site-specific model constructed from the site data.
In this approach different sets of parameters, (Вөdb, Cdb) and (Вөs, Cs) (i.e. means and correla-
tion matrices), are considered for the generic database and the site-specific model, respectively.
19
==PAGE:25==
2 Theoretical Background
These are considered unknown and they are inferred from the generic database and site data,
respectively. The statistical uncertainty in the site-specific parameters (Вөs, Cs) can be very
high due to limited amount of available site investigation data. Hence, Bayesian analysis is
needed to explicitly quantify the statistical uncertainty. With regard to the generic parameters
(Вөdb, Cdb) , if the amount of data is very large, the statistical uncertainty in the parameters
can be low, meaning that Bayesian analysis in this case is not necessary (case in (Ching
and K. K. Phoon, 2019), where the global database used contains a very large number of
data points). However, if the compiled database does not contain a large enough number of
data points, quantification of the statistical uncertainty should be carried out for the generic
distribution parameters, as well.
The main purpose of applying Bayesian analysis is the derivation of the posterior distribution
of the uncertain parameters of the probability distribution function (see 2.3.1). In multivariate
analysis updating all parameters and derive their posterior distribution can be very computa-
tional challenging, and conventional numerical integration in high dimensions (e.g. larger
than 3 parameters) is not effective. It is possible though, to reduce significantly the compu-
tational effort by adopting some special types of prior distributions, called conjugate priors.
When conjugate priors describe each uncertain parameter of the prior distribution, analytical
formulation of their posterior distributions is feasible (Givens and Hoeting, 2013; Gelman
et al., 2013; Ang and W. Tang, 2007; Straub and Papaioannou, 2015; ISSMGE-TC205/304,
2017).
In problems that involve a large number of parameters, sampling methods can be utilized
for efficient computation. Such simulation techniques are the Markov chain Monte Carlo methods,
or MCMC (Hastings, 1970; Metropolis et al., 1953; Gilks et al., 1996). Exact sampling
from the posterior distribution of the parameters is possible when adopting conjugate priors,
which exist under the multi-Normal distribution assumption. The authors in (Ching and
K. K. Phoon, 2019) adopted the Gibbs Sampler algorithm that belongs to the MCMC methods,
in conjunction with conjugate priors, to sequentially generate samples from the conditional
(posterior) distribution of the parameters (Вөdb, Cdb) and (Вөs, Cs). The Gibbs Sampler is also a
particularly useful technique that can handle the incomplete feature of the data (Ching, Muto,
et al., 2006; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019).
The key parts of the proposed hybridization framework can be summarized in the following
steps (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019; Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020):
вҖў Construction of the underlying generic multivariate probability density function condi-
tioned on the complete set of data points in the municipal/regional/global database.
Let f (x|Xdb,o) symbolize the conditional generic distribution with parameters (Вөdb, Cdb).
The unknown parameters are divided into groups and conditional samples can be
generated from their posterior distribution, i.e. conditioned on the observed data, using
the Gibbs Sampler (Gilks et al., 1996; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019). The database
PDF can be expressed as a mixture of multivariate normal PDFs with parameters the
(Вөdb, Cdb) samples (Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020).
вҖў Construction of the underlying site-specific multivariate probability density function
conditioned on the complete set of data points in the site data. Let f (x|Xs,o) symbolize
20
==PAGE:26==
2 Theoretical Background
the conditional generic distribution with parameters (Вөs, Cs). The unknown parameters
are divided into groups and conditional samples can be generated from their posterior
distribution, i.e. conditioned on the observed data, using the Gibbs Sampler (Gilks et al.,
1996; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014). The database PDF is a mixture of multivariate
normal PDFs with parameters the (Вөs, Cs) samples (Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al.,
2020).
вҖў Hybridization between the database PDF and the site specific PDF,
f (x|hb) вҲқf (x|Xdb,o) Г— f (x|Xs,o)
(2.11)
The resulting hybrid PDF can be used for enhanced site-specific predictions (Ching,
K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020).
Studies based on such soil/rock multivariate databases can be found in the literature (Ching
and K. Phoon, 2012; Ching, K. Phoon, and C. Chen, 2014; DвҖҷIgnazzio et al., 2016; S. Liu
et al., 2016; J. R. Chen, 2004; Ching, LI, et al., 2018; S. Feng and Vardanega, 2019b; S. Feng
and Vardanega, 2019a; LГ¶fman and Korkiala-Tanttu, 2021; Ching, K. K. Phoon, HO,
et al., 2020; D. Zhang et al., 2020; Xiao et al., 2021; Ching, Lin, et al., 2017; Ching and
K. K. Phoon, 2014). These are open-access databases and are provided by the committee of
"Engineering Practice of Risk Assessment and Management (TC304)" - "International Society
for Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering (ISSMGE)" (www-01 ).
2.3.5 Recent advancements in Data-driven Site characterization
(Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2020b) extended the model and proposed a "similarity index"
method that is partially able to provide a numerical measure to the site-uniqueness data
feature, for exploiting a global database. These set of methods are based on the assumption
that the measurements between different depths are independent and they do not explicitly
characterize the spatial variability. (Zheng et al., 2021) proposed a probabilistic outlier
detection method, to reduce the influence of bad quality data in the characterization of the
statistical uncertainty of the parameters.
In (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2020a) the BML model (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) was
improved to account for the spatial variability of the site properties among depths (MUSIC-X).
(Ching, W. H. Huang, et al., 2021) developed a Sparse Bayesian Learning method that can
work under realistic and complex 3D setting, but it considers only univariate data (CPT data).
The most recent and advanced data-driven site characterizations methods that can work under
realistic and complex 3D setting (MUSIC-3X), while also attempting to effectively address
the complex "site recognition" challenge were proposed very recently (Ching, W. H. Huang,
et al., 2021; Ching, WU, et al., 2021; Ching, K. K. Phoon, Yang, et al., 2021).
The various aspects of dependency between multivariate data cannot be ignored in realistic
scenarios. An ideal site characterization approach, should target to explicitly characterize the
following dependency structures between the multivariate site data (K. Phoon et al., 2021):
21
==PAGE:27==
2 Theoretical Background
1. cross-correlation between the different parameters (e.g index properties and cone
resistance data at the same location) (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; Ching, Lin, et al.,
2017; K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019)
2. spatial correlation, e.g. undrained shear strength data at different locations (Ching and
K. K. Phoon, 2020a)
3. spatial-cross correlations, e.g index properties and cone resistance data at different
locations (Ching, W. H. Huang, et al., 2021)
22
==PAGE:28==
3 Methods Description
3.1 Learning parameters of probability distributions from data
This section focuses on the main elements of Statistical inference and the respective techniques
which can be used to learn parameters of probability distributions. Three methods are
typically used to estimate the parameters of a probabilistic model:
1. Method of moments (MoM)
2. Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE)
3. Bayesian parameters estimation
3.1.1 Method of Moments (MoM)
The method of moments refers to the most common practice of estimating the parameters of
a distribution from the sample moments. Let X denote the uncertain soil parameter modelled
as random variable and xi, i = 1, ..., n the measurements (samples) obtained from a field/lab
test. For probability distributions that require two parameters to be defined, it is sufficient to
calculate the first two moments, i.e. sample mean x and sample variance s2,
x = 1
n
n
вҲ‘
n=1
xi
(3.1)
s2 =
1
n вҲ’1
n
вҲ‘
n=1
(xi вҲ’x)2.
(3.2)
Let the parameters of the distribution of X be denoted by Оё. With the MoM they can be
derived by utilizing x and s2 as point estimators of the mean (expected value) E[X] = ВөX
and variance Var[X] = Пғ2
X of the random variable X. higher moments such as skewness
(normalized 3rd moment), kurtosis (4th), can be utilized as well.
In certain cases, it can be also possible to calculate the statistical uncertainty in the point
estimates ЛҶОё of the parameters Оё of a distribution, obtained with the MoM. This corresponds
to treating the sample mean and sample variance as random variables and calculating their
expected value and variance. However, there are important limitations in quantifying the
statistical uncertainty with the MoM and this method is not appropriate when limited amount
of data are available. The true mean and variance of an uncertain soil parameter X can
be significantly different from the values obtained from Equation 3.1 and Equation 3.2,
respectively, when the amount of data is low. For more details on the MoM estimator the
reader is referred to (Kottegoda and Rosso, 2008; Straub, 2020).
23
==PAGE:29==
3 Methods Description
3.1.2 Maximum Likelihood Estimation
The MLE method is a more preferable approach than the MoM for learning parameters of a
probability distribution. It can accommodate different types of data, it can handle correlated
observations and it provides a better means for quantifying the statistical uncertainty in the
estimator (Aldrich, 1997; Kottegoda and Rosso, 2008). The MLE approach is also applicable
to more general types of models, and it can be used to learn parameters of a geotechnical
correlation (or regression models in general). In learning the parameters of a transformation
model, MLE can provide estimates of the transformation error uncertainty (e.g. Straub, 2020).
Another practical application of MLE is the estimation of model parameters from censored
data while the method can also provide a quantitative measure to decide the probabilistic
model that better describes an uncertain soil parameter, among a set of competing models
(e.g. C. H. Juang et al., 2015; Kottegoda and Rosso, 2008).
Consider a continuous random variable X representing an uncertain soil parameter with
PDF fX(x). A set of measurements x1, x2, ..., xn is obtained from a field/lab test. Each
measurement xi corresponds to a realization of the PDF of X. Consider also Оё = Оё corresponds
to a vector of unknown, but nonrandom distribution parameters. The PDF of X can be written
as fX(x|Оё) to explicitly indicate the dependency on its parameters Оё. The chance to observe a
single measurement xi, given a series of possible values for the parameters Оё is described by
the likelihood function 2.6, which is a function of Оё (since the measurement has already been
made). It is re-written here for consistency reasons,
Li(Оё) = fX(xi|Оё),
For a data-set containing n (assumed) statistically independent measurements (x1, x2, ..., xn),
the joint likelihood is defined as the product of individual likelihood functions (Equation 2.7),
L(Оё) =
n
вҲҸ
i=1
fX(xi|Оё).
The principle of MLE lies in deriving the parameter values ЛҶОё that maximize the plausibility of
data (x1, x2, ..., xn). The selection of the optimal set of values ЛҶОё can be achieved by maximizing
the joint likelihood function of Equation 2.7,
ЛҶОё = arg max
Оё
L(Оё)
(3.3)
or equivalently, by maximizing the more computationally convenient log-likelihood function,
l(Оё) =
n
вҲ‘
i=1
ln fX(xi|Оё).
(3.4)
The estimators obtained from Equation 3.3 are in general correlated since they are computed
from the same samples. MLE can allow the approximation of the statistical uncertainty in the
point estimates. Two useful statistical properties of MLE are:
24
==PAGE:30==
3 Methods Description
вҖў As the number of observations increases the ML estimators ЛҶОё approach the Normal
distribution. This property follows from the Central limit theorem.
вҖў The ML estimators are unbiased for a large number of observations, i.e the mean values
of ЛҶОё approach the true values.
As pointed out in section 2.3, statistical uncertainty arises due to limited amount of data typi-
cally available on a soil parameter. Hence, though MLE cannot quantify the true uncertainty,
but it can provide an approximation based on the covariance matrix of the ML estimators ЛҶОё.
The values of the matrix can be approximated as,
Var[ ЛҶОёi] вүҲ
1
вҲ’
h
вҲӮ2l(Оё)
вҲӮОё2
i
i
Оё=ЛҶОё
(3.5)
and
Cov[ ЛҶОёi, ЛҶОёj] вүҲ
1
вҲ’
h
вҲӮ2l(Оё)
вҲӮОёiвҲӮОёj
i
Оё=ЛҶОё
(3.6)
where l(Оё) is the log-likelihood function of Equation 3.4, and the partial derivatives are
evaluated at the optimal values ЛҶОё. This matrix is known as the inverse Hessian matrix HвҲ’1.
For some PDF types the ML estimators can be derived analytically from Equation (3.3) (e.g.
for Normal and lognormal distributions). When analytical expression is not feasible, numeri-
cal techniques are used for the computation of the best estimates and the approximation of
the Hessian matrix. For more details on the MLE approach and the cases in which it can
provide good estimates and its limitations the reader is referred to (Papoulis and Pillai,
2002; Givens and Hoeting, 2005; Aldrich, 1997; Straub, 2020; Kottegoda and Rosso, 2008)
3.1.3 Bayesian estimation
A brief discussion on the Bayesian framework was made in section 2.3.1. The bayesian
parameter estimation facilitates the explicit characterization of the statistical uncertainty in
the parameters of a distribution and it is a suggested method when limited amount of data on
an uncertain soil parameter is available. In MoM and MLE methods the unknown parameters
Оё are treated as constant-deterministic values and point estimates are computed based solely
on the measurements xi. In contrast, the bayesian approach enables the exploitation of prior
information on the uncertain parameters of a probabilistic model in the estimation process.
This prior knowledge is reflected in the prior distribution f вҖІ(Оё), Equation 2.5, the unknown
parameters Оё are treated as random variables and a full posterior distribution f вҖІвҖІ
Оё = fОё|x of the
parameters is obtained by updating the density f вҖІ(Оё) based on the data, following Bayes rule
and Equation 2.9,
f вҖІвҖІ(Оё) = cL(Оё) f вҖІ(Оё)
where L(Оё) the likelihood function of Equation 2.6. As pointed out in section 2.3.1, the posterior
distribution reflects the inherent variability of the a measure soil parameter at a location
25
==PAGE:31==
3 Methods Description
within a statistical homogenous area. A set of point estimates ЛҶОё of the parameters can be
derived by computing the posterior mean,
ЛҶОё =
Z
Rk Оёf вҖІвҖІ
Оё (Оё)dОё
(3.7)
where k the number of parameters.
Desk-study and site reconnaissance provide the prior knowledge which is quantitatively
represented by the prior distribution. The choice of the prior distribution is important,
it affects the way in which the posterior is computed and has significant influence in the
prediction quality (Straub and Papaioannou, 2015; Straub, 2020). Depending on the amount
and quality of the information collected prior to any site investigation, different types of prior
distributions may be selected.
Improper and non-informative priors: Uniform distribution
The so called improper priors correspond to improper density functions meaning that they
do not integrate to 1. For example the uniform distribution from 0 to вҲһis an improper PDF
choice for a single distribution parameter Оё,
f вҖІ(Оё) = b, Оё вүҘ0
(3.8)
where b a constant. If for instance b > 0, the integral R вҲһ
0 b dОё is equal to вҲһ. These prior
distribution types are typically selected when there is no information about the parameters.
In this case, the normalizing or proportionality constant in Equation 2.9 is utilized to ensure that
the posterior PDF f вҖІвҖІ
Оё is an appropriate PDF. The calculation of the proportionality constant
can be performed by requiring that the integral of the posterior PDF f вҖІвҖІ
Оё over the entire
parameter space is equal to 1. In case of n number of parameters each one taking values in
[0, вҲһ), the proportionality constant c can be obtained as,
c =
1
R вҲһ
0 ... R вҲһ
0 L(Оё) f вҖІ(Оё) dОё1... dОёn
(3.9)
The complexity of the integral computation in Equation 3.9 depends on the type of the
likelihood function and the number of unknown parameters. In most cases it is not possible
to compute it analytically. Numerical integration techniques can be used in case of a few
unknown parameters.
However, when a large number of parameters are involved the
computational effort increases and the derivation of the constant c becomes impractical. In
these cases, sampling methods such as the MCMC methods can be used to generate samples
from a target distribution and the computation of proportionality constant is not needed (e.g.
Straub and Papaioannou, 2015).
Point estimators can also be computed from the posterior maximum, known also as MAP
estimator (Maximum A-Posteriori). The MAP estimators are calculated by maximizing the
posterior f вҖІвҖІ(Оё), i.e finding its mode,
ЛҶОёpm = arg max f вҖІвҖІ(Оё)
(3.10)
26
==PAGE:32==
3 Methods Description
The computation of the proportionality constant is not needed in this case, which significantly
reduces the computational effort. However when high statistical uncertainty is present the
posterior mean, Equation 3.7, provides better point estimates of the parameters (Straub, 2020).
For non-informative prior distributions, the mode of the posterior is identical with the MLE
obtained from Equation 3.3. In these cases, the likelihood dominates the posterior.
In Table 2.2 some activities that can produce an amount of useful information during the
desk study and site reconnaissance stages of site investigation were presented. This prior
knowledge can be further improved by incorporating sound engineering judgement from
professionals with experience on the geology of the region (e.g. Vick, 2002) As information
on a soil property X and its distribution parameters Оё increases, improper types of prior PDFs
can be replaced by non-informative priors. The integration of prior information is critical for
geotechnical RBD (e.g. K. K. Phoon and Retief, 2016). Even if the amount of information on
a soil parameter is small, non-informative priors can be a means to quantitatively introduce
a degree of engineering judgement, as for instance in defining the physical boundaries of a
property with respect to the soil type.
Typical selection of non-informative priors is the joint uniform distribution. The uniform
distribution assigns equal probability of occurence to the distribution parameters that take
values in a specific interval [Оұ, ОІ]. The values Оұ, ОІ can be related to the minimum and
maximum values of the parameter that had been observed in past studies at the site at hand,
or other sites in the geographical region, or they can be selected based on typical ranges
of the mean, standard deviation or COV reported in literature, related to some specific site
conditions, e.g same soil type. (Cao, Y. Wang, and D. Li, 2016) compiled information on soil
parameters from several sources in literature (e.g. (K. K. Phoon and F. H. Kulhawy, 1999;
Lacasse and Nadim, 1996; Baecher, 1983; Lumb, 1974; Rackwitz, 2000; Uzielli, Lacasse,
et al., 2007; Akbas and F. Kulhawy, 2010)). Prior information on the statistics of relevant
to the current study soil parameters is presented below in Table 3.1. The prior range for
estimates of the mean ВөвҖІ are defined from the minimum and maximum values of Вө reported
in literature. The prior estimates of ПғвҖІ are derived as a function of ВөвҖІ and the reported COV
of each property. The prior ranges in 3.1 refer to fine-grained soils. More specific soil types
with narrower bounds can be found in (K. K. Phoon and F. H. Kulhawy, 1999). Based on
such ranges of statistics, it is trivial to define a joint uniform distribution. For example, in
case of two unknown distribution parameters (Оё1, Оё2), a non-informative prior f вҖІ
Оҳ(Оё1, Оё2) can
be defined as,
f вҖІ
Оё(Оё1, Оё2) =
(
1
(Оё1,maxвҲ’Оё1,min)В·(Оё2,maxвҲ’Оё2,min),
Оё1 вҲҲ[Оё1,min, Оё1,max], Оё2 вҲҲ[Оё2,min, Оё2,max]
0,
else
(3.11)
The derivation of the posterior distribution based on joint uniform priors involves again the
computation of the proportionality constant c in Equation 2.9.
Conjugate priors
In some cases and depending on the form of the likelihood function in Equation 2.6 that
describes the measurements xi, it can be possible to replace the uniform priors with the so
27
==PAGE:33==
3 Methods Description
Property
Soil type
Range of ВөX
COV
Range of Пғx
Оі(kN/m3)
fine grained
13-24
3-20
0.4-4.8
wn (%)
fine grained
13-105
7-46
1-48
LL (%)
fine grained
27-89
3-39
1-35
PL (%)
fine grained
13-35
3-34
0.4-12
PI (вҲ’)
fine grained
11-52
9-57
1-30
LI (вҲ’)
fine grained
0.5-2.5
5-88
0.025-2.2
su (kPa)
fine grained
6-713
4-84
0.2-600
su,UC (kPa)
clay
10-400
20-55
2-220
П• (o)
fine grained
9-41
4-50
0.4-20.5
П• (o)
clay and sand
20-40
5-15
1-6
tan П• (o)
fine grained
0.24-0.69
6-46
0.01-0.32
c (kPa)
aluvial clay
0-24
-
0-13.2
c (kPa)
fine grained
-
20-40
-
Table 3.1: Typical ranges of mean, coefficient of variation and standard deviation of soil
parameters for fine-grained soil; Оі(kN/m3):Total unit weight; wn (%): Natural
water content; LL (%): Liquid Limit; PL (%): Plastic Limit; PI (вҲ’): Plasticity index;
LI (вҲ’): Liquidity index; su (kPa): Undrained shear strength; П• (o): Effective friction
angle;c (kPa):Effective cohesion; Based on (Cao, Y. Wang, and D. Li, 2016; Parker
et al., 2008; K. K. Phoon and F. H. Kulhawy, 1999; K. K. Phoon, 2008)
called conjugate priors (Straub and Papaioannou, 2015). When conjugate priors exist for a
specific type of fX(xi|Оё), it is possible to derive analytically the posterior distribution f вҖІвҖІ
Оё . In
these cases there is no need to compute the constant c for normalizing the posterior PDF. The
posterior distribution has the same analytical form as the PDF used in the likelihood function
fX(xi|Оё) to describe the measurements. An example on how one can derive the posterior
parameters of the lognormal distribution based on conjugate priors is given in (Papaioannou
and Straub, 2017).
Non-informative priors can be also defined based on conjugate priors. When significant
statistical uncertainty exists, a non-informative prior PDF for the normal distribution, can be
defined as a normal distribution with mean ВөвҖІ
ВөX and a very large prior standard deviation
ПғвҖІ
ВөX. A sensitivity analysis can show if the prior distribution is indeed non-informative in
this case (see Straub and Papaioannou, 2015). For more details about the conjugate priors
and in which cases they can be used for analytical evaluation of the posterior, the reader is
referred to (Ang and W. Tang, 2007; Fink, 1997; Raiffa and Schlaifer, 2002; Straub and
Papaioannou, 2015; Straub, 2020; Baecher and Christian, 2003)
3.1.4 The Predictive distribution
The posterior distribution f вҖІвҖІ(Оё|x1, ..., xn) characterizes the uncertainty in the parameters
Оё. For probabilistic assessment one is interested in the statistical uncertainty and inherent
variability of the random variable X (i.e the uncertain geotechnical property) which is modeled
28
==PAGE:34==
3 Methods Description
by a distribution f (x|Оё). The posterior distribution of X conditional on the measurements
(x1, ..., xn), at each spatial location, is known as predictive distribution and this can be derived
with the application of BayesвҖҷ rule and the total probability theorem (see Straub, 2020). The
posterior predictive PDF is computed following Equation
ЛңfX(x) =
Z
Rk f (x|Оё) f вҖІвҖІ
Оё (Оё)dОё
(3.12)
while the predictive CDF follows from the total probability theorem and it is derived from,
ЛңFX(x) =
Z
Rk F(x|Оё) f вҖІвҖІ
Оё (Оё)dОё
(3.13)
where k the number of distribution parameters Оё. The evaluation method of the integrals in
Equations 3.12, 3.13 depends on the approach followed to deriving the posterior distribution
f вҖІвҖІ
Оё (Оё) (e.g. numerical integration, sampling).
3.2 Selection of probability models
In many cases there exist more than one probabilistic model that can be used to model
an uncertain geotechnical parameter X. For example, different probability distribution are
proposed in the literature for modeling the Mohr-Coulomb soil strength parameters c and
П•, denoting the cohesion and friction angle respectively. Some of them include the normal,
lognormal, Weibull, Gamma, Gumbel, Beta probability distributions e.g. (D.-Q. Li and X.-S.
Tang, 2015; X. S. Tang et al., 2013; Baecher and Christian, 2003). Hence, the question is
how to select the best model among a set of candidate models M1, ..., Mm, based on the measurements
and observed data? Two different approaches are described here:
1. Model comparison and selection with MLE based on: i) the Akaike Information Criterion
(AIC) and ii) the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC)
2. Bayesian model selection.
As pointed out in Section 3.1.2, the ML approach can provide a measure that facilitates the
comparison between different candidate models Mi, i = 1, ..., n. The approach of modelsвҖҷ
comparison in with MLE can be achieved through the following steps:
вҖў Derivation of the ML estimators of the parameters following Equation 3.3 for each
candidate model, denoted here by ЛҶОёMi
вҖў Evaluation of the log-likelihood function of each model from Equation 3.4 at the MLE
values ЛҶОёMi, i.e. lMi(ЛҶОёMi)
Following these two steps, the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) can be derived from,
AIC = 2k вҲ’2lMi(ЛҶОёMi)
(3.14)
29
==PAGE:35==
3 Methods Description
and the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) from,
BIC = k ln n вҲ’2lMi(ЛҶОёMi),
(3.15)
where k corresponds to the number of parameters and n the number of data-points. The
model with the lowest value of AIC or BIC is the the favorable one among the candidate
models M1, ..., Mm. Both AIC and BIC are criteria used to assess the loss of information that
occurs when fitting inappropriate models to the data. For instance, MLE tends to favor more
complex models (leading to larger likelihood lMi(ЛҶОёMi), e.g. models with larger number of
parameters, instead of simpler ones, which can lead to overfitting the data. For this reason the
proposed criteria, introduce a degree of penalization to more complex models. While the first
terms in Equations 3.14, 3.15 are related to the quality of the model in terms of the number
of involved parameters, the second terms reflect the penalization factor to more complex
models. These criteria offer a computationally simple method to select appropriate models to
characterize a geotechnical parameter. However in some cases, such as when limited amount
of data are available and the statistical uncertainty is high, they may oversimplify the problem
and the model which gives the minimum BIC or AIC, may not be the most proper one among
the set of candidates (Straub, 2020).
In such cases, it is recommended to apply a Bayesian approach, known as Bayesian model
class selection, to compare different models (Straub, 2020). Apart from comparing different
univariate probability distribution types, the Bayesian model class selection is applicable
to comparing different types copulas (X. S. Tang et al., 2013) and more general types of
models, as well (Yuen, 2010). In this approach a prior probability is assigned to each of the
candidate models Mi, i = 1, ...m, which is then updated based on the observed data. The
models are assumed collectively exhaustive (see set theory) which means that it must hold
вҲ‘m
i=1 Pr(Mi) = 1.
The Bayesian approach for selecting the best candidate probability distribution is based
on the Bayes rule and the total probability theorem. Let Z denote the observed data, Оё the
parameters each model, the main steps can be summarized in the following points:
вҖў Evaluation of the posterior distribution from Equation 2.9, i.e learning the parameters
of each candidate model Mi, with computation of the proportionality constant c from
Equation 3.9. The inverse normalizing constant cвҲ’1 is equal to Pr(Z|Mi) which, in
accordance with Equation 2.6, can be understood as the likelihood of each model Mi
given the observed data Z
вҖў Assignment of a prior probability Pr(Mi) to each candidate model. If there is no
preference on a specific model based on prior knowledge, then equal probabilities can
be assigned such as they sum up to 1
вҖў Following the BayesвҖҷ rule the posterior probability of each model Mi can be computed
from,
Pr(Mi|Z) = Pr(Z|Mi)Pr(Mi)
Pr(Z)
,
(3.16)
30
==PAGE:36==
3 Methods Description
where Pr(Z) is computed from the total probability theorem,
Pr(Z) =
m
вҲ‘
i=1
Pr(Z|Mi)Pr(Mi)
(3.17)
The updated-posterior probability Pr(Mi|Z) can be used as a measure for selecting the best
model.
When limited data are available or the statistical uncertainty is high, it can be useful to
combine different probabilistic models for making predictions. Consider again for example
the Mohr-Coulomb soil strength parameters for which different probability distributions have
been reported in the literature. Especially for design parameters and reliability assessment, it
can be beneficial to to combine proposed probability distribution types under the Bayesian
framework. The resulting model would be a mixture of non necessarily normal distributions,
also called Bayesian model fusion (Straub, 2020).
The approach followed in this study for performing a model fusion, can be summarized in
three points:
вҖў Evaluation of the predictive distribution (PDF or CDF) from Equation 3.12 or 3.13 for
each candidate model. The predictive PDF may be written as ЛңfX(x|Mi) to indicate the
dependence on the model Mi
вҖў Calculation of the posterior probability Pr(Mi|Z) of each model following Equation
3.16
вҖў Expression of the final predictive model, as a weighted summation of different probabil-
ity distributions,
ЛңfX(x) =
m
вҲ‘
i=1
Pr(Mi|Z) ЛңfX(x|Mi).
(3.18)
Equation 3.18 indicates that the separate predictions made from each predictive distribution
ЛңfX(x|Mi) are then weighted with the posterior probability Pr(Mi|Z) of each model.
3.3 Joint distribution of dependent random variables
Some theoretical aspects and the reasoning of constructing a multivariate distribution for
modeling dependent uncertain geotechnical parameters were discussed in Section 2.3.2. The
construction of a joint probability distribution can be achieved based on copula functions.
A formal definition of an n-dimensional copula corresponds to a multivariate distribution
over the domain [0, 1]n, with uniform marginal distributions in the closed interval [0, 1]
(Embrechts et al., 2001; Nelsen, 2006).
31
==PAGE:37==
3 Methods Description
3.3.1 The inversion method: generating samples of a single random variable
Consider the (marginal) CDF of a standard uniform variable U which can be written as,
FU(u) =
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
0
for
u < 0
u
for
0 вүӨu вүӨ1
1
for
u > 1
(3.19)
Let X denote a random variable with CDF FX(x) (continuous - monotone increasing function).
The inverse transformation method is a general method for generating a random variate X from
a distribution FX(x) (e.g. (Ross, 2013)). Consider an one-to-one mapping function X = T(U)
such that if U вҲјU(0, 1), X follows the distribution FX(x). This holds if (Straub, 2014a),
FX(T(u)) = FU(u).
(3.20)
From Equation 3.20 it follows that the transformation is,
T(u) = FвҲ’1
X (u) = x,
(3.21)
where FвҲ’1
X
the inverse CDF of X, which is also known as inverse quantile (Nelsen, 2006) or
inverse percentile function. For a limited number of distributions the inverse CDF FвҲ’1
X
can be
expressed analytically, while in most applications and for most of the known distributions
the inverse CDF is calculated by built-in software algorithms. Transformations of such type
as in Equation 3.21 are called isoprobabilistic transforms. Similarly, FвҲ’1
X (u) is defined the value
such that, FX(x) = u. This means that the distribution FX(x) is uniformly distributed in (0, 1),
or similarly the random variable
U = F(X),
(3.22)
corresponds to a standard uniform variable in (0, 1) (D.-Q. Li and X.-S. Tang, 2015). The
proof of this statement can be derived as follows (Devroy, 1986),
Pr(F(X) вүӨu) = Pr(X вүӨFвҲ’1(u)) = F(FвҲ’1(u)) = u.
(3.23)
A vector of "pseudo"-random standard uniform samples u can be generated with computer
algorithms that are implemented in programming languages, e.g. random.rand with the numpy
library in Python, rand in MATLAB. These functions use Random Number Generators to
produce a sequence of "pseudo"-random numbers Ui that mimic some statistical characteristics
of random numbers, such as the uniformity in distribution type and the randomness, whose
important part is the independence between the generated samples (Ross, 2013). In many
applications, the generated numbers should be tested under certain statistical tests, to check
if they indeed mimic these properties. However, in most reliability applications the "pseudo"-
random numbers obtained from available programming functions can be readily used (Straub,
2014a). For illustration purposes, Figure 3.1 shows the histogram of 1000 generated standard
uniform samples with one custom made version of the Linear Conguential Generator (LCG),
and with the Mersenne Twister algorithm which is the default algorithm in Python. Figure
3.1 allow a visual inspection of the probability density of the generated u samples. It can
32
==PAGE:38==
3 Methods Description
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
density
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 3.1: Example of pseudo-random samples Ui вҲјU(0, 1); Left: LCG samples; Right:
Mersenne Twister generator (Python)
be observed that the samples are not "perfectly" uniform distributed in (0,1). However, the
samples are usable, under the assumption that they can pass some statistical tests.
Hence, considering that a vector of random standard uniform samples u is available, these
can be used to generate a random variate X that follows a continuous distribution FX(x), by
transforming the u samples to x samples, e.g. xi вҶҗFвҲ’1(ui). It should be noted, that samples
from many known distribution types FX(x), can be readily generated using built-in software
functions.
3.3.2 Coupling random variables through copulas
Consider now an n-dimensional vector of continuous random variables X = (X1, X2, ..., Xn)T
representing uncertain geotechnical parameters with known marginal cumulative distribution
functions (CDF) FX1, FX2, ..., FXn. The SklarвҖҷs Theorem (Sklar, 2009; Nelsen, 2006), states that
for continuous marginal CDFs FXi = Pr(Xi вүӨxi), i = 1, ..., n there exist a unique n-copula C
such that for all x in R
n where R the extended real line [вҲ’вҲһ, вҲһ], it holds,
FX(x) = C(FX1(x1), FX2(x2), ..., FXn(xn); Оё),
(3.24)
where Оё denote the copula parameters, depending on its type. Considering Equation 3.22 and
the probability transform ui = FX(xi), the joint CDF of X in Equation 3.24 can be written as,
FX(x) = C(u1, u2, ..., un; Оё).
(3.25)
According to the SklarвҖҷs theorem (Nelsen, 2006, pp. 22), for any u in [0, 1]n it also holds,
C(u1, u2, ..., un) = FX(FвҲ’1
X1 (u1), FвҲ’1
X2 (u2), ..., FвҲ’1
Xn (un); Оё).
(3.26)
Hence, the copula function C describes a statistical dependence structure between the random
variables X and links different marginal CDFs FXi to construct their joint CDF FX(x) (Em-
brechts et al., 2001; Joe, 2016; Nelsen, 2006). It is important that copula functions themselves
33
==PAGE:39==
3 Methods Description
are independent of the marginal CDFs FXi i = 1, ...n, and thus they can be separated. This
means that the marginal distributions of various soil properties and a correlation measure
which often is computed based on observed data, suffice to constructing their joint distri-
bution with a copula function. Moreover, Equation 3.26 indicates that with an appropriate
method for generating standard uniform samples (u1, ..., un) from the copula distribution, it
is possible to obtain dependent samples (x1, ..., xn) вҶҗ(FвҲ’1
X1 (u1), ..., FвҲ’1
Xn (un)). The sampling
procedure, however, includes more steps than the described ones in section 3.3.1.
The joint PDF fX of X which exists under conditions similar as in Equation 3.24(see Nelsen,
2006), can be derived following Equation 3.27,
fX(x) = c(FX1(x1), FX2(x2), ..., FXn(xn))
n
вҲҸ
i=1
fXi(xi)
(3.27)
where c is the copula density function,
c(u1, ..., cn) = вҲӮnC(u1, ..., un)
вҲӮu1, ..., вҲӮun
(3.28)
3.3.3 Gaussian Copula
As pointed out in Section 2.3.2 there exist different copula functions, such as the t, Frank,
Clayton, Gumbel, and Plackett copulas, that can be used to characterize the dependency
structure between geotechnical parameters. A special copula type is the Gaussian copula,
which belongs to the Elliptical family of copulas (e.g. (Embrechts et al., 2001)). In this case,
Equation 3.26, can be written as (Embrechts et al., 2001),
C(u1, u2, ..., un; R0) = ОҰn(ОҰвҲ’1(u1), ОҰвҲ’1(u2), ..., ОҰвҲ’1(un); R0).
(3.29)
where ОҰn(u; R) the n-dimensional multivariate standard normal CDF, ОҰвҲ’1(ui) the inverse
(marginal) standard normal CDF, ui = FXi(xi) the marginal CDF of Xi and R0 a linear corre-
lation matrix of the multivariate normal distribution underlying the Gaussian copula. The
Gaussian copula operates under the assumption which states that: marginally transformed
random variables to the standard normal space, follow the joint (multivariate) normal dis-
tribution (Straub, 2014a). Thus, the Gaussian copula can be completely defined for known
marginal CDFs and a linear correlation matrix. It should be noted, that there is an impor-
tant distinction between dependence and correlation. Dependence is a more general concept
than correlation. While statistical correlation implies dependence between a set of random
variables, the opposite cannot be stated, i.e. dependence does not imply correlation. For
instance, two variables are not independent if there is no linear correlation between them,
since they can be subjected to a different dependence type. It is worth mentioning that the
Gaussian copula cannot describe tail dependence (e.g. (Nelsen, 2006; Embrechts et al., 2001)),
i.e. dependence in upper-right or lower left quadrant tails of a bivariate distribution. this
concept is related to dependence between extreme values.
The Gaussian copula provides an attractive means to construct joint distributions of corre-
lated random variables, which can be used in many uncertainty quantification applications
34
==PAGE:40==
3 Methods Description
and reliability methods. Furthermore, the Gaussian copula is not limited to bivariate distribu-
tions, but it is applicable to construct joint distributions in higher (n > 2) dimensions. Some
examples of usage of the Gaussian copula include:
вҖў Approximate computation of the Probability of failure, design point and reliability
index with the First Order Reliability Method (FORM). The joint distribution of the
input parameters is needed and the method proceeds by transforming: all (potentially
non-normal) random variables, their joint distribution and the respective limit state
function g(X) to the standard normal space g(U). A non-linear limit state function is
linearized by means of first order Taylor series expansion at the design point which is
computed as the point with highest probability density in the standard normal space.
Hence, the limit state surface g(x) = 0 is approximated by its tangent at the design
point (e.g. (P. L. Liu and Der Kiureghian, 1986; Straub, 2014a)).
вҖў Computation of the failure probability with Monte Carlo simulation. Samples of the
joint probability density are generated from the joint distribution of the variables and
the limit state function is evaluated at each sample.
A linear correlation matrix can be obtained from linear correlation coefficient pairs. In
geotechnical engineering, the most popular measure of linear dependency, i.e. correlation,
is the PearsonвҖҷs rho correlation coefficient. Reasons of its popularity is the computational
simplicity, and the fact that geotechnical literature is full of linear transformation models
between geotechnical parameters, thus the correlation concept is most often related to
this specific measure.
However, it should be noted that the usage of PearsonвҖҷs rho as
measure of correlation is only valid in case of Gaussian copulas, where it is imposed that
the transformed variables are jointly normal. Hence, it can be said, that it is not a copula
based measure of statistical dependence, but it is associated with the underlying normal
distribution of the variables. Furthermore, PearsonвҖҷs rho is just one type of dependence
measures. Other statistical measures that are applicable in more general types of copulas,
are the rank correlation coefficients, SpearmanвҖҷs rho and KendallвҖҷs tau, which can overcome
some weaknesses of the PearsonвҖҷs rho (Embrechts et al., 2001; X. S. Tang et al., 2013; D.-Q. Li
and X.-S. Tang, 2015).
Nevertheless, since the Gaussian copula was preferred in this study due to its aforemen-
tioned advantages, the PearsonвҖҷs rho provides a valid measure of statistical dependence
between the random variables. The range of a PearsonвҖҷs correlation coefficient ПҒij, between
a pair of variables is bounded in [ПҒmin, ПҒmax] вҠӮ[вҲ’1, 1]. The PearsonвҖҷs correlation coefficient
between a pair of variables can be defined as,
ПҒij = Cov(Xi, Xj)
ПғXiПғXj
= E
"Xi вҲ’ВөXi
ПғXi
  
Xj вҲ’ВөXj
ПғXj
!#
(3.30)
where E denotes the expectation, Вө the mean of each variable, Пғ the standard deviation
and Cov(Xi, Xj) the covariance of the variables Xi, Xj. By definition of the expectation (e.g.
35
==PAGE:41==
3 Methods Description
(Kottegoda and Rosso, 2008; Straub, 2020) Equation 3.30 can be written as,
ПҒij =
1
ПғXiПғXj
Z +вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
Z +вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ(Xi вҲ’ВөXi) (Xj вҲ’ВөXj) fX(xi, xj) dxidxj
(3.31)
where fX(xi, xj) the joint (bivariate) distribution of Xi and Xj. The correlation coefficient pairs
are the components of the correlation matrix R0.
In many practical applications, correlation coefficient pairs are estimated directly from
observed data (sample Pearson correlation coefficient) as,
ПҒ12 =
вҲ‘n
i=1(x1i вҲ’x1)(x2i вҲ’x2)
p
вҲ‘n
i=1(x1i вҲ’x1)2 вҲ‘n
i=1(x2i вҲ’x2)2
(3.32)
Moreover, an estimation of the correlation coeffient can be obtained with other methods, such
as the MLE which was described in section 3.1.2.
3.3.4 The Nataf model
Random variables whose dependency can be described by a Gaussian copula, are said to have
the Nataf distribution and the Nataf model can be used to construct the multivariate distribution
(Nataf, 1962; P. L. Liu and Der Kiureghian, 1986; X. S. Tang et al., 2013; Straub, 2014a).
Consider a vector of random variables X = (X1, X2, ..., Xn)T with known marginal CDFs
FXi(xi), i = 1, ..., n. The Nataf transformation can be used to transform the correlated random
variables X from their physical space, to uncorrelated and consequently, independent normal
random variables Z in the standard normal space. The Nataf transformation T : X вҶ’Z, is
constituted by two functions T = T2 в—ҰT1. The main steps are described in the following (ERA
Group, 2020):
1. Transformation of the correlated random variables X to correlated standard normal
variables bZ вҲјN(0, R0) (where 0 the n-dimensional null vector):
T1 : Xi вҶ’ЛҶZi = ОҰвҲ’1 (FXi(xi)) , i = 1, ..., n
(3.33)
where ОҰвҲ’1 the inverse standard normal CDF (recall from Equation 3.22 Ui = FXi(xi) вҲј
U(0, 1)). The correlation of transformed to the standard normal space variables bZ, is
described by the correlation matrix R0.
2. Transformation of the correlated standard normal variables bZ, to uncorrelated (and
independent) standard normal variables Z вҲјN(0, I) where I the n-dimensional identity
matrix:
T2 : bZ вҶ’Z = О“bZ,
(3.34)
where О“ denotes the inverse Cholesky factor of R0. The latter contains the correlation
coefficients ПҒ0,ij between the transformed standard normal random variables bZ, which
are in general not the same as in the input correlation matrix R, e.g. estimated sample
Pearson rho. The Cholesky factor О“ is obtained as the inverse of the lower triangle matrix
36
==PAGE:42==
3 Methods Description
(i.e. all elements in the upper triangle equal to 0) L that satisfies the matrix Equation
3.35
LLT = R0.
(3.35)
Equation 3.35 refers to the Choleski decomposition of the correlation matrix R0. The
Cholesky factorization can be performed with software functions. For instance, in
Python with use of the scipy library (www-03 ),
1 L = scipy.linalg.cholesky(R_0,lower=True)
It should be noted, that the Choleski decomposition and the matrix inversion can be
accomplished only if the correlation matrix is positive-definite and this is a requirement
for constructing a valid multivariate distribution (e.g. (Strang, 2006; Ross, 2013; Lebrun
and Dutfoy, 2009a). The correlation coefficients in the matrices R0 and R are related
through Equation 3.36 (ERA Group, 2020),
ПҒij = E
пЈ®
пЈ°
 
FвҲ’1
Xi (ОҰ( ЛҶzi) вҲ’ВөXi
ПғXi
! пЈ«
пЈӯFвҲ’1
Xj (ОҰ( ЛҶzj) вҲ’ВөXj
ПғXj
пЈ¶
пЈё
пЈ№
пЈ»=
=
1
ПғXiПғXj
Z +вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
Z +вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ

FвҲ’1
Xi (ОҰ( ЛҶzi) вҲ’ВөXi
 
FвҲ’1
Xj (ОҰ( ЛҶzj) вҲ’ВөXj

П•2( ЛҶzi, ЛҶzj; ПҒ0,ij) d ЛҶzid ЛҶzj,
(3.36)
where П•2 is the bivariate standard normal PDF with correlation coefficients ПҒ0,ij. For
given correlation coefficient ПҒij, the computation of the correlation coefficient ПҒ0,ij
through Equation 3.36 can be performed iteratively to obtain ПҒ0,ij. The method which
was applied in this study, is based on a two-dimensional Gauss-Legendre quadrature
integration (ERA Group, 2020).
After performing the steps of the Nataf transformation, the joint CDF of the random variables
X can be constructed based on the correlated standard normal variables bZ and the calculated
matrix R0 as (P. L. Liu and Der Kiureghian, 1986),
FX(x) = ОҰn(ЛҶz; R0)
(3.37)
and the joint PDF as,
fX(x) = П•n(ЛҶz; R0) fX1(x1) fX2(x2) В· В· В· fXn(xn)
П•(ЛҶz1)П•(ЛҶz2) В· В· В· П•(ЛҶzn)
= П•n(ЛҶz; R0)
n
вҲҸ
i=1
fXi(xi)
П•(ЛҶzi)
(3.38)
The distribution model is generally referred as the Nataf distribution.
To simulate dependent samples from the joint distribution of the random variables X
to their physical space, the inverse Nataf transformation is required. The inverse transform
from the standard normal space to the probability space of FX(x) can be summarized in the
following:
Z вҶ’bZ = LZ вҲјN(0, R0)
bZ вҶ’U вҲјC : Ui = ОҰ( bZi)
U вҶ’X вҲјFX : Xi = FвҲ’1
Xi (Ui)
(3.39)
37
==PAGE:43==
3 Methods Description
Following these steps, dependent samples of X from the joint probability distribution FX(x)
can be generated.
3.3.5 Illustration: Sampling joint lognormal distributed variables
The procedure of simulating dependent samples from the joint distribution of variables that
have the lognormal distribution as marginal, is presented with a realistic illustrative example.
Consider that the effective friction angle c and the effective friction angle П• are both modelled
with a lognormal distribution. The procedure for obtaining dependent random samples from
their joint distribution can be simplified in this case.
Consider that the means, standard deviations and correlation between the two parameters
are the ones given in Table 3.2, where О»X, О¶X the parameters of the lognormal distribution,
Variable
ВөX
ПғX
О»X
О¶X
X1 = c (kPa)
15
7
2.609
0.444
X2 = П• (o)
29.3
4.5
3.366
0.153
Table 3.2: Example copula: Mean, std, and parameters of the lognormal distributions
which correspond to the mean and standard deviation of the underlying normal distribution,
i.e. О»X = Вөln X and О¶X = Пғln X. The correlation coefficient is considered equal to ПҒ = вҲ’0.45.
If a random variable X is lognormal distributed, then the random variable Y = ln X is a
normal random variable (e.g. (Straub, 2020; D. Q. Li, X. S. Tang, et al., 2013; Straub, 2014a)).
The CDF of the lognormal distribution can be written as a function of the standard normal
distribution as,
FXi(xi) = ОҰ
ln xi вҲ’О»X
О¶X

(3.40)
From Equation 3.33, joint lognormal distributed random variables X can be transformed
marginally to standard normal correlated variables bZ вҲјN(0, R0), as,
ЛҶzi = ОҰвҲ’1

ОҰ
ln xi вҲ’О»X
О¶X

= ln xi вҲ’О»X
О¶X
.
(3.41)
The correlation coefficient between two lognormal variables (X1, X2) is given from Equation
3.42 (e.g. (Johnson and Kotz, 1972; D. Q. Li, X. S. Tang, et al., 2013)),
ПҒX12 =
exp(О¶1О¶2ПҒЛҶz12) вҲ’1
q
exp(О¶2
1 вҲ’1)
 
exp(О¶2
2 вҲ’1)
.
(3.42)
Thus, from Equation 3.42 the correlation coefficient between the standard normal variables
(bZ1, bZ2) can be expressed analytically as,
ПҒЛҶz12 =
ln(1 + ПҒx12ОҙX1ОҙX2)
q
ln(1 + Оҙ2
X1) ln(1 + Оҙ2
X2)
(3.43)
38
==PAGE:44==
3 Methods Description
where ОҙXi = ПғXi/ВөXi the coefficient of variation, and ПҒx12 the correlation coefficient computed
from the data (e.g. MoM, MLE), here equal to -0.45. By substituting the values given in
Table 3.2 in Equation 3.43, the correlation coefficient ПҒЛҶzij, which corresponds to the copula
parameter ПҒ0,ij, is computed as ПҒ0,ij = вҲ’0.484.
The inverse percentile lognormal CDF writes,
FвҲ’1
X (p) = exp

О¶XОҰвҲ’1(p) + О»X

.
(3.44)
where p the percentile. Then, the inverse transformation of ЛҶzi samples to the physical space
can be written as,
xi = FвҲ’1
X (ОҰ(ЛҶzi)) = exp (ЛҶziО¶X + О»X)
(3.45)
Hence the problem reduces to obtaining correlated standard normal samples, and transform-
ing the marginally to the physical space using Equation 3.45. The following script can be
used to perform the transformations given in Equation 3.39, and generate samples from the
joint distribution of the variables. The ERADist package (ERA Group, 2020) is used to define
the lognormal distributions with their parameters.
1 # libraries
2 import numpy as np
3 import scipy.linalg
4 from ERADist import ERADist
5 import random as rnd
6 from scipy import stats
7 import math
8 np.random.seed(2022)
# fix seed to generate the same samples each time
9 #-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
10 n = 2
# number of random variables
11 Ns = 1000
# desired number of simulated samples
12 # means, standard deviations and correlation coefficient (e.g. from soil data)
13 mu_x1 = 15
14 std_x1 = 7
15 mu_x2 = 29.3
16 std_x2 = 4.5
17 rho_12 = -0.45
18 # simple function to obtain the parameters of the lognormal distribution
19 def pars_log(mu_x,std_x):
20
std_x_log = np.sqrt(np.log(std_x**2/mu_x**2 +1));
21
mu_x_log = np.log(mu_x)-(std_x_log**2)/2;
22
return mu_x_log,std_x_log
23 lamda_1, zeta_1 = pars_log(mu_x1,std_x1)
# parameters of c dist.
24 lamda_2, zeta_2 = pars_log(mu_x2,std_x2)
# parameters of phi dist.
25 lamda = np.array([lamda_1,lamda_2])
# store in arrays
26 zeta = np.array([zeta_1,zeta_2])
39
==PAGE:45==
3 Methods Description
27 #-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
28 # Define the marginals based on their parameters
29 marginals = [ERADist(вҖҷlognormalвҖҷ,вҖҷPARвҖҷ,[lamda_1,zeta_1]),ERADist(вҖҷlognormalвҖҷ,вҖҷ
PARвҖҷ,[lamda_2,zeta_2])]
30 cv1 = std_x1/mu_x1
# coefficient of variation of c
31 cv2 =
std_x2/mu_x2
# coefficient of variation of phi
32 # Calculate the correlation coefficient of the standard normal variables from
33 # Equation 3.57. This is also the copula parameter in this case (exact)
34 rho_z = (np.log(1 + rho_12*cv1*cv2)/ np.sqrt(np.log(1 + cv1**2) *
35
np.log(1+cv2**2)))
36 R_z = np.array([[1,rho_z],[rho_z,1]])
# create correlation matrix R
37 #
Perform the transformations given in Equation 3.52
38 # Perform the inverse transformation to obtain independent samples Z
39 # Note that it doesnвҖҷt exist an analytical expression of the inverse standard
normal function, hence the inverse percent function can be used
40 # Generate standard (Ns x 2) uniform samples U(0,1)
41 # Option 1: LCG custom made generation (see Ross, 2013 for details)
42 def LCG_generator(num_iter):
43 #
LCG uses the formula: X_(i+1) = (aX_i + c) mod m
44
# Inputs
45
x_value = 123456789.0
46
a = 101427
47
c = 321
48
m = (2 ** 16)
49
count = 0
50
x = []
51
while count < num_iter:
52
x_value = (a * x_value + c) % m
53
x.append(x_value/m)
54
count = count+1
55
return x
56 # Option 2: use Python built-in generator
57 U = np.random.rand(Ns,2).
# Mersenne generator Python
58 Z = stats.norm.ppf(U)
# The independent standard normal samples
59 #-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
60 # NOTE: Alternatively, Independent standard normal samples Z1, Z2 can
61 # be generated using the Box-Muller method (or e.g. Rejection sampling). The
62 # Box-Muller method is described in page 21 "Phoon,
K.
K.
and
J.Ching(2015)
"Risk and reliability in geotechnical engineering"
63 # This can be programmed easily as follows,
64 X_Box_M1 = []
65 X_Box_M2 = []
40
==PAGE:46==
3 Methods Description
66 counter = 0
67 while counter < Ns:
68
def normal(u1,u2):
69
z1 = math.sqrt( -2 * math.log(u1) ) * math.cos ( 2 * math.pi * u2 )
70
z2 = math.sqrt( -2 * math.log(u1) ) * math.sin (2 * math.pi * u2 )
71
return z1 , z2
72
u1 = rnd.random()
73
u2 = rnd.random()
74
z1,z2 = normal(u1,u2)
75
X_Box_M1.append(z1)
76
X_Box_M2.append(z2)
77
counter = counter +1
78 Z_samples_Box_Muller = np.array([X_Box_M1,X_Box_M2]).T
79 #-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
80 # Perform Cholesky decomposition (the matrix is positive definite),
81 # and get the lower triangular matrix
82 L = scipy.linalg.cholesky(R_z,lower=True)
83 # Obtain correlated samples Z_hat = L @ Z (dot product)
84 Z_hat_samples = np.dot(L,Z.T).T
85 # Transform Z_hat samples to X samples in physical space using Equation 3.56
86 # Generate standard uniform samples, using the correlated std normal samples
Z_hat
87 U_samples = stats.norm.cdf(Z_hat_samples)
88 # Transform to X samples (physical space)
89 X_samples = np.exp(stats.norm.ppf(U_samples)*zeta+lamda)
90 # OR directly from Equation 3.56
91 # X_samples = np.exp(Z_hat_samples*zeta+lamda)
The generated correlated samples of (c, П•) are illustrated in Figure 3.2 along with the corre-
sponding histograms indicating the probability density.
The empirical CDF Fe(x) of the variables can be evaluated from the generated samples.
Fe(x) is an estimate of the underlying distribution function F(x), and can be evaluated as the
proportion of n samplesвҖҷ values that are less or equal to x, i.e (Ross, 2013).
Fe(x) = number of i : X вүӨx
n
= 1
n
n
вҲ‘
i=1
1{XiвүӨx},
(3.46)
where n the number of samples and 1{XiвүӨx} the indicator function, i.e. assigning 1 if Xi вүӨx.
A convenient evaluation of Fe(x) can be achieved for sorted samples. The empirical CDF can
then be compared to the theoretical CDF, which in this case is the lognormal distribution. This
allows to check if the generated samples are indeed lognormal distributed. This can be easily
done for example in Python:
1 # Compute the empirical CDFs
2 x1_srt = np.sort(X_samples[:,0]). # sort the cohesion samples
41
==PAGE:47==
3 Methods Description
10
20
30
40
50
c (kPa)
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
(o)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
density
0.00
0.05
density
Figure 3.2: Generated samples from the joint PDF of (X1, X2)
3 F1_e = np.arange(1,len(x1_srt)+1)/float(len(x1_srt)) # evaluate the empirical
CDF of c
4 x2_srt = np.sort(X_samples[:,1]) # sort the friction angle samples
5 F2_e = np.arange(1,len(x2_srt)+1)/float(len(x2_srt)) # evaluate the empirical
CDF of phi
6 # Compute the theoretical (lognormal) CDFs (here using ERADist)
7 F_X1 = marginals[0].cdf(X_samples[:,0])
8 F_X2 = marginals[1].cdf(X_samples[:,1])
9 # Compute the theoretical (lognormal) PDFs (here using ERADist)
10 f_X1 = marginals[0].pdf(X_samples[:,0])
11 f_X2 = marginals[1].pdf(X_samples[:,1])
The empirical and theoretical CDFs can then be plotted for visual inspection. Figure 3.3
illustrates the comparison of the empirical and theoretical CDFs, and the theoretical marginal
PDFs of the two random variables. As can be observed in the upper two plots of Figure 3.3
there are very small differences between the theoretical and empirical CDFs. It can be said
that the generated samples follow the lognormal distribution, although statistical tests can
be performed to check this assumption. A well known statistical test for this scope, is the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which is discussed later in this chapter.
In addition, it is also possible calculate and plot the joint PDF fX(x1, x2), to illustrate the
42
==PAGE:48==
3 Methods Description
10
20
30
40
50
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fc
Theoretical
Empirical
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F
10
20
30
40
50
c (kPa)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
fc
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
(o)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
f
Figure 3.3: Marginal CDFs and PDFs
dependence structure among the random variables. The PDF of a variable X can be written
as a function of the standard normal PDF as (e.g. Kottegoda and Rosso, 2008, pp. 134),
fX(x) = П•(h(x))

dh(x)
dx

(3.47)
where h(x) = (ln x вҲ’О»X)/О¶X the inverse function, which is here given in Equation 3.41,
corresponding to the transform of the lognormal random variable X to the standard normal
variable bZ. Hence the above equation in this case can be written as,
fX(x) = П•(ЛҶz)
1
x О¶X
,
(3.48)
Substituting Equation 3.48 into the Nataf PDF given in Equation 3.38, leads to the following
expression of the joint PDF of (X1, X2),
fX1,X2(x1, x2) = П•2(ЛҶz, R0)
1
x1 О¶X1
1
x2 О¶X2
(3.49)
where П•2(ЛҶz, R0) the bivariate standard normal PDF of (bZ1, bZ2), with correlation matrix R0.
The joint PDF can be evaluated through a few lines of Python code as follows,
43
==PAGE:49==
3 Methods Description
1 from scipy.stats import multivariate_normal as mvn
2 # create a 2-dim grid to evaluate the bivariate distribution
3 num_p = 1000
4 x1 = np.linspace(1,40,num_p)
# 1000 evenly spaced samples, calculated over the
interval [1,40] for the variable X1 = c
5 x2 = np.linspace(5,45,num_p)
# 1000 evenly spaced samples, calculated over the
interval [5,45] for the variable X2 = \phi
6 X1,X2 = np.meshgrid(x1,x2)
# construct the grid: X1 (1000x1000) and X2 (1000
x1000)
7 X = np.array([X1.flatten(),X2.flatten()]).T # constructs a (1000^2 x 2) array
from the grid
8 # Define the joint PDF given in Equation 3.62. The
9 jointf_X = lambda X: mvn.pdf((np.log(X)-lamda)/zeta, mean = np.zeros(n), cov =
R_z ) * 1/(X[:,0]*zeta_1)*1/(X[:,1]*zeta_2)
10 # Evaluate the PDF, reshape (1000x1000), and plot
11 jpdf_f_X = jointf_X(X).reshape(num_p,num_p)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
X1 = c (kPa)
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
X2 =
(o)
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
(a) Equi-probability density contours of the joint PDF of
(X1, X2)
(b) 3D plot of the joint PDF of (X1, X2)
Figure 3.4: Joint probability density of X1 = c (kPa) and X2 = П• (o)
Figure 3.4a illustrates the shape of the evaluated joint PDF of (X1, X2). Points that fall on each
contour line have equal probability density. Figure 3.4b illustrates the 3-dimensional surface
of the JPDF, with the z-axis corresponding to the joint probability density values. Both figures
can be used to illustrate the dependency structure among the variables, although the most
common visualization method refers to the JPDF isolines in figure 3.4a.
The realistic example presented in this section, focused on explaining the procedure for
constructing a joint-bivariate PDF of variables that have the lognormal distribution as marginal.
A sampling method from the joint distribution, was presented as well. The extension to more
dimensions when the variables are normal, lognormal or a combination thereof, is more or
44
==PAGE:50==
3 Methods Description
less straightforward. However, geotechnical parameters in general, are not always lognormal
distributed, even if the lognormal distribution is one of the most commonly used models
(see section 3.4.1). It should be noted that analytical expressions for the transformations
are available in limited cases. Moreover, the correlation coefficients between the standard
normal variables were here computed analytically from Equation 3.42), due to the underlying
relation with the normal distribution. When other types of marginals are involved, numerical
computation is unavoidable. An efficient and convenient computational tool for performing
the transformations and constructing joint PDFs of multiple random variables with different
types of marginals, is the ERANataf class of functions, provided in the homepage of the ERA
Group of TUM (ERA Group, 2020).
In the following section, the construction of a multivariate distribution, based on the
JohnsonвҖҷs system of distributions is discussed.
3.4 Constructing a Multivariate distribution with JohnsonвҖҷs
marginal distributions
3.4.1 The JohnsonвҖҷs system
Most geotechnical parameters, such as soil shear strengths, can take only non-negative
values. Moreover, soil physics define some boundaries in the values that can be assigned
to a specific soil property related to a specific soil type, or to some other conditions. For
example OCR in overconsolidated clays takes values larger than 1. Considering such physical
bounds, a normal distribution may be not an appropriate probabilistic model for most soil
properties, since normal random variables are unbounded and can take any value in R. For
this reason, the lognormal distribution is a more suitable model for geotechnical properties
and it is often preferred in statistical analyses, since it can overcome some problems associated
with modeling non-normal real data, while retaining beneficial properties of the normal
distribution. The lognormal distribution is bounded at 0. Moreover, a lognormal distributed
random variable Y is translated to a normal random variable by with the logarithmic transform
ln Y, and as discussed in sections 3.1.3, 3.3.5.
K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2013 adopted a more flexible type of marginals, called JohnsonвҖҷs
system of distributions, whose one special member is the shifted lognormal distribution
(lower bound > 0). These distributions can describe a wide range of distribution shapes
and they can be proper choices for bounded soil parameters. The approach to construct
the multivariate model is again based on Nataf transformations (Ching, Lin, et al., 2017),
meaning that the underlying distribution of transformed variables to normal space would
be the multi-Normal distribution. The JohnsonвҖҷs system is a convenient choice for marginal
CDFs because there exist analytical expressions for the transformation to the standard normal
space and its inverse. Such transformations, were presented in the previous section. To retain
the authors mathematical notations in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014), let X denote a standard
normal variable and Y a non-normal random variable. Then the (marginal) transform (recall
45
==PAGE:51==
3 Methods Description
Equation 3.33) to the standard normal space writes,
Xi = ОҰвҲ’1[Fi(Yi)],
(3.50)
and the inverse, i.e. from standard normal space to the physical space of the soil property,
Yi = FвҲ’1
i
[ОҰ(Xi)],
(3.51)
where Fi the CDF of Yi, FвҲ’1
i
the inverse CDF, ОҰ the CDF of the standard normal variable.
The JohnsonвҖҷs system (Johnson, 1949) consists of three members, namely SU, SB and
SL. The former member is associated with a three parameter lognormal distribution. Let
aX, bX, aY, bY denote the distribution parameters (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014). A closed
form expression for the transformation to the standard normal space, given by (Slifker and
Shapiro, 1980), writes as follows,
X вҲ’bX
aX
= Оә
Y вҲ’bY
aY

= Оә (Yn) ,
(3.52)
where Оә denotes the transformation between the variables X and Y and Yn = (Y вҲ’bY)/aY.
the transformation Оә (Yn) for each of the JohnsonвҖҷs system members writes,
вҖў The unbounded member SU:
Оә(Yn) = sinhвҲ’1 Yn = ln

Yn +
q
1 + Y2n

(3.53)
вҖў The SB member bounded in [bY, aY + bY]:
Оә(Yn) = ln

Yn
1 вҲ’Yn

(3.54)
вҖў The SL member with lower bound at bY:
Оә(Yn) = ln(Yn).
(3.55)
Equation 3.55 leads to the shifted lognormal, if bвҲ—
X = bX вҲ’aX ln(aY) (see Ching and
K. K. Phoon, 2014 pp. 5).
The parameters bX, aX define the shape of the distribution, while bY, aY are location and
scale parameters, respectively. Unique distributions can be derived for a large number of
combinations of mean, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis that may characterize
a given set of observed data. In addition, the distribution type remains unchanged after
conditioning when the transformations 3.52 are used to translate a non-normal random
variable to the standard normal space. The reader is referred to (K. K. Phoon and Ching,
2015, pp. 45), (K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2013) for more details on the three members of the
JohnsonвҖҷs system.
46
==PAGE:52==
3 Methods Description
3.4.2 JohnsonвҖҷs member selection and estimation of distribution parameters
(Slifker and Shapiro, 1980) proposed a computationally convenient approach to select the
distribution type and estimate the parameters of each member. The distribution type selection
is based on percentiles and the main steps of the method can be summarized in 5 steps (see
Slifker and Shapiro, 1980, pp. 240):
1. Choose a number z > 0. Based on (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014) and (Slifker and
Shapiro, 1980) an appropriate choice can be z = 0.7
2. Compute 4 percentiles of the standard normal distribution ОҰ, corresponding to -3z, -z, z,
3z. From tables of the standard normal distribution, or with simple software functions,
the four percentiles correspond to:
pa = ОҰ(вҲ’2.1) = 0.018
pb = ОҰ(вҲ’0.7) = 0.242
pc = ОҰ(0.7) = 0.758
pd = ОҰ(2.1) = 0.982
The validity of the chosen value of z, can be checked with an empirical rule, stating that
the sample size in the database should be N вүҘ10/pa = 556, for z = 0.7. If this is not
satisfied the z value should be reduced (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014)
3. Calculate the Y values associated with the above percentiles: ya = FвҲ’1(pa), yb = FвҲ’1(pb),
yc = FвҲ’1(pc) and yd = FвҲ’1(pd). However since the CDF of Y is not known, these values
may be calculated directly from the data in the generic database, i.e. yi = pi sample
percentile. This computation is trivial with the use of a software function. For instance,
using the numpy library in Python
1 y_a, y_b, y_c, y_d = numpy.quantile(Y, (p_a, p_b, p_c, p_d))
4. From the ya, yb, yc, yd values, compute three parameters:
m = yd вҲ’yc
n = yb вҲ’ya
p = yc вҲ’yb
(3.56)
5. In the last step, let D = mn/p2 and select the JohnsonвҖҷs distribution type as:
SU, if D > 1
SB, if D < 1
SL, if D = 1
(3.57)
47
==PAGE:53==
3 Methods Description
Based on the identified JohnsonвҖҷs members, the unknown parameters of each one can be
derived as follows:
For SU:
ax =
2z
coshвҲ’1 h
1
2

m
p + n
p
i,
bX = aX sinhвҲ’1
 
n
p вҲ’m
p
2вҲҡ
D вҲ’1
!
aY =
2pвҲҡ
D вҲ’1

m
p + n
p вҲ’2
 q
m
p + n
p + 2
,
bY = yc + yb
2
+
p

n
p вҲ’m
p

2

m
p + n
p вҲ’2

(3.58)
where D = mn/p, and it should hold aX > 0, aY > 0.
For SB:
ax =
z
coshвҲ’1 h
1
2
q 1 + p
m
  1 + p
n
i,
bX = aX sinhвҲ’1
пЈ®
пЈ°( p
n вҲ’p
m)
q
(
 1 + p
m
  1 + p
n
 вҲ’4
2
  1
D вҲ’1

пЈ№
пЈ»
aY =
p
q 1 + p
m
  1 + p
n
 вҲ’2
2 вҲ’4
1
D вҲ’1
,
bY = yc + yb
2
вҲ’aY
2 + p
  p
n вҲ’p
m

2
  1
D вҲ’1

(3.59)
where D = mn/p, and aX > 0, aY > 0.
For SL:
ax =
2z
ln m
p
,
bвҲ—
X = aX ln
m
p вҲ’1
p
q
m
p
,
bY = yc + yb
2
вҲ’
p
2

m
p + 1

m
p вҲ’1
(3.60)
From Equations 3.50-3.55, and with the distribution parameters known, the transformation
from physical to standard normal space Y вҶ’X can be performed marginally as (Ching, Lin,
et al., 2017; K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015),
X =
пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈІ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈі
bX + aX sinhвҲ’1 
YвҲ’bY
aY

for
SU
bX + aX ln

YвҲ’bY
aY+bYвҲ’Y

for
SB (bY вүӨY вүӨaY + bY)
bX + aX ln

YвҲ’bY
aY

for
SL (y вүҘbY)
(3.61)
3.4.3 Hypothesis testing: The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
The normality of the distribution of the transformed random variable X can be visually
checked buy plotting it against the reference standard normal distribution. Moreover, sta-
tistical tests can be performed to check if indeed is standard normal.
A popular and
48
==PAGE:54==
3 Methods Description
flexible nonparametric statistical test for checking the goodness-of-fit of an empirical distribu-
tion constructed from the available samples, and a theoretical distribution, is the so called
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test (e.g. (Conover, 1999; Ross, 2013)). While other statistical tests
are also available for this task (e.g. Shapiro-Wilk test for normality), the KS test is adopted in
(Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015), and this was performed in
the current study, as well.
The K-S test provides a statistic that can be used to accept or reject the null hypothesis H0,
i.e.
H0 : X has the normal distribution
(3.62)
The K-S statistic Dn is asymptotically distributed (n вҶ’вҲһ) as the Kolmogorov distribution,
Dn = вҲҡ
n sup
x
|Fn(x) вҲ’F(x)| = вҲҡ
n sup
x
Fn(x) вҲ’ОҰ
 x вҲ’Вө
Пғ
 ,
(3.63)
where n the number of samples and sup the supremum of the set distances. Dn measures
of the absolute difference between the theoretical and empirical distributions. Hence, small
Dn values lead to acceptance of the null hypothesis H0, while for large Dn values the null
hypothesis should be rejected. Consider a critical value c such that if,
Dn > c вҮ’Reject H0
Dn вүӨc вҮ’Accept H0
(3.64)
A threshold value c can be chosen such that the probability of rejection of H0, i.e. Pr(Dn > c),
is equal to a small quantity a (normally a = 0.05), which corresponds to the significance
level of the KS test. The c value corresponds to the (1 вҲ’a) percentile of the Kolmogorov
distribution (e.g. (Marsaglia et al., 2003)).
Let pvalue denote the probability Pr(Dn вүҘdn), where dn the realizations of Dn, then H0 is
rejected if p < a. Software functions can be used for efficient computation of the probability
Pr(Dn вүҘdn. For instance, to implement the KS test for a standardized X variable, and derive
the Dn statistic and pvalue in Python, the following function implemented with the scipy library
(www-03 ) can be used,
1 D_n, p_value = scipy.stats.kstest(rvs=X, cdf=вҖҷnormвҖҷ)
3.4.4 The multivariate distribution
It should be noted, that even if the marginally transformed to the standard normal space
random variables X, follow indeed the normal distribution, this does not imply that collec-
tively are multi-Normal distributed (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; Ching, K. K. Phoon,
Khan, et al., 2020; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019). However, the multivariate normality is
again the key assumption made in this method (see also section 3.3.3). Hence, after defining
the marginal distributions, i.e. the JohnsonвҖҷs distributions of the uncertain soil parameters
Y and the transformed to the standard normal space standard normal CDFs of X, the next
step towards the complete definition of a multi-Normal distribution is the computation of a
49
==PAGE:55==
3 Methods Description
linear (Pearson) correlation matrix. This correlation matrix is composed from the correlation
coefficient pairs between the variables Xi and Xj. The computation can be performed based on
Equation 3.30. Let ПҒij denote the correlation coefficient, in case of standard normal variables
one can define ПҒij as (second moment method),
ПҒij = 1
n
n
вҲ‘
k=1
Xi,kXj,k,
(3.65)
where n the number of pairwise (Xi, Xj) and Xi,k the kth sample in the Xi dataset.
The bootstrap technique
The pairwise correlation coefficients between the original variables (Yi, Yj) are generally not
the same with the transformed (Xi, Xj) as highlighted in section 3.3.3. Moreover, the statistical
uncertainty can be high if the estimation of the correlation coefficients between (Xi, Xj) is
based on the moment method of Equation 3.65. Some reasons for high statistical uncertainty
could be the presence of bad quality data in the database, the combination of data from many
different sites and the low amount of data-pairs in the dataset. In addition, it is unlikely that
the ПҒij components will lead to a "positive-definite" matrix, which is critical for constructing
the multi-Normal distribution of X (e.g. Straub, 2020, pp.136).
The authors in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014) adopted a sampling replacement technique
(Efron and Tibshirani, 1993), called Bootstrap to obtain a large number of Оҙij estimates, to
address cases where significant statistical uncertainty is present. The method proceeds by
sampling (with replacement) n random pairs of (Xi, Xj) from the observed pairs in the dataset,
and the correlation coefficient is estimated based on the resampled data. When the process
is repeated many times, the empirical distribution can be constructed from the coefficient
samples and this can be used to approximate the possible range of each ПҒij coefficient, through
the computation of a confidence interval (e.g. 90% CI in Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014).
However, the resampling technique, does not guarantee positive-definiteness of the resulting
correlation matrix.
This problem can be possibly addressed by introducing a positive-
definiteness check for the correlation matrix, that results after each round of ПҒij estimations,
and by repeating the steps until a desired number of valid correlation matrices is accepted.
For n number of soil parameters in the dataset, there exist n(n вҲ’1)/2 possible pairwise
correlations. The proposed approach in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014) is implemented
through the following steps:
1. For each of the n(n вҲ’1)/2 pairwise correlations (Xi, Xj):
вҖў Generate a sample (Xi, Xj) with replacement from the observed data pairs. (For
example, the method numpy.random.Generator.choice in numpy library in Python
can be used (www-02 ))
вҖў Compute the correlation coefficient ПҒij from Equation 3.65
2. Check if the resulting correlation matrix R is positive-definite. Positive-definiteness
implies that all eigenvalues of the matrix О»R, are larger than 0: О»R > 0 (Strang, 2006).
50
==PAGE:56==
3 Methods Description
Accept and store the sampled correlation matrix if it is positive-definite (e.g. in Python
with numpy: (numpy.linalg.eigvals(Csample) > 0).all()), otherwise reject.
3. Repeat steps 1-2 until a desired number k of correlation matrices have been obtained.
The final correlation matrix can be calculated as the mean value of k correlation matrices.
Having computed a valid correlation matrix from the available generic database, the
multivariate normal PDF of X = (X1, X2, ..., Xm) is defined as,
fX(x) =
1
(2ПҖ)m/2p
|C|
exp

вҲ’1
2(x вҲ’Вө)TCвҲ’1(x вҲ’Вө)

(3.66)
where |C| denotes the determinant of the covariance matrix C, Вө the mean vector and m the
number of random variables. The covariance matrix C is constructed as (Straub, 2020),
C = DXRXXDX
(3.67)
where DX = diag[Пғ1, Пғ2, ..., Пғm] the diagonal matrix containing the standard deviations of the
variables. If all variables in X are standard normal variables, then Вө = 0 and the covariance
and correlation matrices are identical, i.e. C = RXX.
Simulation
Simulation of correlated standard normal random variables X can be performed in the same
way as discussed in section 3.3.4 and Equations 3.39. Let Z denote a vector of independent
standard normal samples, and L the Cholesky factor, such that LLT = C, where C is identical
to the m Г— m correlation matrix. The transformation to correlated standard normal variables
writes X = LZ (note that in Equation 3.39 the correlated variables are denoted by bZ). Finally,
correlated random variables Y in the original/physical space can be obtained from Equation
3.51 for each JohnsonвҖҷs member (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014 pp. 12 or Ching, Lin, et al.,
2017, pp.1209),
Y =
пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈІ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈі
bY + aY sinh(Xn)
for
SU
bY + aY
exp(Xn)
1+exp(Xn)
for
SB
bY + exp
 XnвҲ’bвҲ—
X
aX

for
SL
(3.68)
where,
Xni = X вҲ’bXi
aXi
.
(3.69)
The following function programmed in Python can be used to obtain samples of soil parame-
ters based on the approach described above (SU and SB, similarly works for SL). The function
makes use of the ERADist package (see ERA Group, 2020).
51
==PAGE:57==
3 Methods Description
1 import numpy as np
2 import scipy.linalg
3 from ERADist import ERADist # package for flexible definition of distributions
4
5 def Soil_parameters_samples(n, C, dist_params, can_be_negative, Ns):
6
"""
7
Generate correlated samples from the joint distribution of the soil
parameters
8
Inputs:
9
- n: Number of soil parameters in the data-set
10
- C: covariance matrix
11
- dist_params: tuple containing 6 arrays with: JohnsonвҖҷs type (вҖҷSUвҖҷ, вҖҷSBвҖҷ,
вҖҷSLвҖҷ) in index 0, and the distribution parameters (a_x,b_x in indices
[1:3]; a_y,b_y in indices [3:5])
12
- can_be_negative: list containing (вҖҷyвҖҷ/вҖҷnвҖҷ), indicating if the soil
parameter can take negative values
13
- Ns: desired number of samples
14
Output:
15
- Soil_samples: Ns number of soil parametersвҖҷ samples
16
"""
17
Marginals_type = dist_params[0]
18
L = scipy.linalg.cholesky(C,lower=True)
# Cholesky factor
19
V = np.random.rand(Ns,n)
# standard uniform samples
20
stand_norm_dist = ERADist(вҖҷstandardnormalвҖҷ,вҖҷMOMвҖҷ,[])
21
U = stand_norm_dist.icdf(V)
# V -> U inverse transform
22
X_samples = np.dot(L,U.T).T
23
a_y,b_y = dist_params[3:5]
24
a_x,b_x = dist_params[1:3]
25
Xni = ((X_samples - b_x) / a_x)
26
Yi = np.empty(Xni.shape)
27
for i in range(Marginals_type.size):
28
if Marginals_type[i] == вҖҷSBвҖҷ:
29
Yi[:,i] = b_y[i] + a_y[i] * (np.exp(Xni[:,i]) / (1 + np.exp(Xni[:,i
])))
30
elif Marginals_type[i] == вҖҷSUвҖҷ:
31
# Using the Euler transform
32
Yi[:,i] = b_y[i] + a_y[i] * ((np.exp(Xni[:,i]) - np.exp(-Xni[:,i]))
/2)
33
34
Soil_samples = np.empty(Yi.shape)
35
for i in range(n):
36
if can_be_negative[i]:
52
==PAGE:58==
3 Methods Description
37
Soil_samples[:, i] = Yi[:, i]
38
else:
39
Soil_samples[:, i] = np.exp(Yi[:, i])
40
return Soil_samples
41
3.5 Bayesian framework for Multivariate distributions
3.5.1 The multivariate distribution conditioning
Up to this point the proposed method for constructing the multivariate PDF (Ching and
K. K. Phoon, 2014), is based on the same principles discussed in section 3.3.4, i.e. the
multivariate PDF is a Nataf (P. L. Liu and Der Kiureghian, 1986) (or translation) PDF. The
exception is that the multivariate distribution is constructed based on the flexible JohnsonвҖҷs
distributions, for which there exist analytical expression of their inverse CDF, which facilitate
the transformation to the original space of the variables as shown in Equation 3.68. An
important motivation for adopting the JohnsonвҖҷs system in constructing the multivariate PDF
is associated with the conditioning of the distribution. The marginal JohnsonвҖҷs distributions
retain their type when conditioned to some investigation data, and only parameters are
updated (Ching, Lin, et al., 2017; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; K. K. Phoon and Ching,
2015). Hence, if XвҖІ the updated normal distributed variable with parameters aвҖІ
X, bвҖІ
X, this can
be related to the physical variable YвҖІ with the following transformation,
Оә
YвҖІ вҲ’bY
aY

= XвҖІ вҲ’bX
aX
= (ПғвҖІ
XX +вҖІ ВөвҖІ
X) вҲ’bX
aX
= X вҲ’(bX вҲ’ВөвҖІ
X)/ПғвҖІ
X
aX/ПғвҖІ
X
(3.70)
where ВөвҖІ
X and ПғвҖІ
X the updated mean and standard deviation of the normal variable XвҖІ. YвҖІ
remains a Johnson random variable with unchanged distribution type (K. K. Phoon and
Ching, 2015, pp. 69).
An attractive property of the multivariate normal distribution is that all conditional dis-
tributions in a vector of joint normal random variables X, are again multivariate normal
(Straub, 2020). Consider the following example
Example 1: Conditional updating of normal distributed variables
Consider a set of 5 random variables, X = (X1, X2, X3, X4, X5). For illustrative purposes, the
random variables X1, X2, X3, X4, X5 are assumed to marginally follow the normal distribution.
Consider a problem that involves updating X4 and X5 based on X1, X2 and X3. The random
vector can be partitioned in the following subvectors,
X =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
(3.71)
53
==PAGE:59==
3 Methods Description
Before the measurements are made, i.e. prior to site investigation, the random parameters at
each depth in a soil layer, are modelled with a joint normal distribution with the following
mean vector,
Вө =

21.09
0.02
1.85
15.20
30.12
T .
and standard deviations,
Пғ =

7.60
0.33
0.20
6.96
5.52

,
corresponding to the diagonal elements of the matrix DX. The correlation matrix is given as,
RXX =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
1
вҲ’0.06
вҲ’0.26
0.19
вҲ’0.34
вҲ’0.06
1
вҲ’0.57
вҲ’0.36
0.62
вҲ’0.26
вҲ’0.57
1
вҲ’0.10
0.07
0.19
вҲ’0.36
вҲ’0.10
1
вҲ’0.46
вҲ’0.34
0.62
0.07
вҲ’0.46
1
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
From Equation 3.67 the covariance matrix C derives as,
C =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
57.76
вҲ’0.15
вҲ’0.40
10.05
вҲ’14.26
вҲ’0.15
0.11
вҲ’0.04
вҲ’0.83
1.13
вҲ’0.40
вҲ’0.04
0.04
вҲ’0.14
0.08
10.05
вҲ’0.83
вҲ’0.14
48.44
вҲ’17.67
вҲ’14.26
1.13
0.08
вҲ’17.67
30.47
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
Assume that the matrix X contains data for the soil parameters X1, X2, X3, X4, X5 at different
depths in a soil layer of the site at hand. Let the first row of the matrix correspond to a
specific sampling depth, containing the following results,

X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
T =

25
0.11
1.71
вҲ’
вҲ’
T
with no measurements available on X4, X5. Let xo denote the observed values in the measure-
mentsвҖҷ vector, i.e. measurements on (X1, X2, X3), and xu the unobserved ones (X4, X5). The
mean vector Вө can be partitioned as,
Вөo =

21.09
0.02
1.85
T
Вөu =

15.2
30.12
T
where Вөo the means of the variables with observed values, i.e. means of (X1, X2, X3) and Вөu
the mean vector of the unobserved ones (X4, X5). The covariance matrix can be partitioned
accordingly as,
Cuu =

48.44
вҲ’17.67
вҲ’17.67
30.47

,
Cuo =
 10.05
вҲ’0.83
вҲ’0.14
вҲ’14.26
1.13
0.08

Cou =
пЈ®
пЈ°
10.05
вҲ’14.26
вҲ’0.83
1.13
вҲ’0.14
0.08
пЈ№
пЈ»,
Coo =
пЈ®
пЈ°
57.76
вҲ’0.15
вҲ’0.40
вҲ’0.15
0.11
вҲ’0.04
вҲ’0.40
вҲ’0.04
0.04
пЈ№
пЈ»
54
==PAGE:60==
3 Methods Description
The conditional distribution of xu given xo is again multi-Normal, with mean vector and
covariance matrix given from,
Вөu|o = Вөu + CuoCвҲ’1
oo (xo вҲ’Вөo)
(3.72)
Cu|o = Cuu вҲ’CuoCвҲ’1
oo Cou
(3.73)
From Equations 3.72, 3.73 the conditional mean vector of X4, X5 and the conditional covariance
matrix are computed as,
Вөu|o =
16.38
28.86

Cu|o =
 34.49
вҲ’0.54
вҲ’0.54
9.08

Hence, the updated distribution of (X4, X5) is a bivariate normal distribution, with mean
vector and covariance matrix given by Вөu|o and Cu|o respectively,
fX(x4, x5) =
1
(2ПҖ)
q
|Cu|o|
exp
(
вҲ’1
2
x4
x5

вҲ’Вөu|o
T
CвҲ’1
u|o
x4
x5

вҲ’Вөu|o
)
(3.74)
Example 2: Conditional updating JohnsonвҖҷs distributed random variables
Consider now that X = (X1, X2, ..., X5) are standard normal variables, transformed from the
(log-transformed) JohnsonвҖҷs distributed variables Y = (Y1, Y2, ..., Y5). Let the variables in this
case denote: PI (%): plasticity index; %clay: the clay particles fraction (< 0.002mm); %sand:
the sand proportion ([0.06 вҲ’2mm]); ПҒd (t/m3): dry density and П• (o) friction angle. We
consider that all parameters/properties refer to similar soil type, clay mixtures in this case.
Based on a number of laboratory measurements on soil specimens from sites located in the
region, the distribution type and distribution parameters of each random variable Yi were
defined and they are given in Table 3.3, . Consider that the task is to update the Plasticity
Distribution parameters
Random Variable
Soil Parameter
Distribution type
ax
bx
ay
by
Y1
ln(PI)
SB
2.46
-2.23
4.57
-0.25
Y2
ln(%clay)
SU
2.56
4.71
0.54
4.41
Y3
ln(%sand)
SB
1.26
-1.41
5.39
-1.23
Y4
ln(ПҒd)
SU
2.52
1.75
0.20
0.78
Y5
ln(П•)
SB
1.30
-0.91
1.16
2.64
Table 3.3: Distribution type and distribution parameters of Y1, Y2, Y3, Y4, Y5;
index Y1 and the effective friction angle Y5 based on the clay proportion Y2, sand proportion
55
==PAGE:61==
3 Methods Description
Y3, and dry density Y4. The mean vector of X can be partitioned as,
Вө =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
0u
0o
0o
0o
0u
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
=
Вөo
Вөu

(3.75)
This is a more realistic scenario, since during a site investigation there may have been
conducted low cost sieve analysis tests to determine the percentages of fines and sand
(clay fraction measured as reference for fines separation). However, there may be missing
information on the Atterberg limits, since no such tests may have been performed on these
specimens by the time. This information would be valuable for performing soil classification,
and an engineer wishes to update the prior knowledge he/she acquired from the regional
data, given a set of measurements on other (possibly) relevant parameters from the site at
hand. In addition, one wishes to update the information on a design parameter such as the
friction angle based on a set of measurements on soil properties that may affect its behavior.
On top of that a correlation between the plasticity index PI and friction angle П• has been
reported in literature (e.g F. Kulhawy and P. Mayne, 1990). This can be evident for the
considered generic (regional) data used in this example. Hence, it can be useful to jointly
update these properties based on the available test indices, and extract some information
about their dependence at the specific location of the site.
The correlation coefficients between the transformed standard normal variables (Xi, Xj) are
not the same as the those of the original (Yi, Yj), although they take similar values. Here, the
correlation coefficients were computed with the bootstrap technique. The covariance matrix
(equivalent correlation matrix) of the standard normal X is,
C =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
1
0.35
вҲ’0.27
вҲ’0.26
вҲ’0.34
0.35
1
вҲ’0.26
вҲ’0.10
вҲ’0.51
вҲ’0.27
вҲ’0.26
1
0.18
0.28
вҲ’0.26
вҲ’0.10
0.18
1
0.07
вҲ’0.34
вҲ’0.51
0.28
0.07
1
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
and can be partitioned accordingly as,
Cuu =

1
вҲ’0.34
вҲ’0.34
1

,
Cuo =

0.35
вҲ’0.27
вҲ’0.26
вҲ’0.51
0.28
0.07

Cou =
пЈ®
пЈ°
0.35
вҲ’0.51
вҲ’0.27
0.28
вҲ’0.26
0.07
пЈ№
пЈ»,
Coo =
пЈ®
пЈ°
1
вҲ’0.26
вҲ’0.10
вҲ’0.26
1
0.18
вҲ’0.10
0.18
1
пЈ№
пЈ»
Laboratory tests on soil samples extracted from a specific depth at the site, provided mea-
surements for the physical parameters PI, %clay, %sand, and ПҒd. These were log transformed
56
==PAGE:62==
3 Methods Description
to equivalent Yi measurements, and transformed to the standard normal space following
Equations 3.61,
пЈ®
пЈ°
Y1
Y2
Y3
пЈ№
пЈ»=
пЈ®
пЈ°
ln(19.28) = 2.96
ln(14.2) = 2.65
ln(1.84) = 0.61
пЈ№
пЈ»вҲ’вҶ’
пЈ®
пЈ°
X1
X2
X3
пЈ№
пЈ»=
пЈ®
пЈ°
0.37
вҲ’0.22
вҲ’0.12
пЈ№
пЈ»
(3.76)
The conditional distribution of Xu given Xo, i.e. f (Xu|Xo) is a multi-Normal distribution
with conditional mean vector and covariance matrix given by Equation 3.72 and Equation
3.73 respectively. It follows that they are equal to,
Вөu|o =

0.165
вҲ’0.207

Cu|o =

0.803
вҲ’0.134
вҲ’0.134
0.716

(3.77)
The updated marginal distribution of the variable X1 is a normal distribution with mean
ВөвҖІ
X1 = 0.165 and standard deviation ПғвҖІ
X1 =
вҲҡ
0.803 = 0.896, while the updated marginal
distribution of X5 is a normal distribution with mean ВөвҖІ
X5 = вҲ’0.207 and standard deviation
ПғвҖІ
X5 =
вҲҡ
0.716 = 0.846. The updated distribution of Y1 is again an SB distribution with
parameters (see Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014 pp. 5, 17) obtained from Equation 3.70,
aвҖІ
X1 = aX1
ПғвҖІ
X1
= 2.46
0.896 = 2.75,
bвҖІ
X4 =
bX1 вҲ’ВөвҖІ
X1
ПғвҖІ
X1
= вҲ’2.23 вҲ’0.165
0.896
= вҲ’2.67
and aY1 = 4.57, bY1 = вҲ’0.25. The updated distribution of Y5 is again an SB distribution with
parameters
aвҖІ
X5 = aX5
ПғвҖІ
X5
= 1.30
0.846 = 1.536,
bвҖІ
X5 =
bX5 вҲ’ВөвҖІ
X5
ПғвҖІ
X5
= вҲ’0.91 вҲ’(вҲ’0.207)
0.846
= вҲ’0.831
and aY5 = 1.16, bY5 = 2.64.
The calculated mean and standard deviation of Y1 = ln(PI) and Y5 = ln(П•), before and after
conditioning can be seen in Table 3.4. The unconditional and conditional PDFs of Y1 = ln(PI)
Unconditional
Conditional
Variable
ВөY
ПғY
ВөвҖІ
Y
ПғвҖІ
Y
Y1 = ln(PI)
2.98
0.38
3.04
0.33
Y5 = ln(П•)
3.39
0.18
3.36
0.16
Table 3.4: Mean and standard deviation of the variables Y1 and Y2, before and after condition-
ing
and Y5 = ln(П•) are shown in Figure 3.5, along with the site measurements of Y1 and Y5 for
comparison. Small differences in the mode and the shape of the conditional PDFs of the
parameters can be observed. The mode of distribution of Y5 = ln(П•) appears to be reduced
while the change in the mode of the Y1 = ln(PI) distribution is very small. A slight reduction
in the uncertainty is present due to conditioning. In Figure 3.5b one can notice that the actual
57
==PAGE:63==
3 Methods Description
(a) PDF of Y1
(b) PDF of Y5
Figure 3.5: Conditional probability density distribution given Y2 = 2.96, Y3 = 2.65, Y4 = 0.61;
Red dot: measured value
measured value of Y5 is very close to the mode of the conditional distribution. The parameters
on which they conditioned are weakly correlated as can be seen in the covariance matrix Coo.
These observations can be checked by plotting the joint probability density of (Y1, Y5). Since
both variables are SB distributed, according to Equation 3.61,
x1 = bX1 + aX1 ln

y1 вҲ’bY1
aY1 + bY1 вҲ’y1

x5 = bX5 + aX5 ln

y5 вҲ’bY5
aY5 + bY5 вҲ’y5

The derivative with respect to y writes,
dx1
dy1
= вҲ’
aX1aY1
(вҲ’bY1 вҲ’y1)(aY1 вҲ’bY1 вҲ’y1)
dx5
dy5
= вҲ’
aX5aY5
(вҲ’bY5 вҲ’y5)(aY5 вҲ’bY5 вҲ’y5).
The joint bivariate PDF of (Y1, Y5) can be written as,
fY(y1, y5) = fX(x1, x2)

dx1
dy1
dx5
dy5


(3.78)
Figure 3.6 illustrates this joint probability density before and after conditioning Figure 3.6
shows a less slanted (skewed) conditional distribution, which can be noticed in the reduced
off-diagonal elements of the matrix Cu|o. On the other hand, it can be seen that the scatter is
reduced, which can reflect more precise information about the parametersвҖҷ values at the site.
This example aimed to present the procedure of conditioning a bivariate distribution of
JohnsonвҖҷs distributed random variables, based on a set of measurements on multiple variables.
58
==PAGE:64==
3 Methods Description
Figure 3.6: Comparison of Unconditional (dashed contour lines) and Conditional (solid con-
tour lines) joint probability density distribution of (Y1, Y5)
The joint conditional distribution contains more information than the traditional pairwise
regression used in common geotechnical practice. The entire distribution of the soil property,
or the entire multivariate distribution of a set of properties, is updated based on a set of
other (potentially) dependent parameters, and not only single values of two parameters. Only
one observation per variable, i.e measurements at a specific depth, was considered in this
simplified example.
In the following sections, the procedure of constructing a Site-specific multivariate distribu-
tion based on the proposed approach of (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) will be discussed.
The advantages of the Bayesian framework are further exploited. An effective method for
hybridizing a multivariate distribution based on generic data acting as prior, and an imprecise
distribution constructed from multiple, but limited site data is presented. The resulting
posterior ore quasi-site-specific model, can be used for enhanced site-specific predictions.
3.5.2 Conjugate priors
The Bayesian framework, and its main components: i) prior distribution, likelihood function,
posterior distribution, was first introduced in section 2.3.1, and a more detailed description
for the univariate distribution updating based on data, was given in section 3.1.3. In section
2.3.1, it was explained that in certain cases, there exist a type of distributions, called conjugate
priors whose adoption as priors, can lead to a posterior distribution of the same type with the
distribution used to model a random variable. The concept of conjugate priors is applicable
in the multivariate case, and such distributions can substantially reduce the computational
effort in multidimensional problems. In fact, conjugate priors exist under the assumption
of joint normality, and their adoption ensures that the posterior multivariate model retains
its distribution type, i.e. they lead to a multi-Normal posterior distribution. Numerical
integration techniques are not effective for evaluating the posterior distribution when many
59
==PAGE:65==
3 Methods Description
unknown parameters are involved, and advanced sampling algorithms are adopted for this
scope. Conjugate priors allow exact sampling from the joint posterior distribution.
Recall the multi-Normal PDF given in Equation 3.66. Consider a collection of multivariate
data included in the m Г— n matrix X, where m the number of rows and n the number of
random variables. The data are transformed from Y-space to X-space discussed in the
previous sections. Consider also that the data-set is complete, i.e. no missing entries. The
observations of the random variables, are described by the likelihood function (recall Equation
2.6 for single measurement). The PDF of xj, i = 1, 2, ..., m for each set of measurements at a
specific depth, given the distribution parameters Вө and covariance C writes,
fX(xj|Вө, C) = N(xj|Вө, C).
(3.79)
where xT
j is the 1 Г— m vector containing measurements of (X1, X2, ..., Xm), i.e. the j вҲ’th row
of the matrix X. Assuming independence between measurements at different locations, the
total likelihood for m number of records writes,
f (X|Вө, C) =
m
вҲҸ
j=1
N(xj|Вө, C) = |C|вҲ’m/2(2ПҖ)(вҲ’mВ·n)/2 exp
"
1
2
m
вҲ‘
j=1
(xj вҲ’Вө)TCвҲ’1(xj вҲ’Вө)
#
. (3.80)
Before any site investigation, the statistical uncertainty in the parameters Вө and C is
characterized by the prior PDFs f (Вө) and f (C), which reflect the prior knowledge. By
applying Bayesian Analysis, these distributions are updated into posterior PDFs, based on
the observed data, i.e. f (Вө|Xo) and f (C|Xo). Conjugate priors facilitate the selection of non-
informative priors. It is desirable to adopt conjugate priors and choose their parameters such
as they become non-informative. The conjugate prior PDF of Вө is defined as the multivariate
normal distribution (Gelman et al., 2013; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019),
f (Вө) = N(Вө|Вө0, C0)
(3.81)
where in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) (Вө0, C0) denote the prior mean vector and the prior
covariance matrix, respectively. A non-informative prior can be defined from Equation 3.81
with the choice of Вө0 as the null vector and a diagonal C0 matrix with very high values. The
prior PDF of C corresponds to the inverse Wishart distribution (Gelman et al., 2013),
f (C) = IW(C|ОЈ, v) =
|ОЈ|v/2
2nv/2 В· О“n(v/2) В· |C|вҲ’v+n+1
2
В· exp

вҲ’1
2tr(ОЈ Г— CвҲ’1)

,
(3.82)
where ОЈ the scale matrix, v the degree of freedom of the inverse Wishart distribution; О“n
the n-dimensional multivariate Gamma function; tr denotes the summation of the diagonal
elements of a symmetric matrix (trace). To further facilitate the selection of a non-informative
f (C), the authors in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) proposed a hierarchical PDF f (C|a)
where a = (a1, a2, ...an) random hyperparameters following the inverse О“ distribution (see
Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019, pp. 5) with shape and scale parameters Оұ, ОІ, respectively,
f (a) =
n
вҲҸ
i=1
IG(ai|Оұ, ОІ)
(3.83)
60
==PAGE:66==
3 Methods Description
The full multivariate PDF for all random variables can be written as,
f (X, Вө, C, a) = f (X|Вө, C) В· f (Вө) В· f (C|a) В· f (a),
(3.84)
(for full analytical expression, see Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019, pp.6).
3.5.3 The Gibbs Sampler
An efficient stochastic simulation method for tackling problems that involve a large number
of parameters, is the so called Gibbs Sampler (S. Geman and D. Geman, 1984; Gilks et al.,
1996; Ching, Muto, et al., 2006). The Gibbs sampler belongs to the Markov-Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, and is considered as a special case of the Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm (Gelman et al., 2013). The Gibbs sampling technique can be used to indirectly
generate random samples from the joint posterior distribution of the parameters, given that
it is possible to sample directly from each of the full conditional distributions. The method
is based on the decomposition of the unknown parameters into groups, such that direct
sampling of one group can be achieved conditional on the other groups. By sequentially
sampling from the conditional distribution of each group given the other groups, it can be
proved that the generated samples asymptotically converge to the desired distribution (Ching
and K. K. Phoon, 2019) (as n вҲ’вҶ’вҲһ, where n the number of repetitions).
The combination of the Gibbs sampler with conjugate priors, reduces significantly the
computational effort, and allows exact sampling from the distribution of each group given
the remaining groups of parameters, since the conditional distributions can be expressed in
an analytical manner. More specifically, the conditional PDFs of the parameters retain their
prior form and they can be written as,
f (Вө|X, c, a) = N
(
Вө|(CвҲ’1
0
+ mCвҲ’1)вҲ’1
 
m
вҲ‘
j=1
CвҲ’1xj
!
, (CвҲ’1
0
+ mCвҲ’1)вҲ’1
)
(3.85)
f (C|X, Вө, a) = IW
(
C|ОЈ +
m
вҲ‘
j=1
(xj вҲ’Вө)(xj вҲ’Вө)T, n + m + 1
)
(3.86)
f (ai|X, Вө, C, a\i) = IG

ai|a + n + 1
2
, ОІ + 2CвҲ’1
ii

(3.87)
where a\i denotes (a1, ..., aiвҲ’1, ai+1, ..., an) and CвҲ’1
ii
the (i, i) entry in the inverse covariance
matrix (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019, pp. 6).
Hence, Gibbs sampling is an appropriate method for handling missing data. Typically, the
implementation of the algorithm involves a considerable number of generated samples that
have to been discarded. These samples are generated in an initial burn-in number of iterations
(typically in the order of 103 number of iterations), and they do not follow the required
posterior distribution (e.g. for "burn-in" period in MCMC, see Straub and Papaioannou,
61
==PAGE:67==
3 Methods Description
2015 pp. 247). Worth mentioning, is also that the Gibbs sampler does not reject samples,
unlike other MCMC algorithms.
Recall that if there were no missing entries in X and if the measurements at different
depths are assumed independent, then the multivariate PDF of X is given from Equation
3.80 Consider now an incomplete collection of multivariate data included in the m Г— n matrix
X, where m the number of rows and n the number of random variables. Let xj,u denote the
unobserved values and xj,o the observed ones, in each row xj of the matrix X. The mean
vector Вө and the covariance matrix C are partioned similarly as was shown in the examples
of section 3.5.1. The conditional distribution of xj,u given xj,o is the multivariate normal
distribution,
f (xj,u|xj,o, Вө, C, a) = N
n
xj,u|Вөo + Cuo(Co)вҲ’1(xj,o вҲ’Вөo), Cu вҲ’Cuo(Co)вҲ’1Cou
o
(3.88)
In (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) the parametersвҖҷ tuning for non-informative priors corre-
spond to the following selections:
Вө0 = 0;
C0 : diagonal matrix with elements = 104;
v = n + 1;
a = 0.5;
ОІ = 10вҲ’4
The proposed implementation of the Gibbs sampling algorithm in (Ching and K. K. Phoon,
2019) for generating samples from the required joint distribution, can be summarized in the
following iterative steps:
1. Initialization of (Вө, C, a, Xu) at arbitrary values. Note that Xu = x1,u, ..., xm,u, i.e. all
missing entries in X, are intialized so that the matrix X does not contain missing values.
2. Generate sample Вө вҲјf (Вө|X, c, a), given in Equation 3.85. In Python, using functions
from the NumPy and Scipy libraries this can be programmed as follows:
1 import numpy as np
2 from scipy.linalg import inv
3 from scipy.stats import multivariate_normal as mvn
4 mean_vector = inv(inv(C_0) + m * inv(C)) @ np.sum(inv(C) @ X, axis=0)
5 C_matrix = inv(inv(C_0) + m * inv(C))
6 mu = mvn.rvs(mean=mean_vector, cov=C_matrix)
3. Generate sample C вҲјf (C|X, Вө, a) given in Equation 3.86, with diagonal scale matrix
ОЈ = diag(4/a1, 4/a2, ..., 4/an):
1 from scipy.stats import invwishart
2 Sigma_matrix = np.diag(4 / a) + (X - mu) @ (X - mu)
3 v = n + m + 1
# degrees of freedom
4 C = invwishart.rvs(scale = Sigma_matrix, df = v)
4. For i = 1, ..., n draw Оұi from f (ai|X, Вө, C, a\i) given in Equation 3.87:
62
==PAGE:68==
3 Methods Description
1 from scipy.stats import invgamma
2 shape_param = alpha + (n + 1) / 2 # where alpha = 0.5
3 scale_param = beta + 2 * np.diag(inv(C)) # where beta = 10^(-4)
4 a = invgamma.rvs(a=shape_param, scale=scale_param, size=n)
5. For j = 1, ..., m generate sample xj,u вҲјf (xj,u|xj,o, Вө, C, a), from Equation 3.88:
1 for j in range(m):
2
mean_vector = mu_u + C_uo @ inv(C_o) @ (x_o[j] - mu_o)
3
C_matrix = C_u - C_uo @ inv(C_o) @ C_ou
4
x_u[j] = mvn.rvs(mean = mean_vector, cov = C_matrix)
6. Cycle steps 2-5 are T times, such that T samples of (Вө, C, a, Xu) are obtained
As mentioned earlier, a number of initial generated samples should be discarded. The
"burn-in" period can be visually determined, e.g. with trace plots, autocorrelation plots. The
collected samples after the burn-in period follow the posterior PDFs f (Вө, C, a, Xu|Xo), where
boldsymbolXo = (x1,o, ..., xm,o) the observed (training) data.
3.5.4 The predictive distribution
Recall the definition of the predictive distribution given in section 3.1.4, where univariate
distributions were considered. The posterior distribution characterizes the uncertainty in
the distribution parameters. The predictive distribution characterizes the uncertainty of the
random variables, and is the distribution of x conditional on the observations Xo, at each
spatial location, i.e. f (x|Xo). Two scenarios are proposed in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019;
Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020). In (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) it is considered
that the database is global and the target site is local. In (Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al.,
2020) the scenario considers that the database is municipal and the site is local. These scenarios
are based on the following:
вҖў The global-local scenario in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) considers that the mean
vector and the covariance matrix of the database and of the site are different. Hence, two
different sets of parameters (Вө, C) need to be determined. Let (Вөdb, Cdb denote the mean
and covariance matrix of the database. Based on the assumption that the large number
of observations for each soil property in the global database, suffices to characterize the
statistical uncertainty in the distribution parameters, they define the database predictive
PDF as a standard normal multivariate PDF f (x|Xdb,o) = N(x|0, Cdb) (Ching and K. K.
Phoon, 2019, pp. 7). On the other hand, the statistical uncertainty in (Вөs, Cs), i.e. the
parameters of the site-specific PDF, can be high due to limited amount of data. Hence,
these are inferred from the site-specific data through Bayesian Analysis using the Gibbs
Sampler. The site-specific predictive PDF in this case, derives from the Bayes rule and
the total probability theorem, and it can be expressed as mixture of multivariate normal
PDFs.
63
==PAGE:69==
3 Methods Description
вҖў The municipal-local scenario in (Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020) assumes that
the municipal database and the target site follow the same (Вө, C). Due to lower amount
of data in a typical municipal database, the distribution parameters are inferred with
Bayesian Analysis and the Gibbs Sampler. Hence, the generic (municipal) database
predictive distribution f (x|Xdb,o), is not a standard normal multivariate distribution in
this case, and this is constructed using the Bayes rule and the total probability theorem.
The two approaches follow different methodologies for the construction of a site-specific
model that is able to make predictions at site scale. The constructed predictive PDF based
on limited, sparse site data in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019), cannot provide reasonable
predictions for the value of a soil parameter at an unobserved depth. Hence, the authors
propose a hybridization of the site-specific predictive PDF and the generic (global) database
predictive PDF, under a slightly modified Bayesian framework, to produce a quasi-site-specific
model.
On the other hand, since the municipal database and the site are considered to follow the
same (Вө, C) in (Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020), the authors propose the construction
of a quasi-site-specific model by further applying Bayesian updating to the database predictive
PDF f (x|Xdb,o), given the site observed data Xs,o, i.e. f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o).
In the present study, a regional database was considered, and the site under investigation
is local. For this scenario, both cases were considered. Note that the Bayesian updating is
only applicable if the target site is in the coverage of the regional database, which applies in
the present study. The Hybrid approach is applicable even when the site data are not in the
regional database coverage. To test this assumption simple correlation plots (site and regional
data) can be used. Hence,
вҖў The regional predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o) was constructed on based on the observed
data of another sub-dataset extracted from the regional database. In this case, the
construction of a quasi-Site-specific model was based on the updating of the regional
predictive distribution, using the site data. The statistical uncertainty in the regional
(Вөdb,t, Cdb,t) can be high due to the lower number of observations in this dataset. Thus,
Bayesian analysis with use of the Gibbs Sampler was adopted for the evaluation of
the regional database PDF parameters, and subsequently to construct the predictive
regional PDF as a mixture of multivariate normal distributions. The regional predictive
PDF was then updated based on the site data, to derive the quasi-site-specific model.
The assumption that the site data are located in the coverage of the regional database
was tested, meaning that they can follow the same parameters (Вөdb,t, Cdb,t).
вҖў The hybridization approach proposed in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) was adopted to
construct a quasi-site-specific model for making predictions at site level. In this method
the Site-Specific PDF is assumed not to follow the same parameters (mean, covariance)
with the regional PDF. Hence, the Gibbs Sampler is again performed to obtain posterior
parametersвҖҷs samples, and construct the site-specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o) based on
limited site observations. This distribution is the multiplied with the regional predictive
PDF to produce the hybrid or "quasi-site-specific" model.
64
==PAGE:70==
3 Methods Description
3.5.5 Predictive PDF of the generic database
In the following, the procedure for evaluating the predictive PDF f (x|Xo) based on the
observed data is discussed. Consider that the GS algorithm is implemented using the data of
the generic database Xdb. Let Xdb,o and Xdb,u denote the observed and the unobserved entries
in the generic database. Let (Вөdb,t, Cdb,t, Xdb,u,t) denote the collected samples at time step t,
after the burn-in period T. The samples are distributed as the posterior PDF f (Вөdb, Cdb|Xdb,o).
Following the BayesвҖҷ rule and the total probability theorem, the database predictive PDF
f (x|Xdb,o) can be approximated as a mixture of multi-Normal PDFs,
f (x|Xdb,o) =
Z
f (x|Вөdb, Cdb) В· f (Вөdb, Cdb|Xdb,o) В· dВөdbdCdb
вүҲ
1
T вҲ’tb
"
T
вҲ‘
t=tb+1
N(x|Вөdb,t, Cdb,t)
#
(3.89)
where tb refers to the end of burn-in period and T the total time step given for the Gibbs
Sampler, (Вөdb,t, Cdb,t) the GS samples at time-step t. New samples xnew can be drawn in two
steps:
1. Draw random sample t index among (tb + 1, tb + 2, ..., T)
2. Sample xnew вҲјN(xnew|Вөdb,t, Cdb,t)
The statistical uncertainty due to limited training data in the database is characterized by the
samples xnew. In Python these steps can be programmed as follows
1 import numpy as np
2 from scipy.stats import multivariate_normal as mvn
3 t = np.random.default_rng().integers(t_b+1, T+1)
4 x_new = mvn.rvs(mean=mu_db[t], cov=C_db[t])
The regional predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o) can be updated based on the observed site data, i.e.
(x|Xdb,o,Xs,o). The conditioning process is based again on the total probability theorem, and
the resulting distribution is a mixture of multivariate conditional PDFs f (x|Вөdb,t, Cdb,t, Xs,o),
with non-uniform weights. The reader is referred to (Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020)
for the evaluation details.
3.5.6 Site-specific predictive PDF
Consider now the observed data-points in the site data collection Xs,o. The GS algorithm is
applied and the (Вөs,t, Cs,t, Xs,u,t) are the collected samples at time step t, after the burn-in
period T. The samples are distributed as the posterior PDF f (Вөs, Cs|Xs,o). The posterior
predictive distribution of X at each location, i.e. the site-specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o) can
65
==PAGE:71==
3 Methods Description
be approximated as,
f (x|Xs,o) =
Z
f (x|Вөs, Cs) В· f (Вөs, Cs|Xs,o) В· dВөsdCs
вүҲ
1
T вҲ’tb
"
T
вҲ‘
t=tb+1
N(x|Вөs,t, Cs,t)
#
(3.90)
and xnew samples can be generated following the two steps described previously, using this
time the mean vector and covariance matrix samples based on the site data as training data.
Consider that some soil properties have already been observed at a location in a soil layer
at the site. Let these observed values be denoted by xo, the unobserved by xu, and partition
accordingly Вөs,t and Cs,t. The updated predictive PDF conditioned on the observations,
f (xu|Xs,o, xo) can be expressed as a mixture of multi-Normal PDFs,
f (xu|Xs,o, xo) вҲқ
T
вҲ‘
t=tb+1
N(xu, xo|Вөs,t, Cs,t)
вҲқ
T
вҲ‘
t=tb+1
wt Г— N(xu|Вөs,t, Cs,t, xo)
(3.91)
where wt corresponds to the weight of each multivariate normal PDF, and is derived from,
wt = N(xo|Вөs,o,t)
= |Cs,o,t|вҲ’1/2 Г— (2ПҖ)вҲ’n/2 Г— exp

вҲ’1
2ВөT
s,o,t(Cs,o,t)вҲ’1Вөs,o,t

(3.92)
The generation of new samples at a specific depth at the site, distributed as xu вҲјf (xu|Xs,o, xo),
can be achieved through the following steps (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019, pp. 7):
1. Draw random t index among (tb + 1, tb + 2, ..., T), based on the normalized weights,
wnorm =
wt
wtb+1, wtb+2, ..., wT
(3.93)
where wt from Equation 3.92
2. Sample from the posterior predictive distribution xnew,u вҲјN{xnew,u|Вөs,o,t + Cs,uo,t +
(Cs,o,t)вҲ’1(xnew,o вҲ’Вөs,o,t)}
Transform the generated samples into physical soil parameters ynew,u. These samples
can be used to predict the statistics of the distribution of soil properties, at each location
in the soil layer.
The above steps can be programmed in Python as follows,
1 import numpy as np
2 from numpy.linalg import det, inv
3 from scipy.stats import multivariate_normal as mvn
66
==PAGE:72==
3 Methods Description
4 # Step 1: normalized weights
5 w = np.exp(-0.5 * mu_s_o @ inv(C_s_o) @ mu_s_o) / (det(C_s_o) * (2 * np.pi) **
(n)) ** 0.5
6 w_norm = w / w.sum()
7 t = np.random.default_rng().choice(np.arange(t_b + 1, T + 1), p=w_norm)
8 # Step 2: prediction
9 x_u = mvn.rvs(mean=mu_st_u + C_st_uo @ inv(C_st_o) @ (x_o - mu_st_o), cov=
C_st_u - C_st_uo @ inv(C_st_o) @ C_st_ou)
3.5.7 Hybridization of Site-specific and Generic Multivariate PDFs
The hybridization concept proposed by (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019), is similar to the
Bayesian framework. The generic predictive database PDF, i.e. f (x|Xdb,o, serves as prior
distribution. Bayesian updating is performed by multiplying the likelihood function with the
prior generic PDF to produce the posterior PDF. The hybridization method is performed by
multiplying the prior generic PDF f (x|Xdb,o), with the site-specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o),
to produce a hybrid predictive PDF f (x|hb), i.e.
f (x|hb) вҲқf (x|Xdb,o) Г— f (x|Xs,o).
(3.94)
In (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019) the database predictive PDF is equivalent to the posterior
PDF f (x|Вөdb, Cdb = N(x|0, Cdb) for the reasons that were discussed in section 3.5.4.
A
visualization example of how the hybridization works, is given in (Ching and K. K. Phoon,
2019, pp.8). The hybridization approach is based on the following:
вҖў Preservation of the "uniqueness" of the site. This means that the generic and site-specific
PDF can have different means and covariances
вҖў When the site-specific data-set is sufficiently large, the predictions will mainly depend
on the site-specific PDF
вҖў When the site-specific data are sparse, the predictive PDF will approach the generic
PDF.
The procedure for deriving the hybrid PDF as a mixture of multivariate normal PDFs, is
given in (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019).
Define,
f (x|hb) вҲқf (x|Вөdb, Cdb) В· f (x|Xs,o)
вҲқN(x|0, Cdb) Г—
"
T
вҲ‘
t=tb+1
N(x|Вөs,t, Cs,t)
#
вҲқ
T
вҲ‘
t=tb+1
wt Г— N(x|Вөhb,t, Chb,t)
(3.95)
67
==PAGE:73==
3 Methods Description
where wt the weights of the PDFs,
wt = |Cdb + Cs,t|вҲ’1/2 Г— (2ПҖ)вҲ’n/2 Г— exp

вҲ’1
2ВөT
s,t(Cdb + Cs,t)вҲ’1Вөs,t

(3.96)
and the mean vector and covariance matrix are defined as,
Вөhb,t = (CвҲ’1
db + CвҲ’1
s,t CвҲ’1
s,t )Вөs,t
Chb,t = (CвҲ’1
db + CвҲ’1
s,t )вҲ’1
(3.97)
Sampling from the hybrid PDF can be performed through the following steps:
1. Draw t index among (tb + 1, tb + 2, ..., T), based on the normalized weights (see Equation
3.93)
2. Sample from the hybrid predictive PDF xnew вҲјN(xnew|Вөhb,t, Chb,t).
In Python:
1 import numpy as np
2 from numpy.linalg import det, inv
3 from scipy.stats import multivariate_normal as mvn
4 w = np.exp(-1/2 * mu_s @ inv(C_db + C_s) @ mu_s) / (det(C_db + C_s) * (2 *
np.pi) ** (n)) ** (1/2)
5 w_norm = w / w.sum()
6 t = np.random.default_rng().choice(np.arange(t_b + 1, T + 1), p=w_norm)
7 mu_hb = inv(inv(C_db) + inv(C_s)) @ inv(C_s) @ mu_s
8 C_hb = inv(inv(C_db) + inv(C_s))
9 x_new = mvn.rvs(mean=mu_hb, cov=C_hb)
When some soil properties have been observed at a location in a soil layer at the site, the
conditional predictive hybrid PDF writes
f (x|hb, xo) вҲқf (xu|Вөdb, Cdb, xo) В· f (xu|Xs,o, xo)
вҲқ
T
вҲ‘
t=tb+1
wt Г— N(xu|Вөhb,t, Chb,t, xo)
(3.98)
where f (xu|Вөdb, Cdb, xo) and f (xu|Xs,o, xo) the conditional database predictive PDF, and the
conditional site-specific predictive PDF, respectively. The weight of each conditional multi-
variate PDF can be obtained from,
wt = |Cdb + Cs,t|вҲ’1/2|Cs,o,t|вҲ’1/2 Г— (2ПҖ)вҲ’nГ— exp[вҲ’1
2ВөT
s,t(Cdb + Cs,t)вҲ’1Вөs,tвҲ’
вҲ’1
2ВөT
s,o,t(Cs,o,t)вҲ’1Вөs,o,t]
(3.99)
New samples from the conditional Hybrid PDF can be generated as follows,
68
==PAGE:74==
3 Methods Description
1. Draw t index among (tb + 1, tb + 2, ..., T), based on the normalized weights of each
conditional multivariate PDF (Equation 3.93), with wt from 3.99
2. Sample from the conditional hybrid PDF
xnew,u вҲјN(xnew,u|Вөhb,u,t + Chb,uo,t(Chb,o,t)вҲ’1(xnew,o вҲ’Вөhb,o,t),
Chb,u,t вҲ’Chb,uo,t(Chb,o,t)вҲ’1Chb,ou,t)
(3.100)
The xnew,u samples can then be transformed to soil samples, which can be used for
enhanced predictions for the soil property, at the specific location in the soil layer of the
site.
The above steps may be programmed in Python as follows,
1 import numpy as np
2 from numpy.linalg import det, inv
3 from scipy.stats import multivariate_normal as mvn
4 w = np.exp(-1/2 * mu_s @ inv(C_db + C_s) @ mu_s
1/2 * mu_s_o @ inv(C_s_o)
@ mu_s_o) / ((2 * np.pi) ** n * (det(C_db + C_s) * det(C_s_o)) **
(1/2))
5 w_norm = w / w.sum()
6 t = random.default_rng().choice(np.arange(t_b + 1, T + 1), p=w_norm)
7 x_u = mvn.rvs(mean = mu_hb_u + C_hb_uo @ inv(C_hb_o) @ (x_o - mu_hb_o),
8 cov = C_hb_u - C_hb_uo @ inv(C_hb_o) @ C_hb_ou)
69
==PAGE:75==
4 Database overview and Elementary data
Analysis
In this chapter, an overview of the constructed regional database is given. The database is
comprised from a large number of sites in the region, and includes measured properties
and derived soil parameters, specifically from results of laboratory tests. The data collection
spans over a 12-year period. A relational SQL database was constructed from Excel spread-
sheets containing measurements on the soil properties, using an open-source platform and
employing SQL and Python programming languages. The SQL database provided extensive
functionalities in terms of handling and retrieving data of interest. Examples of how to
interact with the SQL database, for retrieving data and storing them to be used in calculations,
are included in python functions in the accompanying material of this document.
The Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion was applied to derive the soil strength parameters,
while elasticity moduli were computed from stress-strain curves. Data from Sieve Analysis
and Atterberg limits tests were combined to perform soil classification of the tested specimens,
based on - relevant to the objective of the study - methods (USCS). The vast majority of the
classified soils referred to clayey soils. It was decided to base the further analysis on clay
mixtures. The following section provides an overview of the considered soil parameters in
the constructed regional database.
4.1 Regional Database overview
A relational SQL database was utilized as the basic data-source for compiling a regional
database under MUSIC characteristics. The TUM Geotechnics SQL database is a product
of data analysis on labolaratory tests, and digitization projects that were carried out during
the academic year 2020-21. Documents with detailed description of how the SQL database
was constructed, the SCHEMA and the Tables structures, containing the testsвҖҷ results, are not
included in the present document. These can become available to interested readers, upon
request. Some essential information on the total number of records included in the TUM Geo
Database is visually presented in the following.
The main sources of data in the database are the following laboratory tests:
1. Sieve Analysis tests
2. Plasticity tests
3. Triaxial compression tests and
70
==PAGE:76==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
4. Unconfined compression tests
Each of the tests corresponds to a SCHEMA structure in the SQL database.
Consider
that each database SCHEMA contains a number of Tables with measurements (e.g. stress-
strain incremental measurements), and a number of derived soil properties (e.g. cohesion,
friction angle). The records (rows) contained in the different Tables, can be linked using the
characteristic "probe-number" (a table column) assigned to each soil specimen.
Figure 4.1 provides a simplified overview of the types of laboratory tests, and the number
of observations, related to the tested specimens numbers ("probenumbers"), that are contained
in the database. On the lower left corner of Figure 4.1 a Venn diagram illustrating the number
of intersections between the different test types, is given. The ellipses correspond to the
tests. The numbers refer to the number of unique specimens, tested in each test. The shaded
parts correspond to the intersections between the various tests, i.e. the number of specimens
tested in multiple types of tests. It is trivial to read the Venn diagram, which is based on the
set theory. For instance, one can observe that from a total 321 number of unique probes in
triaxial tests (see figure on the left, or add numbers on both shaded, and not shaded areas
of TUM_triaxial), 104 of them do not match to any of the other tests. For 84+14=98 of the
triaxial tested specimens, there is available information from both sieve tests and plasticity
tests, which can be used for classification (USCS). On the other hand, there is available
information from Sieve analysis and plasticity tests, for a total of 151 soil specimens, tested in
unconfined compression tests (UC). It can be noticed, that full information is available only
for 14 specimens, i.e. specimens tested in every of the 4 test types.
Additional data that became available during the analysis process (Excel spreadsheets),
and which were not included in the SQL database, were incorporated as well, again based on
the characteristic "probenumber" of each soil specimen. The Venn diagram illustrated on the
right corner of Figure 4.1 provides an overview of the total tested probes, and consequently
the number of rows in the data-set, and of the intersections-matches between the test indices,
after incorporating the additional data. The interpretation follows the same logic.
An incomplete data-set was compiled based on the probe-numbersвҖҷ matches. The "merging"
of the different data-sets was not a trivial task. The main concern was to retain as much
information as possible, on soil strength parameters, e.g. friction angle, undrained shear
strength, while including valuable information from the other test indices. SQL queries
and Python programming were utilized for this scope (some of them can be found in the
supplementary material).
4.1.1 Classification
The USCS (Unified Soil Classification System) (ASTM D2487 - 17e1: 2017) was selected as the
most relevant approach, for the scope of this project. According to this system the soils are
divided in gravel, sand, silt and clay by the grain size limits shown in table 4.1. According to
the unified system, the symbols shown in table 4.2 are used for the classification of coarse
and fine-grained soils. The properties used for the classification are the following:
вҖў grain size limits, see Table 4.1
71
==PAGE:77==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
TUM Geo Database
Sieve Analysis
number of probes = 14459
Plasticity tests
number of probes = 5480
Triaxial shear tests
number of probes = 321
Unconfined compression
tests
number of probes = 4150
+ Additional data
(Excel spreadsheets)
"probenumber"
Figure 4.1: Up: Simplified overview of the TUM Geo SQL database; Left corner: Venn
diagram with the number of probes intersection between the Tables of the SQL
database; Right corner: Venn diagram with the total number of probes and
intersections between the Tables of the SQL database, and the additional data
given in Excel spreadsheets; each colored ellipsis corresponds to a specific test,
or a table in the SCHEMAs of the database, except from the TUM_Excel ellipsis
which corresponds to an incomplete data-set containing different test indices; The
shaded parts correspond to the setsвҖҷ intersection on the specimenвҖҷs characteristic
number ("probenumber")
вҖў Cu =
D60
D10 : Coefficient of uniformity; Diameters Dp where p the percent (%) finer,
obtained from grain-size distributions.
вҖў Cc =
D2
30
(D10)(D60): Coefficient of curvature
72
==PAGE:78==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
Main soil type
Grain size (mm)
Gravel
4.75 - 75
Sand
0.075 - 4.75
Silt and Clay (fines)
<0.075
Table 4.1: Soil-separation size limits
Symbol
G
S
M
C
H
L
W
P
Type
Gravel
Sand
Silt
clay
High
Plasticity
Low
Plasticity
Well
graded
Poorly
graded
Table 4.2: Group symbols for coarse and fine-grained soils classification
вҖў LI (%): Liquid Limit
вҖў PI(%): Plasticity index
A soil classification function was programmed in Python, based on published flowcharts. The
function is provided in the supplementary material. The reader is referred to (Das, 2015) for
more details on the USCS system.
The classification results related to the entire TUM Geo database specimens, are provided
in Figure 4.2, Figure 4.3 and Table 4.3. In a nutshell:
вҖў A total number of 1677 soil specimens were classified. Main soil classes and detailed
soil description included
вҖў Clayey soils of low plasticity (CL) is the most frequent soil category, with 949 specimens
belonging in this class, as can be seen in Figure 4.2. Clay soils of high plasticity (CH) is
the second most frequent class with 276 total counts. These two classes account for
вүғ73% of the total classified specimens. Fine-grained soils account for the majority
of the classified soils, although a considerable number of specimens are associated to
sandy soils (SC) and gravely soils with sand.
вҖў Table 4.3 provides a more detailed overview of the classified soil specimens. CL, lean
clay is the most frequent detailed soil type, among the classified soils. On the other
hand,
вҖў In this study, the further analysis considered the following main soil categories (plastic
soils):
- clay mixtures: CL, CH;
- silty soils MH, ML (and double CL-ML)
Hence, sands and gravelly soils were excluded.
вҖў Figure 4.3 shows the scatter of the LL, PI data points, plotted on the plasticity chart, used
for the fines-grained soils separation (e.g. see Kolymbas, 2011).
73
==PAGE:79==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
CLВ  В  В  В  В 949
CHВ  В  В  В  В 276
SCВ  В  В  В  В 158
GCВ  В  В  В  В  74
MHВ  В  В  В  В  71
SMВ  В  В  В  В  58
MLВ  В  В  В  В  41
CL-MLВ  В  15
SC-SMВ  В  В 9
GM В  В  В  В  В  7
SP-SM В  В  В 5
GC-GMВ  В  В 5
GWВ  В  В  В  В  В 3
GPВ  В  В  В  В  В  3
SPВ  В  В  В  В  В  2
GW-GCВ  В  1
Figure 4.2: USCS soil classification results
CL - ML
U-line
CH
A-line
CL
ML
MH
Figure 4.3: Plasticity chart (plastic soils)
4.1.2 Descriptive statistics
In the following, information and useful descriptive statistics are provided for cohesive,
fine-grained soils, with clay (CL, CH) as the main type of soil in the mixtures. The incomplete
data-set was derived by i) removing records from the TUM Geo database, where some
properties have values with no physical meaning (e.g negative cohesion or friction angle), and
ii) removing records containing propertiesвҖҷ measurements with extreme values or not logical
values for the considered type of soils, based on some experience from past investigations in
the region. More specifically, for ii) the initial processing included the following:
74
==PAGE:80==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
uscs
soil type
count
CL
lean clay
347
lean clay with sand
224
sandy lean clay
177
CH
fat clay
145
SC
clayey sand
107
GC
clayey gravel with sand
70
SC
clayey sand with gravel
51
CH
fat clay with sand
41
SM
silty sand
40
MH
elastic silt
25
CL
sandy lean clay with gravel
23
MH
sandy elastic silt
19
CH
sandy fat clay
19
MH
elastic silt with sand
15
CL
gravelly lean clay with sand
15
Table 4.3: Detailed description, and total number of the 13 most frequent soil types in the
entire TUM Geo Database
вҖў Records where fine content (uscs), fines (%) < 55 were removed
вҖў Measurements where effective cohesion c < 2 (kPa) were replaced with NaNs
вҖў Measurements where effective cohesion c > 200 (kPa) were replaced with NaNs (after
visual inspection)
вҖў Measurements where friction angle П• < 9 (kPa) were replaced with NaNs
вҖў Measurements where effective friction angle П• > 45 (kPa) were replaced with NaNs
вҖў Records where undrained shear strength (from UC tests) su,uc > 1000 (kPa) were
removed
вҖў Records where undrained shear strength (from UC tests) su,uc < 5 (kPa) were removed
Table 4.4 provides a short description of the attributes in the dataset. Following this initial
data processing, the descriptive statistics were computed from the reduced data-set, and are
provided in the Appendix (Table A.1).
4.1.3 TUM-TRX_CLAY_22 Regional Database
The constructed incomplete data-set of fine-grained, cohesive soils, was used as a basis to
derive the TUM-TRX_CLAY_22 database, which was used in the further Analysis. It is
generally known, that data outliers affect any statistical analysis, even more a multivariate
statistical analysis. Outlier detection often requires strong knowledge on the physics and
mechanics of the soil properties and parameters, and is not a trivial task, especially for
75
==PAGE:81==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
attribute
description
z (m)
sampling depth
Dp (Вөm)
grain diameter at p (%) finer
proportion ( %)
proportion per weight (fines,coarse, etc.)
w (%)
water content
LL
Liquid Limit
PL
Plastic Limit
PI
Plasticity Index
LI
Liquidity Index
ic
Consistency Index
A
SkemptonвҖҷs Activity of clays (e.g. see Kolymbas, 2011)
ПҒs (t/m3)
bulk density
ПҒd (t/m3)
dry density
Оіs, Оіd kN/m3
saturated and dry unit weight (see Das, 2015, pp. 15)
c (kPa), П• (o)
(effective) cohesion and friction angle; MIT p-q method (see LADE, 2016)
p, q (kN/m2)
TC tests: average stress and max shear stress (Mohr circle) (see LADE, 2016)
su,uc = quc/2 (kPa)
undrained shear strength from UC tests
Ei,ПғвҖІ
3, E50,ПғвҖІ
3, Es,ПғвҖІ
3 (MPa)
confining stress dependent YoungвҖҷs moduli, from stress-strain curves; CU triaxial tests
Table 4.4: Description of attributes in the Fine-grained, cohesive soilsвҖҷ dataset
spatially variable parameters, collected from a large number of sites. Machine learning
methods, such as unsupervised clustering (e.g. Herlau et al., 2020), can be adopted in such
cases. However the implementation of such methods is not trivial, if one considers i) the
incomplete feature of the geotechnical data, ii) the soil natural and spatial variability.
Having in mind these data characteristics, the procedure for identifying bad quality
data, was mainly based on physical bounds of the soil parameters, i.e. data that are not
representative of reasonable soil parametersвҖҷ values in the considered soil types. In addition,
a simplified version of a probability density based approach was adopted to remove some
possible outliers. The method known as Kernel density estimation, can be used to compute a
smooth estimate of the PDF or jpdf of random variables. For details of the method the reader
is referred to (e.g Herlau et al., 2020). In this study, a simplified version of the method was
adopted, and this involved removal of measurements that fall in regions of very low bivariate
joint probability density. In general, the KDE method can be extended to multivariate (n>2
dimensions) data.
For instance, a simple function was programmed to remove a percentage of the total number
of cohesion and friction angle measurements. Since these parameters are often estimated
with a simple linear regression model (M-C criterion), the derived values can be prompt to
large errors. To identify anomalies in the sets of observations,
вҖў A density threshold of 3% was assumed
вҖў NaNs were removed from the bivariate dataset
вҖў The joint probability density was calculated from the complete set of data, using the
function "gaussian_kde" from the Scipy library www-03
in Python
76
==PAGE:82==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
вҖў Values that fell in probability density regions less than the desired threshold were
replaced with NaNs.
It is important to note that the estimation of the joint PDF with KDE can have low accuracy,
and it can be misleading in some cases. Hence, the kde method should be used with caution
and should include logical reasoning for the soil propertiesвҖҷ physical bounds. Moreover,
the multivariate generic database, should include reasonably high uncertainty in the soil
properties, since the data were collected from many sites and different conditions. Hence, the
kde based outliersвҖҷ removal, was only applied in the initial stage of bad data detection, with
a low density threshold.
The next steps in the data cleansing stage, were based on the following:
вҖў Nan replacement to measurements that are higher or lower than 1.5 Г— iqr (%), where
iqr the interquartile range. See Appendix Table A.1 for quartiles, 25 (%) and 75 (%)
вҖў Records where fines (uscs) <60% were removed, since it was assumed that the sand
content can impact the propertiesвҖҷ behavior
вҖў Records at depths less than 1.5m were removed (possible different behavior in shallow
depths)
вҖў Records where su,uc > 700 kPa where removed, based on visual inspection and on
published representative bounds of the parameter in clayey soils (e.g. see Table 3.1)
Descriptive statistics based on the updated incomplete data-set are given in Table 4.5. The
derived data-set, named in this project as TUM-TRX_CLAY_22 serves as the basis for further
analysis. Thus, it was considered that the database retains information from many different
sites, and a reasonably high amount of uncertainty in the soil properties, while containing
measurements on soil properties, in comparable soil conditions. Hence it can be representative
of the soil properties, strength and elasticity parametersвҖҷ, in the region. The database contains:
вҖў 1220 (incomplete) records
вҖў data from an approximate number of 400 unique projects
вҖў 1095 classified soils, with soil classes shown in Figure 4.4.
Elementary plots (boxplots) are provided in Figure 4.4 for selected properties and parame-
ters, based on the TUM-TRX_CLAY_22 data and the descriptive statistics given in Table 4.5.
Pairwise information and correlation plots
The number of pairwise data-points between the numerical attributes in the dataset is given in
Table 4.6. Note that since the pairwise count is symmetric, only the upper diagonal is shown
to avoid confusion. The diagonal of the matrix is equal to the univariate number of data-
points given in Table 4.5. It can be seen in Table 4.6, that even though the data-set contains a
77
==PAGE:83==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
CL
CH
MH
ML
CL-ML
uscs class
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
count
Figure 4.4: Soil classes in TUM-TRX_CLAY_22
large number of pairwise data-points between index properties and sieve analysis results,
it does not contain many pairwise data-points between these test indices, and the strength
related parameters. Moreover, it can be noticed that the number of datapoints between the
strength parameters from TC tests, and the undrained shear strength from UC tests, is very
low, to obtain meaningful information on their statistical dependence (correlation). Hence,
it was decided to split the data-set into two subsets: one containing information between
sieve-plasticity and the TC testsвҖҷ parameters, and the second one containing data from sieve-
plasticity and undrained shear strength from the UC tests. In addition the attributes that
give a reasonable amount of pairwise information was kept (>35 data-pairs). The selected
attributes and the number of pairwise data-points for these two scenarios (subsets), are
provided in Table 4.7 and Table 4.8, respectively. Note that the first 15 rows and columns have
the same elements in these Tables, since they correspond to the same soil properties. Based
on the number of pairwise data-points it can be said that:
вҖў The number of pairwise data-points between the TC derived parameters, and the rest
soil properties in Table 4.7, may be not large enough to obtain reliable estimations
of their dependency, from the computed sample correlation coefficients. However, it
includes pairwise information on more than one design parameters.
вҖў A larger number of pairwise data-points between the undrained shear strength (UC),
and the rest soil properties in Table 4.7 can be observed. This number may be sufficient
enough to get a more reliable point estimate of the correlation between the soil properties
and the design parameter su,uc.
The Pearson moment correlation coefficients were computed from the pairwise information.
Figures 4.6-4.5 illustrate the magnitude of the pairwise correlation coefficients for each of the
two subsets. Note that the first 15 rows and columns have the same elements in these Tables.
Figures A1-A2 in the Appendix, visualize the pairwise correlation structures between the
considered soil parameters in each sub-dataset (note: log-transformed variables plotted in
these figures).
78
==PAGE:84==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
In Figures 4.6,4.5, the scaling between red and blue colors indicate the magnitude of the
correlation coefficients. Red colored cells indicate positive correlation between the parameters,
while blue colored cells indicate negative correlation. Specific values of the sample correlation
coefficients are given in Tables 4.9, 4.10. It is reasonable that very high absolute correlation
coefficient values, belong to properties that are naturally related to each other, such as the
dry density ПҒd and water content w, or the initial void ratio e0.
Based on (Evans, 1996) the correlation coefficients can be classified as shown in Table 4.11.
It is evident that most parameters in the database are "weakly" or "very weakly" correlated.
However, there exist some interesting correlations between some parameters, such as,
вҖў Moderate positive: Undrained shear strength su,ucand dry density ПҒd, youngвҖҷs modulus
E50,200 and consistency index ic
вҖў Moderate negative: Undrained shear strength su,uc and dry density ПҒd, youngвҖҷs modulus
E50,200 and liquidity index LI, friction angle П• and plasticity index PI, ratio of max shear
and average stresses (q/p)200 and clay content %clay
Of course some of the positive and negative moderate correlations can be explained by the
direct (negative) relationship between properties such as the water content, dry density and
void ratio. However, the sample statistics reveal the existence of considerable inter-correlations
between parameters in the database, which means that a multivariate analysis is justified
and recommended. Statistical uncertainties can be substantially reduced even when the soil
parameters are weakly correlated (e.g. c вҲ’П•). On the other hand, very weak correlations, can
provide guidance on which parameters can be neglected for the Multivariate Analysis.
79
==PAGE:85==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
count
mean
std
min
10%
25%
50%
75%
90%
max
CoV%
z (m)
962
16.275
12.727
1
2.100
5.300
13.200
24.788
36.770
50.500
78.199
d10 (Вөm)
948
1.248
2.354
0
0
0
0
2.025
4
26.700
188.556
d30 (Вөm)
948
7.100
6.515
0
0
2.600
5.250
9.500
15.990
42.600
91.760
d50 (Вөm)
873
17.211
12.164
0
4.020
8
14.800
24.400
35.640
60
70.678
d60 (Вөm)
948
26.290
17.708
0
6.170
12.600
23
36.400
53.500
74.700
67.356
clay (%)
922
16.920
10.548
0
4.011
8.462
15.820
23.632
31.796
46.390
62.344
silt (%)
954
61.801
13.709
15.830
44.131
52.782
62.520
71.618
79.350
98.090
22.183
sand (%)
954
16.949
10.449
-0.180
4.863
8.402
15.430
23.900
32.653
44.130
61.652
gravel (%)
956
3.069
5.373
0
0
0
0.465
3.475
10.655
31.590
175.067
gravel (%)(uscs)
948
2.133
4.214
0
0
0.050
2.272
7.350
25.870
197.556
coarse (%)(uscs)
948
16.091
10.994
-0.190
3.387
6.283
13.760
24.655
32.772
39.930
68.324
sand (%)(uscs)
948
13.958
9.497
-0.190
3.087
5.702
11.950
20.607
27.610
38.900
68.041
fines (%)(uscs)
948
83.909
10.994
60.070
67.228
75.345
86.240
93.718
96.613
100.190
13.102
Cu
320
12.161
6.929
2.049
5.463
7.350
10.115
15.711
21.547
37.333
56.975
Cc
314
1.420
0.491
0.246
0.817
1.097
1.410
1.672
2.014
2.669
34.612
e0
150
0.529
0.191
0.119
0.299
0.388
0.523
0.647
0.786
1.045
36.113
ПҒd (t/m3)
311
1.858
0.201
1.325
1.594
1.738
1.872
1.995
2.111
2.369
10.814
ПҒs (t/m3)
197
2.696
0.135
1.400
2.673
2.700
2.700
2.733
2.755
3.262
5
Оіs (kN/m3)
158
20.642
2.012
11.604
18.518
19.770
20.821
21.869
22.684
24.323
9.747
w (%)
1034
20.505
6.834
1.300
12.373
15.752
20.120
24.646
29.413
40.780
33.331
w < 0.4(%)
1031
19.449
17.210
0
0
12.388
19.177
24.803
30.508
197.586
88.489
LL
1038
42.239
10.020
16.437
30.329
35.306
41.196
48.200
56.054
72.328
23.723
PL
1035
20.757
3.673
10.390
15.983
18.222
20.769
23.113
25.295
31.709
17.693
PI
1046
21.395
7.740
0
12.377
15.803
20.372
25.972
32.050
44.165
36.174
LI
1049
0.011
0.332
-0.901
-0.401
-0.220
-0.003
0.231
0.442
0.964
ic
1042
0.980
0.323
0.080
0.558
0.768
0.998
1.195
1.380
1.865
32.926
A
778
1.274
0.638
0.243
0.608
0.800
1.125
1.626
2.272
3.212
50.089
Am
686
1.652
0.945
0
0.715
0.943
1.363
2.177
3.065
4.777
57.218
Пғp
43
359.535
133
10
200
300
400
400
500
500
36.992
c (kPa)
131
22.626
17.723
1.032
4.153
9.137
17.196
29.535
49.100
80.262
78.332
П• (o)
145
28.961
6.944
11.350
19.497
23.952
29.590
33.600
37.245
44.100
23.975
tan(П•)
145
0.564
0.161
0.201
0.354
0.444
0.568
0.664
0.760
0.969
28.463
r2
145
0.924
0.158
0.064
0.805
0.937
0.984
0.998
1
1
17.103
su,uc (kPa)
246
249.856
168.701
23.552
68.747
120.002
200.953
355.306
513.258
686.650
67.519
q100 (kPa)
90
207.636
151.191
25.871
72.843
101.113
161.822
256.705
391.600
796.604
72.815
p100 (kPa)
90
358.690
225.847
92.174
137.821
199.670
293.782
460.924
630.031
1187.809
62.964
q200 (kPa)
92
287.506
226.185
53.673
106.003
134.901
217.574
370.433
541.452
1628.049
78.671
p200 (kPa)
92
496.776
291.762
167.624
214.596
279.493
434.524
634.305
808.208
1704.425
58.731
q300 (kPa)
58
398.218
226.173
127.956
162.739
211.466
341.067
550.603
680.682
1145.601
56.796
p300 (kPa)
58
721.895
329.796
257.884
339.049
505.512
672.318
896.586
1134.326
1892.680
45.685
q400 (kPa)
41
460.850
221.176
144.462
194.716
257.254
441.244
609.656
710.762
962.922
47.993
p400 (kPa)
41
825.602
285.496
222.313
435.376
587.627
819.495
1049.900
1137.112
1455.563
34.580
(q/p)100
90
0.566
0.112
0.331
0.447
0.486
0.554
0.620
0.714
0.842
19.800
(q/p)200
91
0.540
0.108
0.257
0.408
0.468
0.547
0.607
0.661
0.818
19.933
(q/p)300
57
0.525
0.089
0.346
0.420
0.468
0.528
0.589
0.638
0.708
16.931
(q/p)400
40
0.533
0.104
0.329
0.383
0.465
0.541
0.616
0.634
0.808
19.506
Ei,100 (MPa)
50
61.553
43.526
5.802
11.736
31.017
51.965
83.311
125.101
165.628
70.714
E50,100 (MPa)
69
24.869
23.440
2.202
3.676
7.967
16.518
38.983
55.700
101.172
94.257
Es,100 (MPa)
56
7.263
6.847
1.013
1.249
2.494
4.274
11.648
16.645
31.297
94.273
Ei,200 (MPa)
54
80.680
54.642
8.315
19.390
44.080
67.313
106.460
171.390
225.850
67.728
E50,200 (MPa)
67
30.216
21.300
3.199
7.690
13.160
23.469
42.580
60.264
83.541
70.492
Es,200 (MPa)
53
8.088
7.418
0.975
1.795
3.047
4.807
10.829
17.266
33.358
91.719
Ei,300 (MPa)
30
120.352
59.042
18.564
55.428
79.432
112.894
154.862
188.574
259.700
49.058
E50,300 (MPa)
43
48.413
35.828
8.399
13.733
23.755
33.759
68.597
97.092
137.408
74.005
Es,300 (MPa)
35
8.048
5.296
2.323
3.228
4.408
6.392
9.679
15.980
22.333
65.806
Ei,400 (MPa)
20
101.467
67.831
15.605
27.801
50.106
87.599
147.925
185.694
250.582
66.850
E50,400 (MPa)
26
36.499
21.944
1.944
11.142
21.768
36.758
47.947
64.788
84.678
60.121
Es,400 (MPa)
23
12.760
9.477
2.741
4.922
6.607
8.779
15.530
28.408
36.238
74.274
Table 4.5: Descriptive statistics TUM-TRX_CLAY_22; Includes sample means and std, sample
percentiles, range (min,max) and coefficient of variation CoV %; Approximate
number of unique project names in the dataset: 422; number of incomplete records
(rows): 1220; (r2 goodness of fit of the linear envelope in TC tests)
80
==PAGE:86==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
fines (us)
clay
silt
sand (us) gravel (us)
0
20
40
60
80
100
%
(a) Proportions per weight
d10
d30
d50
d60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
m
(b) Grain size diameters (% finer)
w (%)
LL
PL
PI
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
(c) Index properties
LI
ic
A
1
0
1
2
3
(d) Index properties
c (kPa)
(o)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
(e) Effective cohesion and friction angle (p-q method)
81
==PAGE:87==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
q100
p100
q200
p200
q300
p300
q400
p400
su, uc
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
kPa
(f) p-q at different confining stress levels (TC); undrained shear strength (UC) tests
Ei, 100
E50, 100
Es, 100
Ei, 200
E50, 200
Es, 200
Ei, 300
E50, 300
Es, 300
Ei, 400
E50, 400
Es, 400
0
50
100
150
200
250
MPa
(g) Elasticity moduli at different confining stress levels
Figure 4.4: Box-plots of selected properties and parameters; Box: 25-75 (%) quartiles (Q1-Q3)
(see Table 4.5); black horizontal line in the box: median; Whiskers: Q1 вҲ’1.5 В· iqr-
Q3 + 1.5 В· iqr;
82
==PAGE:88==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
d10
d30
d50
d60
%sand(us)
%fines(us)
%clay
%silt
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
ПҒd
e0
(q/p)100
(q/p)200
(q/p)300
(q/p)400
c
П•
su,uc
Ei,200
E50,200
Es,200
d10
323
323
277
323
323
323
316
323
277
281
276
291
288
286
197
22
21
15
18
10
9
8
10
67
10
13
8
d30
323
836
758
836
831
836
828
836
755
771
761
783
773
769
690
61
60
41
43
25
20
31
36
115
27
30
24
d50
277
758
841
829
822
829
814
836
761
770
768
778
764
760
710
76
67
48
49
26
21
42
47
117
32
35
29
d60
323
836
829
926
919
926
886
925
832
844
838
856
854
850
771
68
67
44
47
25
20
36
41
123
31
34
28
%sand(us)
323
831
822
919
941
941
879
939
846
855
851
867
874
870
770
68
67
44
47
25
20
36
41
124
31
34
28
%fines(us)
323
836
829
926
941
948
886
946
853
862
858
874
876
872
777
68
67
44
47
25
20
36
41
124
31
34
28
%clay
316
828
814
886
879
886
894
894
808
818
810
830
820
816
748
72
63
43
45
25
20
38
43
121
29
32
26
%silt
323
836
836
925
939
946
894
954
858
862
858
874
875
871
776
76
67
44
47
25
20
42
47
125
31
34
28
w
277
755
761
832
846
853
808
858
1034
1011
1012
1012
1000
993
747
230
73
48
51
30
24
51
58
213
34
37
29
LL
281
771
770
844
855
862
818
862
1011
1035
1020
1031
1005
998
754
222
72
48
51
30
24
47
54
211
34
37
29
PL
276
761
768
838
851
858
810
858
1012
1020
1032
1017
1003
996
752
222
71
49
52
30
24
48
55
211
35
38
30
PI
291
783
778
856
867
874
830
874
1012
1031
1017
1045
1014
1007
757
220
72
48
51
30
24
47
54
212
34
37
29
LI
288
773
764
854
874
876
820
875
1000
1005
1003
1014
1049
1041
750
223
73
49
52
30
24
48
55
215
35
38
30
ic
286
769
760
850
870
872
816
871
993
998
996
1007
1041
1042
746
222
73
49
52
30
24
48
55
212
35
38
30
A
197
690
710
771
770
777
748
776
747
754
752
757
750
746
778
64
62
41
43
23
18
34
38
81
28
31
25
ПҒd
22
61
76
68
68
68
72
76
230
222
222
220
223
222
64
311
149
85
87
56
40
117
130
121
51
62
49
e0
21
60
67
67
67
67
63
67
73
72
71
72
73
73
62
149
150
85
87
56
40
102
114
16
51
62
49
(q/p)100
15
41
48
44
44
44
43
44
48
48
49
48
49
49
41
85
85
90
78
52
38
59
68
13
45
56
44
(q/p)200
18
43
49
47
47
47
45
47
51
51
52
51
52
52
43
87
87
78
91
56
38
58
67
13
54
66
53
(q/p)300
10
25
26
25
25
25
25
25
30
30
30
30
30
30
23
56
56
52
56
57
32
35
43
12
31
39
30
(q/p)400
9
20
21
20
20
20
20
20
24
24
24
24
24
24
18
40
40
38
38
32
40
21
27
9
21
24
21
c
8
31
42
36
36
36
38
42
51
47
48
47
48
48
34
117
102
59
58
35
21
131
131
10
36
46
37
П•
10
36
47
41
41
41
43
47
58
54
55
54
55
55
38
130
114
68
67
43
27
131
145
12
39
49
40
su,uc
67
115
117
123
124
124
121
125
213
211
211
212
215
212
81
121
16
13
13
12
9
10
12
246
12
12
9
Ei,200
10
27
32
31
31
31
29
31
34
34
35
34
35
35
28
51
51
45
54
31
21
36
39
12
54
52
42
E50,200
13
30
35
34
34
34
32
34
37
37
38
37
38
38
31
62
62
56
66
39
24
46
49
12
52
67
49
Es,200
8
24
29
28
28
28
26
28
29
29
30
29
30
30
25
49
49
44
53
30
21
37
40
9
42
49
53
Table 4.6: Number of pairwise data-points in the TUM-TRX_CLAY_22 database
d50
d60
%sand_us
%fines_us
%clay
%silt
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
ПҒd
e0
(q/p)200
c
П•
E50,200
d50
841
829
822
829
814
836
761
770
768
778
764
760
710
76
67
49
42
47
35
d60
926
919
926
886
925
832
844
838
856
854
850
771
68
67
47
36
41
34
%sand_us
941
941
879
939
846
855
851
867
874
870
770
68
67
47
36
41
34
%fines_us
948
886
946
853
862
858
874
876
872
777
68
67
47
36
41
34
%clay
894
894
808
818
810
830
820
816
748
72
63
45
38
43
32
%silt
954
858
862
858
874
875
871
776
76
67
47
42
47
34
w
1034
1011
1012
1012
1000
993
747
230
73
51
51
58
37
LL
1035
1020
1031
1005
998
754
222
72
51
47
54
37
PL
1032
1017
1003
996
752
222
71
52
48
55
38
PI
1045
1014
1007
757
220
72
51
47
54
37
LI
1049
1041
750
223
73
52
48
55
38
ic
1042
746
222
73
52
48
55
38
A
778
64
62
43
34
38
31
ПҒd
311
149
87
117
130
62
e0
150
87
102
114
62
(q/p)200
91
58
67
66
c
131
131
46
П•
145
49
E50,200
67
Table 4.7: Subset 1 (TC): Number of pairwise data-points in TUM-TRX_CLAY_22.
d50
d60
%sand_us
%fines_us
%clay
%silt
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
ПҒd
e0
su,uc
d50
841
829
822
829
814
836
761
770
768
778
764
760
710
76
67
117
d60
926
919
926
886
925
832
844
838
856
854
850
771
68
67
123
%sand_us
941
941
879
939
846
855
851
867
874
870
770
68
67
124
%fines_us
948
886
946
853
862
858
874
876
872
777
68
67
124
%clay
894
894
808
818
810
830
820
816
748
72
63
121
%silt
954
858
862
858
874
875
871
776
76
67
125
w
1034
1011
1012
1012
1000
993
747
230
73
213
LL
1035
1020
1031
1005
998
754
222
72
211
PL
1032
1017
1003
996
752
222
71
211
PI
1045
1014
1007
757
220
72
212
LI
1049
1041
750
223
73
215
ic
1042
746
222
73
212
A
778
64
62
81
ПҒd
311
149
121
e0
150
16
su,uc
246
Table 4.8: Subset 2 (UC): Number of pairwise data-points in TUM-TRX_CLAY_22; Note:
Tables correspond to the upper triagular of symmetric matrices
83
==PAGE:89==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
d50
d60
sand(%)
fines(%)
clay(%)
silt(%)
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
d
e0
(q/p)200
c
E50, 200
d50
d60
sand(%)
fines(%)
clay(%)
silt(%)
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
d
e0
(q/p)200
c
E50, 200
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure 4.5: Pairwise correlation coefficientsвҖҷ magnitude (heatmap); Based on pairwise infor-
mation given in Table 4.7
d50
d60
%sand(us)
%fines(us)
%clay
%silt
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
ПҒd
e0
(q/p)200
c
П•
E50,200
d50
1
d60
0.914
1
%sand(us)
0.637
0.793
1
%fines(us)
-0.629
-0.816
-0.924
1
%clay
-0.706
-0.541
-0.213
0.254
1
%silt
-0.076
-0.279
-0.555
0.557
-0.484
1
w
-0.120
-0.138
-0.085
0.081
0.179
-0.036
1
LL
-0.428
-0.403
-0.295
0.267
0.247
0.021
0.262
1
PL
-0.090
-0.174
-0.218
0.186
-0.130
0.203
0.248
0.690
1
PI
-0.493
-0.417
-0.256
0.227
0.364
-0.086
0.208
0.928
0.417
1
LI
-0.036
-0.028
0.022
-0.023
0.152
-0.119
0.736
-0.103
-0.240
-0.018
1
ic
0.028
0.024
-0.025
0.024
-0.155
0.124
-0.722
0.113
0.253
0.025
-0.990
1
A
0.405
0.273
0.060
-0.114
-0.664
0.405
0.006
0.234
0.365
0.117
-0.211
0.215
1
ПҒd
0.123
0.170
0.173
-0.235
-0.182
0.014
-0.819
-0.346
-0.289
-0.322
-0.592
0.562
-0.252
1
e0
-0.168
-0.197
-0.227
0.291
0.205
0.028
0.856
0.428
0.449
0.348
0.425
-0.422
0.235
-0.980
1
(q/p)200
0.196
0.133
-0.041
0.061
-0.407
0.383
-0.029
0.054
0.227
-0.064
-0.216
0.201
0.289
0.252
-0.246
1
c
0.107
0.095
0.060
-0.074
-0.192
0.148
-0.302
0.125
0.065
0.130
-0.336
0.321
0.050
0.146
-0.125
0.007
1
П•
0.304
0.062
-0.073
0.143
-0.266
0.210
0.180
-0.297
-0.040
-0.404
0.193
-0.251
0.062
0.150
-0.123
0.819
-0.266
1
E50,200
0.206
0.218
0.323
-0.397
-0.230
-0.083
-0.288
0.049
0.198
-0.052
-0.524
0.524
0.199
0.234
-0.203
0.212
0.191
0.073
1
Table 4.9: Subset 1 (TC): Pearson correlation coefficient values, based on the pairwise data-
ponts in Table 4.7
84
==PAGE:90==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
d50
d60
sand(%)
fines(%)
clay(%)
silt(%)
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
d
e0
su, uc
d50
d60
sand(%)
fines(%)
clay(%)
silt(%)
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
d
e0
su, uc
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure 4.6: Pairwise correlation coefficientsвҖҷ magnitude (heatmap); Based on pairwise infor-
mation given in Table 4.8
d50
d60
sand(%)
fines(%)
clay(%)
silt(%)
w
LL
PL
PI
LI
ic
A
ПҒd
e0
su,uc
d50
1
Sym.
d60
0.914
1
sand(%)
0.637
0.793
1
fines(%)
-0.629
-0.816
-0.924
1
clay(%)
-0.706
-0.541
-0.213
0.254
1
silt(%)
-0.076
-0.279
-0.555
0.557
-0.484
1
w
-0.120
-0.138
-0.085
0.081
0.179
-0.036
1
LL
-0.428
-0.403
-0.295
0.267
0.247
0.021
0.262
1
PL
-0.090
-0.174
-0.218
0.186
-0.130
0.203
0.248
0.690
1
PI
-0.493
-0.417
-0.256
0.227
0.364
-0.086
0.208
0.928
0.417
1
LI
-0.036
-0.028
0.022
-0.023
0.152
-0.119
0.736
-0.103
-0.240
-0.018
1
ic
0.028
0.024
-0.025
0.024
-0.155
0.124
-0.722
0.113
0.253
0.025
-0.990
1
A
0.405
0.273
0.060
-0.114
-0.664
0.405
0.006
0.234
0.365
0.117
-0.211
0.215
1
ПҒd
0.123
0.170
0.173
-0.235
-0.182
0.014
-0.819
-0.346
-0.289
-0.322
-0.592
0.562
-0.252
1
e0
-0.168
-0.197
-0.227
0.291
0.205
0.028
0.856
0.428
0.449
0.348
0.425
-0.422
0.235
-0.980
1
su,uc
0.081
0.147
0.215
-0.201
0.040
-0.185
-0.447
-0.091
-0.183
-0.050
-0.371
0.364
0.162
0.466
-0.433
1
Table 4.10: Subset 2 (UC): Pearson correlation coefficient values, based on the pairwise data-
ponts in Table 4.8
85
==PAGE:91==
4 Database overview and Elementary data Analysis
range
classification
Positive
Negative
|ПҒ|>0.8
very strong
(d50 вҲ’d60), (PI вҲ’LL), (e0 вҲ’w), (П• вҲ’(q/p)200)
(%finesвҲ’d60), (%finesвҲ’%sand), (ПҒd вҲ’w), (e0 вҲ’ПҒd)
0.6 вүӨ|ПҒ| < 0.8
strong
(%sandвҲ’d50), (%sandвҲ’d60),
(PL вҲ’LL), (LI вҲ’w)
(%finesвҲ’d50), (%clayвҲ’d50), (ic вҲ’w), (AвҲ’%clay)
0.4 вүӨ|ПҒ| < 0.6
moderate
(%siltвҲ’%fines), (PI вҲ’PL), (d50 вҲ’A), (AвҲ’%silt),
(ПҒd вҲ’ic), (e0 вҲ’LL), (e0 вҲ’PL), (e0 вҲ’LI), (su,uc вҲ’ПҒd),
(E50,200 вҲ’ic)
(%clayвҲ’d60), (%siltвҲ’%sand), (%siltвҲ’%clay), (LL вҲ’d50),
(LL вҲ’d60), (PI вҲ’d50), (PI вҲ’d60), (ПҒd вҲ’LI),
(e0 вҲ’ic), (su,uc вҲ’w), (su,uc вҲ’e0), ((q/p)200 вҲ’%clay),
(П• вҲ’PI), (E50,200 вҲ’LI)
0.2 вүӨ|ПҒ| < 0.4
weak
(%finesвҲ’%clay), (LLвҲ’%fines), (LLвҲ’%clay),
(LL вҲ’w), (PLвҲ’%silt), (PL вҲ’w), (PIвҲ’%fines),
(PIвҲ’%clay), (PI вҲ’w), (PI вҲ’PL), (ic вҲ’PL), (A вҲ’d60),
(A вҲ’LL), (A вҲ’PL), (A вҲ’ic), (e0вҲ’%fines), (e0вҲ’%clay),
(e0 вҲ’A), (su,uc вҲ’% sand), (su,uc вҲ’ic), ((q/p)200 вҲ’%silt)
((q/p)200 вҲ’PL), ((q/p)200 вҲ’ic), ((q/p)200 вҲ’A), ((q/p)200 вҲ’ПҒd)
(c вҲ’ic), (П• вҲ’d50), (П• вҲ’%silt), (E50,200 вҲ’d50), (E50,200 вҲ’d60),
(E50,200 вҲ’%sand), (E50,200 вҲ’A), (E50,200 вҲ’ПҒd)
(%clayвҲ’%sand), (%siltвҲ’d60), (LLвҲ’%sand), (PLвҲ’%sand),
(PI-%sand), (LI вҲ’PL), (A вҲ’LI), (ПҒd-%fines),
(ПҒd-LL), (ПҒd-PL), (ПҒd-PI), (ПҒd-A),(eoвҲ’%sand),
(su,uc вҲ’%fines), (su,uc вҲ’LI), ((q/p)200 вҲ’LI), ((q/p)200 вҲ’e0),
(c вҲ’w), (c вҲ’LI), (П• вҲ’%clay), (П• вҲ’LL),
(П• вҲ’ic), (c вҲ’П•), (E50,200 вҲ’%fines), (E50,200 вҲ’%clay),
(E50,200 вҲ’e0)
|ПҒ| < 0.2
very weak
rest
rest
Table 4.11: Classification of correlation according to (Evans, 1996); Red/Blue: positive/nega-
tive pairwise correlations between soil properties, strength parameters and modu-
lus
86
==PAGE:92==
5 Results
This chapter focuses on the implementation of described methods in the previous chapter.
It starts with the application of Bayesian inference on selected parameters included in the
regional database. Bayesian parameter estimation based on the regional data, provides rec-
ommendations on the selection of marginal distributions for several soil parameters in the
regional database. Univariate posterior and predictive distributions from the observed re-
gional data, can be utilized as prior distributions in the updating process. These distributions
can then be conditioned on observed site investigation data, to derive site-specific updated
marginal distributions of the soil properties.
The Gaussian copula framework, and the Nataf model is applied to construct joint dis-
tributions of the soil parameters in the regional database. The best-fit univariate marginals
were used in this stage. The constructed distributions can be used as multivariate prior
distributions, and can then be conditioned on site-investigation data, through the Bayesian
updating stages.
In the subsequent stage, a multivariate distribution based on the JohnsonвҖҷs system of
distributions, was constructed based on the regional data. The regional model serves as a
prior model, containing the prior knowledge about the soil parameters in the region. The
performance of the hybridization, and of the conventional Bayesian updating methods, is
investigated based on a specific local site, in a real case study.
5.1 Constructing a regional multivariate model with different
marginal distributions
5.1.1 Identifying the best-fit marginals for the shear strength parameters
The four candidate models in Table 5.1 were considered for modeling the Mohr-Coulomb
shear strength parameters. For the parameters a, b of the Beta model, constant values were
Model
Parameters
Range of Оё
M1: Trunc Normal
Оё = [Вө, Пғ]
Вө вҲҲR, Пғ > 0
M2: Lognormal
Оё = [О», О¶]
О» вҲҲR, О¶ > 0
M3: Weibull
Оё = [an, k]
an вҲҲ(0, вҲһ), k вҲҲ(0, вҲһ)
M4: Beta
Оё = [r, s, a, b]
r > 0, s > 0, (a < b) вҲҲR
Table 5.1: Candidate models for M-C strength parameters
asigned based on representative to the soil type, physical limits of the random variables.
87
==PAGE:93==
5 Results
Analytical expressions of the probabilistic models and the distribution parameters are not
provided here. The reader is referred to the Appendix of the (ERA Group, 2020) document
for the latter three models, while for the first model, analytical expressions are provided in
(K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015, pp. 94). The MLE and Bayesian methods were implemented
to perform the following steps:
1. compute the parameters of 4 candidate probabilistic models and evaluate their posterior
joint distribution
2. compute the exact predictive distributions with numerical integration
3. select the model that best describes the laboratory data
A Python program was constructed to perform the methods described in detail in sections
3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.1.4, 3.2. Analytical expressions of the likelihood functions (and log-likelihood
functions) were used and these can be found in the python scripts provided in the supple-
mentary material of this document. The computation steps can be briefly summarized in the
following:
вҖў Uniform distributions as priors (see Equation 3.11. Prior bounds were assigned to each
strength parameter based on published literature (e.g. see Table 3.1). These bounds were
then used to define the joint uniform prior of the distribution parameters. A random
sample was drawn from the joint uniform prior for the mean and standard deviation of
the random variables, and the parameters of each PDF were computed based on these
values.
вҖў For each candidate model the MLE point estimates of the distribution parameters
were computed, along with the estimation error of the method (see section 3.1.2). The
likelihood function value was then computed at the ML estimates.
вҖў The proportionality constant was computed with numerical integration over the pa-
rametersвҖҷ space and the posterior distribution was evaluated for each model. Point
estimates of the distribution parameters were obtained from the posterior mean (see
Equation 3.7).
вҖў The predictive CDF of each candidate model was evaluated based on Equation 3.13.
вҖў For selecting the best model among the candidates:
- The AIC and BIC measures (see Equations 3.14, 3.15) were calculated using the
value of the likelihood function at the ML estimates.
- Bayesian model class selection was performed. Equal prior probability was as-
signed to each candidate model, the posterior model probability was computed
based Equation 3.16.
вҖў Model fusion was performed based on the predictive CDFs of the candidate models,
utilizing the posterior model probabilities Pr(Mi|Z) as weights.
88
==PAGE:94==
5 Results
The results from every aforementioned step was stored in nested Python dictionaries.
Results for the M-C strength parameters are provided in the following subsections for the
following subsets of the regional database (see Table 4.5):
1. Entire set of c and П• measurements in the regional database TUM-TRX_CL_22 (see
Table 4.5, except 4 samples labeled as silts (ML, MH)
2. Labeled measurements with number of observations n > 40:
a) Consolidated Undrained (CU)
b) Clays of low plasticity (CL)
The results of the MLE approach along with the estimation error, and the results of the
Bayesian Analysis for each of the four candidate models are provided in Table 5.2. Note that
for the model M4 (Beta distr.) the associated mean and standard deviation of the random
variable is given. These were calculated from the estimated parameters of the Beta distribution
(see ERA Group, 2020). In addition, no results are provided for the normal model M1 in
the analysis of the effective cohesion c, since (after testing) it was judged as inappropriate to
describe the observations.
The results of the Bayesian parameter estimation and the posterior probability of each
candidate model are based on the following prior bounds:
вҖў prior bounds for cohesion c:
- For mean: Вө вҲҲ[1, 60] (kPa)
- For standard deviation: Пғ вҲҲ[8, 18] (kPa)
вҖў prior bounds for friction angle П•
- For mean: Вө вҲҲ[17, 40] (o)
- For standard deviation: Пғ вҲҲ[3, 8] (o)
For the Beta model, the parameters [a, b] were predefined as:
вҖў For cohesion c: [0, 200] (kPa)
вҖў For friction angle П•: [0, 45] (o)
The parameters [a, b] were defined to represent physical limits of the cohesion and friction
angle in the considered conditions, based on published literature and the descriptive statistics
of the regional database (see Tables 3.1, 4.5). From Table 5.2 the information criteria AIC, BIC
(minimum) and the bayesian posterior probability Pr(Mi|Z) (maximum) suggest the models
given in Table 5.3.
Figure 5.1 illustrates a 2d plot of the posterior jpdf of the Weibull distribution parameters.
The Weibull distribution was identified as the best-fit distribution for the friction angle,
based on the entire TUM_TRX_CL_22 dataset, and the dataset containing the labeled CL
measurements. The colorbar in Figure 5.1, indicates the joint probability density in the
89
==PAGE:95==
5 Results
dataset
Model Mi
Variable
ЛҶОёMLE
ЛҶОёpm
AIC
BIC
Pr(Mi|Z)
TUM-TRX_CL_22 (n=140)
M1
c
П•
[28.76 Вұ 0.57, 6.92 Вұ 0.40]
[28.76, 7.01]
942.99
948.87
0.271
M2
c
[2.794 Вұ 0.078, 0.878 Вұ 0.055]
[2.794, 0.891]
1032.95
1038.62
3.65 В· 10вҲ’4
П•
[3.327 Вұ 0.022, 0.265 Вұ 0.016]
[3.327, 0.268]
960.87
966.75
5.19 В· 10вҲ’8
M3
c
[24.90 Вұ 1.872, 1.323 Вұ 0.092]
[25.14, 1.323]
1029.95
1035.62
0.057
П•
[31.44 Вұ 0.56, 4.748 Вұ 0.325]
[31.47, 4.744]
940.83
946.71
0.572
MвҲ—
4
c
[22.92 Вұ 2.48, 17.13 Вұ 1.58]
[23.17, 17.44]
1028.77
1034.44
0.946
П•
[28.87 Вұ 0.59, 7.142 Вұ 0.368]
[28.84, 7.200]
943.82
949.70
0.157
CU (n=110)
M1
c
П•
[28.29 Вұ 0.635, 6.974 Вұ 0.585]
[29.29, 7.087]
743.44
748.84
0.264
M2
c
[2.729 Вұ 0.093, 0.913 Вұ 0.065]
[2.729, 0.927]
807.38
812.57
0.009
П•
[3.309 Вұ 0.026, 0.269 Вұ 0.018]
[3.309, 0.273]
773.44
760.46
1.17 В· 10вҲ’6
M3
c
[23.91 Вұ 2.07, 1.233 Вұ 0.095]
[24.25, 1.235]
809.52
814.71
0.097
П•
[30.98 Вұ 0.82, 4.609 Вұ 0.149]
[31.02, 4.606]
742.12
747.52
0.354
MвҲ—
4
c
[22.38 Вұ 1.71, 17.58 Вұ 1.58]
[22.67, 17.92]
808.87
814.06
0.894
П•
[28.38 Вұ 0.82, 7.116 Вұ 0.413]
[28.35, 7.189]
742.39
747.80
0.437
CL (n=43)
M1
c
П•
[28.45 Вұ 0.81, 5.438 Вұ 0.583]
[28.45, 5.667]
271.66
275.18
0.211
M2
c
[2.798 Вұ 0.152, 0.919 Вұ 0.107]
[2.798, 0.953]
309.79
313.01
1.2 В· 10вҲ’4
П•
[3.327 Вұ 0.035, 0.219 Вұ 0.024]
[3.320, 0.228]
281.45
284.98
2.54 В· 10вҲ’6
M3
c
[24.85 Вұ 2.96, 1.394 Вұ 0.179]
[25.60, 1.394]
303.25
306.47
0.110
П•
[30.61 Вұ 0.87, 6.140 Вұ 0.779]
[30.69, 6.119]
270.05
273.57
0.511
MвҲ—
4
c
[22.66 Вұ 2.71, 16.63 Вұ 2.35]
[23.30, 17.47]
303.38
306.60
0.888
П•
[28.41 Вұ 0.83, 5.446 Вұ 0.543]
[28.36, 5.623]
270.87
274.39
0.278
Table 5.2: Point estimates of the distribution parameters and model selection; вҲ—Associated
mean and std of the Beta RV; вҲ—вҲ—Blue colored values: min AIC/BIC; Red colored
values: max posterior probability
dataset
variable
AICmin
BICmin
Pr(Mi|Z)max
TUM-TRX_CL_22
c
M4: Beta
M4: Beta
M4: Beta
П•
M3: Weibull
M3: Weibull
M3: Weibull
CU
c
M2: Lognormal
M2: Lognormal
M4: Beta
П•
M3: Weibull
M3: Weibull
M4: Beta
CL
c
M3: Weibull
M3: Weibull
M4: Beta
П•
M3: Weibull
M3: Weibull
M3: Weibull
Table 5.3: Best fit models (see Table 5.1, according to AIC, BIC and Bayesian model posterior
probability
colored regions of the plot. Points on the iso-contour lines are equally likely. The posterior
distribution of the parameters of any of the considered models, can be visualized through the
provided simplified Python program.
The predictive distributions of the models, were computed from Equation 3.13 with
90
==PAGE:96==
5 Results
28
30
32
34
36
1 
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
2 
posterior jpdf of parameters: Weibull
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.20
0.24
0.28
0.32
Figure 5.1: Posterior PDF of the parameters of the Weibull distribution; friction angle П• in CL
dataset
numerical integration. The fused predictive distribution was evaluated as a mixture of
the considered models, based on each modelвҖҷs posterior probability Pr(Mi|Z). These are
demonstrated in Figure 5.2, corresponding to the entire regional dataset, and in Figure 5.3,
based on the CL labeled measurements. Similar results with the regional distributions were
obtained using the CU dataset, hence these are not illustrated here.
In both Figures 5.2, 5.3, can be noticed that the fused distribution follows closely the
identified best-fit marginals. Differences are becoming evident in the case of the CL dataset,
Figure 5.3, although considering the PDF and CDF of the effective cohesion, these are very
close to the Beta distribution, due to the high posterior probability of the model (see Table
5.2). This can be explained by the choice of uniform priors, and the relatively large number
of observations in the regional dataset. The likelihood strongly affects the posterior in this
case. The benefits of applying the Bayesian method become more clear when a lower number
of observations are available, although according to reliability standards, a number >30 of
observations are usually needed for more reliable predictions. Within the context of a local
site investigation that usually provides only a basket of observations, the proposed Bayesian
method can provide a reference basis for the uncertainty at the site.
91
==PAGE:97==
5 Results
10
20
30
40
50
(o)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
density
Trunc_normal
Lognormal
Weibull
Beta
Model Fusion
histogram
(a) Predictive PDFs of П•
0
20
40
60
80
c (kPa)
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
0.040
density
Lognormal
Weibull
Beta
Model Fusion
histogram
(b) Predictive PDFs of c
10
20
30
40
50
(o)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cummulative density
Trunc_normal
Lognormal
Weibull
Beta
Model Fusion
ECDF
(c) Predictive CDFs of П•
0
20
40
60
80
c (kPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cummulative density
Lognormal
Weibull
Beta
Model Fusion
ECDF
(d) Predictive CDFs of c
10
20
30
40
50
(o)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cummulative density
Model Fusion predictive
ECDF
(e) Model Fusion П•
0
20
40
60
80
c (kPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cummulative density
Model Fusion predictive
ECDF
(f) Model Fusion c
Figure 5.2: Predictive PDFs, CDFs and model fusion for friction angle П•
92
==PAGE:98==
5 Results
10
20
30
40
(o)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
density
Trunc_normal
Lognormal
Weibull
Beta
Model Fusion
histogram
(a) Predictive PDFs of П•
0
20
40
60
80
c (kPa)
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
0.040
density
Lognormal
Weibull
Beta
Model Fusion
histogram
(b) Predictive PDFs of c
10
20
30
40
(o)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cummulative density
Trunc_normal
Lognormal
Weibull
Beta
Model Fusion
ECDF
(c) Predictive CDFs of П•
0
20
40
60
80
c (kPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cummulative density
Lognormal
Weibull
Beta
Model Fusion
ECDF
(d) Predictive CDFs of c
10
20
30
40
(o)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cummulative density
Model Fusion predictive
ECDF
(e) Model Fusion П•
0
20
40
60
80
c (kPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cummulative density
Model Fusion predictive
ECDF
(f) Model Fusion c
Figure 5.3: Predictive PDFs, CDFs and model fusion for cohesion c and friction angle П•; CL
dataset
93
==PAGE:99==
5 Results
5.1.2 The multivariate regional distribution based on the Nataf model
The Nataf model was adopted to construct an 8-parameter multivariate distribution, based
on the following considerations:
вҖў Best-fit distributions for M-C shear strength parameters, obtained with Bayesian analysis
вҖў Selection of distributions for rest soil properties based on visual inspection and literature
review, and Maximum Likelihood estimation for their distribution parameters.
вҖў Input correlation matrix R constructed from Pearson sample correlation coefficients (see
Table 4.9.
The considered variables (X1, X2, ..., X8) along with the estimated distribution parameters
can be seen in Table 5.4, and the correlation matrix in Table 5.5. For the definition of the
parameters, the reader is referred to (ERA Group, 2020).
Random Variable Xi
distribution
parameters
X1 = d50 (Вөm)
Gamma
Оұ = 0.12, ОІ = 2.144
X2 = LI
Normal
Вө = 0.0105, Пғ = 0.332
X3 = PI
Gamma
Оұ = 0.35, ОІ = 7.50
X4 = ПҒd (t/m3)
Normal
Вө = 1.858, Пғ = 0.201
X5 = (q/p)200
Normal
Вө = 0.540, Пғ = 0.107
X6 = E50,200 (MPa)
Log-normal
О» = 3.135, О¶ = 0.782
XвҲ—
7 = c (kPa)
Beta
r = 1.445, s = 11.034, a = 0, b = 200
XвҲ—
8 = П• (o)
Weibull
an = 31.47, k = 4.744
Table 5.4: Marginal distributions (X1, X2, ..., X8); вҲ—Bayesian posterior mean
RX =
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X1
1
X2
-0.036
1
X3
-0.489
-0.014
1
X4
0.123
-0.592
-0.322
1
X5
0.196
-0.216
-0.064
0.252
1
X6
0.206
-0.524
-0.052
0.234
0.212
1
X7
0.107
-0.336
0.130
0.146
0.007
0.191
1
X8
0.304
0.193
-0.404
0.150
0.819
0.073
-0.266
1
Table 5.5: Correlation matrix (Pearson sample coefficients)
The multivariate Nataf distribution was constructed following the Nataf transformations,
and the joint normality assumption. The steps for simulating dependent samples from the
joint distribution were discussed in detail in sections 3.3.4, 3.3.5. The ERANataf ERA Group,
2020 class of functions were used to efficiently perform the transformations. The computed
94
==PAGE:100==
5 Results
RbZ =
ЛҶZ1
ЛҶZ2
ЛҶZ3
ЛҶZ4
ЛҶZ5
ЛҶZ6
ЛҶZ7
ЛҶZ8
ЛҶZ1
1
ЛҶZ2
-0.038
1
ЛҶZ3
-0.538
-0.014
1
ЛҶZ4
0.129
-0.592
-0.326
1
ЛҶZ5
0.206
-0.216
-0.065
0.252
1
ЛҶZ6
0.244
-0.615
-0.062
0.274
0.249
1
ЛҶZ7
0.117
-0.353
0.137
0.153
0.007
0.227
1
ЛҶZ8
0.322
0.193
-0.409
0.150
0.820
0.086
-0.279
1
Table 5.6: Correlation matrix of the transformed to the standard normal space variables bZ
correlation matrix R0 (see Equation 3.36), is given in Table 5.6. A large number (n = 2 В· 105) of
dependent samples were simulated from the joint Nataf distribution. The simulation results
are demonstrated in the form of bivariate correlations in Figure 5.4 for correlations between
friction angle П•, Figure 5.5 for cohesion c, and Figure 5.6 for the elasticity modulus E50,200.
The 95% Confidence Intervals were constructed from the total number of simulated samples
(2000 of them are plotted).
Figure 5.4 indicates some interesting correlation structures between friction angle and
plasticity index PI, in which the CIs are relatively narrow. Such correlation has reported
in the literature as well (e.g. see F. Kulhawy and P. Mayne, 1990). Very narrow CIs can
be noticed between (П•, (q/p)200, which are physically strong correlated. However, such a
correlation can be useful for estimating with confidence the friction angle from one confining
stress level in a triaxial test. With regard to to the correlation (c, П•), the large uncertainty in
the cohesion parameter is evident, although a weak negative correlation between the M-C
parameters is reported. The plotted samples and CIs in Figure indicate a weak negative
correlation between (LI, c). Observing the correlation structures in Figure 5.6, a moderate
negative correlation was captured between (LI, E50,200). Negative liquidity index values can
indicate over-consolidated soils (e.g. see Das, 2015), and a correlation within these liquidity
index range could potentially be explained by this relation.
The marginal CDFs evaluated using the simulated samples from the Nataf distribution,
are demonstrated in Figures 5.7. Figure 5.8 illustrates the constructed marginal CDFs, and
the empirical CDF computed from limited sparse observations of a local site "U5-Freiham"
(see Table 5.7), which is considered as test dataset in in this study. The provided marginal
distributions can be used as prior distributions, and these can be updated based on the site
data to allow more reliable site predictions (see Figure 2.6). In some cases, such as the regional
CDF of friction angle, or the regional CDF of E50,200, the constructed distributions appear to
describe reasonably well the limited site observations.
The simulation results of the constructed Nataf distribution, are directly comparable to
those presented later in this chapter, in section 5.2.1. The differences between the two models
lies on the selection of the marginal distributions, the method for estimating their parameters,
and the calculation of the correlation matrix.
95
==PAGE:101==
5 Results
100
101
102
d50 ( m)
101
(o)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
LI
101
(o)
101
PI
101
(o)
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
d (t/m3)
101
(o)
2e-01
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
101
(o)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
101
(o)
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
101
(o)
Figure 5.4: Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Correlations between
friction angle and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: Simulated samples from
the Nataf distr.; Black circles: Pairwise data-points in the regional database; Red
line: moving median; Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI)
96
==PAGE:102==
5 Results
100
101
102
d50 ( m)
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
LI
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
101
PI
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
d (t/m3)
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
2e-01
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
101
(o)
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
Figure 5.5: Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Correlations between
cohesion and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: Simulated samples from the
Nataf distr.; Black circles: Pairwise data-points in the regional database; Red line:
moving median; Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI)
97
==PAGE:103==
5 Results
100
101
102
d50 ( m)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
LI
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
101
PI
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
d (t/m3)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
2e-01
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
10
1
100
101
102
c (kPa)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
101
(o)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
Figure 5.6: Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Correlations between
E50,200 and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: Simulated samples from the Nataf
distr.; Black circles: Pairwise data-points in the regional database; Red line: moving
median; Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI)
98
==PAGE:104==
5 Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
d50 ( m)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
LI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
PI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50
d (t/m3)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(q/p)200
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
E50, 200 (MPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
100
c (kPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
10
20
30
40
50
(o)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
Nataf marginal CDFs
ECDF Regional data
Figure 5.7: Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Marginal distribution
of the random variables (X1, ..., X8); Circles: Regional empirical distribution; Blue
line: Marginal CDFs from simulated samples
99
==PAGE:105==
5 Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
d50 ( m)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
LI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
PI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50
d (t/m3)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(q/p)200
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
E50, 200 (MPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
100
c (kPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
10
20
30
40
50
(o)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
Nataf marginal CDFs
ECDF Site data
Figure 5.8: Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Marginal distribu-
tion of the random variables (X1, ..., X8); Circles: Site "U5-Freiham" empirical
distribution; Blue line: Marginal CDFs from simulated samples
100
==PAGE:106==
5 Results
5.2 Constructing a site-specific Multivariate probability distribution
for triaxial testing parameters
The construction of a site specific multivariate probability distribution for selected parameters
from the triaxial dataset, is presented in this section. The case study is based on the site
investigation data given in Table 5.7 for the clayey soil layers at the site U5-Freiham in Munich,
Germany. 11 soil parameters were considered in this scenario, as can be seen in Table 5.7.
z(m)
d50 (Вөm)
%clay
w (%)
LL %
PI
ic
ПҒd (t/m3)
(q/p)200
c (kPa)
П• (o)
E50,200 (MPa)
16.3
1.84
0.61
39.15
26.52
60.94
16.6
46.27
33.99
17.3
1.69
0.58
56.87
17.37
41.60
23.0
1.72
0.54
10.65
23.4
16.26
50.98
26.67
1.30
23.8
1.69
0.53
3.35
31.35
8.71
23.2
13.01
36.28
17.65
1.32
24.2
16.62
46.04
25.78
1.14
1.81
0.58
29.29
31.94
16.61
24.7
23.78
57.72
33.81
1
25.0
18.94
46.17
24.51
1.11
25.3
1.89
0.53
4.95
32.23
19.74
26.8
21.79
57.34
33.08
1.07
27.8
1.96
0.70
14.75
42.29
38.23
28.3
2.07
0.66
61.16
32.79
55.10
28.8
1.90
0.49
69.67
21.92
13.27
30.5
22.61
70.03
41.91
1.13
30.8
20.53
40.48
22.05
0.90
Table 5.7: Site investigation data: Freiham U5, Munich Germany; Data collected from the
same soil unit from boreholes in close proximity at the site; Soil parameters from
Subset 1 (TC) (see Table 4.7)
The selection of the parameters was based on i) the number of observations for each
parameter in the regional database (see Table 4.5), ii) the number of pairwise information
(see Table 4.7) and iii) the indication of possible correlations from the sample correlation
coefficients (see Figure 4.6 and Table 4.9), and their classification given in Table 4.11. It
is evident that the site-investigation data are sparse, with many missing entries matrix.
Furthermore, the measurements on some properties such as d50 and %clay are completely
missing. Due to the data sparsity, all data-points are used as training site data in this study.
Note however, that the site-specific data were removed from the regional database before the
analysis ("leave one out", e.g. see (Herlau et al., 2020; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019)).
5.2.1 The regional multivariate distribution based on JohnsonвҖҷs marginals
Distribution fitting
The JohnsonвҖҷs marginal distribution for each of the 11 soil parameters is defined in the first
step, using the full regional data. The logarithm transform is applied to every property that
101
==PAGE:107==
5 Results
can not take negative values. Hence, the following 11 variables (Y1, Y2, ..., Y11) are defined,
Y1 = ln(d50),
Y2 = ln(%clay),
Y3 = ln(w),
Y4 = ln(LL),
Y5 = ln(PI),
Y6 = ic,
Y7 = ln(ПҒd),
Y8 = ln((q/p)200),
Y9 = ln(c),
Y10 = ln(П•),
Y11 = ln(E50,200)
(5.1)
The JohnsonвҖҷs marginal distribution type for each of the 11 variables (Y1, Y2, ..., Y11), and
the parameters of each distribution were computed following the steps described in section
3.4.2. The fitted JohnsonвҖҷs distributions (red continuous lines) are visualized in Figure 5.9
along with the empirical distributions (grey circles) derived from the generic soil data. A
visual inspection indicates almost exact fit of the JohnsonвҖҷs distribution to the empirical
distributions for the first 7 variables. These correspond to the variables with the larger
number of observations. It can be also said, that the distribution-fitting results are satisfying,
even for the last 4 variables that correspond to the shear strength and elasticity parameters,
and for which the number of data-points is considerably lower. It can be noticed that 6
variables can be modeled with the SU (unbounded) JohnsonвҖҷs member, while the strength
parameters, except from the q/p ratio, and the elasticity modulus were identified as SB
(bounded between [by, ay + by]) members. No SL members were identified, whose relation to
the shifted lognormal distribution is reminded.
The translation Y вҶ’X, i.e. transformation of the non-normal random variables to the to
the standard normal space, was performed following the closed form expressions given in
Equation 3.61. Subsequently, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test, discussed in section 3.4.3,
was performed to check the normality of the transformed variables. The distribution-fitting
results are presented in table 5.8. The third column indicates the identified JohnsonвҖҷs member
for each random variable. In columns 4-7, the computed distributional parameters are given.
The last column of the Table, corresponds to the p-value associated with the K-S test, and
provides indication on whether to accept or reject the marginal normality hypothesis of the
transformed variables Xi. For the chosen a = 0.05 significance level, the p-values indicate that
the null hypothesis is not rejected for all Xi, meaning that the transformed variables can be
considered (marginally) as standard normal variables.
In accordance with the works of (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; Ching, Lin, et al., 2017;
Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019; Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020), the multivariate nor-
mality assumption is adopted in the present study, as well. This means that the transformed
variables (X1, X2, ..., X11), are assumed to jointly follow the multi-Normal distribution (see
also section 3.3.4). Hence, having computed the marginal distributions, the next step was to
compute a valid correlation matrix, to completely define the multivariate distribution model.
The construction of the correlation matrix is presented in the next section.
102
==PAGE:108==
5 Results
Distribution parameters
Random Variable
Soil Parameter
Distribution type
ax
bx
ay
by
p-value
Y1
ln(d50)
SB
1.280
-1.002
4.803
-0.555
0.867
Y2
ln(%clay)
SB
2.178
-5.369
21.535
-17.093
0.640
Y3
ln(w)
SU
1.810
0.995
0.507
3.295
0.824
Y4
ln(LL)
SU
3.933
2.132
0.796
4.180
0.667
Y5
ln(PI)
SU
3.294
2.372
0.962
3.782
0.682
Y6
ic
SU
5.981
3.454
1.624
1.982
0.981
Y7
ln(ПҒd)
SU
2.598
1.989
0.202
0.797
0.938
Y8
ln((q/p)200))
SU
2.750
2.171
0.399
-0.270
0.283
Y9
ln(c)
SB
1.282
-0.515
4.913
-0.097
0.949
Y10
ln(П•)
SB
2.654
-4.637
5.213
-1.079
0.394
Y11
ln(E50,200)
SB
0.933
-0.260
3.396
1.263
0.924
Table 5.8: Distribution type and distribution parameters of (Y1, Y2, ..., Y11);
Bootstrapping correlation coefficients
In chapter 3 and section 3.4.4, the concept of pairwise correlations between two soil parameters
(Yi, Yj) was introduced. It is reminded, that the correlation concept can be related to whether
measuring a soil property Yi, can lead to reduction in the uncertainty of another soil property
Yj. Recall the classification of the sample correlation coefficients (according to (Evans, 1996)),
which were computed from the data, and they were presented in Table 4.11. The correlation
classification revealed that some of the considered soil parameters may present a considerable
degree of linear correlation. For instance, in Table 4.11 there is an indication of "moderate"
correlation between friction angle П• and Plasticity index PI. This means that the measurement
of plasticity index (or Y5) can cause a reduction in the variance of the friction angle (Y9).
For moderate correlations the variance reduction percentage is approximately 25% (1 вҲ’ПҒ2
ij)
(Ching, Lin, et al., 2017). On the other hand, it was pointed out that the number of pairwise
data-points is not sufficient enough to get unbiased estimations on the correlation between
these parameters, directly from the sample coefficients (see Table 4.7). It is crucial, as well,
that a correlation matrix constructed directly from the respective correlation coefficients in
Table 4.7), is not a positive-definite matrix.
To address, to some degree, the statistical uncertainty that arise from the relatively poor
data coverage in the pairwise data-points of some soil parameters, and obtain a valid positive
definite correlation matrix, the rejection-sampling version of the bootstrap technique was
implemented following section 3.4.4. A large number, n = 10000, of samples, representative
of the Pearson (product moment) correlation coefficient pairs of (Xi, Xj), was generated. The
large number of samples was assumed sufficient enough, to provide a more reliable estimation
of the true statistic value, as an average of the total accepted generated samples ПҒij. In Table
the resulting correlation coefficients that lead to a valid positive definite correlation matrix,
is presented. The bootstrap correlation coefficients can be compared to the to the sample
Pearson correlation coefficients computed from the original soil data, given in Table 4.9. A
closer look at the two tables can generally reveal a reduction in the correlation coefficients,
103
==PAGE:109==
5 Results
Cg =
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X11
X1
1
X2
-0.71
1
X3
-0.13
0.14
1
X4
-0.42
0.22
0.23
1
X5
-0.50
0.34
0.17
0.87
1
X6
0.06
-0.15
-0.66
0.12
0.04
1
X7
0.13
-0.10
-0.64
-0.30
-0.26
0.48
1
X8
0.22
-0.28
-0.03
0.04
-0.07
0.17
0.21
1
X9
0.02
-0.10
-0.29
0.22
0.22
0.35
0.08
-0.10
1
X10
0.26
-0.20
0.14
-0.25
-0.31
-0.15
0.14
0.62
-0.34
1
X11
0.18
-0.12
-0.25
0.11
0.05
0.41
0.18
0.20
0.21
0.06
1
Table 5.9: Average values of accepted bootstrap samples of ПҒij; X1 вҲ’X11: Transformed vari-
ables from Subset 1 (TC) (see Table 4.7)
mainly in those that refer to the triaxial testing parameters and some selected soil properties
that presented a "moderate" degree of correlation, from the original soil data.
Simulation from the regional unconditional multivariate distribution
The (standard) multi-normal distribution of (X1, X2, ..., X11) was constructed based on the
identified JohnsonвҖҷs marginals, and the resulting correlation matrix containing the accepted
coefficients of Table 5.9. This distribution is named here as unconditional regional JPDF. The
simulation of dependent soil samples from the joint distribution was discussed in detail
in section 3.4.4. The results on the correlations between the friction angle П• and the rest
soil parameters in the dataset are provided in Figure 5.10 Simulated samples from the
unconditional JPDF are plotted (grey circles) along with the pairwise data-points in the
regional database, and with the computed moving mean, and Confidence Intervals. The
CIвҖҷs correspond to the (2.5%, 97.5%) percentiles, i.e. 95% CIs. The illustrated 95% CIs were
computed from a large number n = 2 В· 106 samples. 2000 of them are shown in each subplot
of Figure 5.10. A visual inspection reveals that:
вҖў The site data (red circles) are within the coverage of the regional database (black circles),
and the data can be assumed to follow same mean and covariance matrix. Under this
homogeneity assumption both Bayesian and Hybrid methods are applicable.
вҖў The CIs become narrower in regions were a larger number of simulated samples fall
вҖў The statistical uncertainty is quite high, in the regional data. This can be noticed in the
CIs of most bivariate correlations.
вҖў Some possibly interesting correlation structures can be noticed between friction angle
and the index properties. Moreover, a negative correlation can be observed between
cohesion and friction angle, which is larger than the regional soil data showed.
104
==PAGE:110==
5 Results
вҖў П• вҲ’E50,200 appear to be uncorrelated, since the simulated data are uniformly scattered
in the E50 range. Very weak correlation appears to be present between П• вҲ’ПҒd in the
regional data, although the site data show a positive trend which could be a sign for
higher correlation degree at the site, between the two parameters.
вҖў A strong correlation exists between П• вҲ’(q/p)200, which was expected to some degree,
if one considers the way these parameters are computed. The two parameters presented
also very strong correlation, based on the regional data.
вҖў The correlation structures justify the choice of parameters for the construction of a
site-specific multivariate model. The uncertainty of the friction angle, can be reduced in
the updating process, due to the existing correlations between the selected parameters.
Correlation structures between c, E50,200, (q/p)200 and the rest soil properties, as obtained
from simulation from the unconditional regional PDF, can be viewed in the Appendix (Figures
A.3, A.7, A.11).
105
==PAGE:111==
5 Results
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Y1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y1)
Johnson's (SB) CDF
Empirical
4
2
0
2
4
Y2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y2)
Johnson's (SB) CDF
Empirical
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Y3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y3)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
Y4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y4)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Y5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y5)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Y6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y6)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Y7
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y7)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Y8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y8)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
0
1
2
3
4
Y9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y9)
Johnson's (SB) CDF
Empirical
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
Y10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y10)
Johnson's (SB) CDF
Empirical
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Y11
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y11)
Johnson's (SB) CDF
Empirical
Figure 5.9: Gray circles: Empirical distribution constructed from the regional data; Red line:
Fitted JohnsonвҖҷs CDFs of variables (Y1, Y2, ..., Y11)
106
==PAGE:112==
5 Results
100
101
d50 ( m)
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
10
1
100
101
%clay
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
101
w (%)
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
20
30
40
60
LL
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
101
PI
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
ic
101
(o)
100
2
d (t/m3)
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
2e-01
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
100
101
102
c (kPa)
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
101
2 Г— 101
3 Г— 101
4 Г— 101
(o)
Figure 5.10: Simulation from the unconditional regional multivariate distribution: Correla-
tions between friction angle and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: Simulated
samples from the unconditional f (x|Вөg, Cg); Black circles: Pairwise data-points
in the regional database; Red line: moving median; Dashed blue lines: 95%
Confidence Interval (CI)
107
==PAGE:113==
5 Results
5.2.2 The quasi-Site-specific model based on Bayesian updating with conjugate
priors and Gibbs Sampling
A brief discussion was made on the simulation results of the unconditional regional multivari-
ate distribution. It is reminded that the "conventional" updating of the regional distribution
based on a set of measurements on soil parameters at the site, was discussed in section 3.5.1
(see Example 2). The results that are presented in this section, are related to the Bayesian
updating process using conjugate priors and the Gibbs sampler to obtain posterior samples of
the parameters (mean vectors and covariance matrix), following sections 3.5.2-3.5.4.
The Bayesian updating of the regional predictive distribution f (x|Xdb,o), based on the site
data given in Table 5.7, (see section 3.5.4, pp. 66) was performed, and the PDF was then
conditioned on the site investigation data, to construct the distribution f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o). The
hybridization method between the regional PDF, and the Site-specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o)
constructed from the limited sparse data of table 5.7, was tested as well. For the calculation
of stable statistics, such as median confidence intervals and correlations, the GS sampler
was programmed with total sampling step size equal to T = 20000, and a burn-in period
of tb = 1000. Figure demonstrates i) a histogram of collected correlation coefficient pairs ПҒ,
between friction angle and the rest parameters, from the posterior samples obtained with
Gibbs Sampling on the regional dataset, ii) the bootsrap average of accepted drawn correlation
coefficients as a vertical red line, and iii) the sample Pearson correlation coefficients computed
from the transformed to the normal space regional data as a vertical black line. Some
comments on Figure 5.11:
вҖў The bootstrap technique produces the lowest correlation coefficients in most cases,
except ПҒ9,10 (cohesion-friction angle) where the results are very close to the sample
coefficient from the regional data, and to the peak of the GS samplesвҖҷ histogram. This
could be an indication of a "weakness" of the bootstrap technique to produce correlation
coefficients of high magnitude.
вҖў The GS samplesвҖҷ histograms indicate higher correlation in most parametersвҖҷ pairs. The
histogram of ПҒ3,10 and ПҒ6,10 illustrates an unsure correlation between these parameters
and friction angle, since the bars are extended from negative to positive values. It
should be noted that (X1, X11) are roughly standard normal, meaning that standard
deviations of the properties are not exactly one (and means are not exactly zero). For
very strong correlations, i.e. ПҒ8,10 the GS posterior histogram indicates some values
larger than 1, which do not represent actual correlation coefficient values ([-1,1]). on the
pother hand, the GS histograms suggest that higher correlation can exist between most
soil parameters in the regional data.
The regional predictive PDF was first evaluated based on the regional triaxial related dataset,
and this distribution was then conditioned on the observed site investigation data (Table 5.7)
to produce the "quasi-site-specific" model f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o), as a mixture of multivariate normal
PDFs. Random samples X were drawn from the distribution, and these were converted
physical samples Y following the inverse transform, and subsequently to soil samples, to
108
==PAGE:114==
5 Results
investigate possible correlation structures between the soil parameters. Similarly, soil samples
were obtained from the hybrid distribution f (x|hb). The simulation results on the soil
parameters cross-correlations with the design parameter friction angle, and the comparison
between the Bayesian and Hybrid methods are demonstrated in Figure 5.12 and Figure 5.13,
respectively. These figures provide a comparison between the Bayesian and Hybridization
methods, with the simulation results from the unconditional regional PDF and from the
Site-specific predictive PDF constructed from the limited site data of table 5.7. The methodsвҖҷ
comparison on the correlation structure between friction angle and the rest soil parameters
in the TC dataset, is illustrated in Figure 5.14 .Note that the Confidence intervals (dashed
blue lines) and the median (red line) in Figure 5.14, were computed based on the entire set of
simulated samples from the updated regional predictive PDF, i.e. f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o).
Comments on the correlations between friction angle and the rest soil parameters, in Figures
5.12-5.14:
вҖў Both tested methods, Bayesian and Hybridization, showed reduced uncertainty, in
comparison with the simulation results from the unconditional regional PDF (see Figure
5.10. This can be noticed in the reduced scatter of the plotted simulated samples in
Figures 5.12, 5.13.
вҖў The uncertainty at the site is high due to sparse and limited observations. This is
reflected by the Site-Specific predictive PDFs (blue dots), and the large scatter in the
simulated samples from this distribution. Note that when no available pairwise obser-
vations exist at the site (first two plots), the simulated samples from this distribution
are scattered over the region defined by the soil parameterвҖҷs bounds.
вҖў The Bayesian methodвҖҷs results in Figure 5.12, indicated higher correlation between
friction angle and the rest the soil parameters. The higher degree of negative correla-
tions between (LL, П•), (PI, П•) and (ic, П•), in comparison to the respective ones shown
in Figure 5.10, is evident. Even though the updating of the regional f (x|Xdb,o) to
f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o), was performed based only on 1 pairwise observationsвҖҷ set (1 site data-
point on the plot), the simulation results provide a better picture on their "site-specific"
dependence. (However, the utilization of the predictive regional f (x|Xdb,o) plays an
important role on this, hence the simulated X samples approach this distribution when
no, or very low number of observations are available at the site).
вҖў Negative correlation exists at the site between (c, П•). Reduction in the uncertainty
is evident from the reduction in the scatter of simulated samples, and more reliable
predictions can be made at the site level.
вҖў The illustrated CIs in Figure 5.14 were computed from Bayesian updating of the regional
predictive PDF. The CIs confirm the uncertainty reduction in comparison with the
simulation results from the unconditional distribution presented in Figure 5.10. This
uncertainty reduction can arise from:
- The updating of the regional PDF based on the observed regional data and the
simulation from the predictive regional PDF. In addition, the conditioning of the
109
==PAGE:115==
5 Results
regional predictive PDF based on the observed site data, reduced further the
uncertainty in those correlations, where a larger number of pairwise data-points
was available. This can be noticed in the mainly in the correlations between (q/p, П•)
(very strong) and (П•, ПҒd). For the latter, a positive correlation appears apply at the
site.
вҖў The last comment refers to the comparison between the Bayesian and Hybridization
methodsвҖҷ results. It is important to note that in the implementation of the hybrid method,
it was considered that f (x|Xdb,o) = f (x|Вөg, Cg), or in other words, the unconditional
regional PDF (Figure 5.10), with covariance matrix obtained from the bootstrap samples,
was utilized in the position of the actual regional predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o), to produce
the hybrid PDF as f (x|hb) = f (x|0, Cdb) Г— f (x|Xs,o) (see section 3.5.6 or (Ching and
K. K. Phoon, 2019)). This consideration is believed that it affects the methodsвҖҷ results,
since the pairwise observations between the triaxial testing derived parameters, and the
rest soil properties (e.g. index properties), in both regional and site specific datasets
(TC dataset Table 4.7), are probably not sufficiently large in numbers to justify this
assumption. The method performs under the framework which states that: "when the
site data are too sparse (or completely missing), the hybrid PDF will approach the
regional PDF" (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019). Moreover, it was shown that a limitation
of the bootstrap technique, is that it provides lower correlation coefficients that may
apply in reality.
This can be also noticed in the correlations of Figure 5.10, where the are not available site
data-points (e.g. correlations with d50, %clay). In these cases, the simulation results from
the hybrid distribution are essentially very similar to the ones from the unconditional
distribution, presented in Figure 5.10. For correlations where only one observationsвҖҷ set
was available (i.e with LL, PI, w and ic) the scatter of simulated samples is reduced
in comparison with the plotted unconditional samples in Figure 5.10. On the other
hand, the scatter of the hybrid simulated samples, with regard to these cases, shows
reduced covariance between these parameters, and a lower degree of correlation with
friction angle. The simulated samples are more concentrated around a specific region,
representative to the pairwise observations at the site. The fact that only one pairwise
data-point was available at the site, was assumed that it cannot lead to reliable CIs
with the hybrid method for these correlations. However, it is evident that even one
paiwise data-point leads to considerable reduction in the scatter, in comparison to the
unconditional samples. The hybrid method appears to be able to capture the correlation
structure when more pairwise site observations are available, i.e. П• with (q/p)200, ПҒd.
With regards to (ПҒd, П•), the hybrid method reduces the scatter and produced slightly
narrower CIs that the Bayesian approach. The Hybrid method can be also repeated
by utilizing f (x|Xdb,o) instead of the unconditional PDF. Moreover, if more data (and
pairwise observations) become available, a better comparison between the Bayesian and
Hybridization can be made.
Bivariate correlation structures between the index properties and the triaxial parameters
110
==PAGE:116==
5 Results
(q/p)200, c, E50,200, are provided in the Appendix (Figures A.4, A.5, A.6, A.8, A.9, A.10, A.12,
A.13).
For E50,200 the simulated samples from the unconditional regional PDF indicated large
uncertainty. High uncertainty was evident in the visualized bivariate correlations, constructed
from the simulated samples of the conditional predictive PDF with the Bayesian approach,
even though the scatter was reduced. It turned out that the hybridization method led to
reduced uncertainty and slightly narrower CIs in the correlations of E50,200. In any case,
it is believed that more pairwise observations are needed to reveal more clear correlation
structures, although the results provided in the Appendix (Figures A.12, A.13) showed that
there may exist some interesting correlations between E50,200, moisture content and index
properties. The site-specific results can be used as a reference for site-specific predictions, and
validation can be performed if more observations become available at the site. Note that all
Site-Specific CIs were computed based on samples from f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o).
Interesting results were obtained for the effective cohesion, as well. It is generally known
that it is very difficult to reliably measure the effective cohesion in laboratory tests (e.g. LADE,
2016), especially in clayey soils, and even for overconsolidated clays the true cohesion can be
approximately zero. This is a limitation of the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, which may
describe well in many cases the data, but it is not expected to provide reliable results in every
case. According to (LADE, 2016, pp. 7) only cemented soils appear to have true cohesion of
any significant magnitude. Hence this parameter is expected to include high uncertainty.
Figure 5.14 illustrates an approximation of the bivariate PDF for some selected parameters.
Note that there exist no analytical expression for the bivariate PDFs. Hence, to obtain a
smooth estimate of the bivariate distribution, n = 15000 pairwise simulated samples were
used, and the Kernel Density estimation (Herlau et al., 2020; www-03 ) functions were used to
derive the bivariate PDF approximation. Note the PDF estimates with the KDE, are highly
dependent on the selection of the bandwidths (among others), and Gaussian kernels are
used. Hence, the numerical values of the PDFs should be used with caution, and those
referring to the shear strength parameters, may have low accuracy and be misleading. Here
a set of candidate values for the bandwidths was pre-defined, and "Leave-one-out" cross
validation (Herlau et al., 2020) was used to compute the optimal bandwidth. The results
were very close to those of the "silverman" method (see scipy.stats.gaussian_kde in www-03
). The distribution shapes can be useful for identifying the dependence structure between
the selected soil parameters, and these can be compared to Figures 5.12, 5.13, where the
cloud of simulated samples represents their joint distribution. The colorbars in each subplot
represent the probability density of the colored regions in the graphs, and the iso-contour
lines correspond to regions with the same probability density.
It can be noticed in Figure 5.14i, that the evaluated with KDE PDF, assigns some density
in the region of negative cohesion values. This is not possible in reality, however it can be
explained by the many low cohesion values in the regional TC dataset (e.g. see statistics in
4.5, Figure 5.10), and the KDE approximation of the PDF with Gaussian kernels. Hence it
is recommended not to use this (c, П•) PDF approximation for reliability purposes, and one
should utilize the simulated samples in this case (e.g. computation of failure probabilities). In
111
==PAGE:117==
5 Results
addition, it can be observed in the same Figure 5.14i, and in Figure 5.14j, as well, that many
site observations fall in regions of very low (kernel) density. This means that the uncertainty
is high at the site for the cohesion parameter, and due to low pairwise observations at the site,
in relevance to the regional dataset, both Hybrid and Bayesian (in higher degree) methods
are mainly affected by the regional data.
In all other subplots of Figure 5.14, the PDFs with KDE, provide a good picture of the
correlation structure between friction angle and the rest soil properties, and can represent
regions in which new observations will fall with confidence. Similar remarks with those of
Figure 5.14 can be made: The Bayesian based computed PDFs appear to be more slanted,
indicating higher covariance (and correlation) between the soil parametersвҖҷ pairs, while the
PDFs values are lower than those of the Hybrid method, since the simulated samples are
distributed over a wider region (soil parameter in the x-axis), which was observed in Figure
5.14, as well. This can be explained again by the low amount of pairwise observations at
the site in relevance to those of the regional dataset, hence the Bayesian based simulation
appears to carry more information about the uncertainty in the soil parameters at a regional
scale, than the respective simulation results from the hybridization method. The obtained
simulation results on the cross-correlations between plasticity index PI and the rest soil
properties are demonstrated in Figure 5.15. The subplot indicating the correlation between
LL вҲ’PI is probably the one with the most interest. Based on the Plasticity chart (Figure 4.3),
the simulation results from the Hybrid PDF, indicate "medium" to "high" plastic clays at the
site, and a narrow CI. A positive correlation between the water content and the plasticity index
is demonstrated in the 3rd subplot, which was not captured in that scale by the simulation
from conditional predictive f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o).
112
==PAGE:118==
5 Results
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
2, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
3, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Frequency
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
4, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
5, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
6, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
7, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
8, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
9, 10
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Frequency
Figure 5.11: Correlation coefficients for friction angle (transformed X variables); Histogram:
GS samples; Red vertical line: Bootstrap accepted samples; Black vertical line:
Pearson product moment correlation coefficients from regional data
113
==PAGE:119==
5 Results
100
101
d50 ( m)
101
(o)
100
101
102
%clay
101
(o)
100
101
w (%)
101
(o)
102
LL
101
(o)
100
101
PI
101
(o)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
ic
101
(o)
100
2
3
d (t/m3)
101
(o)
2e-01
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
101
(o)
100
101
102
c (kPa)
101
(o)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
101
(o)
Figure 5.12: Simulation results on the correlations between П• and rest soil parameters; Light
gray dots: samples from unconditional regional PDF f (x|Вөg, Cg); Blue dots:
Site specific predictive distribution f (x|Xs,o), based on the sparse data of Table
5.7; Dark gray dots: samples from the conditional regional predictive PDF
f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o); Red-black dots: Site pairwise observations
114
==PAGE:120==
5 Results
100
101
d50 ( m)
101
(o)
100
101
102
%clay
101
(o)
100
101
w (%)
101
(o)
102
LL
101
(o)
100
101
PI
101
(o)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
ic
101
(o)
100
2
3
d (t/m3)
101
(o)
2e-01
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
101
(o)
100
101
102
c (kPa)
101
(o)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
101
(o)
Figure 5.13: Simulation results on the correlations between П• and rest soil parameters; Gray
dots: samples from unconditional regional PDF f (x|Вөg, Cg); Blue dots: Site-
specific predictive distribution f (x|Xs,o); Cyan dots: samples from the Hybrid
PDF f (x|hb); Red-black dots: Site pairwise observations from Table 5.7
115
==PAGE:121==
5 Results
100
101
d50 ( m)
20
30
40
(o)
100
101
%clay
20
30
40
(o)
101
20
30
40
w (%)
20
30
40
(o)
20
30
40
60
LL
20
30
40
(o)
101
PI
20
30
40
(o)
0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
ic
(o)
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
d (t/m3)
101
20
30
40
(o)
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
101
20
30
40
(o)
100
101
102
c (kPa)
20
30
40
(o)
101
102
E50, 200 (MPa)
101
20
30
40
(o)
Figure 5.14: Results comparison: Conditional predictive PDF, and hybrid PDF: Correlations
between friction angle and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: (Transformed)
simulated samples from f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o); Cyan dots: (Transformed) simulated
samples from f (x|hb); Black-red circles: Site data from Table 5.7; Red line:
moving median (Bayesian); Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI)
(Bayesian)
116
==PAGE:122==
5 Results
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
101
20
30
40
(o)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
(a) (q/p) вҲ’П• Bayesian
2e-01
3e-01
4e-01
6e-01
(q/p)200
101
20
30
40
(o)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
(b) (q/p) вҲ’П• Hybrid
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
ic
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(o)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
(c) ic вҲ’П• Bayesian
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
ic
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(o)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
(d) ic вҲ’П• Hybrid
101
PI
101
20
30
40
(o)
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
(e) PI вҲ’П• Bayesian
20
30
40
PI
101
20
30
40
(o)
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
(f) PI вҲ’П•
Hybrid
117
==PAGE:123==
5 Results
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
d (t/m3)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
(o)
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
(g) ПҒ вҲ’П• Bayesian
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
d (t/m3)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
(o)
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
(h) ПҒ вҲ’П• Hybrid
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
c (kPa)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(o)
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
(i) c вҲ’П• Bayesian
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
c (kPa)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(o)
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
(j) c вҲ’П• Hybrid
Figure 5.14: Gaussian KDE smooth approximation of bivariate distributions
118
==PAGE:124==
5 Results
101
d50 ( m)
101
PI
100
101
%clay
101
PI
101
6
20
30
w (%)
101
PI
30
40
60
LL
101
PI
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
ic
101
PI
100
2
d (t/m3)
101
PI
Figure 5.15: Simulation results from the conditional predictive PDF, and from the hybrid PDF:
Correlations between PI and rest soil properties; Grey circles: (Transformed)
simulated samples from f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o); Cyan dots: (Transformed) simulated
samples from f (x|hb) Black-red circles: Site data from Table 5.7; Red line: moving
median (Hybrid); Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI) (Hybrid)
119
==PAGE:125==
5 Results
5.2.3 Marginal distributions
The simulated samples can be used to construct the updated marginal CDFs of the variables.
The simulated samples X from the multivariate distributions:
вҖў Site specific predictive: f (x|Xs,o)
вҖў Conditional predictive f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o)
вҖў Hybrid f (x|hb)
were translated to Y samples following the inverse transform, and subsequently to soil
samples. The marginal predictive CDFs are demonstrated in Figure 5.16 along with the
empirical distribution of the observed site investigation data in Table 5.7. Note that the
legend of Figure 5.16 refers to the multivariate distribution from which the X samples were
simulated, except from the site ECDF (directly from the site observations). Comments on
marginal distributions of Figure 5.16:
вҖў When no site observations are available, the hybrid and predictive Bayesian CDFs are
similar, and the site specific (predictive) CDF is flat. In these cases, the regional PDF
governs the behavior of the soil property, and predictions at the site can be made based
on these distributions. This is evident in the first two subplots of Figure 5.16
вҖў For soil properties for which the regional data indicated low statistical uncertainty,
e.g. for ПҒd, or relatively low for (q/p)200 (see Table 4.5), it can be seen that the tree
distributions are close to each other, and they are also close to the empirical CDF of the
site data.
вҖў In most cases, the site-specific predictive CDF tends to follow closely the site ECDF.
For parameters with a large number of observations in the regional database e.g.
LL, PI, ic, w, the marginal CDFs constructed from f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o) appears to be close
to the CDFs constructed from the unconditional (regional prior) f (x|Вөg, Cg. In these
cases, f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o) carries more information about the regional data due to the large
number of different sites, and the relatively low amount of site observations compared
to those included in the regional database.
The univariate information on the soil parameters at the site may be low, but is consid-
erably larger than the pairwise information on which correlations depend, as discussed
previously. With regard to the marginal CDFs, the hybrid distribution appears to
describe better the site observations. In addition, it keeps a balance between regional
and site-specific CDF. When the uncertainty is high in the site data, e.g. for c, E50,200, or
relatively high e.g. П•, the hybrid CDF retains valuable information from the regional
data, deviates from the site-specific CDF, but in lesser degree than the regional CDF. In
the consistency, and Atterberg limits parameters, there is a noticeable deviation between
the hybrid and the rest marginal CDFs, where the hybrid CDF is much closer to the site
data ECDF. For instance, the hybrid and site ECDF of consistency index ic shows that
the propertyвҖҷs values at the site, fall in the interval [0.8 вҲ’1.3], which can be an indication
120
==PAGE:126==
5 Results
of stiff to very stiff clayey soils at the site (e.g. (Das, 2015) pp. 97). Considering the large
number of observations in the regional database for these parameters, and the relatively
low number of available observations at the site (see Table 5.7), more measurements in
the future can be made for validation of the hybrid and Bayesian marginal CDFs results.
However, it is evident in Figure 5.16, that the performance of both methods, is more
than satisfying when it comes to describing limited site observations, and characterize
the uncertainty in the soil parameters at the site level.
Descriptive statistics were calculated from the simulated soil samples, and these are
provided in Table 5.10. These can be compared to the descriptive statistics computed from
the soil data in the regional database, given in table 4.5. The coefficient of variation was
substantially reduced in index properties. Reduction in the the COV of the design parameter
friction angle, was achieved as well with the Bayesian approach, although this was not high.
The COV of cohesion c and YoungвҖҷs modulus E50,200 remained at high levels, indicating high
uncertainty for these parameters. On the other hand, the Bayesian approach appeared to
significantly reduce the COV of the (q/p)200 ratio, which was evident in the correlation plots
of this parameter (see Appendix Figure A.8). In addition, this reduction can provide more
reliable estimates on the friction angle values, since one can utilize the correlation plot of
((q/p)200, П•), and the narrow confidence intervals. Published COV values (e.g. see Table 3.1),
indicate that the marginal statistics in the present study, are within the bounds of general
soil categories. The effective cohesion parameter presents higher CoV than the suggested
upper bound of the statistic range in Table 3.1). A comparison between the Bayesian methodвҖҷs
marginals statistics in Table 5.10, and the CoVs in the descriptive statistics of the regional
database, Table 4.5, shows high reduction in the CoV of the index properties, while lower, but
considerable reduction is achieved for the YoungвҖҷs modulus E50,200.
Mean
Std
CoV%
RV
Вөunc
Вөbayes
Вөhybrid
Пғunc
Пғbayes
Пғhybrid
CoVunc
CoVbayes
CoVhybrid
d50 (Вөm)
15.72
15.75
17.97
11.01
11.01
11.67
70.01
69.90
64.91
%clay
18.36
17.31
17.37
10.08
10.37
10.56
54.93
59.91
60.77
w (%)
19.11
18.67
20.52
5.65
3.09
7.18
29.58
16.56
35.01
LL
42.70
48.08
42.12
11.79
6.86
9.88
27.61
14.26
23.45
PI
21.89
26.15
21.42
8.96
5.10
7.87
40.92
19.49
36.76
ic
1.06
1.12
0.98
0.33
0.15
0.32
31.31
13.64
33.09
ПҒd (t/m3)
1.81
1.85
1.86
0.17
0.14
0.20
9.56
7.47
10.73
(q/p)200
0.55
0.58
0.53
0.11
0.08
0.11
19.67
13.44
21.04
c (kPa)
25.47
27.52
20.86
19.66
21.42
16.30
77.17
77.86
78.12
П• (o)
26.98
28.45
28.86
6.33
6.54
6.90
23.47
22.97
23.92
E50,200 (MPa)
37.86
30.82
30.00
22.62
18.79
20.59
59.75
60.96
68.63
Table 5.10: Marginal statistics of simulated samples from the unconditional, conditional on
the site data Bayesian, and Hybrid distributions
121
==PAGE:127==
5 Results
0
20
40
60
d50 ( m)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
%clay
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
w (%)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
LL
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
PI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
1
0
1
2
3
ic
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
d (t/m3)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(q/p)200
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
50
100
150
200
c (kPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
10
20
30
40
50
(o)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
20
40
60
80
100
E50, 200 (MPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
f(x| , C)
f(x|Xso)
f(x|Xdb, o, Xs, o)
f(x|hb)
ECDF Site data
Figure 5.16: Marginal CDFs; The legend refers to the multivariate distribution from which
the samples were simulated.
122
==PAGE:128==
5 Results
5.3 Constructing a site-specific Multivariate probability distribution
for the undrained shear strength from UC tests
A site-specific multivariate model involving the undrained shear strength (UC tests) and some
selected soil properties based on Tables 4.8, 4.10 was constructed, in a similar way as was
presented in the previous section 5.2. The same site, and the same soil unit was considered
again. The selected parameters and the site-investigation data are given in Table 5.11
z (m)
%silt
%sand
w (%)
PL
LI
A
ПҒd (t/m3)
su,uc (kN/m2)
16.3
1.84
17.3
1.69
24
1.72
24.4
16.26
24.31
-0.302
99.11
24.6
1.69
24.6
13.01
18.63
-0.319
543.07
24.7
16.62
-0.141
1.81
127.76
25
23.78
23.91
-0.004
115.06
25.3
18.94
21.66
-0.111
541.52
26.8
1.89
27.6
21.79
24.26
-0.75
229.56
27.8
1.96
28.3
2.07
28.8
1.90
30.7
22.61
28.12
-0.311
234.18
30.7
20.53
18.43
0.095
226.77
Table 5.11: Site investigation data: Freiham U5, Munich Germany; Data collected from the
same soil unit from boreholes in close proximity at the site; Soil parameters from
Subset 2 (UC) (see Table 4.8)
The site data given in Table 5.11 were collected from boreholes at the same site in close
proximity, since there were not available a sufficient number of observations from the same
borehole. It was assumed in this study that the data at these locations of the site can be
assumed independent. It can be noticed in Table 5.11 data are very sparse and incomplete, and
measurements on the soil proportions and SkemptonвҖҷs activity (A) are completely missing. It
is reasonable that predictions for these parameters will depend on the regional data.
5.3.1 The regional multivariate distribution based on JohnsonвҖҷs marginals
In a similar manner, as previously in section 5.2.1, the regional model was first constructed.
The following variables 8 were defined:
Y1 = ln(%silt)
ln(%sand)
Y3 = ln(w)
Y4 = ln(PL)
Y5 = LI
Y6 = ln(A)
Y7 = ln(ПҒd)
Y8 = ln((su,uc)
(5.2)
123
==PAGE:129==
5 Results
The main interest in this case was to investigate possible correlations between su,uc and the rest
considered soil properties, and to derive updated marginal distributions for the considered
soil parameters. A moderate correlation between su,uc вҲ’w and su,uc вҲ’ПҒd was indicated from
the sample (regional data) Pearson correlation coefficient (see Table 4.11), while a weak
correlation between su,uc вҲ’%sand was identified as well in the same Table.
Similarly with section 5.2, the regional data were utilized, the JohnsonвҖҷs members were
identified and the distribution parameters were computed. The fitting results are provided in
Table 5.12, along with the p-value from the K-S test.
Distribution parameters
Random Variable
Soil Parameter
Distribution type
ax
bx
ay
by
p-value
Y1
ln(%silt)
SU
2.348
3.635
0.215
4.621
0.471
Y2
ln(%sand)
SB
0.878
-0.632
3.822
-0.089
0.228
Y3
ln(w)
SU
1.810
0.995
0.507
3.295
0.824
Y4
ln(PL)
SU
4.403
3.526
0.575
3.539
0.291
Y5
ln(LI)
SU
4.819
-1.191
1.531
-0.380
0.973
Y6
A
SB
1.436
0.030
3.100
-1.414
0.779
Y7
ln(ПҒd)
SU
2.598
1.989
0.202
0.797
0.938
Y8
ln(su,uc)
SB
1.183
-1.023
4.669
2.112
0.455
Table 5.12: Distribution type and distribution parameters of (Y1, Y2, ..., Y8);
Note that the distribution member and the respective parameters for w and ПҒd are the same
as in Table 5.8. Again the Y variables were transformed to X variables and the K-S test was
performed. The null hypothesis (K-S) is not rejected for any variable as can be noticed in the
p-values of Table 5.12. The distributions were plotted along with the empirical distributions
constructed from the regional data, and a good fit of was identified, as well. The fitted CDFs
to data of the variables Y1, Y2, Y4, Y5, Y6, Y8 are demonstrated in Figure 5.17, while those of
Y3, Y7, referring to the natural water content and dry density, were provided in Figure 5.9.
Bootstrapping correlation coefficients
The bootstrap technique was performed to generate (n=10000) correlation coefficient samples
of (Xi, Xj). The average value of the generated coefficients are given in Table 5.13
124
==PAGE:130==
5 Results
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Y1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y1)
Johnson's (SB) CDF
Empirical
4
2
0
2
4
Y2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y2)
Johnson's (SB) CDF
Empirical
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
Y4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y4)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Y5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y5)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Y6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y6)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Y8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F(Y8)
Johnson's (SU) CDF
Empirical
Figure 5.17: Gray circles: Empirical distribution constructed from the regional data; Red line:
Fitted JohnsonвҖҷs CDFs of variables Y1, Y2, Y4, Y5, Y6, Y8
Cg =
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X1
1
X2
-0.50
1
X3
-0.03
-0.06
1
X4
0.21
-0.18
0.24
1
X5
-0.12
0.01
0.67
-0.23
1
X6
0.38
0.11
0.06
0.46
-0.23
1
X7
0.01
0.15
-0.65
-0.26
-0.51
-0.22
1
X8
-0.21
0.25
-0.39
-0.15
-0.31
0.09
0.39
1
Table 5.13: Average values of accepted bootstrap samples of ПҒij
Simulation from the regional unconditional multivariate distribution
Given the covariance matrix the unconditional regional PDF can be constructed. It is con-
sidered that the variables (X1, ..., X8) are jointly normal distributed, with zero mean vector
and unit standard deviations. Unconditional samples can be generated from the distribution,
in a similar way as discussed in section 5.2.1. The simulation results on the correlations
between the design parameter undrained shear strength and su,uc and the rest soil parameters
in the dataset are provided in Figure 5.18 Simulated samples from the unconditional JPDF
are plotted (grey circles) along with the pairwise data-points in the regional database, and
with the computed moving mean, and Confidence Intervals. The CIвҖҷs correspond to the
(2.5%, 97.5%) percentiles, i.e. 95% CIs. The illustrated 95% CIs were computed from a large
number n = 2 В· 106 samples. 2000 of them are shown in each subplot of Figure 5.18. It
125
==PAGE:131==
5 Results
is evident that the pairwise observations between su,uc and the considered soil properties,
are more than those of the triaxial testing parameter П• shown in Figure 5.10. Noticeable
correlations can be observed between (w, su,uc), (LI, su,uc), and (ПҒd, su,uc), while the undrained
shear strength appears to be weakly correlated with the soil proportions.
5.3.2 The quasi-Site-specific model based on Bayesian updating with conjugate
priors and Gibbs Sampling
The Gibbs Sampler was utilized to obtain posterior samples of the parameters of the regional
database Вөdb, Cdb. The GS samples were then utilized, and based on the total probability
theorem, the predictive regional distribution f (x|Xdb,o) which characterizes the uncertainty
of the considered variables, given the observed data in the regional database, was derived
as a mixture of multivariate normal PDFs. The predictive distribution was then conditioned
on the limited site observations of Table 5.11, to derive the quasi-site specific distribution
f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o) with Bayesian updating.
The hybridization approach was tested, as well. The Gibbs sampler was used to obtain
posterior samples of Вөs, Cs, based on the sparse site data of Table 5.11. The site specific
predictive PDF was constructed as a mixture of multivariate normal PDFs, using the generated
samples. The quasi-site specific model was derived from the product of the unconditional
regional PDF f (0, Cg), where Cg) from bootstrap samples given in Table 5.13, and the site
specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o).
For the Gibbs Sampler, T = 10000 cycles were considered and tb = 1000 samples were burnt
out after visual inspection. Figure illustrates a histogram of posterior regional correlation
coefficient samples, extracted from each cycle of the Gibbs Sampling, along with i) the
correlation coefficient between (Xi, Xj) from the original regional data and, ii) the average
value of the generated samples with the bootstrap technique. Similar remarks can be made on
the correlation coefficients of Figure 5.19, as those of Figure 5.11, and possible weakness of the
bootstrap method to capture possible high correlation coefficients, can be again noticed. The
peak of the GS coefficient histogram of ПҒ3,8, shows a moderate degree of negative correlation
between undrained shear strength and water content, while in the subplot of ПҒ7,8, a moderate
degree of positive correlation between dry density and undrained shear strength is indicated.
The simulation results from the conditional on the site data predictive PDF, obtained
with the Bayesian method are illustrated in Figure 5.20. The simulation results from the
Hybridization approach are demonstrated in Figure 5.21. Simulation results for the correlation
between su,uc, and w, PL and LI are provided in these figures. Since no site observations were
available for the soil proportions and SkemptonвҖҷs activity, the simulation results that involve
these variables were very similar to those of the unconditional distribution, given in Figure
5.18. The regional predictive distribution approaches the unconditional distribution due to
the relative large number of observations in this case. In addition the marginal distributions
of these variables which are provided later in this section, indicated similar behavior. With
regard to the correlation of su,uc with the dry density ПҒd, similar type of information can be
produced from the correlation plot between (w, su,uc), hence the former is not illustrated here.
Comments on the simulation results of Figures 5.20, 5.21:
126
==PAGE:132==
5 Results
вҖў In comparison to Figure 5.18, the scatter of simulated samples from both methods was
reduced. The reduction in the scatter, and consequently the uncertainty in the bivariate
correlations, was more evident in the simulation results of the Hybrid multivariate PDF.
This remark can be explained by
- the larger number of univariate data-points for the design parameter su,uc, and
the increased amount of pairwise information in the regional regional dataset UC,
between the strength parameter and the soil properties (see Tables 4.5, 4.8)
- The conditional Bayesian predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o) is expected to approach
the regional predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o), which in turn approaches the unconditional
PDF due to the larger number of observations (compared to the triaxial dataset),
and the large uncertainty in su,uc at the site
вҖў The reduction in the uncertainty of su,uc was not large, and this was only observed in
the simulation results of the Hybrid PDF. It can be noticed in both Figures 5.20, 5.21,
that the scatter indicates a large range over which possible new observations of the
parameter are likely to fall. Large uncertainty is evident at the site data, with two su,uc
observations having values over 540 (kPa), that can be related to very stiff soil. The
statistical uncertainty in the site-specific predictive PDF is also high due to limited
amount of observations. The high uncertainty in su,uc evident in the marginal CDFs
which are presented later in this section.
вҖў Weak negative correlation between (w, su,uc) and (LI, su,uc), appear to apply at the site,
captured at specific regions of w and LI.
A comparison between the simulation results on the bivariate correlations is visualized in
Figure 5.22. Updated CIs are provided based on the simulated samples from the Bayesian
f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o). The CIs are quite large, they include the site data, and they reflect high
uncertainty at the soil layer of the site.
Similar remarks can be made when looking at the KDE approximation of the bivariate PDFs
from the simulated data, demonstrated in Figure 5.23. Note that only the approximations
obtained from the hybrid samples are provided, since they appeared to be more reliable
than the the respective approximations with the Bayesian simulated samples. In the latter
approximations, the gaussian KDE assigned density at su,uc values very close to zero. A large
number of n = 15000 simulated samples was used to approximate the bivariate distributions
of (w, su,uc), (PL, su,uc) and (LI, su,uc). The bandwidths were computed with the "silverman"
rule of thumb, and validated with "leave-one-out" cross validation. It is reminded that the
numerical values of the presented approximations of the bivariate PDFs, should be used with
caution, while for reliability purposes, the simulated samples should be utilized instead.
127
==PAGE:133==
5 Results
102
20
30
40
60
%silt
102
su, uc (kPa)
100
101
%sand
102
su, uc (kPa)
101
w (%)
102
su, uc (kPa)
101
20
30
PL
102
su, uc (kPa)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
LI
102
su, uc (kPa)
100
A
102
su, uc (kPa)
100
2
d (t/m3)
102
su, uc (kPa)
Figure 5.18: Simulation from the unconditional regional multivariate distribution: Correla-
tions between undrained shear strength su,uc and the rest soil parameters in the
UC dataset; Grey circles: Simulated samples from the unconditional f (x|Вөg, Cg);
Black circles: Pairwise data-points in the regional database; Red line: moving
median; Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI)
128
==PAGE:134==
5 Results
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
18
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Frequency
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
28
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
38
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.4
0.2
0.0
48
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
58
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
68
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
78
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency
regional db data
bootstrap
GS posterior regional db
Figure 5.19: Correlation coefficients for friction angle (transformed X variables); Histogram:
GS samples; Red vertical line: Bootstrap accepted samples; Black vertical line:
Pearson product moment correlation coefficients from regional data
129
==PAGE:135==
5 Results
101
w (%)
101
102
103
su, uc (kPa)
100
101
PL
101
102
103
su, uc (kPa)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
LI
101
102
103
su, uc (kPa)
Figure 5.20: Simulation results on the correlations between su,uc and w, PL LI; Gray dots:
samples from unconditional regional PDF f (x|Вөg, Cg); Blue dots: samples from
the site specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o); Dark gray dots: samples from the
conditional regional predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o)
101
w (%)
101
102
103
su, uc (kPa)
100
101
PL
101
102
103
su, uc (kPa)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
LI
101
102
103
su, uc (kPa)
Figure 5.21: Simulation results on the correlations between su,uc and w, PL LI; Gray dots:
samples from unconditional regional PDF f (x|Вөg, Cg); Blue dots: samples from
the site specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o); Cyan dots: samples from the hybrid
PDF f (x|hb)
101
20
30
w (%)
102
su, uc (kPa)
101
20
30
PL
102
su, uc (kPa)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
LI
102
su, uc (kPa)
Figure 5.22: Simulation results on the correlations between su,uc and w, PL LI; Dark gray dots:
samples from the conditional regional predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o); Cyan dots:
samples from the hybrid PDF f (x|hb)
130
==PAGE:136==
5 Results
101
20
30
w (%)
102
su, uc (kPa)
0.0000
0.0001
0.0002
0.0003
0.0004
20
30
PL
102
su, uc (kPa)
0.0000
0.0001
0.0002
0.0003
0.0004
0.0005
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
LI
102
su, uc (kPa)
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Figure 5.23: Kernel Density Estimation of bivariate PDFs; Hybrid simulated samples
131
==PAGE:137==
5 Results
5.3.3 Marginal distributions
The marginal CDFs were constructed from the simulated samples and are demonstrated
in Figure 5.24, along with the empirical distribution from the site data. High uncertainty
at the site in su,uc can be noticed from the site ECDF of the respective plot. The Bayesian
marginal CDF appears to be very close to the marginal CDF constructed using the simulated
samples from the unconditional regional multivariate PDF. The predictive site-specific CDF
is flat for three parameters since no observations were available at the site, and for these
parameters, the three simulated distributions are almost identical, except the one referring to
the SkemptonвҖҷs activity. The Hybrid CDF appears to describe better the site data.
0
50
100
150
%silt
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
f(x| , C)
f(x|Xso)
f(x|Xdb, o, Xs, o)
f(x|hb)
ECDF Site data
0
10
20
30
40
%sand
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
10
20
30
40
50
PL
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
2
1
0
1
2
LI
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
1
2
3
4
5
A
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
0
200
400
600
800
su, uc (kPa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cummulative density
Figure 5.24: Marginal CDFs; Blue line: Hybrid; Red line: Bayesian predictive (conditioned on
site data); Dashed gray line: Site-Specific predictive; Black dashed line: Uncondi-
tional regional; Legend: Multivariate distributions from which the samples were
generated
Updated marginal statistics were calculated from the simulated soil samples, and these
are provided in Table 5.14. The point CoV of su,uc computed from the simulation results of
the Bayesian approach, falls within the range of the prior bounds of the statistic (20-55%)
given in Table 3.1, which refers to clays. Considering the variety of fine-grained soils in the
regional database used in this study (see Figure 4.4), the point CoVs from both unconditional
and Hybrid simulated samples, give reasonable values, not far from the upper bound of the
published guidelines (for clay soil). The provided marginal statistics can be used as reference
for a larger variety of fine-grained soils.
132
==PAGE:138==
5 Results
Mean
Std
CoV%
RV
Вөunc
Вөbayes
Вөhybrid
Пғunc
Пғbayes
Пғhybrid
CoVunc
CoVbayes
CoVhybrid
%silt
62.75
63.00
61.73
13.72
13.64
13.89
21.86
21.65
22.51
%sand
14.03
13.43
13.98
9.33
9.27
9.45
66.53
69.06
67.59
w (%)
19.32
19.44
20.49
5.02
3.26
7.17
25.99
16.78
34.99
PL
20.50
21.82
20.70
3.50
2.63
3.61
17.09
12.04
17.46
LI
-0.05
-0.09
0.01
0.29
0.15
0.33
A
1.48
1.45
1.27
0.78
0.65
0.63
52.50
44.48
49.91
ПҒd (t/m3)
1.82
1.86
1.86
0.16
0.12
0.20
8.67
6.52
10.67
su,uc (kPa)
242.58
247.80
252.76
156.82
127.43
162.28
64.65
51.42
64.21
Table 5.14: Marginal statistics of simulated samples from the unconditional, conditional on
the site data Bayesian, and Hybrid distributions (UC dataset)
133
==PAGE:139==
6 Summary and conclusion
6.1 Thesis contribution
This study adopts fundamental and state-of-the-art methods, to investigate how a geotechnical
engineer nowadays can efficiently handle and analyze Big Indirect Data (BID) in the form
of soil databases, and how one can benefit from the application of probabilistic analysis in
geotechnical practice. This study covers many aspects of site investigation in geotechnical
analysis. Readily available and pre-processed datasets under ideal conditions, are very far
from reality in geotechnical applications. The present study attempts to operate under real-life
conditions, starting from handling raw data, computing meaningful soil parameters to include
in the analysis, and building a database that allows application of probabilistic methods. The
constructed regional database contains data under MUSIC (Multivariate Unique Sparse and
potentially Corrupted) characteristics, collected from a large number of site investigation
programs, over a 12-year period. The database was compiled from measurements and derived
geotechnical properties obtained specifically from results of laboratory tests such as: sieve
analysis, plasticity, unconfined compression and triaxial tests. The present study adds to
the development of a relational database containing several testsвҖҷ results, using open-source
platforms and employing SQL and Python programming languages. The assumptions made
to derive the database were noted down in detail, such as expert engineering judgement can
be applied in almost every step of the procedure.
The Bayesian framework was adopted to select marginal distributions that better describe the
M-C shear strength parametersвҖҷ data in the regional database, to compute reliable statistics,
and to account for the uncertainty in the distribution parameters. The best fit marginals were
further utilized for coupling different dependent soil parameters, to construct a multivariate
distribution. The model is based on the joint normality assumption of transformed to the
standard space random variables, that allows making use of the Gaussian copula framework.
The constructed model efficiently incorporates prior information on a regional scale and can
serve as prior distribution in the Bayesian updating process. The approach provides a means
to simulate dependent samples from a multivariate distribution. Confidence intervals were
computed representative for bivariate correlations at a regional scale. The simulation results
showed that the statistical dependency structure between triaxial testing parameters and
several index properties, can be reasonably captured with the Gaussian copula assumption.
The main part of the study was focused on constructing a site-specific multivariate model,
able to characterize the statistical uncertainty in cross-correlations at the site level. The
approach followed the proposed methods of (Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2014; Ching, K. K.
Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020; Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019), that provide a powerful means for
exploiting BID under MUSIC constraints. Two models were constructed based on the same
134
==PAGE:140==
6 Summary and conclusion
principles: i) a model that involves triaxial testing parameters such as friction angle, cohesion
and YoungвҖҷs modulus, with sieve analysis results and Atterberg limits and, ii) a model that
includes the undrained shear strength from unconfined compression tests and similar index
properties. The model is based solely on data, i.e it is a Machine Learning method, that
operates under the Bayesian framework. The choice of specific prior PDFs for constructing
the regional model, and the site-specific distribution from limited and sparse site data, in
conjunction with advanced sampling techniques, allowed the hybridization of the two models
under a modified Bayesian framework. The resulting multivariate distribution can be viewed
as a quasi-site-specific model which can be used for enhanced site-specific predictions. The
results on the cross-correlations between soil parameters of interest, as well as the derived
marginal distributions of several soil parameters in the dataset, were compared to those of
Bayesian Analysis with conjugate priors and Gibbs Sampling.
The results showed that the derived quasi-site-specific models are able to capture, localise,
and reduce the statistical uncertainty in the cross-correlations, in cases where i) correlations
among soil propertiesвҖҷ data do indeed exist in some degree in the regional data, and ii) a
reasonable number of pairwise observations are available in regional and site data. Both
methods reduce the uncertainty in bivariate correlations in comparison to the unconditional
regional model. Simulation results from the conditional on the site data Bayesian distribution
revealed stronger correlations between friction angle and the soil index properties. On the
other hand, the updated marginal distributions indicated that the Hybridization approach
can better describe the limited sparse site data in the triaxial related dataset, while keeping
a balance between regional and site-specific distributions, when the uncertainty at the site
is high. Results related to the YoungвҖҷs modulus indicated large uncertainty in the bivariate
correlations associated with this parameter and more observations are needed for more
reliable predictions.
With regard to the simulation results on correlations between the undrained shear strength,
both methods indicated large uncertainty in this design parameter, which can be explained
by i) the large uncertainty in the regional data (вүҲ67% CoV), ii) the low number of site
observations and the large uncertainty at the site. Nevertheless, the Bayesian approach
reduces the uncertainty in the CoV of soil index properties and the undrained shear strength,
while the hybridization method appeared to reduce the scatter in the simulated samples of
the bivariate correlations.
Despite that the models do not explicitly characterize the spatial correlation between soil
properties, it allowed the derivation of site-specific distributions for soil parameters, and
updated marginal statistics, representative of the propertiesвҖҷ behavior within the bounds of
an assumed statistically homogenous site soil layer. The computed CoVs indicated that most
coefficients of variation (CoVs), fall within recommended ranges of published guidelines for
comparable soil types.
135
==PAGE:141==
6 Summary and conclusion
6.2 Future improvements
вҖў Expert knowledge is needed for checking the validity of the compiled soil database
for general use. Engineering judgement is necessary for reality checks to the modelsвҖҷ
results. The number of pairwise observations in the triaxial testing parametersвҖҷ dataset
was low for a regional database. More pairwise measurements can allow more reliable
characterization of the correlation behaviors.
вҖў Future attempts on the extension of the compiled regional database, should consider to
providing a better connection with the available geologic models in the region. Ground-
water levels and conditions, soil layering, important parameters for the analysis such as
overburden stresses, over-consolidation ratio, sensitivity, etc., should be incorporated.
вҖў The construction of the multivariate models was based on the degree of correlation
between the soil parameters, using sample coefficients computed from regional data.
Sensitivity analysis should be carried out for the modelsвҖҷ inputs, and this can be an
important add-in in future studies.
вҖў The bootstrap technique appeared to provide low correlation coefficients. The method
could be improved or replaced in future applications.
вҖў The measurement error was not explicitly considered in this study. Measurement errors
can be incorporated as separate random variables in the analysis. Advanced outlier
detection algorithms can be also used to remove bad quality data associated with
laboratory measurements and derived properties. Machine Learning methods have
proved their potential in extracting hidden features of large multivariate datasets, and
such techniques should be tested for future improvements.
вҖў The examined local site included limited and very sparse data collection. Data from
in-situ tests can be utilized to strengthen the support of the database, allowing the
use of geotechnical transformation models, and provide a better basis for applying the
proposed Bayesian methods.
вҖў The present study focused on the cross-correlations between soil parameters. The
multivariate models are able to predict values of a soil parameter at a specific depth in
specific locations of a soil layer at the site. The prediction results can be checked with
actual measured values from in-situ and laboratory tests.
вҖў The simulation results can be used to construct regional and local transformation models,
able to replace global correlations, that often include a large amount of transformation
uncertainty.
вҖў This study focused on fine grained soils, with clay as the main type. Sands can be also
considered in future applications. The compiled databases contain soil classification
labels, which can be used to analyze data belonging to smaller, but more specific soil
groups.
136
==PAGE:142==
6 Summary and conclusion
вҖў The modeling of the spatial correlation of soil properties with random fields, should be
explicitly considered in future studies.
вҖў Worked examples on actual reliability problems are needed to check the performance of
the proposed methods and to allow comparison with current practices.
6.3 Outlook
Several methods were utilized in this study to get a closer insight into laboratory testsвҖҷ related
soil properties in a regional scale. Compiling a regional database, is not straightforward,
since one has to deal with the incomplete feature of the data, and this becomes ever more
complex when one wishes to group observations with respect to some similar soil conditions.
The regional probability distributions of soil properties can reflect prior knowledge on
their statistical uncertainty and inherent variability. The adopted Gaussian copula based
method for constructing joint probability distribution models can be used to examine the
inter-dependency of several geotechnical properties. The approach can be improved in future
studies by making use of more advanced copula functions.
The derived quasi-site-specific models, with the application of the proposed methods of
(Ching and K. K. Phoon, 2019; Ching, K. K. Phoon, Khan, et al., 2020), provide a strong
basis for characterizing the site-specific uncertainty in correlations between soil properties.
The database should be extended to include more pairwise observations. An extension of
the proposed method to account for spatial-cross-correlations can be the cornerstone towards
a full Data-driven probabilistic characterization framework in the future. The advantages
of such an approach for complementing and supporting sound engineering judgement and
expert knowledge in design decisions, are more than obvious.
137
==PAGE:143==
List of Figures
2.1
General stochastic problem, based on K. K. Phoon, 2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Partial factor calibration approaches according to EN 1997-2:2007: 2004
. . . .
5
2.3
Characteristic and design values in design standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Geologic model, ground model and geotechnical model, adapted from (Keaton,
2013; H. C. Juang, 2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Propagation of geotechnical uncertainty, modified from (K. K. Phoon and F. H.
Kulhawy, 1999; K. K. Phoon and Ching, 2015; Baecher and Christian, 2003;
Honjo et al., 2009; Y. Wang, Cao, and D. Li, 2016; Huber, M., 2013) . . . . . .
10
2.6
Bayesian updating of a soil parameter, adapted from (Y. Wang, Cao, and D. Li,
2016)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Example of pseudo-random samples Ui вҲјU(0, 1); Left: LCG samples; Right:
Mersenne Twister generator (Python)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Generated samples from the joint PDF of (X1, X2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
Marginal CDFs and PDFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4
Joint probability density of X1 = c (kPa) and X2 = П• (o) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5
Conditional probability density distribution given Y2 = 2.96, Y3 = 2.65, Y4 =
0.61; Red dot: measured value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.6
Comparison of Unconditional (dashed contour lines) and Conditional (solid
contour lines) joint probability density distribution of (Y1, Y5) . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.1
Up: Simplified overview of the TUM Geo SQL database; Left corner: Venn
diagram with the number of probes intersection between the Tables of the
SQL database; Right corner: Venn diagram with the total number of probes
and intersections between the Tables of the SQL database, and the additional
data given in Excel spreadsheets; each colored ellipsis corresponds to a specific
test, or a table in the SCHEMAs of the database, except from the TUM_Excel
ellipsis which corresponds to an incomplete data-set containing different test
indices; The shaded parts correspond to the setsвҖҷ intersection on the specimenвҖҷs
characteristic number ("probenumber")
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.2
USCS soil classification results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.3
Plasticity chart (plastic soils) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.4
Soil classes in TUM-TRX_CLAY_22 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.4
Box-plots of selected properties and parameters; Box: 25-75 (%) quartiles
(Q1-Q3) (see Table 4.5); black horizontal line in the box: median; Whiskers:
Q1 вҲ’1.5 В· iqr-Q3 + 1.5 В· iqr; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
138
==PAGE:144==
List of Figures
4.5
Pairwise correlation coefficientsвҖҷ magnitude (heatmap); Based on pairwise
information given in Table 4.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.6
Pairwise correlation coefficientsвҖҷ magnitude (heatmap); Based on pairwise
information given in Table 4.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.1
Posterior PDF of the parameters of the Weibull distribution; friction angle П• in
CL dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.2
Predictive PDFs, CDFs and model fusion for friction angle П• . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.3
Predictive PDFs, CDFs and model fusion for cohesion c and friction angle П•;
CL dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.4
Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Correlations
between friction angle and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: Simulated
samples from the Nataf distr.; Black circles: Pairwise data-points in the regional
database; Red line: moving median; Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence
Interval (CI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
5.5
Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Correlations
between cohesion and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: Simulated sam-
ples from the Nataf distr.; Black circles: Pairwise data-points in the regional
database; Red line: moving median; Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Inter-
val (CI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5.6
Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Correlations be-
tween E50,200 and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: Simulated samples from
the Nataf distr.; Black circles: Pairwise data-points in the regional database;
Red line: moving median; Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI) . .
98
5.7
Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Marginal dis-
tribution of the random variables (X1, ..., X8); Circles: Regional empirical
distribution; Blue line: Marginal CDFs from simulated samples . . . . . . . . .
99
5.8
Simulation from the Nataf regional multivariate distribution: Marginal distri-
bution of the random variables (X1, ..., X8); Circles: Site "U5-Freiham" empirical
distribution; Blue line: Marginal CDFs from simulated samples . . . . . . . . . 100
5.9
Gray circles: Empirical distribution constructed from the regional data; Red
line: Fitted JohnsonвҖҷs CDFs of variables (Y1, Y2, ..., Y11)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5.10 Simulation from the unconditional regional multivariate distribution: Cor-
relations between friction angle and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles:
Simulated samples from the unconditional f (x|Вөg, Cg); Black circles: Pairwise
data-points in the regional database; Red line: moving median; Dashed blue
lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
5.11 Correlation coefficients for friction angle (transformed X variables); Histogram:
GS samples; Red vertical line: Bootstrap accepted samples; Black vertical line:
Pearson product moment correlation coefficients from regional data . . . . . . 113
139
==PAGE:145==
List of Figures
5.12 Simulation results on the correlations between П• and rest soil parameters; Light
gray dots: samples from unconditional regional PDF f (x|Вөg, Cg); Blue dots:
Site specific predictive distribution f (x|Xs,o), based on the sparse data of Table
5.7; Dark gray dots: samples from the conditional regional predictive PDF
f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o); Red-black dots: Site pairwise observations . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
5.13 Simulation results on the correlations between П• and rest soil parameters;
Gray dots: samples from unconditional regional PDF f (x|Вөg, Cg); Blue dots:
Site-specific predictive distribution f (x|Xs,o); Cyan dots: samples from the
Hybrid PDF f (x|hb); Red-black dots: Site pairwise observations from Table 5.7 115
5.14 Results comparison: Conditional predictive PDF, and hybrid PDF: Correlations
between friction angle and the rest soil parameters; Grey circles: (Transformed)
simulated samples from f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o); Cyan dots: (Transformed) simulated
samples from f (x|hb); Black-red circles: Site data from Table 5.7; Red line:
moving median (Bayesian); Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI)
(Bayesian)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
5.14 Gaussian KDE smooth approximation of bivariate distributions . . . . . . . . . 118
5.15 Simulation results from the conditional predictive PDF, and from the hybrid
PDF: Correlations between PI and rest soil properties; Grey circles: (Trans-
formed) simulated samples from f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o); Cyan dots: (Transformed)
simulated samples from f (x|hb) Black-red circles: Site data from Table 5.7; Red
line: moving median (Hybrid); Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval
(CI) (Hybrid) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
5.16 Marginal CDFs; The legend refers to the multivariate distribution from which
the samples were simulated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
5.17 Gray circles: Empirical distribution constructed from the regional data; Red
line: Fitted JohnsonвҖҷs CDFs of variables Y1, Y2, Y4, Y5, Y6, Y8 . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
5.18 Simulation from the unconditional regional multivariate distribution: Corre-
lations between undrained shear strength su,uc and the rest soil parameters
in the UC dataset; Grey circles: Simulated samples from the unconditional
f (x|Вөg, Cg); Black circles: Pairwise data-points in the regional database; Red
line: moving median; Dashed blue lines: 95% Confidence Interval (CI) . . . . . 128
5.19 Correlation coefficients for friction angle (transformed X variables); Histogram:
GS samples; Red vertical line: Bootstrap accepted samples; Black vertical line:
Pearson product moment correlation coefficients from regional data . . . . . . 129
5.20 Simulation results on the correlations between su,uc and w, PL LI; Gray dots:
samples from unconditional regional PDF f (x|Вөg, Cg); Blue dots: samples from
the site specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o); Dark gray dots: samples from the
conditional regional predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
5.21 Simulation results on the correlations between su,uc and w, PL LI; Gray dots:
samples from unconditional regional PDF f (x|Вөg, Cg); Blue dots: samples from
the site specific predictive PDF f (x|Xs,o); Cyan dots: samples from the hybrid
PDF f (x|hb) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
140
==PAGE:146==
List of Figures
5.22 Simulation results on the correlations between su,uc and w, PL LI; Dark gray
dots: samples from the conditional regional predictive PDF f (x|Xdb,o, Xs,o);
Cyan dots: samples from the hybrid PDF f (x|hb) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
5.23 Kernel Density Estimation of bivariate PDFs; Hybrid simulated samples . . . . 131
5.24 Marginal CDFs; Blue line: Hybrid; Red line: Bayesian predictive (conditioned
on site data); Dashed gray line: Site-Specific predictive; Black dashed line:
Unconditional regional; Legend: Multivariate distributions from which the
samples were generated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
141
==PAGE:147==
List of Tables
2.1
Reliability Levels according to Honjo et al., 2009
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Sources of prior information in the desk-study and site reconnaissance stages,
adapted from (Cao, Y. Wang, and D. Li, 2016) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
Typical ranges of mean, coefficient of variation and standard deviation of soil
parameters for fine-grained soil; Оі(kN/m3):Total unit weight; wn (%): Natural
water content; LL (%): Liquid Limit; PL (%): Plastic Limit; PI (вҲ’): Plasticity
index; LI (вҲ’): Liquidity index; su (kPa): Undrained shear strength; П• (o):
Effective friction angle;c (kPa):Effective cohesion; Based on (Cao, Y. Wang,
and D. Li, 2016; Parker et al., 2008; K. K. Phoon and F. H. Kulhawy, 1999;
K. K. Phoon, 2008) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Example copula: Mean, std, and parameters of the lognormal distributions . .
38
3.3
Distribution type and distribution parameters of Y1, Y2, Y3, Y4, Y5; . . . . . . . .
55
3.4
Mean and standard deviation of the variables Y1 and Y2, before and after
conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.1
Soil-separation size limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.2
Group symbols for coarse and fine-grained soils classification . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.3
Detailed description, and total number of the 13 most frequent soil types in the
entire TUM Geo Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.4
Description of attributes in the Fine-grained, cohesive soilsвҖҷ dataset . . . . . . .
76
4.5
Descriptive statistics TUM-TRX_CLAY_22; Includes sample means and std,
sample percentiles, range (min,max) and coefficient of variation CoV %; Ap-
proximate number of unique project names in the dataset: 422; number of
incomplete records (rows): 1220; (r2 goodness of fit of the linear envelope in
TC tests) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.6
Number of pairwise data-points in the TUM-TRX_CLAY_22 database . . . . .
83
4.7
Subset 1 (TC): Number of pairwise data-points in TUM-TRX_CLAY_22. . . . .
83
4.8
Subset 2 (UC): Number of pairwise data-points in TUM-TRX_CLAY_22; Note:
Tables correspond to the upper triagular of symmetric matrices . . . . . . . . .
83
4.9
Subset 1 (TC): Pearson correlation coefficient values, based on the pairwise
data-ponts in Table 4.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.10 Subset 2 (UC): Pearson correlation coefficient values, based on the pairwise
data-ponts in Table 4.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
142
==PAGE:148==
List of Tables
4.11 Classification of correlation according to (Evans, 1996); Red/Blue: posi-
tive/negative pairwise correlations between soil properties, strength parameters
and modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.1
Candidate models for M-C strength parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.2
Point estimates of the distribution parameters and model selection; вҲ—Associated
mean and std of the Beta RV; вҲ—вҲ—Blue colored values: min AIC/BIC; Red colored
values: max posterior probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.3
Best fit models (see Table 5.1, according to AIC, BIC and Bayesian model
posterior probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.4
Marginal distributions (X1, X2, ..., X8); вҲ—Bayesian posterior mean . . . . . . . .
94
5.5
Correlation matrix (Pearson sample coefficients) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.6
Correlation matrix of the transformed to the standard normal space variables bZ 95
5.7
Site investigation data: Freiham U5, Munich Germany; Data collected from the
same soil unit from boreholes in close proximity at the site; Soil parameters
from Subset 1 (TC) (see Table 4.7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.8
Distribution type and distribution parameters of (Y1, Y2, ..., Y11);
. . . . . . . . 103
5.9
Average values of accepted bootstrap samples of ПҒij; X1 вҲ’X11: Transformed
variables from Subset 1 (TC) (see Table 4.7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
5.10 Marginal statistics of simulated samples from the unconditional, conditional
on the site data Bayesian, and Hybrid distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
5.11 Site investigation data: Freiham U5, Munich Germany; Data collected from the
same soil unit from boreholes in close proximity at the site; Soil parameters
from Subset 2 (UC) (see Table 4.8)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
5.12 Distribution type and distribution parameters of (Y1, Y2, ..., Y8); . . . . . . . . . 124
5.13 Average values of accepted bootstrap samples of ПҒij . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
5.14 Marginal statistics of simulated samples from the unconditional, conditional
on the site data Bayesian, and Hybrid distributions (UC dataset)
. . . . . . . . 133
143
==PAGE:149==
Bibliography
Aas, K. et al. (2009). вҖңPair-copula constructions of multiple dependenceвҖқ. In: Insurance:
Mathematics and Economics 44(2), pp. 182вҖ“198.
Akbas, S. and F. Kulhawy (2010). вҖңCharacterization and estimation of geotechnical variability
in Ankara clay: a case historyвҖқ. In: Geotech. Geol. Eng. 28(5), pp. 619вҖ“631.
Aldrich, J. (1997). вҖңR. A. Fisher and the making of maximum likelihoodвҖқ. In: Statistical
Science 12(3), pp. 1912вҖ“1922. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gsf.2020.03.017.
Ang, A.-S. and W. Tang (2007). Probability Concepts in Engineering: Emphasis on Applications to
Civil and Environmental Engineering. Wiley: New York, NY.
ASTM D2487 - 17e1: (2017). Standard Practice for Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes
(Unified Soil Classification System). West Conshohocken (PA).
Baecher, G. (1983). вҖңProfessional judgment and prior probabilities in engineering risk
assessmentвҖқ. In: Proceedings of Fourth International Conference on Application of Statistics and
Probability in Soil and Structural Engineering, pp. 633вҖ“650.
Baecher, G. and J. T. Christian (2003). Reliability and statistics in geotechnical engineering. John
Wiley & Sons Inc.
Baecher, G. and J. T. Christian (2008). Spatial variability and geotechnical reliability. Reliability-
Based Design in Geotechnical Engineering. Taylor & Francis: London and New York, pp. 76вҖ“
133.
Baynes, F. (1999). вҖңEngineering Geological Knowledge and QualityвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the
Eight Australia New Zealand Conference on Geomechanics, Hobart, Vitharana & Colman (eds) 1,
pp. 227вҖ“234.
Bock, H. (2006). вҖңCommon ground in engineering geology, soil mechanics and rock mechanics:
Past, present and futureвҖқ. In: Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the Environment 65, pp. 209вҖ“
216.
Burland, J. (1987). вҖңThe teaChing of soil mechanicsвҖ“a personal view. The Nash LectureвҖқ.
In: Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering,
pp. 1427вҖ“1441.
Cao, Z. and Y. Wang (2014). вҖңBayesian model comparison and characterization of undrained
shear strengthвҖқ. In: J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng. 140(6). doi: https://doi.org/10.1061/
(ASCE)GT.1943-5606.
Cao, Z., Y. Wang, and S. K. Au (2011). вҖңCPT-Based Probabilistic Characterization of Effective
Friction Angle of SandвҖқ. In: Georisk 2011, Geotechnical Risk assessment and management,
pp. 169вҖ“177.
Cao, Z., Y. Wang, and D. Li (2016). вҖңQuantification of prior knowledge in geotechnical site
characterizationвҖқ. In: Engineering Geology 203, pp. 107вҖ“116.
144
==PAGE:150==
Bibliography
Cao, Z., Y. Wang, and D. Q. Li (2016). вҖңSite-specific characterization of soil properties using
multiple measurements from different test procedures at different locations вҖ“ A Bayesian
sequential updating approachвҖқ. In: Engineering Geology 211, pp. 150вҖ“161.
Chen, J. R. (2004). Axial Behavior of Drilled Shafts in Gravelly Soils. Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY.
Cheung, R. W. M. and W. H. Tang (2005). вҖңRealistic Assessment of Slope Reliability for
Effective Landslide ManagementвҖқ. In: GГ©otechnique 55(1), pp. 85вҖ“94.
Ching, J., W. H. Huang, and K. K. Phoon (2021). вҖң3D Probabilistic Site Characterization
by Sparse Bayesian LearningвҖқ. In: Journal of Engineering Mechanics 146(12). doi: 10.1061/
(ASCE)EM.1943-7889.0001859.
Ching, J., D. Li, and K. K. Phoon (2016). вҖңStatistical characterization of multivariate geotech-
nical dataвҖқ. In: Reliability of Geotechnical Structures in ISO2394.
Ching, J., K. H. LI, et al. (2018). вҖңGeneric transformation models for some intact rock
propertiesвҖқ. In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal 55(12), pp. 1628вҖ“1645. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1139/cgj-2017-0537.
Ching, J., G. H. Lin, et al. (2017). вҖңCorrelations among some parameters of coarse-grained
soils вҖ” the multivariate probability distribution modelвҖқ. In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal
54(9), pp. 1203вҖ“1220.
Ching, J., M. Muto, and J. L. Beck (2006). вҖңStructural model updating and health monitoring
with incomplete modal data using Gibbs samplerвҖқ. In: Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering 21(4), pp. 242вҖ“257.
Ching, J. and K. K. Phoon (2012). вҖңValue of Geotechnical Site Investigation in Reliability-
Based DesignвҖқ. In: Advances in Structural Engineering, pp. 1935вҖ“1945.
Ching, J. and K. K. Phoon (2014). вҖңCorrelations among some clay parameters вҖ” the multi-
variate distributionвҖқ. In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal 51(6), pp. 1вҖ“19.
Ching, J. and K. K. Phoon (2019). вҖңConstructing Site-Specific Multivariate Probability Dis-
tribution Model Using Bayesian Machine LearningвҖқ. In: Journal of Engineering Mechanics
145(1). doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)EM.1943-7889.0001537.
Ching, J. and K. K. Phoon (2020a). вҖңConstructing a Site-Specific Multivariate Probability
Distribution Using Sparse, Incomplete, and Spatially Variable (MUSIC-X) DataвҖқ. In: Journal
of Engineering Mechanics 146(7), 040200611. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)EM.1943-7889.0001779.
Ching, J. and K. K. Phoon (2020b). вҖңMeasuring Similarity between Site-specific Data and
Records from Other SitesвҖқ. In: Journal of Risk and Uncertainty in Engineering Systems, Part A:
Civil Engineering.
Ching, J., K. K. Phoon, Y. HO, et al. (2020). вҖңQuasi-site-specific prediction for deformation
modulus of rock massвҖқ. In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal.
Ching, J., K. K. Phoon, Z. Khan, et al. (2020). вҖңRole of municipal database in constructing site-
specific multivariate probability distributionвҖқ. In: Computers and Geotechnics 124, p. 103623.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compgeo.2020.103623.
Ching, J., K. K. Phoon, Z. Yang, et al. (2021). вҖңQuasi-site-specific multivariate probability
distribution model for sparse, incomplete, and three-dimensional spatially varying soil
145
==PAGE:151==
Bibliography
dataвҖқ. In: Georisk: Assessment and Management of Risk for Engineered Systems and Geohazards,
pp. 1вҖ“24. doi: 10.1080/17499518.2021.1971256.
Ching, J. and K. Phoon (2012). вҖңModeling parameters of structured clays as a multivariate
normal distributionвҖқ. In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal 49(5), pp. 522вҖ“545. doi: https :
//doi.org/10.1139/t2012-015.
Ching, J., K. Phoon, and C. Chen (2014). вҖңModeling CPTU parameters of clays as a multi-
variate normal distributionвҖқ. In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal 51(6), pp. 77вҖ“91. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1139/cgj-2012-0259.
Ching, J., S. WU, and K. K. Phoon (2021). вҖңConstructing Quasi-Site-Specific Multivariate
Probability Distribution Using Hierarchical Bayesian ModelвҖқ. In: Journal of Engineering
Mechanics 147(10).
Clayton, C., M. Matthews, and N. Simons (1983). вҖңData sources for engineering geologic
studiesвҖқ. In.
Conover, W. j. (1999). Practical nonparametric statistics (3rd ed.) John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
DвҖҷIgnazzio, M. et al. (2016). вҖңCorrelations for undrained shear strength of Finnish soft claysвҖқ.
In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal 53, pp. 1628вҖ“1645. doi: https://doi.org/10.1139/cgj-
2016-0037.
Das, B. M. (2015). Principles of Foundation Engineering, 8th Edition. Cengage Learning. isbn:
9781305081550.
Devroy, L. (1986). Non-Uniform Random Variate Generation. Springer-Verlag. isbn: 3-540-96305-
7.
Djoenaidi, W. J. (1985). A compendium of soil properties and correlations. University of Sidney:
School of Civil and Mining Engineering.
Efron, B. and R. Tibshirani (1993). An introduction to the bootstrap. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Einstein, H. and G. Baecher (1982). вҖңProbabilistic and statistical methods in engineering
geology I. Problem statement and introduction to solution.вҖқ In: Ingenieurgeologie und Ge-
omechanik als Grundlagen des Felsbaues/Engineering Geology and Geomechanics as Fundamentals
of Rock Engineering, pp. 47вҖ“61.
Embrechts, P., F. Lindskog, and A. McNeil (2001). Modelling Dependence with Copulas and
Applications to Risk Management, Chapter 2. Department of Mathematics ETHZ: CH-8092
ZГјrich, Switzerland.
EN 1997-1:2004: (2004). Eurocode 7 - Geotechnical designвҖ“Part 1: General rules.
EN 1997-2:2007: (2004). Eurocode 7 - Geotechnical design - Part 2: Ground investigation and testing.
ERA Group (2020). Documentation of the ERA Distribution Classes. https://www.cee.ed.
tum.de/era/software/eradist/. Accessed: 2021-10-08. Technical University of Munich,
Germany.
Evans, J. (1996). Straightforward statistics for the behavioral sciences. Brooks/Cole Publishing:
Pacific Grove, California.
Feng, S. and P. J. Vardanega (2019a). вҖңA database of saturated hydraulic conductivity of
fine-grained soils: probability density functionsвҖқ. In: Georisk: Assessment and Management
of Risk for Engineered Systems and Geohazards 13(4), pp. 255вҖ“261. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1080/17499518.2019.1652919.
146
==PAGE:152==
Bibliography
Feng, S. and P. J. Vardanega (2019b). вҖңCorrelation of the hydraulic conductivity of fine-
grained soils with water content ratio using a databaseвҖқ. In: Environmental Geotechnics 6(5),
pp. 253вҖ“268. doi: https://doi.org/10.1680/jenge.18.00166.
Feng, X. and R. Jimenez (2014). вҖңBayesian prediction of elastic modulus of intact rocks
using their uniaxial compressive strengthвҖқ. In: Engineering Geology 173(1), pp. 32вҖ“40. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)GT.1943-5606.
Fink, D. (1997). вҖңA compendium of conjugate priorsвҖқ. In: Technical Report 101.
Gelman, B. et al. (2013). Probability Concepts in Engineering: Emphasis on Applications to Civil
and Environmental Engineering. Chapman & Hall: London, United Kingdom.
Geman, S. and D. Geman (1984). вҖңStochastic Relaxation, Gibbs Distributions, and the Bayesian
Restoration of ImagesвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
PAMI-6(6), pp. 721вҖ“741. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1984.4767596.
Gilks, W. R., D. J. Spiegelhalter, and S. Richardson (1996). Markov chain Monte Carlo in
practice. Chapman and Hill: London.
Givens, G. and J. Hoeting (2005). Computational Statistics. Wiley: New York, NY.
Givens, G. and J. Hoeting (2013). Computational Statistics, 2nd Ed. Chapman & Hall: New
York, NY.
Grigoriu, M. et al. (1987). вҖңProbabilistic site strategy for transmission linesвҖқ. In: Briaud, J.L.
(Ed.), Foundations for Transmission Line Towers (GSP 8), pp. 1вҖ“14.
Hastings, W. K. (1970). вҖңMonte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their
applicationsвҖқ. In: Biometrika 57, pp. 97вҖ“109.
Herlau, T., M. N. Schmidt, and M. Morup (2020). Introduction to Machine Learning and Data
Mining, Lecture Notes. DTU.
Hoek, E. (1999). вҖңPutting numbers to geology- An engineerвҖҷs viewpoint.вҖқ In: Quarterly Journal
of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology 32(1), pp. 1вҖ“19.
Hohenbichler, M. and R. Rackwitz (1981). вҖңNonnormal dependent vectors in structural
safetyвҖқ. In: Journal of Engineering Mechanics 107(6), 1227вҖ“1238.
Honjo, Y. et al. (2009). Geotechnical Risk and Safety. Taylor & Francis. isbn: 978-0-415-49874-6.
Huang, A. and M. P. Wand (2003). вҖңSimple marginally noninformative prior distributions for
covariance matricesвҖқ. In: Bayesian Anal. 8(2), pp. 439вҖ“452.
Huber, M. (2013). Soil variability and its consequences in geotechnical engineering. Institute for
Geotechnics of University of Stuttgart.
ISO2394:1973/1986/1998/2015 (2015). General Principles on Reliability for Structures. Geneva,
Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization.
ISSMGE-TC205/304 (2017). Final report for joint TC205/TC304 working group on вҖңDiscussion of sta-
tistical/reliability methods for EurocodesвҖқ. International Society of Soil Mechanics, Geotechnical
Engineering (ISSMGE) - Technical Committee TC205 вҖҳSafety & Serviceability in Geotechni-
cal DesignвҖҷ & Technical Committee TC304 вҖҳEngineering Practice of Risk Assessment, and
ManagementвҖҷ.
Jaksa, M. B. et al. (2003). вҖңA framework for quantifying the reliability of geotechnical
investigationsвҖқ. In: Proceedings of 9th International Conference on the Application of Statistics
and Probability in Civil Engineering, pp. 1285вҖ“1291.
147
==PAGE:153==
Bibliography
Jiang, C. et al. (2015). вҖңA vine-copula-based reliability analysis method for structures with
multidimensional correlationвҖқ. In: Journal of Mechanical Design 137(6), p. 061405.
Joe, H. (2016). Dependence modeling with copulas. Chapman and Hall/CRC. isbn: 9781466583221.
Johnson, N. L. (1949). вҖңSystems of frequency curves generated by methods of translationвҖқ.
In: Biometrika 36, pp. 149вҖ“176.
Johnson, N. L. and S. Kotz (1972). Distributions in Statistics: Continuous Multivariate Distribu-
tions. Wiley: New York.
Juang, C. H., S. Khishnevisan, and J. Zhang (2015). Maximum likelihood principle and its
application in soil liquefaction assessment. Chapter 4, Risk and reliability in geotechnical engineering,
Eds. K. K. Phoon & J. Ching. Taylor & Francis. isbn: 978-1-4822-2721-5.
Juang, H. C. (2019). вҖңGeological Uncertainty: A Missing Element in Geotechnical Reliability
AnalysisвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Geotechnical Safety and Risk
(ISGSR).
Keaton, J. R. (2013). вҖңEngineering geology: Fundamental input or random variable?вҖқ In:
Foundation Engineering in the Face of Uncertainty: Honoring Fred H. Kulhawy, pp. 232вҖ“253.
Knill, J. (2003). вҖңCore values: The first Hans-Cloos lectureвҖқ. In: Bulletin of Engineering Geology
and the Environment 62, pp. 1вҖ“34.
Kolymbas, D. (2011). Geotechnik: Bodenmechanik, Grundbau und Tunnelbau. Springer: Berlin.
isbn: 9783642204821.
Kottegoda, N. T. and R. Rosso (2008). Applied Statistics for Civil and Environmental Engineers.
Wiley-Blackwell. isbn: 1405179171.
Kulhawy, F. and P. Mayne (1990). Manual on Estimating Soil Properties for Foundation Design.
Electric Power Research Institute EL-6800, Project 1493-6, Electric Power Research Institute,
Palo Alto, Calif.
Lacasse, S. and F. Nadim (1996). вҖңUncertainties in characterising soil propertiesвҖқ. In: Uncer-
tainty in the geologic environment: From theory to practice, pp. 633вҖ“650.
LADE, P. V. (2016). Triaxial Testing of Soils. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. isbn: 9781119106623.
LГӨnsivaara, T., K. K. Phoon, and J. Ching (2021). вҖңWhat is a characteristic value for soils?вҖқ
In: Georisk: Assessment and Management of Risk for Engineered Systems and Geohazards. doi:
10.1080/17499518.2021.1975301.
Lebrun, R. and A. Dutfoy (2009a). вҖңDo Rosenblatt and Nataf isoprobabilistic transformations
really differ?вҖқ In: Probab. Eng. Mech. 24(4), pp. 577вҖ“584.
Lebrun, R. and A. Dutfoy (2009b). вҖңModeling multivariate distribution of multiple soil
parameters using vine copula modelвҖқ. In: Probabilistic engineering Mechanics 24(3), pp. 312вҖ“
320.
Lemaire, M. (2009). Structural reliability. Wiley-ISTE. isbn: 978-1848210820.
Li, D. Q., X. S. Tang, et al. (2013). вҖңBivariate simulation using copula and its application
to probabilistic pile settlement analysisвҖқ. In: Int. J. Numer. Anal. Methods Geomech. 37(6),
pp. 597вҖ“617.
Li, D. Q., S. B. Wu, et al. (2012). вҖңPerformance of translation approach for modeling correlated
non-normal variablesвҖқ. In: Structural Safety 39(2), 52вҖ“612. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.strusafe.2012.08.001.
148
==PAGE:154==
Bibliography
Li, D. Q., L. Zhang, et al. (2015). вҖңBivariate distribution of shear strength parameters using
copulas and its impact on geotechnical system reliabilityвҖқ. In: Computers and Geotechnics 68,
pp. 184вҖ“195.
Li, D.-Q. and X.-S. Tang (2015). Modeling and simulation of bivariate distribution of shear strength
parameters using copulas. Chapter 2, Risk and reliability in geotechnical engineering, Eds. K. K.
Phoon & J. Ching. Taylor & Francis. isbn: 978-1-4822-2721-5.
Liu, P. L. and A. Der Kiureghian (1986). вҖңMultivariate distribution models with prescribed
marginals and covariancesвҖқ. In: Probab. Eng. Mech. 1(2), 105вҖ“112. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0266-8920(86)90033-0.
Liu, S. et al. (2016). вҖңMultivariate correlation among resilient modulus and cone penetration
test parameters of cohesive subgrade soilsвҖқ. In: Engineering Geology 209, pp. 1628вҖ“1645. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enggeo.2016.05.018.
LГ¶fman, M. S. and L. K. Korkiala-Tanttu (2021). вҖңTransformation models for the compress-
ibility properties of Finnish clays using a multivariate databaseвҖқ. In: Georisk: Assessment and
Management of Risk for Engineered Systems and Geohazards. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/
17499518.2020.1864410.
LГј, T.-J. et al. (2020). вҖңModeling multivariate distribution of multiple soil parameters using
vine copula modelвҖқ. In: Computers and Geotechnics 118, p. 103340. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.compgeo.2019.103340.
Lumb, P. (1974). вҖңApplication of statistics in soil mechanicsвҖқ. In: Soil Mechanics Lee, I.K. (Ed.),
pp. 44вҖ“111.
Lyche, T. (2020). Numerical Linear Algebra and Matrix Factorizations: Texts in Computational
Science and Engineering. Springer, Cham. isbn: 978-3-030-36468-7.
Marsaglia, G., W. W. Tsang, and J. Wang (2003). вҖңEvaluating KolmogorovвҖҷs DistributionвҖқ.
In: Journal of Statistical Software 8(18), pp. 1вҖ“4. doi: doi:10.18637/jss.v008.i18.
Mayne, P. W., B. R. Cristopher, and J. Dejong (2001). Manual on subsurface investigations.
Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration.
Metropolis, N. et al. (1953). вҖңEquation of State Calculations by Fast Computing MachinesвҖқ.
In: J. Chem. Phys. 21, pp. 1097вҖ“1092. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1699114.
Muller, L. and E. Fecker (1979). вҖңExperience in Site Investigation for Dam ConstructionвҖқ. In:
Bulletin of the International Association of Engineering Geology( 20), pp. 51вҖ“58.
Nataf, A. (1962). вҖңDГ©termination des distributions de probabilitГ© dont les marges sont
donnГ©esвҖқ. In: Comptes Rendus de lвҖҷAcadГ©mie des Sciences 225, 42вҖ“43.
Nawari, N. O. and R. Liang (2000). вҖңReliability of measured geotechnical propertiesвҖқ. In:
Performance confirmation of constructed geotechnical facilities( 94), pp. 322вҖ“335.
Nelsen, R. B. (2006). An Introduction to Copulas. Springer; 2nd edition: New York, NY. isbn:
978-0-387-28678-5.
Orr, T. L. (2017). вҖңDefining and selecting characteristic values of geotechnical parameters
for designs to Eurocode 7вҖқ. In: Georisk: Assessment and Management of Risk for Engineered
Systems and Geohazards 11(1), pp. 103вҖ“115. doi: 10.1080/17499518.2016.1235711.
Orr, T. L. and Farrell, E. R. (1999). Geotechnical Design to Eurocode 7.
149
==PAGE:155==
Bibliography
Papaioannou, I. and D. Straub (2012). вҖңReliability Updating in Geotechnical Engineering
Including Spatial Variability of SoilвҖқ. In: Computers and Geotechnics 42, pp. 44вҖ“51.
Papaioannou, I. and D. Straub (2017). вҖңLearning soil parameters and updating geotechnical
reliability estimates under spatial variability вҖ“ theory and application to shallow founda-
tionsвҖқ. In: Georisk: Assessment and Management of Risk for Engineered Systems and Geohazards
11(1), pp. 116вҖ“128. doi: 10.1080/17499518.2016.1250280.
Papoulis, A. and S. U. Pillai (2002). Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes.
McGraw-Hill: New York, NY. isbn: 0070486581.
Parker, C., A. Simon, and C. R. Thorne (2008). вҖңThe effects of variability in bank material
properties on riverbank stability: Goodwin Creek, MississippiвҖқ. In: Geomorphology 101,
pp. 533вҖ“543. doi: 10.1016/j.geomorph.2008.02.007.
Parry, S. et al. (2014). вҖңEngineering geological models - an introduction: IAEG commission
25вҖқ. In: Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the Environment 73(3), pp. 689вҖ“706.
Phoon, K. K. (2006). вҖңModeling and simulation of stochastic dataвҖқ. In: GeoCongress2006.
Phoon, K. K. (2008). Reliability-Based Design in Geotechnical Engineering. Taylor & Francis.
Phoon, K. K. (2018). вҖңEditorial for Special Collection on Probabilistic Site CharacterizationвҖқ. In:
ASCE-ASME Journal of Risk and Uncertainty in Engineering Systems, Part A: Civil Engineering
4(4).
Phoon, K. K. (2020). вҖңThe story of statistics in geotechnical engineeringвҖқ. In: Georisk: As-
sessment and Management of Risk for Engineered Systems and Geohazards 14(1), pp. 3вҖ“25. doi:
10.1080/17499518.2019.1700423.
Phoon, K. K. and J. Ching (2013). вҖңMultivariate Model for Soil Parameters Based on Johnson
DistributionsвҖқ. In: Foundation Engineering in the Face of Uncertainty: Honoring Fred H. Kulhawy,
pp. 337вҖ“353.
Phoon, K. K. and J. Ching (2015). Risk and reliability in geotechnical engineering. Taylor &
Francis. isbn: 978-1-4822-2721-5.
Phoon, K. K. and J. Ching (2016). Semi-probabilistic Reliability-based design. Chapter 6, Reliability
of Geotechnical Structures in ISO2394, Eds. K. K. Phoon & J. V. Retief. CRC Press/Balkema,
pp. 159вҖ“192.
Phoon, K. K. and F. H. Kulhawy (1999). вҖңCharacterization of geotechnical variabilityвҖқ. In:
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 36:612вҖ“624.
Phoon, K. K. and J. V. Retief (2016). Reliability of Geotechnical Structures in ISO2394. Taylor &
Francis. isbn: 978-1-138-02911-8.
Phoon, K., J. Ching, and T. SHUKU (2021). вҖңChallenges in data-driven site characterizationвҖқ.
In: Georisk: Assessment and Management of Risk for Engineered Systems and Geohazards, pp. 1вҖ“13.
doi: 10.1080/17499518.2021.1896005.
Rackwitz, R. (2000). вҖңReviewing probabilistic soils modelingвҖқ. In: Computers and Geotechnics
26, pp. 199вҖ“223.
Raiffa, H. and R. Schlaifer (2002). Applied Statistical Decision Theory. Division of Research,
Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University: Boston. isbn: 978-0-12-
415825-2.
150
==PAGE:156==
Bibliography
Rosenblatt, M. (1952). вҖңRemarks on a multivariate transformationвҖқ. In: Ann Math Stat 23(3),
pp. 470вҖ“472.
Ross, S. M. (2013). Simulation. Epstein Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
University of Southern California. Fifth edition. isbn: 978-0-12-415825-2.
Sklar, A. (2009). вҖңRandom variables, distribution functions, and copulas: A personal look
backward and forwardвҖқ. In: Lecture Notes-Monograph Series 28, pp. 1вҖ“14.
Slifker, J. F. and S. S. Shapiro (1980). вҖңThe Johnson System: Selection and Parameter
EstimationвҖқ. In: Technometrics 22(2), pp. 239вҖ“246.
Spry, M., F. Kulhawy, and M. Grigoriu (1988). вҖңReliability-based foundation design for
transmission line structures: geotechnical site characterization strategyвҖқ. In: Report EL-5507,
p. 142.
Stapledon D, H. (1982). вҖңSubsurface engineering - in search of a rational approachвҖқ. In: 4,
pp. 26вҖ“33.
Strang, G. (2006). Linear Algebra and Its Applications, 4th Edition. Cengage Learning. isbn:
0030105676.
Straub, D. (2014a). Lecture notes in Structural Reliability. ERA Group, Technical University of
Munich.
Straub, D. (2014b). вҖңValue of information analysis with structural reliability methodsвҖқ. In:
Structural Safety 49, pp. 75вҖ“86.
Straub, D. (2020). Lecture notes in Engineering Risk Analysis. ERA Group, TUM.
Straub, D. and I. Papaioannou (2015). вҖңBayesian analysis for learning and updating geotech-
nical parameters and models with measurementsвҖқ. In: Risk and Reliability in Geotechnical
Engineering, Chapter 5 (K. K. Phoon and J. Y. Ching eds., pp. 221вҖ“264.
Straub, D., I. Papaioannou, and W. Betz (2017). вҖңReliability Updating in the Presence of
Spatial VariabilityвҖқ. In: Risk and Reliability Analysis: Theory and Applications, edited by P.
Gardoni 49, pp. 75вҖ“86.
Straub, D. and I. Welpe (2014). вҖңDecision-making under risk: a nor- mative and behavioral
perspectiveвҖқ. In: Risk-A Multidisciplinary Introduction, Chapter 3.
Sudret, B. (2008). вҖңGlobal sensitivity analysis using polynomial chaos expansions. ReliabilityвҖқ.
In: Engineering and System Safety 93(87), pp. 964вҖ“79.
Sudret, B. (2015). Polynomial chaos expansions and stochastic finite-element methods. Chapter 6,
Risk and reliability in geotechnical engineering, Eds. K. K. Phoon & J. Ching. Taylor & Francis.
isbn: 978-1-4822-2721-5.
Sullivan, T. D. (2010). вҖңThe Geological ModelвҖқ. In: Geologically Active - Proceedings of the
11th Congress of the International Association for Engineering Geology and the Environment,
pp. 155вҖ“170.
Tang, X. S. et al. (2013). вҖңImpact of copula selection on geotechnical reliabilityвҖқ. In: Computers
and Geotechnics 49, 264вҖ“278.
Trautmann, C. and F. Kulhawy (1983). вҖңData sources for engineering geologic studiesвҖқ. In:
Bulletin of the Association of Engineering Geologists 20(4), pp. 439вҖ“454.
Trefethen, L. N. and D. Bau (1997). Numerical Linear Algebra. Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics. isbn: 0898713617.
151
==PAGE:157==
Bibliography
Tsilifis, P. et al. (2019). вҖңSparse Polynomial Chaos expansions using Variational Relevance
Vector MachinesвҖқ. In: Submitted to Journal of Computational Physics. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.
2020.109498.
Uzielli, M., S. Lacasse, et al. (2007). вҖңSoil variability analysis for geotechnical practiceвҖқ. In:
Characterisation and Engineering Properties of Nat- ural Soils, Tan, et al. (Eds.), pp. 44вҖ“111.
Uzielli, M. and P. W. Mayne (2011). вҖңServiceability limit state CPT-based design for vertically
loaded shallow footings on sandвҖқ. In: Geomechanics and Geoengineering: An International
Journal 6(2), 91вҖ“107.
Vick, S. G. (2002). Degrees of Belief: Subjective Probability and Engineering Judgment. ASCE Press:
Reston, Virginia. isbn: 978-0-12-415825-2.
Wang, F., H. Li, and Q.-L. Zhang (2017). вҖңResponseвҖ“SurfaceвҖ“Based Embankment Reliability
under Incomplete Probability InformationвҖқ. In: International Journal of Geomechanics 17(12).
doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-5622.0001017.
Wang, L., N. Ravichandran, and C. H. Juang (2012). вҖңBayesian Updating of KJHH Model
for Prediction of Maximum Ground Settlement in Braced Excavations Using Centrifuge
DataвҖқ. In: Computers and Geotechnics 44, pp. 1вҖ“8.
Wang, Y., S. Au, and Z. Cao (2010). вҖңBayesian approach for probabilistic characterization of
sand friction anglesвҖқ. In: Engineering Geology 114(3), pp. 354вҖ“363.
Wang, Y. and Z. Cao (2013). вҖңProbabilistic Characterization of YoungвҖҷs Modulus of Soil Using
Equivalent SamplesвҖқ. In: Engineering Geology 159, pp. 106вҖ“118.
Wang, Y., Z. Cao, and D. Li (2016). вҖңBayesian perspective on geotechnical variability and site
characterizationвҖқ. In: Engineering Geology 203, pp. 117вҖ“125.
Wu, X. Z. (2013a). вҖңProbabilistic slope stability analysis by a copula-based sampling methodвҖқ.
In: Computational Geosciences 17(5), 739вҖ“755.
Wu, X. Z. (2013b). вҖңTrivariate analysis of soil ranking-correlated characteristics and its
application to probabilistic stability assessments in geotechnical engineering problemsвҖқ. In:
Soils and Foundations 53(4), 540вҖ“556.
www-01 ( ). http://140.112.12.21/issmge/tc304.htm. Accessed: 2021-10-08.
www-02 ( ). https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generated/numpy.random.
choice.html. Accessed: 2021-02-08.
www-03 ( ). https://www.scipy.org. Accessed: 2021-02-08.
Xiao, S. et al. (2021). вҖңEstablishing region-specific N вҖ“ Vs relationships through hierarchical
Bayesian modelingвҖқ. In: Engineering Geology, p. 106105. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enggeo.2021.106105.
Yuen, K.-V. (2010). вҖңRecent developments of Bayesian model class selection and applications
in civil engineeringвҖқ. In: Structural Safety 32(5), pp. 338вҖ“346.
Zhang, D. et al. (2020). вҖңMultivariate probability distribution of shanghai clay propertiesвҖқ. In:
Engineering Geology, p. 105675. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enggeo.2020.105675.
Zhang, J., L. Zhang, and W. Tang (2009). вҖңBayesian Framework for Characterizing Geotech-
nical Model UncertaintyвҖқ. In: Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering 135(7),
pp. 932вҖ“940.
152
==PAGE:158==
Bibliography
Zhang, J., L. Zhang, and W. Tang (2012). вҖңImplementation of Bayesian Theory on LRFD of
Axially Loaded Driven PilesвҖқ. In: Computers and Geotechnics 42, pp. 73вҖ“80.
Zhang, L. (2004). вҖңReliability verification using proof pile load testsвҖқ. In: Journal of Geotechnical
and Geoenvironmental Engineering 130(11), pp. 1203вҖ“1213.
Zheng, S. et al. (2021). вҖңProbabilistic outlier detection for sparse multivariate geotechnical
site investigation data using Bayesian learningвҖқ. In: Geoscience Frontiers 12, pp. 425вҖ“439. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gsf.2020.03.017.
153
==PAGE:159==
I confirm that this master thesis is my own work and I have documented all sources and
material used.
Munich, 31.03.2022
Orestis Zinas
