==PAGE:1==
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related
Samples
Master Thesis
DTU HEALTH TECH Biophotonic Imaging Group
Department of Health Technology
Keqing Dai
Peter E. Andersen
Gavrielle Rebecca Untracht
Anja Lykke Borre
Supervisors
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
Master Thesis
March, 2022
By
Keqing Dai
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at the Biophotonic Imaging Group,
Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. Biotechnology.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors Peter, Gav, and Anja, for all the
help and guidance you have given me. Thanks to Gav for sharing many MATLAB scripts
with me and helping me getting them running. Big thanks to Niels for the great sessions
with the cool TIMAHC microscope. Thank you Dominik and Pilar, for all the help, good
talks, and literature recommendations at the beginning of this project. Thanks to Lars for
all the support with chemicals. Many thanks to everyone in the group, the past year has
been rough for all of us but it was always good to see you, online or in this new thing
called the physical world.
So many people has generously helped me with the porcine colon samples. Urs, Embla,
Peter, Karsten, Lotte, and the kind owners of Today købmand and Rong Xing supermar­
ket, thank you, without you there might not have been anything for me to image.
Huge thank you to my dearest friends and family, for all the kindness, patience, and love.
Keqing Dai ­ s182426
Signature
Date
ii
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
30 March 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The current colonoscopy routine relies on histopathological evaluation for diagnosis, grad­
ing, and staging. Adapting advanced imaging modalities to colonoscopy could theoreti­
cally provide real­time assessment of colon tissue, aid the screening and examination of
colon cancer and other colonic diseases.
This project used the complementary imaging modalities optical coherence tomography
and multiphoton microscopy to image porcine colon samples. Images from the two modal­
ities were examined and compared. Two types of porcine colon samples (frozen­thawed
and fresh) were imaged using OCT and MPM. The attenuation coefficients of the top of
the mucosa layer were extracted from the two types of samples, as yet another contrast
to the multimodal imaging approach.
With the OCT scanning large field of view, providing the structural morphology information
based on the scattering properties of tissues, and MPM imaging of various fluorescence
and second harmonic generation signals from different molecules with high resolution,
multimodal imaging can provide diverse physiological information about the tissue.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Colon cancer and colonoscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Optical coherence tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Multiphoton microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Multimodal imaging approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Experimental Setup and Methods
5
2.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
OCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Multiphoton microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Sample and sample handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
OCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Multiphoton microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results
11
3.1
OCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Structural . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Attenuation coefficient extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Multiphoton microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.1
2D images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.2
3D images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Discussion
23
4.1
Assessing on the imaging systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.1.1
VivoSight OCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.1.2
TIMAHC multiphoton microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Assessing the samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
OCT attenuation coefficients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Multimodal imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4.1
OCT imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4.2
Multiphoton microscopy imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4.3
Comparison and combination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Conclusion
31
Bibliography
33
A MATLAB scripts
35
A.1 Loading and flattening the tissue surface of an OCT image stack . . . . . . 35
A.2 Creating an en face view of the OCT image stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
B Attenuation coefficients
37
B.1 The results from fitting the exponential model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
iv
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:7==
B.2 Statistics results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
C OCT images of tissue features
40
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Colon cancer and colonoscopy
Colorectal cancer was the third most commonly diagnosed cancer and the second leading
cause of cancer death in 2020, according to global cancer statistics estimates [1]. The
screening and examination of colorectal cancer are commonly carried out by colonoscopy,
a technique that allows imaging of the inside of the colon by inserting a long, thin tube
in the colon to illuminate the field and collect signals to generate images. It is also via
colonoscopy that biopsy and polyp removal surgery are visually guided.
The traditional colonoscopy uses white light to illuminate the insides of the colon, the
physician then identifies abnormalities by the morphology of colon tissue and makes as­
sessments based on established classification systems [2]. However, white light imaging
can only provide limited contrast, lesions that are flat or smooth on the surface can easily
be overlooked. Using advanced imaging techniques to improve colonoscopy is of great
interest for improving colon lesion detection, research has been carried out to evaluate
the performance of a variety of imaging techniques, such as confocal microscopy, Raman
spectroscopy, hyperspectral imaging, molecular imaging, optical coherence tomography,
and multiphoton microscopy [3]. These techniques have different contrast mechanisms,
field of view, resolution, imaging speed, but all share the potential of improved real­time
imaging and aiding physicians in making decisions during colonoscopy.
1.2
Optical coherence tomography
OCT is a high­resolution imaging method that measures the echoes of backscattered light
from the sample and is therefore described as the optical analogue to ultrasound [4]. The
contrast in OCT images comes from different refractive indices and scattering properties
of the biological tissue. The near infrared wavelength range that OCT utilises is where
biological tissues usually have low absorption, allowing imaging depths up to 2 mm [3, 4].
OCT retinal imaging has been demonstrated since 2002 [5]. Although no commercial OCT
colonoscopy system is available yet, using OCT for colon imaging has been an ongoing
investigation.
The morphology of freshly excised human colon samples has been examined using OCT
(Figure 1.1), a neural network was then trained by the images to diagnose neoplastic
tissue in the colon samples [6]. Another study also used the combination of deep learning
and OCT imaging on diagnoses of rat colon based on morphology [7].
Other than morphological information, it has been raised that a way to do quantitative
analysis with OCT would be measuring the attenuation coefficient of samples [8, 9]. A
study showed the extraction of the attenuation coefficient of freshly excised human colon
and compared the values from different degrees of colonic abnormality [10]. These lat­
est studies showed the general appearance of an OCT colon image, suggesting great
potential in adapting OCT imaging in colonoscopy.
1.3
Multiphoton microscopy
Multiphoton microscopy (MPM) uses a nonlinear optical effect to excite fluorescence emis­
sion within a small focal volume [11]. When performing label­free MPM, the contrast
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: OCT images (A,B,C,D) of freshly excised human normal colon tissue, from
[6]. E shows a comparison with HE staining image, F is a photograph of the fresh normal
colon sample.
comes from the endogenous molecules emitting autofluorescence when excited. In ad­
dition, MPM can also collect signals from the second (or third) harmonic generation of
molecules like collagen. MPM Light source is also often in the near infrared range, the
penetration depth of the excitation light is, therefore, deeper than that of single­photon
excitation, due to low tissue absorption in the near infrared range.
Label­free MPM imaging of freshly excised human colon has been studied and reported
[12]. Figure 1.2 from the study shows that label­free MPM could show great details of
tissue structures and even cell nuclei, given the multiple excitation wavelengths, emission
filters that fit the fluorophores’ emission spectra, and good resolution of the microscope.
Another study performed label­free MPM on fresh mice colon samples and was able to
evaluate and grade colitis lesions in the colon [13]. Dilipkumar et al. reported in vivo label­
free MPM imaging of colon in mice, images that were similarly informative as a histology
image were captured [14]. A study used MPM and SHG signals to evaluate and confirm
the changes in collagen structures in colon mucosa with rats, suggesting that SHG could
be used as a marker for identifying colonic cancer [15].
2
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Label­free multiphoton microscopy imaging of fresh human colon (left) with
comparison to HE staining image (right), from [12]. Scale bar: 50 μm.
1.4
Multimodal imaging approach
Using a combination of complementary imaging modalities could be able to provide 3D
molecular and structural information, with flexible switching from one set of field of view,
resolution, and contrast to another. Combining optical coherence tomography (OCT) and
multiphoton microscopy (MPM) is a potential choice for multimodal imaging of the colon,
evaluating the imaging ability of such a multimodal system is highly relevant.
Real­time colonoscopy with high resolution, good imaging depth, and sufficient contrast
will be a powerful tool for colorectal cancer diagnosis. In this project, both OCT and MPM
will be used to image two types of porcine colon samples. The imaging capabilities be­
tween the two modalities will be compared, and the difference of the two types of samples
will be examined by both OCT and MPM.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:13==
2
Experimental Setup and Methods
2.1
Setup
2.1.1
OCT
A commercial OCT system (VivoSight OCT, Michelson Diagnostic Inc.)designed for fast
skin imaging was used for OCT imaging. The light source is an eye­safe broadband laser
with central wavelength of 1305 (± 15) nm; the lateral resolution of the OCT system is 7.5
μm, and the axial resolution is 10 μm [16]. This OCT system uses a patented multi­beam
technology for deeper imaging depth and higher lateral resolution.
Figure 2.1: The setup of the OCT system. (a) The probe is fixed above the sample during
imaging. (b) A photograph of the sample under the probe taken by the probe camera. (c)
The en face view. (d) The B­scan, yellow box indicate the 6.0 mm × 1 mm area in focus.
Sample placement
Samples were cut into small pieces and placed in small containers. The probe was placed
directly over but not touching the sample, as shown in Figure 2.1(a).
Image characteristics
The pixel width and height of a B­scan are around 4 µm. The dimension of a C­scan can
be chosen from 6.0 mm × 6.0 mm × 1.9 mm, 5.0 mm × 5.0 mm × 1.9 mm, and 1.0 mm
× 1.0 mm × 1.9 mm. The number of B­scans taken within a C­scan can be chosen from
120, 250, and 500.
The VivoSight system always keeps the dimension of the C­scan regardless of the number
of B­scans. For example, to acquire a C­scan with the dimension of 6.0 mm × 6.0 mm ×
1.9 mm, one can choose to take 120, 250, or 500 B­scans along the y­axis. The distance
between B­scans will be determined by the image width (6.0 mm in this example) divided
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
5
==PAGE:14==
by the number of B­scans (120, 250, or 500). This is important for generating an en face
image with enough structural information along the y­axis. In this project, all shown en
face images were generated from C­scans with 500 B­scans (12 μm pixel width along
y­axis), which is the maximum B­scan number available, but still, the pixel size in y­axis
will be greater than the lateral resolution (7.5 μm).
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the dimensions of a OCT C­scan and en face stack.
2.1.2
Multiphoton microscopy
The custom­made replica of a two­photon laser scanning microscope TIMAHC [17] was
used for fluorescence imaging of both frozen­thawed and fresh porcine colon samples.
The light source of TIMAHC is a femtosecond laser(Chameleon Discovery NX, Coherent)
with tuning range from 660 nm to 1320 nm, pulse duration of 100 fs.
The objective is a water immersion objective (XLPLN25XSVMP2, Olympus), 25 times
magnification and 1.0 numerical aperture (NA). The working distance is 4 mm. Requires
that the sample is fixed and immersed in an aqueous solution, while the objective is also
immersed and away from the sample at a distance.
TIMAHC is a microscope of upright design. Samples are placed in petri dishes, fixed by
tape. The Petri dish is then filled with phosphate­buffered saline with the objective head
dipping inside and kept at a distance from the surface of the imaged sample.
The microscope is designed to image tagged biological samples, therefore the filters are
the ones suitable for fluorescence tags. There are two band­pass filters, allowing light
from 500 ­ 550 nm and 570 ­ 640 nm to pass through, respectively.
Images were taken in different settings. The 2D images were 512 by 512 µm, 1024 by
1024 pixels. The 3D images of the frozen sample were 301 µm by 301 µm, the stack
step size (z­direction) was set to be 1 µm. The image resolution is in the order of several
micrometers.
Excitation wavelengths were chosen based on literature studies. 4 wavelengths were
chosen for the frozen­thawed sample imaging, 5 were used for fresh sample imaging.
Multiple excitation wavelengths aimed to compare potentially different molecules, as well
as cover both fluorescence and second harmonic generation signals.
2.2
Sample and sample handling
Colon samples from humans are not available for this project. The reason for choosing to
use the porcine colon as a substitute instead of rat or mouse colon is that the physiology
and mechanisms of diseases of the porcine colon have a higher similarity to the human
colon than to rats or mice [18].
6
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: The setup of TIMAHC, the design on the right side is adapted from [17].
Two type of porcine samples were acquired and imaged, the frozen­thawed samples and
the fresh samples.
Frozen sample: bought from local stores, kept in the freezer around ­18°C, thawed at
room temperature hours before imaging. The commercially available colon are sold as a
frozen meat product. The procedure usually is that the colons are washed, then turned
inside out for further cleaning. It is unknown how fast the meat products were frozen
(although often labelled as quick­frozen) or how well the temperature was kept low during
transportation to distributors. The frozen colon samples thawed at room temperature then
were cut into smaller pieces, placed in small a plastic container for imaging. Phosphate­
buffered saline (PBS) is applied onto the tissue surface when needed to keep the samples
moist.
Fresh sample 1: from the Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Copen­
hagen. The pig was under anaesthetic. The distal part of the colon was taken, fecal
pellets were removed. Excised tissue samples were immersed in PBS and kept on ice
during transportation. The samples were later cut into smaller pieces for imaging.
Fresh sample 2: from DTU European Ossabaw Facility, pig no. 81. The pig was a 6
month old male. It was first anaesthetized then terminated. The distal part of the colon
was excised, fecal pellets were removed. Immersed in PBS and kept on dry ice shortly,
later cut into smaller pieces for imaging and stored on ice.
PBS was used for rinsing and keeping samples moist because it maintains pH, ionic
strength and salt concentration. The pH of PBS used was 7.4. The pH value could have
great effects on fluorescence, using PBS is a way to keep the pH value constant and not
have huge variation between imaging takes. Osmosis and ion concentration in PBS are
not toxic to cells.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Comparison of porcine and human digestive systems, from [18].
All imaging were performed at room temperature.
2.3
Data processing
2.3.1
OCT
C­scans from OCT imaging were exported as TIFF files. In order to analyse the scans in
en face view, and perform attenuation coefficients extraction, the C­scans are transformed
and modified (flattening and averaging) in MATLAB.
En face
The C­scans were loaded into MATLAB and then the dimensions of the stacks were rear­
ranged (the script is included in the Appendix A.2). No other alterations were performed in
this step. Usually, C­scans with 500 B­scans are selected for this procedure since there
are more B­scans in the direction the en face images are more detailed in these C­scans.
Flattening
Tissue surfaces are not usually flat. Flattening was done in MATLAB for easier comparison
(between A­scans) and A­scan averaging (the script is included in the Appendix A.1).
Note that the script for flattening does not always detect the sample surface correctly, B­
scans and areas where the surface detection was wrong were avoided when doing further
analysis. The program recognises the sample surface and then cut off the parts (in these
cases, air) above it.
A­scan and A­scan averaging
A­scans were noisy and it was difficult to separate tissue characteristics from noise. Av­
eraging was done by taking the rolling average of 10 neighbouring A­scans. 10 because
averaging more is not giving any more noise reduction and might lose structural details,
averaging less is not smoothing the A­scan enough (Figure 2.7).
Fitting and extracting the attenuation coefficients
Data from selected A­scan data (10­averaged) were extracted in ImageJ. Tissue layers
are identified by inspecting both the OCT image and the A­scan peaks in the signal ­ depth
8
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: A general view of OCT image stack processing.
plot. Then an exponential fit was plotted using the curve fitting tool in MATLAB. This is
because the exponential model from Beer’s law is used in this process.
According to Beer’s law:
I(z) ∝exp(−2sz).
(2.1)
A(z) =
!
I(z)
(2.2)
A(z) ∝Az=0exp(−tz)
(2.3)
Where I(z) is the OCT signal intensity, µt is the attenuation coefficient, z is depth, A(z)
is the OCT signal amplitude.
An exponential with one term in the curve fitting tool was chosen to be fitted on the signal­
depth data. The coefficient before the depth term is an estimate of the attenuation coeffi­
cient. The general model has the form of f(x) = a ∗exp(b ∗x), the coefficient b taken as
the attenuation coefficient estimate.
Statistics
A two­sample t­test was performed on the extracted attenuation coefficient estimated of
two types of samples. The aim was to see if fresh and frozen­thawed samples showed
a difference in the mean values of the attenuation coefficients. The results of all the
attenuation coefficient estimates were reported in a box plot.
2.3.2
Multiphoton microscopy
The images were processed in ImageJ. Brightness and contrast are adjusted to balance
good contrast and not lose too much information. Selected channels are merged to com­
pare the locations of different signals.
Software Icy was used to generate the orthogonal views of the 3D image stack. MATLAB
was used to visualise the image stacks in 3D and generate the 3D slice planes views as
well as the 3D volume view of the MPM image stack.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.6: The original B­scan (a) is compared with the processed B­scan after flattening
(b).
Figure 2.7: Different numbers for averaging A­scans are compared.
10
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:19==
3
Results
3.1
OCT
3.1.1
Structural
B­scan
OCT image stacks of both types of porcine colon samples are taken. Signals are collected
up to 1.0 ­ 1.2 mm deep into the tissue. Pixel sizes are both 4.1 μm in both vertical and
horizontal directions in the B­scans, while the distance between individual B­scans varies
depending on the number of B­scans taken and the dimension of the scan.
frozen­thawed
In an OCT B­scan of a frozen­thawed sample Figure 3.1, the mucosa layer including the
thin muscle layer of muscularis mucosae, and part of the submucosa layer can be ob­
served. Crypts can be observed at the top (mucosa) layer as tunnels or partial tunnels
(circular or elliptical areas), as the crypts are not always going straight and aligned. The
mucosa layer is usually several hundred microns thick until it comes to the thin muscle
layer of muscularis mucosae, which shows a stronger signal than the other layers. The
signal intensity is lower in the submucosa, where occasionally bright spots or bright hor­
izontal lines are observed. Signals decay to low levels in this layer as light has travelled
around 1 mm or more into the tissue. At certain places in the samples, the submucosa
layer detaches away from the muscularis mucosae layer, leaving a dark space in between.
Liquid (PBS) on the flat surface causes bright reflection.
fresh
The three layers can still be identified in the OCT images of fresh porcine colon samples.
Residue mucus shows as weakly scattering on top of the tissue surface. In the top layer
of mucosa, crypt openings are rarely visible, there is instead a strong signal at the top 150
μm of the mucosa, then the signal decays, until the muscularis mucosae layer. Some dark
space still exists between the muscularis mucosae layer and submucosa layer, although
huge gaps like the ones in frozen samples are not observed in the available samples.
Notice the bright vertical lines that originate from the top layer and travel down to the
deepest layer of tissue are observed in both types of samples.
en face
Frozen sample OCT images were flattened, then transformed into en face images. Both
of these en face images are from around 40 μm into the tissue surface. A distinctive
Figure 3.1: B­scan of a frozen­thawed porcine colon sample
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: B­scan of a fresh porcine colon sample
Figure 3.3: Flattened en face view of a frozen colon sample.
12
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.4: Flattened en face view of a fresh colon sample.
feature one can observe from the en face view of both types of samples is the crypts at
the top mucosa layer. Figure 3.3 and Figure 3.4 show the en face view at around 70 μm
beneath the tissue surface. Note that the darker patch at the top right corners of both
images are areas that the flattening algorithm did not recognise correctly and therefore
are not at the same depth as the rest of the image.
The difference in appearance can be observed between the two sample types. The crypt
openings in the image of a frozen sample are round areflective areas. In the fresh sample
image, the crypt openings are more often observed to be circular areas that are less
scattering than their surrounding tissue, while occasionally having a smaller areflective
spot in the centre.
Figure 3.5 shows a zoomed­in view of the en face images. Both image series start from
near the tissue surface (hence the bright surface reflections and dark lack of signals from
the air), moving deeper into the tissue by 20 μm increment. The difference in the crypt
openings patterns described above is sustained.
When viewing the en face images deeper into the tissue, bright spots come into view and
replace the dark spots of crypt openings, corresponding to the bright vertical lines seen
in the B­scans (Figure 3.1 and 3.2).
3.1.2
Attenuation coefficient extraction
Attenuation coefficient extraction was focused on the (top) mucosa layer(before muscu­
laris mucosae), method as described in Section 2.3.1. And in the box plot Figure 3.6 are
the attenuation coefficient estimates from frozen­thawed colon samples and fresh colon
samples.
The unit of the attenuation coefficients are converted to [mm−1]. Outliers of different order
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.5: Comparing flattened en face view of frozen and fresh colon samples with a
zoomed­in view. 20 μm increment deeper into the image stack from left to right.
Figure 3.6: Comparing extracted attenuation coefficients of frozen and fresh colon top
mucosa layer.
14
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:23==
of magnitudes have been removed.
The mean value of the attenuation coefficient of frozen sample mucosa layer is 1.8 mm−1,
standard deviation 0.5 mm−1; the mean value of the attenuation coefficient of fresh sample
mucosa layer is 3.2 mm−1, standard deviation 0.6 mm−1.
The difference in the distribution of the estimates from the two sample types is examined
by performing a two­sample t­test. The attenuation coefficient estimates of the two groups
have different means at 5% significance level, p ≪0.01.
3.2
Multiphoton microscopy
3.2.1
2D images
The multiphoton microscopy images of the mucosal surface were taken. For both types
of samples, no labelling or staining was applied. The 2D images are 512 μm x 512 μm in
size.
Frozen samples
4 different excitation wavelengths were tested for the imaging of frozen samples: 750 nm,
800 nm, 900 nm, and 1050 nm (Figure 3.7). The imaging position was not adjusted during
the acquisition, however, a shift in the field of view happened between the imaging of 800
nm excitation and 900 nm excitation. Crypts can be observed as the round regions that
lack of signals, around 50 ­ 80 μm in diameter. Some of these dark regions are elongated,
as some of the crypts are not oriented straightly perpendicular to the surface and therefore
show the cross­section in this view.
The images from 750 nm excitation(Figure 3.7(a) and (b)), as well as the image of 900 nm
excitation, 500­550 nm channel(Figure 3.7(e)), have lower signal­to­noise ratio compared
to other images.
Strong two­photon fluorescence signal spots are present in the images, most of the bright
spots are under 5 μm in diameter. A ring around certain crypts can be observed in the
MPM images though details of cell lining cannot be seen, an example is in Figure 3.8
pointed out by the arrows. In the Figure 3.7(g)(1050 nm excitation, 500 ­ 550 nm filter),
the second harmonic generation signals show fibre structures in the mucosa layer. A
merged image (Figure 3.9) of MPM and SHG shows how the two types of signals are
located.
Fresh samples Based on a spectral analysis of non­labeling MPM imaging of freshly
excised human colon [12] and the results from imaging the frozen samples, 5 excitation
wavelengths were used for the imaging of fresh porcine colon samples: 700 nm, 730 nm,
800 nm, 900 nm, and 1050 nm (Figure 3.10). The imaging position was kept the same
during acquisition, however, the images exhibit slight differences in the field of view.
In the images taken using 700 nm and 730 nm excitation, the structure of the colon mucosa
is not recognisable in images Figure 3.10(a) and Figure 3.10(c), and Figure 3.10(b) and
Figure 3.10(d) have low signal­to­noise ratio, though still showing structural traits of the
colon mucosa. Epithelial cells lining the crypts can be observed to surround the crypt
lumen in images Figure 3.10(e)­(j), which were not observed in the frozen sample imaging.
Figure 3.10(i) shows the SHG signal from fiber structures.
In Figure 3.11, the SHG signal (cyan) image overlays with the MPM image. It shows
where the SHG signals and the immune cells in lamina propria (round cells with bright
signal, magenta) are located.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.7: The 2D images of frozen colon sample, taken using TIMAHC.
16
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.8: MPM image of a frozen sample taken at 900 nm excitation, filter 570 ­ 640 nm
(Figure 3.7(f)). A ring is visible surrounding the crypt (arrow).
Figure 3.9: Merged image of the SHG image (Figure 3.7(g)) and MPM image (Fig­
ure 3.7(h)) at 1050 nm excitation 570 ­ 640 nm filter, frozen sample.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
17
==PAGE:26==
3.2.2
3D images
3D image stacks were taken using the multiphoton microscope to examine the imaging
depth and the crypt structures. Figure 3.12 shows that crypt tunnels can be viewed and
tracked for up to 200 μm into the tissue.
3D image stacks of the fresh colon sample were also taken. Although the MPM imaging of
the fresh sample showed more structural details as seen in the 2D images in Figure 3.10,
there were parts in the field of view that had extraordinarily strong signal intensities and
disrupted the imaging. A visual comparison with the frozen sample 3D stack is not pre­
sented here due to the poor quality of the fresh sample 3D image stack.
18
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.10: The 2D images of fresh colon sample, taken using TIMAHC.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.11: Merged MPM image and SHG image of the fresh colon sample. 1050 nm
excitation 500 ­ 550 nm filter(Figure 3.10(i)) in cyan, merged with 1050 nm excitation 570
­ 640 nm filter (Figure 3.10(j)) in magenta.
20
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:29==
(a) 3D slice planes view of the MPM image stack.
(b) 3D volume view of the MPM image stack.
(c) Orthogonal views of the 3D image stack, 70
μm in depth.
Figure 3.12: MPM image stack of a frozen porcine colon sample. The image stack is
taken with 800 nm excitation, 570 ­ 640 nm filter.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:31==
4
Discussion
4.1
Assessing on the imaging systems
4.1.1
VivoSight OCT
The OCT system used for imaging is the commercial system VivoSight, commonly used
in clinical practices and research in skin imaging. It uses a patented multi­beam tech­
nology to improve resolution as well as imaging depth. The system is easy to operate,
and high­quality images are acquired using the current settings. Although it is also the
case that one cannot easily change the settings such as the position of the focal plane,
or choosing to take more than 500 B­scans within one C­scan.
Unsolvable image jitter when taking small image stacks
It is an option to take 1.0 mm × 1.0 mm × 1.9 mm C­scans. If one chooses to take 500
B­scans in this stack, pixel width along the y­axis will in theory be 2 μm and able to make
full use of the 7.5 μm lateral resolution. But when taking a C­scan of such dimension, the
images jittered in the order of 50 μm. From correspondence with VivoSight, the jitter is
known to be caused by the laser and cannot be avoided. One would need to adapt tools
for automatic registration in order to fix the images and generate a corrected en face stack
if one wishes to the have fully­utilised lateral resolution in both x­ and y­axis.
Performance metrics
Point spread function (PSF) and modulation transfer function (MTF) are two important
metrics for OCT imaging systems. To be able to interpret biological sample images and
extract optical properties accurately, it would be optimal to measure the PSF and MTF,
make adjustments and interpret images accordingly. Methods for measuring the PSF and
MTF have been reported [19, 20]. For further investigation into OCT imaging using this
system, the next step would be imaging phantom samples with known dimensions and
performing the measurements.
4.1.2
TIMAHC multiphoton microscope
Emission filters
The custom­made TIMAHC microscope is usually used for imaging biological samples
that are tagged, which is why the two bandpass filters of specific ranges (500 ­ 550 nm
and 570 ­ 640 nm) were installed. Although the filter choices were limited and not optimal
for autofluorescence signals, according to spectral analysis of fresh human colon, autoflu­
orescence from certain cells is emitted within the wavelength ranges of both filters [12].
Figure 4.1 shows that using 730 nm excitation, part of the emission from epithelial cells,
immune cells, and fibrous structures can all be detected within the ranges of bandpass
filters used in TIMAHC (filter ranges marked by the black squares).
It is confirmed by the TIMAHC images of the fresh colon sample in Figure 3.10 that aut­
ofluorescence and SHG signals from certain cells and structures are picked up within the
wavelength ranges of the filters. Comparing Figure 3.10(c)­(h) to the Figure 4.1, most
of the signals coming from the immune cells within lamina propria is as expected (dis­
regarding the unknown background or laser light bleed through in Figure 3.10(c)). The
730 nm excitation image Figure 3.10(d) shows lower contrast, but signals from epithelial
cells inside the crypts can be observed, the weak signals from epithelial cells layer can
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: The spectral analysis result from [12]. The fluorescence intensity ­ emission
wavelength plots of three excitation wavelengths are presented, the coloured lines rep­
resents different signal source: epithelial cells (green), immune cells (red), and fibrous
structure (yellow). The black squares are added to these plots to indicate the wavelength
ranges of the filters used in TIMAHC.
be clearly separated from the crypt openings. Due to the limitation of the filters as well
as the laser tuning range, SHG signals from fibrous structures were excited at 1050 nm
and expected at 525 nm (within the 500 ­ 550 nm filter). Both Figure 3.7(g) Figure 3.10(i)
showed SHG signals from fibrous structures in frozen and fresh samples.
Power measurements
The fluorescence intensity of two­photon fluorescence is proportional to the square of the
intensity of the excitation light. In order to confirm that the signals are two­photon fluores­
cence, one should examine if the fluorescence intensity and the laser power (intensity of
the excitation light) are exhibiting this square­law. Such measurements were attempted
when imaging the fresh samples, images were taken at 5 varying power levels with 900
nm excitation. The power level is controlled by entering the desired input laser power in
the control program of the laser, which does not equal the power of the excitation light
arriving at the tissue. An attempt to measure the laser power after the objective was
also not successful, due to the available power meter having an upper limit of only 50
mW, while the expected power levels are much higher and therefore cannot be measured
accurately. There is also the challenge that the laser power may further dampen in the
aqueous solution (PBS in this case) when travelling from the water­dipping objective to
the tissue surface.
Although the square­law was not confirmed, the fluorescence signals are expected to be
from two­photon excitation. The TIMAHC is designed and built for multiphoton imaging,
and the results are comparable with previous research on multiphoton imaging. The SHG
signals showed that the nonlinear optical process was able to take place under the ex­
citation light conditions. Nevertheless, an intensity ­ power measurement would still be
a good measure and provide insight into the minimum excitation light intensity needed
for two­photon excitation, it could provide important parameters for the design of novel
microscopes such as a two­photon light­sheet microscope.
Shifting field of view during imaging
An unintended shift of field of view was observed between the 2D images. While taking the
2D images series (Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.10) respectively, only the excitation wavelength
and occasionally the input power level was adjusted on the control program. It was most
24
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:33==
obvious when switching the excitation wavelength from 800 nm to 900 nm in the frozen
sample imaging (Figure 3.7(c)(d) to (e)(f) ). The fresh sample imaging series showed
changes between images of different excitation wavelengths, even when they were not
likely caused by differences in excited fluorophores. The immune cells’ signals through
Figure 3.10(f), (h), and (i) seem to be from different locations in the field of view.
To investigate the shifts in the two image series, images from different excitation wave­
lengths are merged in Figure 4.2. The difference in the frozen sample imaging from 800
nm to 1050 nm excitation is huge, the two images are hardly overlapping. It is possible that
the sample was moved unintentionally during the imaging process from the movements
of the table or floor, or that the tissue was very uneven and the two images are imaged at
different depths of the tissue due to chromatic aberrations. The shift in the fresh sample
imaging from 800 nm to 1050 nm was relevantly small, most of the features in the images
are the same, although with a general trend that the 800 nm image is slightly towards
the top­right direction compared to the 1050 nm image. This could either be caused by a
slight movement of the sample, or it could be that the two images are focused on different
planes in the sample, speculated to be caused by chromatic aberrations.
Figure 4.2: Respectively merged images from frozen and fresh sample 2D imaging to
visualise the view shift during acquisition using different excitation wavelengths.
4.2
Assessing the samples
In total, two sets of frozen samples and two sets of fresh samples were imaged in this
project. All of the samples were imaged with the OCT system, while only one set of
frozen sample and one set of fresh sample were imaged with TIMAHC MPM.
Unprotected freezing of biological tissue can easily cause damage to the cells, by both the
mechanical damage from the ice crystals piercing the cells and that when water turns into
ice, the concentration of the solute rises and cells respond to the osmotic change [21]. It is
to be expected, that the frozen porcine colon samples have undergone damaging freezing
and thawing processes, as they were not carefully treated with controlled cryopreservation
protocols. The MPM images showed the difference between the frozen and the fresh
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
25
==PAGE:34==
samples, most noticeably that the epithelial cells can only be observed in the fresh colon
sample.
The limited number of examined samples means that investigation into various factors
was not available. The age, diet, body size of the animals are likely to be very different. It
would be of interest to do a series of imaging of samples of a known source and have more
control over the variables. For example, one could image the freshly excised sample and
then freeze the sample for later imaging. Co­registration and comparison of the images
would be valid.
It should be noticed that when receiving the freshly excised sample used in TIMAHC MPM
imaging, dry ice was used for cooling instead of ice, and it has caused the PBS and parts
of the tissue to freeze up. The samples were immediately removed from the dry ice within
around 10 minutes and were kept on ice before imaging with TIMAHC, later kept in the
fridge at 4 °C before OCT imaging. It was not planned and should have been avoided, it
also calls for more experiments with imaging the freshly excised samples.
The sample surfaces are usually not flat. Putting a coverslip on top of the sample could
effectively flatten the surface and have more even and regular images, especially for
MPM imaging. This was not adopted because of an interest in mimicking the condition of
colonoscopy.
The pH of the sample was maintained by keeping the sample in PBS. This was used so
that the pH value will be stable. It is known that fluorescence can be greatly influenced
by the pH, and in this project, the stability during MPM imaging was considered a priority
instead of mimicking the pH conditions in the colon of a living animal. It is an important
variable and should be considered in future research when it comes to translating the
results into in vivo conditions.
4.3
OCT attenuation coefficients
The mean value of attenuation coefficient from the top mucosa of frozen­thawed samples
was lower than that from the fresh samples. The OCT images also show that in the frozen­
thawed samples, top mucosa was looser, crypt openings are bigger. It could be that the
damage from the freezing and thawing process has made the tissue more loose and less
scattering.
Initially, extracting attenuation coefficients from all three recognisable layers in the OCT
images was attempted. An example is shown in Figure 4.3.
After repeating the fitting for several A­scans, it shows that the second layer (muscularis
mucosae) is too thin and there are not always enough data points for a valid fitting. And
the fitting of the third layer (submucosa) requires establishing some criteria to distinguish
background from weak signals. Eventually, a decision was made to focus on the fitting
and extraction of attenuation coefficients of only the first layer.
The exponential model is a simple model for tissue attenuation that does not take multi­
ple scattering into consideration, which may not always fit well enough with the complex
biological tissue. The selection of starting and ending points in an A­scan to fit is cur­
rently manually done, although automation of this process could be developed in further
research. Several outliers have come up during the fitting, but they were at the order of
100 mm−1 and were disregarded.
The results from Section 3.1.2 were of the same magnitude (1 ­ 10 mm−1) as the known
reduced scattering coefficients of soft tissue [22]. Scattering coefficients extracted from
26
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.3: Example for fitting exponential model on all three layers of a fresh colon sam­
ple OCT A­scan. (a), the position of the A­scan used in the fitting in this example is marked
by the yellow line. (b), the A­scan plotted as OCT signal against distance into the tissue.
(c),(d),and (e) are the fitting of the top of the mucosa (first layer), the muscularis mucosae
(second layer), and the submucosa (third layer). Note that the attenuation coefficients in
the fits are shown here in the unit [μm−1].
OCT images of freshly excised human colon specimens were reported in the research
by Zeng et al. using the same model [10] . They compared the extracted scattering
coefficient from excised normal colon tissues, cancerous specimens, and a colonic polyp.
The reported mean scattering coefficient from 5 different samples varied from 2.50 mm−1
to 8.21 mm−1.
The extracted attenuation coefficients from fresh porcine colon samples in this project
were comparable to that of the reported fresh human colon samples. The results from
this study also suggest how much the extracted attenuation coefficients can vary between
samples from different individuals. A larger sample size from more individuals is needed
for establishing any standards for diagnosis based on extracted attenuation coefficients.
4.4
Multimodal imaging
4.4.1
OCT imaging
Contrast in OCT images comes from the scattering properties of the sample. Different
tissue types in a biological sample can be distinguished by their scattering properties, in
this project the OCT images showed three identifiable layers in the porcine colon samples
(as seen in Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2). From the B­scans, another feature that can be
observed is the vertical lines of strong signal intensity that occurs around crypt openings.
This feature was reported by other studies of colon OCT imaging [23, 6], and was sug­
gested to be used as an indicator of the colon tissue being normal and not cancerous
[6].
The muscularis mucosae layer is usually bright in the OCT images. This could be because
muscularis mucosae is a layer of smooth muscle that is more densely packed in a certain
way that is more scattering than the rest of the mucosa or the dense connective tissue
submucosa.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
27
==PAGE:36==
The OCT modality also allows penetration depth greater than 1 mm. Combined with
the contrast that differentiates tissue types, OCT images provides general morphology
information of the biological sample with a large field of view. OCT imaging allows fast
visualisation of the mucosa. Since the muscularis mucosae layer can be identified, any
abnormal thickening of the mucosa or degradation of the muscularis mucosae can be
noticed in an OCT image.
Besides the morphological information, OCT images also provide the opportunity for ex­
tracting optical properties. The difference between frozen and fresh porcine colon tissue
texture were also noticeable in the mean attenuation coefficients of the two types of sam­
ples. Optical properties of biological tissue could also aid the identification of abnormali­
ties.
4.4.2
Multiphoton microscopy imaging
The contrast in multiphoton microscopy images comes from various endogenous autoflu­
orescence molecules and second harmonic generation from molecules of specific struc­
tures (e.g. collagen).
Figure 4.4: The structures in a MPM image of fresh porcine colon sample taken at 900
nm excitation, filter 570 ­ 640 nm (Figure 3.10(h)). The crypt (white dotted line circle), cell
nuclei(blue oval), and cells in lamina propria (yellow rectangle) can be seen on the image.
Three features of the MPM fresh colon images are marked in Figure 4.4. The cell nuclei
of epithelial cells are dark round areas surrounded by signals from the cytoplasm. The
immune cells in lamina propria between the crypts show strong signals. The immune cells
(plasma cells, lymphocytes, eosinophils, and macrophages) are observed to fluoresce at
most excitation wavelengths, possibly due to the inclusions that contain broad­spectrum
emission molecules such as lipofuscin inside these cells [12, 24]. Fluorophores in the
cells also include NAD(P)H and FAD, signals from FAD were expected at 800 nm, 900
nm, 730 nm, and 700 nm excitation, and signals from NAD(P)H were expected in 730 and
700 nm excitation images.
The size of cell nuclei is an important indicator of cancer, the MPM images showed po­
tential for measuring cell nucleus diameters, although that would require the microscope
to be calibrated.
28
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:37==
The fluorophores in the frozen samples are not clear. The fluorescence signals (see
Figure 3.8) are spots with diameters too small to be mammalian cells. They might be
residual inclusions in the immune cells.
From the 3D MPM image stack in fig. 3.12, it can be seen that the tracking crypt structure
is possible, and the TIMAHC MPM system gives a penetration depth of around 200 μm in
the frozen sample. Although the image stack from the fresh sample is not presented here
due to not enough images were taken to construct a continuous 3D model, MPM can also
be used to do 3D imaging of fresh samples.
4.4.3
Comparison and combination
Figure 4.5: Comparison between the OCT en face image and the MPM image of a frozen
porcine colon sample. The region in the OCT en face image (marked by the yellow box)
is zoomed in and compared side by side with a MPM image. The sharp dark areas in
the OCT en face image (not in the zoomed in region) are caused by incorrect surface
registration in the flattening script.
A side­by­side comparison of the OCT and MPM images is presented in Figure 4.5 and
Figure 4.6. The comparisons show how OCT provides a greater field of view, while the
MPM, with a superior resolution, allows inspection of cellular structures and sub­cellular
structures (cell nuclei). Neither of the two modalities requires applying extra dye or stain to
gain contrast, yet have provided various information about the imaged biological samples
as a potential optical histology technique.
4.5
Outlook
Further research can extend the depth of this multimodal combination by investigating
image co­registration methods, sample variability, and automation of the attenuation co­
efficient extraction process. Along with the developments in miniaturization and fibre op­
tics, a OCT­MPM colonoscopy will be put into clinical use and aid colon screenings or
surgeries.
Another way to further develop the multimodal idea is to upgrade the modalities to improve
imaging quality and contrast to classify cells and tissue types. Combinations such as
spatially off­set OCT and multiphoton light­sheet microscopy could be attempted. The fast
volumetric imaging from light­sheet microscopy could be valuable for such an advanced
imaging system.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.6: Comparison between the OCT en face image and the MPM image of a fresh
porcine colon sample. The region in the OCT en face image marked by the yellow box is
zoomed in and compared side by side with a MPM image. The small, sharp dark areas
in the OCT en face image (outside the zoomed in region) are caused by incorrect surface
registration in the flattening script.
30
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:39==
5
Conclusion
Imaging of porcine colon samples was performed using the complementary modalities
of OCT and multiphoton microscopy. Sample handling methods were established for
imaging purposes.
With the OCT system, image stacks of the colon samples were taken and processed for
interpretation and evaluation of structural information. Three distinctive tissue layers were
observed in the OCT B­scans. Crypt pattern differences between fresh and frozen­thawed
colon samples were observed in the en face view.
Attenuation coefficients of the colon mucosa (not including muscularis mucosae) layer
were extracted based on the Beer’s law model, the mean values of the attenuation coef­
ficients of fresh and frozen­thawed samples were compared and tested to be statistically
different.
Multiphoton microscopy imaging of both types of colon samples provided a comparison in
morphology and fluorescence signal differences. Different cell types and cell nuclei were
observed in the fresh sample imaging. A 3D image stack of a frozen colon sample was
examined to evaluate the imaging depth of the label­free multiphoton microscopy.
This project has demonstrated 2D and 3D OCT and multiphoton microscopy imaging of
porcine colon samples and suggested interpretations and analysis, potentially providing
aid for future studies. The project does have the limitation that only a small number of
samples were acquired and imaged. Further studies in biological sample imaging and
optical properties extraction could aim at processing larger sample sizes and investigating
the variability between individuals.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[1]
Hyuna Sung et al. “Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of inci­
dence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries”. In: CA: a cancer
journal for clinicians 71.3 (2021), pp. 209–249.
[2]
Jasper LA Vleugels, Yark Hazewinkel, and Evelien Dekker. “Morphological classifi­
cations of gastrointestinal lesions”. In: Best Practice & Research Clinical Gastroen­
terology 31.4 (2017), pp. 359–367.
[3]
Ben Glover, Julian Teare, and Nisha Patel. “The status of advanced imaging tech­
niques for optical biopsy of colonic polyps”. In: Clinical and Translational Gastroen­
terology 11.3 (2020).
[4]
Wolfgang Drexler, James G Fujimoto, et al. Optical coherence tomography: tech­
nology and applications. Vol. 2. Springer, 2015.
[5]
Maciej Wojtkowski et al. “In vivo human retinal imaging by Fourier domain optical
coherence tomography”. In: Journal of biomedical optics 7.3 (2002), pp. 457–463.
[6]
Yifeng Zeng et al. “Real­time colorectal cancer diagnosis using PR­OCT with deep
learning”. In: Optical Coherence Tomography. Optical Society of America. 2020,
OW2E–5.
[7]
Cristina L Saratxaga et al. “Characterization of Optical Coherence Tomography Im­
ages for Colon Lesion Differentiation under Deep Learning”. In: Applied Sciences
11.7 (2021), p. 3119.
[8]
Shuang Chang and Audrey K Bowden. “Review of methods and applications of at­
tenuation coefficient measurements with optical coherence tomography”. In: Jour­
nal of biomedical optics 24.9 (2019), p. 090901.
[9]
Peijun Gong et al. “Parametric imaging of attenuation by optical coherence tomog­
raphy: review of models, methods, and clinical translation”. In: Journal of biomedical
optics 25.4 (2020), p. 040901.
[10]
Yifeng Zeng et al. “The angular spectrum of the scattering coefficient map reveals
subsurface colorectal cancer”. In: Scientific reports 9.1 (2019), pp. 1–11.
[11]
Warren R Zipfel, Rebecca M Williams, and Watt W Webb. “Nonlinear magic: mul­
tiphoton microscopy in the biosciences”. In: Nature biotechnology 21.11 (2003),
pp. 1369–1377.
[12]
Takahiro Matsui et al. “Non­labeling multiphoton excitation microscopy as a novel
diagnostic tool for discriminating normal tissue and colorectal cancer lesions”. In:
Scientific reports 7.1 (2017), pp. 1–9.
[13]
Lucas Kreiß et al. “Label­free in vivo histopathology of experimental colitis via 3­
channel multiphoton endomicroscopy”. In: Gastroenterology 159.3 (2020), pp. 832–
834.
[14]
Ashwathama Dilipkumar et al. “Label­Free Multiphoton Endomicroscopy for Mini­
mally Invasive In Vivo Imaging”. In: Advanced Science 6.8 (2019), p. 1801735.
[15]
Fabián Čaja et al. “Local Immune Changes in Early Stages of Inflammation and Car­
cinogenesis Correlate with the Collagen Scaffold Changes of the Colon Mucosa”.
In: Cancers 13.10 (2021), p. 2463.
[16]
Zahra Turani et al. “Optical radiomic signatures derived from optical coherence to­
mography images improve identification of melanoma”. In: Cancer research 79.8
(2019), pp. 2021–2030.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
33
==PAGE:42==
[17]
David G Rosenegger et al. “A high performance, cost­effective, open­source micro­
scope for scanning two­photon microscopy that is modular and readily adaptable”.
In: PloS one 9.10 (2014), e110475.
[18]
Liara M Gonzalez, Adam J Moeser, and Anthony T Blikslager. “Porcine models of
digestive disease: the future of large animal translational research”. In: Translational
research 166.1 (2015), pp. 12–27.
[19]
Peter D Woolliams and Peter H Tomlins. “Estimating the resolution of a commercial
optical coherence tomography system with limited spatial sampling”. In: Measure­
ment Science and Technology 22.6 (2011), p. 065502.
[20]
PD Woolliams and PH Tomlins. “The modulation transfer function of an optical co­
herence tomography imaging system in turbid media”. In: Physics in Medicine &
Biology 56.9 (2011), p. 2855.
[21]
David E Pegg. “Principles of cryopreservation”. In: Cryopreservation and freeze­
drying protocols (2007), pp. 39–57.
[22]
Steven L Jacques. “Optical properties of biological tissues: a review”. In: Physics in
Medicine & Biology 58.11 (2013), R37.
[23]
Pei­Lin Hsiung et al. “Ultrahigh­resolution and 3­dimensional optical coherence to­
mography ex vivo imaging of the large and small intestines”. In: Gastrointestinal
endoscopy 62.4 (2005), pp. 561–574.
[24]
B Sainz Jr, Irene Miranda­Lorenzo, and C Heeschen. “The fuss over lipo “fuss” cin:
not all autofluorescence is the same”. In: European Journal of Histochemistry: EJH
59.1 (2015).
34
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:43==
A
MATLAB scripts
A.1
Loading and flattening the tissue surface of an OCT
image stack
R
WW `2/BM;  KmHiB@7`K2 iB77 7BH2
k
7BH2 4 ^yjyN7`2b?b+jXiB7^c WSmi vQm` 7BH2MK2 ?2`2
j
Q#D 4 hB77U7BH2-^`^Vc
9
8
M6`K2b 4 8yyc WMmK#2` Q7 "b+Mb BM i?2 /ib2i
e
d
7Q` B 4 R,M6`K2b
3
b2i.B`2+iQ`vUQ#D-BVc
N
iKT4`2/UQ#DVc
Ry
BK;U,-,-BV 4 `;#k;`vUiKTVc
RR
2M/
Rk
Rj
R9
WW AM +b2 vQm rMi iQ i`v 2tTQ`iBM; b 
/B+QK 7BH2- vQm +M mb2 i?Bb +Q/2XXX
,
R8
WBK; 4 /B+QK`2/U(6QH/2` -6BH2-^X/+K ^)Vc
Re
Rd
WW lbBM; 2/;2 /2i2+iBQM iQ 7Hii2M i?2 iBbbm2 bm`7+2
R3
Wi?Bb +M #2 mb27mH 7Q` i`vBM; iQ HQQF i 2M7+2 THM2b i  bBKBH` /2Ti? XXX
BM i?2 iBbbm2
RN
ky
(Lx-Lt-Lv)4bBx2UBK;Vc
kR
kk
kj
Wam`7+2 /2i2+iBQM mbBM; *MMv 2/;2 7BHi2`
k9
7B;m`2URVc+H7c
k8
7Q` vv4R,Lv
ke
AMih2KT4BK;U,-,-vvVc
kd
bm`7 4 2/;2UAMih2KT -^+MMv^-yXj-k8Vc
k3
bm`7"_4 #rKQ`T?Ubm`7-^#`B/;2^Vc
kN
(TMs- TMu) 4 7BM/Ubm`7"_Vc
jy
TMy4x2`QbUR-LtVc
jR
TMyU7HBTm/UTMuVV 4 7HBTm/UTMsVc
jk
jj
am`7AM/U,-vvV4TMyc
j9
BK;2b+UAMih2KTVc+QHQ`KTU;`vVc
j8
?QH/ QMcHBM2UR,Lt-TMy-^*QHQ`^-^`2/^-^GBM2qB/i?^-jVc?QH/ Q77ciBiH2UXXX
MmKkbi`UvvVV
je
/`rMQrc
jd
2M/
j3
jN
WJ2/BM 7BHi2` HQM; i?2 bm`7+2
9y
am`7AM/64`QmM/UK2/7BHikUam`7AM/ -(ey-jy)-^bvKK2i`B+^VVc
9R
am`7AM/*QK#4KtUam`7AM/ -am`7AM/6Vc
9k
9j
99
98
W6Hii2M
9e
am`7AM/2tL2;4@am`7AM/*QK#c
9d
93
WAMioQH4bBM;H2UBK;Vfk88c
9N
AMioQH 4 BK;c
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
35
==PAGE:44==
8y
8R
7Q` vv4R,Lv
8k
7Q` tt4R,Lt
8j
BK;U,-tt-vvV4+B`+b?B7iUAMioQHU,-tt-vvV-(am`7AM/2tL2;Utt-vvV-y-y)Vc
89
xn+`QTT2/Utt-vvV 4 9ey Y am`7AM/2tL2;Utt-vvVc
88
8e
QH/Ji`Bt 4 BK;UR,xn+`QTT2/Utt-vvV-tt-vvVc
8d
M2rJi`Bt 4 x2`QbU9ey-RVc W h?2 M2r Ki`Bt UrBi? x2`QbV
83
M2rJi`BtUR,xn+`QTT2/Utt-vvVV 4 QH/Ji`Btc W Pp2`HT i?2 Q`B;BMH XXX
Ki`Bt BM i?2 M2r Ki`Bt
8N
ey
7Hii2M2/U,-tt-vvV 4 M2rJi`Btc
eR
ek
2M/
ej
2M/
e9
e8
bp2biB77UmBMi3U7Hii2M2/V-^yjyN7`2b?b+jn7HiXiB7^Vc WbpBM; i?2 7Hii2M2/ XXX
BK;2
ee
J 4 KQpK2MU7Hii2M2/ -Ry-kVc W`QHHBM; Ry@p2`;2 Q7 HH i?2 @b+Mb
ed
bp2biB77UmBMi3UJV-^7`2b?TB;+QHQMnb+M8nRyp`;7HiXiB7^Vc
A.2
Creating an en face view of the OCT image stack
R
WW `2/BM;  KmHiB@7`K2 iB77 7BH2
k
7BH2 4 (^yjyN7`2b?b+RXiB7^)c WSmi vQm` 7BH2MK2 ?2`2
j
Q#D 4 hB77U7BH2-^`^Vc
9
8
M6`K2b 4 8yyc WMmK#2` Q7 "b+Mb BM i?2 /ib2i
e
d
7Q` B 4 R,M6`K2b
3
b2i.B`2+iQ`vUQ#D-BVc
N
iKT4`2/UQ#DVc
Ry
BK;U,-,-BV 4 `;#k;`vUiKTVc
RR
2M/
Rk
Rj
WpBbmH +?2+F B7 i?2 BK;2 HQQFb b[m`2 i /2Ti? Ryy
R9
BK;2b+Ub[m22x2UBK;URyy-,-,VVV
R8
tBb b[m`2
Re
7` 4 b[m22x2UBK;URyy-,-,VVc
Rd
R3
7Q` B 4 R,9ey
RN
iKT 4 BK`2bBx2Ub[m22x2UBK;UB-,-,VV -(R98e-R98e)Vc
ky
BK;kU,-,-BV4iKTc
kR
WBK;j 4 T2`Kmi2UBK;k -(j k R)Vc
kk
2M/
kj
k9
+H2` QTiBQMbc
k8
bp2biB77UmBMi3UBK;kV- (^yjyN7`2b?b+RnMQi7Hi2M7+2XiB7^)Vc
36
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:45==
B
Attenuation coefficients
B.1
The results from fitting the exponential model
Attenuation coefficient [mm−1]
Fresh colon samples
Frozen­thawed colon samples
2.861
2.719
3.089
2.07
3.624
2.188
3.892
1.6
2.219
2.179
2.864
2.523
3.238
2
3.188
1.442
3.959
2.183
3.295
2.086
3.599
2.026
3.683
2.29
3.107
0.9845
2.743
1.683
4.841
1.589
2.802
1.787
3.707
1.961
2.45
1.355
2.041
1.988
2.007
2.628
4.716
1.359
2.764
0.8532
2.443
1.456
3.468
1.174
3.141
0.8046
3.548
1.383
3.615
1.738
3.525
1.619
4.404
1.276
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
37
==PAGE:46==
4.051
1.512
2.583
1.56
2.982
2.619
2.28
2.01
3.197
2.032
2.908
1.453
3.613
1.321
2.422
1.584
2.466
1.886
2.612
2.081
2.832
1.151
2.779
1.654
3.069
2.624
3.079
2.851
2.324
1.826
2.806
2.256
3.885
1.769
3.828
1.656
4.233
1.546
3.249
2.294
3.364
1.746
4.24
2.702
3.861
2.155
3.86
2.587
3.402
1.836
3.631
2.466
3.654
2.229
2.968
2.171
3.091
2.395
3.253
1.817
3.376
1.532
3.599
1.954
B.2
Statistics results
38
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:47==
Figure B.1: Results from using ttest2 function in MATLAB.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
39
==PAGE:48==
C
OCT images of tissue features
Although not discussed in the report, some OCT images captured features of the colon
tissue.
40
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
==PAGE:49==
Figure C.1: Possible lymphoid follicle opening in a fresh colon sample.
Figure C.2: Possible innominate grooves (the grooves in the en face view), fresh colon
sample.
Multimodal Imaging of Colon Cancer­Related Samples
41
