==PAGE:1==
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE
SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
Master Thesis
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER
ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
Master Thesis
Marts, 2022
By
Jesse Thomas Za Iap
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemical Engineering, Brovej, Building 229,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.kt.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was conducted over a period of seven month at the National Food In-
stitute Research Group for Bioactives. It a partial fulfilment for the degree MSc in
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering.
Jesse Thomas Za Iap - s183172
Signature
Date
ii
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
11 / 03 / 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
UVB radiation triggers common metabolic responses in microalgae. For N.oceania
this also includes several increases in vitamin D3 levels.
Only recently, it has
been demonstrated that enhanced UVB increased the vitamin D3 amount in a
dose-dependent manner in N.oceanica. In the present study, the impact of culti-
vation parameters such as UV, temperature, salinity, pH and culture volume on
biomass productivity, vitamin D3 and fatty acids composition in outdoor cultiva-
tion of N.oceanica was investigated. Furthermore, experiments on the interactive
effect of indoor UVB and light duration on cell density, vitamin D3 and fatty acids
composition was conducted. The study also looked into whether the ability to pro-
duce vitamin D3 was strain-specific and whether the processing steps involved in
biomass production had any impact on vitamin D3 content in N.oceaninca.
The results show that temperature and UV were those factors which gave the rea-
sonable explanation for the change in biomass observed throughout January, March,
April, June, July, August, September and October. It was demonstrated that cul-
ture cultivated under indoor UVB dose of 7.4 vitD3 kJ/m2 and visible light with
intensity of 100 umol/m2*s for a light regime of 24:00 hr showed the highest biomass
production. When the light regime was changed to 18:06 hr, no growth was observed
in the 4 days of treatment period. For the culture cultivated in the dark, the UVB
treatment reduced the cell density and was lower than that of the culture cultivated
in a light regime of 24:00 hr. It was suggested that a combined effect of changing in
UVB dose mediated by differences in cell density between the culture and the role
of visible light were attributed to the observed difference in vitamin D3 content and
fatty acids composition.
Furthermore, UVB dose of 7.4 vitD3 kJ/m2 in the presence of visible light induced
higher amounts of vitamin D3 in the strain from Israel compared to the strain from
Norway. The MUFAs and SAFAs level was also different between the two control
groups. However, the UVB treatment did not show any significant change in the
fatty acids composition for each strain. The result on the processing steps impact on
N.oceanica ability to produce vitamin D3 under UVB exposure of 7.4 vitD3 kJ/m2
shows that harvested biomass after centrifugation had no significant difference in
the content of vitamin D3 compared to the living growing culture. Only the freeze-
dried biomass had significantly lower vitamin D3 content of 0.48±0.1µg/100g DW
of vitamin D3.
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I must admit that writing this section was the easiest part of the report.
It is
mainly because in this section I can share and express my gratitude towards those
individuals who have been through my last step of ending my master program. First
and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Jette Jacobsen,Petra Ložnjak
Švarc and Naama Segal for the professional support and feedback they provided me
during our meetings. Especially Petra for always helping me throughout my work
in the microalgae lab. And I would like to thank Claus and Peter for whom without
their help, I could not have achieved biological experiments with microalagae in the
due time. It would also be quite challenging for me to not mention my deep and
sincere thanks to Inge and Heidi who helped and guided me in the laboratory work.
At last, I would like to mention, Dhasu, Marie and Breeththa for the moral support
and helping me to reach the finish line with my report.
To my lovely family and God, thanks for being in my life in any circumstances.
iv
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background from vitamin D perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Microalgae and vitamin D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Hypothesis and objective of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Microalgae
6
2.1
Microalgae historical background and its application
. . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Bioactive compound derived from microalgae . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Microalgae cultivation and abiotic factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Microalgae processing on large scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Experimental design
21
3.1
Study 1-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Cultivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
UVB dose and culture sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Vitamin D analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Fatty acids composition determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results and Discussions
28
4.1
Study 1: Vitamin D3 and fatty acids in a strain of N. oceanica culti-
vated in outdoor ponds in Israel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Study 2: The interactive effect of indoor UVB and light duration on
N.oceanica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Study 3: The effect of UVB on vitamin D3 and fatty acids composi-
tion between two different strains of N.oceanica . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Study 4: N.oceanica ability to synthesize vitamin D3 at different
stage in microalgae processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Conclusion and future perspectives
41
5.1
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Bibliography
43
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
v
==PAGE:8==
A X-card for reference samples
49
B Data for cultivation parameters at outdoor ponds in Israel
51
vi
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:9==
Nomenculture
• UVB Ultraviolet-B
• UVC Ultraviolet-C
• UVA Ultraviolet-A
• UVR Ultraviolet radiation
• N.oceanica Nannochloropsis oceanica
• 7-DHC 7-Dehydrocholesterol
• DHA Docosahexaenoic acid
• EPA eicosapentaenoic acid
• DW Dry weight
• CO2 Carbon dioxid
• EFSA The European Food Safety Authority
• GRAS Generally recognized as safe
• FDA The Food and Drug Administration
• TAG Triacylglycerols
• MGDGMonogalactosyldiacylglycerol
• PUFAPolysunsaturated fatty acid
• SAFA Triacylglycerols
• MUFA Monounsaturated fatty acid
• ROS Reactive oxygen species
• VL Visible light
• PSII Photosystem II
• PBR Photobioreactor
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
1
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background from vitamin D perspective
Vitamin D deficiency occurs across different regions of the world, where its more
predominant in places like The Middle East, China, Mongolia and India [Schoor
and Lips 2017]. In India, Mongolia and Tunisia, the percentage of the population
with serum 25(OH)D concentrations below 25/30 nmol/L exceeds 20% [Cashman,
Sheehy, and O’Neill 2019].
According to the US Institute of Medicine, vitamin
D deficiency is defined as <30 nmol/L based on a risk of metabolic bone disease.
While in Europe serum 25(OH)D <25nmol/L has been a traditional cutoff to define
deficiency for several decades [Cashman, Dowling, et al. 2016]. Using the Institute
of Medicine´s definition 6.7% and 11% of the US and European general population
are considered as vitamin D deficient, respectively [Schleicher et al. 2016, Cashman,
Dowling, et al. 2016].
Since the early studies of McCollum and Davis in 1913, a comprehensive under-
standing of the functionality of vitamin D on the musculoskeletal has been widely
documented. The role of vitamin D is to maintain and regulate calcium and phos-
phorous level in the human [DeLuca 2004]. Without it the dietary uptake of calcium
can decrease from 30-40% to 10-15% and from 80% to 60% for phosphorus [Holick
2007]. Consequently, low vitamin D level may lead to rickets in kids and in adults
increase the risk for osteoporosis and osteomalacia [DeLuca 2004,Holick 2007]. Be-
yond the skeletal earlier studies have reported a strong association between vitamin
D deficiency and its effect on cancer prevention, improved cardiovascular function,
diabetes prevention and prevention of immune-related diseases [Bikle 2016]. How-
ever, based on new evidence those associations are inconsistent and inconclusive
[McKenna and Kilbane 2022]. Similarly, though indirect evidence of an immunomod-
ulatory role of vitamin D in respiratory infections has been proven in recent studies,
the evidence for a direct evidence of a link between vitamin D levels and covid-19
incidence or outcomes is lacking [Vimaleswaran, Forouhi, and Khunti 2021].
With such serious consequences on public health affecting billions of people across
the globe, it is of vital importance to understand the different sources to the vitamin
and solutions to combat or at least reduce the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency.
Vitamin D can be found as different vitamers where cholecalciferol (D3) and ergo-
2
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:11==
calciferol (D2) are the main forms(Jäpelt and Jakobsen 2013). Both can be sourced
through diet or in the case of vitamin D3 be synthesized in the skin when exposed
to irradiation. The latter being the most important source and depends on the in-
tensity of UV-light which depends on several factors but most importantly on the
season and latitude [Christakos et al. 2016]. In human skin tissue natural occurring
provitamin known as 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) is converted into pre-vitamin
D3 when exposed to irradiation with wavelenght of 290-315nm (UVB). Pre-vitamin
D3 is thermodynamically unstable and at room temperature or above, it under-
goes a transformation into vitamin D3 [Havinga 1973]. The produce vitamin D3
then diffused into the blood stream and transported by vitamin D3 binding protein
(DPB) to the liver where enzymes with 25-hydroxylase activity converts it into 25-
hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) [Bikle, Malmstroem, and Schwartz 2017]. Currently,
level of 25(OH)D is the most commonly used biomarker to determine a person´s
vitamin D status. 25(OH)D must undergo another enzymatic conversion in the kid-
ney in order to become metabolically active in the form of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D. This substance is the ligand for vitamin D receptor (VDR) which are expressed
by most cells at some stage in their development or activation [Bikle, Malmstroem,
and Schwartz 2017]. A graphical presentations of the steps involved in the vitamin
D production and metabolism is given in [fig. 1.1].
Figure 1.1: The metabollic pathway for vitamin D and the figure is adopted from
Christakos et al. 2016
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
3
==PAGE:12==
In addition to the cutaneous synthesis of vitamin D3 in human the vitamin can also
be supplied through diet, where wild salmon is regarded as having high amounts of
vitamin D with reported value of 18.5±4.6 g/100g [Jakobsen et al. 2019]. Other ma-
jor sources of vitamin D beside fish and fish products includes cod liver oil, egg yolk
and fortified foods [Cashman, Dowling, et al. 2016]. In the plant kingdom vitamin
D2 is also found in UVB exposed fungi, yeast and plants which are contaminated
by fungi [Jäpelt and Jakobsen 2013]. With such few available natural sources and
a meta-analysis showing on average only minimal increase in serum 25(OH)D be-
tween fish consuming group and control [Lehmann et al. 2015], the dietary intake
of vitamin D has had a minor role on vitamin D status unless fortified.
Therefore, in places where UVB is less available other measures must be taken to
improve vitamin D status. In a study by O’Neill et al. the available UVB decreased
with increasing latitude from 35oN to 65oN. And when a threshhold of UVB dose of
<1000 J/m2 is used to define months as winter months, places like Crete (35o) has
no winter months while Oslo has six [O’Neill et al. 2016]. Below the threshold value,
the dermal synthesis of pre-vitamin D3 will be relatively low and would only lead
to minimal increases in average monthly serum 25(OH)D. UVB availability is also
influenced by other factors such as seasonality, air pollution, skin pigmentation, and
cultural practices [Cashman, Sheehy, and O’Neill 2019].It should also be noted that
UVB exposure is limited by adverse effects related to skin damage and skin cancer
[Cashman, Sheehy, and O’Neill 2019].
Therefore, the most effective approaches to improve vitamin D status in the popu-
lation seems to be by vitamin D supplementation and food fortification [Pilz et al.
2018]. There are two different ways of fortifying food, either by adding vitamin
D in food or by increasing vitamin D content of food without direct addition of
vitamin D. Example for the latter method, which is also termed bio-addition or
bio-fortification, could be increasing vitamin D content of the feed consumed by
farmed fish [Pilz et al. 2018]. In nature bio-fortification is also observe where low
amount of vitamin D2 present in meat originates from plants that the animal con-
sumes [Jäpelt and Jakobsen 2013]. In addition, high content of vitamin D3 in fish
also originates from the aquatic food chain. This conclusion was postulated by the
studies of Takeuchi et al. by excluding the possibility of vitamin D production in
the fish through photochemical in the skin or nonphotochemical enzymatic forma-
tion [Takeuchi et al. 1991]. Same explanation was suggested by Rao et al. that
the phytoplankton by irradiation produces vitamin D3 and being at the bottom of
aquatic food chain are the source of vitamin D3 to zooplankton which are a major
dietary source for fish [Rao and Raghuramulu 1996]. But it was only as recent as
2020 that our understanding on the role of UVB in inducing formation of vitamin
D3 in microalgae increase through several studies by Ljubic et al. [Ljubic, Jacobsen,
et al. 2020,Ljubic, Thulesen, et al. 2021].
1.2
Microalgae and vitamin D
The findings by Ljubic, Thulesen, et al. 2021 have a significant application and open
up for further investigations into other possible microalgae species that are capable
of producing vitamin D when exposed to UVB. At for now, the work of Ljubic and
coworker have elucidate several aspects on the role of UVB on the vitamin D pro-
4
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:13==
duction in microalgae. Firstly, they demonstrated that Nannochloropsis oceanica
produces high level of vitamin D3 when cultivated under artificial UVB while other
species including, Chlorella minutisssima, Arthrospira maxima and Rhodomonas
lack this ability. They also showed a close linear relationship between the dose of
UVB and the vitamin production in N. Oceanica. However, the UVB also had ad-
verse effect on the growth where the biomass accumulation was significantly reduced
as the UVB dose was 16 kJ/m2/day or 22 kJ/m2/day. A further study yielded an-
other discovery that beside N.oceanica, strains of Dunaliella salina and N. limnetica
were also capable of producing high amount of vitamin D3 and D2 under UVB
treatment.
Eventhough N.limnetica and N.oceanica are from same genus, the former is found in
fresh water while N.oceanica is a marine species. And D.salina being from different
genus it is evident that the ability to produce relatively high amount of vitamin D
under UVB treament is neither genus-specific nor habitat-specific. In addition, UVB
didn’t stimulate production of vitamin D in Tetraselmis suecica which invalidated
the hypothesis that since cholesterol have 7-DHC as precusors, the high content
of it could be used as an indicator for a microalgae ability to synthesize vitamin
D. As mention, these studies contribute to our understanding of the relationship
between the effects of UVB on vitamin D production in microalgae but have also
been left open for further investigation. It is on this ground that this project have
been launched with a collaboration with the National Center of Marine Culture in
Israel who cultivates a strain of N.oceanica at large scale for aquaculture.
1.3
Hypothesis and objective of the thesis
As for this project the overall aim is to obtain new understandings of N.oceanica as it
relates to how its bioactive compounds changes under different cultivation conditions.
With that in mind, the following hypothesis will be investigated through biological
experiment and biochemical analysis performed at DTU FOOD.
Hypotheses:
• The content of vitamin D in N.oceanica cultivated under artificial UVB light
can be higher than if cultivated in open ponds in Israel during summertime.
• Production of vitamin D by exposure of artificial UVB light on N.oceanica is
independent of the strain.
• The dose of visible light during cultivation of N.oceanica under artificial UVB
affects the production of biomass and content of vitamin D. Compared to 0
hours and 24 hours visible light, a photoperiode i.e 18 hours visible light and
6 hours dark gives the highest yield.
• The content of vitamin D in N.oceanica cultivated in the sunlight depends on
the UV-index on the last 3 days before harvesting
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
5
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Microalgae
Since the study of Beijerick (1890) and Miquel (1892) who for the first time achieved
unialgal cultures of green algae and diatoms in the late 1890s, the understanding
of these orgasnism has increased exponentially. Algae is a term used as a collective
common name for all organisms which contain chlorophyll a and can carry out pho-
tosynthesis but are not specialized land plants like mosses, ferns, coniferous, tress
and flowering plants [Borowitzka 2018a]. This term covers organism that can be
extremely long and visible with the naked eye such as multicellular seaweed or as
microscopically, small like the green algae (0.5-1.3 um) [Richmond 2013]. To fur-
ther classify the algae into two groups based on their size, the latter belongs to the
group called microalgae and the former into the group known as macroalgae. Due to
its content of chlorophyll a which allows photosynthesis and its size, the prokaryote
cyanobacteria are also a microalga [De Morais et al. 2015]. Therefore, a more precise
definition is given specifically for microalgae is that it is a microscopic eukaryotic,
unicellular, colonial, and filamentous algae, as well as the oxygenic photosynthetic
bacteria (prokaryotes), the cyanobacteria [Borowitzka 2018b]. In nature, microalgae
can be found in many places across the globe either as free floating(plantonic) or
grow attached to something. Owning to their tolerance for a wide range of salini-
ties, pH, temperature and light intensities they are found in different habitats and
environments such as saltwater, fresh water, and soil [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018].
Taxonomically, microalgae are placed in two superkingdoms (bacteria and eukary-
ota). In the Eukaryota they are further placed in the subgroups (infrakingdoms)
Archaeplastida, Chromalveolata, Rhizaria, and Excavata.
Between these classes,
the most abundant are the diatoms (Bacillariophyceae), the green algae (Cryso-
phyceae), and the golden algae(Chrysophyceae) [Jacob-Lopes et al. 2019].
Con-
versely, the green algae, the cyanobacteria (Cyanophyceae), and the diatoms are
the most significant regarding biotechnological exploitation and use [Jacob-Lopes
et al. 2019].There are roughly 41,000 taxonomically identified strains of microalgae
spread across 38 classes [J.P. and M.W. 2018]. Around 30.000 has been studied and
analyzed [Morales, Aflalo, and Bernard 2021]. Species like Nannochlorpsis belong
to the class Eugstigmatophyceae in the phylum Ochropphyta which belongs to the
infrakingdom Excavata [Borowitzka 2018a]. The main photosynthetic pigments of
this groups are chlorophyll a and violazanthin [Borowitzka 2018a].
6
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:15==
2.1
Microalgae historical background and its ap-
plication
Microalgae and its application as a human food source have been around for 2000
years.
The cyanobacterium Nostoc has been used as a traditional medicine for
treatment of diarrhea, hepatits and hypertension [Rizwan et al. 2018] and a food
source to survive during famine [Spolaore et al. 2006a] in China. Earlier mention of
microalgae and its impact on humans can be found in the bible, where some verses
mentioned red water which caused fish deaths which appears in reference to the red
tides caused by toxic algae [Borowitzka 2018b].
Collecting microalgae biomass in huge quantities cannot be done easily from natural
populations but culturing and harvesting technologies must be applied to produce
adequate amounts for use. This happened in Taiwan in 1956 when the first commer-
cial microalgae plant growing Chlorella in large scale was constructed [Borowitzka
2018b]. The construction was the product of several studies on microalgae as a new
alternative and unconventional protein source [Spolaore et al. 2006a] by application
of large-scale culture which took place in the early 1950s in countries like, the US,
Germany, Japan, Israel, Sweden and Italy [Borowitzka 2018b]. For many species
the content of protein was high as shown in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Comparison of protein and carbohydrates content in different species of
microalgae. Source: [Harun et al. 2010]
In the 1970s new commercial production sites for Arthrospira (Spirulina) were es-
tablished in Mexico [Spolaore et al. 2006a], Japan, Thailand and US [Jacob-Lopes
et al. 2019]. During this time the first aquaculture fields also appeared. But more
importantly was the occurrence of the world energy which provoked new interest in
exploration of microalgae as an alternative fuel source [Chew et al. 2017].
In the following decades utilization of microalgae for other purposes than human
food became a reality in the likes of Dunielle salina entering the market with pro-
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
7
==PAGE:16==
duction plants in Israel, Australia and the US [Rizwan et al. 2018]. Cultivation of
Dunalielle and Haematococcus was mainly with the focus of pigments (β-carotene
and astaxanthin) production for food additive and animal feed [Jacob-Lopes et al.
2019]. In the early 1990s, the interest in polyunsaturated fatty acids with focus on
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) to be used for aqua-
culture and enrichment of nutritional products also lead to establishment of new
production sites [Jacob-Lopes et al. 2019]. The most frequently used are Chlorella,
Tetraselmis, Isochrysis, Pavlova, Phaeo- dactylum, Chaetoceros, Nannochloropsis,
Skeletonema and Thalassiosira [Spolaore et al. 2006b].
The latest statistics on algae production across Europe including European countries,
UK, EEA countries and Switzerland showed that 225 algae producing companies are
on the continent with 33% being microalgae producing entities [Araújo et al. 2020].
In addition, 222 companies were producing spirulina and accounts for an approxi-
mate annual production of 142 tons (DW) compared to 182 tons (DW) of microalgae
where major species were Chlorelle spp. and H.pluvialis which correspond to more
than 80% of the total production volume [Araújo et al. 2020]. Globally, the volumes
are significantly higher with the annual production of microalgal biomass dry of
19.000 ton, generating an estimated USD 5.7 billion [Jacob-Lopes et al. 2019]. Also,
at this scale most of the market is represented by Spirulina and Chlorella with an
annual production of 3000 and 4000 tons, respectively [Jacob-Lopes et al. 2019].
Microalgae’s current and potential application as a renewable source is vast due
to its content of various bioactive compounds which can be altered under different
stress conditions during cultivation. In figure 2.2 is depicted an overview of the
different field where product of microalgae can be valuable. Another application
which is not represented in the figure is biofuel production.
Figure 2.2: Microalgae’s current and potential applications in different fields. Source:
[Rizwan et al. 2018]
In view of its environmental application one of the benefits related to microalgae
is the use of solar energy and fixation of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) which
contributes to reduction of CO2 and the impact on global warming. The biofixation
of CO2 content from the flue and flaring gasses is around (5–15%) for microalgae
8
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:17==
whereas for terrestrial plants the values are 0.03–0.06% of CO2 absorb from the
atmosphere [Rizwan et al. 2018]. In addition, microalgae can also be used to remove
nitrogen, phosphor in domestic waste water[Rizwan et al. 2018] and heavy metals
in industrial waste water [Harun et al. 2010].
Other advantages related to microalgae are its higher growth rate which produce
higher yields compared to higher plants [De Morais et al. 2015]. Microalgae do not
create competition for arable lands and food crops which is a major drawback in bio-
fuel production from second generation biomass [Chew et al. 2017]. The cultivation
of microalgae is not seasonal and with marine species, fresh water is not necessary,
either.
In some instances, such as Phycocyanin, which is a unique natural blue
colorant, no similar alternative is available and for other specifics applications the
synthetic molecules are less effective than the natural [Jacob-Lopes et al. 2019].
Another important aspect that contributes to increase interest in microalgae is con-
sumer preference for natural product with the underlying assumption that natural
product is safer and more eﬀicacious than a synthetic product [Borowitzka 2018a].
The safety side of microalgae species that reached the commercial level have been
strictly regulated for toxins by agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and national food agencies.
Microalgae species such as Spirulina/Arthrospira sp., Chlorella sp., Porphyridium
cruentum, and Crypthecodinium cohnii are granted the GRAS (generally recognized
as safe) status by the FDA. And other species such as Haematococcus pluvialis,
Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Dunaliella sp., Nannochloropsis sp., Nitzschia sp. and
Schizochytrium sp. have their safety aspect classified as ‘no toxins known’ [Jacob-
Lopes et al. 2019].
2.2
Bioactive compound derived from microalgae
Bioactive compounds are physiologically active substances with functional properties
in the human body [De Morais et al. 2015]. Bioactive compounds of microalgal origin
can be sourced directly from primary metabolism, such as proteins, fatty acids,
vitamins, and pigments, or can be synthesized from secondary metabolism. In most
microalgae, the bioactive compounds are accumulated in the biomass; however, in
some cases, these metabolites are excreted into the medium; these are known as
exometabolites. Pure molecules can also be extracted when their concentrations
are suﬀiciently high. This leads to valuable products like fatty acids, pigments and
stable isotope biochemicals [Spolaore et al. 2006a].
2.2.1
Lipids
Alongside protein and carbohydrates are lipids important constituents in plants and
animals. The lipids can be classified based on their functionality into membrane and
non-membrane lipids. The two major classes of lipids in unicellular algae are storage
lipids, triacylglycerols (non-membrane) membrane lipids such as phospholipids and
glycolipids. Some lipids class are confined to the chlorplast such as monogalactosyl
diacylglycerol (MGDG) and DGDG [Assaf Sukenik and Carmeli 1990]. Each lipids
class has its own characteristic fatty acid composition. Ex. MGDG makes up to 60%
of the thylakoid membranes and has high content of polysunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs) while TAGs mostly consist of saturated (SAFAs) and monosaturated fatty
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
9
==PAGE:18==
acids (MUFAs) [Sukenik, Yamaguchi, and Livne 1993].
The SAFAs andMUFAs
are such as C14:0 (MA, myristic acid), C16:0 (PA, palmitic acid), C16:1 (POA,
palmitoleic acid), C18:0 (SA, stearic acid) and C18:1 (OA, oleic acid).
Figure 2.3: Chemical structure of triglyceride, EPA and DHA
γ-linolenic acid (GLA), arachidonic acid (AA), eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and do-
cosahexanoic acid (DHA) are all long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs)
since more than one double bound is present in the chain. Depending on the loca-
tion of the first double bound, the fatty acids can either be grouped as omega-3,
omega-6 etc. These compounds are important for human tissue integrity and have
beneficial health effects [36]. The major structural fatty acid in the gray matter of
the brain and in the retina of the eye is DHA [Spolaore et al. 2006a]. Therefore, it
has a crucial role in the correct development of brain and eye in infants. Other men-
tioned health benefits associated with the PUFAs are, revitalize the skin, reduction
of the problems associated with various cardiac disorders, arthritis, hypertension,
heart disease, asthma, migraine headache etc [Khanra et al. 2018,Jacob-Lopes et al.
2019].
The PUFAs are also essential fatty acids because animals and higher plants are not
capable of synthesizing these compounds having more than 18 carbon atoms since
the requisite enzymes are absent [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018]. A common and most
popular source are from fish oils where the marine fish themselves do not synthesize
but relies on it from diet. However, in recent years problems associated with the
rapid depletion of marine resources, possible accumulation of toxins, unpleasant
taste and smell, oxidative stability of fish oils combined with the increasing demand
for PUFAs have created a vacuum for discovery of new sustainable, alternative
sources to capitalized the market [Khanra et al. 2018].
Through decades of research several species of microalgae are known to contain
huge quantities of lipids including the essentials fatty acids. Some microalgae, such
as Nannochloropsis, Tetraselmis, Isochrysis, Thalassiosira and Chaetoceros, can also
produce long chain fatty acids, such as DHA and EPA, which are valuable as healthy
food supplement [Chew et al. 2017].
When it comes to DHA, marine microalgae have significantly more of DHA than
10
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:19==
compared to freshwater microalgae [Harun et al. 2010]. As presented in figure 2.4
Marine microalgae Nannochloropsis sp. contain anywhere from 31% and upto 68%
of dry weight of lipids [Wahidin, Idris, and Shaleh 2013] and in Nannochloropsis
gaditana as much as 27% of total fatty acids is comprised of EPA [Al-Hoqani, Young,
and Purton 2017]. But the predominantly fatty acids in most of Nannochloropsis
strains were 16:0, 16:1 and 18:1 [Al-Hoqani, Young, and Purton 2017].
Figure 2.4: Amount of lipids in various species of microalgae. Source: [Harun et al.
2010]
In microalgae, the unsaturated fatty acids are subjected to lipid oxidation during
various environmental stresses which may lead to increased levels of radicals such
as reactive oxygen species (ROS). To repair the damaged cell membranes and to
maintain the fluidity of the membrane, the omega-3 fatty acids are utilize by the
algae [Ljubic 2020].
2.3
Microalgae cultivation and abiotic factors
The first step in cultivation of microalgae is to decide the species of interest. Au-
totrophic microalgae grow in condition where light is the main energy source for
metabolism. Other microalgae species such as Arthrospira platensis, Chlorella vul-
garis,and Haematococcuspluvialis can grow in different types of metabolic condi-
tions including heterotrophic and mixotrophic [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018].
In
heterotrophic cultivation, the source used for metabolism is organic carbon while
mixotrophic is a combination of autotrophic and heterotrophic condition.
Afterwards it should be determined the operation mode where batch and continuous
system are quite common. During cultivation its important to monitor the growth
since the health of the microorganism is reflected by this. Microalgae growth is
measured in terms of doubling time and biomass productivity [Rizwan et al. 2018].
Biomass productivity and culture density are somewhat proportional and culture
density is then normalized with optical density (OD). Meaning that measurement of
OD can be used to monitor the growth. For most microalgae species, the absorbances
wavelengths lie between 600-700 nm [Rizwan et al. 2018]. In addition, growth rate
can also be measured by counting the total cell.
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
11
==PAGE:20==
When microalgae grow it passes through different growth phases. In figure 2.5 is
depicted a graphical presentation of the different stages seen during algae growth.
In the early stage, microalgae adapt to the new environment physiologically. After
the lag phase, the algae start to grow exponentially, and slows down or stops when
external supply no longer can sustain the necessary condition. This can be due to
depletion of nutrient or production of substances which have inhibitory effects on
growth. At this stationary phase, growth cannot take place unless a new medium
is provided, or the inhibitory substances are removed. Without any action, culture
death is likely to occur as represented by a decline in biomass after stationary phase
in the figure.
Figure 2.5: Possible different stages encounter during growth of microalgae
As mentioned, one of the advantages of using microalgae for the extraction of high
value bioactive compounds is that its substrates such as light, CO2 and water may
be available at low cost [Khanra et al. 2018]. But other cultivation parameters that
must be taken into consideration for optimal biomass production are algae strain,
nutrient availability, temperature, pH,salinity, and mixing [Khan, Shin, and Kim
2018]. If some of these conditions are suboptimal it may cause stressful situation for
the microalgae which can stimulate biosynthesis of specific compounds [De Morais
et al. 2015].
2.3.1
Nutrients
Microalgae require both micro and macro nutrients for their growth and metabolism
[Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018]. Compounds such as C, N, O, H, P, are classified as
macronutrient while Fe, Mn, Cu, Mo, Zn, B and Co are considered as micronutrients.
Some species also requires salts and vitamins in the culture medium in order to grow
[Rizwan et al. 2018]. In algal cells nitrogen is a fundamental element in all structural
and functional proteins.
Similarly, phosphor is major part of phospholipids and
in essential macromolecules such as DNA, RNA and ATP [Juneja, Ceballos, and
Murthy 2013].
The reproduction and growth of microalgae is supported by photosynthesis hence
12
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:21==
elements like carbon, oxygen and hydrogen must be available in the medium. While
availability of oxygen and hydrogen is not a concern, carbon must often be supplied
in order to obtain high density [Richmond 2013].
The inorganic carbon can be
supplied in the form of CO2, carbonate or bicarbonate for autotrophic conditions.
CO2-enriched air is injected at the bottom which also provide some form of mixing.
The injected dissolved CO2 may be present in various forms which depend on the
pH , temperature and nutrients [Juneja, Ceballos, and Murthy 2013].
Even though micronutrients are only required in trace amounts, the absence of it
have impact on the growth. This is due to the dependency of various enzymatic
activities upon these trace elements [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018].
Therefore, a
culture medium used for cultivation of microalgae must include these elements for
optimal growth.
2.3.2
pH, salinity and temperature
Algal growth rate, cell size and biochemical composition are all affected by environ-
mental factors such as temperature, pH, light, nutrients and salinity. Since microal-
gae are a diverse group of organisms optimal growth conditions are depended upon
the species and strain. Despite the difference when it comes to pH the majority
grows well in the pH range between 6 to 8.76 [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018].
During growth microalgae absorbs the existing inorganic carbon and pH level in-
crease in the culture medium. At higher pH, carbon is less available as CO2 but
more in the form of carbonates. Furthermore, the high pH also lowers aﬀinity of al-
gae to free CO2 and as a consequence the carbon uptake rates are reduced affecting
the growth [Juneja, Ceballos, and Murthy 2013]. Therefore, pH control is essential
for effective cultivation of microalgae. In a recent paper, Kumaran et. al studied
the optimal condition for biomass production of N.oceanica using Response Surface
Methodology (RSM) of six parameters including nitrate, phosphate, temperature,
pH, salinity and agitation speed. Only nitrate content, temperature and pH had a
significant influence on biomass.
The optimal pH and temperature were reported as 8 and 22 C, respectively [Ku-
maran et al. 2021]. As for temperature, the value is close to 19-21 stated by [Abu-
Rezq et al. 1999a] but is lower than the optimum range of 25-29 C reported by
Sandnes et al. for the same species [Sandnes et al. 2005a]. Yet, in general when tem-
perature is below optimal value an increase in temperature to the optimum range
exponentially increases algal growth. But an increase or decrease in the tempera-
ture above the optimal value will slow down or even stop algae growth and activity
[Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018]. This is in part due to the reduced activity of CO2
fixation of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (Rubisco) [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018].
Due to a variety of the species, green alga like Dunaliella salina can grow at salinities
up to 11 times that of seawater salinity. For Nannochloropsis sp. the most suitable
salinity level is reported as 25-30 ppt [Sen et al. 2005] and 20-40 ppt [Abu-Rezq et al.
1999b]. Changing the salinity level higher or lower than microalgae natural levels
can affect the growth and alter biochemical composition. For example, increase in
lipids concentration is observed at higher salinity, and for Dunaliella saturated and
monosaturated fatty acids are increased as the NaCl concentration went from 0.4 to
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
13
==PAGE:22==
4 M [Juneja, Ceballos, and Murthy 2013].
2.3.3
Light
Visible light (VL) is part of the electromagnetic spectrum and spans the wavelength
region from 400-700nm (figure 2.6). It is also known as visible spectrum since these
wavelengths reach the retina and produce the sensation of seeing.
Light source
can either be natural in the form of sunlight or emitted through artificial means
[S. K. Wang et al. 2014]. Microalgae cultivation light and its characteristics such
as intensity, quality and photoperiod play a crucial role as biochemical composition
and biomass yield are affected by it [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018].
Figure 2.6: The visible spectrum of electromagnetic radiation
The action of light takes place in the thylakoid which is in the chloroplast of the
microalgae cells. Photons from light at different wavelengths are absorbed by light
harvesting pigments such as chlorophylls, carotenoids and phycobilins. Chlorophylls
have optimal absorption at a wavelength between 600-700 nm and it is the most
abundant pigments in the cells for most species. Therefore, this region of spectrum
is effectively utilized by the cells for photosynthesis. Though chlorophylls are the
primary pigments for photosynthesis the carotenoids and phycobilins are important
accessory pigments which expands the absorption spectrum by absorbing light at
different wavelengths [Xue et al. 2005]. The content of pigments varies among the
different algae species hence responds differently to light wavelengths [S. K. Wang
et al. 2014]. As consequence, the optimal light requirements for growth and biomass
accumulation are not the same.
The photons harvested by the pigments are utilized to produce adenosine triphos-
phate (ATP) and the electron carrier nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH). These compounds are the main product from light reaction which is one
of the two main steps in the photosynthesis process. The subsequent step termed
as dark reaction, utilize the compounds for CO2 fixation in the Calvin cycle [S. K.
Wang et al. 2014].
Photon flux density (often with unit umol/m2*s) is a measurement of the irradiance
struct on an object. When a culture surface is irradiated, only a fraction of the
photon flux is absorbed by the cells. The actual size that is absorbed depends on
several factors, including cell density, the optical properties of the cells, length of
the optical path (OP) of the cultivation system, and the rate of culture mixing
[Richmond 2013]. If other culture factors such as temperature, nutrient, salinity
and pH are not optimal it may also reduce the light utilization eﬀiciency [Richmond
14
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:23==
2013]. Photons that are not absorbed for photosynthetic activity are dissipated as
heat. Cells also reflects small fractions of the light.
In a situation where all the parameters affecting growth are kept at optimal and the
culture cell density is low, only the intensity of the light source controls the growth.
Such condition is depicted by generalized light response curve shown in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Light response curve of photosynthesis also known as P curve. Source:
[Richmond 2013]
The rate of photosynthesis is proportional to light intensity above the light com-
pensation point, Lc. Below this point, the low light intensity only results in low
growth rate which is balanced by cellular respiratory activities and hence the net
growth is zero. At some point light intensity reaches a saturation level at which
point the growth rate is at the maximal attainable [Richmond 2013]. The photosyn-
thetic photon flux density (PPFD) required to saturate the photosynthetic units in
the cell is usually 1/5 or 1/10 the PPFD (￿2000 to 2500 ￿mol/m2/s) (39a). Differ-
ent optimal light intensities have been reported. For most microalgae species, the
optimal value is in the range of photons/m2 /s [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018]. In a
study by Kitaya et al. for some species 100 ￿mol/m2/s is optimum [Khan, Shin, and
Kim 2018]. Beyond saturation point, increasing light intensity does not result in an
increased photosynthetic rate due to the level being balanced by photorespiration
and photoinhibition.
Photoinhibition is a result of a damaged unit in the photosynthetic apparatus or
other important entities in the cells. To avoid photo inhibition, incremental light
intensity strategy applied throughout the culture period is better than using a con-
stant light intensity [S. K. Wang et al. 2014]. The quality of the light source also
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
15
==PAGE:24==
affects photoinhibition. Blue light with its shorter wavelength has a higher proba-
bility of causing photo-damage in the cells due to having higher energy [S. K. Wang
et al. 2014]. As a result, controllable artificial light has been reported to perform
better than direct sunlight in terms of growth rate for a culture of Chlorococcum sp.
[Chew et al. 2017].
2.3.4
Light and the role of mixing
It is often that in high density biomass culture, growth of the algae cannot solely
be explained by the light curve without also taking into consideration of light atten-
uation. When light passes through the algal, the absorption of the cells and light
scattering attenuates light energy exponentially. The heterogeneously distribution
of light intensity may form two zones with one zone being at the outer illuminated
volume where light is suﬀicient to support photosynthesis and a dark volume in
which light intensity is insuﬀicient for growth [Richmond 2013]. To avoid the effects
of shading mixing a place is an important role.
Not only does mixing provide a uniform distribution of nutrients, air, and CO2 in
microalgae culture, but it also provides a better distribution of light availability
for the cells in the culture. With high cell density 20–30 g/L and above cells do
not experience continuous illumination but rather a cycles of light and darkness,
which in combination with mixing can be beneficial for strong light as in outdoor
cultivation. When the cell density is low (0.17 g/L) there is no light gradient, and
the cells are small such as for Nannochloropsis sp. mixing has no effect to smaller
effect on the photosynthetic rate [Richmond 2013].
Another important aspect of light in microalgae cultivation is its photoperiod which
is the ratio of light and dark exposure time. According to Wahidin et al, the opti-
mal light/dark regimes for lipid content, cell concentration and growth rate were 18
hour of light and 6 hour of darkness (18:06 hr) at 100 mol/m2s and 23 C for Nan-
nochloropsis sp. compared to light regimes of 24:0 hr and 12:12 hr [Wahidin, Idris,
and Shaleh 2013]. In a different study on the effects of irradiance and photoperiod
on the biomass and fatty acid (FA) composition of Chlorella vulgaris by Khoeyi et
al., the PUFAs level was reduced as the visible light duration was increased from
08:16 hr to 16:08 hr. In contrast, the saturated fatty acid increased with the higher
light duration [Khoeyi, Seyfabadi, and Ramezanpour 2012].
2.3.5
UVB
UVB, visible and infrared radiation are collectively referred to as optical radiate.
With shorter wavelengths the ultraviolet radiation (UVR) spans from 100nm to 400
nm as seen in figure 2.8 and accounts for around 5% of terrestrial sunlight [L. Diffey
2015]. This region is further subdivided into UVA (320–400), UVB (290–320 nm)
and UVC (290-200 nm). The intensity and the quality (spectrum) of UV radiation
hitting the earth surface is a function of factors such as elevation of the sun above
the horizon, solar altitude, absorption and scattering by ozone layer clouds and other
molecules [L. Diffey 2015]. Consequently, UVC is almost completely absorbed by
the atmosphere [Ljubic, Holdt, et al. 2021] and is not part of the terrestrial UV
radiation which constituents of 6% UVB and 94% UVA [L. Diffey 2015]. UVA is
not as effective as UVB to cause biological damage henceforth the effect of UVB
on microalgae and plants is widely studied.
It has been shown for spinach thy-
16
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:25==
lakoids, intact cyanobacterial and whole leave that photodamage is determined by
light dosage and is independent on intensity of incident light at which the protons
are delivered [Sicora, Máté, and Vass 2003].
Figure 2.8: The ultraviolet spectrum of electromagnetic radiation
In general, it’s known that high dose of UVB influence growth, pigmentation, nitro-
gen fixation, general metabolism in many cyanobacteria and some microalgae due to
direct impacts on membrane proteins, photosystem II (PSII), DNA, enzymes, pig-
ments, growth regulators and indirect effects by formation of reactive oxygen species
such as superoxide (O2), hydroxyl radicals (OH) or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) [Xue
et al. 2005]. In plants and microalgae, the photosynthetic apparatus is potentially
the main target of UVB, and its damage contributes significantly to the overall
UVB effect [Ljubic, Holdt, et al. 2021]. And since UVB can penetrate down to
water depts of 20-30 m in the ocean it may cause serious effects in marine organism
[Zhang, Tang, Zhou, et al. 2015].
Since growth is considered as an important parameter that integrates stress effects
in several biochemical processes in the cell [Xue et al. 2005], previous studies on
UVB stress on microalgae includes growth measurements and are available. Suresh
Babu et al. investigated the effects of UVB on three species of cyanobacteria and
found that growth for Noctoc was inhibited by 25% when exposed to UVB dose
of 2J/cm2 with intensity of 0.4 mW/cm2 for 4 consecutive days [Babu, Joshi, and
Viswanathan 1998]. A similar result was reported by Kumur who observe a lowered
biomass productivity when a culture of Chlorella sp. was exposed to UVB 5.7 W/m2
for 2 hr for 4 days. In both studies, light with photoperiod of 18:06 hr was applied
[V. Kumar et al. 2018]. In addition, a recent study by Anita et al. also showed that
for Nannochloropsis oceanica the negative effect of UVB was noticeable with the
lowest intensity of 3 kJ/m2/day was pronounced as the intensity was increase to 16
kJ/m2/day within the 4 days [Ljubic, Jacobsen, et al. 2020].
As part of adaptive mechanism to the UVB stress motile microalgae can escape
from high to low UVB levels while changes in morphology to increase shelf-shading
have also been regarded as an effective strategy [Zhang, Tang, Zhou, et al. 2015]. A
different response seen in most microalgae is the so-called photo acclimation which
includes alteration of pigment content in order to mitigate the excess energy thereby
preventing damage to photosynthetic apparatus. In an experimental result it was
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
17
==PAGE:26==
reported that UV irradiance also caused the reduction of the contents of chloro-
phyll a, carotenoid and carbohydrate [V. Kumar et al. 2018]. A similar tendency
was also observed during Suresh et al.’s experiment where chlorophyll content of the
cyanobacteria was reduced by 25.5±3%, 34.5±3%, and 67±1.5% when the cyanobac-
teria sps were exposed to UVB at 0.4, 0.5, and 0.6 mW/cm2, respectively [Xue et al.
2005]. Photo-acclimation also involves accumulation of detoxifying enzymes such
as superoxide dismutase, catalase and quenching agents like carotenoids [Xue et al.
2005]. The role of these compounds is to act as antioxidant and quenching highly
reactive singlet oxygen which are produce during interaction between UV radiation,
oxygen and certain organic compounds [Zhang, Tang, Zhou, et al. 2015]. In some
cyanobacteria species protection against UVB stress has been attributed to the syn-
thesis of UVB absorbing compounds such as scytonemin and mycosporine-like amino
acids. These compounds absorb maximally at 334 nm and provide photoprotection
to avoid damage to the photosynthetic apparatus and other molecular targets by
absorbing these harmful photons at 334 nm[Xue et al. 2005].
The visible part of the solar radiation has been demonstrated to provide some form
of photoreactivation in microalgae. Sicora et al. studied the interaction of visible
light and UVB in the inactivation and repair of PSII in photosynthesis apparatus.
In intact cells, photodamage PSII can be repaired via de novo synthesis of the D1
and D2 reaction center in proteins and the net loss of activity is determined by
the balance of the damage and repair processes [Sicora, Máté, and Vass 2003]. For
cyanobacteria strain Synechocystis the presence of visible light at 130 µmol/m2/s1
prevented UV-induced loss of PSII activity [Sicora, Máté, and Vass 2003]. However,
when the light intensity was increased to 1300 µmol/m2/s1 the protective effect
disappeared. Ashok Kumar et al. also reported protection against UVB by visible
light for N 2-fixing cyanobacteria Anabaena [A. Kumar et al. 2003]. In addition, in
their study the restoration of 14CO2 uptake was significantly better for samples that
were exposed to visible light immediately after UVB exposure, compared to samples
kept in dark.
They also showed that blue light had the best photoreactivation
performance.
2.4
Microalgae processing on large scale
The primary steps of microalgae biomass production include cultivation, harvesting
and extraction [Khanra et al. 2018]. For large scale production the two most used
techniques for cultivation are the open raceway pond system (figure 2.9 ) and closed
photobioreactor [Harun et al. 2010].
Outdoor: Currently, the majority of microalgal production is dominated by outdoor
culti [Harun et al. 2010]. The popularity of outdoor cultivation relies on the lower
capital and operating cost by utilizing sunlight as the main energy source. Moreover,
using sea water instead of fresh water will reduce operating cost [Khan, Shin, and
Kim 2018]. The durability and scalability are also better in open ponds compared to
photoreactors [Rizwan et al. 2018]. However, to achieve feasible culture the biomass
output should be > 30 g/m2/day [Khan, Shin, and Kim 2018] which requires a
large surface area with a shallow depth. The dependency of sunlight also limits
the choice of location, because it is diﬀicult to maintain optimal condition due
to changing day/night cycle, weather and season [S. K. Wang et al. 2014]. The
18
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:27==
variation in key parameters such as light intensity, temperature, pH and dissolved
oxygen concentration also affects the growth rate and metabolism of the microalgae
[Harun et al. 2010]. In addition, outdoor cultivation is also more susceptible to
contamination.
Figure 2.9: Outdoor racepond cultativation system for N.oceanica located in Eilat,
Israel
Photobioreactor: Since the first concept of tubular photobioreactor was explored
by Pirt et al. [Muller-Feuga et al. 1998] several photobioreactors (PBRs) systems
including flat-plate, bubble spurge vertical column, and airlift PBR have been devel-
oped [Khanra et al. 2018]. Compared to outdoor cultivation, PBRs allows controlled
environment [De Morais et al. 2015] and they have a greater advantage in terms of
microalgae productivity, nutrient uptake eﬀiciency and culture density [Chew et al.
2017]. The systems that can obtain pure cultures, are not restricted to a location
and have high surface-to-volume ratio which allows for occupying smaller space [De
Morais et al. 2015]. The light utilization eﬀiciency is usually higher under artificial
light sources compared with natural sunlight [S. K. Wang et al. 2014]. The main
disadvantages of PBRs are the high initial cost and energy required with the use of
an artificial light source [Harun et al. 2010]. Despite the higher cost, circumstances
such as to produce high-value end-products or product that are targeted for medical
or pharmaceutical applications where regulatory requirement must be meet, using
artificial light source may be more economically feasible [Chew et al. 2017].
2.4.1
Harvesting
Harvesting’s main objective is to separate biomass from the culture medium. In
biodiesel application, this step accounts for 20-30 % of the total biomass production
cost [Rizwan et al. 2018]. Several techniques are available to achieve this goal includ-
ing gravity sedimentation, filtration, ultrafiltration, centrifugation, and sedimenta-
tion sometimes combined with flocculation or flocculation-floatation are combined
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
19
==PAGE:28==
[Khanra et al. 2018]. According to Richmond, quality of the product is one of the
main criteria for the selection of a suitable harvesting method [Harun et al. 2010].
For products used for food or aquaculture continuously operating centrifuges are
recommended since large volumes can be processed [Rizwan et al. 2018]. Floccula-
tion and gravity sedimentation are low-cost methods due to low energy requirement.
However, chemicals used in flocculation process can be significantly hazardous to the
environment and the separation is too slow in gravity sedimentation. In recent years
studies on tangential flow filtration and pressure filtration as energy eﬀicient dewa-
tering methods has proved to be the most competitive compared to other microalgae
harvesting options [Harun et al. 2010].
2.4.2
Dehydration
After harvesting, the microalgae biomass must undergo dehydration as part of a
common practice to extend the shelf-life of the final product. Some of the most
used drying methods are thermal, drum-drying, freeze-drying, spray-drying, and
sun-drying [Rizwan et al. 2018]. Sun drying is not effective at drying because of the
high content of water and spray drying is not an economical method for low-value
products [Rizwan et al. 2018]. For thermal drying different ranges of temperature
and time has been reported but in general a temperature at 60 C and a duration of
24 hr is used [Khanra et al. 2018]. Freeze-drying often operates at a temperature
range of −50 to −80 C with time duration around 24–48 hr [Khanra et al. 2018].
Compared to thermal drying, freeze-drying operation is both high energy demanding
and takes longer time.
2.4.3
Extraction
For recovery of intracellular bioactive compounds further treatment of biomass must
be performed. Before any chemical extraction the cell are disrupted using mechan-
ical or non-mechanical modes. Mechanical methods include bead mill, press, high-
pressure homogenisation, ultrasonication, autoclave, lyophilisation, and microwave
[Khanra et al. 2018]. For the non-mechanical methods acids, alkalis, enzymes, or
osmotic shocks are used to break the microalgal cells [Khanra et al. 2018]. Mechan-
ical pre-treatment methods (sonication, steam explosion and microwave radiation)
were found effective for large-scale operations [Khanra et al. 2018].
20
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Experimental design
In this project different experiments were conducted with the overall aim of obtaining
a new understanding of Nannochlorpipsis oceaniaca. The experimental work can
be divided into 4 studies and the objective of each study will be provided in the
following.
3.1
Study 1-4
Study 1: Analysis of vitamin D3 content and fatty acids in a strain of Nannochlorop-
sis oceanica cultivated in outdoor ponds in Israel
The aim of this study is to elucidate the impact of varying culture environments
on vitamin D3 and fatty acids in N.oceanica. In this study, the samples for the
analysis represent N. oceanica which were cultivation in outdoor pond through-
out several months (January,March,April,June,July,August,September and Octo-
ber) at “The National Center for Mariculture, Israel Oceanographic & Limnolog-
ical Research” in Israel in 2021. A continuous culture lasted for a month, where
samples for analysis were harvested at certain dates throughout the cultivation.
The harvested time interval for each sample is not necessarily the same for each
month. The dried samples seen in figure 3.1 were sent to DTU Food and analyse
of vitamin D3 content and fatty acids composition were performed. The cultiva-
tion parameters such as temperature, salinity, pH and cell concentration are moni-
tored and also provided for all months. The UV-index was found from online site:
https://www.weatheronline.co.uk/Israel/Eilat/UVindex.htm, at 24/11/2021.
Study 2: The interactive effect of indoor light duration and UVB exposure on biomass
production, vitamin D3 content and fatty acids composition for N. oceanica
In this study the main objective is to investigate the effect of different duration of
visible light on N.oceanica when the UVB exposure level remains the same. The
strain of N. oceanica (NIVA 2/03) was provided by the Norwegian Institute for water
research, Oslo, Norway. The experimental setup is illustrated in figure 3.2.
The light duration evaluated in this study consist of dark (protected from visible
light), 18 hr and 24 hr. Due to limited time, the experiment was conducted for
the minimum day necessary to observe any effect of light duration which took place
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.1: Experimental design where each culture has different light regime but
all was performed as triplicates
Figure 3.2: Experimental design where each culture was performed as triplicates
around day 4 in the study by Wahidin, Idris, and Shaleh 2013. A triplicate was per-
formed for each culture of 5L in a 8L rectangle box with the dimension of 34X25X16
cm. Since the cultivation system had only 6 functioning CO2 gas supplies, the three
different cultures could not run simultaneously. The culture with 18:06 hr photo-
period was conducted subsequently using an auto-timer to control light duration.
In figure 3.3 experimental setup for this sub-study is depicted.
To monitor biomass production, a sample of approx. 2 ml of each culture was taken
out and OD measurement at 750 nm was performed. As the measured OD value
approach 1, the samples were diluted in order to avoid inaccurate measurement.
Study 3: The effect of UVB on vitamin D3 content and fatty acids composition
between two different strains of Nannochloropsis oceanica
The purpose is to investigated any difference in the amount of vitamin D3 and fatty
acids composition between N.oceanica strain from Israel and Norway when both
22
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.3: On the left is shown triplicates of the two cultures with one in the
absence of light and the other with constant light exposure. The right photo shows
the inside of the setup used to prevent light illuminating the culture.
are exposed to UVB. For this experiment, 3L culture of the two different strains
with similar OD value was transferred to a 8L rectangle box (34X25X16 cm). A
triplicate was performed. The similarity in OD was archived by diluting the culture
with medium.
Study 4: N. oceanica ability to synthesize vitamin D3 at different stage in microalgae
processing
This study aims to determine whether processing steps after centrifugation and
freeze-drying has any effect on N. oceanica’s ability to produce vitamin D3 when
exposed to UVB. The procedure involves centrifugation of 1L of culture and transfer
the concentrated biomass onto petri dish. Afterwards, the sample underwent UVB
treatment with the same dose as previous. In addition, another sample which have
been through centrifugation and the freeze-dried process was also treated with UVB.
Both samples were done as triplicate.
3.2
Cultivation
For the studies 2-4 the microalgae biomass was cultivated from inoculum which were
sent from Norway and Israel. A pair of inoculum from Norway was in a medium of
20 mL while those from Israel was on a agar-plate. For both cases the cultivation
took place in 0.15g/L of Guillard F/2 medium and 35.3 g/L of seasalt. The room
temperature was 21±1 0C. The two inoculum from Norway was separately trans-
ferred into 100 mL bottle. The culture was left for growth with lit closed for 5 days
at a light intensity of 70-80 ￿mol photon/m2/s.The light was provided by LED lights
(SunFlux A/S, Glostrup, Denmark) and the intensity was measured using lightmeter
(Universal Light Meter ULM-500, Heinz Walz GmbH, Effeltrich, Germany) at the
outer surface of the bottle. Afterwards, 60 mL of medium was added to each bot-
tle and the position of the bottles was moved. At this position the light intensity
was measured as 35-40 photon/m2/s. After 3 days both culture was transferred to
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
23
==PAGE:32==
500 mL bottle. Medium was added so that the total volumen was 320 mL and air
and pH controlled was attached. Sterile air was used for mixing throughout the
cultivation. The pH was controlled and maintained at 7.5±0.5 using Millwaukee
MC-122-pH controller (Milwaukee Electronics, Szeged, Hungary) equipped with a
solenoid valve for controlling CO2 addition.
The culture was left for 4 days at 60-70 ￿mol photon/m2/s. One of the culture had
higher biomass production and was transffered to 3L and upscale to 1280 mL with
new medium. After additional 3 days of growth, the 3L was upscale to 5 L and the
second culture was upscale to 1280 mL. At this stage the light intensity was kept
around 80-100 ￿mol photon/m2/s. From the two bottles, a total of 25L culture was
prepared in five bottles of 5L and left for additional 7 days. Four of the five bottle
(20L) were then transferred into two separate 20L bottles (figure 3.4). After 3 days,
the experiment for study 2 was conducted. The age of the cell from inoculum to
experiment was 25 days. For the strain from Norway using a sterile plastic stick
some of the algae was transferred from the agar plate into a glass tube. Then same
procedure which was used for cultivation of the strain from Norway was applied.
In order to avoid contamination sanitizing was used during any direct involvement
with the culture as much as possible. In addition, at every step to reach 25L fresh
medium was added as part of maintaining the culture at the exponential growth
phase which were used for studies 2-4.
Figure 3.4: The cultivation experiment starting from innoculum in tube glass (bot-
tom left) to 5x5L bottles (top) and to 25L (bottom right).
3.3
UVB dose and culture sampling
UVB dose: The UVB in study 2-4 was provided by photocat w/ plexiglas. The
lamp was characterized and irradiance at a distance of 40cm was determined to be
1.82 W/m2 (figure 3.5). The charaterization method are described in the paper
24
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:33==
by Ložnjak Švarc, Rahimi, et al. 2022. Since each wavelengths ability to convert
7-DHC into vitamin D3 are different, CIE factor was used correct and determined
the vitD3 irradiance of 0.843 vitD3 W/m2. In our experiment, the distance was 22
cm between the surface of the samples and the lamp. To find the vitD3 irradiance at
22 cm a handheld UVB-photometer (ILT,1400-BL, International Light Technologies,
Peabody, MA, USA) was used to measure irradiance at 40 cm and at 22 cm. The
relative difference between these two measured values (2.52±0.01 and 4.11±0.01
W/m2) were then multiplied by 0.843 vitD3 W/m2 to get vitD3 irradiance of 1.37
vitD3 W/m2 at 22 cm. To arrived at the dose the irradice was then multiplied by
1.5 hr exposure time to get a dose of 7.4 vitD3 kJ/m2.
Figure 3.5: The UVB lamp used for experiment was characterized (left) and then
weighted for each wavelenghts effectiveness in producing vitamin D3 from 7-DHC
using CIE factor (right)
Culture sampling: To obtain dried biomass for biochemical analysis in study 2-4,
the respective volume used during the experiment were first separated for biomass
using centrifugation (refrigerated centrifuge, IEC Centra-GP8R, Buckinghamshire,
England) at 6000 g. Before freeze-drying (Beta 1–8, Martin Christ GmbH, Osterode,
Germany) the samples were washed with distilled water. After freeze-drying the
samples were stored in a refrigerator for few days before analysis.
3.4
Vitamin D analysis
The analysis of vitamin D3 and fatty acids composition are already established
methods and described in the papers by Barnkob et al. 2018 and Ložnjak Švarc,
Barnkob, and Jakobsen 2021. As part of assessing
Chemicals and reference materials: The internal standard 13C5-labeled vitamin
D3, 4-phenyl-1,2,4-triazoline-3,5-dione (PTAD), were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(Steinheim, Germany). ethanol (96%), sodium ascorbate and potassium hydroxide
were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ultra-pure Milli-Q were pre-
pared at DTU Food using Milli-Q Advantage A10 water deionizing system (18.2
MΩ, Millipore, Bradford, USA)
As for vitamin D analysis, microalgae sample of 0.02-0.1 g was weighted in a 50 mL
tube. 0.2 g of sodium ascorbate, 13C5-labeled vitamin D3 (8 ng) internal standard,
9 mL of ethanol and 3 mL of KOH 60% was all added to the tube and left for
saponification overnight with Multi Reax (1700 rpm) at room temperature. For
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
25
==PAGE:34==
extraction, 20% ethylacetat in n-heptane was used to extract the unsaponifiable
matter by liquid/liquid extraction. The extracted phase was dried using vacuum
centrifuge for 1hr 30min. Impurities left in the sample were removed by dissolving
the dried matter in 1 mL of ACN in 0.1% formic acid and performing hybrid solid-
phase extraction. The liquid was then evaporated under N2 gas at 35 C. The last part
of the sample preparation include derivatization by adding 4-phenyl-1,2,4-triazole-
3,5-dione (PTAD; Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) to the dried sample and
leave it in the dark for 5 min. The derivatization reaction was terminated using
75 uL water and the samples were transferred to HPLC vial. The prepared sample
was quantified using LC-MS/MS consisting of an Agilent 1200 Series HPLC and
Agilent 6470 Triple Quadrupole MS (Santa Clara, CA) coupled with a C18 column
(Ascentis Expess, 2.1 mm × 10 cm, 2.7 ￿m; Supelco Analytical, Bellafonte, PA).
And for the mobile phase the method include a gradient mobile phase of water:-
methanol including 2.5mM ammonium phosphate.
3.5
Fatty acids composition determination
The method used to determine fatty acids composition in the microalgae sample
was in accordance with the method developed by Safafar et al. with the title ”two-
step direct transesterification as a rapid method for the analysis of fatty acids in
microalgae” (Safafar et al. 2019).
Chemicals and reference materials: In the used method for determining FAME
composition, internal standard was used. The standards (C23:0 FAME) were pur-
chased from Sigma (St. Louise,USA) and Fluka (Deisenhofen, Germany). Other
chemicals including heptane, methanol, toluene, and BHT (butylated hydroxytoluene)
and boron trifluoride (BF3) were purchased from Sigma. And HPLC grade water
was prepared at DTU Food using Milli-Q Advantage A10 water deionizing system
from Millipore Corporation (Billerica, MA, USA).
The analysis was performed in duplicate with each sample consisting of approxi-
mately 40-50 mg of microalgae biomass. In a glass tube containing the weighted
biomass, 1 mL of 1 M NaOH in methanol, 1mL of toluene and 100 µL of internal
standard solution (2% (w/v)(C23:0) in n-heptane) were added. The sample then
underwent an ultrasound treatment for 10 min followed by heat treatment at 100 °C
in a bathtub for 2 min. After the sample was cooled, 2 mL of Boron trifluoride (BF3)
was added to the tube and a second heat treatment at same condition for 2 min took
place. Then, 2 mL of saturated salt solution and 1 mL of n-heptan with 0.01% BHT
solution were added to the cooled sample. The sample was mixed and the upper
phase (heptane) was transferred into GC vials and analyzed by gas chomatography
(HP-5890 A, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The separation of the
FAMEs took placed using GC column DB 127-7012 (10 ￿m*100 ￿m*0.1 ￿m), from
Agilent Technologies. The temperature program with an initial temperature of the
oven being 160°C was set as follows: 160–200 °C (10.6 °C/min), 200 °C kept for
0.3 min,200–220 °C (10.6 °C/min), 220 °C kept for 1 min,220–240 °C (10.6 °C/min)
and kept at 240 °C for 3.8 min.
26
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:35==
3.6
Statistical analysis
All biochemical analysis related to sub-study 1 was done in duplicate.One-way analy-
sis of variance (ANOVA) in Data Analysis function in Excel (Version 2201, Microsoft,
Redmond, WA, USA) was used to determine significant difference in the vitamin D3
and fatty acids between the groups where p-values ￿0.05 were considered significant.
Tukey-Kramer HSD test was used to determine the significant difference between
different light regime in study 2. For biological experiment involving cultivation and
different treatment which is the case for sub-study 2-4, a triplicate was performed.
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
27
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussions
In the analytical part of the project, for every batch of samples run to quantify
vitamin D3 and fatty acids content, a reference sample from previous study was
included as part of quality control. The reference sample that was used was from
January 8 and Marts 8. The result of the X-card, which can seen in appendix A.3,
showed a consistent, reproducible value throughout the analysis. The vitamin D3
content in January 8 was 62.1±2.1 ng/g (n=8) which is within the reference range of
58.7-66.7 ng/g. For EPA, the relative amount in the reference sample (Marts 8) was
24.0±0.9 % (n=7) which is also within the reference range of 21.6-25.7. Therefore,
the accuracy of the analysis is acceptable.
4.1
Study 1:
Vitamin D3 and fatty acids in a
strain of N. oceanica cultivated in outdoor
ponds in Israel
Outdoor cultivation is currently the most feasible and applied system for commer-
cial production of microalgae biomass, yet due to poor control of culture conditions
it is also associated with low productivity [S. K. Wang et al. 2014]. One of the key
parameters that is diﬀicult to control with current cultivation technology is natural
sunlight, since the variation depends on solar altitude. And solar altitude depends
on the time of day, day of year, and geographical location (latitude and longitude)
[L. Diffey 2015]. Solar radiation is also highly affected by absorption in the atmo-
sphere (ozone, pollutants, clouds) which ultimately changes the quality and quantity
of the sun rays. Similarly, temperature also varies with the changing nature of sun-
light availability. These constantly changing environments induce several different
adaptation mechanisms in the microalgae [Xue et al. 2005]. Especially when drastic
change (ex. change in UV-level) occurs which may impose stressful conditions for
the microalgae. If it also involves change in valuable bioactive compounds in the
organism, it is crucial to assess how it affects the overall quality of the product.
Such knowledge allows for taking considered actions during cultivation to avoid or
minimize the effect on the quality of the product. In figure 4.1 is presented the vari-
ation of vitamin D content in N. oceanica which were cultivated at different months
in race ponds in Israel.
28
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.1: Vitamin D content (µg/100 g dry matter) and cell concentration (cell-
s/mL) of samples were collected from culture at different months. The standard
deviations for vitamin D3 are represented as bars (n=2)
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
29
==PAGE:38==
In the figure, related cell concentration is also given but the values only represent a
single measurement.The data points show an increasing biomass productivity during
the first week for all the months. In addition, the cell concentration is below 6*105
cells/mL in the first 4 days of cultivation except for June. At this level, the vitamin
D3 content is above the numerical value for cell concentration for all month except
for January. The vitamin D3 content reaches the highest attainable during this time-
span for each particular month for all months. At the next sampling point around
day 16, most of the culture have reached a cell concentration of close to 10*105
cell/mL. At this point the vitamin D3 content has dropped to 7.5 (µg/100 g DW)
whereas the value was above this value for all months expect for January. Subsequent
data points sampled around day 24 and 30 show that for March, June, September
and October the cell concentration was above 10*105 cell/mL. Regarding August and
April no data was available in this period. In addition, for July and January the cell
concentration remain below 7*105 cell/mL and with the available data it is only for
these two months where the numerical value of vitamin D3 content is above that of
cell concentration. In summary, the vitamin D3 content seems to be controlled by
the cell concentration which is in agreement with current understanding.
The growth of N.oceaninca is significantly influenced by nitrate, temperature and
pH [Kumaran et al. 2021]. Optimal temperature of 22oC [Kumaran et al. 2021],
24oC [Sandnes et al. 2005b] and 25oC [Chini Zittelli et al. 1999] for growth of Nan-
nochloropsis spp. has been reported. One possible explanation for the difference
in the reported values is that the effect of temperature are species and strain spe-
cific [Kumaran et al. 2021. In the study of Chini Zittelli et al., Nannochloropsis
sp. was cultivated in outdoor bioreactors from March to September in Florence,
Italy. During this period the low performances of cultures in July and August were
attributed to prolonged exposure to supraoptimal diurnal temperatures (5 oC above
25 oC)) and high irradiances at midday [Chini Zittelli et al. 1999]. In figure 4.2, the
average temperature of cultures cultivated in outdoor racepond in Eilat is recorded
to be highest in the month of July (23.6±1.0) and August (24.5±1.84). The highest
temperature of 25.9 was also recorded in July (data can be seen in appendix B.1).
In the same figure, average UV-index data from meteorological services available
online shows similar development as for temperature in the period from January to
October. Though the UV-index does not represent the actual UVB level hitting on
the surface of the culture, a combination of its average value and temperature sug-
gests an existence of unfavorable conditions for growth during July and August. The
biomass production then increases as the average temperature decreases to 20.7±0.9
in October. The monthly average cell concentration also increases with increasing
temperature from 13.1±1.7 in January to 21.2±1.3 in June. Other factors such as
salinity and pH seem not to have any significant impact on the growth. For salinity,
average biomass productivity increases regardless of whether the salinity is around
50 ppt in the first quarter of 2020 (January, March, April) or below 40 ppt in Au-
gust, September and October. A similar observation is also made for pH, where the
average monthly biomass also increases when the average pH value is close to 8.5
as in August and October or close to 10 as in March, April and June. On the basis
of our data and in the absence of data for solar irradiance and nitrate level, the
optimal temperature for the strain of N.oceaninca cultivated at this center is likely
closer to 20 oC than it is to 25 oC or below 20 oC. But it is not straightforward to
30
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:39==
established the effect of temperature when both temperature and irradiance change
during the day and month.
Figure 4.2: Data of parameters monitored throughout cultivation period in Israel.
The unit for each parameter is stated
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
31
==PAGE:40==
Temperature also has an effect on lipid in N.gaditana, where lipid accumulation was
high at 20 oC and decreases with increasing temperature [Camacho-Rodríguez et al.
2015]. For specific fatty acids such as EPA, Nannochloropsis cultivated at 20 °C had
a higher level than those at 30 °C [Sukenik, Yamaguchi, and Livne 1993]. In this,
study fatty acids composition of N.oceanica (figure 4.3) showed changes throughout
cultivation across different months. There are no fatty acid analyses for the months
of January and March since this period was not covered in this project. As for key
components such as EPA and 16:0, there were no significant difference in the average
amount between different months (full data in appendix B.2). However, a difference
is observed (p<0.06) between amount of EPA in July compared to June.
32
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.3: Amount of fatty acids (g/100g DW) in N. oceanica cultivated at different
month in 2021. The bars indicate standard deviation (n=2)
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
33
==PAGE:42==
4.2
Study 2: The interactive effect of indoor UVB
and light duration on N.oceanica
Though it is diﬀicult to compare results from studies because of difference in the
species or cultivation conditions, it is generally accepted that when it comes to high
UVB doses and its effect on microalgae growth, substantial evidence reports that
inhibition takes place due to impairment in different biochemical processes [Xue
et al. 2005]. In this study, growth is observed for two of the cultures(UVB-L0 and
UVB-L18 in figure 4.4) where the maximum cell density is observed for both at day 2.
As seen in figure 4.4, the maximum cell density is reached in the culture where light
is provided constantly throughout the cultivation period. However, the cell density
is around 20% lower for cultures cultivated in the absence of light. A similar result
was demonstrated by Kumar et al. which investigated the role of visible light (VL)
on reversing UV-B-mediated negative effects on N2-fixing cyanobacterium Anabaena
BT2 [A. Kumar et al. 2003]. Anabaena BT2 was cultivated in a medium followed by
UVB exposure at different intensity (0.1-2.4 W/m2) for 2 hours and in combination
with visible light where the intensity was 14.4 hr W/m2 and provided with 14:10 hr
photoperiod. At the highest UVB treatment, growth was observed in the culture
with combined UVB and VL after a 2 days lag phase. For the culture with only UVB
treatment, growth was only observed at the lowest UVB intensity. In addition, since
the growth was lower than culture in the presence of VL, it showed that VL provide
some form of protection for cellular growth. They also observed improved 14CO2
uptake and RuBISCO activity in the presence of visible light after UVB-exposure
which suggested an existence of active photoreactivation system. Similarly, on the
basis on our results for these two cultures (UVB-L0 and UVB-L24), it seems that
the presence of visible light also provides some form of photoprotection for growth
in N. oceaninca. The subsequent decline in biomass as reflected by a decrease in the
OD values for both cultures is a result of what is usually observed in batch cultures
as nutrient level becomes insuﬀiciently low.
In contrary to what has been expected, no significant growth was observed in the
culture cultivated in the supposed optimal visible light regimen of 18:06 hr. This
is surprising since the UVB dose does not totally inhibit growth as seen with the
culture treated with UVB alone.
It should be noted that the difference between the cultures include more than the
difference in the light regime. As it was not possible to conduct all three cultures
at the same time, the culture with a light regime of 18:06 hr was postponed. Con-
sequently, the N.oceanica was 5 days older in the culture at light regime of 18:06
hr. In addition, the initial cell concentration is also lower than the two cultures
where the starting cell density are almost identical. The lower initial cell density
may be responsible for the cells being exposed to more UVB, due to less mutual
shading effects among the cells. This is also the best explanation for why vitamin
D3 content is significantly higher in this culture compared to the two others. In
figure 4.5, the vitamin D3 content was 19.3±1.4 while for culture under UVB only
and with constant light, the values are 3.1±0.1 and 7.7±0.4, respectively. In a study
by Ljubic et al., light penetration was drastically reduced to almost zero for culture
of A. maxima at day 4 with OD (750nm) value of 1.1 and measured at 7 cm from
34
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.4: OD measurements for three different cultures in the timespan of 4 days.
The bars indicate standard deviation (n=3)
the light exposed side(Ljubic, Holdt, et al. 2021). Since our experimental setup is
similar to their study, it can also be expected that light attenuation (including UVB)
would become larger as the cell concentration increases over the cultivation period.
But light attenuation would almost remain the same for light regime 18:06 hr as
the OD did not change. Consequently, as more cells are exposed to higher doses of
UVB in cultures with lower OD and since it have been demonstrated that a linear
relationship exist between vitamin D3 concentration in N. oceanica and UVB dose
[Ljubic, Jacobsen, et al. 2020], the result in figure 4.5 is reasonable. A combination
of higher UVB stress and lower visible light exposure time may explain the possi-
ble prolonged lag phase in the 18 hr culture. In the study by Wahidin, Idris, and
Shaleh, the optimal photoperiod of 18:06 hr was only applicable at light intensity
of 100 umol/m2*s. When the light intensity was at 50 umol/m2*s, the light regime
of 24:0 hr was the most optimal since the light intensity imposed photolimitation
conditions. Therefore, increasing light dose by extending the time of light exposure
improved growth [Wahidin, Idris, and Shaleh 2013]. Therefore, a possible reason
why 18:06 hr has a lower performance in terms of biomass productivity than 24:00
hr, might be a combined effect of higher UVB stress and photolimitation conditions.
Differences in UVB doses as a result of changing light penetration depth is not the
only factor explaining the variation in vitamin D3 between the cultures. Otherwise,
the culture cultivated in the dark (UVB only) would have higher vitamin D3 con-
tent since its cell concentration is lower than the culture with constant light. In
figure 4.6, the fatty acid composition in the three cultures are presented. Signifi-
cant differences are observe for monounsaturated fatty acids such as 16:1(n-7) and
18:1(n-9) and for saturated fatty acids such as tetradecanoate (14:0), hexadecanoic
acid (16:0) and octadecanoic acid (18:0). For polyunsaturated fattys acids such as
20:4(n-6) and eicosapentaenoic acid(20:5(n-3)) no significant differences exist. The
only PUFA with significant difference between cultures with visible light and with-
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.5: Vitamin D3 content (µg/100 g DW) in N. oceanica cultivated under
different light regime with constant UVB exposure. Control refers to culture before
any treatment of UVB or light regime. The bars indicate standard deviation (n=3)
the different letter above the bars represent significant differences (p<0.01)
out is for 18:2(n-6). These results indicate that the presence of visible light has a role
in biosynthesis of specific types of fatty acids, particularly the saturated fatty acids.
Sukenik and Carmeli have shown that storage triacylglycerol (TAGs) lipids which
mainly consist of 14:0, 16:0 and 16:1(n-7) in Nannochloropsis spp. are synthesized
and accumulated during the light period and rapidly consumed along with carbon-
hydrates for cellular maintenance during dark periods [Assaf Sukenik and Carmeli
1990]. Chini Zittelli et al. also observed the influence of the natural light-dark cycle
on the fatty acid composition in the biomass of Nannochlopsis spp. [Chini Zittelli et
al. 1999]. They report how the content of saturated (14:0, 16:0) and monosaturated
(16:1(n-7) and 18:1(n-9)) decrease significantly by 5.4% for the lowest and up to 16%
for the largest change. For PUFAs, 20:4(n-6) showed no significant difference while
a change of 24% and 7% was observed for 18:2(n-6) and EPA, respectively. However,
the increase of both EPA and 18:2(n-6) was relative, and was a result of night con-
sumption of storage material (carbohydrates, and saturated and monounsaturated
fatty acids) (Chini Zittelli et al. 1999).
Similarly, our findings on the composition of fatty acids in figure 4.7 also reflects
how the dark period influence relative change in PUFAs. The relative amount of
PUFAs is lowest (27%) in the culture with 24 hr availability of visible light whereas
it increases to 33% and 48% in the culture with light availability of 18 hr and 0 hr,
respectively. However, the absolute amount of EPA appears not to be affected. The
amount of vitamin D3 synthesizes by N.oceanica seems to be affected by a combined
effect of the dose of UVB (as already established in studies by Ljubic, Jacobsen, et al.
2020) and products synthesized in the presence of visible light.
It has been demonstrated that treated samples of 3 days dark period induced in-
creases in production of b-carotene and total carotenoid content in N.oceaninca as a
way to improve the harvesting of photons and allow cells to optimize light-harvesting
capacity under reduced light [Chua et al. 2020]. An analysis of these caroteniods
could provide information on the combined effect of UVB and the role of dark pe-
36
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.6: Amount of fatty acids (mg/g DW) in N. oceanica cultivated under
different light regime with constant UVB exposure. The bars indicate standard de-
viation (n=3) and the different letter above the bars represent significant differences
(p<0.05)
riod. Caroteniods are known to have strong antioxidant capacities and can scavage
ROS species. Under UVB stress Ljubic, Thulesen, et al. 2021 and V. Kumar et al.
2018 reported reduction in B-carotene in N.oceanica and Chlorelle sp., respectively.
Furthermore, the effect of UVB in the dark culture could not be evaluated since a
culture without UVB was not included in the experiments. Such a culture would
have elucidated the overall effect of UVB on biomass production and fatty acids
composition. It would also demonstrate if growth was due to the photons provided
by the UVB or from other sources, such as during sampling where the box was
opened for exposure.
Figure 4.7: Fatty acid composition in N. oceanica cultivated under different light
regime with constant UVB exposure
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
37
==PAGE:46==
4.3
Study 3: The effect of UVB on vitamin D3 and
fatty acids composition between two different
strains of N.oceanica
The initial plan for this study included a comparison between the two different
strains of Nannochloropsis oceanica from Israel and Norway, as it relates to their
biomass productivity, vitamin D content and fatty acids when cultivated under
supposed optimal condition at 18:06 hr photo-period. However, the cultivation of N.
oceanica from Israel faced problems and was not able to provide with the necessary
volume for the experiment at due time. Consequently, the objective was altered
by only focusing on the effects of UV-B on vitamin D3 content and fatty acids
composition from these two different strains.
As known, UVB radiation triggers the production of vitamin D3 which can be seen
in the significant differences in the amount of vitamin D3 between control (NW-
control and IS-control) and exposed culture (NW+UVB and IS+UVB) in figure 4.8.
Surprisingly, though the species are the same, difference in the strain of N.oceanica
shows significant difference in their ability to produce vitamin D3. Compared to
their respective controlled group, the strain from Norway and Israel had an increase
in amount of 14.3 and 19.2 times, respectively. The OD values were 0.674 ±0.003
for strain from Norway and 0.653±0.004 for that of Israel. At a UVB dose of 7.4
kJ/m2 the production of vitamin D3in N.oceanica strain from Israel is 48.5% more
than the strain from Norway.
Figure 4.8: Content of vitamin D_3 in strain of N. oceanica from Norway (NW) and
from Israel (IS). Control sample are not exposed to UVB while UVB treated culture
are exposed to a dose of 7.4 D3 kJ/m2̂. he bars indicate standard deviation (n=3)
and the different letter above the bars represent significant differences (p<0.01)
In terms of UVB effects on fatty acids composition between the difference strains,
there were no significant difference between before and after UVB treatment as
depicted in figure 4.9. It is likely because of a change in lipid composition is an
acclimation adaption mechanism which takes more time than the 1.5 hr treatment
time. However, a significant difference in the relative amount of MUFAs and SAFAs
is present between the two control cultures. This difference could be due to small
variations such as irradiance during the cultivation upto the point of UVB treatment
38
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:47==
or as a result of genetic differences in the strain.
Figure 4.9: Relative composition (%) of different groups of fatty acids in N. ocean-
ica strafrom Norway (NW) and from Israel (IS). The bars indicate standard devia-
tion (n=3) and the different letter above the bars represent significant differences
(p<0.05)
4.4
Study 4: N.oceanica ability to synthesize vi-
tamin D3 at different stage in microalgae pro-
cessing
In vibrates the synthesize of vitamin D3 in the skin tissue is well understood. 7-
DHC in the skin tissue are converted into pre-vitamin D3 when exposed to high
energy irradiation in the form of UVB. At room temperature pre-vitamin D are
converted to vitamin D3 due to termodynamically instability of pre-vitamin D3 at
room temperature [Havinga 1973]. As part of process optimization in production of
vitamin D3, Ljubic, Jacobsen, et al. 2020 investigated whether up-concentration of
biomass would have significant effect on vitamin D3 production. When concentrated
biomass collected after centrifugation was exposed to UVB of 15-16 kJ/m2/s the
produced amount of vitamin D3 was 1.3±0.4 µg/100g DW. Our study also reports a
vitamin D3 content of 1.9±0.2 when exposed to 7.4 kJ/m*2 of vitamin D3 effective
UVB dose. A useful comparison of absolute vitamin D amount cannot be made
since the lamps and dose were different between the studies, however they have
reported vitamin D3 content of 28.5±0.5 in live growing culture. This difference is
insignificant in our culture where the amount of vitamin D3 was 1.9±0.04 in living
culture with OD values of 0.653±0.004 (seen in figure 4.10). On the basis of our
findings, when it comes to vitamin D3 content, it makes no difference whether UVB
treatment takes place in a culture where cell mass only accounts for (0.1-0.3% DW)
or after the biomass are harvested using centrifugation where the biomass is 20-30%
DW. The percentages of biomass in the different samples are approximated in the
same study by Ljubic, Jacobsen, et al. 2020.
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.10: Vitamin D3 content in samples of N.oceanica at different processing
steps. The result of sample (NW+UVB) is taken from study 3. The bars indicate
standard deviation (n=3) and the different letter above the bars represent significant
differences (p<0.05)
Yet, it is important to note that the amounts are relatively low compared to other
natural sources of the vitamin. The highest reported amount of vitamin D3 found
in farmed (9.4± µg/100 g DW) and wild salmon (18.5±4.6 µg/100 g DW) are
considerably higher [Jakobsen et al. 2019]. Especially for the freeze dried biomass
where the content is as low as 0.48±0.1. It is arguable whether the low amount
found in freeze-dried biomass is only due to the decrease in moisture level which
reduce the irraidince surface area or due to alteration of biosynthesis of precursors
for vitamin D3. Ljubic, Jacobsen, et al. 2020 observed a decrease in the precursor,
7-DHC amount in the biomass after centrifugation and freeze-dried compared to
control. However, it was inconclusive since they also saw an increase for the live
growing culture. In case, the fall in 7-DHC level took place as a result of UVB
exposure, it would be interesting to investigate the maximum attainable amount of
vitamin D3 by increasing the UVB dose in harvested biomass or free-dried.
40
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and future
perspectives
5.1
Future perspectives
The role of vitamin D3 in human is to maintain and regulate calcium and phos-
phorous level [DeLuca 2004].
In plants intermediates in the synthesis route of
1α,25(OH)2D3 such as, 7-DHC, vitamin D3 and 25(OH)D3 have also been detected
in several plants, and it is believed that the pathway are the same as in animals
[Boland et al. 2003]. It has also been reported that vitamin D3 in culture of P. vul-
garis root segments stimulates Ca2+ uptake [Boland et al. 2003]. In the study of the
cross-talk relationship between ROS and calcium signaling, Zhang et al. concluded
that in Dunaliella salina responding to UV-B stimuli, the ROS and calcium signal-
ing pathways are linked [Zhang, Tang, M. Wang, et al. 2017]. ROS are byproducts
mainly due to the activation of a plasma membrane-bound NADPH oxidase or as
a result of metabolic disruption for responding to external UV-B radiation [Zhang,
Tang, M. Wang, et al. 2017]. Ca2+ directly activates NADPH oxidase to produce
ROS, while ROS also modulate cytosolic Ca2+ by activating the calcium channels.
Of my best knowledge, the role of D3 as it relates to cross-talk relationship between
ROS and calcium signaling has not been investigated yet. Therefore, such study may
elevate our understanding of microalgae responds to UV-B stimuli. In our study the
strain from Israel had significant difference with respect to its vitamin D3, MUFAs
and SAFAs amount under same UVB exposure. The strain specific response open
up for investigation into characterization of the structure and regulation of the genes
coding for vitamin D3,
Scytonemin and mycosporine-like amino acids have maximum absorbtion at 334 nm
and provide photoprotection to cyanobacterie against UV radiation [Xue et al. 2005].
The presence of these compounds and its effect on vitamin D3 yield in N.ceanica is
yet to be disclose.
5.2
Conclusion
The biomass productivity of N.oceaninca cultivated in outdoor raceponds in Eilat,
Israel are affected by the temperature of the culture. The lowest monthly average
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
41
==PAGE:50==
cell concentration are recorded in the month of lowest monthly average temperature
(January and March) and the highest (July and August). For other factors such as
salinity, pH and culture volume, there were no clear indication of any significant im-
pact induced by these factors on biomass production. Despite in the absence of data
for January and March, there were no significant difference in the fatty acids com-
position between the different months. Furthermore, the tendency of the variation
in vitamin D3 content shows that it is affected by the biomass concentration.
The culture cultivated under indoor UVB dose of 7.4 vitD3 kJ/m2 and visible light
with intensity of 100 umol/m2*s for a light regime of 24:00 hr showed highest biomass
production. In the absence of visible light, growth was reduced. In addition, the
culture with a light regime of 18:06 hr was not able to grow in the 4 days of the
cultivation period. In terms of fatty acids composition, both cultures cultivated
under visible light showed significantly higher content of saturated (14:0 and 16:0)
and monounsaturated ((16:1(n-7) and 18:1(n-9)) compared to the culture cultivated
in the dark. Due to lower biomass and higher UVB stress, the culture with light
regime of 18:06 hr had the highest production of vitamin D3 19.3±1.4. Though
the culture exposed to the light regime of 24:00 hr had a higher biomass compared
to the culture with only UVB treatment, the vitamin D3 was still higher (7.7±0.4)
3.1±0.1. On the basis of these results, it can be concluded that the vitamin D3 yield
is a combined effect of visible light and UVB dose.
Our results also suggested that the ability to produce vitamin D3 in N.oceanica
is strain-specific. When both cultures with similar OD values were exposed to 7.4
vitD3 kJ/m2 in the presence of visible light, the strain from Israel was able to
produce 48.5% more of vitamin D3. However, the UVB treatment did not have
any significant impact on the fatty acid composition. But, the MUFAs and SAFAs
present in control cultures for the strain from Israel was significantly higher than
that in the control culture from Norway.
In the case of processing steps, harvested biomass after centrifugation had no sig-
nificant difference in the content of vitamin D3 compared to the living growing cul-
ture of N.oceanica when both were exposed to 7.4 vitD3 kJ/m2 . The freeze-dried
biomass had 0.48±0.1µg/100g DW of vitamin D3 which was significantly lower than
1.9±0.04µg/100g DW
42
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
Abu-Rezq, Tawfiq S. et al. (1999a). “Optimum production conditions for differ-
ent high-quality marine algae”. eng. In: Hydrobiologia 403.0, pp. 97–107. issn:
00188158, 15735117. doi: 10.1023/A:1003725626504.
– (1999b). “Optimum production conditions for different high-quality marine algae”.
eng. In: Hydrobiologia 403.0, pp. 97–107. issn: 00188158, 15735117. doi: 10.1023/
A:1003725626504.
Araújo, Rita et al. (2020). “Current Status of the Algae Production Industry in Eu-
rope: An Emerging Sector of the Blue Bioeconomy”. eng. In: Frontiers in Marine
Science 7, p. 626389. issn: 22967745. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2020.626389.
Babu, G. Suresh, P. C. Joshi, and P. N. Viswanathan (1998). “UVB-induced reduc-
tion in biomass and overall productivity of cyanobacteria”. eng. In: Biochemical
and Biophysical Research Communications 244.1, pp. 138–142. issn: 10902104,
0006291x. doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.8224.
Barnkob, Line Lundbæk et al. (2018). “Vitamin D enhanced pork from pigs exposed
to artificial UVB light in indoor facilities”. eng. In: European Food Research and
Technology 245.2, pp. 411–418. issn: 14382385, 14382377. doi: 10.1007/s00217-
018-3173-6.
Bikle, Daniel D. (2016). “Extraskeletal actions of vitamin D”. eng. In: Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 1376.1. Ed. by M Zaidi, pp. 29–52. issn: 17496632,
00778923. doi: 10.1111/nyas.13219.
Bikle, Daniel D., Sofie Malmstroem, and Janice Schwartz (2017). “Current Con-
troversies: Are Free Vitamin Metabolite Levels a More Accurate Assessment of
Vitamin D Status than Total Levels?” eng. In: Endocrinology and Metabolism
Clinics of North America 46.4, pp. 901–918. issn: 15584410, 08898529. doi: 10.
1016/j.ecl.2017.07.013.
Boland, Ricardo et al. (2003). “Vitamin D compounds in plants”. eng. In: Plant Sci-
ence 164.3, pp. 357–369. issn: 18732259, 01689452. doi: 10.1016/S0168-9452(02)
00420-X.
Borowitzka, Michael A. (2018a). “Chapter 3 - Biology of Microalgae”. In: Microalgae
in Health and Disease Prevention. Ed. by Ira A. Levine and Joël Fleurence. Aca-
demic Press, pp. 23–72. isbn: 978-0-12-811405-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-811405-6.00003-7.
– (2018b). “Chapter 9 - Microalgae in Medicine and Human Health: A Historical Per-
spective”. In: Microalgae in Health and Disease Prevention. Ed. by Ira A. Levine
and Joël Fleurence. Academic Press, pp. 195–210. isbn: 978-0-12-811405-6. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811405-6.00009-8.
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
43
==PAGE:52==
Camacho-Rodríguez, J. et al. (2015). “The influence of culture conditions on biomass
and high value product generation by Nannochloropsis gaditana in aquaculture”.
eng. In: Algal Research 11, pp. 63–73. issn: 22119264. doi: 10.1016/j.algal.2015.
05.017.
Cashman, Kevin D., Kirsten G. Dowling, et al. (2016). “Vitamin D deficiency in Eu-
rope: Pandemic?” eng. In: American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 103.4, pp. 1033–
1044. issn: 19383207, 00029165. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.115.120873.
Cashman, Kevin D., Tony Sheehy, and Colette M. O’Neill (2019). “Is vitamin D
deficiency a public health concern for low middle income countries? A systematic
literature review”. eng. In: European Journal of Nutrition 58.1, pp. 433–453. issn:
14366215, 14366207. doi: 10.1007/s00394-018-1607-3.
Chew, Kit Wayne et al. (2017). “Microalgae biorefinery: High value products perspec-
tives”. eng. In: Bioresource Technology 229, pp. 53–62. issn: 18732976, 09608524.
doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.01.006.
Chini Zittelli, G. et al. (1999). “Production of eicosapentaenoic acid by Nannochlorop-
sis sp. cultures in outdoor tubular photobioreactors”. In: Journal of Biotechnology
70.1. Biotechnological Aspects of Marine Sponges, pp. 299–312. issn: 0168-1656.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-1656(99)00082-6.
Christakos, Sylvia et al. (2016). “Vitamin D: Metabolism, Molecular Mechanism of
Action, and Pleiotropic Effects”. eng. In: Physiological Reviews 96.1, pp. 365–408.
issn: 15221210, 00319333. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00014.2015.
Chua, Elvis T. et al. (2020). “Cold and dark treatments induce omega-3 fatty acid
and carotenoid production in Nannochloropsis oceanica”. In: Algal Research 51,
p. 102059. issn: 2211-9264. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.2020.102059.
De Morais, Michele Greque et al. (2015). “Biologically Active Metabolites Synthe-
sized by Microalgae”. eng. In: Biomed Research International 2015, p. 835761.
issn: 23146141, 23146133. doi: 10.1155/2015/835761.
DeLuca, Hector F. (2004). “Overview of general physiologic features and functions
of vitamin D”. eng. In: American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 80.6, 1689S–96S.
issn: 19383207, 00029165. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/80.6.1689s.
Harun, Razif et al. (2010). “Bioprocess engineering of microalgae to produce a variety
of consumer products”. eng. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 14.3,
pp. 1037–1047. issn: 18790690, 13640321. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2009.11.004.
Havinga, E (1973). “Vitamin-D, Exemple and challenge”. eng. In: Experientia 29.10,
pp. 1181–1193. issn: 00144754, 14209071, 1420682x. doi: 10.1007/BF01935064.
Holick, Michael F. (2007). “Medical progress: Vitamin D deficiency”. eng. In: New
England Journal of Medicine 357.3, pp. 266–281. issn: 15334406, 00284793. doi:
10.1056/NEJMra070553.
Al-Hoqani, Umaima, Rosanna Young, and Saul Purton (2017). “The biotechnologi-
cal potential of Nannochloropsis”. eng. In: Perspectives in Phycology 4.1, pp. 1–15.
issn: 2198011x, 23646993. doi: 10.1127/pip/2016/0065.
J.P., Sexton and Lomas M.W. (2018). Microalgal systematics. Cited by: 1, pp. 73–
107. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-811405-6.00004-9.
Jacob-Lopes, Eduardo et al. (2019). “Bioactive food compounds from microalgae: an
innovative framework on industrial biorefineries”. eng. In: Current Opinion in Food
Science 25, pp. 1–7. issn: 22148000, 22147993. doi: 10.1016/j.cofs.2018.12.003.
44
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:53==
Jakobsen, Jette et al. (2019). “Vitamin D in Wild and Farmed Atlantic Salmon
(Salmo Salar)-What Do We Know?” eng. In: Nutrients 11.5, p. 982. issn: 20726643.
doi: 10.3390/nu11050982.
Jäpelt, Rie Bak and Jette Jakobsen (2013). “Vitamin D in plants: a review of oc-
currence, analysis, and biosynthesis”. eng. In: Frontiers in Plant Science 4.MAY,
p. 136. issn: 1664462x. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00136.
Juneja, Ankita, Ruben Michael Ceballos, and Ganti S. Murthy (2013). “Effects of
environmental factors and nutrient availability on the biochemical composition
of algae for biofuels production: A review”. eng. In: Energies 6.9, pp. 4607–4638.
issn: 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en6094607.
Khan, Muhammad Imran, Jin Hyuk Shin, and Jong Deog Kim (2018). “The promis-
ing future of microalgae: Current status, challenges, and optimization of a sus-
tainable and renewable industry for biofuels, feed, and other products”. eng. In:
Microbial Cell Factories 17.1, p. 36. issn: 14752859. doi: 10.1186/s12934-018-
0879-x.
Khanra, Saumyakanti et al. (2018). “Downstream processing of microalgae for pig-
ments, protein and carbohydrate in industrial application: A review”. eng. In:
Food and Bioproducts Processing 110, pp. 60–84. issn: 17443571, 09603085. doi:
10.1016/j.fbp.2018.02.002.
Khoeyi, Zahra Amini, Jafar Seyfabadi, and Zohreh Ramezanpour (2012). “Effect
of light intensity and photoperiod on biomass and fatty acid composition of the
microalgae, Chlorella vulgaris”. eng. In: Aquaculture International 20.1, pp. 41–49.
issn: 1573143x, 09676120. doi: 10.1007/s10499-011-9440-1.
Kumar, Ashok et al. (2003). “Role of white light in reversing UV-B-mediated effects
in the N2-fixing cyanobacterium Anabaena BT2”. eng. In: Journal of Photochem-
istry and Photobiology B: Biology 71.1-3, pp. 35–42. issn: 18732682, 10111344.
doi: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2003.07.002.
Kumar, Vinod et al. (2018). “The effects of ultraviolet radiation on growth, biomass,
lipid accumulation and biodiesel properties of microalgae”. eng. In: Energy Sources,
Part A: Recovery, Utilization and Environmental Effects 40.7, pp. 787–793. issn:
15567230, 15567036. doi: 10.1080/15567036.2018.1463310.
Kumaran, Jisha et al. (2021). “Enhanced biomass production and proximate compo-
sition of marine microalga Nannochloropsis oceanica by optimization of medium
composition and culture conditions using response surface methodology”. eng. In:
Animal Feed Science and Technology 271, p. 114761. issn: 03778401, 18732216.
doi: 10.1016/j.anifeedsci.2020.114761.
L. Diffey, Brian (2015). “Sources and measurement of ultraviolet radiation”. eng. In:
Lehmann, Ulrike et al. (2015). “Eﬀicacy of fish intake on Vitamin D status: A meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials”. eng. In: American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 102.4, pp. 837–847. issn: 19383207, 00029165. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.114.
105395.
Ljubic, Anita (2020). “Novel microalgal based ingredients”. eng. In:
Ljubic, Anita, Susan L. Holdt, et al. (2021). “Fatty acids, carotenoids, and toco-
pherols from microalgae: Targeting the accumulation by manipulating the light
during growth”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Phycology 33.5, pp. 2783–2793. issn:
15735176, 09218971. doi: 10.1007/s10811-021-02503-2.
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
45
==PAGE:54==
Ljubic, Anita, Charlotte Jacobsen, et al. (2020). “Microalgae Nannochloropsis ocean-
ica as a future new natural source of vitamin D”. eng. In: Food Chemistry 320,
p. 126627. issn: 18737072, 03088146. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.126627.
Ljubic, Anita, Elisabeth Thule Thulesen, et al. (2021). “UVB exposure stimulates
production of vitamin D3 in selected microalgae”. eng. In: Algal Research 59,
p. 102472. issn: 22119264. doi: 10.1016/j.algal.2021.102472.
Ložnjak Švarc, Petra, Line Lundbæk Barnkob, and Jette Jakobsen (2021). “Quan-
tification of vitamin D3 and 25-hydroxyvitamin D in food – The impact of eluent
additives and labelled internal standards on matrix effects in LC-MS/MS anal-
ysis”. eng. In: Food Chemistry 357, p. 129588. issn: 18737072, 03088146. doi:
10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.129588.
Ložnjak Švarc, Petra, Marzia Rahimi, et al. (2022). “Bio-Fortified Pork Cracklings
with UVB LED Tailored Content of Vitamin D3”. eng. In: Foods 11.5, p. 726. issn:
23048158. doi: 10.3390/foods11050726.
McKenna, Malachi J. and Mark Kilbane (2022). “Vitamin D Deficiency”. eng. In:
Endocrinology and Diabetes, pp. 245–256. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-90684-9_23.
Morales, Marjorie, Claude Aflalo, and Olivier Bernard (2021). “Microalgal lipids: A
review of lipids potential and quantification for 95 phytoplankton species”. eng. In:
Biomass and Bioenergy 150, p. 106108. issn: 18732909, 09619534. doi: 10.1016/j.
biombioe.2021.106108.
Muller-Feuga, A. et al. (1998). “Comparison of artificial light photobioreactors and
other production systems using Porphyridium cruentum”. eng. In: Journal of
Applied Phycology 10.1, pp. 83–90. issn: 09218971, 15735176. doi: 10.1023/A:
1008046814640.
O’Neill, Colette M. et al. (2016). “Seasonal changes in vitamin D-effective UVB
availability in Europe and associations with population serum 25-hydroxyvitamin
D”. eng. In: Nutrients 8.9, p. 533. issn: 20726643. doi: 10.3390/nu8090533.
Pilz, Stefan et al. (2018). “Rationale and plan for vitamin D food fortification: A
review and guidance paper”. eng. In: Frontiers in Endocrinology 9, p. 373. issn:
16642392. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2018.00373.
Rao, D. S. and N. Raghuramulu (1996). “Food chain as origin of vitamin D in fish”.
eng. In: Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology - a Physiology 114.1, pp. 15–19.
issn: 03009629. doi: 10.1016/0300-9629(95)02024-1.
Richmond, Amos (2013). “Biological Principles of Mass Cultivation of Photoau-
totrophic Microalgae”. eng. In: Handbook of Microalgal Culture: Applied Phycol-
ogy and Biotechnology: Second Edition, pp. 171–204. doi: 10.1002/9781118567166.
ch11.
Rizwan, Muhammad et al. (2018). “Exploring the potential of microalgae for new
biotechnology applications and beyond: A review”. eng. In: Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy Reviews 92, pp. 394–404. issn: 13640321, 18790690. doi: 10.1016/
j.rser.2018.04.034.
Safafar, Hamed et al. (2019). “Two-Step Direct Transesterification as a Rapid Method
for the Analysis of Fatty Acids in Microalgae Biomass”. eng. In: European Journal
of Lipid Science and Technology 121.5, p. 1700409. issn: 14389312, 14387697. doi:
10.1002/ejlt.201700409.
Sandnes, J. M. et al. (2005a). “Combined influence of light and temperature on
growth rates of Nannochloropsis oceanica: Linking cellular responses to large-
46
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:55==
scale biomass production”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Phycology 17.6, pp. 515–
525. issn: 15735176, 09218971. doi: 10.1007/s10811-005-9002-x.
– (2005b). “Combined influence of light and temperature on growth rates of Nan-
nochloropsis oceanica: Linking cellular responses to large-scale biomass produc-
tion”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Phycology 17.6, pp. 515–525. issn: 15735176,
09218971. doi: 10.1007/s10811-005-9002-x.
Schleicher, Rosemary L. et al. (2016). “The Vitamin D status of the US population
from 1988 to 2010 using standardized serum concentrations of 25-hydroxyVitamin
D shows recent modest increases”. eng. In: American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
104.2, pp. 454–461. issn: 19383207, 00029165. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.115.127985.
Schoor, Natasja van and Paul Lips (2017). “Global Overview of Vitamin D Status”.
eng. In: Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America 46.4, pp. 845–
870. issn: 15584410, 08898529. doi: 10.1016/j.ecl.2017.07.002.
Sen, B. et al. (2005). “Studies on Growth of Marine Microalgae in Batch Cultures:
III. Nannochloropsis oculata (Eustigmatophyta)”. und. In: Asian Journal of Plant
Sciences 4.6, pp. 642–644. issn: 18125697, 16823974. doi: 10.3923/ajps.2005.642.
644.
Sicora, Cosmin, Zoltán Máté, and Imre Vass (2003). “The interaction of visible and
UV-B light during photodamage and repair of Photosystem II”. eng. In: Photo-
synthesis Research 75.2, pp. 127–137. issn: 15735079, 01668595. doi: 10.1023/A:
1022852631339.
Spolaore, Pauline et al. (2006a). “Commercial applications of microalgae”. eng. In:
Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering 101.2, pp. 87–96. issn: 13474421, 13891723.
doi: 10.1263/jbb.101.87.
– (2006b). “Commercial applications of microalgae”. eng. In: Journal of Bioscience
and Bioengineering 101.2, pp. 87–96. issn: 13474421, 13891723. doi: 10.1263/jbb.
101.87.
Sukenik, A, Y Yamaguchi, and A Livne (1993). “Alterations in lipid molecular-
species of the marine eustigmatophyte Nannochloropsis sp”. eng. In: Journal of
Phycology 29.5, pp. 620–626. issn: 15298817, 00223646.
Sukenik, Assaf and Yael Carmeli (1990). “Lipid synthesis and fatty acid composi-
tion in Nannochloropsis sp. (Eustigmatophyceae) grown in a light-dark cycle”. In:
Journal of Phycology 26.3, pp. 463–469. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0022-
3646.1990.00463.x.
Takeuchi, A et al. (1991). “Possible origin of extremely high contents of vitamin-D3
in some kinds of fish liver”. eng. In: Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A-
physiology 100.2, pp. 483–487. issn: 03009629. doi: 10.1016/0300-9629(91)90504-
6.
Vimaleswaran, Karani S., Nita G. Forouhi, and Kamlesh Khunti (2021). “Vitamin
D and covid-19”. eng. In: Bmj 372.mar04 9, n544. issn: 17561833, 09598138,
09598146. doi: 10.1136/bmj.n544.
Wahidin, Suzana, Ani Idris, and Sitti Raehanah Muhamad Shaleh (2013). “The
influence of light intensity and photoperiod on the growth and lipid content of
microalgae Nannochloropsis sp”. eng. In: Bioresource Technology 129, pp. 7–11.
issn: 09608524, 18732976. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2012.11.032.
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
47
==PAGE:56==
Wang, Shi Kai et al. (2014). “Microalgae cultivation in photobioreactors: An overview
of light characteristics”. eng. In: Engineering in Life Sciences 14.6, pp. 550–559.
issn: 16182863, 16180240. doi: 10.1002/elsc.201300170.
Xue, Lingui et al. (2005). “Effects of enhanced ultraviolet-B radiation on algae and
cyanobacteria”. eng. In: Critical Reviews in Microbiology 31.2, pp. 79–89. issn:
15497828, 1040841x. doi: 10.1080/10408410590921727.
Zhang, Xinxin, Xuexi Tang, Ming Wang, et al. (2017). “ROS and calcium signal-
ing mediated pathways involved in stress responses of the marine microalgae
Dunaliella salina to enhanced UV-B radiation”. eng. In: Journal of Photochem-
istry and Photobiology B: Biology 173, pp. 360–367. issn: 18732682, 10111344.
doi: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2017.05.038.
Zhang, Xinxin, Xuexi Tang, Bin Zhou, et al. (2015). “Effect of enhanced UV-B
radiation on photosynthetic characteristics of marine microalgae Dunaliella salina
(Chlorophyta, Chlorophyceae)”. eng. In: Journal of Experimental Marine Biology
and Ecology 469, pp. 27–35. issn: 18791697, 00220981. doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2015.
04.002.
48
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:57==
Appendix A
X-card for reference samples
Figure A.1: X-card for vitamin D3 for reference sample of January 8
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.2: X-card for vitamin D3 for reference sample of March 8
Figure A.3: X-card for relative amount (%) of EPA in reference sample of March 8
50
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:59==
Appendix B
Data for cultivation parameters at
outdoor ponds in Israel
Figure B.1: Maxinum and mininum values for different factors monitered during
cultivation of N.oceanica in Israel
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure
B.2:
Fatty
acids
(g/100
g
DW)
for
cultivation
experiment
in
April,June,July,August,September and October in Israel
52
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
==PAGE:61==
VITAMIN D IN MICROALGAE GROWN IN THE SUN OR UNDER ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 229
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.kt.dtu.dk
