==PAGE:1==
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
Master Thesis
April, 2022
By
Kristoffer Demandt Hansen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Compute, Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of graph algorithms,
neural networks and data mining.
Kristoffer Demandt Hansen ­ s153318
Signature
Date
ii
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project explores the feasibility of using a new data­driven path planner, Neural A*
Search, to conduct shortest­path planning on a new domain, Mars. When training a neural
network to generalize to any domain a large amount of data is needed. And not only is
large amounts of data a necessity to train models to generalize well, data also need to be
annotated in a way that can facilitate the trained model to learn the target function.
However, there is no readily available data source that contains overhead images of Mars.
Consequently, a data source had to be identified which could serve as a baseline source
of data. The solution was to use the NASA­developed tool, Where is the rover, consisting
of interactive imagery taken by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter. This tool allows any
interested party in tracking the currently active Mars rovers, Curiosity and Perseverance,
with the added bonus of also supplying a trajectory that each rover has followed while
exploring the surface of Mars.
The availability of a path annotation was of extreme importance, as Neural A* Search
learns from ground­truth paths provided by experts, such that an optimal path can be
learned from input images. Using the tool, 343 image patches of size 210 x 210 at a zoom
level of 50 meters were cropped for further processing by tracking the current trajectory
of Curiosity, which is the rover that has covered the most distance to date.
To distinguish image patches from each other, all image patches were segmented into
the distinct areas of exploration conducted by Curiosity. After dividing image patches into
the distinct areas, the dataset was balanced such that each distinct area had the same
number of samples to combat imbalance. This reduced the number of data points from
343 to 249, which is a very limiting amount of data to work with. To mitigate this, basic
data augmentation techniques was employed to artificially inflate the data set from 249
data points to 2.241 unique samples.
Finally, all the collected data went through a preprocessor to prepare it for Neural A*
Search to conduct shortest path planning on Mars. After training, the network showed
promising but inconclusive results. A series of experiments to validate the generalisation
capability to new domains of the system were further elaborated upon.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would first like to thank Bjørn Klient Christensen, Associate Professor at DTU Engineer­
ing Technology, for agreeing to take on the role of my primary supervisor for this project.
Bjørn has provided excellent guidance throughout the thesis period.
Second, I would like to thank my co­supervisor, Tiberiu­Ioan Szatmari, Industrial Ph.D. stu­
dent at DTU Compute, who is currently undertaking his Ph.D. in Private Machine Learning.
Tiberiu­Ioan has first and foremost been a great help in framing the overall idea behind
the project. Without his expertise in data science and machine learning, this project would
never have seen the light of day.
Thank you to Ryo Yonetani, the principal author of Neural A* Search. I reached out to
Ryo in the final stages of the project to get clarification on certain parts of the Neural A*
source code, to which end Ryo was more than happy to help.
Last, but not least, a very heartfelt thank you goes out to my family, who have shown
me great support during this entire period. The past six months have not been easy, and
especially during the final phase of the project, they have provided an immense amount
of support so I could focus on completing the project with little to no interruptions.
iv
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Exploring Mars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Neural network­powered exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Reading guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Pathfinding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Related Work
18
4
Neural A* Search
20
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2
Implementation of Neural A* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Path Planning on Mars
24
5.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.2
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Training Neural A* Search on Mars data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.4
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Discussion
41
7
Conclusion and Future work
44
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Bibliography
46
A Appendix A
49
A.1 Experiment: Baseline results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.2 Experiment: Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Exploring Mars
Steering an unmanned, autonomous vehicle (UAV) through unknown terrain is no easy
feat. But that is exactly what is needed when doing space exploration on neighbouring
planets to Earth. In 2003, NASA sent two robotic rovers to Mars, named Spirit and Oppor­
tunity, under the umbrella term the Mars Exploration Rovers, or MERs, as part of the Mars
Exploration Program. The mission was simple: investigate Mars for signs of microbial life
and water. The mission was intended to last for just 90 days, but both rovers managed to
carry on for much longer than planned. Spirit continued exploring until 2010, but Opportu­
nity, on the other hand, surpassed all expectations and continued exploring the surface of
Mars for over 15 years until a sand storm broke its solar panels in 2018. Since then there
has been no sign of contact with the rover [1], and its mission was officially concluded in
2019.
Curiosity was sent to Mars in November 2011 as part of the Mars Science Laboratory
mission and landed in the Gale Crater in August 2012. As the most powerful, most well­
equipped rover to date, Curiosity has since its launch found both chemical and mineral
evidence that Mars was once a habitable environment. In March of 2020, NASA once
again launched a rover, Perseverance, which landed on Mars in February 2021. Now,
Perseverance is attempting a record breaking drive on Mars [2] in the Jezero Crater,
where Perseverance’s self­driving capabilities will be thoroughly tested.
1.2
Neural network­powered exploration
In this project, we seek to investigate the feasibility of using a novel data­driven path plan­
ner, Neural A* Search [3], powered by state­of­the­art advances in Convolutional Neural
Networks in a bid to aid the martian rovers with their pathfinding. Data­driven path plan­
ners has gained increasing amounts of attention in recent years as a promising addition to
classical heuristic planners such as A* [3]. This avenue of research is growing in popular­
ity due to both a growing volume of readily available training data and massive increases
in computing power. These advances enable neural networks to swiftly analyze natural
image inputs to do automatic feature extraction such that classification and localisation
of objects within an image can happen. This can be leveraged to calculate possible tra­
jectories based on clever use of semantic segmentation [4] of images coupled with deep
convolutional networks for feature extraction [5] to generate a discrete graph on which
planning can take place.
In order to aid the pathfinding by means of a neural network a lot of data is needed, so
that will be one of the main focal points in this project. To that extent, NASA provides
an excellent tool to track the trajectory of both Curiosity and Perseverance [6]. However,
because Perseverance only recently, in relative terms, landed on Mars, more data with
higher diversity is readily available from Curiosity. For this reason, most of the data will be
taken from the original MERs mission, specifically using the terrain that Curiosity explored
as the baseline.
Data samples will be categorized into distinct regions of Mars that Curiosity have explored
to segment the terrain and its surface traits specific to that area. The purpose of this is to
scaffold a structure in the data for further processing to test if a path planning model will
generalize better to certain areas over others. Tracing the trajectory of Curiosity creates
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
1
==PAGE:10==
a challenge with limited but also imbalanced data. To mitigate data scarcity, Data Aug­
mentation is going to play a key role to artificially inflate the amount of training data. With
respect to this, a survey of relevant augmentation methods will be explored to select the
most fitting techniques for inflating the data set. To mitigate unbalanced data, a method
to quantify surface­similarity will be explored to aggregate areas with similar features.
Based on this, the Neural A* Search planner will be trained to do Path Planning on Mars.
1.3
Reading guide
In chapter chapter 2 the relevant background that scaffolds the project will be introduced,
i.e. pathfinding algorithms and neural networks. In chapter 3 a concise survey of related
work will be presented. In chapter 4 an introduction will be given to Neural A* search
and how it is implemented. In chapter 5 the main body of work will be presented with an
emphasis on data collection and data augmentation. In chapter 6 a discussion about the
project will be made. Finally, the conclusion is presented in chapter 7 along with a few
closing thoughts on how future work may be done based on the findings in this project.
2
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
In the following, the relevant background that forms the basis of the project will be intro­
duced, namely essential concepts from Pathfinding and Machine Learning. For pathfind­
ing there will be an an emphasis on graph algorithms, focusing on A* search due to its
direct link with Neural A* Search. For Machine Learning, priority will be given to the con­
cepts that forms the basis for Neural A* Search, such as Neural Networks, and specific
components that Neural A* Search directly utilizes as part of the implementation.
2.1
Pathfinding
Finding a path from A to B is a fundamental skill that humans have mastered through
thousands of years of evolution. Based on prior research by John O’Keefe, May­Britt
Moser and Edvard I. Moser discovered that humans have cells that constitute a positioning
system in the brain, which garnered them all a Nobel prize in 2014 [7]. These studies into
human spatial navigation prove that humans have a neural basis for not only remembering
where we are but also where we have been and where we are going [8].
As society becomes increasingly automated with robots that rely on computer vision, the
same neurological traits that enable pathfinding in humans are critical to modern ma­
chines. Today, robots often need reliable methods to efficiently and correctly plan a path
from A to B while maintaining a path history for backtracking. Of course, the methods
utilized by robots to ascertain their surroundings and how to navigate within them are a
lot more involved than just pathfinding, i.e., object recognition and analyzing terrain ma­
neuverability are just as important factors that play into navigation.
Research in pathfinding already started more than a hundred years ago, with the advent
of Depth­First Search (DFS) pioneered by french mathematician Charles Pierre Trémaux
in the 19th century [9]. Trémaux’s pioneering work paved the way for modern pathfinding
algorithms like A* search [10], a decades­old algorithm that is still widely used today as a
benchmark for other algorithms [11].
The classical use case for pathfinding algorithms is a maze where the state­space is
static. Obstacles remain in the same place, their type is known before the search begins,
and the boundaries constricting the searchable space do not change [9]. However, in
robotics, there is a need to compute traversable space in real­time – this is crucial to
facilitate navigation in unknown state spaces reliably and safely while also minimizing the
amount of downtime [12].
Several algorithms can be employed to efficiently find a path from A to B. But what consti­
tutes efficiency? Is it just the shortest path? What if the most straightforward path involves
traversing a mountain? Or is it computational efficiency, i.e., speed or memory consump­
tion? The domain that pathfinding is applied to must be considered because it imposes
restrictions on what can be regarded as efficient. Finding the shortest path from A to B
becomes a problem where constraints must be factored in. A solution to this challenge is
representing pathfinding algorithms as a graph.
2.1.1
Graph algorithms: a brief primer
The domain of graph algorithms is large, and the following only makes up for a small
snippet of it as a foundation to understand why we model pathfinding problems as graphs,
as seen in figure fig. 2.1.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
3
==PAGE:12==
A graph consists of vertices, denoted by the numbers, and is connected by edges, delin­
eated by the lines connecting the vertices. There is a path between vertices if an edge
exists that connects them. A graph is connected if there is a path from any vertex to any
other vertex in the graph. Furthermore, a graph is said to be undirected if all edges are
bi­directional.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: A connected, undirected graph
The length of any path in a graph is computed as the sum of the number of edges traversed
from the start vertex to the goal vertex. On fig. 2.1b the path from vertex one to five is
highlighted in red, yielding a path of length three.
To add constraints to a graph, we can add weights to the edges, and the graph becomes
weighted. The weights are typically associated with edge length [13], but the weight can
be attributed to any meaning that applies to the domain. We can illustrate this using a
made­up scenario. In fig. 2.2 we let the edge weight denote elevation. The goal of the
shortest path search then becomes to find a path that minimizes the amount of elevation.
This results in a path for this specific weighted graph where the path from A to B is not
found by traversing the minimum number of edges, i.e., 1 →2 →5, but instead traversing
the edges that sum to the lowest amount of elevation, i.e., through 1 →3 →4 →2 →5.
Figure 2.2: The shortest path under edge weight constraints
Pathfinding algorithms that utilize a graph to traverse the state space fall under the cat­
egory of Discretization Algorithms [12]. As the name suggests, a consequence of mod­
eling a pathfinding problem as a graph is discretization, namely that the state space has
to be represented as a set of discrete data points (vertices) with a particular relationship
(edges). This limitation becomes apparent once we start integrating discrete pathfinding
algorithms with a Neural Network. We will expand on this in chapter 4.
Now that we have a grasp on how pathfinding problems can be modeled using a graph,
we can formalize a path planning problem and how we can solve it.
4
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:13==
2.1.2
Formalising pathfinding
Given the knowledge we now have it is possible to describe a path planning problem using
more formal notation. A graph G is defined as G = (V, E), where V is the set of vertices
in the graph, and E is the set of edges {u, v} that connect a vertex v to any neighbouring
vertices [14]. We also define the start and goal vertex as the set of vertices {vs, vg} ∈V .
With this we can now compute a path of connected vertices P = (v1, v2, ..., vn) ∈V , where
v1 = vs and vn = vg. If we apply this notation to the graph in fig. 2.1 we yield a graph
G = (V, E) where
V = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
E = {{1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1, 4}, {2, 4}, {2, 5}, {3, 4}, {4, 5}}
Given two vertices u and v, if uv ∈E, then u and v are adjacent. From this we can define
the neighborhood of N(v) as the set of vertices adjacent to v [14]:
N(v) = {x ∈V | vx ∈E}
(2.1)
Using fig. 2.1 as our baseline, this implies that N(1) = {2, 3, 4} and N(5) = {2, 4}.
There are many shortest path algorithms to choose from when presented with a path
planning problem, so to determine which algorithm is suitable for the job, there are four
pillars to weigh it against, namely: Completeness, Optimality, Time Complexity, and Space
complexity [15]. Given enough time, all pathfinding algorithms which are complete will find
their way to the goal [16]. However, one such method is not necessarily optimal, i.e., the
method might not find the best path.
The most basic search algorithms, such as DFS, are generally speaking not complete,
nor optimal [17, p. 231]. With that being said, DFS is widely used and one of the most
fundamental ways to search [16, p. 2]. DFS can also be very useful when it comes
to identifying cycles in an undirected graph. if we revisit the graph on fig. 2.1 we can
immediately identify a cycle as seen in fig. 2.3a.
(a) A cycle of three vertices
(b) Acyclic graph as a result of back­edge re­
moval using DFS
Figure 2.3: Cyclic graphs
A cycle has been found if DFS finds an edge that points to an already­visited vertex. The
edge leading to the already visited vertex is called a back­edge. All back­edges can then
be removed to generate an acyclic graph as seen in fig. 2.3a.
A constraint such as a search time is often an essential factor when choosing the appro­
priate method. DFS will explore the entire state space until reaching the goal, and there
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
5
==PAGE:14==
is a high probability of consuming a lot of time and memory if search history is maintained
as well [16]. To that effect, more efficient algorithms have since been developed that em­
ploy heuristics while performing the search to plan ahead at each step for a more optimal
decision­making process [12]. One such algorithm is A* Search.
2.1.3
A* Search
Despite being invented in 1968 [10], A* is still widely accepted as one of the most efficient
pathfinding algorithms today [11]. The algorithm’s popularity can be attributed to A* being
both complete and optimal given a proper heuristic function h(v) [18, p. 97]. In A* Search,
each vertex v is evaluated according to an evaluation function f(v) = g(v) + h(v) where
g(v) is the accumulated cost to reach the current vertex, and h(v) is the estimated cost
to reach the goal vertex from the current vertex. In other words, f(v) expresses the
estimated cost of the cheapest solution through v [18, p. 97]. As such, the heuristic acts
as a qualified guess of how to achieve the optimal solution.
The drawback, however, is maintaining a search history, where the worst case space
complexity is exponential, given by O(bd), where b is the branching factor and d is the
depth of the tree [18, p. 101]. This can be mitigated by modifying A* to employ iterative
deepening of the search tree, resulting in IDA*, short for Iterative Deepening A* Search.
The optimality of A* depends on the heuristic function h(v) being admissible [18, p. 97],
i.e., the the heuristic employed should not overestimate the cost of the remaining distance.
Common heuristic functions to evaluate path distance is the Manhattan distance and the
Euclidean distance [19].
Figure 2.4: Visualization of Manhattan and Euclidean Distance
In fig. 2.4 the green line represents Euclidean distance, whereas the red, blue and yellow
lines represent Manhattan distance. An important thing to note, though, is that to imple­
ment Euclidean distance, the movement of the agent within the state space needs to be
able to move diagonally. Because A* is a discretization algorithm, where paths in the
state space are represented as a discrete graph, it can be computationally expensive to
approximate the Euclidean distance when A* has to cover large distances [12].
The basic concept of A* is to do prioritized exploration of a graph. Concretely, A* will use
a priority queue to explore vertices with lower cost first [18, p. 94]. After exploring a vertex
v, the set of neighbours given by N(v) will be found. For each neighbour that is reachable
from v, the neighbour is evaluated to determine if it provides a better path to the goal. This
search continues until the goal is reached.
A* is outlined in algorithm 1 as it is defined by Yonetani et al in [3, p.3 ]. A* search takes as
input a graph G = (V, E) as defined previously. Furthermore, A* expects a cost function
6
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:15==
Algorithm 1: A* Search
Input
: Graph G, movement cost c, start vs, goal vg
Output: Shortest path P
1 Initialize O ←vs, C ←∅, Parent(vs) ←∅
2 while vg ̸∈C do
3
Select v∗∈O based on eq. (2.2)
4
Update O ←O \ v∗, C ←C ∪v∗
5
Extract Vnbr ∪V based on eq. (2.3)
6
foreach v′ ∈Vnbr do
7
Update O ←∪v′, Parent(v′) ←v∗
8
end
9 end
10 P ←Backtrack(Parent, vg)
c(v) and a set of vertices, namely the start and goal vertex {vs, vg} ∈V . From this, the
set of neighbour vertices to a vertex v can be found as N(v) = {v′ | (v, v′) ∈E, v ̸= v′}.
A* search maintains an open list O for future node selection, and once a vertex has been
visited, it will be added to the closed list C.
(a) Search space
(b) Tree expansion of A* search
Figure 2.5: A* search applied on a state space
To briefly illustrate how A* works, a made­up example can be seen in fig. 2.5. A search
space has been created in fig. 2.5a with an admissible heuristic. The edge weight denotes
the cost of the path between vertices. Take note that the heuristic values applied here
are for demonstration purposes. In practice, a proper heuristic function like Euclidean
distance would compute the values.
Applying A* as outlined in algorithm 1 yields the result in fig. 2.5b. First we initialize
O = vs = S. We now select the next node in O to visit based on the criterion in eq. (2.2)
v∗= min(g(v) + h(v)), v ∈O
(2.2)
Because O initially only contains one vertex, S, we select S. We then update O using the
difference operator, i.e., A \ B = {a ∈A | a ̸∈B}, and add S to the list of already visited
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
7
==PAGE:16==
vertices C. The next step is performing neighbour extraction, which happens according
to eq. (2.3)
Vnbr = {v′ | v′ ∈N(v∗) ∧v′ ̸∈O ∧v′ ̸∈C}
(2.3)
For the case of S we extract Vnbr = {A, B, D}, given that S satisfies the condition N(v) =
N(S) = {SA, BA, DA} ∈E, and Vnbr satisfies the condition in eq. (2.3). Moving on, for
each node v′ in Vnbr = {A, B, D} we add v′ to O and set the parent of v′ to v∗= S. This
continuous until the goal vg is found and added to C. Once this happens, the search is
completed, and a solution path P will be generated.
The node expansion carried out by A* and the subsequent path to the solution is marked
in green for a total A* score of 13. The list of visited nodes become
C = {S(5), A(12), B(11), D(12), C(12), E(13)}
where the number in parenthesis denotes the A* score of that node expansion. The
resulting solution path becomes
P = {S(5), D(12), C(12), G2(13)}
which is generated by recursively backtracking from the goal node to the start node.
The worst­case space complexity for A* is O(bd). In the case of this example O(23) =
8 = |C|. This can be explained by the heuristic function – while admissible, it still was not
very accurate at estimating the distance from S to the goal. This is because this example
does not utilize a consistent heuristic, defined in [18, p. 99] as:
A heuristic h(n) is consistent if, for every node n and every successor n′ of n
generated by any action a, the estimated cost of reaching the goal from n is no
greater than the step cost of getting to n′ plus the estimated cost of reaching
the goal from n′.
By looking at fig. 2.5b, and using the list of visited nodes, we can see that B3(11) has
a lower estimated goal cost than its parent A7(12). Following the definition, this a non­
consistent heuristic, which explains why the worst­case space complexity for A* is reached.
8
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Machine Learning
Machine Learning, or ML, is a modern advancement within the field of AI. Today, it is so
popular that AI and ML have become almost synonymous. Specifically, ML is a subfield
of AI that gives computers the ability to learn without explicit programming; essentially
imitating intelligent human behaviour.
ML powers everything from predictive text on our smartphones, language translation, con­
tent suggestions on our news feed to autonomous vehicles and medical imaging. A 2020
survey by Deloitte showed that 67% of companies use ML, and 97% plan to use in 2021
[20].
The goal of AI is to model intelligent behavior, e.g. learning to read natural language text,
or to perform an action in the physical world. An analogy can be drawn between ML and
traditional computer programming, where the latter is sort of like baking. A recipe needs
very precise amounts of ingredients, and the baker needs to to perform certain actions
for exact amount of time. In a similar fashion, traditional programming requires detailed
instructions if a computer is to follow a sequence of steps to produce the correct output.
However, while humans can easily recognize an arbitrary object on a photo, teaching
a computer to do the same is essentially impossible using traditional approaches. ML
facilitates this learning through experience – well, through very sophisticated algorithms
and huge amounts of data that models learning through experience.
Data is key here. Without it, the learning will be very limited, if at all possible. From data,
ML algorithms find patterns so the resulting model becomes proficient at predicting or
performing an action. A subset of the data is then reserved for testing to check if the ML
model is accurate in its predictions.
ML can be subdivided into three learning categories: Supervised, Unsupervised and Re­
inforcement [18, p. 695]. In Supervised Learning training happens on labeled data. Over
time models become very accurate, but labeling data is time consuming. Still, this is the
most common type of learning in the present day. In Unsupervised Learning the algorithm
will sift through unlabeled data, looking for patterns or trends not explicitly obvious, such
as purchasing habits. In Reinforcement Learning models learn by trial and error through
a reward system akin to that of human beings.
ML algorithms are so good at what they do that advances in ML has given rise to ML
models that learn things human simply are not capable of, e.g., things like Google Search,
which can search and sort enormous amounts of data in a split second.
But as with anything, there is always a flip side to the coin [21]. One such example is
transparency, which is an area of concern with respect to the nature of what ML models
are doing and how they make decisions. Validation should be a necessary step to verify
that the ML model work as intended. Treating it as a black box is not a good idea. An
important question to ask is: What rules did the model apply to arrive at this outcome?
Another concern is accuracy. The level of accuracy of modern ML models is in the area
of 95% to 99% of human capability [18, p. 862]. This is obviously quite good. But it also
highly depends on the domain that the model is applied to. Recommendation systems
for a streaming service is one thing, but a self driving car is another – here, even a 99%
accuracy rating could be a serious flaw that results in catastrophic outcomes.
A final concern is bias. ML has social implications, big and small, but also ethical [18,
p. 1034]. ML models are trained by humans, so human bias can sneak its way into the
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
9
==PAGE:18==
model itself. ML models are trained on vast amounts of data, which can hold any degree
of inequity. This is passed on to the learning mechanism, and as a result this inequity will
be part of the outcome. For example, chat bots trained on data from Twitter has showed
to pick up on offensive or racist language. Bias can be fought, but it is difficult. Checking
data for inequity is one way to combat bias, but given the amount of data, this can be
infeasible. A more empirical approach is to employ human­centered AI to data gathering
such that data is diverse, i.e., it represents different backgrounds, lifestyles, and so on.
ML is associated with a series of subfields, one of which are Neural Networks. We will
take a dive into Neural Networks next to set the stage for how Neural A* leverages ad­
vancements in this field to predict shortest paths with the help of machine learning.
2.2.1
Neural Networks: A brief primer
Modeled after the human brain [18, p. 728], a Neural Network is a fascinating model
which is able to do classification and localisation of objects in a complex environment
with very high accuracy. As such, they are also a topic of high interest within the research
community, with tens of thousands of publications in the field [18, p. 736]. This section
will outline the main concepts of Neural Networks as a foundation for talking about the
popular Neural Network architectures of U­Net and VGG­16 [4, 5], as they play key roles
in how Neural A* works .
Neural Networks contain processing nodes, formally known as perceptrons. In colloquial
terms, however, they are usually called neurons. The most commonly employed type of
Neural Network is a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), that is, a network in which neurons are
organized into multiple layers. In addition, neural networks are divided into two distinct
subcategories, namely feed­forward networks and recurrent networks. In fig. 2.6a a feed­
forward MLP is illustrated.
(a) A neural network
(b) A neuron (Russel and Norvig, 2020)
Figure 2.6: Comparison of feed­forward and recurrent network types
A feed­forward network forms a directed, acyclic graph, where all neurons in the first
layer only point to neurons in the immediate next layer. This pattern continues until the
final layer reaches the output layer. In a recurrent network, the graph is undirected, such
that it feeds its outputs back into its own inputs. Both types are illustrated in fig. 2.7.
Feedback enables interesting capabilities, and makes recurrent networks a closer model
of the human brain, such as support for short­term memory [18, p. 729].
In fig. 2.6b the inner workings of a neuron is illustrated. Each neuron receives an input and
produces an output based on the values passed on by previous neurons. Activation of a
neuron j in a subsequent layer is propagated via the edges between it and the previous
neuron i. Once again, we can think of edges as the axons in a brain. Like in a weighted
10
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:19==
graph, edges between neurons also have a weight wi,j associated with it, usually called
a bias. Before a neuron propagates its activation ai, each neuron computes its weighted
sum of all of its inputs as in eq. (2.4)
inj =
n
∑
i=0
wi,jai
(2.4)
and then applies an activation function g(inj) to this sum. The magnitude of the activation
function determines how strong the connection between the neurons is. The choice of
activation function are many, and depends largely on the type of prediction the output
layer is supposed to make [18], but also on where in the network it is used. A very popular
choice for the activation function in the hidden layers is the Rectified Linear Unit, or ReLU,
defined in eq. (2.5), because it is computationally efficient and non­linear [22].
f(x) = max(0, x)
(2.5)
For the output layer, the choice is often the logistic (sigmoid) function given by eq. (2.6)
when a network is intended for binary classification
f(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.6)
or the softmax function in eq. (2.7) when a network has to do classification on multiple
classes
σ(z)i =
ezi
∑K
j=1 ezj
(2.7)
The purpose of applying an activation function is to introduce non­linearity in the network,
which is necessary to facilitate back­propagation of values from the output layer to the
hidden layers [18, p. 733]. This is essentially what enables the network to learn, in that
back­propagation is a way for the network to self­adjust the edge weights and biases that
determines whether or not a neuron will be activated.
(a) A feed­forward network
(b) A recurrent network
Figure 2.7: Comparison of feed­forward and recurrent network types
The algorithm behind this is Gradient Descent, an optimization algorithm that tries to find
a local minimum of a cost function. This is analogous to path planing algorithms which
seek to lower the sum of the cost of traveling from a start vertex to a goal vertex. In a
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
11
==PAGE:20==
Neural Network, however, this is a non­trivial task to solve. The number of input variables
in a Neural Network is very large, so the subsequent graph produced has many local
minimum. Because the output layer is trying to predict an outcome, this is associated
with a probability between 0 and 1. Ideally, this should be 1. As such, a loss metric of
how accurate a prediction was is propagated backwards [18, p. 719].
If a network tries to classify images of dogs and cats, and the network has just begun
training, it is likely to be very inaccurate. In a first attempt, it might be fed an image of
a cat and output a 70% probability of the image being a dog, and a 30% probability that
it is a cat. In order to compute a loss, a loss function is utilized to quantify the loss. In
practice, the choice of loss function is connected with the choice of activation function
used in the output layer [23, p. 181]. But for the sake of this example, a simple loss
function to implement is the Mean Squared Error (MSE) given by eq. (2.8)
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(Xi −Pi)2
(2.8)
Computing the loss with MSE produces a loss of Losscat = (0.3−1)2 = 0.49 and Lossdog =
(0.7 −0)2 = 0.49, giving a total loss of 0.98. This value is back­propagated to the hidden
layers for Gradient Descent to find a local minimum as illustrated in fig. 2.8.
(a) Initial loss
(b) Local minimum
Figure 2.8: Gradient descent
Here it is clearly illustrated why activation functions need to be non­linear, because Gra­
dient Descent needs to be able to take the derivative to approximate the local minimum
using a step size [18, p. 719]. The greater the loss, the greater the step size. As the loss
converges towards a local minimum, the step size will decrease to stabilize on the saddle
point. The step size is usually referred to as the learning rate of the network – by the
intuition that the speed at which the network learns is given by the speed of how fast the
network is approximating the local minimum.
A specialized type of Neural Network is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), a type
of network highly efficient at image analysis, among other things. The main difference to
a regular Neural Network is in the hidden layers, where so called convolution layers are
implemented. These specialized layers are responsible for picking up patterns in images
[4]. This is achieved by a series of techniques which typically are stacked in a sequential
fashion. A simplified illustration of this mechanism can be seen in fig. 2.9.
This architecture enables CNN’s to learn patterns in images, such as simple edges, or
more complex shapes like a circle. To facilitate this pattern matching, CNN’s convolve
over an image by way of convolution with a filter (also referred to as a kernel) to do
pattern matching in subsets of the input image. The layered structure of a CNN means
12
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:21==
that simple patterns are picked up in the initial layers, and with each subsequent layer,
pattern matching becomes increasingly sophisticated.
Figure 2.9: The base architecture of a CNN
When the image is fed into the CNN, the convolution process will begin1. For the sake
of simplicity, we can illustrate this with an image of an X as in fig. 2.10. The result of
convolution is a feature map, which can seen in fig. 2.11. Convolution is applied by sliding
the filter over the entire image to calculate destination pixel values via matrix multiplication
between each element of the sliding window and the input image. The resulting feature
map highlights the feature which the applied filter was trying to extract.
(a) Filters of size 3x3
(b) Filters applied to an image
Figure 2.10: Filtering
Figure 2.11: Feature map after completed iteration of convolution
1Here, it is assumed that pixel normalization has been carried out prior to feeding the image to the network
to map each pixel value p such that p ∈{0, 1} according to a hard threshold.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
13
==PAGE:22==
The second stage in a CNN is typically normalization. Because the convolution process
may produce negative pixel values, which are meaningless, these are transformed ac­
cording to a threshold. Most networks employ ReLU to do this transformation, as previ­
ously defined in eq. (2.5). The corresponding result is a feature map akin to the one in
fig. 2.11 but where all negative values are now 0.
The third stage is in the network is pooling. Effectively, pooling has two uses. First, it
acts as a down sampling technique to shrink the image for computational efficiency in
subsequent layers [5]. Second, it makes the the model invariant to local translation [23,
p. 342]. This means that small location changes of features in the input data does not
affect the output of the pooled data. Once again, a sliding window of smaller size than the
filter is applied, but this time to the feature map. Each time the window slides, it moves a
certain amount of pixels set by a constant referred to as a stride. The size of the stride can
be any scalar > 0. A popular choice of pooling is max pooling, where the maximum value
in the window is transferred to the output matrix. This process is illustrated in fig. 2.12.
The result is a similar but smaller feature map.
Figure 2.12: Illustration of max pooling
After several stages of convolution, normalization and pooling, we end up with a series
of feature maps.
Because feature maps are three­dimensional objects – images are
represented as a height, width, depth data structure – these need to be flattened to a
one­dimensional structure before being presented to the fully connected layer for final
classification.
Figure 2.13: Feature maps flattened into a fully connected layer
Once the convolution layers of the CNN are complete, the fully connected layer acts like
in a regular Neural Network. The array of feature maps is flattened to a one­dimensional
14
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:23==
structure with an initial value associated to it. For the case of an image, that value repre­
sents pixel intensity. Learning once again happens according to edge weights and biases
between neurons, which are adjusted via back­propagation after the output layer calcu­
lates a loss.
2.2.2
Machine Learning in the context of Neural A*
Before we dive into what Neural A* Search is there are a few cornerstones to lay as a
foundation first. Neural A* is a CNN in its own right that utilizes state­of­the­art advances
in the field of Neural Networks such as network architectures for semantic segmentation
of images and Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for feature extraction. To that extent,
there are two two main bodies of work which will be introduced here.
Semantic segmentation: U­Net
To facilitate a network that can learn visual cues from a problem instance, the base net­
work architecture of Neural A* Search is U­Net [4], a Convolutional Network for Biomedi­
cal Image Segmentation, originally developed by Ronneberger et al. at the University of
Freiburg in 2015. U­Net is a acclaimed [24] for its efficiency at doing semantic segmen­
tation of images. The basic idea of semantic segmentation is to group together similar
parts of an image that belong to the same class and to localise where on the image these
groups present themselves at a pixel level. The idea is illustrated in fig. 2.14a.
(a) Semantic segmentation of an image
(b) Overlap­tiling strategy [4]
Figure 2.14: Semantic segmentation
Using a CNN to do semantic segmentation separates the network architecture slightly
from a conventional CNN. The main reason for this is that the network no longer is trying
to predict the class label of an image, but trying to segment the various classes within the
image on a pixel level. However, the pooling technique employed to down sample images
in a conventional CNN is attributed with information loss when no padding is applied [25].
In the case of U­Net, no padding is applied after convolution to rapidly shrink the image
size due to GPU memory constraints [4]. This translates to information loss because bor­
der pixels are removed when using unpadded convolution operations. This is a problem
when the task involves localisation of classes within the image at a fine­grained level of
detail. However, U­Net was designed with this in mind.
To mitigate this information loss, U­Net adds in successive layers of up­sampling opera­
tors. The stroke of genius in the design of the U­Net architecture is how the output of the
first convolutional layer is sent directly to the next convolutional layer via a shortcut. This
enables an overlap­tiling strategy as seen in fig. 2.14b. Here a direct copy of the feature
map prior to max pooling is overlaid with the upsampled max pool feature map to recreate
border pixels.
The architecture of U­Net can be seen in fig. 2.15. The shape of the model looks like a
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
15
==PAGE:24==
U, hence the name of the network. Because the network is not trying to do class label
prediction from an input image, U­Net does not implement a fully connected layer.
Figure 2.15: U­Net architecture [4]
U­Net can be divided into three main parts: Encoder, Bridge and Decoder. The encoder
part is the convolutional layers, also called the contracting part of the network. The bridge
is what we see as the shortcut between convolutional layers. Finally, the upsampling
part of the network is referred to as the expansive part. Neural A* relies on both efficient
feature extraction and localisation of obstacles within the image after segmentation has
been carried out to. To that extent, VGG­16 has been selected as the encoder.
Feature extraction: VGG­16
VGG­16 was designed by Simonyan et al. at The University of Oxford in 2015 [5] as
the Visual Geometry Group’s (VGG) contribution to the ImageNet Challenge 2014, where
VGG­16 secured a first and second place in localisation and classification, respectively.
VGG­16 is a very deep convolutional network intended for large scale image recognition,
and sets itself apart from other CNNs by exploring how depth effects performance in image
classification.
Figure 2.16: VGG­16 architecture [5]
16
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:25==
In fig. 2.16, the architecture of VGG­16 is illustrated. As the name implies, VGG­16 has
16 convolution layers which are utilized to perform feature extraction. A fixed 3x3 filter
is applied with every convolution with 1­pixel padding followed by a ReLU. Subsequent
stages of the network include max pooling layers using a 2x2 kernel with a stride of 2.
This arrangement is consistently utilized throughout the network. At the very end, three
fully connected layers are found. The output layer using a softmax activation function as
in eq. (2.7).
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Related Work
The focus of this project is investigating the feasibility of a planning­based neural network
that can generalize to a new domain. A survey of related work has been carried out to
that extent, where several different approaches to data­driven path planners have been
proposed. Research in this area is garnering attention as a possible extension to classical
planning algorithms. However, it is still a relatively new field, with the bulk of the research
still being focused on classical path planning algorithms. Research into data­driven path
planning stems from the hope of achieving better efficiency over classical heuristic plan­
ners, which do point­to­point based shortest path search [3].
There is an abundant amount of literature exploring the domain of classical planning. In
[26], a comprehensive 2015 study on recent advancements in pathfinding techniques,
the researchers noted that basic shortest path search algorithms are mature theories,
and it is expected that significant changes are coming to the domain of navigation. This
is demonstrated in [27], where contributions to motion planning for autonomous vehicles
is surveyed. Paden et al. note that in the United States in 2014, over 8 million traffic
incidents were reported, spanning over 30.000 deaths, over 2 million injuries, and over 6
million collisions. It is estimated that 94% are attributed to driver error. Advancements in
autonomous vehicle navigation are estimated to reduce these numbers significantly.
In [28] Choudhury et al. demonstrated a data­driven planner which learns planning poli­
cies in a given world via Imitation Learning (IL). In IL, an expert provides a set of demon­
strations from which an agent will try to learn an optimal policy to follow, effectively imi­
tating the decisions made by the expert. The same concepts inspire this as in Reinforce­
ment Learning, where an agent is always incentivized to take the action that results in the
highest cumulative award [29]. With IL, the result is a clairvoyant oracle who can make
optimal decisions within the world where an expert provides demonstrations. Choudhury
et al. found that when applied to traditional search­based planning problems, there was
a 70x speed­up over traditional A* [28]. However, the researchers noted that the agent’s
incentive to maximize reward is the limitation. This can be a problem when faced with
a challenge where the solution to maximizing the reward is not part of the belief space
generated by the training session.
It is hard for classical path planning algorithms to find solutions on natural images because
this would require comprehensive pixel­wise labeling on the image for the planner to do
useful searching on it [3]. To that effect, research into data­driven approaches that can
perform pathfinding on real­world images is gaining momentum.
In [30], a novel approach to data­driven reactive planning was attempted. Tamar et al.
designed a differentiable neural network with a planning module which they named a
Value Iteration Network (VIN), based on the design of value­iteration planning algorithms.
The goal of this neural network is to learn how to plan. Reactive planning is well­suited
when an agent needs to respond quickly to changes in its environment. However, it may
produce sub­optimal plans because the available solution might only be partially complete
[31]. As such, reactive planning is in stark contrast to deliberative planning algorithms like
a Hierarchical Task Network (HTN), where extensive computation is done to map future
actions in the available state space carefully. In this body of work, Tamar et al. also
tested their VIN on natural overhead images of Mars. But while VINs are effective, they
18
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:27==
have certain disadvantages like training instability, sensitivity to random seeds, and other
optimization problems [32].
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
19
==PAGE:28==
4
Neural A* Search
In the following an introduction to Neural A* Search will be given. In relation to this, a
comparison to standard A* search will be outlined to illustrate the potential of data­driven
path planning. A bit of detail on how Neural A* is implemented will also be covered.
However, the implementation is very complex, as it is based on various methods of related
work in data­driven path planning, so only the essential idea will be described.
4.1
Introduction
Neural A* is a new approach to data­driven path planning. The vision behind Neural A*
originates from the question whether it is possible to train a data­driven planner to learn
visual cues from an input image to facilitate navigation as an approximation of what a
human does [3]. Given the feature extraction capabilities of a CNN, this vision has shown
to be feasible.
Traditional A* search is an efficient planner, but it can fall short when searching dead
ends, such as obstacles shaped like a U. Backed by a CNN, Neural A* can learn how to
navigate within a certain domain, given expert demonstrations of how to do so. This type
of learning is also called imitation learning.
Training is done on a large number of inputs, where experts have shown the ground­truth
path to follow, which enables faster search than traditional A* with small degradation in
optimality. This is clearly illustrated in fig. 4.1. On the left, we see traditional A* encounter­
ing a dead­end formed as an inverted U. A consequence of this is the number of explored
nodes significantly rises. This is in stark contrast to Neural A* on the right, which quickly
picks up on visual cues in the input space to diverge from the dead­end. The result is that
many fewer nodes are explored.
(a) Traditional A*
(b) Neural A*
Figure 4.1: A* vs Neural A*. Reproduced from [33]
For traditional shortest­path problems such as the one illustrated in fig. 4.1, Yonetani et al.
(2020) has demonstrated that Neural A* performs better than other data­driven path plan­
ners. To quantify this, two metrics were implemented: 1. How often Neural A* found an
optimal path compared to traditional A*, and 2. How many fewer nodes Neural A* explored
20
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:29==
compared to traditional A*. To calculate the trade­off between search exploration and path
optimality, the harmonic mean was calculated between these two measurements. Test­
ing was conducted on three different data sets, namely the Motion Planing (MP) Dataset
compiled by Bhardwaj et al. (2017), a custom extension of the MP dataset compiled by
the authors of Neural A*, and the City/Street Map (CSM) Dataset compiled by Stuertevant
et al. (2012). Here, Neural A* scored 52.0%, 54.2% and 43.6%, respectively, which was
the highest amongst other popular data­driven path planners, particularly BB­A* [34] and
SAIL [28].
4.2
Implementation of Neural A*
Neural A* utilizes a trainable encoder to produce a guidance map such that a path planning
algorithm like A* can conduct its search on a problem instance by way of the guidance
map. This is achieved by transforming standard A* to a differentiable version embedded
as a module within a CNN to enable back­propagation from the output layer.
Essentially, the encoder is a mapping function that maps a cost to a pixel coordinate. As
such, when a problem instance is input to the encoder, e.g. a 2D maze, it will produce a
pixel­wise cost map based on visual cues. In fig. 4.2 a visualization of the general idea is
illustrated. Here a simple problem instance, given by a 2D maze, is input to the encoder,
which produces a corresponding guidance map, where green is high cost nodes and white
is low cost nodes.
In the next section we will explore the basic ideas of how Neural A* is implemented.
Figure 4.2: Problem instance to guidance map. Reproduced from [3].
As described in the previous section, to enable Neural A* to learn visual cues from a prob­
lem instance, the base network architecture of Neural A* Search is U­Net with VGG­16
as the encoder. The combination of U­Net and VGG­16 enables semantic segmentation
of the input space for an efficient pixel­level feature extraction for classification of impass­
able and passable nodes. As such, the overall goal of Neural A* is to teach the encoder
to minimize the difference between search histories and ground­truth paths. To do this,
visual cues which are effective at reducing this difference are learnt, such as the shape of
a dead­end. On natural image inputs, passable and impassable regions are distinguished
by colors and textures. This results in a uniform learning strategy that can be applied to
the more trivial 2D problem instances as well as natural image inputs [3].
In fig. 4.3 the architecture of Neural A* Search is illustrated. Once the guidance map has
been produced, the differentiable A* module is ready to search the guidance map using the
same concepts as known from traditional A* search, albeit using a differential approach.
A search history will be produced and a loss will be calculated based on the ground­truth
path. When the problem instance is a regular 2D map, the ground­truth path is computed
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
21
==PAGE:30==
using an optimal planner such as A*. When the problem instance is a real­world image,
it is assumed that the ground­truth path is given by human annotators [3].
Figure 4.3: Neural A* network architecture [3]
Due to the discrete nature of path planning algorithms, as mentioned in section 2.1.1,
training a neural network to do shortest­path search is a challenge because functions need
to be differentiable for gradient descent to do its job. As a solution to this problem, Neural
A* Search transforms all variables in A* search as matrices. This both introduces non­
linearity to facilitate learning, but also makes it such that convolution can be leveraged for
e.g. neighbour extraction. To illustrate the main concept, let us examine a brief example
of how this transformation takes place.
Recalling the A* algorithm as outlined in A* Search, the original bookkeeping structures
O, C, Vnbr ∈{0, 1}V are transformed to binary matrices of the input map size. However,
Yonetani et al. note that doing neighbour selection as defined in eq. (2.3) in a differen­
tiable manner is fairly complex since it involves a discrete operation. As such, they drew
inspiration by the work in [35].
The differentiable A* algorithm expects the graph G = (V, E) as a 2D environmental map
X ∈{0, 1}V , where all edges have a unit cost c(′v) = {0, 1}, such that 0 is impassable
and 1 is passable [3, p. 3]. The binary input map X is illustrated in fig. 4.4 and is inspired
by the map on fig. 4.1.
Figure 4.4: The binary environmental map X
The start node vs, goal node vg and selected node v∗are transformed to binary one­hot
encoded matrices given by Vs, Vg, V ∗∈{0, 1}V , where each matrix is computed as the
inner product of the all­ones matrix Y of the map size. For the sake of simplicity we will
22
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:31==
assume a map size n = 9. Given an input graph G, which is transformed to the 2D
environmental map X, we can obtain Vs and Vg by
⟨Vs, Y ⟩=


0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

×


1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

=


0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


⟨Vg, Y ⟩=


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

×


1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

=


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1


Selecting V ∗is a complex operation, so we will not detail that here. More details about
node selection is outlined in [3, p. 4]. After selecting which node to expand, neighbouring
nodes can be identified via convolution and a series of masking operations as defined in
eq. (4.1)
Vnbr = (V ∗K) ⊙X ⊙(1 −O) ⊙(1 −C)
(4.1)
The basic concept to obtain neighbour nodes for expansion is by applying a 3x3 kernel to
V ∗, as illustrated in fig. 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Expanding nodes of V ∗. Reproduced from [33]
The rest of the operations ensure that expanded neighbour nodes are passable to main­
tain graph topology, and to make sure the selected nodes are not contained in the open
or closed list, O and C, respectively [3, p. 4]. This continuous in a loop until the network
has identified the best path from Vs to Vg.
The output of the network during training is a guidance map along with a loss. The loss
function takes the closed list C of explored nodes and the guidance­map to derive a loss
based on the provided ground­truth path. This is used in back­propagation to adjust the
encoder to produce a new guidance­map, where the encoder will be penalized for ex­
panding nodes that that leads to training inaccuracy.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
23
==PAGE:32==
5
Path Planning on Mars
In the following chapter, the methods of data collection and subsequent data augmentation
will be presented. As mentioned in the Introduction, data scarcity presents a problem, and
to that effect data augmentation plays a key role in artificially inflating the amount of data
to properly train a network. However, before any data augmentation can take place, we
first need to collect data. The process of collecting data and how it was balanced is the
subject of the following sections.
5.1
Data collection
No readily available data set to do image analysis on Mars exists that also does not re­
quire heavy use of manual annotation. As such, a tool created by NASA to track the
whereabouts of their rovers [6] has been extensively used to manually crop images of
Curiosity along the trajectory it has taken through the Gale Crater. In fig. 5.1 the entire
path of Curiosity can be seen. To date, Curiosity has traveled 27.44 km.
Figure 5.1: NASA’s tool for rover tracking
Looking at the trajectory, the vast majority of terrain covered in the beginning was char­
acterized by a maneuverable and smooth surface. As Curiosity progressed towards its
current destination, the terrain starts to diverge from the landing site from smooth and ma­
neuverable to more complex as seen in fig. 5.2. Already, we start to note that imbalance
24
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:33==
likely will impact the final data set, and that a strategy for balancing the data will have to
be devised in the later stages before augmentation can happen.
Figure 5.2: Terrain diverges from simple to complex
The strategy for collecting data was quite simple. Tracking the path of Curiosity from its
landing site to its current destination, images of size 210 x 210 were cropped all along the
path at a zoom level of 50 meters. This level of zoom provided the best trade­off between
the number of potential data samples and image clarity. The size of the image was chosen
empirically as a good size to encapsulate features while maintaining a decent resolution
for training purposes.
Each crop consists of a reference image containing the path and a training image without
the path. This effectively removes the need to manually annotate the image by means of
an expert, i.e., no ground­truth path has to be provided to facilitate training. However, a
consequence of using an image with a higher resolution lowers the amount of available
data, constrained by the amount of crops we can do using a window size of 210 x 210.
On fig. 5.3 a set of images can be seen, where fig. 5.3a is the image containing the path
taken by Curiosity, and fig. 5.3b is the same image but without the path.
(a) Reference image with a path
(b) Testing image without a path
Figure 5.3: One cropped pair of images for training
A caveat to cropping the images manually using the tracking tool is making sure there is
pixel­perfect alignment between both images. This was achieved using a cropping tool
that saves the bounding box of the crop. In this way, when the first crop containing the
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
25
==PAGE:34==
path was made, the path annotation could simply be disabled, and then another crop
could be perfectly aligned on top of it. Because these images are to be used in a CNN
with max­pooling, which makes the model invariant to local translation as discussed in the
section on Neural networks, this probably could have been less of a concern. However,
one goal of this data collection is to prepare a data set that also acts as a solid foundation
for future use. As such, this strengthens the data set in a case where pixel­wise sensitivity
is important.
(a) Bradbury Landing to Darwin
(b) Darwin to Cooperstown
Figure 5.4: Delineating areas of exploration
To segment the areas explored by Curiosity, each set of images are associated with a
specific region on the path. The purpose of this is to segment samples that describe the
terrain and its surface traits specific to that area as a class of its own, and to scaffold a
modular structure in the data for further processing, e.g., to test if a path planning model
will generalize better to certain classes (areas) over others.
To delineate an area, the area name was selected to provide a rough delineation between
an area A and an area B as an empirical approximation. This can be seen in fig. 5.4. The
red lines delineates the area from Bradbury Landing to Darwin on fig. 5.4a, and from
Darwin to Cooperstown on fig. 5.4b, as Curiosity traverses from Bradbury Landing to
Cooperstown. This, of course, is not a very precise measurement by any means, but
since there are no coordinates provided on the trajectory that clearly defines when an
area starts and when an area finishes, this was the best alternative.
In table 5.1, an overview of all the areas that Curiosity has traversed is outlined along
with the number of samples cropped from each area. Looking at the table, it is clear that
there is a lot of spread in the number of samples collected per area. As expected, this
is a case of class imbalance, which describes a data set with a skewed ratio of majority
to minority samples [36]. However, looking at the path taken by Curiosity, it is clear that
some areas have a certain level of similarity, such as the area between Bradbury Landing
and Cooperstown. As such, it may be possible to aggregate similar areas into one.
In the next section, we will explore how to balance the data set.
26
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:35==
Area code
Name
Samples
01
Bradbury Landing
5
02
Yellowknife Bay
23
03
Darwin
23
04
Cooperstown
53
05
Kimberley
54
06
Pahrump Hills
10
07
Marias Pass
8
08
Bridger Basin
9
09
Gobabeb
8
10
Naukluft Plateau
25
11
Murray Buttes
27
12
Ogonquit Beach
24
13
Vera Rubin Ridge
59
14
Greenheugh Pediment
15
343
Table 5.1: Table of areas and samples associated with each area
5.1.1
Balancing the data set
When training a neural network it is important that the data set has a high level of balance
between classes, otherwise there is a risk that the network will be biased towards the ma­
jority class – also called overfitting. Specifically, overfitting will occur when there are class
imbalances, but also when the data set is small [37]. This exacerbates the argument be­
hind the application of data augmentation once the data set has been properly balanced.
While augmentation is a highly efficient way of reducing imbalance in a data set, the data
collected so far contains so few samples across each class that applying augmentation
to it will maintain the class imbalance in a linear fashion.
An efficient way to balance a data set is to undersample [38]. Undersampling a data set
simply means to reduce the size of the abundant class until a decent proportionality be­
tween classes have been reached. However, in the case of the Mars data set obtained
using NASA’s tracking tool, there is already a very limited amount of data. Still, it is neces­
sary to balance the data set in one way or the other. At the other end of the spectrum we
can also choose to oversample the data set [38, p. 105]. This is effectively augmentation,
as we will see in the next section, Data augmentation. But there are constraints to how
the data can be augmented. So while augmentation is a valid way to inflate the classes
with a low amount of samples, it will translate to fewer available methods of augmentation
for the remainder of the data set because we cannot apply the same augmentation tech­
nique to the same class two times. As such, undersampling will be the preferred method
to balance the data set.
The first step in undersampling the Mars data is to investigate the possibility of merging
areas with a certain level of similarity into one class. As evidenced by table 5.1, there is
large variance of samples between each class, so if e.g. Area 01 could be merged with
Area 02, this variance would already significantly decrease. But combining those two ar­
eas to form one class with 28 samples would create a new class that is overly abundant
with respect to e.g. Darwin, which now only has 23 samples. This is a percentage dif­
ference of almost 20%, which is not negligible, especially once augmentation starts to be
employed.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
27
==PAGE:36==
Ideally, we want to balance the data set such that each output class is represented by the
same number of input samples [38]. Whether or not this is realistic will be investigated.
In reality, it can be argued that each class should stay within a 5% margin with respect to
the number of samples. In other words, if we were to combine Area 01 and 02 to create
a new class C with 28 samples, we would have to undersample C by at least 3 samples
to maintain a 5% margin between C and Area 03.
To determine if certain areas can be merged to more easily facilitate an undersampling
strategy of the overly abundant classes, we will do a visual inspection of the trajectory,
which can provide some pointers as to which areas can be aggregated into one by surface
similarity. Using table 5.1, we can see that Area 01, Bradbury Landing, only has 5 sam­
ples. This is in stark contrast to Area 04, Cooperstown, where 53 samples were taken.
However, Area 1 through 4 look to be very similar in surface color and terrain features as
can be seen in fig. 5.5, so there is potential that these areas can be combined into one
class. But as we track Curiosity through these areas, and as we progress towards Area 4,
the surface and terrain characteristics become increasingly differentiated. For example,
the surface color darkens and the terrain has more diversity, i.e. craters, ridges, elevation
differences, and so on. If we train the model to think of Area 1 through 4 as the same
class, the model might not generalize well when we test it on these areas in isolation.
Figure 5.5: Side­by­side of Area 01, 02, 03 and 04
Surface similarity analysis
To quantify whether or not areas can be thought of as similar we need a metric to support
whether or not aggregation can take place. Two popular methods to determine similarity
are MSE, as defined in eq. (2.8), and Structural Similarity Image Measure (SSIM).
Humans have a visual perception highly adapted for extracting structural information from
a scene [39], but this information can be difficult to capture by algorithms when we are not
dealing with advanced methods such as a neural network. While MSE is fast to imple­
ment, it is not accurate at detecting structural similarity between images [40]. SSIM was
implemented by Wang et al. (2004) in an effort to mitigate this.
The main difference between MSE and SSIM is that MSE computes a global error in pixel
intensities. As such, MSE is not able to capture subtle differences in structure between
two structurally different images that share the same pixel intensity spectrum. Wang et
al. (2006) use clever insight into what constitutes structure in an image and devised a
method, SSIM, which is invariant to luminance and contrast information in an image such
that SSIM can extract structure as an isolated feature [40, p. 604]. This approach is much
more sophisticated compared to MSE, which only looks at the error in global pixel intensity
across the entire image.
In fig. 5.6 a short comparison of MSE and SSIM can be seen. The images used are from
28
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:37==
Area 01 and Area 07. As a sanity check, both methods are applied to the same image in
fig. 5.6a. Here we see that both methods yield a score of 0.00 and 1.00, respectively; that
is, MSE computes no error between the images, and SSIM computes a 100% structural
similarity between the images. The image pair on the right, in fig. 5.6b, is a comparison of
two distinct areas with a high degree of dissimilarity. Here, MSE computes a large error of
global pixel intensity, and SSIM yields a 0.32% similarity index. While MSE does capture
the difference, SSIM was designed with structural information in mind. Also, SSIM returns
a value between 0 and 1, which is a much easier range of values to use as a measure for
quantitative measurements. As such, the preferred method to use as a foundation for a
surface similarity analysis is SSIM.
(a) MSE score: 0.00. SSIM score: 1.00
(b) MSE score: 1523.99. SSIM score: 0.32
Figure 5.6: Similarity analysis of areas. Left: Area 01 vs Area 01. Right: Area 01 vs Area
07
To get an idea of when an area A can be similar to an area B, we will first determine
a mean SSIM score from an intra­sample scenario. This intra­sample mean value will
serve a a baseline indication for when two areas are similar enough to be aggregated. In
table 5.2, the intra­sample SSIM score for each sample is shown as a 5x5 matrix, with
ones along the diagonal, indicating identical samples.
Sample
1
2
3
4
5
1
1.00
0.45
0.44
0.45
0.42
2
0.45
1.00
0.44
0.48
0.44
3
0.44
0.44
1.00
0.46
0.42
4
0.45
0.48
0.46
1.00
0.44
5
0.42
0.44
0.42
0.44
1.00
Table 5.2: Intra­sample mean SSIM for each area
Looking at table 5.2, it is clear that structural similarity in samples from the same area
have a relatively low similarity index score. Following suit, we can investigate mean intra­
sample similarity index scores for every area. This is done by iterating over each area
A = {ii, i2, . . . in}, where i is a sample image, selecting a fixed sample i ∈A = A0,
computing the similarity index score between i and n ∈A and finally calculating the mean
SSIM as in eq. (5.1)
MeanSSIM(A) = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
SSIM(A0, Ai)
(5.1)
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
29
==PAGE:38==
The results from this calculation are shown in table 5.3.
Area
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Mean SSIM
0.55
0.41
0.43
0.38
0.46
0.40
0.35
0.32
0.26
0.19
0.13
0.15
0.31
0.26
Table 5.3: Intra­sample mean SSIM for Area 01
There is very low variance in the intra­sample mean scores (0.03) with a standard devi­
ation of 0.18. But looking at the results in table 5.3, it is clear that structural similarity,
even in the same areas, decreases steadily as Curiosity travels away from the landing
site. This is in line with the manual observations of the path, which indicate that surface
traits become increasingly more diverse towards Curiosity’s current destination.
To get a better grasp on the similarity between each area, i.e., the similarity between Area
01 and Area 06, we could do an inter­sample SSIM score between them. However, due
to class imbalance, the class with the fewest amount of samples would dictate how many
comparisons we can do on a sample­to­sample basis. But as an empirical study, this
should suffice to gain some insight into how similar surfaces are across the entire path
traveled by Curiosity.
Following this notion, we will do an A/B similarity test between Area 01 and every other
area. The result of the test can seen in table 5.4. The diagonal represents the intra­sample
mean SSIM for the same area and mirrors the table in table 5.3.
Area
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
1
0.55
0.38
0.41
0.39
0.43
0.37
0.33
0.34
0.25
0.22
0.18
0.16
0.31
0.26
2
0.43
0.41
0.41
0.38
0.43
0.37
0.33
0.34
0.25
0.22
0.17
0.16
0.31
0.26
3
0.42
0.37
0.43
0.38
0.42
0.35
0.30
0.32
0.24
0.22
0.17
0.16
0.30
0.26
4
0.36
0.35
0.37
0.38
0.41
0.31
0.28
0.29
0.22
0.21
0.16
0.15
0.29
0.23
5
0.39
0.41
0.44
0.40
0.46
0.37
0.32
0.34
0.24
0.23
0.17
0.18
0.31
0.27
6
0.37
0.34
0.36
0.34
0.39
0.40
0.31
0.33
0.23
0.20
0.15
0.18
0.28
0.25
7
0.35
0.29
0.30
0.29
0.33
0.28
0.35
0.27
0.20
0.18
0.14
0.15
0.25
0.22
8
0.29
0.26
0.28
0.27
0.29
0.25
0.24
0.32
0.18
0.17
0.14
0.13
0.22
0.20
9
0.23
0.21
0.22
0.21
0.22
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.26
0.14
0.12
0.12
0.18
0.17
10
0.23
0.24
0.25
0.24
0.25
0.21
0.19
0.19
0.16
0.19
0.13
0.12
0.20
0.18
11
0.20
0.17
0.18
0.17
0.19
0.17
0.16
0.16
0.13
0.12
0.13
0.11
0.15
0.14
12
0.15
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.19
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.12
0.12
0.10
0.15
0.16
0.13
13
0.33
0.36
0.39
0.37
0.42
0.33
0.28
0.30
0.21
0.22
0.16
0.19
0.31
0.26
14
0.29
0.26
0.28
0.26
0.28
0.24
0.23
0.24
0.18
0.17
0.13
0.15
0.23
0.26
Table 5.4: Mean inter­sample SSIM across all areas
Visually inspecting the samples taken from Area 01 through Area 04 as in fig. 5.5, it is
clear that the surface in these areas have a high degree of similarity from a human point
of view. However, the mean intra­sample SSIM for these areas would tend to disagree,
which range from 0.55 down to 0.38. The area that has the highest degree of similarity is
Area 01, and only receives an intra­sample SSIM score of 0.55. As we progress towards
Area 04, the intra­sample SSIM score steadily decrease. As such, there is an argument
to make based on SSIM, that as Curiosity approaches Area 04, divergence in surface
similarity starts to happen within the same area. This trend becomes increasingly more
powerful as we progress towards Area 14.
Still, it may be possible to extrapolate from these numbers that a certain threshold can
30
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:39==
distinguish an area A from an area B as being similar enough for aggregation. This
number, of course, is not set in stone, and must be correlated with visual observations of
the terrain. Using Area 01, with a baseline SSIM of 0.55, we can compare other areas to
this baseline. Recall that in fig. 5.6, two distinct areas, Area 01 and 07, with a low degree
of visual similarity, was shown to have an SSIM score of 0.32. Following this, it can be
argued that an inter­sample SSIM score between two areas must be higher than 0.32
before they can be aggregated.
However, observing Area 01 and 02, which by visual inspection have a very high degree
of similarity, there is still only a 0.38 to 0.43 intra­sample SSIM score between them. So
the threshold of 0.32 could probably be raised to be an average of the inter­sample SSIM
scores. Following this notion, we can draw inspiration from a concept previously explored
in the section on Neural networks, namely convolution but with mean­pooling instead of
max­pooling with a 2x2 kernel to calculate the mean value between 2 areas. The result
of this can be seen in table 5.5.
Area
1­2
3­4
5­6
7­8
9­10
11­12
13­14
1­2
0.44
0.40
0.40
0.34
0.23
0.17
0.29
3­4
0.38
0.39
0.37
0.30
0.22
0.16
0.27
5­6
0.38
0.39
0.41
0.33
0.23
0.17
0.28
7­8
0.30
0.29
0.29
0.30
0.18
0.14
0.22
9­10
0.23
0.23
0.22
0.19
0.19
0.12
0.18
11­12
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.15
0.12
0.12
0.15
13­14
0.31
0.33
0.32
0.26
0.20
0.16
0.27
Table 5.5: Mean values of inter­sample SSIM between two areas
Using the values obtained in table 5.5, we can balance the data. As outlined previously,
it is only necessary to merge certain areas to achieve balance in the data set such that
we get a reasonable ratio of input samples across all output classes. While it is difficult
to set a precise threshold for when a merge of areas can be supported by the resulting
mean similarity index, we can base it on the following logic. Recalling that the highest
intra­sample SSIM score was 0.55 for Area 01 (table 5.3), and a low SSIM score between
two distinct areas with a low degree of similarity was empirically found to be 0.32 (fig. 5.6),
we can select the threshold for merging areas as a number in this range.
Figure 5.7: Side­by­side of Area 06, 07 and 08
Based on the mean values of inter­sample SSIM scores, we see that Area 01 and 02
are good candidates to merge as the SSIM score is relatively high. While Area 3 and 04
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
31
==PAGE:40==
have a decent similarity index, it is not necessary to up­ or downsample either Area 03,
Darwin, or Area 04, Cooperstown, so no action will be applied here. However, Area 04
is a majority class by a large margin, so downsampling is the obvious choice here. To
bring Area 04 down to level, 28 samples will be removed. The same applies for Area 05,
Kimberley, where 29 samples will be removed. Area 06 through 08 are minority classes,
along with Area 01. These areas have a relatively low mean inter­sample SSIM. Visually
inspecting these areas does reveal structural differences, but the surface type and terrain
looks very similar. This is illustrated in fig. 5.7. Thus, here we choose to override the SSIM
score and trust human perception of structural similarity more. Moving on from here there
a few actions left to take.
Area 09, Gobabeb, is a bit of an outlier. First of all, it is a minority class by a large mar­
gin. Second, it has a very low mean intra­sample and inter­sample SSIM score when
compared to all other areas. This is easily explained when you zoom out and look at
the surrounding areas, illustrated in fig. 5.8. The trajectory followed by Curiosity in and
around the area of Gobabeb is a mixture of the surrounding areas. The sample popu­
lation cropped for Gobabeb thus represents the surrounding areas more than it actually
represents the area of Gobabeb itself. As such, Gobabeb will be removed from the data
set entirely.
Figure 5.8: Area 09, Gobabeb is a mishmash of the surrounding areas
Following suit is Area 10, which is perfectly balanced in relation to the other classes. Area
11 needs a bit of downsampling, so does Area 13. Area 12 is within a very narrow margin,
so we could choose to augment, but in reality, this probably will not matter. Finally, there
is Area 14, which needs a bit of upsampling to be level with the rest of the classes. The
final result of the balanced data set can be seen in table 5.6.
Now that the data set has been properly balanced it is time to look into inflating it to a size
where it will be useful for training. Balancing the data set has shrunk the original sample
size considerably from 343 to 249 samples – and that is after a few simple augmentations
to upsample the minority classes. As such, it is critical that more data is generated prior
to training the network, as too little data has effects akin to unbalanced data when training
a model [38]
32
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:41==
Area
Name
Samples
Action
Balanced set
01
Bradbury Landing
5
Merge with 02
25
02
Yellowknife Bay
23
Merge candidate
0
03
Darwin
23
Upsample to size 25
25
04
Cooperstown
53
Downsample by 28
25
05
Kimberley
54
Downsample by 29
25
06
Pahrump Hills
10
Merge with 7 and 8. Downsample by 2
25
07
Marias Pass
8
Merge candidate
0
08
Bridger Basin
9
Merge candidate
0
09
Gobabeb
8
Remove entirely
0
10
Naukluft Plateau
25
None
25
11
Murray Buttes
27
Downsample by 2
25
12
Ogonquit Beach
24
None
24
13
Vera Rubin Ridge
59
Downsample by 34
25
14
Greenheugh Pediment
15
Upsample to size 25
25
343
249
Table 5.6: Data set after balancing
5.2
Data augmentation
Having access to large amounts of data is important. It is a general observation that neural
networks learn better when there is an abundance of data [36]. But collecting enormous
amounts of data is both a daunting and extremely time consuming task, since data first
has to be collected and appropriately labeled. This oftentimes require the involvement
of domain experts that can pinpoint where to source the data from, assessing the quality
of the data, collecting it, and finally organizing and labeling it such that a model can be
trained to do some form of prediction. As such, improving model generalization is one of
the most difficult challenges in the area of data science, simply because vast amounts of
labeled data is necessary to facilitate learning.
However, research in the area of data augmentation has paved the way for mitigating
cases where data is a limited resource. With respect to this, augmentation has proven to
be a very efficient method for improving generalization of models. As such, the purpose
of augmentation is to decrease the distance between the training and testing data.
Data augmentation encompasses a distinct set of techniques, but it is not the only way
to combat overfitting. As research into deep learning has rapidly evolved over the years,
so has the need to find ways to artificially inflate a data set. Advanced methods to tackle
overfitting has paved the way for fully­fledged neural networks intended to solve overfitting
issues such as Transfer Learning Networks and Neural Style Transfer. But methods like
these do not tackle the problem of data scarcity by looking at the root cause, that is, the
number of distinct samples in the original training data. Data augmentation, on the other
hand, does.
When enough data is present, advanced overfitting solutions are obviously not necessary
to employ. But in reality, big data is rarely a luxury to many domains in which neural net­
works and deep learning are applicable, such as medical imaging [4]. Data augmentation
works under the assumption that more information can be extracted from the original data
set by augmenting it in various ways. It effectively forms a way to artificially inflate the
original data set, and creates new data that resemble the original samples, but creates
data different enough such that the model can consider them as two separate pieces of
input.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
33
==PAGE:42==
Of course, augmentation comes with its own set of limitations. Not all augmentation meth­
ods are label­preserving, as we will shortly see in the next section. Some methods can
distort the original input so much that it removes the expected features within the image
that is supposed to form a class prediction. This is also called a non­label preserving
augmentation technique. Therefore, it is important that the augmentation technique is
selected carefully and applied to an appropriate input.
With that being said, augmentation techniques can be stacked and combined with other,
more advanced techniques such as a Generative Adversarial Network, or GAN. Basic
geometric transformations like a rotation in combination with a GAN create mind­boggling
amounts of new data that can be used for training and testing [37].
In the following section a short survey of relevant augmentation methods will carried out,
such that we can select a few relevant, basic transformations to apply to the Mars data
set.
5.2.1
Survey of relevant augmentation methods
Augmentation can be used to statically inflate the size of the data set, i.e., each applied
transformation on a data set of size N can produce a new data set of size 2N. In the
case that data is abundant, memory consumption of such a data set can quickly rise to
problematic levels. On the other end of the spectrum one can choose to do augmentation
during training. This approach, however, can have impact on training time, which arguably
can grow rapidly. The advantage, of course, is that memory consumption is of no concern.
This is generally described as offline and offline data augmentation.
Because the Mars data set is very small, offline augmentation is not a concern. So far, the
Mars data set only consists of 237 samples before upsampling the minority classes to level
them with the rest of the data set. Clearly, this is on the edge of being applicable to train a
model, so a selection of basic augmentation methods have been made to swiftly inflate the
amount data available to train the network. The selected techniques have been singled
out because they are label­preserving and fast to implement, with label­preserving being
a critical component. The path is a necessary feature that must not be removed post­
transformation. In general, this is referred to as the safety of the augmentation technique
The safety of a technique has to be seen in relation to the domain it is applied to, as
previously mentioned. An example of an unsafe technique is rotation when used on the
MNIST data set of handwritten digits. If you apply a transformation to rotate a 6, then it
will become a 9, and thus the class has completely changed. However, it should be noted
that there exists no image augmentation technique that does not distort the label in some
way [36, p. 7].
The bulk of the selected techniques are geometric transformations, such as flipping verti­
cally and horizontally, along with a few kernel filters, such as Gaussian noise. Geometric
transformations are across the board considered good when there is positional bias in the
data. In the case of Mars data, the positional bias could be the path, which is typically
cropped in the center of a sample. Kernel filters, such as sharpening, are efficient at cap­
turing objects or features of interest. This is also applicable to the Mars data, where we are
interested in highlighting features in the terrain that delineate passable from in­passable
areas.
However, augmenting data with kernel filters is an avenue somewhat unexplored in data
augmentation when coupled with e.g. a CNN [36, p. 12]. This is due to the inherent
design of a CNN, where convolution layers already have kernels that behave in a similar
34
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:43==
fashion. As such, kernel filters could possibly be implemented directly as a layer in a
neural network instead of applied as an augmentation technique.
In table 5.7 a summary of each selected technique can be seen.
Base type
Type
1
Geometric
Horizontal flipping
2
Vertical flipping
3
Horizontal and vertical flipping
4
Rotation
5
Kernel
filter
Gaussian noise
6
Gaussian blur
7
Sharpen
8
Color space
Grayscale
Table 5.7: Selected augmentation techniques
Out of a wide array of basic geometric and color space transformations there were of
course also techniques which were discarded. For example, most of the color space
transformations with the exception of one were not chosen. This was for a few reasons.
1. They are usually effective when lighting bias is an issue [36]. But as the cropped image
patches from the Curiosity rovers path do not suffer from poor lighting conditions, this
argument was not applicable. 2. There could be a correlation between surface color and
maneuverability. As such, changing the color space in some dimension could negatively
affect generalization of the model when unseen testing data is presented which contain
the actual color space of Mars.
However, grayscale was chosen. This is because the tracking tool applies a grayscale
filter to areas outside of any area that the rover has not visited. Therefore it is safe to
assume that grayscale images could be an appropriate data source to train a model on
as a preliminary step before visiting these areas. This goes in line with another argument,
namely that changing color space of an input image will eliminate bias in favor of spatial
information [36, p. 10]. This goes for the argument of using grayscale transformations,
such that structural features like passable and impassable can be singled out.
Finally was translation and cropping discarded. These specific techniques have to be
manually verified to make sure they have not changed the label of the input. Therefore,
these were not selected due to the overhead they introduce to verify that they are label­
preserving. It is also safe to assume that random cropping will partially or fully obstruct the
path, rendering the image useless for training. Discarding cropping is a little unfortunate,
though, because it was found in a study that cropping contributes to the highest increase
in training accuracy out of all geometric transformations [36, p. 11].
5.2.2
Augmenting the data set
Now that we have selected a few basic augmentation techniques we can start inflating
the size of the data set. Recalling that a select few classes were still underrepresented
(table 5.6), these need to be upsampled by means of augmentation before proceeding
to augment the remainder of the data set. Luckily, this is easy to do, as the number of
lacking samples are very few; just 2 for Area 03, and 10 for Area 14, respectively.
As previously mentioned, any augmentation technique can be used to inflate a sample
size from N to 2N. As such, we will use a method of augmentation not part of the set of
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
35
==PAGE:44==
techniques outlined in table 5.7 such that all of the identified techniques can be used to
augment the data set once it is completely balanced. Here, a technique like translation is
befitting. While there is potential for translation to be unsafe, because we are dealing with
so few samples, we can easily verify that the samples created are safe before proceeding.
Continuing on, we will briefly take a look at how the some of the selected augmentations
affect our data.
In fig. 5.9 an illustration of a selection of geometric transformations can be seen. The orig­
inal sample can be seen in fig. 5.9a. In each of the subsequent images, a horizontal flip, a
vertical flip and a rotation has been applied as a transformation. The rotation transforma­
tion automatically pads the image to maintain dimensions. The safety of applying rotation
is dependent on how many degrees of rotation is used with respect to the domain. As
previously mentioned, rotating handwritten digits can completely change the class label.
But on the Mars data set, it simple changes the trajectory. Here, only a slight rotation is
used, set to a fixed parameter between a random choice of {−15, 15} degrees of rotation
with a probability of 1.
(a) Original
(b) Horizontal flip
(c) Vertical flip
(d) Rotation
Figure 5.9: Geometric transformations on a sample from Area 07, Marias Pass
In fig. 5.10 all the selected kernel transformations are illustrated. The most interesting
transformations here is the noise and sharpen transformations. Sharpening the image, as
mentioned previously, has the distinct advantage of highlighting specific spatial features
of an image. This is clearly illustrated in fig. 5.10c, where ridges and elevation changes
stand out more. Adding noise to an image is attributed with the network learning features
in a more robust manner. The application of this is mostly relevant to networks that have
to deal with image input that already contain noise, such that a model can generalize
better to unseen data which contains it. However, the notion of employing noise as an
augmentation technique here stems from the fact that the data is scarce.
(a) Original
(b) Gaussian blur
(c) Sharpen
(d) Gaussian noise
Figure 5.10: Kernel transformations on a sample from Area 07, Marias Pass
Now that the data set is balanced we can apply the full set of transformations to our data
36
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:45==
set. The method of doing this is simply to iterate over each area a ∈A = {a1, a2, · · · , an}
and for each transformation t ∈T = {t1, t2, · · · , tn} select a sample s ∈a, apply transfor­
mation y = t(s), and finally save y to a list S. This method was followed for the original,
unbalanced data set, and for the balanced data set to produce 4 distinct set of sample
populations as outlined in table 5.8.
After augmentation the final size of the data set is scaled linearly by each method. Be­
cause we have selected 8 methods of augmentation, the final size of the data set becomes
N × 8 + N = 249 × 8 + 249 = 2.241. This is quite an improvement over the original 343
(unbalanced) samples.
Summary
We collected 343 data samples which can be used to do shortest path search on Mars.
However, we also discovered that the data set was highly unbalanced. To mitigate this,
SSIM was used to identify areas that share a similar structure. SSIM revealed that some
areas had a relative high degree of structural similarity, but because data is scarce, not all
areas were candidate for aggregation with other similar areas. Using SSIM as a baseline,
we merged a select few areas with structural similarity to combine minority classes that
share surface traits. This in turn enabled us to do undersampling to remove samples from
majority classes to level the data points for each class. However, two classes remained
underrepresented, as they were not a candidate for a merger with others. To mitigate this,
a few basic augmentation techniques was utilized to level them with the rest. The result
of this was a balanced data set, where five classes were merged to form two new distinct
classes, and two classes were upsampled. The final, balanced data set now consists of
249 distinct samples.
After this, data augmentation took place to further enhance the data set. A selection
of eight geometric and kernel transformations were singled out for their ease of imple­
mentation and relevancy of bringing out certain favorable traits in the data set. Applying
augmentation successfully inflated the number of samples from 249 to 2.241.
The data set has been segmented into separate distinct parts as seen in table 5.8 to pre­
serve the original data, and to better compartmentalize what data is used during training
sessions.
Unbalanced
Balanced
Unaugmented
343
249
Augmented
3.087
2.241
Table 5.8: Distribution of samples
In the next section we will dive into training Neural A* Search on Mars data. A few prelim­
inary sections will be used to describe the overall system, and how all the collected data
is prepared to be in a suitable format such that the network can work with the data.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
37
==PAGE:46==
5.3
Training Neural A* Search on Mars data
Now that data has been collected, and augmented to a reasonable level of distinct sam­
ples, we are now ready to employ Neural A* Search to do shortest path planning on Mars.
In fig. 5.11, a high­level abstraction of how the system operates is illustrated.
Figure 5.11: High­level abstraction of the system
The flow of the system is as follows. We take a set of images, namely an image with a
path and its corresponding reference image without a path, and feed them to the data
augmentation routine outlined in the previous section, Data augmentation. From this, a
new artificial image pair is created and stored in memory.
The preprocessor is responsible for creating data samples that the network can work with
– in the case of Neural A* Search, that is a NumPy archive, also known as an .npz archive.
This archive contains a series of data structures that enables the network to train. Among
the data structures are an input image, a trajectory (the ground­truth path) along with the
start and goal position. In the next section, we will take a look how Mars images are
processed and prepared for the network.
The preprocessor employs various tricks to prepare the raw data for training. In fig. 5.12
a high­level overview can be seen which outlines each step carried out to prepare the
collected data for Neural A* search.
Figure 5.12: Preprocessing data to prepare it for Neural A*
The first goal of the preprocessor is to receive a pair images, one containing a path, and
the corresponding one without it, such that the trajectory of Curiosity can be extracted. The
result of this can be seen in fig. 5.13. The method to extract is as follows. Given an image
A and an image B, produce a new image C by doing a pixel­wise comparison of them
both. To do this, we iterate over the images and extract a set of pixels {ui, ki} = (Ai, Bi).
38
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:47==
For each pixel­pair that has the same absolute value, i.e., |ui| = |ki|, set the color to
black. For all other cases, set the pixel value to Bi. This yields a new picture as seen in
fig. 5.13c.
(a) Reference
(b) Path
(c) Trajectory
Figure 5.13: Extracting the trajectory
The secondary step is to compute the trajectory using the output image C. To extract the
coordinates of the trajectory within the image, we simply iterate over the image, looking
for values that are non­black.
The length ratio, or simplicity factor, is now computed. This is a metric to determine how
complex the trajectory is compared to the straight­line distance between the start node and
goal node. First the straight­line distance is computed. The length ratio is obtained as a
ratio between the straight­line distance and the total distance of the trajectory. This metric
is in place to determine whether or not a trajectory is too complex, and as such, the length
ratio is an empirically defined metric. Most cropped image patches contain trajectories
that are fairly simple, as we are dealing with a Mars rover which travels in fairly straight
lines. However, there are image patches which contain overlapping trajectories because
the Mars rover was exploring an area in a back­and­forth manner. The length ratio can
then discard such trajectories, because they will be difficult to use as a ground­truth path.
The next step is to resize the trajectory to ensure that the it can fit the output image
dimensions of 64 x 64. After this one­hot binary encoding takes place, and the start and
goal matrices are generated along with the input image (the reference image without the
path), which through a simple downsampling pass. Finally, all of the input variables are
packaged as a NumPy archive.
5.4
Experiments
A description of experiments is outlined below. In the appendix, a section for each exper­
iment has been added with placeholder tables and figures.
5.4.1
Baseline results
Training was conducted using the original, unbalanced data set to form a baseline. Train­
ing ran for 20 epochs with a batch size of 64. In fig. 5.14 the output of the first training
session can be seen. While not entirely conclusive, Neural A* seems to be able to apply
Neural A* search to Mars in this instance. However, we note that the trajectory is offset,
which could point to an issue with the preprocessor or simply that the model needs more
training time.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.14: A sample training result
5.4.2
Experiment: Learning curve
The first experiment to conduct is to investigate the model’s training/testing performance.
This is a basic metric to evaluate how well the model is generalizing to a domain, or if
there are issues with over or underfitting. Concretely, one should record the loss at every
epoch during training, and plot this against the loss at every epoch during testing, to check
how well the model is generalizing to the data.
5.4.3
Experiment: Transfer learning
The second experiment is linked to the process of Transfer Learning, used to pre­train the
network. We have already touched upon transfer learning a bit in the Discussion, where
Neural Style Transfer was attempted to inflate the data set. The idea behind Transfer
Learning is slightly different, though. This is a more generalized approach, where a net­
work will be trained on a domain with an abundance of data, such as ImageNet. After
training, the weights will be copied to train a new network. This is effective because many
images share low­level spatial features, which can aid the new network to focus on learn­
ing more complex feature sets earlier in training [36, p. 3].
The Transfer Learning approach could work as follows. First, train the network using the
available Mars data to establish a baseline. Once again, the learning curve should be
recorded. After this, pre­train the network on a big dataset containing top­down images
of a surface, such as the Stanford Drone Dataset used by the original Neural A* Search.
Now, train the network again, using the copied weights, and test if that improves the
baseline. Measure the loss and plot a learning curve to investigate if the baseline has
improved.
40
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:49==
6
Discussion
In this section an open­ended discussion about the project will be presented. The discus­
sion will revolve around what influenced the decisions to use various methods throughout
the project, and describe which alternative routes were explored to gather empirical evi­
dence of the best way to move forward. Based on this, the section will finish with a more
concrete list of suggestions for future work that can take this project, or something similar,
to the next level.
From the outset of this project there was a clear goal to have a fully trained network in
place at the end of the project period that could generalize to Mars. However, one of
the major milestones in reaching that goal was the ability to source data. This quickly
revealed to be a large obstacle to overcome, as the amount of readily available data was
nowhere to be found. This opened up a plethora of research avenues to be explored,
as evidenced by the relatively lengthy sections on data collection and subsequent data
augmentation. As such, this slowly changed the focal point of the project towards a more
data­centric one, where the goal was to obtain and structure data in preparation to train
a neural network.
Deciding that data should be sourced as image crops using NASA’s Where is the rover tool
was a clear milestone. But it also begged many questions, such as: How do we source it?
And how can we maximize the amount of samples without sacrificing quality? Attacking
these question with an empirical mindset was the only way forward. To begin with, data
was actually sampled from the Perseverance rover, since it is the newest addition of rovers
to explore Mars. However, the amount of data one can sample from Perseverance’s
trajectory is quite limited since the rover has only covered 7.58 km, as opposed to Curiosity
which has covered 27.44 km as of the day of writing.
In terms answering the first question, how to source the data, a few avenues were ex­
plored. The first one was somewhat involved, i.e., devising a method to automatically crop
image patches. This implies creating an actual tool for handling that job. Opening the web
page and selecting the container which holds the map is one thing, but you would also
have to track the path using some form of image analysis technique. Clearly, this avenue
was quickly disregarded. The second avenue was an alternative data source. This was
considered because the amount of data you can obtain by cropping image patches from
any rover is very limited. One such source was actually identified, namely the Rockfall
Detection on the Moon and Mars data set created by Bickel et al. (2021) [41]. However,
one major issue with this data set is the lack of a trajectory. There were three inherent
problems with this. First, the lack of a trajectory in and of itself. Second, the trajectory
outlined by the MERs also serve as ground­truth paths, as they are a created in unison
with human experts who partially guide the MERs. This means that manually recreating
a trajectory on each sample image would create a big risk in training a model that does
not do path finding very well, because what constitutes a good trajectory requires domain
experts [36, p. 5]. This is closely connected with the third reason: no trajectory means
manually adding one, and that is a very time consuming task.
As such, the manual approach of cropping image patches using the Where is the rover
tool was selected, which came with its own set of limitations, however. Obviously, there
was going to be an inherent issue with data limitation. Secondly, how to crop the images
was an open­ended question, mainly because pixel­perfect alignment of the image pair
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
41
==PAGE:50==
was a concern. As discussed in the section on data collection, this was probably a bit
of an overly cautious approach, but since the project has changed its focus to a more
data­oriented one, creating a solid data set using good principles from the get­go was
important.
Settling on a data source and a method of obtaining data was a big leap forward. After
trying a few different resolutions at various zoom levels, the final 210 x 210 at 50 meters
was selected. This turned out to be a good middle ground between having enough image
clarity to make features stand out while still being able to crop a decent amount of image
patches. By cropping image patches along the trajectory of Curiosity, 343 original samples
were collected. During this time it was agreed that the data set should be subdivided into
categories which delineate image patches distinct to each area. This was a decision
made to once again build upon the idea of creating a solid data set for use at later stages
– maybe in other projects, too. Furthermore, this also meant that image patches not only
had one feature, namely a trajectory, but also a class label associated with it. A positive
side effect of this is the possibility of training experiments to predict areas by class label.
This lead into the the classic case of dealing with an imbalanced data set, and to that extent
another another body of research had to be sifted in order to find a way to quickly balance
the data set. Here, the SSIM approach was selected for its ability to pick up structural
similarity while being invariant to lighting and contrast differences [39]. However, the way
the balancing was done was still highly empirical in nature despite analysing the data from
many angles with SSIM. More sophisticated methods to do class balancing in limited data
sets do exist, but due to time constraints, SSIM seemed like a reasonable plan of attack.
And the SSIM approach was also relatively successful in creating a balanced data set
somewhat fast.
After balancing, there were 249 samples left of the original 343, and this is clearly not
enough to train a model without running into issues with underfitting1. To mitigate this,
augmentation of the data set is needed, and once again, a body of research had to be
explored to identify strategies. A method was selected relatively fast, namely Neural Style
Transfer – in the following simply referred to as an NST. This type of network is a some­
what flashy demonstration of how Deep Neural Networks can simulate abstract human
behaviour by e.g. creating art [36, p. 27]. However, this implies that an NST can be
useful for other things as well, such as data augmentation. To that effect, a simple albeit
a bit naive experiment was conducted to check if data inflation was possible using an
open­source NST solution. The result can be seen in fig. 6.1.
(a) Style (target)
(b) Content
(c) Result
Figure 6.1: Style transfer experiment between a campus parking lot and Mars
The general idea behind an NST is to apply a style image to a content image to fuse
1https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/underfitting
42
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:51==
the two, in very simplified terms, of course. In this experiment, some form of fusion did
happen, but the resulting image clearly had no use in training a model to do path finding
on Mars. There are a few ways to explain this. First, some domains are better suited
for style transfer than others. It has been shown that using style transfer on training data
can aid the transition from a simulated environment to the real­world [36, p. 28]. For
instance, we can think of self­driving cars where style transfer between night and day can
facilitate better generalization to either class. Second, if the style set is very small there
will be a high degree of bias in the data. As these examples were only draw from a test
distribution of 10 samples, it is clear that a lot more data is needed before any meaningful
augmentation can happen, if at all possible.
An interesting avenue of exploration in data augmentation could have been adversarial
networks, which are very efficient at revealing the space of optimal augmentation methods
[36, p. 18]. In adversarial attacking, two or more adversary networks will try to force each
other to misclassify class labels by finding weak spots in the adversary’s trained model.
The output of this forms an effective search algorithm to determine room for augmentation,
also called adversarial training.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
43
==PAGE:52==
7
Conclusion and Future work
7.1
Conclusion
This project was motivated by the novelty of applying state­of­the­art advances in neural
networks to do data­driven pathfinding. In relation to this, a thorough but concise back­
ground study of pathfinding algorithms and neural networks was conducted to set the
stage.
Because neural networks are so reliant on large amounts of data, it was clear from the
early stages of the project that obtaining a proper data source would be imperative for
moving forward. To collect data, the NASA­developed tool Where is the rover was chosen,
which enables any interested party to track the currently deployed Mars rovers, Curiosity
and Perseverance.
Using this tool, 343 unique data points were collected with the path annotated on the im­
age, which is a necessity for Neural A* Search to do path planning. Because the collected
dataset was imbalanced, an investigation on how to balance the data was conducted. The
Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) was selected for aggregating similar surface
areas with a similar structure. After this, data augmentation was used to artificially inflate
the data set from 249 unique data points to 2.241 unique data points.
Neural A* Search comes with its own custom data preprocessor to process the Stanford
Drone Dataset. This was remade to process the new Mars data such that it could be used
in the context of Neural A* Search. The baseline results were promising, but inconclusive,
and to that effect, a plan for experiments was laid out to investigate further.
7.2
Future work
Arguably, the most notable improvement can be found in the amount of data available.
There are two concrete paths to explore concerning data limitation. The first avenue is
gaining access to an abundant data source. Here, NASA would be an obvious choice.
However, under the assumption that being granted access to annotated photos of the
Mars surface is too ambitious, the second path to explore is applying more advanced
augmentation methods.
A lot of time and effort has been made to segment Curiosity’s trajectory into distinct re­
gions. This has potential to extend the use case of the data set such that class prediction
of a distinct area based on its features can happen. However, to enable classification one
would have to devise a method to add class labels to each sample within an area.
The first method to explore here is adversarial networks to search for the optimal space
of augmentation methods. Following this, a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) could
be used to inflate the data set rapidly. As the name suggests, GANs implement adver­
sarial networks to facilitate data augmentation. A GAN employs an interesting idea of
a generator and discriminator network, also called the counterfeiter and cop. When the
generator receives any input, it will learn how to reproduce it to convince the cop that the
reproduction is natural. The point of the discriminator is then to train on the input handed
over by the counterfeiter. The training error will decrease as the counterfeiter becomes
increasingly good at reproducing data. As such, a self­enforcing loop of data augmenta­
tion starts to happen. This loop means GANs are regarded as one of the most promising
44
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:53==
techniques for augmentation due to both their efficiency and ability to produce models
that are better at doing classification [36, p. 21].
After augmentation has been done, the data set will most likely be unbalanced. It would
make sense to balance the data set using a more methodical approach rooted in data
science to mitigate this. One such technique is using a KNN­undersampling classifier
as proposed by Beckmann et al. (2015) [38]. This network removes samples from the
majority class based on the count of neighbors in minority classes. This would most likely
be a more effective method of undersampling to achieve balance in the data set over a
manual, albeit systematic analysis through SSIM.
In the experiments department, there is room for improvement. One such improvement
could be to do k­fold cross­validation on the resulting model after looking into more suitable
methods of augmentation and balancing, respectively. Currently, the only estimate of
model skill is based on a regular train/test split. Using k­fold cross validation would gain
better insight into how well the model is doing, as it is known to create a less biased
estimate of model accuracy [18, p. 708].
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
45
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
NASA. MARS Exploration Rovers. URL: https : / / mars . nasa . gov / mer / mission /
overview/.
[2]
NASA. Mars Exploration Program. URL: https://mars.nasa.gov/msl/home/.
[3]
Ryo Yonetani et al. Path Planning using Neural A* Search. 2020. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2009.07476.
[4]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­Net: Convolutional Net­
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer­
Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015. Ed. by Nassir Navab et al. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2015, pp. 234–241. ISBN: 978­3­319­24574­4.
[5]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large­Scale Image Recognition. 2014. DOI: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1409.
1556.
[6]
NASA. Mars Exploration Program: Where is the rover. URL: https://mars.nasa.gov/
msl/mission/where-is-the-rover/.
[7]
The Nobel Assembly at Karolinska Institutet. Press release. The 2014 Nobel Prize
in Physiology or Medicine. 2014. URL: https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/
2014/press-release/.
[8]
Arne D. Ekstrom. Why vision is important to how we navigate. 2015. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/hipo.22449.
[9]
Alexander Schrijver. On the History of the Shortest Path Problem. 2021.
[10]
Peter E. Hart, Nils J. Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. A Formal Basis for the Heuristic
Determination of Minimum Cost Paths. 1968. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TSSC.
1968.300136.
[11]
Michal Cáp et al. Multi­agent RRT*: Sampling­based Cooperative Pathfinding. 2013.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1302.2828.
[12]
Thomas Aamand Witting and Olav Nørgaard Olsen. Empirical comparison of Pathfind­
ing Algorithms. 2021.
[13]
Antti Laaksonen. “Graph Algorithms”. In: Guide to Competitive Programming: Learn­
ing and Improving Algorithms Through Contests. Springer International Publishing,
2017, pp. 77–106. ISBN: 978­3­319­72547­5. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-72547-5_7.
[14]
John M. Harris, Jeffry L. Hirst, and Michael J. Mossinghoff. “Graph Theory”. In:
Combinatorics and Graph Theory. Springer, 2008, pp. 5–6. ISBN: 9780387797106.
DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-79711-3.
[15]
Chung­Yang Huang, Chao­yue Lai, and Kwang­ting Cheng. “Fundamentals of al­
gorithms”. In: Electronic Design Automation. Elsevier, 2009. Chap. 4, pp. 173–234.
ISBN: 9781282542150. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374364-0.50011-4.
[16]
Tom Everitt and Marcus Hutter. Analytical Results on the BFS vs. DFS Algorithm
Selection Problem. Part II: Graph Search. 2015.
[17]
Stefan Edelkamp. Heuristic search. 2002.
[18]
Stuart Russel and Peter Norvig. “Informed (Heuristic) Search Strategies”. In: Artifi­
cial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pearson, 2020. ISBN: 9780134671963.
[19]
Sudip Karki and Hari Sagar Ranjitkar. Master Thesis: Comparison of A*, Euclidean
and Manhattan distance using Influence Map in Ms. Pac­Man. 2016.
[20]
The Deloitte AI Institute. Becoming an AI­fueled organization. 2020. URL: https:
//www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/cognitive-technologies/state-of-ai-and-
intelligent-automation-in-business-survey.html.
46
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:55==
[21]
Sara Brown. Machine learning, explained. 2021. URL: https://mitsloan.mit.edu/
ideas-made-to-matter/machine-learning-explained.
[22]
Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E. Hinton. “Rectified Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltz­
mann Machines”. In: ICML. 2010.
[23]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep Learning. Adaptive computation
and machine learning. MIT Press, 2016. ISBN: 9780262035613. URL: https : / /
books.google.co.in/books?id=Np9SDQAAQBAJ.
[24]
Sourodip Ghosh, Aunkit Chaki, and Kc Santosh. “Improved U­Net architecture with
VGG­16 for brain tumor segmentation”. In: Physical and Engineering Sciences in
Medicine 44 (May 2021). DOI: 10.1007/s13246-021-01019-w.
[25]
Bilal Alsallakh et al. “Mind the Pad ­ CNNs can Develop Blind Spots”. In: CoRR
abs/2010.02178 (2020). arXiv: 2010.02178. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02178.
[26]
Zeyad Abd Algfoor, Mohd Shahrizal Sunar, and Hoshang Kolivand. A Comprehen­
sive Study on Pathfinding Techniques for Robotics and Video Games. 2015. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/736138.
[27]
Brian Paden et al. A Survey of Motion Planning and Control Techniques for Self­
Driving Urban Vehicles. 2016. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2016.2578706.
[28]
Sanjiban Choudhury et al. “Data­driven Planning via Imitation Learning”. In: CoRR
abs/1711.06391 (2017). arXiv: 1711.06391. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.06391.
[29]
F. Richard Yu and Ying He. “Reinforcement Learning and Deep Reinforcement
Learning”. In: Deep Reinforcement Learning for Wireless Networks. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pp. 15–19. ISBN: 978­3­030­10546­4. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-030-10546-4_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-10546-4_2.
[30]
Aviv Tamar et al. Value Iteration Networks. 2016. DOI: https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1602.02867.
[31]
Will Briggs and Diane Cook. Anytime Planning for Optimal Tradeoff between Delib­
erative and Reactive Planning. 1999.
[32]
Lisa Lee et al. “Gated Path Planning Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1806.06408 (2018).
arXiv: 1806.06408. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.06408.
[33]
Tatsunori Taniai. Path Planning using Neural A* Search (ICML 2021). URL: https:
//medium.com/sinicx/path-planning-using-neural-a-search-icml-2021-ecc6f2e71b1f.
[34]
Marin Vlastelica P. et al. “Differentiation of Blackbox Combinatorial Solvers”. In:
CoRR abs/1912.02175 (2019). arXiv: 1912.02175. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.
02175.
[35]
Hubara Itay et al. “Binarized Neural Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1602.02830 (2016).
arXiv: 1602.02830. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02830.
[36]
Connor Shorten and Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar. “A survey on Image Data Augmentation
for Deep Learning”. In: J. Big Data 6 (2019), p. 60. DOI: 10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0.
[37]
Hiroshi Inoue. “Data Augmentation by Pairing Samples for Images Classification”.
In: CoRR abs/1801.02929 (2018). arXiv: 1801.02929. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1801.02929.
[38]
M. Beckmann, N. Ebecken, and B. Pires de Lima. “A KNN Undersampling Approach
for Data Balancing”. In: Journal of Intelligent Learning Systems and Applications 7
(2015), pp. 104–116. DOI: 10.4236/jilsa.2015.74010.
[39]
Chaofeng Li and Alan Bovik. “Three­Component Weighted Structural Similarity In­
dex”. In: Proc. of SPIE­IS&T Electronic Imaging (Jan. 2009). DOI: 10 . 1117 / 12 .
811821.
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
47
==PAGE:56==
[40]
Zhou Wang et al. “Image Quality Assessment: From Error Visibility To Structural
Similarity”. In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13.4 (2004), pp. 600–612.
DOI: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861.
[41]
V. T. Bickel, L. Mandrake, and G. Doran. “A Labeled Image Dataset for Deep Learning­
Driven Rockfall Detection on the Moon and Mars”. In: Frontiers in Remote Sensing
2 (2021). ISSN: 2673­6187. DOI: 10.3389/frsen.2021.640034. URL: https://www.
frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/frsen.2021.640034.
48
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix A
A.1
Experiment: Baseline results
Model
Loss
Original
Original + augmentation
Balanced
Balanced + augmentation
Table A.1: Loss for each distinct set of data
A
Figure A.1: Baseline learning curve
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
49
==PAGE:58==
A.2
Experiment: Transfer Learning
A
Figure A.2: Learning curve after applying Transfer Learning
50
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
==PAGE:59==
Neural Network Aided Path Planning on Mars
51
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
