==PAGE:1==
An authentication system based on in­air
gesture
Master Thesis
DTU Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
Master Thesis
March, 2022
By
Yiming Sun
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared five months at the Section for Secure, Department of Ap­
plied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
This thesis was conducted under the supervision of Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor
at Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science of Technical University of
Denmark.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Yiming Sun ­ s192126
Signature
11­March­2022
ii
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Biometric technology is a security technology that is gradually added to many products
with the continuous development of the Internet. Biometrics brings convenience and se­
curity in many situations in real life. Hand gesture as part of the popular biometric tech­
nology has become a trend in doing the authentication system. This report will implement
a system that based on in­air gesture to authenticate the user. The system will run in the
latest inference framework which has a good performance in real­time recognition. There
is still some disadvantage of the solution from the system but it gives a new idea to make
the biometric recognition system more perfect.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Yiming Sun, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
I would like to thank my supervisor, Weizhi Meng, who offered me the opportunity to do the
thesis in the area that I am interested in. Thanks for the help from the people in SPTAGE
LAB. And thanks for my friends who study in DTU that helped me with the experiment of
my thesis.
iv
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Multiple Biometrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Hand Gesture Recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Previous Work
5
2.1
Traditional Detection Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Detection Algorithms Based On Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
System Design
19
3.1
Image Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2
Hand Gesture Recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Implementation
27
4.1
Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Joint Nodes Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Hand Gesture Recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Hand Gesture Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
User Study
31
6
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
35
A Code
39
B Results
43
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Biometric technology is a security technology that is gradually added to many products
with the continuous development of the Internet. Biometrics brings convenience and se­
curity in many situations in real life. But on the other hand, concerns about the privacy
issues that arise from it are also growing and becoming a tough problem to be solved. Un­
like passwords, biometrics are permanently linked to everyone, with a life­long immutable
property, and once leaked, they are leaked forever. Therefore, biometric identification
technology needs a more effective privacy protection mechanism.
1.2
Multiple Biometrics
With the development of technology, people are gradually discovering that biometrics is
an ideal means of implementing encryption. People do not need to memorize the complex
password and with one biometric, people can use it to encrypt all the information that they
want to. No one will need to worry about the personal data loss caused by information
leakage. And people do not need to carry a USB key everywhere in order to log in a secure
system out of office[1]. But in October, 2016, Shellphish cracked fingerprint recognition
from HuaWei P9 Lite, people start questing the security of the biometrics[2].
Therefor, scientists start implementing multi­biometrics to secure the data. For example,
iris recognition[3], face recognition[4], palmprint recognition[5] and vein recognition[6]. In
this report, we will focus on the hand gesture recognition[7].
1.3
Hand Gesture Recognition
Gesture recognition is a perceptual computing user interface, it allows computers rec­
ognize the gesture that user did and interpret it in to the command that computer can
understand. These gestures are very diverse, ranging from a simple double tap to a
complex series of sign language. Currently, there are mainly two different categories of
gesture recognition: gesture recognition that interacts with a touch screen, and gesture
recognition that does not require a touch screen. There are some products that used in
commercial are succeed: FingerSense from Qeexo[9] are one of the successful products.
It can identify the contact of fingers, knuckles, nails and some other items with the screen.
Until now, it is used in over 300 million devices. And for gesture recognition that does not
require a touch screen, there are some common ways:
• Camera­based: One way is to generate a depth map for a gesture seen by the
camera at a short distance, and use this data to simulate a 3D image of the object.
Another way is using two cameras to simulate a 3D image, which is more accu­
rate. There are two products that were popular: Leap Motion[10] and Kinect from
Microsoft[11].
• Data gloves: Compared with camera­based gesture recognition without touch screen,
the accuracy provided by data gloves is unmatched by the former. The CyberGlove
is one of the best­selling data gloves out there, and it accurately measures up to 22
joint angles[12].
• Muscle Signal: Muscle signals is also used for gesture recognition, but there haven’t
a commercial product based on this technology yet. There is a demo that can do
hand gesture recognition by Qeexo AutoML[13].
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Multiple Biometric System[8]
2
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Sign Language[14]
1.4
Contribution
Inspired by camera­based hand gesture recognition, we will implement an authentication
system that based on hand gesture. There are three main contributions in this report:
• Real time recognition: The system can recognize the hand gesture in real time.
While user using the camera, the system will output the gesture results at the same
time.
• Accurate: The system will use an inference framework that is already trained based
on deep learning. Which will achieve a high rate in recognizing the hand gesture.
• Fast: Because the inference framework used in the system, so there do not need
a powerful device to training the model. That means, the system will have a low
hardware dependent and can be run in a fast way.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
3
==PAGE:12==
4
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:13==
2
Previous Work
As we discussed in chapter 1, hand gesture recognition that using camera is the area
that we will focus in this report. In computer vision, hand gesture recognition is classified
into target detection. In this chapter, we will discuss the main target detection algorithms.
Existing target detection algorithms include traditional detection algorithms and detection
algorithms based on deep learning. Traditional target detection algorithms are mostly
based on sliding window frameworks or matching based on feature points. Since 2012,
AlexNet has won the ImageNet Large­scale Visual Recognition Challenge[15], which the
algorithm is far better than the traditional algorithm, bringing the public’s vision back to
the deep neural network. In this chapter, we will briefly talk about traditional detection
algorithms and detection algorithms based on deep learning.
2.1
Traditional Detection Algorithms
The traditional detection method has generally three steps:
Figure 2.1: Three Steps of Traditional Detection
• Region Selection First, on a given image, sliding windows of different sizes are
used to traverse the entire image to select candidate regions, and sliding windows
of different sizes are used to frame a certain part of the image to be tested as a
candidate region, and then the visual features related to the candidate region are
extracted.
• Feature Extraction Feature extraction, such as histogram of oriented gradient and
Scale­Invariant Feature Transform in human detection and ordinary target detection,
and then extract features for these areas.
• Classifier Classification That is, use the trained classifier for classification, such as
the commonly used support vector machine, and finally use the classifier to classify.
Although this method has achieved good results, the use of sliding windows for region
selection is not targeted, resulting in high time complexity and window redundancy.
Then we go to the algorithm part. Traditional target detection algorithms can be roughly
divided into two categories: target instance detection and traditional target category de­
tection. To make it more intuitive, we will focus on two main algorithms that are using in
traditional detection wildly: algorithms based on SIFT[16] series and algorithms based on
AdaBoost algorithms[17].
2.1.1
Algorithms Based on SIFT Series
SIFT Algorithm
Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) is an image descriptor for image­based match­
ing developed by David Lowe (1999,2004)[18]. The SIFT algorithm proposed by Lowe
matches the target by finding feature points that are not easily affected by illumination,
noise and affine transformation. It is currently an extremely widely used key point detec­
tion and description algorithm.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: SIFT Algorithm Process
The algorithm uses Gaussian blur to realize scale space. In each group in the Gaussian
pyramid, the adjacent two layers are subtracted (the next layer is subtracted from the
previous layer) to generate a Gaussian difference pyramid. After generating Difference
of Gaussian Pyramid for extreme value detection, then by judging the main curvature of
the edge, the unstable points of the edge response are screened out, and the key points
with stable matching and strong anti­noise ability are obtained. Finally, the orientation
histogram is used to count the gradients and orientations of key point neighborhoods to
6
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:15==
obtain descriptors.
Figure 2.3: Generation of Gaussian Difference Pyramid
The SIFT algorithm uses a series of methods to ensure that the extracted features have
the characteristics of translation, scaling, and rotation invariance. However, the SIFT
algorithm has problems such as high complexity, slow detection speed, and difficulty in
extracting effective feature points for blurred images and smooth edges.
PCA­SIFT Algorithm
PCA­SITF Algorithm [19] made innovations in descriptor construction. It introduce Prin­
cipal Component Analysis (PCA) method and use PCA instead of histogram to reduce
the dimension of the descriptor vector to improve the matching efficiency. However, the
information loss caused by dimensionality reduction reduces the matching effect of the
algorithm compared with SIFT.
The following describes the part of its feature descriptor calculation in SIFT algorithm.
• First, rotate the axes to the orientation of the key points to ensure rotation invariance.
Taking the 8*8 neighborhood as the center of the feature point as the sampling
window, the relative direction of the sampling point and the feature point is classified
into a histogram containing 8 directions after Gaussian weighting, and finally a 32­
dimensional feature description of 2*2*8 is obtained. son.
• Each cell represents a pixel in the scale space where the feature point neighborhood
is located, the direction of the arrow represents the gradient direction of the pixel,
and the length of the arrow represents the magnitude of the pixel. Then the gradient
direction histograms of 8 directions are calculated within a 4×4 window. A seed point
is formed by plotting the accumulation of each gradient direction.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Generation of Feature Point Descriptor
Each histogram has 8 gradient directions, and each descriptor contains an array of four
histograms located near keypoints. This results in a SIFT feature vector with 128 dimen­
sions. (First a 4×4 to calculate A histogram, each histogram has 8 directions. So it is
4×4×8=128 dimensions) After normalizing this vector, the influence of lighting is further
removed.
In PCA­SIFT algorithm, it has the same subpixel location, scale and principal orientation
as standard SIFT. But in step of calculating descriptor, it use the technique of principal
component analysis. Here is the description of calculating descriptor part in PCA­SIFT
algorithm.
• Instead of the original 4*4*8 feature description, use the 41*41 image spot around
the feature point to calculate its pivot, and use PCA­SIFT to convert the original
2*39*39 (or XY directions) namely A 3042­dimensional vector is reduced to 20 or X
dimensions for a more precise representation.
• For each key point, extract a 41 × 41 image spot around the key point at a given
scale and rotate to its main direction. Then calculate the 39 × 39 horizontal and
vertical gradients to form a vector of size 3042, using The pre­computed projection
matrix n×3042 is multiplied by this vector. This generates a PCA­SIFT descriptor of
size n.
In the case of rotation, scale transformation, perspective transformation and adding noise
matching, the descriptors obtained by PCA­SIFT are significantly ahead of SIFT. In lu­
minance transformation, it is comparable to traditional SIFT. There are also more correct
point pairs obtained when matching than traditional SIFT. It can be seen that the descrip­
tors generated by PCA­SIFT are of high quality. In terms of running time, PCA­SIFT is
slightly faster than SIFT in feature point extraction and descriptor calculation. But in the
subsequent descriptor matching process, the speed of PCA­SIFT greatly exceeds that of
SIFT.
SURF Algorithm
The SURF algorithm[20] is also an improved algorithm based on SIFT algorithm. The
Hessian matrix[21] is the core of the algorithm. The algorithm uses Gaussian Filter[22] to
ensure scale independence, and replaces the Gaussian filter with a box filter to simplify
8
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:17==
the calculation. By constructing the Hessian matrix, the key point location is obtained. In
addition, in the scale space, unlike SIFT to construct images of different scales, SURF
keeps the image size unchanged and only changes the size of the filter, thereby reducing
the amount of computation.
The approximate DoH pyramid of the SURF algorithm is shown below:
Figure 2.5: Approximate DoH Pyramid of SURF Algorithm
After the scale space is established, it is necessary to search and locate key points. Com­
paring each pixel in the box­filtered response image with its 26 pixels in its 3­dimensional
neighborhood, if it is the maximum point, it is considered to be the local feature point of
the region. Then, a 3­dimensional linear interpolation method is used to obtain sub­pixel­
level feature points, and at the same time, some points smaller than a given threshold are
removed, so that the feature points detected by extreme values are more robust.
Figure 2.6: Key Point Search and Locate of SURF Algorithm
In a short word, the SURF algorithm uses the approximate Hessian matrix to reduce the
decimation process, quickly builds a scale pyramid, and improves the speed of target
detection.
Comparison of Algorithms Based on SIFT Series
After what we talked in section 2.1.1, we can make the following conclusions for the three
algorithms: SIFT, PCA­SIFT and SURF:
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
9
==PAGE:18==
The PCA­SIFT and SURF algorithms simplify the matching process of SIFT respectively,
so the matching accuracy of feature points must be reduced.
• The SIFT algorithm extracts the most abundant feature points, and has the best
performance in scale, rotation, etc., but the high complexity leads to the slowest
detection speed, and the extraction effect of blurred and smooth edges is not ideal.
• PCA­SIFT uses the PCA method for dimensionality reduction. While reducing the
calculation, information loss occurs, so the overall performance is relatively general
among the three algorithms.
• SURF uses the integral graph reasonably to reduce the operation, and methods
such as wavelet transform and Hessian matrix will not reduce the accuracy. While
obtaining good detection speed, it also ensures that the overall performance is better
than PCA­SIFT.
2.1.2
Algorithms Based on AdaBoost Algorithms
There are two main algorithms that based on Adaboost Algorithms: Adaboost algorithms
and Viola­Jones algorithm.
AdaBoost Algorithm
AdaBoost algorithm [23] is a machine learning algorithm based on Boosting[24]. Initially,
it is assumed that n samples in the training set have the same weight. After each training,
the weight of the data in the training set is adjusted to increase the weight of the wrong
samples, so that the next classifier can focus on the wrong samples. After N rounds of
training, N weak classifiers are integrated, and corresponding weights are assigned ac­
cording to the performance of each classifier to form a strong classifier with high accuracy
and low error rate.
The Adaboost algorithm can be briefly described as three steps:
• The first step is to initialize the weight distribution D1 of the training data. Assuming
that there are N training sample data, each training sample is given the same weight
at the beginning: w1 = 1/N.
• Then, the weak classifier hi is trained. The specific training process is: if a training
sample point is accurately classified by the weak classifier hi, then its corresponding
weight should be reduced in the construction of the next training set. On the contrary,
if a training sample point is mis­classified , then its weight should be increased. The
sample set with updated weights is used to train the next classifier, and the whole
training process goes on iteratively.
• Finally, each trained weak classifier is combined into a strong classifier. After the
training process of each weak classifier is completed, increase the weight of the
weak classifier with a small classification error rate, making it play a larger decisive
role in the final classification function, and reduce the weight of the weak classifier
with a large classification error rate to make it play a smaller decisive role in the final
classification function. In other words, a weak classifier with a low error rate will
have a larger weight in the final classifier, otherwise it will be smaller.
Taking face recognition as an example, in the process of face detection, a strong classifier
needs to be used, and it consists of multiple weak classifiers. The classification process
is shown in the following figure:
10
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.7: Classifier Training Process
Viola­Jones Algorithm
The Viola­Jones algorithm[25] (Referred to as VJ algorithm below)is the first face detection
algorithm that can process in real time and has better effect. The proposal of this algorithm
marks that face detection has entered the stage of practical application.
VJ algorithm uses Haar features[25] to describe the window, reflects the light and dark
changes in local areas, and uses the idea of integral graph to solve the shortcomings
of large amount of calculation and repetition in Haar feature extraction. At the same
time, because a single strong classifier cannot guarantee detection accuracy. The idea
of cascading is introduced. As shown in the figure 2.8, classifier cascade resembles a
decision tree, VJ is arranged according to the complexity and computational cost of the
classifier. The classifier with higher classification cost needs to classify fewer images,
reducing the classification workload.
Figure 2.8: Classifier cascade
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
11
==PAGE:20==
The figure 2.9 will give a specific description of how integral graph is used to extract haar
features in The VJ algorithm. As shown in the figure below, assuming that the origin of the
coordinates is o, we use the diagonal letters of the rectangle to represent the rectangle,
then the area of the rectangle abcd can be obtained by the area of the rectangle od, the area
of the rectangle oc and the rectangle oa, specifically S(abcd) = S(od) + S(oa) −(S(ob) +
S(oc)). The integral graph can be obtained by superimposing the previously calculated
coordinate points, so the integral graph is an accelerated algorithm. The haar­like feature
is realized by adding and subtracting the gray rectangle and the white rectangle, as shown
in a to f in the following figure.
Figure 2.9: Integral graph
In conclusion, the VJ algorithm uses Haar features to describe the common attributes
of targets, uses integral graphs to achieve fast feature calculation, and uses cascaded
classifiers to reduce the computational load of AdaBoost to detect targets quickly.
2.2
Detection Algorithms Based On Deep Learning
The proposal of R­CNN[26] in 2014 made the target detection algorithm based on CNN
gradually become the mainstream. The application of deep learning has improved both
detection accuracy and detection speed. Since AlexNet[27] used convolutional neural
networks in the competition to greatly improve the accuracy of image classification, some
scholars have tried to apply deep learning to target category detection.
The convolutional neural network can not only extract features with higher layers and
better expressive ability, but also complete the extraction, selection and classification of
features in the same model. In this regard, there are mainly two mainstream algorithms:
• One is a classification­based R­CNN series target detection framework that com­
bines regionproposal and CNN networks
12
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:21==
• The other category is the algorithm that converts object detection into a regression
problem
2.2.1
Region Proposal­based Detection Algorithms
In this section we will focus on R­CNN algorithm, Fast­RCNN algorithm and Faster­RCNN
algorithm.
R­CNN Algorithm
The R­CNN model was proposed by Ross Girshick et al. Which has made a huge break­
through in object detection. The R­CNN algorithm follows and improves the idea of the
OverFeat algorithm[28]. As shown in the figure below, R­CNN uses Selective Search to
obtain candidate regions (about 2000). The size of the candidate region is then normal­
ized and used as the standard input of the CNN network. Then use AlexNet to obtain the
features in the candidate region, and finally use multiple SVM for classification and linear
regression to fine­tune the positioning frame.
Figure 2.10: Process of R­CNN Algorithm
R­CNN significantly improves the detection performance from 24.3%[28] of OverFeat to
31.4%[29] (ILSVRC2013 dataset[15]), and achieves 58.5%[26] accuracy on VOC2007
dataset[30]. However, R­CNN performs feature extraction on nearly 2000 candidate re­
gions respectively, and there are many repeated regions between candidate regions, re­
sulting in a large number of repeated operations and running slowly. At the same time,
the data is stored for every stop, which greatly consumes the storage space. In addition,
normalizing the candidate region will affect the final result.
Fast R­CNN Algorithm
On the basis of SPP­Net[31], the Fast R­CNN algorithm[32] simplifies the SPP layer into
the ROI Pooling layer, and decomposes the output of the fully connected layer as SVD
to obtain two output vectors: the classification score of softmax and the bounding box.
This improvement merges the classification problem and the bounding box regression
problem. Using softmax instead of SVM, all features are stored in video memory, reducing
disk space usage. SVD decomposition can greatly speed up the detection speed without
affecting the accuracy.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.11: Process of Fast R­CNN Algorithm
Fast R­CNN uses VGG16[33] instead of AlexNet, the average accuracy rate reaches
70.0%[34], and the detection speed reaches 0.3s[35] per image. Fast R­CNN still uses
the Selective Search[36] method to select candidate regions, which involves a lot of com­
putation. It can be seen that improving Selective Search is the key to the speed improve­
ment of Fast R­CNN.
Faster­RCNN Algorithm
Faster R­CNN[37] uses the Region Proposal Networks[37] to replace the Selective Search
algorithm, enabling real end­to­end computation for target recognition.
As shown in the figure below, the RPN uses a windowed operation on the feature map
and uses the anchor frame of the preset scale to map to the original image to obtain the
candidate region. The feature map input to the RPN and the feature map in the fully
connected layer share computation. The use of RPN enables Faster R­CNN to complete
operations such as candidate regions, feature extraction, classification, and localization
correction within a network framework.
14
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.12: Process of Region Proposal Networks
RPN makes Faster R­CNN only need 10ms[37] in the region proposal stage, the detection
speed reaches 5f/s[37] (including all steps), and the detection accuracy is also improved,
reaching 73.2%[37]. However, FasterR­CNN still uses ROI Pooling, which causes the
subsequent network features to lose translation invariance, which affect the final posi­
tioning accuracy. After ROI Pooling, each area passes through multiple fully connected
layers, and there are many repeated calculations. Faster R­CNN uses the anchor frame
on the feature map to correspond to the original image, and the anchor frame has under­
gone multiple down sampling operations, corresponding to a larger area of the original
image, resulting in Faster R­CNN’s detection of small targets. The effect is not very good.
In conclusion, starting with R­CNN, researchers focus the problem of object detection on
classification. Although researchers continue to improve detection efficiency and real­time
performance, the results are still unsatisfactory. In this regard, the researchers proposed
another new idea, which directly converts the target detection to regression, and uses a
picture to get the bounding box and category.
2.2.2
Regression­Based Detection Algorithms
Regression­Based Detection Algorithms are some algorithms that achieved the detection
by transforming object detection into regression problems. There are several classification
for the algorithms, for example, by different labeling schemes, we can classify algorithms
to key point­based and author­IOU based. By the different based on the number of stages,
we can classify algorithms to single stage, double stage and multi­stage. In this section,
we will talk two popular regression­based detection algorithms that leading a trend in the
detection algorithms based on deep learning.
YOLO
From R­CNN to Faster­RCNN, target detection always follows the idea of ”region proposal
and classification”. Training the two models will inevitably lead to an increase in param­
eters and training volume, which will affect the speed of training and detection. Because
of the disadvantage of these two algorithms, YOLO proposed a ”single­stage” idea[38].
As shown in the figure below, YOLO divides the picture into S×S grids (cells), each grid
is only responsible for detecting the target whose center falls on the grid, and each grid
needs to predict the bounding box and category information of two scales , predict the
bounding box, target confidence and category probability of the targets contained in all
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
15
==PAGE:24==
regions at one time to complete the detection.
Figure 2.13: YOLO ALgorithm
YOLO replaces the region proposal with a multi­scale area centered on the cell, giving
up some accuracy in exchange for a substantial increase in the detection speed. The
detection speed can reach 45f/s, which is enough to meet the real­time requirements,
and the detection accuracy is 63.4%, which is higher than that of Faster R­ CNN 73.2% ,
the gap is large[39].
SSD Algorithm
SSD, the full name of Single Shot MultiBox Detector, is a target detection algorithm pro­
posed by Wei Liu at ECCV 2016[40]. It is one of the main detection frameworks so far.
Faster­RCNN has high detection accuracy but slow detection speed, YOLO has low de­
tection accuracy but fast detection speed, SSD combines the advantages of both, and
draws on the idea of RPN on the basis of YOLO to ensure high­precision detection while
taking into account Detection speed.
Like Yolo, SSD uses a CNN network for detection, but uses multi­scale feature maps. Its
basic architecture is shown in the figure below.
Figure 2.14: SSD Algorithm
16
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:25==
As shown in the figure above, a relatively large feature map and a relatively small feature
map are used for detection. The advantage of this is that larger feature maps are used
to detect relatively small objects, while small feature maps are responsible for detecting
large objects. The 8x8 feature map can be divided into more units, but the size of the
prior box of each unit is relatively small. The mAP of SSD300 can reach 73.2%, which is
basically the same as Faster R­CNN, and the detection speed reaches 59f/s, which is 6.6
times faster than Faster R­CNN[41].
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
17
==PAGE:26==
18
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:27==
3
System Design
In this chapter we will talk about the design of the system. The authentication system
based on in­air gesture will be a real­time system, users can custom their hand gesture
and the system will record the gesture. The system will authenticate users by recognize
their hand gestures. We will use OpenCV for image processing in this project, and the
recognition work will be done by Mediapipe. There are two main parts of the system:
custom hand gesture and authentication. The flow chart shown as the figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: System Flow Chart
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
19
==PAGE:28==
3.1
Image Processing
In image processing, we will use OpenCV to process the image. OpenCV, the full name of
Open Source Computer Vision, is an open source cross­platform computer vision library
based on the BSD license[42]. It consists of C functions and C++ classes, and provides
interfaces for languages such as Python and MATLAB. OpenCV provides a large num­
ber of image processing functions, from image display, to pixel manipulation, to target
detection, etc., which greatly simplifies our development process. The main features of
OpenCV as follows:
• The purpose of use is to develop real­time applications
• Independent of operating system, hardware and graphics manager
• Has generic image loading, saving and fetching modules
• Has application development kit with low­level and high­level
Due to the cross­platform feature of OpenCV, it is more flexible in choosing a develop­
ment language. To make the development more efficiency, we will use python as the
programming language in this system. Although python is very powerful and has its own
image processing library PIL, it is still much weaker than OpenCV. Like many open source
software, OpenCV also provides a complete python interface, which is very easy to use.
3.2
Hand Gesture Recognition
3.2.1
Deep Learning Inference Framework
As we discussed in chapter 2, detection algorithms based on deep learning gradually
occupy the mainstream direction in daily computer vision applications. There are some
framework like Tensorflow and Caffe that are widely used[43]. The model directly obtained
by the deep learning framework is too heavy, and it is not suitable for direct deployment
on the PC. Therefore, we will deploy the trained model through the inference framework.
For example, if we want a machine to recognize an object in a photo, such as a cat,
we usually need to convert a large number of cat photos into data and input it into a
neural network. By activating the neural network, let the machine learn with There are
characteristics of cat photos, such as color, hair, shape, etc.
Then we will get an algorithm model with the ability to recognize cats. Next, we will make
the computer recognize cats in real world. This requires a deep learning inference frame­
work to apply the trained model to reality. In the end, software that specifically recognizes
cats is developed or deployed directly into hardware such as mobile phones.
The deep learning inference framework is like a connector, one side is the algorithm
model, the other side is the hardware. The figure below gives a simple example of deep
learning inference framework.
20
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.2: Deep Learning Inference Framework
In the deep learning inference framework, the model optimizer is used to convert the
model trained by the open source framework into an intermediate representation that the
inference engine can recognize. The role of the model optimizer includes compressing
the model and speeding up, for example, removing inference useless operations, layer
fusion, and memory optimization.
The inference engine is a set of API interfaces that supports C, C++ and python. And
developers could implement the development of the reasoning process by themselves.
3.2.2
Mediapipe
Mediapipe is an open source framework which use TFLite[44] as Inference Engine of
Google, which supports many common AI functions, such as face detection, gesture track­
ing, human posture detection, etc[45]. In this project, we will use the gesture model of
Mediapipe, which is officially trained by Google And open source a tool for gesture detec­
tion, so we don’t need to train the model ourselves.
MediaPipe contains 2 important concepts: Graph and Calculator.
• Graph: The processing of the media stream
• Calculator: The most basic unit in MediaPipe. Calculator defines many functions,
such as image conversion, model inference, etc.
We will give a simple example Graph based on MediaPipe Visualizer:
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.3: Simple detection and landmark structure of Mediapipe
Then by using the hands detection module of Mediapipe, we can detect the 21 joint nodes
on the human hand through the trained model. And return their positions in the image
in three­dimensional, mark them in the image and connect them with lines. So we can
achieve a simple gesture discrimination by calculating the distance and depth between
points. The figure 3.4 shows the 21 joint nodes on the human hand through the trained
model.
3.2.3
Hand Gesture Data Set
To make the gesture clear and variable, we have set 14 different hand gestures in the
system. The hand gesture and the meaning of them are shown as figure 3.5. Among the
gestures, there are five gestures that are from Chinese culture: six, seven, eight, nine
and ten. The gesture ”nine” is same with gesture”one” except the index finger is bent,
and normally the bent angle is more than 90 degree.
22
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: 21 Joint Nodes on the Human Hand[45]
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.5: Hand Gesture Data Set
24
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:33==
3.2.4
Hand Gesture Recognition Algorithm
After detecting 21 joint nodes on human hand and defined hand gesture data set, we will
need an algorithm that can detect the hand gesture by the 21 joint nodes. We will imple­
ment a Convex Hull[46] to compute the hand gesture. By setting joint nodes (0,1,2,3,6,10,
14,19,18,17) as a Convex Hull, and set joint nodes (4,8,12,16,20) as a list to detect the
number of fingers that are outside of Convex Hull. Then as the algorithm 1 describes, it
will output the hand gesture by computing the number of fingers that out of convex hull
and the relative position of joint nodes.
Figure 3.6: Convex Hull Construction
Algorithm 1 Hand Gesture Recognition Algorithm
Input Hand joint nodes coordinate H,
Gesture data set G
Output Hand gesture results R
1: Set convex hull C
2: for hand joint nodes in H do
3:
Calculate the distance d between the hand joint node H and convex hull C
4:
if d > 0 then
5:
Append hand joint nodes H into list upfingers U
6:
end if
7: end for
8: Compare the upfingers U with the data set G
9: if U and G match then
10:
Output the result R
11: else
12:
Output null
13: end if
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.7: Hand Gesture Data Set
3.2.5
Data Processing and Display
After we talked in previous section, we will get the result of hand gesture for each frame
of the video. The results we will display it in two ways: real­time display and user­defined
gesture display. For real­time display, once the program get the result by the algorithm 1, it
will display the result on the screen through the function of OpenCV. And for user­defined
gesture display, in order to avoid distractors which will be shown when user changing their
gestures, we will only save the gesture that user did for over 1 second.
26
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:35==
4
Implementation
In this chapter we will focus on the performance of the program and the accuracy. The
user who participated in the experiment are students from DTU, all data use is authorized
by the user. In order to protect the user privacy, some of the results will not displayed in
real name and part of the pictures will have a mosaic.
4.1
Environment
The system is written in python, and the main hardware of the PC are as follows: Intel(R)
Core(TM) 12900K CPU@5.2GHz, 32GB RAM and NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080TI.
4.2
Joint Nodes Recognition
After importing the relevant function package, capture the camera of the PC. Then write
a simple loop for reading video. In the loop, we will need to convert the BGR image to
RGB image, because mediapipe reads RGB by default, while Opencv is BGR. And then
imports the converted image into the module for recognition. Mediapipe has function that
can draw the joint nodes on the image and output the position of the joint nodes. The
results shows as follow:
Figure 4.1: Joint Nodes Recognition
We have tested joint nodes recognition in different conditions. It can also be recognized
by bending fingers or hide fingers behind the hand.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Hide one finger
(b) Bending fingers
Figure 4.2: Joint nodes recognition in different conditionss
4.3
Hand Gesture Recognition
In gesture recognition, all gestures set in the data set can be correctly recognized. When
a new gesture that is not in the data set appears, the system will not display the corre­
sponding gesture. When the hand is moving or changing to different gestures, the system
can track the joint nodes easily. And at the same time, the convex hull can be calculated
well and shown on the video. The result of the experiment are shown below:
28
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.3: Hand Gesture Recognition
4.4
Hand Gesture Authentication
After the system can recognize the hand gesture correctly, it is easy to do the authentica­
tion. When user finish defining the hand gesture, the system will output the hand gesture
that recognized on the screen to let user make sure of it. While doing the authentication,
if what user did is same as they set, the system will output ”welcome”. Otherwise it will
output the hand gesture what user did during the authentication and remind the user to
try again.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.4: Hand Gesture Authentication
30
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:39==
5
User Study
In this chapter, we will talk about the problems that we faced during the implementation.
We invited 20 students come from more than 5 different countries or area who study
at DTU joined the experiment. Each of the student will do the experiment three times.
For the first time, user will do three different gestures that the system defined. And the
second time will do four different gestures. The last time will do five different gestures.
The experiment took in different time in a day that can simulate the case when user using
the system in different light conditions. In the figure below shows some of the results, the
full result will be show in appendix.
Figure 5.1: Succeed Gesture Recognition Results
There are also some results that is failed to be recognized by the system:
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.2: Failed Gesture Recognition Results
During the failed gesture recognition results, we can notice that:
• Picture 1 in Figure 5.2 recognized eight instead of a correct result 1. After we enlarge
the picture, we can find that the joint node 4 is slightly out of the convex hull that we
defined in chapter 3. Picture 2 in Figure 5.2 has the same problem. After reminding
the user to change the angle of the gesture, the problem get fixed.
• Picture 3 in Figure 5.2 recognized seven. This gesture is not in the data set that
we defined in chapter 3. But in the logic of the hand gesture data set in figure 3.7,
to make the program have a better compatibility, as long as the distance between
(4,12) divide by distance (8,12), the gesture will be recognized as seven. The ges­
ture that user did in picture 3 meets the definition in Figure 3.7. So the system
recognize the gesture as seven.
• Picture 4 in Figure 5.2 is not recognized. It is because this gesture is not defined in
the system. It is a failure result but match the setting of the system.
From the analyse of the failed gesture recognition result, we can conclude that: the system
can reach a very high accurate when the angle and light are perfect. Due to there is only
one camera in the project, when user using an abnormal angle to do the hand recognition,
the system will have some inaccurate results.
32
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:41==
6
Conclusion
Biometric technology is a very convenient and secure identification technology at present.
As biometric technology enters a mature stage, there will have more and more cases for
biometric technology used in real life. And for target detection algorithm based on deep
learning, its related research is still in progress, with the latest results appearing almost
every year. Even so, the detection effects of these methods are still at a low level, which
makes them not widely used in practical and general detection tasks. At the same time,
the tradition target detection algorithms are also wildly used now. Probably in the future,
applying traditional methods to deep learning methods will help to improve the detection
effect.
We can see that using multi­biometrics will be a trend in the near future, using the related
information will be a breakthrough for the target detection. Having a good accuracy when
having a good speed will also be an important research direction.
In the future work, a system combined with face recognition, pose recognition and hand
recognition will be a good target to solve the existing problems that biometrics authenti­
cation systems have.
Figure 6.1: Holistic Pipeline Example[47]
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
33
==PAGE:42==
34
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Li MeiHong and Liu JiQiang. “USB key­based approach for software protection”. In:
2009 International Conference on Industrial Mechatronics and Automation. IEEE.
2009, pp. 151–153.
[2]
Xia Yang et al. “Formalizing and Verifying GP TEE TA Interface Specification Us­
ing Coq”. In: Chinese Conference on Trusted Computing and Information Security.
Springer. 2017, pp. 213–226.
[3]
John Daugman. “How iris recognition works”. In: The essential guide to image pro­
cessing. Elsevier, 2009, pp. 715–739.
[4]
Vicki Bruce and Andy Young. “Understanding face recognition”. In: British journal of
psychology 77.3 (1986), pp. 305–327.
[5]
Tee Connie et al. “An automated palmprint recognition system”. In: Image and Vision
computing 23.5 (2005), pp. 501–515.
[6]
Yuhang Ding, Dayan Zhuang, and Kejun Wang. “A study of hand vein recognition
method”. In: IEEE International Conference Mechatronics and Automation, 2005.
Vol. 4. IEEE. 2005, pp. 2106–2110.
[7]
William T Freeman and Michal Roth. “Orientation histograms for hand gesture recog­
nition”. In: International workshop on automatic face and gesture recognition. Vol. 12.
Zurich, Switzerland. 1995, pp. 296–301.
[8]
Arjun Bc. “A SURVEY ON MULTIMODAL BIOMETRIC SYSTEM”. In: Jan. 2016.
[9]
Huy Viet Le et al. “PalmTouch: Using the palm as an additional input modality on
commodity smartphones”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human
factors in computing systems. 2018, pp. 1–13.
[10]
Leap Motion. “Leap motion”. In: San Francisco, CA, USA (2015).
[11]
Zhengyou Zhang. “Microsoft kinect sensor and its effect”. In: IEEE multimedia 19.2
(2012), pp. 4–10.
[12]
CyberGlove Systems Inc. CyberGlove. 2017. URL: http://www.cyberglovesystems.
com/.
[13]
Josh Stone. Detecting Air Gestures with Qeexo AutoML. 2020. URL: https://qeexo.
com/detecting-air-gestures-with-qeexo-automl/.
[14]
Irving Amukasa. Translating the Kenyan Sign Language with Deep Learning. 2019.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/translating-the-kenyan-sign-language-with-
deep-learning-e58792f1b27a.
[15]
Olga Russakovsky et al. “ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge”. In:
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) 115.3 (2015), pp. 211–252. DOI:
10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
[16]
David G Lowe. “Object recognition from local scale­invariant features”. In: Proceed­
ings of the seventh IEEE international conference on computer vision. Vol. 2. Ieee.
1999, pp. 1150–1157.
[17]
Robert E Schapire. “Explaining adaboost”. In: Empirical inference. Springer, 2013,
pp. 37–52.
[18]
Tony Lindeberg. “Scale invariant feature transform”. In: (2012).
[19]
Yan Ke and Rahul Sukthankar. “PCA­SIFT: A more distinctive representation for
local image descriptors”. In: Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Computer Society Con­
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004. CVPR 2004. Vol. 2.
IEEE. 2004, pp. II–II.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
35
==PAGE:44==
[20]
Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. “Surf: Speeded up robust fea­
tures”. In: European conference on computer vision. Springer. 2006, pp. 404–417.
[21]
Geng Du, Fei Su, and Anni Cai. “Face recognition using SURF features”. In: MIPPR
2009: Pattern Recognition and Computer Vision. Vol. 7496. International Society for
Optics and Photonics. 2009, p. 749628.
[22]
Richard A Haddad, Ali N Akansu, et al. “A class of fast Gaussian binomial filters for
speech and image processing”. In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 39.3
(1991), pp. 723–727.
[23]
Raúl Rojas et al. “AdaBoost and the super bowl of classifiers a tutorial introduction
to adaptive boosting”. In: Freie University, Berlin, Tech. Rep (2009).
[24]
Robert E Schapire. “The boosting approach to machine learning: An overview”. In:
Nonlinear estimation and classification (2003), pp. 149–171.
[25]
Paul Viola and Michael Jones. “Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of
simple features”. In: Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE computer society conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. CVPR 2001. Vol. 1. Ieee. 2001, pp. I–I.
[26]
Ross Girshick et al. “Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and se­
mantic segmentation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. 2014, pp. 580–587.
[27]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks”. In: Advances in neural information pro­
cessing systems 25 (2012).
[28]
Pierre Sermanet et al. “Overfeat: Integrated recognition, localization and detection
using convolutional networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6229 (2013).
[29]
Ross Girshick et al. “Region­based convolutional networks for accurate object de­
tection and segmentation”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence 38.1 (2015), pp. 142–158.
[30]
M. Everingham et al. The PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge 2007 (VOC2007)
Results. http://www.pascal­network.org/challenges/VOC/voc2007/workshop/index.html.
[31]
Kaiming He et al. “Spatial pyramid pooling in deep convolutional networks for visual
recognition”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
37.9 (2015), pp. 1904–1916.
[32]
Ross Girshick. “Fast r­cnn”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision. 2015, pp. 1440–1448.
[33]
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. “Deep compression: Compressing deep
neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1510.00149 (2015).
[34]
Zhenzhen Song et al. “Kiwifruit detection in field images using Faster R­CNN with
VGG16”. In: IFAC­PapersOnLine 52.30 (2019), pp. 76–81.
[35]
Richard Evan Sutanto, Lenny Pribadi, and Sukho Lee. “3D integral imaging based
augmented reality with deep learning implemented by faster R­CNN”. In: Interna­
tional Conference on Mobile and Wireless Technology. Springer. 2017, pp. 241–
247.
[36]
Jasper RR Uijlings et al. “Selective search for object recognition”. In: International
journal of computer vision 104.2 (2013), pp. 154–171.
[37]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster r­cnn: Towards real­time object detection with region
proposal networks”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 28 (2015).
[38]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You only look once: Unified, real­time object detection”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2016, pp. 779–788.
36
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:45==
[39]
Xianlei Qiu and Shuying Zhang. “Hand detection for grab­and­go groceries”. In:
Technical report (2017).
[40]
Wei Liu et al. “Ssd: Single shot multibox detector”. In: European conference on
computer vision. Springer. 2016, pp. 21–37.
[41]
Seyyed Hamed Naghavi and Hamidreza Pourreza. “Real­time object detection and
classification for autonomous driving”. In: 2018 8th International Conference on
Computer and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE). IEEE. 2018, pp. 274–279.
[42]
Gary Bradski and Adrian Kaehler. Learning OpenCV: Computer vision with the
OpenCV library. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2008.
[43]
Vassili Kovalev, Alexander Kalinovsky, and Sergey Kovalev. “Deep learning with
theano, torch, caffe, tensorflow, and deeplearning4j: Which one is the best in speed
and accuracy?” In: (2016).
[44]
Shuangfeng Li. “Tensorflow lite: On­device machine learning framework”. In: Jour­
nal of Computer Research and Development 57.9 (2020), p. 1839.
[45]
Fan Zhang et al. “MediaPipe Hands: On­device Real­time Hand Tracking”. In: CoRR
abs/2006.10214 (2020). arXiv: 2006.10214. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10214.
[46]
Ronald L. Graham. “An efficient algorithm for determining the convex hull of a finite
planar set”. In: Info. Pro. Lett. 1 (1972), pp. 132–133.
[47]
Ivan Grishchenko and RE Valentin Bazarevsky. “MediaPipe Holistic—Simultaneous
Face, Hand and Pose Prediction, on Device”. In: Retrieved June 15 (2020), p. 2021.
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
37
==PAGE:46==
38
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:47==
A
Code
Figure A.1: angle function and result function
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.2: Gesture Recognition
40
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:49==
Figure A.3: main process
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.4: authentication
42
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:51==
B
Results
Figure B.1: results1
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure B.2: results2
44
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
==PAGE:53==
An authentication system based on in­air gesture
45
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
