==PAGE:1==
Vision Transformers for Image
Registration
Paraskevas Pegios
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
During the last years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been es-
tablished in the ﬁeld of unsupervised deformable image registration. Inspired
by the current research developments, vision transformers have been proposed
for solving image registration tasks as a strong candidate to overcome the main
limitation of CNNs to model long-range displacements. This has been assumed
since vision transformers can have a global perspective of the images thanks
to the nature of the attention mechanism. Even though existing transformers
have already demonstrated state-of-the-art results in image registration, there
is no extensive validation of the key premise that they have the ability to better
capture long displacements. The study presented in this master thesis focuses
on testing this hypothesis by evaluating the target registration error by dis-
placement length. Our ﬁndings show that transformers outperform CNNs on a
small public dataset of lung CT images with large displacements. However, the
performance diﬀerence stems from transformers registering small displacements
with higher accuracy. Contrary to previous beliefs, we found no evidence to sup-
port the hypothesis that transformers register long displacements better than
CNNs. Additionally, our experiments provide insights on how to train vision
transformers eﬀectively on small datasets for deformable image registration. To
ensure reproducibility, all code and experiments will be publicly available.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU Compute)
in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Engineering in
Mathematical Modelling and Computation. The master thesis was assigned to
a workload of 30 ECTS and it was supervised by Professor Aasa Feragen and
Steﬀen Czolbe, Ph.D. candidate at the University of Copenhagen. The project
has been approved by Associate Professor Martin Skovgaard Andersen, Head of
Studies at the Mathematical Modelling and Computation M.Sc. program.
Lyngby, 24-February-2022
Paraskevas Pegios
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Professor Aasa Feragen for her guidance and time dedi-
cated to our meetings. Professor Aasa Feragen has inspired me throughout my
studies not only by teaching me the fundamentals of deep learning and computer
vision but also by oﬀering me special courses outside of the main curriculum.
I would also like to thank Steﬀen Czolbe, Ph.D. candidate at the University
of Copenhagen, for the excellent collaboration we have had during the project.
Without his supervision and insightful feedback, this project could not have
been successfully completed. Finally, I would like to thank my family for their
patience and true love. Without their support, I would not have been able to
follow my dreams.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Medical Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Optimization-based approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.4
Learning-based approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Vision Transformers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.1
Attention Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.2
Transformer: Attention is All You Need . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.3
Self-attention vs Convolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.2.4
ViT: Vision Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Vision Transformers for Unsupervised Image Registration
33
3.1
AiR: Attention for Image Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
ViT-V-Net: Vision Transformer for Medical Image Registration .
35
3.3
TransMorph: Transformer for Medical Image Registration . . . .
36
4
Can Transformers capture long-range displacements better
than CNNs?
41
4.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Implementation Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Results and Experimental Evaluation
49
5.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5.1.1
Quantitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.2
Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.1
Smoothness of deformation ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.2
The eﬀect of transfer learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2.3
The eﬀect of warm-up phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Discussion
61
7
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Image registration seeks to ﬁnd a geometric transformation that will non-linearly
align two images. The transformation assigns pixel correspondences between the
images. Common applications in medical imaging are tracking of tumor progres-
sion and population analysis. The majority of current research employs unsuper-
vised Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Very recently, transformer-based
models have been proposed for deformable image registration outperforming
convolutional architectures. Even though transformers have achieved state-of-
the-art results there is no extensive validation of where the performance gain
comes from.
The main goal of the project is to apply state-of-the-art vision transformers for
the image registration task and evaluate their performance in comparison to
more traditional CNNs. A part of the project is to understand the basics of the
image registration problem and how the attention mechanism works. The larger
part of the project is the training and testing of the existing models on a public
dataset. The novelty of the project is in testing the key hypothesis that trans-
formers can better capture long-range displacements than CNNs, conducting
the evaluation by the length of the displacements.
The rest of the project is structured as follows. All the necessary background
theory is discussed thoroughly in Chapter 2. The existing transformer-based
models for deformable image registration are presented in detail in Chapter 3.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
In the title of Chapter 4 the main research question that this project tries to
answer is stated: “Can Transformers capture long-range displacements better
than CNNs?". Moreover, the related work, the proposed training strategy, and
the experimental setup are discussed. The results and the experimental evalu-
ation are presented in Chapter 5. An in-depth discussion of the results and the
conducted experiments is provided in Chapter 6. Finally, conclusions are drawn
in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Image Registration
Image registration is the process of transforming two images into one coordinate
system [1].
The overall goal is to establish a meaningful way of correspon-
dence between two images, a target (ﬁxed) image, and a source (moving) image.
In other words, image registration is the process of establishing spatial corre-
spondences between images. In the literature, registration is also referred to
as alignment, spatial normalization, warping, mapping, or matching. Typically
the images of interest to be registered may come from diﬀerent measurement
devices, times, or viewpoints. In general, comparing images obtained from dif-
ferent sources requires the process of registration. Registration is widely applied
in computer vision, satellite, and medical imaging.
2.1.1
Medical Image Registration
In the context of medical imaging, registration is one of the most well-studied
problems, and together with image segmentation, it could be considered the
pillar of the domain. This is because registration is the most important com-
ponent of almost any clinical diagnosis pipeline. Physicians seek to understand
==PAGE:14==
4
Background
the information about anatomy and pathology and observe and quantify struc-
tural changes from medical images. They often need to compare images of the
same anatomical region obtained under diﬀerent time periods or circumstances.
Thus, medical images need to be spatially or temporally aligned such that do-
main experts are able to compare them. Ordinary examples are to compare
images of the same subject that comes from diﬀerent time steps or to compare
diﬀerent subjects. Even though it is fairly trivial for the human visual system
to recognize that two 2D images are not aligned, diﬀerences in the spatial prop-
erties of anatomical 3D structures between images can make the alignment task
very challenging. To this end, registration is used to align the structures within
the images such that after registration, the same anatomy is represented at the
same pixel (voxel) location, i.e, the same coordinate within the images.
There are several use-cases of medical image registration in which the aim is
to fuse, track or control measurements of the same or diﬀerent subjects. More
speciﬁcally, it is used for simple motion correction, when diﬀerent orientations
of the same subject are obtained over time. This is common in practice when
taking measurements of the same subject. Furthermore, registration is used for
within-subject uni-modal registration. This is very important when the same
subject changes between pre-treatment and post-treatment measurements, e.g,
when evaluating cancer treatment of a patient over time. On top of that, reg-
istration is also used for inter-subject comparison of organ structures as well
as for registering images from diﬀerent modalities, known as multi-modal regis-
tration, in the context of image-guided surgery. Registration is also crucial in
group analysis when the goal is to compare a larger number of diﬀerent sub-
jects. Given a reference atlas (template) that represents the average anatomy
of a population, registration enables to align diﬀerent subjects. An example is
provided in Fig. 2.1
.
Figure 2.1: Atlas-based registration. From left to right: moving image (to be
registered), reference atlas image, and registration result. Figure
from [2].
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Image Registration
5
2.1.2
Key Concepts
2.1.2.1
Image Domain
Image registration focuses on spatially aligning two images by computing a
transformation between the domains of the images. Intuitively, the image do-
main or space can be thought of as a coordinate space that captures the visual
representation of a scene. Formally, “an image domain Ωis a space that is as-
sociated with an optical system and consists of points of which each is an image
of a corresponding point in the space in which the objects being imaged reside”
[3]. In other words, images domains are coordinate systems used for modeling
optical systems as spatial transformations. An example is provided in Fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: An image A deﬁned in domain Ω1. A reference image B deﬁned
in domain Ω2. Wrapping: T(X): Ω1 →Ω2.
In the ﬁeld of medical imaging, it is common to use standard spaces for group
analysis. A standard space is an average space that is used to to make an atlas
(template) that represents what is common across the population. An atlas is
used to register a lot of diﬀerent subjects to a common coordinate system which
maps to speciﬁc anatomical locations. In the literature, this is often referred to
as atlas-based image registration.
2.1.2.2
Spatial Transformations
Registration of images requires computing a spatial transformation such that
the transformed moving image matches a ﬁxed image. Intuitively, spatial trans-
formations allow us to move from one image space to another. More formally,
a spatial transformation is a geometric transformation of the image coordinate
system. A spatial transformation T to move from domain Ω1 to domain Ω2 is
shown in Fig. 2.2. Spatial transformations are characterized by their degrees of
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
freedom (DOF) which indicate what kind of transformations are allowed within
the alignment.
The simplest one is called rigid transformation and has 6 DOF in 3D by in-
cluding 3 rotations and 3 translation parameters, one for each dimension. Rigid
transformation describes any linear transformation that can be performed with-
out changing the size or the shape of a structure within the image. In medical
imaging, rigid transformation is very useful for motion correction. Aﬃne trans-
formations add 6 more DOF, giving 12 DOF in total, by adding scaling and
shearing parameters for each dimension. This is also a linear (global) transfor-
mation since it applies the same transformation to every voxel. It is straightfor-
ward for a domain expert to manually identify a small number of correspondence
points between two images and derive the corresponding linear transformation.
An aﬃne transformation can be represented only by 12 parameters stored in
a transformation matrix.
The aﬃne transformation of a 3-dimensional pixel
coordinate can be expressed as follows,


x′
y′
z′
1

=


a11
a12
a13
a14
a21
a22
a23
a24
a31
a32
a33
a34
0
0
0
1




x
y
z
1


(2.1)
The transformation matrix is used to transform homogeneous pixel coordinates.
Homogeneous coordinates are used in projective geometry in order to represent
diﬀerent kinds of geometric transforms in a uniform way. The extra dimension
allows to model a n−dimensional aﬃne transformations as (n+1)×(n+1) ma-
trices acting on (n + 1) −dimensional vectors. In practice, the most important
use-case of aﬃne transformations is to retrieve the right orientation, and rough
shape and use it to initialize non-linear transformations. Deformable (non-rigid)
transformation is local, non-linear, and applies a diﬀerent transformation to ev-
ery voxel meaning that each voxel can theoretically move independently.
In
this way, deformable transformation is able to change the shape of the struc-
ture of interest within the images at a ﬁne level as illustrated in Fig 2.3. In
real-world scenarios, constraints or regularization techniques are applied in or-
der to preserve topological content and to estimate an anatomically meaningful
transformation. A deformable transformation Φ can be represented by a defor-
mation (warp) ﬁeld, i.e, a vector ﬁeld stored in a computer as an image where
in each position the displacements of each dimension are stored. In medical
imaging, deformable transformations are used for high-quality within-subject
and inter-subject registration or to get quality alignment between a subject and
a template.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Image Registration
7
Figure 2.3: Examples of spatial transformations. Figure form [4].
2.1.2.3
Deformable Registration
Deformable registration is the process of computing a non-linear mapping be-
tween the source (moving) and target (ﬁxed) in order to align them as illustrated
in Fig. 2.4. Finding this transformation is a complex problem, especially when
working with 3D medical images. Deformable registration is performed by pro-
gressively deforming a moving M to match a ﬁxed image F, through iterative
optimization, until the optimal deformation is estimated.
Figure 2.4: Deformable registration. Image from [5].
In general, there are two main approaches to image registration, namely, feature-
based and intensity-based. In the former one, the idea is to ﬁrst identify key
landmark points (features) between the images and then estimate the optimal
transformation between them. Feature-based transformations can be estimated
using iterative closest point (ICP) [6] and coherent point drift (CPD) [7], for
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
rigid and nonrigid transformations respectively. The advantage of this class of
methods is that solving inference is straightforward. On the other hand, ﬁnding
automatically landmark points is a complex task while using sparse correspon-
dences is not suﬃcient to guarantee a smooth deformation. To tackle these lim-
itations, intensity-based methods deﬁne a (dis-)similarity metric to compare the
pixel intensities of the two images. The aim is to estimate a deformable transfor-
mation that minimizes the distance between the warped images. Intensity-based
methods are widely used in medical imaging and they constitute the focus of
the project. A similarity metric is measured at each iteration and utilized to
optimize the transformation, which is subsequently applied to the moving image
via interpolation as illustrated in Fig. 2.5.
Figure 2.5: The process of intensity-based deformable registration between a
ﬁxed and a moving image. Figure from [4].
2.1.2.4
Distance Metrics
In order to perform deformable registration between two input images, a moving
image M and a ﬁxed image F, it is necessary to determine a way of quantifying
how well or not they are aligned. To this end, diﬀerent metrics can be used which
measures the distance or (dis)-similarity between the observed ﬁxed image F and
the new transformed image N which can be expressed as function composition,
i.e, N = M ◦Φ. The only requirement for a distance metric D is that it needs
to be easy to compute for eﬃciency reasons as well as to be diﬀerentiable since
we seek to optimize it.
Diﬀerent distance metrics D are suitable in diﬀerent circumstances. The sim-
plest choices are the mean-squared-error (MSE) and the mean-absolute-error
(MAE). On a grid of discrete pixel-coordinates p ∈Ω, they are deﬁned as fol-
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Image Registration
9
lows,
MSE(F, N) = 1
|Ω|
X
p∈Ω
∥F(p) −N(p)∥2
(2.2)
MAE(F, N) = 1
|Ω|
X
p∈Ω
|F(p) −N(p)|
(2.3)
where P
p∈Ωis implemented as a vectorized operation over the discrete pixel-
coordinates p and |Ω| is the total number of discrete pixels of the image deﬁned
in the domain Ω. Intuitively, one image is superimposed to the other while their
corresponding intensity values are subtracted, squared (or we take their absolute
value), and summed up. Obviously, the closer to 0 the value of the dissimilarity
metric the better the alignment. These choices are natural when the images
come from the same image space, i.e, for uni-modal registration when the pixel
intensities are the same. An example from medical imaging is the registration
of computed tomography (CT) images.
When dealing with the registration of magnetic resonance (MR) images, it is
necessary to take into that they have diﬀerent brightness or contrast. In this
setup, the previously discussed dissimilarity metrics are not suitable because
they are sensitive to large intensity diﬀerences. For this reason, (average patch-
based) normalized cross-correlation (NCC) is used which takes into account the
mean intensity value and the variance (of square extracted patches) of both
images.
In that sense, NCC seeks to normalize two images that come from
the same modality but diﬀerent spaces in order to be able to compare them.
Formally it is deﬁned as follows,
NCC(F, N) = 1
|Ω|
X
p∈Ω
NCCpatch (Fp, Np)
(2.4)
where Fp and Np denote the extracted patch around discrete coordinate pixel
p and,
NCCpatch (a, b) =
N
X
n=1
(an −a)
 bn −b

σaσb
(2.5)
where a and b are images patches represented as column vectors of length N
with patch-wise means a, b and variances σa, σb.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
In multi-modal registration, for instance, when registering a CT to an MR scan,
it is not suitable to measure directly the diﬀerence of the intensity values. For
this reason, information theoretical approaches are used which are based on dis-
tributions [8, 9]. Inspired by feature-based registration, semi-supervised metrics
have been proposed. These metrics take advantage of additional information
like segmentation masks or landmarks, [10, 2] in order to estimate the transfor-
mation. They extend the previously discusses metrics by adding a supervised
component to the overall distance metric. This can be deﬁned as follows,
D′ = D + γDsup
(2.6)
where γ is a trade-oﬀparameter between the 2 components, i.e, a trade-oﬀ
between feature-based and intensity-based optimization. The additional com-
ponent Dsup can be either expressed as the mean overlap between regions of
interest or the euclidean distance between landmarks. Very recently, a data-
driven (dis-)similarity metric based on the alignment of semantic features has
been proposed [11].
2.1.2.5
Re-sampling & Interpolation
Once a spatial transformation Φ is estimated, the registration process requires
applying the transformation to the moving image M in order to create a modiﬁed
moved (warped) image N. In that sense, deformable registration can be split
into two main steps as follows,
1. Estimate a deformation ﬁeld (spatial transformation)
2. Apply the transformation image using re-sampling
In general, N is expressed as function composition, N = M ◦Φ.
Knowing
that the overall goal is to transform all pixel coordinates p according to some
deformation vector ﬁeld u, it is expected that these do not in general fall on the
corresponding positions of the moving image M. Thus, in order to implement
the function composition, an interpolation function is required to re-sample
the corresponding intensity values. This is illustrated in Fig 2.6 (left), where
the intensity value at new position (blue cross) M(p + u(p)) is calculated by
considering the neighboring pixels (red stars).
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Image Registration
11
Figure 2.6: Illustrative example for interpolation. Image from [12].
There are diﬀerent options that can be used, namely nearest neighbor, and linear
interpolation (also called bilinear 2D or trilinear in 3D). The former assigns to
each pixel in the transformed image, the intensity value of the closest point in
the ﬁxed image. The latter, for each pixel, uses the immediate neighborhoods
(4 pixels in 2D and 8 voxels in 3D) and calculates a weighted average of their
intensities. The weights are dependent according to their distance from the pixel
at the question and the closest neighbors get a higher weight. Both interpolation
methods are very fast but they lead to information loss if they are applied
iteratively. Other more sophisticated sampling methods include more points,
such as splines, sinc, and k-space methods.
2.1.2.6
Evaluation
Once the registration process is ﬁnished it is always important to evaluate the
result by measuring the registration accuracy. The most common evaluation
metrics used in the literature for intensity-based registration are the Dice score
and the Target Registration Error (TRE).
Dice score overlap uses true segmentation masks (image labels) of regions of
interest (ROI) and measures the overlap of warped labels. Labels are typically
diﬀerent anatomical structures in medical images. If the estimated deformation
ﬁeld Φ represents accurate correspondences it is expected that labels in F and
N are overlapping. Let Sk
F and Sk
N be the voxels of one-hot encoded k mask
labels for F and N = M ◦Φ respectively. Then the Dice is given by,
Dice(Sk
F , Sk
N) = 2(Sk
F ∩Sk
N)
|Sk
F | + |Sk
N|
(2.7)
When Dice score is 1 indicates perfect registration while a score of 0 indicates
that there is no overlap. The mean Dice over K diﬀerent ROIs can be also
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
calculated as follows,
Dice = 1
K
K
X
k=1
Dice
 Sk
F , Sk
N

(2.8)
Note that a Generalized Dice Loss [13], which diﬀerentiable can be used as
supervised component Dsup along with any intensity-based distance metric (See
Eq.(2.6)) for estimating the transformation.
TRE uses key landmark points and is very relevant and useful for evaluating
registration accuracy when prior knowledge indicates that large displacements
should be expected. Given ordered corresponding point sets (qi, pi) of T key
landmarks and transformation Φ,
TRE = 1
T
T
X
i
∥qi −Φ(pi)∥2
(2.9)
Obviously, TRE can be also used as a supervised component. In the literature,
Eq.(2.9) is often referred to as Fiducial Registration Error (FRE) when the
corresponding sets are used during the feature-based registration process. It is
worth noting, that key landmark points or segmentation labels used for estimat-
ing the transformation setting should never be used for measuring registration
accuracy. During the evaluation, a hold-out test set should be used.
2.1.3
Optimization-based approach
All intensity-based deformable registration methods can be deﬁned as an opti-
mization problem. The classical optimization-based approach relies on one pair
of images which are typically 3D volumes. More speciﬁcally, given a moving
(source) image M : ΩM →R and a ﬁxed (target) image F : ΩF →R, the
overall goal is to estimate a transformation Φ : ΩF →ΩM between them. For
simplicity of notation, subscripts of the domains can be dropped, i.e, Φ : Ω→Ω.
The optimal deformation is estimated by minimization of an overall loss function
L composed of a distance metric D and a regularization term R as described
below,
L(M, F, Φ) = D(F, N) + λR(Φ)
(2.10)
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Image Registration
13
where, N represents the new moved (transformed) image, i.e, M warped by
Φ and λ is the regularization parameter. The spatial transformation Φ repre-
sents the registration (deformation) ﬁeld that maps discrete pixel-coordinates p
coordinates of F to coordinates of M. Typically, the transformation Φ is char-
acterized by a displacement vector ﬁeld u. The displacement for each discrete
pixel-coordinate p (p ∈ΩF ) is given by,
p′ = Φ(p)
= p + u(p)
(2.11)
For each voxel position, p′ does not in general fall on a voxel position in the
moving image M (ΩM). Since image values are only deﬁned at integer locations,
in order to apply Φ, re-sampling is necessary. Often this is implemented using
linear interpolation of neighboring voxels (See Section 2.1.2.5). Formally, N is
expressed as function composition as follows,
N = (M ◦Φ)(p) = M(Φ(p))
=
X
q∈Z(p′)
M(q)
Y
d∈{x,y,z}
(1 −|p′
d −qd|)
(2.12)
where Z (p′) are the neighbors of p′ and d iterates over the dimensions of Ω.
The regularization term is used to obtain a smooth transformation and imposes
our prior knowledge in medical imaging that anatomy evolves smoothly, i.e,
that neighbor pixels should move in the same way. The simplest way to impose
regularization is to use the diﬀusion regularizer which penalizes discontinuities
on the deformation space. Diﬀusion regularizer is deﬁned as follows,
R(Φ) =
X
p∈Ω
∥∇u(p)∥2
(2.13)
where, ∇u(p) is approximated using ﬁnite diﬀerences over the pixel coordinates.
Formally, ∇u(p) =

∂u(p)
∂x , ∂u(p)
∂y , ∂u(p)
∂z

, where the spatial gradients for the
ﬁrst dimension are approximated as ∂u(p)
∂x
≈u ((px + 1, py, pz))−u ((px, py, pz)).
Similarly, ∂u(p)
∂y
and ∂u(p)
∂z
are approximated. Furthermore, the regularization
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
term is necessary in order to limit the solution space since non-linear transfor-
mation models are over-parametrized and can have potentially inﬁnite solutions.
It worth noting that there are diﬀerent and more complicated regulizers in the
literature.
The distance metric D in Eq.(2.10) measures the distance between the observed
ﬁxed image and the transformed (moved) image. Diﬀerent distance metrics can
be used as discussed in Section 2.1.2.4.
Traditional optimization-based algorithms optimize the overall loss function in
Eq.(2.10) for each image pair individually. Most existing algorithms follow an
iterative, gradient-descent-based approach. The process consists of accumulat-
ing iteratively deformations by better warping the moving (source) image to the
ﬁxed (target) according to the overall objective. This is given in pseudo-code.
Algorithm 1: Gradient-descent-based approach to optimize Eq.(2.10)
Input : F(ﬁxed), M(moving), λ(regularization parameter), τ(step length)
Return: Φ∗
Initialize Φ0 = Id(Identity Transform)
Introduce an initial warped image N = M ◦Φ0
Calculate the loss function in Eq.(2.10)
Repeat until convergence
while NOT CONVERGED do
Compute update of the displacement based on the gradient of Eq.(2.10)
∆Φ = −∇ΦL(M, F, Φ)
= −∇ΦD(F, N) −λ∇ΦR(Φ)
Apply the update to the transformation
Φ = Φ + τ∆Φ
Re-introduce a new warped image using Eq,(2.12)
N = M ◦Φ
Re-calculate the overall loss function in Eq.(2.10)
end
The loss function in Eq.(2.10), is not convex meaning that Algorithm 1 can be
stuck in multiple local minimums. The overall optimization problem is strongly
non-linear and deﬁned in a high-dimensional space. In other words, the relation-
ship between the parameters is non-linear which makes the overall optimization
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Image Registration
15
challenging. Furthermore, Algorithm 1 may be very slow in practice. It can
take up from minutes up to hours for a single image pair when run in CPU,
which makes its usage infeasible in real-time applications as well as in popula-
tion studies, where the registration of a large number of subjects is required.
Nevertheless, reﬁnements of classical optimization-based algorithms have been
successfully used in many real-world applications.
2.1.4
Learning-based approach
The advances of deep neural networks in the last decade, and the fact that
the limitations of the optimization-based approaches share many features with
deep learning, created new opportunities for learning-based methods for reg-
istration. Recently, deep learning-based registration methods have become an
active topic that has attracted a lot of attraction from the research community.
These methods made it possible to develop real-time applications by leveraging
modern GPUs and signiﬁcantly reducing inference time. On the other hand,
deep learning models are often computationally intensive and require a lot of
time to be trained, while they are limited to data that comes from the same
distribution that they are trained on.
In general, these methods exploit many images pairs of ﬁxed and moving images.
These pairs are aﬃne pre-aligned such that the only source of misalignment is
non-linear.
In this way, learning-based methods are able to use a function
approximator gθ(F, M), i.e, a deep neural network, to encode the transformation
between the images.
Diﬀerent deep-learning approaches have been proposed
[14, 15].
Most of the existing methods use a network gθ to predict a dense
displacement ﬁeld u, which deﬁnes a mapping from F to M. Other methods
encode the static velocity ﬁeld while other more restricted methods predict
aﬃne transformations. In [16], instead of outputting the transformation between
coordinates, given a labeled ROI in M, gθ predicts the ROI in F directly.
2.1.4.1
Supervised approach
Early works such as the Quicksilver model [8] tried to solve the registration
problem as a black-box supervised problem. These methods requires access to
a large dataset of triplets D = {Fn, Mn, Φgt
n }N
n=1 where Φgt is the ground truth
deformation ﬁeld. They treat the problem as a regression one, in which a neural
network for a pair speciﬁc function evaluation outputs directly gθ(F, M) = Φ.
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
During training the following expected supervised loss function is minimized,
L(θ; D) = E(F,M)∼p(F,M)[∥gθ(F, M) −Φgt∥2]
(2.14)
using a training dataset D. The gradients of parameters θ are calculated us-
ing back-propagation and updated through (mini-batch) stochastic gradient de-
scent.
Figure 2.7: Quicksilver framework [8]. Original image from [5].
2.1.4.2
Unsupervised approach
Even if supervised methods yielded promising results, they are impractical since
most of the times ground trough targets are very costly and thus Φgt comes from
the output of algorithmic approaches. The seminal work of Guha Balakrishnan
et al. [2], popularized the use of deep neural networks by leveraging Spatial
Transformation Networks in the context of unsupervised deformable learning-
based registration.
Spatial Transformer Network
Spatial Transformer Network (STN) [17] was originally proposed as a module to
learn linear transformations. Originally, it was combined with a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) to improve its classiﬁcation performance. The goal of
the spatial transformer module was to scale, rotate and translate the coordinates
of the input in order to learn to focus on the object of interest within the image
but it has been extended to non-linear transformations.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Image Registration
17
Figure 2.8: The architecture of spatial transformer module. Figure from [17].
A spatial transformer module takes only one input image (or feature map) U
which goes through a neural (localization) network parameterized by θ, as il-
lustrated in Figure 2.8. The network outputs a transformation Tθ that we seek
to apply to the input U. Subsequently, a grid G of discrete pixel coordinates
is generated. The generated grid G is associated with the input through the
learnable linear transformation Tθ. This transformation is a mapping from the
transformed output space into the input image space. For a rigid transformation
Aθ, this is expressed formally as follows,
 xs
i
ys
i

= Tθ (Gi) = Aθ


xt
i
yt
i
1

=
 θ11
θ12
θ13
θ21
θ22
θ23
 

xt
i
yt
i
1


(2.15)
where Gi = (xt
i, yt
i) is a speciﬁc grid point, i.e, discrete pixel-coordinate, in the
transformed (target) image V, and (xs
i, ys
i ) are the source coordinates in the
input.
In order to get the pixels intensities of V, a spatial transformation function
or sampling is required. For this reason, a bi-linear of the input is used. In
that sense, the networks learn a transformation from the output space to the
input space such that during sampling the correct input pixels intensities are
interpolated. When the downstream task is classiﬁcation, the module learns
transformations that are able to focus on the object of interest. Two examples
of applying the Tθ to the input U to produce V are illustrated in Figure 2.9.
Note that, during training an overall classiﬁcation framework (STN + CNN) is
able to back-propagate through the translation Tθ since the linear-interpolation
function is diﬀerentiable. Moreover, it is noticeable that parameters θ are dy-
namic and they depend on the input U. This is because the localization net
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
which learns the transformation function depends on the input.
Figure 2.9: Left: The sampling grid is the regular grid G = TI(G), where I
is the identity transformation parameters. Right: The sampling
grid is the result of warping the regular grid with a linear trans-
formation Tθ(G). Note that V has the same dimensions as U but
its pixels values have come from a subset of points in U. Figure
from [17].
VoxelMorph Framework
The spatial transformer module demonstrated the ability of deep neural net-
works to encode learnable transformations from the training data itself. Early
unsupervised learning-based methods [18, 19] showed that a CNN as a local-
ization net together with a spatial transformation function can be used for the
alignment of images. These architectures can be thought as a special type of
STN [17] which takes two input images (concatenated) instead of one and out-
puts only one transformation.
These models are optimized to align the two
input images in an unsupervised fashion.
VoxelMorph [2] universalize the use of STN in context of deformable image
registration by extensively evaluating their performance with clinically relevant
data. The unsupervised learning-based framework borrows all the intonations
from the classical optimization-based approaches and uses the same kind of loss
functions. In that sense, instead of optimizing directly the deformation ﬁeld for
a speciﬁc pair of images, the framework optimizes the parameters of a network
that gives deformations ﬁelds.
More speciﬁcally, given random pairs of ﬁxed and moving images from a dataset
D = {Fn, Mn}N
n=1, the framework models a function to approximate the dis-
placement ﬂied from the training data, i.e, gθ(F, M) = u. The displacement
ﬁeld u(p) deﬁnes a displacement of the corresponding discrete pixel-coordinates
p of F, i.e, a mapping from F to M. For each grid point p in F, a correpos-
ding discrete position p′ = Φ(p) in M, is computed using Eq.(2.11). In this
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Image Registration
19
way, the network gθ computes the deformation ﬁeld Φ using a set of parameters
θ. The warping of the moving image M to M ◦Φ is performed using a spa-
tial transformation function which enables to compute the dissimilarity of the
moved (warped) image M ◦Φ and the ﬁxed image F. Inspired by STNs, the
authors implemented spatial transformation function M ◦Φ with a linear inter-
polation function (Eq.(2.12)) which is diﬀerentiable. Following the traditional
optimization-based approach, which seek to optimize Eq.(2.10) for a speciﬁc
pair of images, the network is optimized to minimize the expected loss function
using the training set D,
L(θ; D) = E(F,M)∼p(F,M)[D(F, M ◦Φθ) + λR(Φθ)]
(2.16)
where the deformation ﬁeld Φ is parameterized by the parameters of the net-
works gθ, R is the regularization term given by Eq.(2.13) and λ is the trade-oﬀ
parameter. During training, each image pair contributes slightly to the parame-
ters θ, which are updated using (mini-batch) stochastic gradient descent. Note
that during backpropagation gradients can be computed and passed through the
sampling operation. During test time, given unseen pairs of images, the network
predicts the registration ﬁeld, by evaluating gθ(F, M). The overall framework
is illustrated in Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: Original image from [5].
In the original framework gθ is implemented with a Unet-like architecture. Unet
[20] was originally proposed for image segmentation. The architecture is the
combination of two paths, an encoder, and a decoder. The encoder is used to
capture the features of the inputs while the decoder is used to enable precise
localization using upsampling operations.
Skip connections are also used by
connecting each layer not only to the previous but also to its twin-layer. This
allows gradients to travel more freely, avoiding the vanishing gradient problem.
Note that down-sampling layers cause the information to be lost. In that sense,
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
passing information to a layer coming from the corresponding scale, less detail
is lost.
The authors demonstrated that the method does not require extensive tuning of
the regularization parameter and the results vary smoothly. Moreover, it does
not require a lot of training data and it can achieve decent results with just a
dataset of 10 images, while with over 50 images the results are comparable to
the state-of-the-art pair-speciﬁc optimization-based approaches. By using the
VoxelMorhp’s output as the initialization for optimization-based approaches, in
Algorithm 1, the results are further improved, by ruining the algorithm for just
a few iterations. It is worth noting that by adding a supervised component in
the loss function in Eq.(2.16) (See Sections 2.1.2.4 & 2.1.2.6) the method can
signiﬁcantly improve over the state-of-the-art optimization-based methods.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Vision Transformers
21
2.2
Vision Transformers
During the last years, transformer models had a major impact in the ﬁeld of
natural language processing (NLP) by achieving state-of-the-art performance in
most of the tasks and replacing recurrent neural networks (RNN) models such
as long short-term memory networks. Recently, a lot of research has been fo-
cused to adopt transformers in order to handle eﬃciently image data and solve
computer vision (CV) tasks. Diﬀerent from RNNs and CNNs which operate
on lattices, transformers are based on attention mechanism, which operates on
sets of elements. Having this relaxation, transformers are able to handle dif-
ferent types of data, e.g, text, signals, images, and point clouds. Speciﬁcally,
transformers have been used for diﬀerent kinds of mappings such as,
• image-to-set, e.g, image to set of bounding boxes for object detection [21]
• sequence-to-sequence, given the positional information for the ordering
of the sets, e.g, machine translation [22] or conditional image generation
given text [23]
• image-to-vector, e.g, image classiﬁcation [24]
• image-to-image, e.g, medical image segmentation [25] and registration [26]
• sequence-to-vector, e.g, text classiﬁcation
• sequence-to-set, e.g, even location and duration (1D outlier detection)
• set-to-set, e.g, point clouds to bounding boxes
2.2.1
Attention Mechanism
The attention mechanism is a technique that draws inspiration from the human
cognitive system of attention. It is designed to help deep learning models to
focus on important input features, e.g, pixels in a given input image, by pay-
ing attention to the context in which it appears. This is achieved by training
the attention module in an end-to-end fashion along with a prediction model.
Originally, it was proposed to tackle the bottleneck problem of sequencing mod-
eling [27, 28], in which RNNs fail to model long-range dependencies due to the
vanishing of the gradients.
Adopting the style of information retrieval systems, attention mechanism is
often deﬁned in terms of queries, keys, and values. In that context, a query
==PAGE:32==
22
Background
describes what is being searched within a database, while keys are the speciﬁc
characteristics of the elements in the database.
The aim is to measure the
similarity between all the keys and a speciﬁc query in order to “attend” and
return the most relevant values of the stored information. A typical example is
searching for a video in a search engine, where the query is what the user enters,
the keys are the titles of all the stored videos and the values are the content of
the videos. By measuring a similarity score between the query and all the keys,
it is expected to retrieve the most similar video aﬃliated with the most similar
key. In that sense, the similarity is used as a proxy to attention.
In the context of machine learning, the attention mechanism describes a weighted
average of a set of elements with the weights dynamically computed based on
an input query and the key elements. Let q, k, v be a query, a key, and a value
feature vector respectively and f(., .) be a score function that measures the sim-
ilarity between a key and a query. Given a speciﬁc query qi, the output zi of
the attention mechanism can be computed as follows,
αij =
exp (f (qi, kj))
P
j exp (f (qi, kj)),
zi =
X
j
αij · vi
(2.17)
The attention score αij describes the relationship between the speciﬁc query qi
and a key kj of the set and captures how well or not they are aligned. The
weights are normalized, to sum up to 1 with a softmax function. The output is
computed by taking a weighted average over the set of value feature vectors. In
other words, the output representation zi of the attention mechanism associated
with query qi is expressed as a linear combination of the value vectors weighted
by the attention weights. Obviously the larger the attention score of f (qi, kj)
the larger the αij and thus the bigger the contribution of vi in the output.
2.2.1.1
Scale Dot-Product Attention
The most typical attention mechanisms use the scale dot-product similarity to
measure a kind of correlation between high-dimensional vectors, i.e, if they point
in the same direction. There are two types of dot-product attention, namely
self-attention when query, key, and value feature vectors come from the same
set of inputs and cross-attention when we compute scores from two diﬀerent
sets.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Vision Transformers
23
Self-Attention
In self-attention, every element of the given set exposes a query vector which
encodes “what it wants to know” about the other elements in the set, a key
vector which encodes “what it is oﬀering” and a value feature vector which en-
coder “what is contained” in the speciﬁc input element. Each extracted query
is compared to each key and the information is routed according to which ones
have the largest inner product. This is illustrated in Figure 2.11. Every input
element is connected with every output element with diﬀerent attention weights.
Note that α’s in Figure 2.11 are vectors containing the corresponding attention
weights. The strength of the connections is determined by the attention mecha-
nism rather than fully learned. Hence, a self-attention module can be considered
as a fully connected layer where the weights are dynamic and they depend on a
whole set of inputs.
Figure 2.11: Information ﬂow in self-attention. Original Figure form [29].
Formally, given an input set {xi}N
i=1 of D −dimensional vectors, a matrix
X ∈RN×D can be constructed. Note that the ith row of X corresponds to
an element xi ∈RD. Each input vector xi is projected to 3 diﬀerent rotations
matrices, namely WQ ∈RD×Dq, WK ∈RD×Dk, and WV ∈RD×Dv in order to
extract the features representations Q, K, and V for queries, keys and values
respectively.
This implemented by passing X independently trough 3 diﬀer-
ent linear layers with the corresponding trainable parameter matrices. Since
self-attention aims to compute inner products between queries and keys, it is
necessary to have the same dimensionality, i.e, Dk = Du. Even though it is not
required for the value vectors to have also the same dimensions, for simplicity of
notation it is assumed that Dk = Du = Dv := Dh. The feature representations
==PAGE:34==
24
Background
are computed as follows,
Q = XWQ ∈RN×Dh,
K = XWK ∈RN×Dh,
V = XWV ∈RN×Dh
(2.18)
Note that non-linearities are not applied since attention is completely based on
orientation. The score function in Eq.(2.17) is implemented with the scale dot
product. The inner products (similarities) between each query vector and all
the key vectors in the set can be computed in parallel using matrix operations.
Hence, the attention weights are computed as follows,
A = softmax
QK⊤
√Dh

∈RN×N
(2.19)
where softmax denotes row-rise softmax normalization function. In this way, the
attention weights Aij are based on the pairwise similarity between two elements
of the set and their respective query qi and key kj representations. The output
is computed as follows,
Z = AV ∈RN×Dh
(2.20)
where each element in Z is dependent on all other elements in the same row.
By stacking the weight matrices into a single one, WQKV = [WQ; WK; WV ] ∈
RD×3Dh, the self-attention layer SA(.) can be summarized as follows,
[Q, K, V] = XWQKV
WQKV ∈RD×3Dh,
(2.21)
A = softmax
QK⊤
√Dh

A ∈RN×N,
(2.22)
SA(X) = AV = Z
Z ∈RN×Dh
(2.23)
Each self-attention mechanism can be considered as one “head”. The overall con-
cept can be further reﬁned into the so-called multi-head self-attention by using
several independent self-attentions. This is achieved by using k diﬀerent sets of
query, key, and value matrices, one for each “head”, and by applying indepen-
dent and parallel computations. In this way, the original input is projected to
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Vision Transformers
25
diﬀerent representation sub-spaces which allows each independent self-attention
to have a diﬀerent way to route the input information, i.e, to attend to diﬀerent
segments of the input. More speciﬁcally, the input X is projected to k diﬀerent
self-attention weight matrices which end up to k diﬀerent output matrices. The
outputs are concatenated and projected back to the desired N × D output di-
mension using a new weight matrix WO ∈RkDh×D. This is illustrated in Figure
2.12. To keep compute and number of parameters constant when changing k,
Dh in (Eq.(2.21)) is typically set to D
k . The multi-head self-attention attention
layer MSA(.) is summarized as follows,
MSA(X) = [SA1(X); SA2(X); . . . ; SAk(X)]WO
= [Z1; Z2; . . . ; Zk]WO ∈RN×D
(2.24)
Figure 2.12: A multi-head self-attention layer.
==PAGE:36==
26
Background
Cross-Attention
When attention is performed on queries coming for one set {ξi}M
i=1, stored in
matrix Ξ ∈RM×D, and keys and values coming from another set {xi}N
i=1, stored
in matrix X ∈RN×D, is called cross-attention. The corresponding queries, keys
and values are computed as follows,
Q = ΞWQ ∈RM×Dh,
K = XWK ∈RN×Dh,
V = XWV ∈RN×Dh
(2.25)
Then, the cross-attention matrix A ∈RM×N and the output of the cross-
attention layer CA(., .) can be summarized as follows,
CA(X, Ξ) = softmax
QK⊤
√Dh

V
= AV ∈RM×Dh
(2.26)
As in self-attention, multiple “heads” can be combined in cross-attention too.
2.2.2
Transformer: Attention is All You Need
Transformer [22] was the ﬁrst model exclusively based on the attention mech-
anism. Even though it was originally proposed for neural machine translation,
e.g, translation from English to French, the ﬂexibility of the encoder-decoder ar-
chitecture enabled the research community to quickly adapt it to solve numerous
other tasks. The overall encoder-decoder architecture is shown in Figure 2.13.
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Vision Transformers
27
Figure 2.13: Figure from [22].
Learnable embedding layers are used in both the encoder and decoder in order
to project the input words in a low-dimensional continuous euclidean space.
More speciﬁcally, an embedding layer is a look-up table that is used to learn
the representations of categorical inputs, such as sequences of words that come
from a vocabulary of words (corpus). In this way, the embeddings capture the
semantic information of the inputs and allow us to ﬁnd associations between
them in the embedding space.
Furthermore, the process of chopping sequences of words into tokens (words)
is often called “tokenization”. When tokens are processed through an attention
mechanism the sequential information is lost. To this end, positional encodings
are also used in both the encoder and the decoder. Inventively, positional em-
bedding is a vector of constant values which are added to an input embedding
vector in order to slightly alter it based on the positional information. Thus,
the positional encoding features enable us to determine the position of each
element in the sequence or the distance between diﬀerent elements in the se-
quence. These vectors can be either learned or follow a speciﬁc pattern by using
the sinusoidal function as shown in Figure 2.14.
==PAGE:38==
28
Background
Figure 2.14: Figure produced using code from [30].
The encoder takes as input sentences from the source language that we seek
to translate. As illustrated in Figure 2.13, it consists of L identical number of
computational blocks, where each block consists of a multi-head self-attention
layer and a fully connected feed-forward layer. Each block also includes residual
skip connections [31] followed by layer normalization (LN) [32] between the
layers. Note that in layer normalization, the mean and variance are computed
across channels and spatial dimensions.
Through skip connections, residual
layers can easily learn the identity function.
Hence, residual layers can not
harm the performance of the network, but only improve it. The motivation for
this structure is that it can prevent vanishing or exploding gradient problems.
Furthermore, skip connections allow the representations of diﬀerent processing
levels to interact.
The decoder takes as input sentences from the target language and also consists
of L blocks. Each block is composed of a multi-head self-attention layer, a multi-
head cross-attention layer, and a linear feed-forward layer. It is noticeable that
self-attention is masked in pursuance of not allowing it to “attend” to feature
positions in the output target sequence. This is very important in NLP tasks,
such as machine translation, where the goal is to predict the next word given
the past words. The self-attention layer is used to extract query representations
of the target language while the cross-attention layer is used to associate the
source with the target language. The output from the encoder is used from
the decoder to produce the key and the value feature representations. Again
skip connections and layer normalization are used between the layers. The ﬁnal
output is transformed through the liner layer while the output probabilities are
calculated using a softmax function. The output probabilities are assigned to
each word in the corpus of the target language.
During training, the model allows parallelization which led to scaling up lan-
guage models to billions of parameters such as Bidirectional Encoder Represen-
tations from Transformers (BERT) [33] and Generative Pre-trained Transformer
(GPT) [34]. During test time it is used in an auto-regressive manner to predict
the next word in the sentence of the target language.
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Vision Transformers
29
2.2.3
Self-attention vs Convolution
In general, self-attention transforms a data point into a data point of the same
spatial dimensions or sequence length.
For instance, given an image, a self-
attention layer transforms it into an output of the same size.
Every query
pixel in the output layer aggregates information from all input pixels. How the
information is aggregated is dynamic and is dependent on each input pixel. In
other words, self-attention is a global and dynamic operation. On the other
hand, when applying a convolution layer in an image, every output pixel is
dependent only on the local region in the input that is captured from a ﬁxed
convolutional kernel. Particularly, convolution is a local and ﬁxed operation.
Transformer outperforms traditional architectures in NLP tasks, however, it is
limited to the memory and computes requirements of the self-attention oper-
ation. This is because it calculates the pairwise inner product between each
pair of words in an input sequence. This is a quadratic operation, i.e, O(N 2)
where N is the number of elements within the input sequence. For a paragraph
of N tokens long, a self-attention layer would require N 2 connections. For im-
age data, it is prohibitively large to process each pixel individually because each
pixel within an image would have to “attend” every single other pixel. For exam-
ple, with N × N images, a self-attention layer would require (N 2)2 connections
which is impossible to process with current hardware even for small images.
Figure 2.15: Image from [35]. The colors in local and global attention indi-
cates that the connections are dynamic.
To tackle the computational limitations and handle eﬃciently image data dif-
==PAGE:40==
30
Background
ferent approaches have been proposed. Following the foundational motivation
behind convolution, this can be achieved by modifying how the information
is routed in the self-attention layer and restricting it to a local neighborhood
[36, 37, 38, 39]. Hence, a local self-attention layer can be thought of as a convo-
lution layer where the weights of the kernel are computed dynamically from the
attention module. In this way, the computational complexity is only dependent
on the size of the neighborhood. An illustrative comparison between local atten-
tion, convolution, global attention, and fully connected layer is shown in Figure
2.15.
It is worth noting that the modiﬁcation can be implemented through
specialized attention patterns. Other approaches combine convolutional archi-
tectures with self-attention modules.
Going even further, multi-head self-attention can be thought of intuitively as
multiple feature maps of a convolution layer that capture diﬀerent features from
the image. The main diﬀerence is that in multi-head self-attention the input
feature map is linearly projected to multiple sub-spaces.
2.2.4
ViT: Vision Transformer
The seminal work of Dosovitskiy et. al [24], demonstrated that it is possible to
obtain state-of-the-art results in image recognition by using a pure transformer
without any use of convolutions or modiﬁed attention modules. The authors
proposed to simply split the input images into patches and treat them as tokens
(words) in an NLP task. The original architecture is a standard transformer
encoder where the input is a sequence of linear projections of image patches.
The model was originally used for image classiﬁcation and it is illustrated in
Figure 2.16.
Figure 2.16: Figure from [24].
==PAGE:41==
2.2 Vision Transformers
31
Formally, let x ∈RH×W ×C be an input 2D image, where C is the number of
channels and H, W are the spatial dimensions. Since transformer encoder works
with 1D sequences of token embeddings, x is split into P ×P (non-overlapping)
patches and reshaped into a sequence of ﬂattened patches, i.e, xp ∈RN×(P 2C),
where N = HW
P 2 is the number of patches. In this way, each image can be treated
as a sequence of N tokens (patches). The smaller the patch size P, the larger
the eﬀective sequence length N and thus the more expensive the self-attention
operation. For each ﬂattened patch a lower-dimensional patch embedding is
produced using a linear projection E ∈R(P 2C)×D. The dimensionality D of
the linear mapping is chosen to be the same as the latent vector size of the
transformer encoder. Similar to BERT [33], a learnable xclass token, is added
to the sequence of embeddings.
Given that the transformer is permutation
invariant, a standard 1D trainable position embedding Epos ∈R(N+1)×D is
added to the projected patch representations in order to preserve the ordering
information of the patches. The resulting embedding sequence is then fed to a
standard transformer encoder. This is summarized as follows,
z0 =

xclass ; x1
pE; x2
pE; · · · ; xN
p E

+ Epos,
(2.27)
z′
ℓ= MSA (LN (zℓ−1)) + zℓ−1,
ℓ= 1 . . . L
(2.28)
zℓ= MLP (LN (z′
ℓ)) + z′
ℓ,
ℓ= 1 . . . L
(2.29)
y = LN
 z0
L

(2.30)
where L is the number of transformer encoder blocks, MSA(.) is the multi-head
self-attention as described in Eq.(2.24), LN(.) is layer normalization [32] and
MLP(.) is standard multi-layer perceptron implemented with two layers and
a GELU activation function [40].
The output z0
L of the classiﬁcation token
(xclass = z0
0) serves as the image representation y. During training, a classiﬁ-
cation head is applied to z0
L as illustrated in Figure 2.16. It is noticeable that a
hybrid model can be used where the patch embedding projection E is applied to
patches extracted from a CNN feature map, instead of raw input image patches.
Vision Transformer (ViT) lacks the inductive biases of a CNN, such as trans-
lation invariance and a locally restricted receptive ﬁeld. In a CNN the local
information is aggregated from layer to layer and the eﬀective receptive ﬁeld is
increased linearly by the depth of the network. On the other hand, ViT has a
global ﬁeld of view and captures long-range dependencies within an image, even
from the shallowest layers. The authors hypothesized that ViT would require
a huge amount of data to be trained. For this reason, they used an internal
dataset of 300M images for pre-training and then they ﬁne-tune the model for
other smaller public datasets to achieve state-of-the-art results in most of them.
==PAGE:42==
32
Background
Indeed, it was proved that the more the training data the better the results for
ViT, while CNNs typically reach a plateau in performance.
Figure 2.17: Figure from [24].
A visualization of the learned ﬁrst linear embedding ﬁlters is shown in Fig-
ure 2.17 (left). The ﬁrst layer weights share similar features and capture low-
frequency color features and high-frequency grayscale features similar to the
ﬁrst layers of a CNN. In Figure 2.17 (middle) the trained position embeddings
are also demonstrated. The patterns show that closer patches and patches in
the same row/column tend to have more similar position embeddings. More-
over, the authors in order to investigate how far away are the learned global
interactions deﬁned the “attention distance” as analogous to the receptive ﬁeld
of CNNs. This was computed as the average distance between the query pixel
and the rest of the patch, multiplied by the attention weight. In Figure 2.17
(right) the size of the attended area by head and network depth (averaged for
a number of examples images) is illustrated. It is clear that there are heads
that can attend the whole image even from the ﬁrst layers while the “attention
distance” is increased by depth as in CNNs. Furthermore, the model attends
to the image regions that are semantically relevant for the downstream task of
image recognition as illustrated in Figure 2.18.
Figure 2.18: Figure from [24].
The major disadvantage of ViT is that it requires pre-training in very big
datasets. Recently, new ViT-like architectures and other vision transformers
[41, 42] (not limited to image recognition) that require substantially less amount
of data to be trained as well as new methods in order to train the model more
eﬃciently [43, 44] have been proposed.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3
Vision Transformers for
Unsupervised Image
Registration
Convolution-based architectures such as Unet [20] have been established for
solving image registration problems.
Their main limitation is that they are
unable to model long-range displacements between a ﬁxed and moving image
especially when the displacements become larger than the eﬀective receptive
ﬁeld. Their intrinsic locality is clearly observed when working with 3D images
where the depth of networks is limited by the compute and memory requirements
of the existing hardware. Even with large receptive ﬁelds, CNNs tend to focus
on local aspects, which is problematic in image registration tasks.
During the last years, transformer architectures have demonstrated their ability
to model global relationships within images by using the attention mechanism.
Following the current research developments in vision transformers, attempts
have been made to apply them in the context of unsupervised learning-based
registration (Section 2.1.4.2).
==PAGE:44==
34
Vision Transformers for Unsupervised Image Registration
3.1
AiR: Attention for Image Registration
AiR [45] is an unsupervised Transformer approach for image registration. It is
in the early stage of development and tries to adapt methods from the ﬁeld of
natural language processing. More speciﬁcally, the authors used an encoder-
decoder transformer similar to the one originally proposed for machine trans-
lation, with the diﬀerence being that masked self-attentions are obviously not
necessary for the decoder (See Section 2.2.2). This is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
The moving and ﬁxed images are separated by the encoder-decoder structure,
split into patches and the ﬁnal output of the decoder predicts the deformation
ﬁeld. Analogous to the machine translation task the ﬁxed image plays the role
of the source language and the moving image the role of the target language.
The model was trained using a similarity loss function but without the use of a
regularization term. Due to hardware limitations, the authors used only 1 en-
coder and 1 decoder block with 4 attention heads each and evaluated the model
only on 2D toy datasets. To achieve better performance than the baselines,
a multi-scale method was proposed by applying the model to diﬀerent input
resolutions and combining the results. The qualitative evaluation provided by
the authors indicates that the proposed transformer tended to produce jagged
edges compare to CNN-based approaches.
Figure 3.1: Figure from [45].
==PAGE:45==
3.2 ViT-V-Net: Vision Transformer for Medical Image Registration
35
3.2
ViT-V-Net: Vision Transformer for Medical
Image Registration
ViT-V-Net [26] was proposed as a modiﬁcation of TransUnet [25] for 3D images
in order to model the displacement ﬁeld. Note that TransUnet was originally
used for 2D image segmentation. The overall architecture of ViT-V-Net is illus-
trated in the left part of Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Figures from [26].
The ﬁxed (target) F ∈RH×W ×L and the moving M ∈RH×W ×L images are
concatenated and pass through 3 Unet-like blocks with convolution layers and
max-poolings in order to down-sample the spatial dimensions of the input. More
speciﬁcally, the original architecture uses 3 convolution layers in the encoder
with 16, 32, 32 channels. This is due to the fact that a naive application of
ViT [24] using full resolution images would result to a large computational
complexity. The extracted high-level features are separated into N vectorized
xi
p patches of dimensions P 3 × C , where N = W HL
P 3 , P is the patch size, C
denotes the channel size.
Typically P = 8 and C = 32.
Using a trainable
patch embeddings E ∈RP 3C×D, the patches are mapped to a latent D =
256 −dimensional space. As in ViT, trainable positional embeddings Epos ∈
RN×D are added in order to preserve positional information of the patches. The
resulting embeddding sequences is then fed to a standard transformer encoder
with L = 12 layers of multi-head self-attention (MSA, Eq.(2.24)) and 12 heads
each, layer normalization (LN) [32] and standard multi-layer perceptrons (MLP)
as illustrated in Figure 3.2 (right). Mathematically,
z0 =

x1
pE; x2
pE; · · · ; xN
p E

+ Epos,
(3.1)
z′
ℓ= MSA (LN (zℓ−1)) + zℓ−1,
ℓ= 1 . . . L
(3.2)
zℓ= MLP (LN (z′
ℓ)) + z′
ℓ,
ℓ= 1 . . . L
(3.3)
==PAGE:46==
36
Vision Transformers for Unsupervised Image Registration
Then, the output is reshaped and passed to an extra convolutional layer of 512
channels before the Unet-like upsample blocks of the decoder. The decoder con-
sists of 4 convolution layers with 96, 48, 32, 32, 16 channels and predicts the
deformation ﬁeld. The transformation is applied to the moving image with a spa-
tial transformation (STN) as in the standard unsupervised learning framework
described in Section 2.1.4.2. Note that, skips connections are used and reshaped
when necessary for the dimensions to match. During training, a dropout rate
of 0.1 is applied to the linear layers of ViT.
The authors trained ViT-V-Net exactly as VoxelMorph [2] and reported state-
of-the-art results in terms of mean Dice Score (Eq. (2.8)) against algorithmic
and learning-based approaches in an internal dataset of brain images of 260
subjects. Even if the method improves the performance over the baselines there
was no insight into where the performance gain comes from.
3.3
TransMorph: Transformer for Medical Image
Registration
Very recently, TransMorph [46] was proposed for unsupervised volumetric med-
ical image registration. TransMorph uses a Swin Transformer-based [47] back-
bone which was originally proposed as a general-purpose 2D backbone model
for computer vision tasks. Swin Transformer overcomes the limitations of ViT
[24], which works with ﬁxed-sized patches and captures large variations in the
scale of visual entities. In tasks like image segmentation or registration, this can
be problematic because pixel-level information is required.
TransMorph processes the inputs in a hierarchical way by starting with small-
sized patches and gradually increasing the size via patch merging layers as the
model progresses through deeper transformer layers achieving scale-invariance
like Unet [20]. A Swin transformer block outputs the same number of tokens as
the input and replaces the multi-head self-attention (MSA, Eq.(2.24)) with two
successive blocks; a window-based multi-head self-attention (W-MSA) which
performs self-attention locally within each window, and a sifted-window multi-
head self-attention (SW-MSA) which sifts the windows to allow more patches to
interact. This is illustrated in Figure 3.3 (orange box) together with the over-
all architecture of TransMorph. It is noticeable that performing self-attention
in a local window (neighborhood) reduces the complexity of the self-attention
operation as described in Section 2.2.3.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 TransMorph: Transformer for Medical Image Registration
37
Figure 3.3: Figures from [46].
The transformer encoder network takes as input the concatenated ﬁxed F ∈
RH×W ×L and the moving M ∈RH×W ×L images and ﬁrst splits them into 3D
non-overlapping patches of size 2×P×P×P, where typically P = 4. The patches
are reshaped into a sequence of N = H
P × W
P × L
P ﬂattened patches (tokens) and
for each token a patch embedding of dimension C is produced using a linear
projection layer E ∈R2(P 3C) resulting to an output z0 =

x1
pE; x2
pE; · · · ; xN
p E

of dimensions N × C. It is worth noting that, positional embeddings are not
necessary since in learning-based unsupervised image registration the positional
information of the voxel locations is enforced by comparing the warped image
with the ﬁxed image through a similarity metric (Eq. (2.16)). The authors
observed that adding positional information does not lead to any improvement
in performance while it adds extra parameters to the overall network. After the
linear projection layer, the encoder is composed of 4 stages which are built by
connecting a patch merging layer and multiple Swin Transformer blocks applied
on the tokens z0. A patch merging layer is implemented by concatenating the
features of 2 × 2 × 2 neighboring tokens which reduce the number of tokens
by a factor of 8 and by applying a linear layer that reduces the dimensions
of each feature. For instance, the output of the ﬁrst Swin transformer Block
with dimensions
H
4 × W
4 × L
4 × C is transformed to a feature map of
H
8 ×
W
8 × L
8 × 8C dimensions reducing the number of tokens via concatenation. The
8C −dimensional concatenated features are then subjected to a linear layer,
yielding 2C −dimensional features.
In the second stage, Swin Transformer
blocks are applied for feature transformation, with the resolution kept at H
8 ×
W
8 × L
8 × 2C. As the encoder grows deeper, patch merging is used to reduce the
number of tokens. The dimensions of the last stage of the transformer encoder
are H
32 × W
32 × L
32 × 8C. Intuitively, merging layers can be thought as pooling
layers while Swin Transformer blocks as convolution layers in the context of
CNNs.
==PAGE:48==
38
Vision Transformers for Unsupervised Image Registration
The decoder produces a dense prediction of the dismantlement ﬁeld at the same
resolution as the input images. It consists of Unet-like decoder blocks with up-
sampling layers followed by convolutional layers. Given that the transformer
encoder is not able to produce high-resolution feature maps due to the na-
ture of patch operations, two convolution layers are used to the original and a
down-sampled version of the input. Skip connections are used both from the
convolutional and the transformer blocks in order to forward to the decoder
both high resolution and abstract information.
In order to deal with non-square images, TransMorph computes W-MSA within
non-overlapping local rectangular shaped windows, i.e, within windows of shape
Mx × My × Mz. At the second layer of the Swin transformer block, namely the
SW-MSA layer, the widows are shifted by
 Mx
2

×
j
My
2
k
×
 Mz
2

voxels. As
in [47], cycle sifting instead of naive zero-padding is used for eﬃcient batch com-
putation. Mathematically, the window-based attention for the two consecutive
Swin Transformer blocks illustrated in Figure 3.3 can be written as follows,
ˆzℓ= W-MSA (LN (zℓ−1)) + zℓ−1
(3.4)
zℓ= MLP (LN (ˆzℓ)) + ˆzℓ,
(3.5)
ˆzℓ+1 = SW-MSA (LN (zℓ)) + zℓ,
(3.6)
zℓ+1 = MLP (LN (ˆzℓ+1)) + ˆzℓ+1,
(3.7)
where LN is layer normalization, MLP is standard multi-layer perceptrons and
ˆzℓ, and zℓdenote the output features of the (S)W-MSA and MLP module ℓ
respectively.
Diﬀerent from Eq.(2.19) relative position bias of the tokens in
each window is also used when computing the self-attention matrix,
A = softmax
QK⊤
√
d
+ B

(3.8)
where the Q, K ∈RMxMyMz×d, MxMyMz, is the number of tokens in a 3D
window, d is the dimensions of the query and key features and B denotes the
bias matrix of tokens in each window.
The main TransMorph model has an embedding of C = 96 and 4-stages with
{2, 2, 4, 2} number of Swin-Transformer blocks and {4, 4, 8, 8} number of heads
in stage respectively. The authors provide several variants of the model. For
example, TransMorph-small is a smaller version with C = 48 and 4 number of
heads in each stage of the encoder. In general, the windows sizes {Mx, My, Mz}
==PAGE:49==
3.3 TransMorph: Transformer for Medical Image Registration
39
are restricted by the sizes of the input images and it is recommended to be the
same as the input size after 32-fold downsampling.
TransMoprh is trained using the standard unsupervised learning framework de-
scribed in Section 2.1.4.2. The authors provide extensive evaluation and ablation
studies as well as comparisons with both CNN-based and transformer-based
baselines reporting state-of-the-art results in terms of mean Dice Score (Eq.
(2.8)) for inter-patient brain MRI registration and phantom-to-CT registration.
==PAGE:50==
40
Vision Transformers for Unsupervised Image Registration
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Can Transformers capture
long-range displacements
better than CNNs?
Recent advances in unsupervised medical image registration have demonstrated
that transformer-based networks can outperform traditional Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (CNNs) by better comprehending the spatial correspondence be-
tween the moving and the ﬁxed images [46]. Even though there is clear evidence
that transformers can have a global view of the entire image thanks to the self-
attention mechanism [46], there is no extensive validation of the main hypothesis
that transformers have the ability to better capture long-range displacements.
In this work, we investigate this hypothesis by applying transfer learning and
a warm-up training phase to improve the performance of transformers. Finally,
we validate the components of our method by conducting an ablation study.
4.1
Related Work
Transfer learning in the context of machine learning seeks to improve the learn-
ing of a target task by utilizing knowledge from a source learning task. In other
==PAGE:52==
42 Can Transformers capture long-range displacements better than CNNs?
words, it focuses on transferring knowledge obtained while addressing one prob-
lem and applying it to a similar but distinct one. Even if it is well-known that
transfer learning beneﬁts both CNNs and transformers for classical computer
vision tasks such as natural image recognition and segmentation, it is still open
to exploring its application in the context of 3D medical image registration.
Due to the lack of medical training data, it is usually eﬀective for 2D medical
image classiﬁcation and segmentation to apply transfer learning to CNNs using
supervised ImageNet [48] pre-trained weights. It is noticeable that in [49] it
is argued that the improved performance, both in terms of performance and
training time, is thanks to better initialization and weight statistics and not
as a result of feature reuse.
In [50] transfer learning is applied for 3D MRI
brain tumor segmentation using ImageNet pre-trained weights and treating MRI
modalities as RGB input channels of a pre-trained ResNet encoder.
This is
implemented by replacing 3 × 3 with 1 × 3 × 3 convolutions in ResNet and
initializing it with 2D ImageNet pre-trained weights in order to process 3D input
volumes slice by slice. Moreover, Med3D [51] has been proposed as a general
pre-trained 3D backbone model that can be ﬁne-tuned for smaller MRI and CT
classiﬁcation and segmentation tasks achieving promising results. To pre-train
Med3D the authors use 3DSeg-8 which is a custom pre-processed dataset where
data comes from 8 public datasets for MRI and CT segmentation. During the
training stage, a decoder branch to solely processes the feature map produced
from the related dataset is used.
In the ﬁeld of NLP, transfer learning is considered a standard technique for
transformers. Vision transformers, because of the lack of inductive bias, require
either pre-training in very big datasets and then ﬁne-tuning to smaller speciﬁc
tasks or the application of self-supervised pre-training techniques. Very recently,
in [52] it has been demonstrated that pretraining transformers on ImageNet
can improve signiﬁcantly the performance in the medical image domain for 2D
segmentation tasks, closing the gap in performance with CNNs.
Learning rate warm-up is a standard training approach for transformers.
A
warm-up is a phase in which we gradually increase the learning rate while after
the warm-up steps the originally chosen learning rate or a learning rate scheduler
is used.
Learning rate warm-up was originally used to allow adaptive optimizers such
as Adam [53] or RMSProp to correct the statistics of the gradients. This is
because poor estimates of the variance in the gradients during the early epochs
can potentially push the optimization process in the wrong direction. Thus,
when training with simple stochastic gradient descent, there is no need for a
warming phase. In the context of transformers, applying consecutively Layer
Normalization layer across the multi-head self-attention layers can lead to high
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Method
43
gradients during early iterations. Even though these limitations can be overcome
by using an improved adaptive optimizer such as RAdam [54] and Pre-Layer
Normalization [55] respectively, learning rate warm-up with simple Adam is
widely used for training transformers due to its simplicity and eﬀectiveness.
4.2
Method
Let F, M be the ﬁxed and the moving image volumes respectively deﬁned in n-D
spatial domain Ω⊂Rn, where typically n = 3. It assumed that both images
are single-channel grayscale images. Moreover, they have been aﬃnely aligned
as a preprocessing step, leaving nonlinear displacement as the only source of
misalignment between the volumes F, M ∈RH×W ×L.
We seek to predict a transformation function Φ = Id + u, where u is the dis-
placement ﬁeld that deﬁnes the mapping from F to M and and Id is the identity
transformation. We model u using a function approximator, i.e, a deep neu-
ral network which can be either a convolutional-based or a transformer-based
network. In that sense, a network is used to generate the transformation be-
tween the images, i.e, gθ(F, M) = u where θ = {θenc, θdec} and subscripts enc
and dec denote the parameters of the encoder and decoder part of network re-
spectively. Instead of naive random initialization of the parameters, we apply
transfer learning using pre-trained weights from a diﬀerent registration task to
initialize the parameters of the encoder θenc, while the decoder part is initialized
randomly. The wrapping is applied using a spatial transformation function, i.e,
M ◦Φ.
Given pairs of images from the training dataset D = {Fn, Mn}N
n=1, an adaptive
optimizer is used to ﬁnd the optimal parameters θ∗= {θ∗
enc, θ∗
dec} of the network
by minimizing the following expected loss function,
θ∗= arg min
θ

E(F,M)∼D [D(F, M ◦Φθ) + λR(Φθ)]

(4.1)
where D is the dataset distribution, the deformation ﬁeld Φ is parameterized by
the parameters of the network gθ, D is a distance metric, R is the regularization
term and λ is the trade-oﬀregularization hyper-parameter. During training, a
learning rate warm-up phase is used in order to ﬁne-tune the encoder and train
the overall model for the downstream registration task. Intuitively, the warm-
up phase allows the transformer to adapt to the data by slowing tuning the
attention mechanisms in deep transformer networks. If the modeling processes
==PAGE:54==
44 Can Transformers capture long-range displacements better than CNNs?
requires the spatial dimensions (H, W, L) of images to be divisible by 2k, where
k ∈N+, the images can be zero-padded or for simplicity, images slices can be
discarded when there is no loss of important information.
4.3
Dataset
Previous works focused on evaluating the performance of transformers mainly
in terms of Dice score using medium to large size datasets. In this work, we
choose to conduct the evaluation in terms of TRE (Eq. 2.9) using a challenging
small dataset for paired 3D lung CT registration with large displacements.
The Learn2Reg 3D CT Lung Dataset [56, 57] was constructed by the Depart-
ment of Radiology at the Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands and it was originally released in Learn2Reg Challenge 20201, a
satellite event of MICCAI 20202 for registration challenges. The dataset is used
for intra-subject registration, i.e, for registering lung 3D CT images acquired
at diﬀerent time steps for a speciﬁc subject. For each case, the images to be
registered are taken at the time of inspiration and expiration. The dataset is
publicly available. Examples from the dataset are demonstrated in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Four moving (inhaling) and ﬁxed (exhaling) image pairs (slices)
from Learn2Reg CT Lung Dataset [56, 57].
More speciﬁcally, the dataset consists of 60 monocentric thorax CT images com-
1https://learn2reg.grand-challenge.org/Learn2Reg2020/
2https://miccai2020.org/en/
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Implementation Details
45
ing from 30 subjects. A pair of inhaling (moving) and exhaling (ﬁxed) images is
available for each case together with an automatically extracted segmentation
mask for evaluation. The original dataset provided by the challenge organiza-
tion was split into 20 (cases 1 - 20) and 10 (cases 21 - 30) training and test scan
pairs respectively. For all original training pairs3, automatically computed key-
point correspondences are also available. During the challenge, the performance
of the submitted models was evaluated on the original test set4 in terms of TRE
using manual landmarks which are not publicly accessible. For this reason, the
dataset is arbitrary re-organized in order to use the available keypoints for the
ﬁnal assessment as follows,
• Training set: cases 11-30 (20 pairs)
• Validation set: cases 6-10 (5 pairs with available keypoints)
• Test set: cases 1-5 (5 pairs with available keypoints)
Preprocessing: All standard preprocessing steps were performed by the chal-
lenge organization. This includes not only re-sampling to the same spatial di-
mension and voxel resolution but also aﬃne pre-registration in order to ease the
use of learning-based algorithms. Thus, all images and segmentation masks have
a resolution of 192×192×208 with a spacing of 1.75×1.25×1.25 mm. It is worth
noting that the automatically computed keypoint correspondences are consid-
ered noisy labels with residual errors of 1-2mm. Because many transformer-
based encoders downsample the input by a factor of 32, meaning that the input
must be divisible by 32, for simplicity the last slices are disregarded resulting
in 192 × 192 × 192 image volumes. This is done without loss of important in-
formation since there are no keypoints in these image regions. Lastly, the ﬁxed
images F (expiration) and moving images M (inspiration) are normalized, i.e,
F, M ∈[0, 1].
The main challenges of the dataset are its limited size and the long-range dis-
placements between inhaling and exhaling due to breathing. Besides that, an-
other challenge is that the lungs are not fully visible in several expiration scans
as shown in Figure 4.1.
4.4
Implementation Details
Models: As a convolutional-based model, the original VoxelMorph-2 is used.
3https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3835682
4https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4048761
==PAGE:56==
46 Can Transformers capture long-range displacements better than CNNs?
For transformer-based models, ViT-V-Net and TransMorph are used as de-
scribed in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3 respectively. Given that the window sizes
{Mx, My, Mz} in TransMorph is recommended to be the same as the input size
after 32-fold downsampling, they are set as {192/32, 192/32, 192/32} = {6, 6, 6}.
It is noticeable that during the encoding process, convolution-based models
down-sample the input by a factor of 16 while transformer-based models by a
factor of 32. The number of parameters in each model used in our experiments
is provided below in terms of millions of parameters.
Model
Number of Parameters (M)
TransMorph
46.77
Vit-V-Net
31.60
VoxelMorph-2
0.31
Table 4.1: Number of parameters in each model. The values are provided as
million (M) parameters.
Loss function: The overall loss function is deﬁned in Eq.
4.1.
As a dis-
tance metric between the ﬁxed and the warped image, we use normalized cross-
correlation (NCC) with a patch size of 5 (Eq. 2.4 and Eq. 2.5). In order to
penalize discontinuities on the deformation space and impose smoothness con-
strain in the displacement ﬁeld, we use the diﬀusion regularizer (Eq. 2.13).
Transfer Learning: Publicly available pre-trained models5 on the IXI dataset
for atlas-to-patient registration are used. The original dataset consists of 576
brain MRI volumes in total and it was preprocessed and released together with
pre-trained TansMorph variants and baseline models in [46]. We use the pre-
trained models for VoxelMorph-2, ViT-V-Net, and TransMorph and we denote
the application of transfer learning to a model with a ++ superscript, e.g,
TransMorph++.
Warm-up phase: The number of warm-up steps is set to 100 (the total number
of epochs is 800). During the warm-up phase, the learning rate is increased
linearly until a speciﬁed learning rate α is reached and then a learning scheduler
is used. Diﬀerent learning rate schedulers are evaluated namely a linear decay
scheduler, and a cosine-shaped learning rate decay with and without warm-up
restarts (4 cycles/restarts). When a warm-up phase is disregarded a default
polynomial decay scheduler with a decay rate of 0.9 is used as in [46].
All
learning rate schedulers are visualized in Figure 4.2.
5https://github.com/junyuchen245/TransMorph_Transformer_for_Medical_Image_
Registration/blob/main/TransMorph_on_IXI.md
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Implementation Details
47
Figure 4.2: Diﬀerent learning rate schedulers used in our experiments.
Training details: For all the conducted experiments the same training budget
of 800 training epochs is used and the batch size is set to 1. As an adaptive
optimizer, we use AdamW [58] which is a simple modiﬁcation of Adam to cor-
rectly apply weight decay regularization and we set the weight decay factor to
0.0001. Also, for all the learning schedulers the maximum learning rate is set
to α = 0.0001. During the experiments we evaluate diﬀerent values for diﬀu-
sion regularization hyper-parameter λ ∈{0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2}. Training
images are augmented with random aﬃne transformations. Finally, we save the
best model checkpoints based on the validation loss.
==PAGE:58==
48 Can Transformers capture long-range displacements better than CNNs?
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Results and Experimental
Evaluation
In this Chapter, a complete evaluation of all the models and the proposed train-
ing approach is demonstrated. First, we provide an extensive quantitative evalu-
ation of the best-performing models, along with a detailed qualitative evaluation.
Moreover, we validate all the components of the proposed training strategy by
conducting three diﬀerent experiments.
5.1
Results
In this Section, we report the results of the best-performing models. We pro-
vide both quantitative and qualitative results for a comprehensive comparison
between convolutional-based and transformer-based models.
5.1.1
Quantitative Results
All models are evaluated with and without the application of transfer learning.
When transfer learning is applied the encoder part of the networks is initial-
==PAGE:60==
50
Results and Experimental Evaluation
ized with IXI pre-trained weights and we denote this with a ++ superscript,
i.e, VoxelMorph-2++, ViT-V-Net++ and TransMorph++. Furthermore, we also
combine and evaluate transfer learning together with a warp-up training phase.
Using the validation set, the regularization parameter λ is empirically set to 0.5
for the convolutional-based and to 1 for the transformer-based models respec-
tively.
The main goal of this study is to investigate if transformer-based can capture
better long-range displacements than convolutional-based models. To this end,
we conduct the evaluation in terms of TRE and we report the results on the
test set in Table 5.1. The initial TRE on the aﬃnely aligned test set is 15.34
mm.
λ
Warm-up
Scheduler
Model
TRE ↓
|JΦ|<0(%) ↓
σ(|JΦ|)
-
-
-
Aﬃne
15.34
-
-
-
Polynomial (0.9)
VoxelMorph-2
11.74
0.61
0.133
0.5
-
Polynomial (0.9)
VoxelMorph-2++
10.58
0.45
0.120
✓
Linear
VoxelMorph-2++
11.57
0.34
0.104
-
Polynomial (0.9)
ViT-V-Net
10.80
0.16
0.090
1
-
Polynomial (0.9)
ViT-V-Net++
10.12
0.84
0.122
✓
Linear
ViT-V-Net++
10.58
0.31
0.101
-
Polynomial (0.9)
TransMorph
11.88
2.29
0.188
1
-
Polynomial (0.9)
TransMorph++
9.96
1.04
0.131
✓
Linear
TransMorph++
9.91
0.34
0.105
Table 5.1:
Evaluation metrics on the test set: TRE is measured in millimeters while the
number of folding voxels is reported as a percentage over the test set. The best-
performing models in terms of TRE are highlighted in bold.
Given that after registration image folding is anatomically impossible, we exam-
ine the topology of the acquired deformation ﬁelds by performing a quantitative
analysis of the regularity of the transformations. In particular, for every point
p = (i, j, k) in a deformation ﬁeld we evaluate the Jacobian determinant,
|JΦ(p)| = |∇Φ(p)|
(5.1)
=

∂i
∂x
∂j
∂x
∂k
∂x
∂i
∂y
∂j
∂y
∂k
∂y
∂i
∂z
∂j
∂z
∂k
∂z

(5.2)
The Jacobian captures the local properties of Φ around a voxel point p. If the
determinant of the Jacobian is 1, indicates that no volume change has occurred
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Results
51
while a Jacobian determinant greater than 1 indicates expansion.
When its
value is between 0 and 1 implies shrinkage. Singularity, i.e, a place where folding
occurs, is indicated by a Jacobian with a determinant less or equal to 0. Thus,
the domain folding is quantiﬁed by the percentage of transformation voxels
with a negative determinant of the Jacobian of the transformation ﬁeld, while
the smoothness of the transformation is measured by the standard deviation
of the Jacobian determinant. For all the implemented models we evaluate the
quality of the transformations by calculating both statistics on the test set. The
results are demonstrated in Table 5.1 together with TRE.
For the rest of both the quantitative (Section 5.1.1) and the qualitative eval-
uation (Section 5.1.2), we report the results for the best performing models
as illustrated in bold in Table 5.1. Note that, diﬀerent from VoxelMorph2++
and ViT-V-NeT++, TransMorph++ performs better when a warm-up phase is
applied during training.
(a) Diagnostic plot for test set
(b) Diagnostic plot for validation set
Figure 5.1:
TRE (y-axis) calculated across the displacement length (x-axis) do-
main:
The displacements lengths are binned into 40 (approximately) evenly-
sized by elements discrete bins.
The mean and the standard deviation for
each of the three best-performing models are plotted.
Bin-wise statistical t-
tests with Benjamini/Hochberg correction are used to highlight the signiﬁcant
bins (p-value ≤0.05) for the pair-wise model comparisons.
Signiﬁcant bins be-
tween VoxelMorph-2++ and TransMorph++ (blue stars) are illustrated on top
of TransMorph++’s curve while signiﬁcant bins between VoxelMorph-2++ and
ViT-V-Net++ (red stars) and between ViT-V-Net++ and TransMorph++ (black
squares) are shown on top of ViT-V-Net++’s curve.
Diagnostic plots to measure TRE across the displacement length domain are
==PAGE:62==
52
Results and Experimental Evaluation
illustrated in Figure 5.1 for both the test and the validation set. The displace-
ment lengths are binned into approximately evenly-sized discrete bins, with an
average size of 218 elements in each bin, in order to determine the mean and
the standard deviation for each bin. In this way, diagnostic curves are produced
for each model to inspect the TRE as the displacements length increases. To
inspect if the performance of two diﬀerent models is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, bin-
wise statistical t-tests with Benjamini/Hochberg correction are performed while
the statistically signiﬁcant bins are highlighted on top of the diagnostic plot.
It is worth noting that in both test and validation sets, there are many more
samples in the small length domain. More speciﬁcally, the test set consists of
8712 keypoints in total, with 3439 landmarks of length between 15-30 and only
616 with a length greater than 30.
In the validation set, there is a total of
8925 keypoints, with 3223 of them having a length between 15-30 and only 322
having a length greater than 30.
Intending to acquire a better intuition regarding the performance of all the
models, TRE is measured for each case separately in both the test and validation
sets. The results are shown in Table 5.2. Note that, the results are reported
not only for the best performing models but also for the baseline models trained
with randomly initialized weights. The number of keypoints available for each
test and validation case is also provided.
TRE ↓
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Test Set
Case 6
Case 7
Case 8
Case 9
Case 10
Val Set
Aﬃne
25.33
18.07
10.15
6.62
15.81
15.34
16.05
9.19
14.85
18.05
8.68
14.14
VoxelMorph-2
21.00
12.92
8.07
4.01
12.49
11.74
9.97
6.58
14.06
13.76
6.80
10.69
VoxelMorph-2++
17.83
11.33
6.85
4.25
12.10
10.58
8.45
5.90
12.49
12.38
6.65
9.51
ViT-V-Net
21.00
10.87
7.18
4.12
11.41
10.80
8.47
5.41
12.66
12.94
5.97
9.52
ViT-V-Net++
21.19
10.92
6.13
2.86
10.10
10.12
8.23
4.28
12.52
11.87
5.65
8.87
TransMoprh
22.70
13.24
7.76
3.65
12.14
11.88
11.03
6.82
13.17
15.15
6.05
11.12
TransMoprh++
20.74
10.25
6.01
3.11
10.17
9.91
7.74
4.94
11.65
11.77
5.67
8.72
Keypoints
1322
2191
1566
1393
2240
8712
2056
2013
1641
2413
829
8952
Table 5.2:
TRE in mm calculated for each case in both test and validation sets:
The test set consists of cases 1-5 while the validation set contains cases 6-10. TRE
over the test and validation set are also reported. The best TRE for each case is
highlighted in bold. The number of keypoints is provided in the last row.
5.1.2
Qualitative Results
To ensure that all methods result in a meaningful registration, we illustrate the
ﬁxed and moving images, as well as the morphed image warped by transfor-
mation produced from all the best performing models. The results are demon-
strated in Figure 5.2. The plotted 2D examples are slices retrieved from the
original 3D test images.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Results
53
In an eﬀort to evaluate the quality of the generated displacements ﬁelds, we
visualize them together with the target displacement ﬁled in Figure 5.3. More
speciﬁcally, for each test case, we produce the displacements ﬁelds and color
the vectors based on their lengths. Moreover, we compare the best-performing
transformer-based model, i.e, TransMorph++, with VoxelMorph-2++ by high-
lighting their qualitative diﬀerences in Figure 5.4. In this respect, we create a
color scale for the displacements vectors based on the diﬀerence in TRE between
the two models. Negative values are colored with purple tones and correspond
to a smaller TRE for VoxelMorph-2++ while positive values are colored with
diﬀerent tones of greens and indicate a smaller TRE for TransMorph++. In this
way, regions in the displacements ﬁelds where one of the two models performs
better can be easily identiﬁed. Regions, where the models perform similarly, i.e,
their diﬀerence in TRE, are close to 0, are colored with white tones. Note that,
in Figures 5.3 and 5.4 the scaling for each test case is diﬀerent.
Figure 5.2:
Qualitative comparison of the best performing models: The moving im-
age M (1st column) is registered to the ﬁxed image F (2nd column). The mor-
phed images M ◦Φ obtained from models VoxelMorph-2++, Vit-T-Net++ and
TransMorph++ are shown in columns 3-5. The provided image slices are retrieved
from test cases 3 and 4. The ﬁrst 4 rows are slices 70, 80, 120, and 130 of test case
4 while the following rows are the same slices for test case 3.
==PAGE:64==
54
Results and Experimental Evaluation
(a) Target
(b) VoxelMorph-2++
(c) ViT-V-Net++
(d) TransMorph++
Figure 5.3:
Qualitative comparison of displacement ﬁelds: The displacements ﬁelds u of
the best-performing models are illustrated. The target displacement ﬁeld for each
test case is illustrated in the 1st column. The test cases are presented in descending
order, starting from case 5 (1s row). The displacement vectors are colored based
on their lengths.
(a) Case 5
(b) Case 4
(c) Case 3
(d) Case 2
(e) Case 1
Figure 5.4:
Qualitative comparison of displacements ﬁeld between TransMorph++ and
VoxelMorph-2++: The displacement vectors are colored based on the diﬀerence in
TRE between the two models. The greener the vector the better in performance
TransMorph++ is while as a vector gets more purple the better VoxelMorph-2++
is. White tones imply that there is no diﬀerence in TRE.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Experiments
55
5.2
Experiments
In this Section, we conduct three diﬀerent experiments with a focus on evaluat-
ing the components of our training strategy. More speciﬁcally, we inspect the
smoothness of the deformation ﬁelds for all the baseline models trained with
randomly initialized weights and we further examine if transfer learning can
be beneﬁcial in the context of unsupervised learning-based image registration.
Also, we test the eﬀect of a warm-up phase during training by using diﬀerent
learning rate schedulers both for the baseline and pre-trained models.
5.2.1
Smoothness of deformation ﬁelds
λ
Model
TRE ↓
|JΦ|<0(%) ↓
σ(|JΦ|)
L
D
R
0.1
VoxelMorph-2
13.38
6.68
0.642
-0.183
-0.195
0.120
0.25
VoxelMorph-2
11.94
1.85
0.230
-0.163
-0.176
0.049
VoxelMorph-2
11.74
0.61
0.133
-0.152
-0.167
0.029
VoxelMorph-L
10.46
0.37
0.110
-0.141
-0.155
0.027
0.5
ViT-V-Net
10.98
2.16
0.216
-0.171
-0.195
0.049
TransMorph-S
12.98
5.90
0.457
-0.179
-0.220
0.083
TransMorph
13.28
7.09
0.593
-0.207
-0.255
0.097
VoxelMorph-2
11.66
0.26
0.093
-0.145
-0.160
0.021
VoxelMorph-L
10.57
0.19
0.080
-0.139
-0.154
0.020
0.75
ViT-V-Net
10.86
0.37
0.115
-0.155
-0.175
0.027
TransMorph-S
12.10
1.62
0.169
-0.146
-0.174
0.037
TransMorph
12.20
3.84
0.297
-0.175
-0.218
0.057
VoxelMorph-2
11.82
0.17
0.080
-0.140
-0.158
0.018
VoxelMorph-L
10.58
0.08
0.069
-0.136
-0.153
0.017
1
ViT-V-Net
10.80
0.16
0.090
-0.149
-0.170
0.021
TransMorph-S
11.66
0.47
0.103
-0.133
-0.157
0.024
TransMorph
11.88
2.29
0.188
-0.161
-0.200
0.039
VoxelMorph-2
11.68
0.06
0.060
-0.135
-0.155
0.013
VoxelMorph-L
11.15
0.01
0.045
-0.129
-0.145
0.010
1.5
ViT-V-Net
11.35
0.04
0.067
-0.141
-0.164
0.016
TransMorph-S
11.95
0.11
0.073
-0.124
-0.149
0.017
TransMorph
11.36
0.61
0.100
-0.137
-0.172
0.023
VoxelMorph-2
11.66
0.02
0.047
-0.130
-0.152
0.010
VoxelMorph-L
11.40
<0.01
0.038
-0.125
-0.143
0.009
2
ViT-V-Net
11.64
<0.01
0.047
-0.130
-0.151
0.011
TransMorph-S
12.41
0.02
0.057
-0.114
-0.140
0.013
TransMorph
11.92
0.06
0.068
-0.130
-0.162
0.016
Table 5.3:
Model hyper-parameter selection: Evaluation metrics calculated on the test
set. We tune each model independently using the validation set. The results are
grouped by the values of λ.
The dashed lines separate convolutional-based and
transformer-based models. For each value of λ the models with the lowest TRE are
highlighted (gray for convolutional-based and bold for transformer-based).
==PAGE:66==
56
Results and Experimental Evaluation
In this experiment, we aim to select the hyper-parameter λ for all the baseline
models to ensure objective evaluation.
Knowing that the strength of regu-
larization has a signiﬁcant impact on the characteristics of deformable image
registration methods, we tune the regularization hyper-parameter using the val-
idation set by trying diﬀerent values of λ ∈{0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2}. Note
that, all the models are initialized with random weights. For this experiment,
a larger variant of VoxelMorph and a smaller version of TransMorph, as de-
scribed in Section 3.3, are also used. The larger VoxelMorph variant, denoted
as VoxelMorph-L, uses also 5-stages, it is implemented with 32, 64, 128, 256,
256 channels and 2 extra layers of 16 channels at the output resolution, and
has 10.97 million parameters. In both VoxelMorph-2 and VoxelMorph-L, the
bottleneck layer applies convolutions over a volume (1/16)3 the size of the input
images. The smaller version of TransMorph is denoted as TransMorph-S and
has 11.27 million parameters.
Apart from the evaluation metrics, the total loss L, distance measure D and
regularization term R are also evaluated on the test set, and reported in Table
5.3. The results are grouped by the diﬀerent trials of λ and we highlight the
baseline models with the lowest TRE. The baseline convolutional-based models
are highlighted in gray while the baseline transformer-based models are in bold.
5.2.2
The eﬀect of transfer learning
λ
Model
TRE ↓
|JΦ|<0(%) ↓
σ(|JΦ|)
L
D
R
0.1
VoxelMorph-2++
10.68
3.06
0.375
-0.170
-0.178
0.079
0.25
VoxelMorph-2++
10.83
1.02
0.182
-0.158
-0.168
0.040
VoxelMorph-2++
10.58
0.45
0.120
-0.149
-0.162
0.027
0.5
ViT-V-Net++
10.30
4.58
0.366
-0.201
-0.237
0.073
TransMorph++
10.00
5.49
0.468
-0.200
-0.241
0.081
VoxelMorph-2++
11.05
0.20
0.090
-0.148
-0.163
0.020
0.75
ViT-V-Net++
10.41
1.70
0.187
-0.176
-0.208
0.042
TransMorph++
10.55
2.60
0.220
-0.169
-0.204
0.047
VoxelMorph-2++
11.25
0.13
0.074
-0.141
-0.158
0.017
1
ViT-V-Net++
10.12
0.84
0.122
-0.171
-0.199
0.028
TransMorph++
9.96
1.04
0.131
-0.160
-0.192
0.031
VoxelMorph-2++
11.39
0.03
0.052
-0.135
-0.153
0.012
1.5
ViT-V-Net++
10.50
0.08
0.075
-0.156
-0.182
0.017
TransMorph++
10.49
0.16
0.080
-0.150
-0.180
0.020
VoxelMorph-2++
11.97
0.02
0.047
-0.132
-0.154
0.011
2
ViT-V-Net++
10.45
0.03
0.056
-0.151
-0.177
0.013
TransMorph++
10.31
0.03
0.061
-0.144
-0.173
0.015
Table 5.4:
Hyper-parameter tuning for models initialized with IXI pre-trained en-
coder weights:
Evaluation metrics calculated on the test set.
The results are
grouped by diﬀerent values of λ.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Experiments
57
Given that the used dataset has a limited size and the fact that there is no induc-
tive bias in vision transformers, we suspect that transfer learning can boost the
performance of transformers. Thus, in this experiment, our goal is to examine if
transfer learning is beneﬁcial for transformers and in general for learning-based
registration models trained in very small datasets. We use the available IXI
pre-trained weights [46] for VoxelMorph-2, ViT-V-Net, and TransMorph to ini-
tialize the weights of the encoder part of the models. We denote the application
of transfer learning with a superscript ++. As in the previous experimental
setup, we tune the regularizer strength hyper-parameter for each model and we
report the results in Table 5.4. The results are grouped by the diﬀerent values
of λ and the model with the lowest TRE for each λ is demonstrated in bold.
We further investigate the eﬀect of transfer learning for each model separately
by plotting all the evaluation metrics (Figure 5.5) and the losses (Figure 5.6) for
the hyper-parameter selection both with and without the application of transfer
learning. Note that, all measures are evaluated on the test set. We select λ for
each model scoring the lowest TRE for the next experiment.
(a) TRE
(b) Transformation folding
(c) Transformation smoothness
Figure 5.5:
Eﬀect of transfer learning: Evaluation metrics on the test set for trialing values
of regularization hyper-parameter λ. All models are trained and evaluated with
both randomly initialized (dashed lines) and IXI pre-trained encoder weights.
==PAGE:68==
58
Results and Experimental Evaluation
(a) Total Loss
(b) Distance Metric
(c) Regularizer
Figure 5.6:
Eﬀect of transfer learning: Losses measured on test set for trialing values of
regularization hyper-parameter λ. All models are trained and evaluated with both
randomly initialized (dashed lines) and IXI pre-trained encoder weights.
5.2.3
The eﬀect of warm-up phase
Learning rate warm-up is considered as a standard training strategy for both
training from scratch and ﬁne-tuning pre-trained transformers due to its sim-
plicity and eﬀectiveness. Intuitively, by gradually increasing the learning rate
from 0 until a predeﬁned learning rate α, we allow the transformer to adapt to
the data by slowing tuning the attention layers.
In this experiment, we examine the eﬀectiveness of the warm-up phase during
training not only for transformer-based but also for convolutional-based mod-
els. Furthermore, we evaluate three diﬀerent learning rate schedulers, namely a
linear decay scheduler, a cosine-shaped learning rate decay, and a cosine-shaped
with 4 warm-up restarts/cycles, denoted as Cosine-R. For all models, we use 100
warm-up steps with a training budget of 800 epochs in total. The maximum
learning rate α is set to 0.0001. During training, we use the best-performing
regularization hyper-parameters from the previous experiment, i.e, λ = 0.5 for
VoxelMorph-2++ and λ = 1 for ViT-V-Net++ and TransMorph++. We report
the results for the models initialized with pre-trained IXI encoder weights in
Table 5.5. The evaluation metrics are calculated on the test set and they are
grouped by the three diﬀerent learning rate schedulers used after the warm-up
phase. We highlight in bold the models with the lowest TRE for each scheduler.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Experiments
59
Scheduler
Model
TRE ↓
|JΦ|<0(%) ↓
σ(|JΦ|)
L
D
R
VoxelMorph-2++
11.57
0.34
0.104
-0.149
-0.161
0.024
Linear
ViT-V-Net++
10.58
0.31
0.101
-0.159
-0.182
0.023
TransMorph++
9.91
0.34
0.105
-0.152
-0.177
0.026
VoxelMorph-2++
11.56
0.34
0.106
-0.150
-0.162
0.024
Cosine
ViT-V-Net++
10.67
0.20
0.099
-0.160
-0.183
0.023
TransMorph++
9.91
0.41
0.109
-0.151
-0.178
0.027
VoxelMorph-2++
11.62
0.33
0.105
-0.149
-0.161
0.024
Cosine-R
ViT-V-Net++
10.54
0.30
0.101
-0.161
-0.184
0.023
TransMorph++
10.16
0.41
0.111
-0.154
-0.180
0.026
Table 5.5: Warm-up training phase: Evaluation metrics calculated on the test. The results
are grouped by the diﬀerent learning rate schedulers used after the warm-up steps.
For each of the schedulers, the model with the lowest TRE is highlighted in bold.
For the purpose of validating each component of the proposed training strategy,
we also evaluate the application of a warm-up phase for the baseline models
which are initialized with random weights. For fair comparison we set the same
regularization hyper-parameters during training, i.e, λ = 0.5 for VoxelMorph-2
and λ = 1 for ViT-V-Net and TransMorph. The results are demonstrated in
Table 5.6.
Scheduler
Model
TRE ↓
|JΦ|<0(%) ↓
σ(|JΦ|)
L
D
R
VoxelMorph-2
12.08
0.46
0.108
-0.146
-0.158
0.024
Linear
ViT-V-Net
11.43
0.08
0.076
-0.140
-0.158
0.018
TransMorph
11.11
0.54
0.113
-0.138
-0.165
0.027
VoxelMorph-2
12.19
0.46
0.110
-0.144
-0.157
0.025
Cosine
ViT-V-Net
11.54
0.06
0.072
-0.137
-0.154
0.017
TransMorph
11.53
0.43
0.110
-0.139
-0.165
0.026
VoxelMorph-2
12.36
0.47
0.111
-0.144
-0.156
0.025
Cosine-R
ViT-V-Net
11.75
0.07
0.071
-0.137
-0.154
0.016
TransMorph
11.40
0.53
0.117
-0.142
-0.169
0.027
Table 5.6: Warm-up training phase for baseline models initialized randomly: Evalua-
tion metrics calculated on the test. The results are grouped by the diﬀerent learning
rate schedulers used after the warm-up steps. For each of the schedulers, the model
with the lowest TRE is highlighted in bold.
Furthermore, we compare the evaluating metrics for the models trained with
and without a warm-up phase. Note that when a warm-up phase is not used,
a polynomial decay scheduler with a decay rate of 0.9 and an initial learning
rate α = 0.0001 is applied as in [46]. We highlight the eﬀect of the warm-up
phase and of each scheduler for all the models separately in Figure 5.7. More
speciﬁcally, we compare all the training strategies and learning rate schedulers
in terms of TRE, transformation folding, and transformation smoothness. For
visibility purposes and easy comparisons, we plot thresholds on top of the plots
using the evaluation metrics of our best performing model, i.e, TransMorph++
==PAGE:70==
60
Results and Experimental Evaluation
trained using a warm-up phase with a linear decay scheduler.
(a) TRE
(b) Transformation folding (c) Transformation
smooth-
ness
Figure 5.7: Eﬀect of warm-up training phase: Evaluation metrics for all the training strate-
gies. The models are compared individually in order to better highlight the dif-
ferences. The comparisons are made for all models trained with and without the
application of transfer learning. TRE is presented in the 1st column, the percent-
age of the folding voxels is illustrated in the 2nd column and the standard deviation
of the Jacobian determinant is shown in the last column. For all the models we
use the same ordering of schedulers/training strategies (x-axis) and the same scal-
ing on the y-axis.
The thresholds (vertical dashed lines) are used for visibility
purposes and represent the evaluation metrics of the best-performing model. The
best-performing model is TransMorph++ trained using a warm-up phase with a
linear decay scheduler (TRE = 9.91, |JΦ|<0 = 0.34%, σ(|JΦ|) = 0.105)
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Discussion
Vision transformers have proved their capacity to capture global relationships
within images. Very recently, transformer-based models have been successfully
applied in unsupervised medical image registration by using the hypotheses
that transformers can perform better than CNNs on long range displacements
[26, 46]. Despite the evidence that transformers can have a global perspective of
the images [46], there is no comprehensive validation of the key premise. In this
study, we aim to answer the question: Can transformers capture long-range dis-
placements better than CNNs? To this end, we compared convolutional-based
with transformer-based models using diﬀerent training strategies. In addition to
evaluating registration error by displacement length, the ﬁndings of our experi-
ments provide insights on how to train eﬀectively vision transformers on small
datasets for deformable image registration.
We conducted the evaluation in terms of TRE since our goal is test to the ability
of the models to capture long-range displacements. Because deformable trans-
formations are over-parametrized, we limited the solution space for attaining a
good pixel-matching by using a regularization term. Given that the strength of
the regularization hyper-parameter has a signiﬁcant impact on the characteris-
tics of the transformations, we tuned λ for each model using the validation set.
In all the experiments, we further assessed the smoothness and the irregularity
of the transformations, as in medical imaging, anatomy should evolve smoothly,
while image folding is physically impossible.
==PAGE:72==
62
Discussion
An extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluation of the best-performing
models (Table 5.1) is provided in Section 5.1. While all models produced rea-
sonable smooth transformations, TranMorph++ yielded the lowest TRE. With
a focus on evaluating the models across the displacement length domain, di-
agnostic plots were provided for both the test and validation sets in Figure
5.1. It is evident that even if TranMorph++ and ViT-V-Net++ perform signiﬁ-
cantly better than VoxeMorph++ in the small to medium length domain, there
is no such diﬀerence as the length of the displacement increases to larger values.
Interestingly, ViT-V-Net++ resulted in signiﬁcantly worse performance than
VoxeMorph++ for the displacements with length more than 30 mm in the test
set, while TranMorph++ also performed worse on very large displacements. It is
worth noting that the regions where transformers were signiﬁcantly worse than
the convolution-based model represent only 8.44% and 3.44% of the total num-
ber of displacements vectors in the test set, for ViT-V-Net++ and TranMorph++
respectively. The initial TRE calculated for the aﬃnely aligned train cases 11-
20 (15232 available keypoints in total), is 11.50 mm. Thus, from Table 5.2,
case 1 could be considered as an outlier with regards not only to validation and
tests but also to the train set. The fact that transformers performed worse than
VoxeMorph++ only for the case slightly outside of the training domain could be
an indication that they are more prone to overﬁtting. This can be also inspected
visually in Figures 5.4 and 5.3 where the vast majority of the outliers can be
spotted in regions where TranMorph++ is worse than VoxeMorph++. Overall
transformers performed better than CNNs in our experiments. Yet, we observed
that the performance diﬀerence stems from transformers registering small dis-
placements with higher accuracy. Contrary to previous beliefs, we found no
support for the hypothesis that transformers register long displacements better
than CNNs.
In the ﬁrst experiment (Section 5.2.1), we studied the eﬀect of regularization on
the deformation ﬁelds. The overall goal was to evaluate and compare the quality
of the transformations of the baseline models trained with randomly initialized
weights. In Table 5.3, we list the performance of the models in terms of TRE
for varying values of λ, together with the percentage of voxels with negative
Jacobian determinants, and the standard deviation of the Jacobian determinant.
Moreover, the values of the losses (L, D, R) evaluated on the test set are also
provided. Looking at Table 5.3 it is clear that all transformers require stronger
regularization than convolutional-based models. For λ = 0.5, both VoxelMorph-
2 and VoxelMorph-L already gives reasonably smooth transformations, while for
all transformers, |JΦ|<0 is much higher. By setting λ = 0.75 for ViT-V-Net, the
quality of the transformations can be on the same level as for VoxelMorph-L
trained with λ = 0.5. TransMorph variants require even stronger regularization.
In particular, to get a σ(|JΦ|) ≈0.100, we need to set λ = 1 and λ = 1.5 for
TransMorph-S and TransMroph respectively. This can be also inspected not
only by the smoothness of the transformations but also by the values of the
==PAGE:73==
63
regularization loss term R. It is noticeable that small values of distance measure
D only implies for good matching of the intensity values. The performance of
VoxelMorph-L is comparable with ViT-V-Net, while VoxelMorph-2 and both
TranMorph variants seem to lack in performance. Overall, it is evidence that
for all the models, tuning the hyper-parameter λ, the resultant deformation ﬁeld
balances topology preservation with plausible values of TRE. We chose optimal
values of lambda for all models for the other experiments.
In the second experiment (Section 5.2.2), knowing that vision transformers of-
ten require pre-training in big datasets and then ﬁne-tuning to smaller speciﬁc
tasks, we examined the use of transfer learning. It is worth noting that Voxel-
Morph’s ability to handle small datasets has been proven [2] while similar ex-
periments have not been conducted yet for ViT-V-Net and TransMroph. Since
the used dataset is small, we leveraged the available IXI pre-trained weights
[46] for VoxelMorph-2, ViT-V-Net, TranMorph in order to initialize the encoder
part of the networks. Unfortunately, the are no pre-trained weights available
for VoxelMorph-L and TransMorph-S. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst to evaluate the application of transfer learning in the context of unsuper-
vised deformable image registration. We chose to initialize only the encoder
since the decoder can be considered task-speciﬁc. Looking at Table 5.4, clearly,
the quality of the transformations varies smoothly when trialing diﬀerent values
of λ, while as in the previous experiment transformers seem to need a stronger
regularization. In general, transfer learning proved beneﬁcial for all the models.
In Figure 5.5 it is clear that TransMorph made the most from transfer learning
in terms of TRE. This is expected since the encoder of the network consists
entirely of Swin transformer blocks which lack the inductive bias of convolu-
tions. While ViT-V-Net also gained from transfer learning, the gap between
ViT-V-Net and ViT-V-Net++ is smaller. This could be explained by the fact
that the vision transformer is only used at the bottom of the U-net, i.e, at the
hidden representations, which are down-sampled by a factor of four, potentially
limiting the transformer’s contribution. Moreover, transfer learning proved ben-
eﬁcial not only for transformer-based models but also for VoxelMorph-2. The
performance of VoxelMorph-2++ is comparable with the one of VoxelMorph-L
which indicates that transfer learning could be useful for convolutional-based
models when working with small datasets and limited hardware. Finally, se-
lecting the hyper-parameter (Figure 5.5) for all models which gave the lowest
TRE and reasonable smooth transformations, allowed us to ensure an objective
evaluation.
In the third experiment (Section 5.2.3), we evaluated the eﬀect of the warm-up
training phase on the best performing models, with three diﬀerent schedulers
(Table 5.5). Additionally, we further assessed its eﬀect on the baseline models
(Table 5.6) to validate each component of the training strategy. The results
are highlighted in Figure 5.7. For the baseline TransMorph, the application of a
==PAGE:74==
64
Discussion
warm-up phase resulted in much smoother transformations for all the schedulers,
with near-identical TRE. Applying only transfer learning without a warm-up
phase also led to smoother transformations, while combining both techniques
yielded even lower TRE. In particular, for TranMorph++, linear and cosine
scheduler gave the lowest TRE but the former resulted in smoother transfor-
mations. Interestingly, diﬀerent from TransMorph, when transfer learning was
applied to ViT-V-Net, the transformations were less smooth. This can be also
observed for varying values of λ in Figure 5.5 from the previous experiment.
Both for Vit-V-Net++ and ViT-V-Net, the warm-up phase over-smoothed the
transformations while it also hurt the performance of the models in terms of
TRE. Again, the reason could be that the transformer exists only in the bot-
tleneck of the network. As expected, for VoxelMorph and VoxelMorph++, the
warm-up phase harmed the performance since it just consumed epochs from the
training budget.
It is worth noting that in this study there was no intention to achieve state-of-
the-art results on the used dataset. Our goal was to compare CNNs and trans-
formers on registering long-range displacements. According to [59], traditional
registration optimization-based approaches can still achieve higher accuracy on
inhale/exhale lung CT than learning-based systems. The specialized learning-
based approach PDD-Net [59, 60] which uses a discrete displacement layer and
a contrast-invariant metric (MIND descriptors) and the discrete optimization
method Deeds [61, 62] were the two best-performing methods in Learn2Reg
2020 (Task 2) Lung CT Challenge 1. Very recently, GraphRegNet [63] has been
proposed, achieving state-of-the-art results on registering long-range displace-
ments from lung CT images.
1https://learn2reg.grand-challenge.org/Learn2Reg2020/
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Finally, to answer the main question posed in the title of Chapter 4: contrary
to previous assumptions [46], we found no evidence to support the claim that
transformers register long displacements better than CNNs. In our experiments,
transformers outperformed CNNs but the performance gain came from better
registering small range displacements.
Moreover, to compare convolutional-
based with transformed-based models by displacement length, we provided fur-
ther insights on how to train eﬀectively vision transformers on small datasets for
deformable image registration. More speciﬁcally, transfer learning proved ben-
eﬁcial not only for transformers but also for CNNs. This can be very useful in
practice when working with limited hardware and datasets. As expected, Trans-
Morph beneﬁted the most from transfer learning since its encoder is completely
composed of transformer layers. Through experimental evaluation, it was shown
that TransMorph can outperform CNNs and hybrid models like ViT-V-Net on
a small dataset, but apart from transfer learning, it requires a warm-up training
phase to improve the quality and smoothness of transformations.
==PAGE:76==
66
Conclusion
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1] L. G. Brown, “A survey of image registration techniques,” ACM computing
surveys (CSUR), vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 325–376, 1992.
[2] G. Balakrishnan, A. Zhao, M. R. Sabuncu, J. Guttag, and A. V. Dalca,
“Voxelmorph: a learning framework for deformable medical image registra-
tion,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 1788–1800,
2019.
[3] Merriam-Webster, “Image space. merriam-webster.com medical dictionary,”
https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/image%20space/, 2021.
[4] K. A. J. Eppenhof, “Supervised deformable image registration using deep
neural networks,” Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, 2020.
[5] A. V. Dalca, “Unsupervised learning-based registration,” learn2reg: https:
// github. com/ learn2reg/ tutorials2019/ , 2019.
[6] P. J. Besl and N. D. McKay, “Method for registration of 3-d shapes,” in
Sensor fusion IV: control paradigms and data structures, vol. 1611, pp. 586–
606, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 1992.
[7] A. Myronenko and X. Song, “Point set registration: Coherent point drift,”
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 32,
no. 12, pp. 2262–2275, 2010.
[8] H. Qiu, C. Qin, A. Schuh, K. Hammernik, and D. Rueckert, “Learning dif-
feomorphic and modality-invariant registration using b-splines,” in Medical
Imaging with Deep Learning, 2021.
==PAGE:78==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] B. D. de Vos, F. F. Berendsen, M. A. Viergever, H. Sokooti, M. Staring,
and I. Išgum, “A deep learning framework for unsupervised aﬃne and de-
formable image registration,” Medical image analysis, vol. 52, pp. 128–143,
2019.
[10] B. B. Avants, C. L. Epstein, M. Grossman, and J. C. Gee, “Symmetric dif-
feomorphic image registration with cross-correlation: evaluating automated
labeling of elderly and neurodegenerative brain,” Medical image analysis,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 26–41, 2008.
[11] S. Czolbe, O. Krause, and A. Feragen, “Semantic similarity metrics for
learned image registration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10051, 2021.
[12] N. Paragios, “Introduction to deformable registration,” MISS 2014: https:
// iplab. dmi. unict. it/ miss14/ Lectures/ Paragios. pdf , 2019.
[13] C. H. Sudre, W. Li, T. Vercauteren, S. Ourselin, and M. J. Cardoso, “Gen-
eralised dice overlap as a deep learning loss function for highly unbalanced
segmentations,” in Deep learning in medical image analysis and multimodal
learning for clinical decision support, pp. 240–248, Springer, 2017.
[14] Y. Fu, Y. Lei, T. Wang, W. J. Curran, T. Liu, and X. Yang, “Deep learning
in medical image registration: a review,” Physics in Medicine & Biology,
vol. 65, no. 20, p. 20TR01, 2020.
[15] H. R. Boveiri, R. Khayami, R. Javidan, and A. Mehdizadeh, “Medical image
registration using deep neural networks: A comprehensive review,” Com-
puters & Electrical Engineering, vol. 87, p. 106767, 2020.
[16] Y. Hu, E. Gibson, D. C. Barratt, M. Emberton, J. A. Noble, and T. Ver-
cauteren, “Conditional segmentation in lieu of image registration,” in Inter-
national Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention, pp. 401–409, Springer, 2019.
[17] M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, et al., “Spatial transformer
networks,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 28,
pp. 2017–2025, 2015.
[18] B. D. de Vos, F. F. Berendsen, M. A. Viergever, M. Staring, and I. Išgum,
“End-to-end unsupervised deformable image registration with a convolu-
tional neural network,” in Deep learning in medical image analysis and
multimodal learning for clinical decision support, pp. 204–212, Springer,
2017.
[19] H. Li and Y. Fan, “Non-rigid image registration using fully convolutional
networks with deep self-supervision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00799,
2017.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[20] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net:
Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Conference on
Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention, pp. 234–241,
Springer, 2015.
[21] N. Carion,
F. Massa,
G. Synnaeve,
N. Usunier,
A. Kirillov,
and
S. Zagoruyko, “End-to-end object detection with transformers,” in Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 213–229, Springer, 2020.
[22] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in
neural information processing systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
[23] A. Ramesh, M. Pavlov, G. Goh, S. Gray, C. Voss, A. Radford, M. Chen,
and I. Sutskever, “Zero-shot text-to-image generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.12092, 2021.
[24] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Un-
terthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, et al., “An image
is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[25] J. Chen, Y. Lu, Q. Yu, X. Luo, E. Adeli, Y. Wang, L. Lu, A. L. Yuille,
and Y. Zhou, “Transunet: Transformers make strong encoders for medical
image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04306, 2021.
[26] J. Chen, Y. He, E. C. Frey, Y. Li, and Y. Du, “Vit-v-net: Vision transformer
for unsupervised volumetric medical image registration,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.06468, 2021.
[27] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473,
2014.
[28] J. Cheng, L. Dong, and M. Lapata, “Long short-term memory-networks for
machine reading,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06733, 2016.
[29] S. Wang, “Lecture 10, transformer model,” CS583: Deep Learning, 2020.
[30] J.
Alammar,
“The
illustrated
transformer.”
https://github.
com/jalammar/jalammar.github.io/blob/master/notebookes/
transformer/transformer_positional_encoding_graph.ipynb, 2020.
[31] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016.
==PAGE:80==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
[33] I. Tenney, D. Das, and E. Pavlick, “Bert rediscovers the classical nlp
pipeline,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05950, 2019.
[34] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever, “Improving
language understanding by generative pre-training,” OpenAI, 2018.
[35] N. Adaloglou and S. Karagiannakos, “How attention works in deep
learning:
understanding the attention mechanism in sequence models,”
https://theaisummer.com/, 2020.
[36] N. Parmar, A. Vaswani, J. Uszkoreit, L. Kaiser, N. Shazeer, A. Ku, and
D. Tran, “Image transformer,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 4055–4064, PMLR, 2018.
[37] H. Hu, Z. Zhang, Z. Xie, and S. Lin, “Local relation networks for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pp. 3464–3473, 2019.
[38] P. Ramachandran, N. Parmar, A. Vaswani, I. Bello, A. Levskaya, and
J. Shlens, “Stand-alone self-attention in vision models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.05909, 2019.
[39] H. Wang, Y. Zhu, B. Green, H. Adam, A. Yuille, and L.-C. Chen, “Axial-
deeplab: Stand-alone axial-attention for panoptic segmentation,” in Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 108–126, Springer, 2020.
[40] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “Gaussian error linear units (gelus),” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
[41] K. Han, Y. Wang, H. Chen, X. Chen, J. Guo, Z. Liu, Y. Tang, A. Xiao,
C. Xu, Y. Xu, et al., “A survey on visual transformer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.12556, 2020.
[42] S. Khan, M. Naseer, M. Hayat, S. W. Zamir, F. S. Khan, and M. Shah,
“Transformers in vision: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.01169, 2021.
[43] M. Caron, H. Touvron, I. Misra, H. Jégou, J. Mairal, P. Bojanowski, and
A. Joulin, “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14294, 2021.
[44] H. Touvron, M. Cord, M. Douze, F. Massa, A. Sablayrolles, and H. Jégou,
“Training data-eﬃcient image transformers & distillation through atten-
tion,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10347–10357,
PMLR, 2021.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[45] Z. Wang and H. Delingette, “Attention for image registration (air): an un-
supervised transformer approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02282, 2021.
[46] J. Chen, Y. Du, Y. He, W. P. Segars, Y. Li, and E. C. Frey, “Transmorph:
Transformer for unsupervised medical image registration,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.10480, 2021.
[47] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and B. Guo, “Swin
transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.14030, 2021.
[48] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “Imagenet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in 2009 IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 248–255, Ieee, 2009.
[49] M. Raghu,
C. Zhang,
J. Kleinberg,
and S. Bengio,
“Transfusion:
Understanding transfer learning for medical imaging,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.07208, 2019.
[50] J. Wacker, M. Ladeira, and J. E. V. Nascimento, “Transfer learning for
brain tumor segmentation,” in International MICCAI Brainlesion Work-
shop, pp. 241–251, Springer, 2020.
[51] S. Chen, K. Ma, and Y. Zheng, “Med3d: Transfer learning for 3d medical
image analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00625, 2019.
[52] C. Matsoukas, J. F. Haslum, M. Söderberg, and K. Smith, “Is it time
to replace cnns with transformers for medical images?,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.09038, 2021.
[53] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[54] L. Liu, H. Jiang, P. He, W. Chen, X. Liu, J. Gao, and J. Han, “On
the variance of the adaptive learning rate and beyond,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.03265, 2019.
[55] R. Xiong, Y. Yang, D. He, K. Zheng, S. Zheng, C. Xing, H. Zhang, Y. Lan,
L. Wang, and T. Liu, “On layer normalization in the transformer architec-
ture,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10524–10533,
PMLR, 2020.
[56] A. Hering, K. Murphy, and B. van Ginneken, “Learn2Reg Challenge: CT
Lung Registration - Training Data,” Zenodo, May 2020.
[57] A. Hering, K. Murphy, and B. van Ginneken, “Learn2Reg Challenge: CT
Lung Registration - Test Data,” Zenodo, Sept. 2020.
==PAGE:82==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[58] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[59] M. P. Heinrich and L. Hansen, “Highly accurate and memory eﬃcient
unsupervised learning-based discrete ct registration using 2.5 d displace-
ment search,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 190–200, Springer, 2020.
[60] M. P. Heinrich, M. Jenkinson, M. Bhushan, T. Matin, F. V. Gleeson,
M. Brady, and J. A. Schnabel, “Mind: Modality independent neighbour-
hood descriptor for multi-modal deformable registration,” Medical image
analysis, vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1423–1435, 2012.
[61] M. P. Heinrich, M. Jenkinson, M. Brady, and J. A. Schnabel, “Mrf-based
deformable registration and ventilation estimation of lung ct,” IEEE trans-
actions on medical imaging, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1239–1248, 2013.
[62] M. P. Heinrich, O. Maier, and H. Handels, “Multi-modal multi-atlas seg-
mentation using discrete optimisation and self-similarities.,” VISCERAL
Challenge@ ISBI, vol. 1390, p. 27, 2015.
[63] L. Hansen and M. P. Heinrich, “Graphregnet: Deep graph regularisation
networks on sparse keypoints for dense registration of 3d lung cts,” IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2246–2257, 2021.
