==PAGE:1==
Cognitive behavior for robots
Chengyandan Shen (s192117)
Master of Science in Engineering
2021
==PAGE:2==
Cognitive behavior for robots
Report written by:
Chengyandan Shen (s192117)
Advisor(s):
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
28 September- 11 April 2022
ECTS:
35
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Me Myself, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Robots with cognitive behaviors are an emerging field of research. Cognitive capabil-
ities enable robots to complete tasks automatically under different environments and
situations. However, in order to realize the cognitive behavior of the robot, too much
information must be specified in advance. A robotic cognitive system can only respond
to limited situations and purposes. Therefore, the objective of this project is to de-
sign and implement a scalable cognitive architecture to realize general cognitive abilities
for robots.
The project proposes a cognitive architecture driven by situation aware-
ness and decision-making. There are three levels of situation awareness: perception,
comprehension, and projection. Decision-making is realized through the Multi-Criteria
Decision-Making(MCDM) method. Both situation awareness and decision-making are
modular and can be easily extended in our cognitive architecture.
A scenario of an autonomous mobile robot (AMR) designed to pick up garbage on a
highway was customized to develop and test the cognitive architecture. The whole sys-
tem is implemented and simulated in software platforms ROS and Gazebo. According
to the test results, the proposed objective was achieved.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Analysis
3
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Cognitive Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Customized environment and problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Simulation environment and framework
7
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
ROS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Simulation environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Situation generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Situation Awareness
11
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
SA model construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.5
Module test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Decision Making
19
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
Decision-making model construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5
Module test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
6
Cognitive architecture
31
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Final cognitive architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
System test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Future work
39
8
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Developing cognitive behaviors for autonomous robots is an emerging research area. Cog-
nitive behaviors are able to assess the current situation in the environment, to react to
changes in the environment, to deliberately select actions in order to pursue goals, to
plan future actions, to predict future states, and to adapt to regularities in the environ-
ment [Lai+12]. Robots with cognitive behavior can be created for different purposes
such as assisting in laboratory, healthcare or search and rescue in dangerous scenarios.
However, too much information must be specified beforehand for current robot cognitive
system, and, programming one task at a time is not likely to lead to a robot with gen-
eral capabilities. Thus, one robot cognitive system can only react to limited situations
and purpose. Therefore, the main purpose of our project is to design and implement a
general and scalable cognitive architecture for robots.
This project proposes a scalable cognitive architecture consisting of two main compo-
nents: situational awareness and decision-making. Robots implemented using our cogni-
tive architecture need to be able to perceive their surroundings, understand the current
situation, and make decisions to achieve their goals. A scenario of an autonomous mo-
bile robot (AMR) designed to pick up garbage on a highway is customized as the base
environment for developing and testing our cognitive architecture. The entire project
will be developed and simulated in software platforms ROS(Robot Operating System )
and Gazebo.
1.1
Objectives
The objectives of this project are as following:
• To design a scalable cognitive architecture that leads to general cognitive
capabilities for robots.
• To design a situation awareness model that enables the robots to perceive
and understand its surrounding environment.
• To design a decision-making model that enables the robots to make the best
selections from alternatives.
• To implement the cognitive architecture based on situation awareness model
and decision-making model.
• To design a simulation environment that is able to test the cognitive archi-
tecture.
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
• To test the feasibility and scalability of our cognitive architecture.
1.2
Thesis outline
In this section, an overview of each chapter in the thesis is presented.
Chapter 2: Give a brief introduction to the project.
Chapter 3: Analyze the problem raised in chapter 1, and propose general cognitive
architecture as potential solution.
Chapter 4: Develop situation awareness model.
Chapter 5: Develop decision-making model.
Chapter 6: Determine and test the final cognitive architecture based on chapter 4 and
chapter 5.
Chapter 7 and 8: Future work and Conclusion
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
2.1
Introduction
In this chapter, a general analysis of the project is presented. An overview of state-of-art
in cognitive architecture is discussed, and a general model of our cognitive architecture
is designed to solve the problems raised in Introduction. Furthermore, a description of
the customized environment is given.
2.2
Cognitive Architecture
The most significant problem in our project is related to equipping the robot with the
ability to understand current situations and select the best action to execute at runtime.
However, a growing number of robotics researchers have realized that programming
robots one task at a time is not likely to lead to a robot with such general capabilities,
so interest has turned to build robotic cognitive architectures as a natural way to try to
achieve this goal [BLL04]. Typically, a cognitive architecture of intelligent robotic sys-
tems has some lower-level modules, such as perception, control, and task execution, and
some higher-level modules, which have provide function like recognition and interpreta-
tion of complex contexts, planning of intrinsic tasks, and learning behavior [Bur+05].
A cognitive architecture determines the structure of a computational cognitive behavior
model. Even though one can design a cognitive architecture to solve a specific problem,
a cognitive architecture is designed to be basis for creating general, autonomous agents
that can solve a wide range of problems. One of challenges for a cognitive architecture
is to coordinating a wide variety of capabilities we associate with intelligent robotic sys-
tems [Lai19].
2.2.1
state-of–the-art cognitive architectures
Several state-of–the-art cognitive architectures have been reviewed and studied in the
project. The primary aim of the research on the cognitive architectures is to understand
the overall cognitive process and each block in the process. Our proposal for a cognitive
architecture starts from analysis of the state-of-art cognitive architectures in order to
get inspiration and deduce the elements suitable for our problem.
==PAGE:10==
4
2 Analysis
The Learning Intelligent Decision Agent (LIDA) [KF21], is a systems-level, biologically-
inspired cognitive architecture for creating and modeling control structures for autonomous
agents. The LIDA conceptual model views cognition as emerging from a continual series
of potentially overlapping cognitive cycles. These cycles can be split into three phases:
Perception and Understanding phase. Recognizing features, objects, situations,
etc., and building an internal representation.
Attending phase. Deciding what part of the representation is most salient and broad-
casting it consciously.
Action Selection phase. Choosing an appropriate action in response.
By implementing various stages of these cognitive cycles, LIDA allows autonomous
agents to continually sense, perceive, and act on their environments.
Soar [Lai19], was the first cognitive architecture integrated with real robots and has
been used in multiple robotic agents [Lai+91]. The basics of Soar cognitive architecture
is consist of Spatial Visual System(SVS), Symbolic Working Memory, and Symbolic
Long-Term Memories. SOAR is a general cognitive architecture selecting the required
skill for the current situation and goal without having a predefined list of plans or situa-
tions. This feature is a key point for general purpose robots when improvements in the
human–robot interaction (HRI) are needed [Pui+15].
ADAPT [KF21], is a production-based architecture with a working memory, and matches
productions against working memory during each cycle in the same manner as Soar ar-
chitecture. ADAPT manipulates a hierarchy of perceptual and planning schemas that
include explicit temporal information and that can be executed in parallel. Perception is
active, which means that all perceptual processing is goal directed and context-sensitive,
even down to the raw sensory data.
From the cognitive architectures we reviewed above, some common characteristics can
be found: All cognitive architectures are modular and hierarchical. There are two main
components within the cognitive architecture, situation awareness and decision making.
Situation awareness enables the agent to perceive from its surrounding environment,
and recognize current situations. Decision-making allows the agent to select the optimal
solution to adapt the situation. For example, in LIDA cognitive cycle, the Perception
and Understanding phase and Attending phase serve as situation awareness part, while
the Action Selection phase works as decision-making part.
2.2.2
Initial cognitive architectures
Motivated by the conclusions from the previous section, we determined that the cogni-
tive behavior of robots is not established and manually programmed at design time, but
stems from situational awareness and decision-making. Therefore, we built our initial
cognitive architecture in the following figure 2.1.
Internal & External Environment. Dynamic environment including external world
and internal states of the robot.
==PAGE:11==
2.3 Customized environment and problem
5
Figure 2.1: Initial Cognitive architecture model.
Situation awareness. Perceive relevant information from both the Internal External
environment continually. Understand the information and recognize what are the cur-
rent situations. And predict what might happen with current situations.
Decision-making. Select the most urgent (important, safe, beneficial …) alternatives
in current situation to achieve the goal.
Execution. Execution of the selected task.
To make our initial cognitive architecture scalable, we should start with making the
modules inside it scalable. More specifically, make situation awareness and decision-
making modules easily extensible. To do this, a more in-depth study of each of these
components is required. Thus, the methodological section in this report is divided into
three chapter: Situation awareness, Decision-making and the overall cognitive architec-
ture that combines them.
2.3
Customized environment and problem
As we discussed in the introduction chapter, a customized scenario is designed as the
base environment for developing and testing our cognitive architecture. In the scenario,
an AMR implemented with our cognitive architecture is designed to pick up garbage on
a highway environment. The highway environment is dynamics and stochastic.
The highway environment is made of following elements: weather, garbage, people,
power station, dumping place and a highway with urgent lane and soil. Furthermore, the
following situations are designed with these elements for testing the situation awareness
ability.
==PAGE:12==
6
2 Analysis
• Weather: clear, rain, snow, fog, heavy rain, heavy snow, heavy fog
• Garbage detected: different types and sizes of garbage may be detected in
random location on the highway.
• Potential accident detected: people may be detected standing in the highway
emergency lane. It could be a bad accident and the people need help, or it
could be a ’safe case’ and no help is needed.
• Route condition: if it rains for a long time, there may be soft soil, otherwise
the route is in good condition.
• Low power. When the power status is under 20%.
• Low storage room for garbage. When the storage status is under 20%.
The agent has the following 6 tasks, they serve as alternatives to test the decision-making
ability.
• Pick up garbage. (The main goal of the agent.)
• Go to power station.
• Check potential accident.
• Go dumping
• Go to shelter
• Wait
After setting up the environment, the problem is, how to design a cognitive architecture
that enable the AMR perceives its environment, recognizes the situations and makes the
best selection among the alternatives autonomously in order to achieve goals. And when
there are new situations or new goals, how to make the designed cognitive architecture
easily scalable.
Since the AMR with such cognitive architecture works closely as an intelligent agent in
artificial intelligence: an intelligent agent is anything which perceives its environment,
takes actions autonomously in order to achieve goals [Win92]. Thus, for simplicity, the
AMR embedded with cognitive architecture is called the agent in the rest of this report.
As what we discussed in the introduction chapter, the environment and the agent will be
simulated in software platform. Where and how we design the simulation environment
will be presented in the next chapter.
2.4
Summary
This chapter introduces the state-of-the-art cognitive architectures. And based on them,
the initial cognitive architecture is formed. Then, a customized environment is designed.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 3
Simulation environment
and framework
3.1
Introduction
In this chapter, the software framework and simulation environment are introduced and
developed. The Robot Operating System (ROS) is the framework for building the overall
project. Gazebo is used to provide a realistic simulation environment.
3.2
ROS
In this project, ROS is selected as the software platform to develop and test the cognitive
architecture. The oﬀicial description of ROS is:
ROS is an open-source, meta-operating system for your robot. It provides the services
you would expect from an operating system, including hardware abstraction, low-level de-
vice control, implementation of commonly-used functionality, message-passing between
processes, and package management. It also provides tools and libraries for obtaining,
building, writing, and running code across multiple computers [OKa14]
There are three major advantages for using ROS: Distributed computation; Software
reuse; Rapid testing [OKa14].
Distributed computation. ROS allows robot systems communicate between multiple
processes and different computers.
Software reuse. ROS provides a large collection of useful robotics algorithms, for ex-
ample, navigation, mapping and path-planning. And they are easy to be implemented
as ROS packages.
Rapid testing. Real robots are not always available, ROS provides simulator that can
replace those low-level programs so that the higher-level function such as data processing
and decision-making can be tested.
For our project, distributed computation is beneficial because in the analysis chapter,
the cognitive system is divided into small, stand-along modules and need to communi-
cate with each other. In ROS, this can be achieved by creating modules as ROS nodes
and making them subscribe to each other. Software reuse allows the execution part in
our project. SLAM algorithm can be directly used for the agent to map and navigate
to a goal location. In our project, it is diﬀicult to buy a real robot right away and very
==PAGE:14==
8
3 Simulation environment and framework
time consuming to test on a real robot. So finding a suit simulator in ROS is a good
way to test our system. For the above reasons, ROS is determined to use for our project.
3.3
Simulation environment
An open-source 3D robotics simulator named Gazebo is used for robot and environment
simulation in our project. Gazebo can accurately and eﬀiciently simulate complex envi-
ronments and robot characteristics. It features a powerful physics engine, high-quality
graphics, and allows users to design world models in a convenient procedural and graph-
ical interface [KH04].
3.3.1
World
The Gazebo world can be designed and created by writing an XML file in SDF format.
Based on the description of customized environment in Analysis chapter. The world file
should include model information of weather, garbage, people, power station, dumping
place and a highway with urgent lane and soil.
However, since the weather, garbage and people are changing and stochastic issues in
the environment. For now, we only choose to build a static world. Therefore, the world
file only includes model information of power station, dumping place and a highway
with urgent lane and soil. All the model information is imported from a git repository:
osrf/gazebo_models.
After launch the world file, the designed simulated highway environment is shown in
Figure 3.1:
As seen in the figure, there are two area in the world. The first part is where the power
station and the dumping place located. Power station located in (0, 20)￿Dumping place
located in (7, 18); they are also works as shelters when the weather become bad, like
heavy rain or snow.
The second part is the highway. It has asphalt and soil. The soil part is on both sides
of the highway, and there are trees grows above it so it can be distinguished from the
asphalt.
3.3.2
The agent
Turtlebot3 burger is selected as the agent in this project. Turtlebot3 robots are made
by ROBOTIS. The Turtlebot3 burger type is equipped with a LDS-01 which is a 360
degrees laser distance sensor which is ideal for Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) and navigation. It is simulated in Figure 3.2.
==PAGE:15==
3.4 Situation generator
9
Figure 3.1: World.
Figure 3.2: Turtlebot3 burger.
3.4
Situation generator
After setting up the static world and the agent, it is time to make the world dynamics.
As what we discussed in the Analysis chapter. We have 6 situations that is continuously
changing in the world.
To simulate these situations in ROS and Gazebo, publisher nodes are created.
time_pub. Publish hours in a day from 0 to 24.
weather_pub. Publish a random weather in (clear, rain, snow, fog, heavy rain, heavy
snow, heavy fog) every 24 hours.
spawn_garbage. Spawn one or multiple garbage in the highway, the garbage location,
==PAGE:16==
10
3 Simulation environment and framework
type and size are randomly generated.
safe_case_pub. Spawn one people stood in the highway urgent lane, publish talking
words in: ‘Safe’, ‘Good’.
danger_case_pub. Spawn one people stood in the highway urgent lane, publish talk-
ing words in: ‘Danger’, ‘help’, ‘police’.
3.5
Summary
In this chapter, ROS and gazebo are selected as the software platform and simulator
for develop our cognitive architecture. Simulated world is designed and turtlebot3 is
selected as the agent. Further, ROS publish nodes are designed to simulate changing
situations.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 4
Situation Awareness
4.1
Introduction
After setting up all the simulated environment and situations that the robot might en-
counter, the agent robot needs to perceive and understand its surrounding environment.
However, in the process of environmental cognition, the agent generally has no prior
knowledge of the environment, and may encounter various dynamic or static situations.
In this chapter, situation awareness (SA) is modeled and implemented to solve this
problem. Good SA ability is also essential for the agent to make good decision, for
decision-making requires an accurate and adequate representation of the environment
to choose the optimal decision.
4.2
methods
In this section, Endsley’s definition to SA is stated and our method for developing SA
is introduced.
SA is a person’s mental model of the world around them. It is formally defined by
Endsley [End88], as ”the perception of the elements in the environment within a volume
of time and space, the comprehension of their meaning and the projection of their status
in the near future”. According to this definition, SA is divided into three levels:
Perception: Perceiving related factors in the environment, both externally and inter-
nally.
Comprehension: Understanding what those factors mean, particularly when inte-
grated together in relation to person’s goals.
Projection: Predicting what will happen with the current data and understandings.
The reason we chose Endsley’s definition to model SA is it is a perfect fit in our cog-
nitive architecture. We could easily model it into three blocks, and develop from the
lowest level Perception, which is directly connect to the environment we built in the
last chapter. And, given the definition of a projection, we can use it to check whether a
decision made by an agent is executable. Last but not least, each of these three blocks
is extensible, which leads to the general SA capability of the agent. Our SA framework
is shown in Figure 4.1:
==PAGE:18==
12
4 Situation Awareness
Figure 4.1: General structure of SA model.
4.3
SA model construction
With the general structure of the SA model, each module inside SA is further developed
based on our customized environment. As discussed in the analysis chapter, there are
following possible situations that need to be apprehensive by the agent:
• Weather: clear, rain, snow, fog, heavy rain, heavy snow, heavy fog.
• Garbage detected: size, type and location of garbage.
• Potential accident detected: dangerous case, safe case.
• Route condition: soft soil, good condition.
• Low power. When the power status is under 20%.
• Low storage room for garbage. When the storage status is under 20%.
4.3.1
Perception
To obtain suﬀicient information for the above situation, sensors are required to perceive
relevant data from the environment, which is the perception process in our SA model.
First, we need to determine which sensors are needed and relevant to our situation.
For weather conditions, the sensors we are using now are:
Temperature sensor: Sensor the temperature in the environment.
Humidity sensor: Sensor the humidity in the environment.
Luminance sensor: Sensor the luminance in the environment.
Visibility sensor: Sensor the temperature in the environment.
Clock: Inform the agent current time.
For garbage detected and potential accident detected situations, the sensors we are using
now are:
Camera: Recognize objects including garbage and people. And inform the agent the
==PAGE:19==
4.3 SA model construction
13
size and type of the detected garbage.
Laser: Inform the agent of its distance to the detected garbage and potential accident.
Acoustic sensor: Hear sound near the potential accident.
For low power and low storage situations:
Internal sensor: inform the agent its power status and storage status.
4.3.2
Comprehension
After acquiring sensor data from perception, we should build comprehension that enables
the agent to understand the sensor data and form accurate representations of situations.
Taking sensor readings as inputs, comprehension should output which situation does
the data lead to. In our method, situations can be seen as combinations of different
ranges of sensor readings, or even combinations of different situations. According to our
understanding of situations, a table is shown in Table 4.1
Table 4.1 consists low-level situations that determined only by data from perception. We
also create some higher-level comprehended situations that determined by both percep-
tion and low-level situations we created above. Comprehension for high-level situations
is shown in Table 4.2
situations
sensors
clock
/h
luminance
/nit
humidity
/%
visibility
/km
temperature
/°C
laser
/m
sound
camera
clear
0~50
5~10
0~30
heavy rain
80~100
heavy fog
0~50
0~2.5
0~30
heavy snow(daytime)
9~18
7~10
0~5
-20~0
heavy snow(night)
18~9
0~5
0~3
-20~0
potential accident detected
distance10
”help”,”good”
”safe”,”danger”
......
human
shape
defect camera
0 or 10
0
garbage detected
distance<10
garbage
shape
Table 4.1: Comprehension for low-level situations.
==PAGE:20==
14
4 Situation Awareness
high-level
low-level
weather
potential
accident
detected
voice
sensor
laser
soft soil
rain over
20 h
distance
to soil<0
safe case
True
”good”,
”safe”...
dangerous case
True
”danger”,
”police”...
Table 4.2:
Comprehension for Higher-level situations.
4.3.3
Projection
In this project, the objectives of projection are:
• Predict whether there will be enough power for the agent robot to complete the
selected alternative.
• Predict whether there will be enough room for the target garbage.
Considering that projection is used to evaluate decisions made by decision-making part,
it is not needed until a decision is made. In addition to a decision, some basic data from
perception is needed to make predictions, such as power status, storage status, and the
distance the agent need to travel from its current location to the target location and
back to the power station.
Based on what we analyzed above, the framework of SA model is constructed in
Figure 4.2.
==PAGE:21==
4.4 Implementation
15
Figure 4.2: Framework of SA.
4.4
Implementation
In this section, the process of how the SA model is implemented in the ROS is shown.
Figure 4.3 shows how the SA model is implemented in ROS for weather situations.
The humidity_s, temperature_s, luminance_s and visibility_s is respectively simu-
lated as humidity sensor, temperature sensor, luminance sensor and visibility sensor.
They are ROS nodes that subscribe the real weather information in the simulated en-
vironment, which is /weather, and then publish the simulated data of humidity, tem-
perature, luminance, and visibility of the current weather. The simulated data are set
randomly close to what we set for the comprehension. For example, if the real weather
is heavy rain, according to the table 4.1, then the data published from humidity sensor
is around 80 1̃00. The weather_integrated_info just works as an integrated sensor that
==PAGE:22==
16
4 Situation Awareness
Figure 4.3: Implementation of weather situations in SA.
combine all the weather-related sensor, thus making it easier to subscribe the weather-
related data in the future. Weather_com is coded corresponding to the table 4.1 we
discussed in the last section.
Similarly with implementing weather, Figure 4.4 shows how to implement the rest of
the situations.
Figure 4.4: Implementation of other situations.
4.5
Module test
In this section, a simulation test is shown to check the feasibility of SA model.
In the simulation test, a random weather is published daily in ROS terminal. Simulated
==PAGE:23==
4.5 Module test
17
sensor readings from perception and the comprehended situation from comprehension
are recorded and plotted with time of day. Since there are delays when running the ROS
nodes, a whole day starts in 3 AM and ends in 3 AM of next day. The test result is
shown in Figure 4.5.
In figure 4.5, the above figure shows the ’real weather’ published by weather generator.
Figure 4.5: Simulated weather for test.
The figure below shows the test results of SA model.
In Weather Perception and Comprehension, the horizontal axis is the simulated time
in the environment, the left vertical axis represents numerical range of sensor readings
from perception, the right vertical axis represents weather situations from comprehension.
The light blue line in the result represents the comprehended situations, the other lines
represent sensors readings from Perception. For example, in the first day, the luminance
sensor readings are around 0 to 10, the humidity sensor readings are 0, the temperature
sensor readings are from -20 to 0, and the visibility is around 8. In the same day, the
situation indicator is snow.
==PAGE:24==
18
4 Situation Awareness
For the perception results. The sensor readings are consistent with the environment since
the perception module are simply designed to subscribe the environment data without
transforming them. In a day, humidity and visibility are steady, while luminance and
temperature are changing by the time. This can be explained by that in our simulation
environment settings, humidity and visibility are only affected by weather, luminance
and temperature, on the other hand, are related with both weather and time of the
day. For the comprehension results, it is obvious to see that the weather indication
corresponds to the table in method section and matches the real weather situations.
The feasibility of the SA model is verified by the weather test. Perception can provide
basic information of the environment, and comprehension can tell a situation based on
the data collected by perception. Same settings, this model is also feasible when applied
to other situations. More importantly, it is always possible to expand the situations by
simply adding new sensor nodes or combinations.
4.6
Summary
In this chapter, the concept and Endsley’s definition of Situation awareness is introduced.
Our situation awareness model is designed with three parts: Perception, comprehension
and projection. And the reason why we chose to model SA based on Endsley’s definition
is explained. Then the implementation methods are stated, and test results are shown.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 5
Decision Making
5.1
Introduction
After gaining a good understanding and representation of the environment, the next
step is to enable our agent to make reasonable choices from the alternatives. However,
at this stage, the agent does not know what is a good choice under various conditions.
Decision making is a fundamental robotic cognitive skill designed to solve this problem
and allow the agent to choose the best among limited alternatives.
Decision making is a hot topic that researchers have been studying for a long time.
There are many ways to realize decision-making nowadays.
In this chapter, we will
discuss Reinforcement learning methods and Multi-Criteria Decision-Making methods.
And our approach to develop and implement decision-making model are also presented.
5.2
Methods
Since we already have an agent, environment, alternatives(tasks) for the problem. It is
easy to think of using reinforcement learning to solve this problem. RL is designed to
solve decision-making problems, which involve agents learning to take sequential deci-
sions to perform tasks in an environment. A RL problem is usually modeled as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP), for MDPs are a mathematically idealized form of the reinforce-
ment learning problem [SB18]. A MDP is defined as a 4-tuple (S, A, P(s’|s,a), r(s,a)).
S defines the set of representation of the environment’ state that the agent can receive.
A defines the set of actions the agent can take. R(s,a) is the a consequence of taking
action a in state s. And P(s’|s, a) is the transition function which defines probability of
being in the next state s’ when taking an action a in state s.
However, some states in our problem are continues, resulting diﬀicult in forming state
set for the MDP. For example, power status, storage room and the distance between
the agent to different goal positions. These along will formulate at least a 6-dimensional
state spaces. And if we discretize each dimension into k parts, then there would be kn
many states. If n is large, then kn is not feasible. And with this amount of state spaces,
it is diﬀicult to extend with new action or new state. Moreover, discretizing states space
usually results in lack of smoothness.
Therefore, another method: Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) [ZWS22] is stud-
ied for solving our problem. MCDM is a general term referring to all methods that
==PAGE:26==
20
5 Decision Making
solve problems involving selection from among a finite number of alternatives [Kou+18].
Normally, A MCDM method is consist of: Alternatives, criteria, weights of importance.
Alternatives. represent the different choices available to the decision maker. Usually,
the set of alternatives is assumed to be finite.
Criteria. represent the different factors on the basis of which the alternatives can be
investigated.
Importance factors (weights of importance). represent a measure of the signifi-
cance of each criterion in the decision-making process.
The essence of MCDM is the ranking of all the alternatives and then the selection of
optimal one by employing certain approach and existing decision information with con-
sideration of different criteria. Compared with RL methods, MCDM suits our problem
better. Therefore, MCDM is selected as the decision-making method in this project.
The following definitions are considered to formulate the MCDM problem in our project.
Ai Alternatives, i ,..., m (m represents the number of alternatives)
Cj Criteria, j ,..., n (n denotes the number of criteria)
wij The normalized weight of criteria Cj for alternative Ai
As mentioned in the analysis chapter, the alternatives Ai and criteria Cj with ranges
are listed below:
Alternatives
• A1 Pick up garbage.
• A2 Go to power station.
• A3 Go check potential accident.
• A4 Go dumping
• A5 Go to shelter
• A6 Wait
Criteria
• C1 Weather(clear, rain, snow, fog, heavy rain, heavy snow, heavy fog)
• C2 Spacing distance(0 to 60)
• C3 Garbage value (0 to 30)
• C4 Power status(0 to 100)
• C5 Storage status(0 to 100)
• C6 Route condition(Soft soil or Good)
Weights of criteria for alternatives
Usually, it is assumed that the decision maker has determined the weights of the decision
==PAGE:27==
5.2 Methods
21
criteria based on relative significance. However, using ranks to elicit weights by some
formulas is more reliable than just directly assigning weights to criteria, because usually
decision makers are more confident about the ranks of some criteria than their weights,
and they can agree on ranks more easily [Ros13]. After reading through the book “New
Methods and Applications in Multiple Attribute Decision Making (MADM)”[AK+19],
the Simple Multi-Attribute Rating Technique (SMART) method seems to match our
problem best. Since it has the following features:
• It determines the weights of criteria by ranking them.
• It is possible to use independent and dependent criteria.
• The qualitative criteria can be converted into the quantitative criteria by
ranking.
In our project, the process of how to use SMART to weight each criterion and make the
best choice among the alternatives is shown in the following steps.
Step 1. Design a ranking standard
First of all, we need to design a ranking standard for all the criteria. In this project,
Extent of emergency is chosen as ranking standard. There are 6 rankings of emergency
level. The ranking standard is shown in table 5.1
Step 2. Ranking the criteria
Different from SMART, we rank the criteria dependently with the alternatives. Since in
our case, each criteria matters differently for various tasks. For example, power status
influences greatly on A2: Go to power station, but does not have influence on A3 Go
check potential accident. Accordingly, before assigning a rank to the criteria for each
alternative, we first need to consider which criteria are relevant for prioritizing alterna-
tives. The criteria are ranked in table 5.2.
From table 5.2, If an alternative has a criterion rank of 0, it means that criterion is
irrelevant when determine the priority of the alternative. A value of 5 indicates that the
criterion is extreme emergent (important) in prioritizing alternatives.
Step 3. Calculate the normalized weights.
The normalize weights are calculated based on the table 5.3. Since we will compare the
priority between different alternatives, it makes more sense to calculate the normalized
Ranking of emergency
Definition
5
Extreme emergent
4
Very emergent
3
Fairly emergent
2
Medium
1
Not urgent
0
Irrelevant
Table 5.1: Ranking of qualitative emergency level.
==PAGE:28==
22
5 Decision Making
Alternative
Rank of criteria
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
A1
0
3
3
0
0
2
A2
0
3
0
5
0
0
A3
5
3
0
0
0
5
A4
0
3
0
0
5
0
A5
5
3
0
2
2
0
A6
5
0
0
0
0
5
Table 5.2: Ranking the criterias.
weights by comparing the rank of the criterion to the sum of the rank criterion of all the
alternatives. Thus, the equation to calculate the normalized weights is :
Applying this equation to table , the normalized weights of criteria are shown in table .
In the table 5.3, the garbage value (C3) has a weight of 1 because it is only relevant to
A1 picking up garbage. This weight is reasonable because the main goal of our agent is
to pick up garbage, and if there is garbage, the weight should be relatively higher than
others. On the other hand, the weight of the C2 distance is relatively low. This can be
interpreted as the distance is related to most alternatives, so it is not a very decisive
issue for prioritizing alternatives.
Step 4. Form a decision matrix.
A decision matrix is a matrix of alternatives and current criteria information.
It is
formed based on the information provided by the decision maker. In this project, SA
is used to provided the information of the current criteria. Considering all the criteria
are changing, the decision matrix in our project is also dynamics. One example of our
decision matrix at a certain time is shown below.
Alternative
Rank of criteria
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
A1
0.100
0.200
1
0
0
0.160
A2
0
0.200
0
0.714
0
0
A3
0.333
0.200
0
0
0
0.420
A4
0
0.200
0
0
0.714
0
A5
0.333
0.200
0
0.286
0.286
0
A6
0.333
0
0
0
0
0.420
Table 5.3: Normalized weights for criteria.
==PAGE:29==
5.3 Decision-making model construction
23


rainy
8
7.5
50
80
0
rainy
18
7.5
50
80
0
rainy
38
7.5
50
80
1
rainy
21
7.5
50
80
0
rainy
18or21
7.5
50
80
0
rainy
0
7.5
50
80
0


Step 5. Quantify current criteria information
For now, it is still diﬀicult to prioritize the alternatives because not all criteria infor-
mation is qualitative, and the scope of the various criteria should be uniform. In the
first step, ranking standard has been determined so that it can be used to quantify and
unify current criteria information in the decision matrix. For example, when quantify
weather, rain can be ranked in 2 according to 4.1 for A5: Go to shelter. For qualitative
criteria such as power status and storage status, emergency ranking should increase ex-
ponentially when the value is low. And their range should be limited between 0 5 based
on ranking standard. On this basis, the equation of Quantify is determined below. In
SMART, value calculated in this step is called effective weights of criteria gij.
For cost criteria: distance, power status and storage status, gij is calculated by:
gij = e
1.8×
(
1−
x−xmin
xmax−xmin
)
−1
(5.1)
For reward criteria: garbage value, gij is calculated by:
gij = e
1.8×
(
1−
xmax−x
xmax−xmin
)
−1
(5.2)
Step 6. Calculate the priority of alternatives
The priority values of alternative fij is determined using equation 5.3. The alternative
with the highest priority value will be selected as the most urgent task in the current
situation.
fij =
n
∑
j=1
wijgij;
i, j = 1, . . . , 6
(5.3)
5.3
Decision-making model construction
So far, we introduced MCDM method and described how the MCDM is used to reach to
compute priority values and reach a decision. In this section, a decision-making model is
designed and constructed. Modularizing the decision-making process makes it is easier
to extend and fits better into our cognitive architecture. The general structure of our
decision-making model is designed as figure 5.1.
From Figure 5.1, our decision-making model consists of 5 modules: Alternatives,
Current Alternatives models (CAM), priority list, route planner and projection. Among
==PAGE:30==
24
5 Decision Making
Figure 5.1: General structure of decision-making.
them, Alternatives, CAM and Priority List form the MCDM process.
Alternatives: A set of tasks or actions that the agent can execute.
CAM: A tuple of all alternatives and their corresponding current priority values.
Priority list: Collect the priority values of all the alternatives, a priority list is formed
by sorting the priority values in descending order.
Route planner: It is possible that the priority values of different alternatives are simi-
lar and all come first in the priority list. In this case, the route planner aims to find the
shortest path through all top alternatives. and provide a list of the best travel sequence
as new priority list back to priority list block.
Projection: Predict whether the selected alternative can be successfully executed. If
so, a reward is fed back into the priority list to make the execution of the current alter-
native more stable. Otherwise, the currently selected alternative will be discarded with
its priority set to 0. The next alternative in the priority list will be evaluated until an
executable alternative is found.
The selected alternative is the first alternative ranked in the priority list.
Having determined the general structure of the decision model, we return to our cus-
tomized problem again. We start by building the MCDM process. First, 6 alternatives
were identified, consistent with what we discussed in the analysis section. Initially, these
alternatives contain only their mission information. In order to calculate the priority
value for each alternative, criteria information is required. And since we have already
analyzed in the MCDM section on which criteria are relevant to determine the priority
values for alternatives, as shown in the table . One alternative can directly access to
SA module and ask for the current information of relevant criteria. Then, follow the
procedures in the MCDM section, calculate the priority value of the alternative. Af-
ter the MCDM process, the CAM is formed by aggregating all alternatives and their
current priority values, here, CAM included goal locations and priority values of all 6
alternatives. The priority list sorts the alternatives by their priority value. If the priority
values of different alternatives are similar, in this project, with a difference within 5 is
==PAGE:31==
5.3 Decision-making model construction
25
considering as similar priority, and all come first in the priority list. This means that
these alternatives are almost as urgent. In this case, a route planner is needed. Last, in
this project, Projection is used for power check and space check, as described in the SA
chapter. If the top-ranked alternative fails to pass the power check or the space check,
its priority value will be reset to 0 in the priority list. And the next alternative in the pri-
ority list will be evaluated until an executable alternative is found. Once an executable
alternative is found, the reward of 10 is fed back to its priority value in the list to ensure
stability.Based on what we analysis above, the framework of Decision-making model is
shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Framework of decision-making model.
For Figure 5.2, List1* is a list of alternatives with similar priority value; List2* is the
best travel sequence found by route planner. List* is List2*if there are more than one
alternative in List1*, Otherwise, its just the priority list formed by priority list block.
==PAGE:32==
26
5 Decision Making
5.4
Implementation
Based on the framework, the implementation should be fairly simple. The implementa-
tion process is shown in figure 5.3.
As mentioned in the SA chapter, the integrated sensor is designed so that if access
Figure 5.3: Implementation of decision-making.
to relevant information is required, only one node needs to be subscribed. For exam-
ple, G_sensor_info contains garbage type, size, and location information that Pickup
garbage needs to calculate its priority value. The MCDM process takes place within each
alternative node. After the priority value is calculated, the alternative node publishes
its target location and priority value. Priority list and route planner are implemented
in one node: priority_list, for its easier for them to pass complex message like tuple in
ROS. The pseudo-code is shown below.
==PAGE:33==
5.4 Implementation
27
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for Priority list and route planner
Subscribe Allthealternativescontentandtheirpriorityvalue
Publish Prioritylist
while not rospy.is_shutdown() do
dic ←alternative : location, priority For (alternative : location, priority) In
all alternatives
▷Extend new alternatives here
Aexe ←Atop : dic[Atop][0], dic[Atop][1] + reward
▷Receive feedback reward from
Projection
dic.update(Aexe)
list ←sorted(dic.items(), key = lambadar : r[1][1], reverse = True)
▷Sorted
priority list
ptop ←((list[0])[1])[1]
▷Top priority value
for i in list do
listkeys.append(i[0])
▷list of alternative content in sorted order
listvalues.append(i[1]) ▷list of alternative location and priority in sorted order
if (i[1])[1] > ptop −5 then
values ←i[1]
▷list of alternative location and priority
keys ←i[0]
▷alternative content
dicnew[keys] ←values[0]
end if
list1value ←list(dicnew.values())
list1keys ←list(dicnew.keys())
end for
if len[list1keys] > 1 then
▷if there more than one alternative in list1
find_shortest_route(list1values)
for l in kmin do
t ←list(dicnew.keys())[list(dicnew.values()), index(l)]
list2.append(t)
end for
Publish list2
else
Publish listkeys
end if
end while
==PAGE:34==
28
5 Decision Making
5.5
Module test
In this section, a simple environment is designed for testing the implemented decision-
making model.
Simplified test environment
Figure 5.4: Simplified test environment for decision-making model.
In the test, it is assumed that the agent has obtained the following information about
the environment.
• Weather: clear
• Route condition: Good
• Power status: 50
• Storage status: 60
• Garbage detected: location: (9, 6); size: 12; type: rubber.
• Potential accident detected: location: (20, 45); voice: ‘safe’.
• Location of power station: (3,3)
• Location of dumping place: (9,3)
• Location of the agent: (7,3)
The test results are shown in ROS terminals. From Figure 5.5, At first, the priority
list is: Go to power station(priority: 19.0); Pickup garbage(priority: 18.7);
Go dumping(priority: 16.9); Check potential accident(priority: 1.8); Go to
shelter(priority: 0); Wait(priority: 0). Then, list1 is formed for the top three
alternatives’ priority values are similar. Plan_all is a list includes the paths through all
the top alternatives in list1. The distance of each path is also shown. Accordingly, the
path with the shortest distance is found successfully, which is list2: Pickup garbage;
Go dumping; Go to power station. The testing results show that the priority list
and route planner works well in the decision model.
==PAGE:35==
5.6 Summary
29
Figure 5.5: Test results for priority_list.
Next, the projection node is launched.
The test results shown in Figure 5.6.
After
projection, the priority value of pick up garbage in the priority list increased by 10. This
means that the agent has enough power and space to complete the Pickup garbage. So
a reward 10 is fed back to the priority list. Due to this reward, the current priority list
does not have a similar priority value. Route planner is not required at this time.
Figure 5.6: Test results after projection.
5.6
Summary
In this chapter, MCDM and SMART are studied as methods to determine the priority
value of alternatives. The decision-making model is developed in five blocks and im-
plemented in ROS. A simple case is designed to test the feasibility of the implemented
decision-making model.
==PAGE:36==
30
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6
Cognitive architecture
6.1
Introduction
This chapter will describe the final solution to our cognitive architecture, which is built
by the SA and decision-making models from previous chapters. The overall solution will
be tested using two different situation scenarios. There is also an extended example to
demonstrate the scalability of our cognitive architecture.
6.2
Final cognitive architecture
Combined the SA and decision-making model, the overall model of our cognitive archi-
tecture is shown in Figure 6.1.
From Figure 6.1, our cognitive architecture consists of: Perception; Comprehen-
Figure 6.1: Overall cognitive architecture, green squares are extensible modules, yellow
are non-extensible modules. The blue ones are environment and actions..
sion; Alternatives; CAM; Priority list; Route planner and Projection. The
==PAGE:38==
32
6 Cognitive architecture
clear descriptions on these modules are already discussed in the situation awareness and
decision-making chapter. Most of them are extensible modules. Priority lists and route
planners are not extensible, for the methods we use to sort priorities and find shortest
paths are fixed. In addition to dividing modules into expandable and non-expandable
modules, they can also be divided into modules that represent short-term or long-term
memory. In our architecture, we have short-term memory representation modules: per-
ception, CAM, and priority lists, which only hold data for the current time. Long-term
memory representative modules: Comprehension, Projection, and the MCDM method
for calculating priority values are all constructed from long-term experience.
A major advance in our cognitive architecture is that it supports the ability to scale. If
a new situation arises in the environment, we can extend the perception module with
new sensors to obtain information, and make new combinations in the comprehension
module. If there is a new alternative, we just need to find out how its priority relates to
our existing criteria and calculate its priority value. Then, add it to the CAM. Therefore,
our cognitive architecture fits the goals we set in the analysis chapter.
6.3
System test
Two cases are shown in this section. One is to test the feasibility of the overall system,
and the other is to demonstrate the scalability of the final cognitive model.
6.3.1
Case1. Test the feasibility of the overall system
For feasibility test, We divided it into four steps to show the testing results.
Step 1 Show the environment. The locations of power station, dumping place, garbage,
potential accident, as well as the agent are shown in the Gazebo world. Information
that is diﬀicult to directly shown in Gazebo is shown in ROS terminal.
Step 2 Situation awareness. There are two ROS terminal showing the result of SA
module. In the first terminal, the perceive and comprehended information for detected
garbage and potential accident are shown. For detected garbage, garbage size, type and
location, as well as its distance to the agent will be published in the ROS terminal; For
the potential accident, the location and sound heard of potential accident are published.
Notice even though the agent is set to be able to hear the voice within distance of 10.
Here, the voice will be published as a ground truth. The other terminal will show the
weather, power status and storage status of the agent.
Step 3 Decision-making. There are also two terminals in decision-making step. One is
showing the alternative content with its priority value; The other shows the priority list
and the result of route planner, if needed.
Step 4 Projection. Last step in the test is to check whether the top priority alternative
in the priority list is executable or not.
==PAGE:39==
6.3 System test
33
Step 1. Environment
From step 2 in Figure 6.3, the situation and environment the agent acquires from SA are:
Figure 6.2: Test environment for case1.
• Weather: rain
• Route condition: Soft soil
• Power status: 23
• Storage status: 87
• Garbage1 detected: location: (10, 2); size: 15; type: rubber; distance between
the agent: 10.2.
• Garbage2 detected: location: (12, -9); size: 6; type: plastic; distance between
the agent: 15.9.
• Potential accident detected: location: (27, 8); voice: ‘safe’; distance between
the agent: 28.9.
• Location of power station: (0,20)
• Location of dumping place: (7,18)
• Location of the agent: (0,0)
==PAGE:40==
34
6 Cognitive architecture
Figure 6.3: Test results for case1.
From step 3 in Figure 6.3, the priority list of the current alternatives is:
Pickup
garbage1(priority:
35.5); Go to power station(priority:
32.3); Check po-
tential accident(priority:
30.9); Go to shelter(priority:
19.9); Go dump-
ing(priority: 9.8); Pickup garbage2(priority: 8.8); Wait(priority: 0). Since
the top three alternatives’ priority values are similar, route planner found the best path
to travel all these alternatives. The new priority list given by route planner is List2: Go
to power station, Pickup garbage1; Check potential accident.
In step 4, the top priority alternative Go to power station is executable according to Pro-
jection. Now a reward 10 is feedback to step3, the priority list becomes:Go to power
station(priority: 42.3); Pickup garbage1(priority: 35.5); Check potential ac-
cident(priority: 30.9); Go to shelter(priority: 19.9); Go dumping(priority:
9.8); Pickup garbage2(priority: 8.8); Wait(priority: 0). Go to power station is
selected as the result reached by decision-making.
==PAGE:41==
6.3 System test
35
The test results of Case 1 show that the implemented cognitive architecture enables
the agent to perceive and recognize the environment and make decisions based on its
understanding.
6.3.2
Case2. Extend with explore
In this case, there is no garbage on the highway. And the agent needs to move to a
new observation position to detect new garbage, we call this process ”explore”. How to
extend this alternative: explore, in the proposed cognitive architecture is shown in case
2.
As described in the previous section, scaling the alternative only requires three steps.
Step 1. Determine how its priority relates to our existing criteria.
Explore is only required when no garbage is detected. So its priority value is only cal-
culated when no garbage related information is received. When explore is required, its
priority value is related to the weather and the distance of the agent to the observation
location.
Step 2. Calculate its priority value
The priority value is calculated according to the MCDM method described in the
decision-making chapter.
Step 3. Add explore and its priority value to CAM
This step is done in the priority_list node, the position and priority value of the obser-
vation point is added to the dictionary, the implemented CAM.
After completing the three steps. The test results are shown similarly to the case 1, for
simplicity, only decision-making ROS terminal result is shown for this case.
Environment
The situation and environment the agent acquires from SA are:
• Weather: clear
• Route condition: Good
• Power status: 94
• Storage status: 80
• Potential accident detected: location: (27, 8); voice: ‘safe’; distance between
the agent: 28.9.
• Location of power station: (0,20)
• Location of dumping place: (7,18)
• Location of the agent: (0,0)
• Location of observation location: (30,0)
The testing results in decision-making ROS terminal are shown in Figure 6.5 From Fig-
==PAGE:42==
36
6 Cognitive architecture
Figure 6.4: Test environment for case2.
Figure 6.5: Test results for case2.
ure 6.5, the priority list of the current alternatives is: Explore(priority: 14.0); Go
dumping(priority: 9.8); Go to power station(priority: 5.5); Check potential
accident(priority: 1.9); Go to shelter(priority: 0); Wait(priority: 0). This in-
dicated that our cognitive architecture has been successfully extended with alternative:
explore.
==PAGE:43==
6.4 Summary
37
6.4
Summary
In this chapter, the final cognitive architecture is presented. Two test cases are given to
test the feasibility and scalability of our cognitive architecture.
==PAGE:44==
38
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 7
Future work
In this chapter, expected future work is presented.
Extend the cognitive architecture with new situations In the overall system test,
only one expansion scheme is given, in which the alternatives are expanded. However,
since our SA module is also extensible, an example showing how to extend new cases
would be interesting.
Improve the execution part The main goal of cognitive architecture is to enable
robots to understand their surroundings and make decisions based on what they un-
derstand. Therefore, the execution part is omitted in the test chapter, and when an
alternative is chosen, the test ends. Since the SA in our project are constantly interact-
ing with the environment, it would be nice to show how the robot interacts with the
environment and see how the priority value changes.
Applying with deep learning methods In the decision-making chapter, it is men-
tioned the our problem is not suitable for MDPs. But actually, there are reinforcement
learning methods with continues state space. Further research can be done in this area.
Develop the system in the real world This project is completely developed and
simulated in software platform ROS and Gazebo. Further improvement can be made to
test the designed cognitive architecture in the real world.
==PAGE:46==
40
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
A scalable cognitive architecture is successfully designed and implemented for a garbage
pickup robot on a highway case. The cognitive architecture is developed by building sit-
uation awareness and decision-making models respectively. Situation awareness module
is implemented in this project as it enables the agent to perceive from the environment,
identify the current situation, and predict whether a decision can be executed by check-
ing power and storage status. In addition, SA provides a good context representation, so
the MCDM process in decision-making can be completed. The decision model includes
the MCDM process, the route planner, and the projection of SA. The implemented deci-
sion model not only makes the most urgent decision in the environment, but also finds
the shortest path traversing all the alternatives given similar priority values. The overall
system is successfully implemented and simulated in ROS and Gazebo.
A highway garbage pickup scenario was designed as the base environment for developing
and testing our cognitive architecture. Based on the test results, the agent is able to
select the most urgent alternative based on the information obtained from the highway
environment and its understanding of the current situation. Thus, the feasibility of the
proposed cognitive architecture is demonstrated. Furthermore, a new alternative is suc-
cessfully extended in the cognitive architecture, which demonstrates the scalability of
the proposed architecture.
==PAGE:48==
42
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[AK+19]
Alireza Alinezhad, Javad Khalili, et al. New methods and applications in
multiple attribute decision making (MADM). Volume 277. Springer, 2019.
[BLL04]
D Paul Benjamin, Damian M Lyons, and Deryle W Lonsdale. “ADAPT: A
Cognitive Architecture for Robotics.” In: ICCM. Citeseer. 2004, pages 337–
338.
[Bur+05]
Catherina Burghart et al. “A cognitive architecture for a humanoid robot: A
first approach.” In: 5th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid
Robots, 2005. IEEE. 2005, pages 357–362.
[End88]
Mica R Endsley. “Design and evaluation for situation awareness enhance-
ment.” In: Proceedings of the Human Factors Society annual meeting. Vol-
ume 32. 2. Sage Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. 1988, pages 97–
101.
[KF21]
Sean Kugele and Stan Franklin. “Learning in LIDA.” In: Cognitive Systems
Research 66 (2021), pages 176–200.
[KH04]
Nathan Koenig and Andrew Howard. “Design and use paradigms for gazebo,
an open-source multi-robot simulator.” In: 2004 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)(IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37566).
Volume 3. IEEE. 2004, pages 2149–2154.
[Kou+18]
Maryam Kouzehgar et al. “Multi-criteria decision making for eﬀicient tiling
path planning in a tetris-inspired self-reconfigurable cleaning robot.” In: Ap-
plied Sciences 9.1 (2018), page 63.
[Lai+12]
John Edwin Laird et al. “Cognitive robotics using the soar cognitive archi-
tecture.” In: Workshops at the twenty-sixth AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence. 2012.
[Lai+91]
John E Laird et al. “Robo-Soar: An integration of external interaction, plan-
ning, and learning using Soar.” In: Robotics and autonomous systems 8.1-2
(1991), pages 113–129.
[Lai19]
John E Laird. The Soar cognitive architecture. MIT press, 2019.
[OKa14]
Jason M O’Kane. “A gentle introduction to ROS.” In: (2014).
[Pui+15]
Jordi-Ysard Puigbo et al. “Using a cognitive architecture for general purpose
service robot control.” In: Connection Science 27.2 (2015), pages 105–117.
==PAGE:50==
44
Bibliography
[Ros13]
Ewa Roszkowska. “Rank ordering criteria weighting methods–a comparative
overview.” In: Optimum. Studia Ekonomiczne 5 (65) (2013), pages 14–33.
[SB18]
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An intro-
duction. MIT press, 2018.
[Win92]
Patrick Henry Winston. Artificial intelligence. Addison-Wesley Longman
Publishing Co., Inc., 1992.
[ZWS22]
Jinbiao Zhu, Dongshu Wang, and Jikai Si. “Flexible Behavioral Decision-
Making of Mobile Robot in Dynamic Environment.” In: IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (2022).
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:52==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
