==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Plantar Biometrics for Security
An analysis on unconventional biometrics
in edge computing and prospects of
Continuous Authentication.
Mads Stege (s165243)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The purpose of this project was to investigate and identify the underlying challenges
of plantar-based biometric platforms. It was found that the papers and platforms were
often focusing too heavily on the raw data collection, rather than the security of the
platform. Additionally, the platforms were either heavy, immobile, power consuming,
excessively capable for the simple task at hand, or down-right physically impeded the
users’ regular gait.
For those reasons, this project firstly compared similar systems described in related
papers, to contrast the identified advantages of a platform proposal.
Secondly, the project explored the possibility to use cheaper and more eﬀicient hard-
ware for the task of using plantar biometrics. It was found to be perfectly feasible to
swap over to an inexpensive Arduino-based microcontroller, rather than using propri-
etary hardware or ARM-based Raspberry Pi’s.
Finally, an analysis was conducted to investigate the security concerns related to a
generic platform for capturing and analysing plantar biometrics. It was found that the
concept had great potential for securing the data of the subjects involved. Additionally, it
was found that the platform naturally prohibited typical attack vectors against biometric
systems. As part of the analysis, the notion of Continuous Authentication was brought
up.
Due to plantar biometrics leaning towards this use case, this subject was also
explored.
In conclusion, this thesis found strong evidence to suggest that the proposed plantar
biometric platform is:
• Perfectly suitable as a plausible authentication method. Said method could either
be as the primary authentication method, or as a secondary multi-factor authen-
tication method.
• A viable platform for ensuring Continuous Authentication.
• A strong contender for further development and fine-tuning.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acronyms
AAA Authentication, Authorisation & Accounting. 34, 35, 46
AES Advanced Encryption Standard. 32
BLE Bluetooth Low Energy. 13
BSN Body Sensory Network. 5
CA Continous Authentication. 8
CIA Confidentiality, Integrity & Availability. 34, 35, 42, 46
ECDHE Elliptic Curve Diﬀie-Hellman key Exchange. 13, 32
FAR False Acceptance Rate. 5
FBS Foot Biometric System. 14, 18, 37–39, 44, 46, 48, 49
FEC Forward Error Correction. 32
FESD Fuzzy Ensemble Subspace Discriminant. 6
FKNN Fine K-Nearest Neighbor. 6
FMR False Match Rate. 7
FNR False Negative Rate. 15
FRR False Rejection Rate. 5
FSVM Fine Gaussian SVM. 6
ICA Independent Component Analysis. 7
IDS Intrusion Detection System. 46
MFA Multi-Factor Authentication. 44, 45, 49
NB Naïve Bayes. 5
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology. 37–40, 44, 55
PA Proof Authority. 14, 17, 36, 37, 40, 41, 44, 45, 50, 54
==PAGE:6==
iv
List of Acronyms
PCA Principle Component Analysis. 6, 7
PII Personal Identifiable Information. 35, 43, 49
RMF Risk Management Framework. 34, 37–39
SBC Single Board Computer. 13
SM Sub-Module. 14, 17, 36, 37, 40, 41, 44, 45
SoC System on a Chip. 32, 52
SVM Support Vector Machine. 6
SVM-GRBF Support Vector Machine with Gaussian Radial Basis Function. 5
UPS Uninterruptible Power Supply. 39
VANET Vehicular Ad-hoc Network. 8
WBAS Wearable Biometric Authentication System. ix, 14, 17–19, 21, 27, 30–33, 36,
37, 40, 41, 43, 45, 47, 48, 53, 54
==PAGE:7==
List of terms
Butterworth filter A type of signal processing filter designed to make a frequency
response to be as flat as possible in the passband. 24
Continous Authentication A method for continually verifying the authenticity of
the user, instead of conventional authentication such as passwords, smart cards,
etc. The traditional methods only ensures security at the time of login, and cannot
guarantee such authentication in the time between login and logout. 5, 8, 37
Data Model The trained and functional pseudo-anonymised model of data derived
from the data subject’s gait and resulting plantar biometrics. 49, 54
Data Subject The human individual from which the data model is derived. 30, 54, 55
Features Features are the elements of the input vectors of the data put into the model.
24, 25
Inferencing time The time between an input has been made to the Arduino board,
until it delivers a classification. 27
Learning rate A parameter for the quantifiable learning allowed from one learning
cycle to the next [Zvo]. 25
Loss The term loss is a summation of errors in the model - it measures how well (or
bad) the model is performing [Riv]. Ideally, you want as low a loss as possible.
However, such loss-values may also result in overfitting. 27
Man in the Middle attack An attack wherein a malicious party intercepts the com-
munications between two legitimate parties, so that it appears that they are com-
municating directly with the other party. v, 8
Masquerading attack An attack where a malicious party presents themselves as a
trustworthy party. This is the key difference between a masquerading attack and
a Man in the Middle attack attack. The malicious party does not need to wait for
a communication with the designated target to start. 8
Overfitting Refers to the model being ’too good’ for the task, resulting in inflexibil-
ity when exposed to new data [Tok]. Thus, a slightly more inaccurate model is
preferable, than one incapable to classify new data. 25, 29
==PAGE:8==
vi
List of terms
Replay attack A simple type of attack wherein a malicious party repeats an older
message to a party. 8
Threat Source The origin of the threat, either a person, or a scenario occurring. May
be either intentional or accidental. 37
Threat The way of exploiting a vulnerability within a system. 37
Vulnerability A specific weakness within a system that may cause a hazard to be
invoked. 37
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The project was supervised by Associate Professor Xenofon Fafoutis and Post Doctorate
Charalampos Orfanidis. The project was carried out from the 23rd of August, 2021, to
the 27th of March 2022. The thesis represents a workload of 30 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, March 26, 2022
Mads Stege (s165243)
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
Over the course of this project, a number of people have provided valuable expertise,
time and resources to help shape this project, the thesis and the actual system.
In no particular order, the author wishes to thank:
• Associate Professor Xenofon Fafoutis & Post Doctorate Charalampos Orfanidis,
for the original project idea, as well as their excellent guidance, feedback and
critique throughout the project.
• Peter I. El-Habr, for his support and inquisitive discussions surrounding my project.
• My relatives, for their advice, tools, and recommendations regarding system design,
ideas, and overall support for this project idea.
• The volunteers, who provided the biometric data for the Wearable Biometric Au-
thentication System (WBAS) system.
• Christopher K. Ellemann, for his recommendations regarding the system security
and the chosen framework of the security analysis.
• Søren Meyer, for his comments and critique of the force sensor circuitry, and
discussion on eliminating possible sources of noise in the data gathering segment.
Disclaimer
Some segments borrow elements and structure from prior graded reports from the Spring
2021 DTU course, ’Computer Security Incident Response’ (course number 02192). These
are solely used as points of reference as the contents within this paper is entirely original.
Unless a third-party source is explicitly specified, diagrams and drawings are to be
regarded as the product of the author.
This project was extended for a total of six weeks beyond its original delivery date
due to hardware failures and medical exemptions.
Lastly, foot-related puns may be used throughout the report.
==PAGE:12==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related works
4
2.1
Sole-based papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Mat-based papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Photography-based papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Continuous Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Design
11
3.1
Prior designs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Chosen design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Final Foot Biometric System design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Error sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Expected system operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Prospective users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Implementation
19
4.1
Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Hurdles along the way
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results & Evaluation
27
5.1
Data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Evaluation and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Considerations of platform characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Security Analysis & Threat model
34
6.1
Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Classification of information & assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
System characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Threat Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.5
Vulnerability Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:13==
Contents
xi
6.6
Control Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.7
Likelihood Determination & Impact Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Discussion
47
7.1
Usability in edge cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Stepping outside the usual scope of binary biometrics . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.3
Viability of solutions involving machine learning - Exceedingly complex?
48
7.4
Viability of biometrics in the modern age . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.5
Introducing IoT into security may worsen current situation . . . . . . . .
49
8
Future work
51
8.1
Improving the current sole’s circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2
Improving the processing unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.3
Adopting entirely new sensor platform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.4
Adding additional sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.5
Adding an additional foot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.6
Prospects of Continuous Authentication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9
Conclusion
55
9.1
Conflict of interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A
Appendix
56
A.1 Data gathering - Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.2 Foot pressure - Heatmap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.3 Final circuit wiring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.4 Information letter and consent form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.5 NIST assessment descriptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Biometrics, the field of using unique biological features to identify a person’s identity is
far from a new concept. Dating back some 31.000 years B.C.[Kel], early cave paintings
and hand prints described distinct human features, enabling one to recognise one another
using rudimentary methods. Over the course of human history, various methods have
been utilised. From Henry Fauld’s paper in 1880 proposing the usage of fingerprints as a
method of identification [CAP90], to modern solutions using brain waves as described by
Vldlamudi and Kishan [VK21], or blood samples as per Cardoso et. al.’s work [Car+10].
With society’s ever progressing demand and need of authentication, novel ideas are
brought forth to help solve the challenge. A relatively novel area of biometrics is the
usage of plantar biometrics, foot sole features, to verify human identities. Within this
niche, proposals typically take on one of three approaches:
• Leg-mounted solutions, with subsystems responsible for data processing.
• Static mats with sensitive sensors.
• Static photographic platforms.
In recent years, plantar biometrics has seen growing interest due to its adherence to
four beneficial properties for its use as authentication [Yeh+18]:
• Universality: There are characteristics that (nearly) every user should have.
• Distinctiveness: There exists suﬀicient difference of characteristics between two
subjects.
• Collectability: Said characteristics are measurable in a quantitative manner.
• Transparency: Lastly, the characteristics are collectable without the user’s notice
or influence. Likewise, the collection will not influence the user in return.
1.1
Outline
This thesis serves as an investigative system-oriented development project, the primary
goal of which is the designing, implementing and evaluating a novel proposal using
plantar biometrics. Throughout this process, a number of alternative proposals from
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
within the field of foot biometrics will be evaluated and referenced for further analysis
of the security aspects of this paper’s proposed solution.
This first chapter 1 introduces the field and concept upon which this work is based,
and the aim of the project. Chapter 2 will detail a number of similar works to this, their
results, and what this work can utilise from them. Chapter 3 will discuss the choices
made in the physical hardware as well as the potential error sources of the platform.
Additionally, the security of existing solutions will also be weighed in on, in order to
create a broader understanding of the potential threats against the system. Following
this, chapter 4 will detail the actual implementation of the proposed solution, and the
challenges born thereof. Working off of this, chapter 5 will go into the gathering and
evaluation of data from the implemented system. Detailing the explicit threat landscape
and system security is a substantial part of the novelty of this project. Thus, chapter
6 will discuss and analyse the security aspects, vulnerabilities and potential controls of
the proposed solution. A brief discussion in chapter 7 will go into various concerns that
has arisen over the course of the project. Chapter 8 will discuss the future prospects
of the solution presented in this work, and what potential areas of improvement that
might bring additional benefits. Lastly, chapter 9 will round off the project findings, and
summarise the lessons learned, both within the context of the security of the platform,
and plantar biometrics as a whole.
1.2
Project objectives
Having discussed the approach of the project, the aim of this project can be divided into
three separate tasks:
1. To investigate the potential and viability of plantar biometrics authentication using
embedded edge computing devices.
2. To analyse the threat landscape of modern plantar authentication systems and
potential weaknesses of such.
3. To compare and draw parallels between the proposed system design, and prior
work within the field.
To clarify, the developed platform should meet the following requirements for it to
be considered an eligible alternative to the proposed biometric-based authentication
platforms from the papers:
• The platform should be capable of correctly authenticating a person based upon
their plantar biometrics.
– The degree of certainty is to be considered, but a high degree of confidence is
not mandated. A lower degree of confidence may be permissible for certain
scenarios or environments.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Project objectives
3
– The certainty should be based on the system’s trained model of the wearer’s
gait - i.e. the system should only be familiar with one individual’s unique
model.
For comparison of the system’s performance, multiple individuals
may be used (see section 5).
• The platform should be light, and unobstructive to the wearers usual leg movement
and walking patterns.
– This is both to preserve the wearer’s comfort and to keep the captured data
as close as possible to the natural walking pattern of the user.
• The platform should be able to capture, compare and be ready to send a credible
result within a timely manner, i.e. less than two seconds.
– Due to the physical limitations in hardware available for the platform, both
in terms of memory and CPU, some delay is expected.
– This measure does not include time taken up by swapping out training the
model, authentication models, poor wiring, etc..
• The system should offer improvements over existing papers’ proposals. This in-
cludes, but not limited to:
– Hardware costs.
– Ergonomics.
– Security and resilience against malicious entities.
– Power consumption.
– Openness of the platform for future developments.
– Applicability for consumer installation and daily usage.
Lastly, some materials was handed out prior to the project starting, namely:
• 1x Arduino Tiny Machine Learning Kit consisting of:
– 1x Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense.
– 1x Tiny Machine Learning Shield.
– 1x OV7675 Camera Module.
– 1x USB A - Micro USB Cable (1m)
• 16x Interlink Force sensors, model number 1027-1001-ND of FSR400, FSR402,
FSR406 and FSR408. 0.018 - 2.04 kg. of force (0.04 - 4.5 Lbs.).
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2
Related works
A number of articles and papers have previously worked on biometrics based on the
characteristics of walking and stepping pattern. Their conclusions and methodologies
vary greatly. For this reason, a summarising table 2.1 helps create an overview of the
various projects, and their results, placed at the end of this chapter.
To help ease differentiating the different methods’ focus and results, they have been
divided into three primary categories based on their method of verification:
• Sole-based: These papers describe using a range of sensors placed on carefully
selected areas on the foot sole. These platforms are mobile, and are to be carried
by the user over the course of a work day.
• Mat-based: These papers describe using a pressure sensitive mat, often placed
at the entrance of a restricted area before allowing passage. These are, of course,
immobile but has a more restrictive platform resulting in better protection against
physical tampering.
• Photography-based: These papers describe using feature extraction, rather than
foot pressure, to distinguish between data subjects. These suggestions are, as with
the mats, immobile, and require the use of a (camera) sensor to capture the relevant
pieces of information.
Whilst most papers only focus on one type of the listed verification methods and then
expanding various iterations of this. However, a small number focused more on biomet-
rics in general, with a sub-discussion on plantar biometrics. One example of this would
be Khoker and Singh’s survey [KS21], which focuses on the broader scope of biometrics,
herein plantar. The duo’s work sheds light on the three types of biometric features, such
as the physiological (face, fingerprint, DNA, iris, etc.), the behavioural (voice, signature,
keystroke patterns, etc.) and the ”soft” features (height, weight, gender, ethnicity, etc.).
Along this open-minded approach, the survey goes on to discuss a number of different
areas of discourse within the field. Within these expected subjects are the affects of age,
the various methods of extractions, and the prospects of multi-modality. Additionally,
the diﬀiculties of user acceptance, an increasing societal reliance on varying degrees of
biometrics and ultimately, the very limitations of the whole concept is also entertained.
The survey rounds up with a brief recap of the different methods, and finishes off with
a taste on some of the future prospects of plantar biometrics.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Sole-based papers
5
2.1
Sole-based papers
Appropriately titled ”I Walk, Therefore I Am”, Yeh et al. [Yeh+18] presents a compre-
hensive overview of the problems typically associated with wearable IoT devices, their
downsides, and the need for changes in both typical policy and standards of security
within the field.
Figure 2.1: Yeh et al.’s collection of various biometric au-
thentication methods for Continuous authentication. Fur-
ther discussed in section 2.4.
They use this introduc-
tion to lead into the concept
of Continous Authentication
through IoT, and discuss a
great many different related
papers of biometrics success
rates.
They also debate a
variety of biometric methods
for Continuous Authentica-
tion, as seen in figure 2.1.
Using
a
Raspberry
Pi
II and six pressure sensors,
their platform used Naïve
Bayes
(NB)
and
Support
Vector Machine with Gaus-
sian Radial Basis Function
(SVM-GRBF) to analyse the data and thereby ultimately generate an authentication
token for individual identification and verification. Whilst initial results showed high
degrees of verification accuracy (a low False Rejection Rate (FRR)), it also highlighted a
potential for two individuals to score high or even similar scores (a high False Acceptance
Rate (FAR)). This was identified to be caused by the humans themselves, or environ-
ment interference. A proposed data purification procedure was implemented to avoid
this, and much cleaner results was derived. At worst, the true individual verification
rate was 99.40% correct, whilst the closest false individual verification rate was 80%
at best.
Describing the concept of a Body Sensory Network (BSN), Ivanov et al. [Iva+20] cites
an expectation for growing need of biometric footwear to help facilitate this. By using a
segmented design (as explained in section 3.1.1), they propose a two-part system, with
one part being fastened to the shoe sole and transmitting the data to a central processing
system. The argument is that this design allows for only minimal weight and equipment
being installed on the user.
Using nine separate sensors and a prior paper on the optimal placement of these,
the group sat out to investigate four distinct neural network architectures using the
previously touched multimodal sensor insoles.
They found evidence suggesting that
these multimodal sensor-enabled footwear could serve a biometric purpose in the next
generation of BSN. With a 70% segmentation overlap, Ivanov and his team was able to
reach a mean accuracies of up to 93.3% ± 0.009 with some architectures.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Related works
Taking a more humble approach to the number of sensors and instead relying on
different parameters, Huang et al. [Hua+06] proposes a different modular system design
that only uses four individual force sensors. On the other hand, they remedy this by
adding peripheral parameters, such as:
• The tilt angle
• Gyroscope readings
• A bend sensor
• And an accelerometer
Whereas the previous papers solely focused on using force sensors for acquiring their
data sets, Huang’s team instead focused on broadening their scope of possible data
sources. Such sensors can be many times smaller than a regular force sensor, like the
FSR402 sensors that was also utilised. The parameters also adhere to the four essen-
tial authentication principles of universitality, distinctiveness, collectability and trans-
parency. This approach would, after carefully extracting the most valuable data using
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) and a Support Vector Machine (SVM) to train
and classify the data, result in successful recognition rates of about 98%
The papers highlighted in this section details the potential for a platform, similar
to the one described in the Implementation.Whilst the various solutions have different
designs and approaches to gathering information, processing it, and presenting their find-
ings, the core concept of a wearable solution remains constant. This idea, combined with
the very high accuracy acquired, supports the notion of the eligibility of the platform.
2.2
Mat-based papers
A humble but still very much worthwhile paper on the topic of footprint identification can
be found in Keatsamarn’s writing on the topic [KP18]. Foregoing the previous paper’s
approach of explaining the concepts and use cases, the author instead dives head first
into their methodology and hardware before continuing with a brief explanation on the
software’s workings and design. Using a simple Convolutional neural network to deep
learning, Keatsamarn’s network was able to reach an impressive 92.69% recognition rate
using nothing but the footprints of a human.
In stark contrast to the previous work, Basheer et al. [Bas+21] instead leads into
a much more diverse scope of investigation for their work. Trying their hands at three
different approaches, the authors sought to identify the most reliable algorithm for the
purpose of creating their enhanced human footprint matcher. Using either Fine Gaus-
sian SVM (FSVM), Fine K-Nearest Neighbor (FKNN) and Fuzzy Ensemble Subspace
Discriminant (FESD). Whilst the FSVM and FKNN only reaches recognition rates of
84.7% and 92.3% respectively, the FESD reaches an impressive 98.89% recognition rate.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Photography-based papers
7
Even more impressively is the False Match Rate (FMR) (the rate of falsely identifying
as a genuine subject) of just 0.01%.
Across a span of 220 volunteers, Basheer’s group’s results speak for themselves, as an
impressive contribution to the possibility of using a static mat as a method to acquire
plantar biometrics.
Taking on a more recent approach to using sensitive mats, Yun et al. [Yun+07]
decided to go with a combination of the dynamic footprints as discussed in Kaetsamarn’s
report, along with the actual walking gait patterns of the data subject. Despite the
creativity of approach, Yun’s team was ’only’ able to achieve a 90% recognition rate.
In addition to the mat’s need for additional spacing, the very authentication method
mandates that only one user are stepping on it, at a time. This may potentially slow
down the processing rate of individuals.
Nagwanshi and Dubey’s [KD12] work on biometric authentication is a concise but
adequate introduction and review on the niche of pressure mat sensor systems. After a
brief rundown of various other work, the duo starts by explaining the typical algorithms
used for the purpose, and their respective processes of standardising their inputs. Espe-
cially their work on documenting the distinct footprint pressure surface distribution is
of great interest, as it may hint at the greatest areas of interest for a system like the one
discussed in this thesis (see section 4.1.2).
Whilst not as relevant to the topic of this paper, the work of the listed researchers
did provide valuable input on the specifics of the way feet press down on the sole.
2.3
Photography-based papers
The notion of the necessity and purpose of dedicated and special hardware is thoroughly
debunked in Kushwaha et al.’s [KNS18] work from 2018. Using a humble paper scanner,
the team set out to investigate the prospects of various geometry feature extraction,
including Shape Descriptor, Shape Segmentation and Eigen-Foot. Whilst the various
methods for feature extraction results in successful recognition rates of 75.8%, 51% and
92.5%, the authors’ notion of potential use cases are especially valuable. The idea of
introducing these systems in places with a great amount of human movement, such as
places of worship, airports or stadiums.
Khoker et al.
[KSK15] provide an important highlight of the difference between
recognition rate and verification rate in their work investigating the possibilities of foot-
print recognition with PCA and Independent Component Analysis (ICA). Whilst their
Euclidian, City Block, Cosine and Correlation models were only able to achieve a recog-
nition rate between 75% to 79%, the verification rate achieved an impressive 95.25% and
97.23% depending on whether PCA or ICA was used.
Lastly, Uhl and Wild [UW08] work investigates a number of different plantar features
that may be extracted using a photosensitive sensor. These include the overall shape
and geometrical information focusing on characteristics such as length, shape and area of
the silhouette curve, sole/toe length, the soleprint, minutia-based ballprint features and
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Related works
Eigenfeet features. Showcasing the great diversity of potential features to find within
this type of biometric serves as a great inspiration for future works within the field, to
identify potential areas of discovery.
2.4
Continuous Authentication
As touched on briefly before, Yeh’s discussion [Yeh+18] on the topic highlights the
potential for an adversary to infiltrate a user session after initial authentication, thus
validating the need for Continous Authentication. Given the authors’ in depth investiga-
tion on this subject, it was concluded that this work should investigate the field of this
topic as well. It will not be included in table 2.1, as it is a subgenre of the project.
Nag et al.’s work [NRD17] discusses a broad variety of methods for Continous Authen-
tication (CA), including niche fields, such as stylometry captured from mobile devices.
These include application usage, web browsing, GPS location, gesture patterns, physical
handling of the device, etc. Similarly, Palaniswamy et al. [Pal+] discusses the usage of
CA in Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs), in order to prevent new attacks target-
ing said networks, like Replay attacks, Man in the Middle attacks, and Masquerading
attacks.
Similarly to this work and previously mentioned related works, Acar et al. [Aca+18]
proposed a wearable authentication device, e.g. a smart watch. The device captured
keystroke dynamics periodically, to help prevent insider threats. A staggering accuracy
of 99.2% was achieved, with an error rate as low as 1% with 30 seconds of processing
time. Whilst attempts to reduce this time requirement down to 20 seconds with a slightly
larger error rate of 2-3% was done, this method of authenticating a user is especially
imperceptible, as people are already used to wearing a watch on their wrist.
Similarly, of equally indiscernible methods, Monda and Bours [MB13] suggests using
the user’s computer mouse’s movements to try and recognise the user.
Testing six
different machine learning algorithms, they identified a methodology to achieve a state
where ”the genuine user has never been classified as an impostor throughout a full
session whereas the average number of mouse actions an impostor could perform before
detection is 94 from the best classification algorithm with a person based threshold.”.
On a similar note of using computer peripherals, Ananya [AS18] discusses a variety
of methods using keystroke dynamics. Like with the former mentioned methods, this
utilisation of everyday tools allows for seamless integration into the user’s daily tasks,
as well as entertainment.
In summary, CA is an area of great interest and attention within biometrics. As
such, it is worthwhile to entertain the notion of the potential for this project to include
such measures in future developments (see section 8.6).
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Contribution
9
2.5
Contribution
Having gone over the various dispositions and results of the peer research, it is evident
that they all show great success in authenticating the user through various means. How-
ever, the potential for an adversary to exploit and potentially infiltrate the systems is
both substantial and concerning. Additionally, these proposals often necessitates ex-
pensive equipment and materials, or the need for strapping cumbersome hardware onto
the data subject. All the while, sacrificing the individual’s privacy and ease of daily
operations. To rectify this deficiency within the field of plantar biometrics, this project
will seek to investigate and analyse the likelihood of a successful compromisation of the
system, through an analytical and security-oriented approach.
The primary contribution of this thesis project is the detailed proposal for an au-
thentication system using an edge computing-based IoT platform.
Secondly, an analysis on security and overall system resilience against attackers is
made, to illustrate the benefits of this system over alternative proposals by other re-
searchers and developers, also referenced in this paper.
These include costs, power
consumption, resilience against physical attacks and system hardware footprint, among
others.
Finally, throughout the process of presenting beforementioned solution, discussions
on various concerns that occurred over the development process is made. This is done
to provide the reader with a detailed perspective of the many security concerns faced by
modern day authentication methods, and the proposed platform.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Related works
Paper
Main contribution
This paper
[Yun+07] Solely focuses on two metrics on
static mats for recognition.
Combines
three
different
walking
metrics with a mobile wearable solu-
tion instead.
[KD12]
Investigative
work
on
different
recognition methods, and compares
the respective recognition rates.
Utilises some of the same concepts,
discusses the usage of various met-
rics and provides a physical system
for verification.
[KNS18]
Focuses on pictures of the shape of
feet, as the only metric, and achieves
a accuracy of 75.8% correctly veri-
fied individuals.
Takes additional parameters into ac-
count to achieve a greater degree of
accuracy and dependability.
[Bas+21]
Proposes
a
Fuzzy
Ensemble
Learning-based algorithm.
Also
compares similar algorithms’ perfor-
mance in contrast.
Focuses more on the holism and ap-
plicability of the system.
[KS21]
Compares different methods for bio-
metric recognition using feet.
Is oriented towards different goal,
and does not concern itself overly
with the results of individual algo-
rithms.
[KSK15]
Introduces a PCA and ICA-based
technique to identify individuals.
Proposes an entire system for secur-
ing facilities, and a more practical ap-
plication of plantar biometrics.
[KP18]
Authors introduces novel neural net-
work trained models to identify peo-
ple from feet images.
Utilises a different modelling base, on
weight and current measurements.
[UW08]
Tested various methods of recogni-
tion, with the best performing being
the Eigenfeet-algorithm.
Utilises a different modelling base, on
weight and current measurements.
[Yeh+18]
Proposes a wearable system similar
to this paper’s, based a Raspberry
Pi and a ML technique called SVM-
GRBF.1
Proposes a system with a smaller
footprint,
reduced
power
usage,
greater physical security and overall
system resilience.
[Iva+20]
Proposes similar IoT system as this
paper, but with a secondary data
processing node.
Overall 93.3%
identification rate.
This paper focuses on implement-
ing a single-unit system, without the
need for a secondary processing unit
to collect and compare the data.
[Hua+06] Proposes system with multiple sen-
sors, sending data for further pro-
cessing on a secondary stationary
system.
Proposes a monolithic system re-
stricted to one central unit placed on
top of the shoe, for authentication.
Table 2.1: The table above details various similar papers associated with the field of
feet biometrics, their primary contributions, and how this paper differs from these, and
provides new information.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Design
To explain the reasoning for the selected system design of this paper, a detour in to the
challenges and decisions of peer papers prior to this, are presented.
3.1
Prior designs
Related work within the field of plantar-based biometrics has made a number of different
proposals for implementation into a bona fide authentication scenario.
3.1.1
Modular system
Some of the related papers, [Iva+20] [Hua+06] [Yeh+18], have proposed a wearable
system consisting of two separate units.
Each of these are then tasked with either
data gathering, or data processing. This system offers up a number of ergonomic and
implementation-wise advantages:
• The sensory system on the shoe can be stripped down to the bare necessities for
data gathering and transmission, both of which are very light in demands for
computational processing1.
• Offloading the data processing allows for potentially faster processing of data, as
a stationary processing unit may allow for more powerful hardware.
• Allocating the data processing to a single entity allows for easier integration with
existing systems, and monitoring by organisations’ IT departments.
However, within the context of system security and possible points of entry, this model
exposes a number problematic key points:
• Slimming down the data gathering platform to only contain the bare necessities
for gathering data means that countermeasures such as encryption and check sums
are not possible to be made.
1Admittedly, the time of the papers’ publishing may also indicate why this was a concern. There
has been a rapid growth in the technical prowess of micro controllers over the past 15-20 years. As
such, constrictive hardware capabilities may have limited the potential for other solutions to be viable
for this purpose.
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Design
• The transportation of data between the micro controller responsible for gathering
the data, and the actual data processing unit poses a risk, as malicious entities
may sniff out improperly secured data packages.
• Centralising the data and models of people also makes for a great target on that
specific core-critical system. Given that such a system would mandate extensive
reach to accommodate various interfaces and tools in the facility, a successful
breach would allow for wide-spanning accessibility for the adversary.
In summary, a modular system pursues stability, ease of implementation/manage-
ment, and costs.
3.1.2
Monolithic system
Monolithic systems are instead a self-contained system, capable of both gathering and
processing the data for comparison to a pre-trained model. This type of system offers
some advantages over the modular systems in both security and hardness:
• Advances in both processing power, memory, and storage, allows for additional
countermeasures in the form of encryption, check sums, certificates, etc.
• Eliminating the need for transportation of data between the data gathering system
and the data processing system, a malicious entity would need physical access to
the device in order to grasp the sensitive models and data.
• Reorienting the actual data processing back onto the data gathering board makes
lateral movement diﬀicult, as each node would only be familiar with this distinct
data subject. This heightens the resilience of the system, and overall security.
While this type of system offers new benefits, and eliminates some of the segmented
system’s weaknesses, it also introduces a number of new concerns:
• Using a more powerful platform may involve devices with vulnerable designs or
exposed ports. It would be trivial for a malicious entity to directly attack the
device. This could either mean leaking the source code or infecting the system
with a malicious piece of software.
• Powerful platforms would also need further onboard batteries to operate for longer
periods without interruption. This would add weight and additional complexity to
the circuitry, as the batteries are often the heaviest piece of a system of this size.
• Using more resourceful equipment also opens up the possibility of something un-
related to the task failing. This may potentially hinder or even trigger a failure in
the process.
In summary, a monolithic system pursues greater levels of security and independence,
removal of unsafe communications, and greater overall system resilience.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Chosen design
13
3.2
Chosen design
Having discussed and considered the various pros and cons of the two types of system
designs, it is evident that an ideal solution would be to combine the two in pursuit of a
stable, secure and suﬀicient system.
To have the ability to process data directly alongside the user securely, while retaining
both a small form factor and low costs/power usage would make for the most suited
system.
Through a bit of investigation, it became clear that this far fetched idea was not too
surrealistic. Prior papers have used both Raspberry Pi boards, and custom embedded
circuits in this system design, allowing for a relatively small form factor. Another can-
didate outside this field of small Single Board Computer (SBC), is the humble Arduino
microcontroller unit. These boards uses an array of pins to enable rapid prototyping in
embedded systems, whilst retaining a great deal of control of the system.
A number of different Arduino boards are available for various purposes. A newly
introduced series of ”NANO”-boards come equipped with a multitude of sensors, con-
nectivity in the form of both Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) and regular Bluetooth®,
and the addition of a powerful 32-bit ARM®Cortex™-M4 CPU. The M4 processor has
ushered in a new age of microcontrollers capable of astounding feats within the world of
AI, allowing for a myriad of use cases. The low physical profile, low power consumption
and the option for built-in cryptographic tools like Elliptic Curve Diﬀie-Hellman key Ex-
change (ECDHE), SHA-256 hashing, and AES-128 bit encryption via the ATECC608A
crypto chip, are all very favourable traits in a processing platform for this project.
For the reasons listed above, it was decided to go with this Arduino platform, as it
appeared to be both the most novel and the most capable of the platforms considered
for the objectives given. Figure 3.1 showcases how an Arduino-based platform could
interact as an authentication system using its onboard communication channels.
Figure 3.1: Proposed system design using an Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense microcon-
troller.
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Design
3.3
Final Foot Biometric System design
Firstly, the term, Foot Biometric System (FBS), will from now on be used to describe
the entirety of the biometric system including all of its components.
3.3.1
The Wearable Biometric Authentication System
(WBAS)
The shoe-mounted part of the system is the first step of the authentication process. The
WBAS sensors are placed inside a shoe sole, whilst an externally mounted processing unit
captures the data and compares it to a pre-trained model. The system is then responsible
for transmitting the calculated authentication score, upon the wearer initiating a request
mandating a validation through the FBS.
3.3.2
The Sub-Module (SM)
In order for the wearer of the WBAS to interact with their organisation’s assets, an
interface is required. This is where the secondary part of the system, the Sub-Module
(SM), comes into action. The SM may be a door lock, a file system server, a computer
lock or any other barrier that either prohibits access or guards valuable assets. Examples
of an employee requesting access to said assets could be via:
• Physical presence (Bluetooth or WiFi).
• Scanning of an ID card.
• Pressing a unique ID code.
• Etc.
3.3.3
The Proof Authority (PA)
In order to validate and monitor the data subjects’ movements, requests and authentica-
tion scores, a central Proof Authority (PA) is necessary. This system carries the highest
degree of trust, and should be serviced within the facility’s own IT infrastructure.
3.4
Error sources
Having now decided upon an applicable design, the next step is to explore any potential
error source and fields of uncertainty aﬀiliated with this. Within the field of biometrics,
a discussion of potential error sources of the model data to disclose any potential areas
of conflicting convictions is highly relevant.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Error sources
15
3.4.1
Impact of age
The primary benefit of biometrics is that it is diﬀicult for one to forget a fingerprint at
home, or how one performs a face scan. However, the natural effects of ageing of data
subjects may be a potential area of concern, since any models or parameters trained
after the characteristics of a data subject might result in higher False Negative Rate
(FNR).
Depending on the type of biometrics, varying degrees of study has been made:
• Kohker’s work [KS21] states that little research has been made on the effects of
ageing on footprints.
• Meanwhile, Lanitis [Lan10] explains that loss of muscle strength, arthritis, and
other age-related causes is likely to have an adverse effect on the movement patterns
of the data subjects. Especially Parkinson’s disease is highlighted as problematic,
as described by Jankovic & Kapadia [JK01].
Given the project scope of a system capable of capturing both movement patterns and
footprints, particular attention should be observed when discussing the viability of the
system.
3.4.2
Impact of injury and biology
Given the system’s reliance of leg and foot movement, one obvious source of errors
would be injuries sustained on the lower part of the body or general nerve damages.
Any trauma, fracture, or laceration inflicted may change the way a data subject walks
even by minute details in order to alleviate pain and discomfort.
Another often overlooked area of new technology is the difference in male and female
bodies and their respective susceptibility to genetic disorders. One such effect is the
prevalence of hip dysplasia in women [SB14], and type 2 diabetes in men [Wan+08]
- the latter especially may contribute to deteriorating feeling and blood circulation in
extremities, including the feet. It is no surprise that should either such situation arise,
this system could potentially falter, and in a worst case scenario, fail to authenticate the
wearer.
Lastly, a different concern is people suffering from flat feet (Pes Planus, or fallen
arches) may necessitate a different orientation of the force sensors embedded in the sole,
compared to an individual with ordinary feet arches.
3.4.3
Impact of intoxication from drugs and/or
alcoholics
Undoubtedly, the effects of euphoric and/or illegal substances on the wearer’s gait and
movement patterns would impede the system’s reliability and authentication of the
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Design
wearer. An overall disclaimer of the system’s usability should be made, to only be worn
by sober users.
3.4.4
Impact of operating temperature and humidity
As per the data sheet [Ele] for the chosen variable resistor, the following operating
temperatures documented in table 3.1 affects the resistor’s average resistance
Operating Temperature Performance
Average resistance change
Cold (-40°C after 1 hour)
-5%
Hot (+85°C after 1 hour
-15%
Hot & Humid (+85°C 95RH after 1 hour)
+10%
Table 3.1: Oﬀicially documented effect of temperature on the force sensors used.
The shoes will undoubtedly be exposed to a range of temperatures when worn by
the user. Suﬀicient insulation from humidity and heat from the user’s feet must be
implemented to prevent influencing the sensors in a negative manner. This insulation
should also retain the sensors placement on the sole, to avoid them moving around
==PAGE:31==
3.5 Expected system operation
17
3.5
Expected system operation
An elementary sequence diagram (figure 3.2) has been made to illustrate the proposed
system’s basic communication design:
Figure 3.2: Sequence diagram showcasing the proposed protocol paradigm for the system
1. Initially, the WBAS wearer (denoted as FBS on the image) would request access
to a system, piece of material or a facility. They would send along a unique ID
value for said wearer, to identify themselves.
2. The SM system responsible for allowing access to materials or facilities would pass
the request for access along to the central PA system, along with the wearer’s
unique ID.
3. The PA will look up the unique ID in an internal database, to see if:
• The wearer has requested access to other systems prior.
• The time skip since their last request for access. If the time is outdated, a
new score is requested.
• The recorded authenticity score of their latest entry is ’good enough’. If the
score is too low to access the materials or facilities requested, a new score is
requested.
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Design
4. Hereafter, the system grants access if the dated score is suﬀiciently high and not
expired. If the score fails any of these checks, a new score is requested of the
WBAS.
3.6
Prospective users
An important aspect of this type of system, is to consider the potential user(s) of it.
An organisation that administrates high-value data or materials might realistically have
need for reliable biometrics. Such examples include:
• Military (sub)contractors.
• Medical research and development.
• Federal institutions.
• (IT) Security or surveillance bureaus.
A system such as the FBS would mandate a certain level of IT Security maturity,
to effectively operate the FBS. This includes suﬀicient network coverage, an up-to-date
security suite and an experienced IT staff.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
4.1
Hardware
The arguably most diﬀicult part of the project revolved around designing a functional
and sturdy platform to gather the biometric data. The platform needed to be both light,
small and easy to tinker with, should the need arise.
4.1.1
Circuitry
Given that the Arduino had already been chosen as the centrepiece of the device, bread-
boards could be used to design a rudimentary circuit based on the oﬀicial data sheet
from the force sensors [Ele]. Figure 4.1 highlights this concept, by using the Arduino’s
internal 3.3V rail and three analogue pins to read off the circuit’s sensors.
(a) Proposed circuitry design
from breadboard
(b) Finished circuit
implementation
Figure 4.1: Initial circuit proposal from breadboard prototype, and the finished circuit
for the WBAS.
The decision to use the 3.3V rail, over the 5V was that in order to use the higher
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Implementation
voltage, an external power source had to be supplying power1.
Further more, it is
technically possible to use the microcontroller’s digital pins to supply a voltage to power
the variable resistors. This was considered, but was ultimately scrapped to instead use
a more consistent and purpose-built source instead. However, using the digital pins may
have allowed for greater power-saving features, by switching off the power supply to the
force sensors when they are not being measured. As the board would ”only” read the
sensors 50 times a second, there is a potential for a lot of downtime saving power by
cutting the power outside of the time of measuring.
The variable resistors works optimally and with the least strain, when a current of
no more than 1 mA runs through the voltage divider circuit. Given an input voltage
of 3.3V, and the fact that the variable resistors provide, at max, a 1,500Ωresistance,
a 1,800 Ωresistor was needed. This conclusion was simply derived from Ohm’s law
(V/R = A −→3.3V/3300Ω= 0.001A) However, at the time of prototyping, no such
resistor was available, and a 2,200Ωresistor was used instead. Whilst not ideal, it will
suﬀice.
A complete diagram of the wiring of the finished circuit can be viewed in appendix
A.3.
4.1.2
Sole design
The choice for the placement of the sole was rather rudimentary. Related works, such
as Ivanov’s [Iva+20] referenced some earlier work seeking to investigate the design of a
sensor insole for gait analysis [Iva+19]. Combined this with Keatsamarn and Pintavi-
rooj’s heat map of plantar pressure points [KP18] (see appendix A.2) showcasing the
exact areas of the sole which experiences the greatest amount of pressure, the following
sole layout could be made, as show in figure 4.2.
The colourful ribbon cable extending downwards in 4.2(c) connects directly to the
10-pin cluster in the bottom left of image 4.1(b).
1This is due to the fact that the USB power does not provide suﬀicient power for the 5V rail. As per
the board’s oﬀicial datasheet [Arda], at least 6.5V of current must be provided for the 5V to function
properly
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Hardware
21
(a) Cropped heat map of
plantar pressure [KP18]
(b) Drafted sole layout
(c) Implemented sole layout
Figure 4.2: Chosen sole layout for the WBAS. Sensors were referred to as FS1-FS3, with
FS1 and FS2 being placed in the front on the ball of the foot, and FS3 at the heel.
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Implementation
4.1.3
Finalised hardware design
Given the need for ease access and monitoring, it was decided to place the Arduino
circuit on the back of the heel. This meant that the USB port was easily accessible, and
that the processing board was out of the way of the foot when the shoe was being put
on, or taken off.
Further more, a small band of velcro was glued onto the back of the circuit and the
shoe, to make it easy to remove the circuit from the shoe again, should any problems
arise.
Figure 4.3: Final shoe design - note the scale of the minuscule print compared to the
much larger shoe.
4.2
Software
Early on in the project, the scope for the system’s training and modelling of data was
recognised as a central piece of the project’s success. However, the project’s focus was
not in the finer details of the models, but rather in the eligibility of the platform as
a concept - the true purpose of the project was to see if the platform was feasible and
suﬀicient for the task at hand, not the investigation on which machine-learning algorithm
or neural network architecture is most optimal.
This approach made for some interesting choices of methodology along the way of
the project.
4.2.1
Choice of methodology
The choice of the most suitable approach for the beforementioned task, was not an easy
one - There were pros and cons for each approach to be considered. Delegating the
time, effort and resources necessary to develop a machine learning algorithm, as well as
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Software
23
a neural network from scratch was technically possible. However, combined with little
to no prior experience within the field, and very limited value to be gained from such
an arduous task, it was decided to look for viable alternatives.
Ideally, delegating the tiresome task at hand to a third party service provider instead
would arguably yield a better time utilisation, a more consistent data processing and
a less error-prone comparison and evaluation. For those reasons, Edge Impulse™[Edg],
a California-based service provider was chosen. Edge Impulse specialises in bringing
machine learning to a wider audience of developers. Their platform allows for a myriad
of processing platforms to be used for both data gathering and model generation, as well
as varying degrees of control of the data processing and neural architecture.
After consulting the respective project supervisors and getting the go-ahead, it was
decided to relegate the responsibility to this provider.
4.2.2
Data collection
In order to generate suﬀicient data, the decision was made to mimic the settings of similar
papers. Thus, a data frequency of 50 Hertz was chosen. The six data points (three
gyroscope axis and three force sensors) were recorded for between 100 to 300 seconds,
resulting in between 30,000 to 90,000 data points captured for each data subject.
Due to the only available shoe provided for the project being a size 45 (EU standard),
this imposed a minor restriction on the data subjects eligible for data acquisition. All
ten data subjects who volunteered for the project were:
• Biological male.
• Between 22 and 78 years of age.
• Weighed between 70 and 105 kilograms.
• Between 170 and 195 centimetres tall.
Some subjects reported minor medical conditions that may have an impact on their
gait pattern. Said conditions made for inspiration for section 3.4.1, but was otherwise
not discussed or noted over the course of the experiments. This was due to the conclusion
that any permanent trauma or condition influencing the model, would also help create
a more unique model.
For example, one data subject noted suffering from fallen arches or flat feet. This
resulted in the front force sensors (placed on the left and right side of the ball of the
foot) being activated and released near simultaneously. Meanwhile, another data subject
without such medical history showed a clearly defined period of time between the two
force sensors peaking. Such data patterns was also shown in the work of Ivanov’s work
[Iva+20], indicating the data collected where both correct and replicatable.
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Implementation
Figure 4.4: Sensor readings of Data Subject 01.
Note
how Force Sensor 3 (FS3) peaks first, followed by Force
Sensor 1 and 2. Vertical axis: Relative captured value;
Horizontal axis: Time in ms.
Edge Impulse provides a
number of different guides
and examples for gathering
data.
One such guide in-
cluded a piece of code as an
example, in the documenta-
tion for their Data Forwarder
v.
1.14.3 [Impa].
This
code was expanded to also in-
clude the data gathered from
the pressure sensors.
As
per the documentation, val-
ues should be separated by ei-
ther a tab, or a comma, and
sent via a 115,200 baud rate. Please see appendix A.1 for the full code.
The uploading of this code onto the shoe’s processing board is necessary, as Edge
Impulse’s own ’Data Forwarder’ CLI program uses the output of the code to identify
the number of sensors and the sampling rate.
As per Edge Impulse’s recommendations, a 80%/20%-relationship between training
and test data will be utilised for the models. This ensures that a suﬀicient number of
data will be used to train the models, whilst a representative amount of data can be
used for testing the model.
4.2.3
Design of data processing and Neural Network
As touched on earlier, Edge Impulse allows for some measure of customisation of the
project ’Impulse’, the structure of data processing and neural network. It is also pos-
sible to set up custom processing blocks to fulfil specific tasks or satisfy niche metrics.
However, for the task at hand, generic ’blocks’ will be used.
Figure 4.5 describes the details of the chosen Impulse. Firstly, the acquired data is
sent through a Spectral Analysis [Impc], used to extract frequency and power character-
istics of the signals. It works by:
1. Scaling the raw input signal.
2. Applying a Butterworth filter.
3. Adding the root mean square of the output to the Features’ list.
This output is then subjugated to a Raw Data [Impb] processing block. This simply
applies an additional scaling of the input axis. This action is described as ”great for
signals that have already been pre-processed, and if you just need to feed your data into
the Neural Network block” by Edge Impulse.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Software
25
Figure 4.5: Full design of both data processing and neural network architecture. Note
the two separate hidden layers (denoted with serrated edges), in between the input and
output layer (thicker edges).
Next, the data is fed into a Keras-based Neural Network architecture to try and ’learn’
patterns by which to classify data. Keras is an open-source Python Library running on
top of the well known machine learning platform TensorFlow [Ten].
For the purpose of avoiding potentially Overfitting the model, a Learning rate of
0.00015 was chosen, over the course of 100 training cycles using trial and error.
The Neural Network consists of four layers, these being an input layer with 366
Features, before being processed by another two ”hidden” layers, denoted in the diagram
with a stapled line. These layers serve as mathematical functions seeking to produce an
output specific to an intended result - i.e. they apply weights to the values. Lastly, the
output of these are classified into 10 separate classes, one for each data subject.
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Implementation
4.3
Hurdles along the way
It is a natural occurrence that obstacles and unpredicted delays factor into the shaping
of the project. In this segment, some of the most influential hindrances are noted, so as
to better convey the challenges that was tackled during the project.
4.3.1
Noise and circuitry saturation
Whilst developing the early prototypes for the project, it was found that increasing the
number of variable force sensors inevitably lead to increasing noise pollution on the
remaining sensors. The exact cause of this was never identified, however, a number of
potential causes were eliminated:
• The software was ruled out to be an issue through trial and error.
• The type of force sensor (FS400, FS402, FS406) installed had no effects - the noise
persisted.
• Alternating from having individual digital pins provide voltage across the force
sensors to instead rely on the board’s internal 3.3VOut pin instead provided no
differences.
The source of the noise may have originated from outside interference or poor con-
nectivity in the breadboard. A small capacitor, such as a 100 µF placed between the
output from each voltage divider and ground level may have improved the noise ratio.
However, given the time constraints imposed on the project, as well as the desire to
make new progress, it was decided to flesh out a functional prototype without noise.
This was possible, so long as no more than three sensors was attached.
4.3.2
Malfunctioned Processing Board
In the process of developing the prototype board, the beforementioned noise resulted in
a number of different hypotheses concerning the origins of the problem. One of which,
was the potential for the Arduino’s 3.3V power circuit being of insuﬀicient quality to
run four resistors parallel - even if the resulting current would only be minuscule. This
may then have caused some fluctuations or fluttering in the read outs.
To mitigate this, an external 6.5V power source was connected to the board’s VIn
and ground pins, so that power may be drawn from the board’s 5VOut pin. However,
during the prototyping process, a stray wire accidentally touched a connection, resulting
in 6.5V running into a 5VOut for a short period. This caused irrevocable damage to the
Arduino, and it became unresponsive and would no longer accept code pushes.
To mitigate this loss, two additional Arduino boards was purchased, for further
prototyping in case another mishap occurred.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Results & Evaluation
Having now a functional data gathering platform, as well as a usable data acquisition
and processing system, the gathering of data can begin.
5.1
Data collection
Before equipping the shoe, all volunteers were handed a Subject Information Letter, as
well as an Informed Consent Form to sign. The volunteers were given the choice between
a Danish or an English rendition. Please see appendix A.4 for the full details. Likewise,
all participants were given identical directives prior to walking, to ensure equal and
suﬀicient instruction.
The volunteers were asked to walk casually until instructed to stop, in their usual
walking pattern along a flat distance.
They were to ignore the adjacent researcher
walking behind them, with a laptop collecting data. This included to avoid coordinating
their gait or speed to that of the researcher. Likewise, they were asked to note if anything
felt off, hurt, they would like a break, or if anything felt uncomfortable otherwise.
Each volunteer was given a designated moniker to easily group their data, such as
”Data Subject XX”, or ”DSXX” for short. The relation between the volunteer and the
nickname is only known by the author.
5.2
Results
Using Edge Impulse allows for easy comparison of test data to the trained model classes.
A confusion matrix, as shown in table 5.1, highlights the performance of the model.
A discussion may be, that the WBAS should only need to recognise a single individual.
In some ways, the model’s robustness and accuracy is put under greater stress, than it
would if only a single data subject were to be recognised. Additionally, by presenting
the data in a matrix and organising it in this manner, comparisons to related works such
as Yeh [Yeh+18] or Basheer [Bas+21] is much easier.
Overall, a 94.3% accuracy was achieved, with a a Loss of 1.87. Additionally, Edge
Impulse reported a 27 millisecond Inferencing time, a peak ram usage of 2.3 KB and a
flash memory usage of 160.0 KB.
==PAGE:42==
28
5 Results & Evaluation
Tester/Classifier
DS01
DS02
DS03
DS04
DS05
DS06
DS0
DS08
DS09
DS10
DS01
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
DS02
0%
87.5%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
6.3%
6.3%
0%
DS03
0%
0%
95%
0%
0%
0%
5%
0%
0%
0%
DS04
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
DS05
0%
0%
0%
0%
94.7%
0%
0%
5.3%
0%
0%
DS06
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
88.2%
2.0%
9.8%
0%
0%
DS07
0%
0%
1.9%
0%
1.9%
9.4%
86.8%
0%
0%
0%
DS08
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
0%
DS09
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
DS10
0%
0%
0%
1.8%
0%
0%
0%
0%
1.8%
96.4%
F1 Score
1.00
0.93
0.95
0.97
0.96
0.89
0.91
0.91
0.98
0.98
Table 5.1: Confusion matrix showcasing the model’s recognition rate between the 10 classes of data subjects. The F1 Score
rates how successful the classifier is - it is the harmonic mean of precision and recall [Bae].
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Evaluation and discussion
29
5.3
Evaluation and discussion
The results gathered showed consistent recognition rate across the classifications. Com-
bined with a low inferencing time of just 27 ms, this indicates that the system is indeed
functional for usage in a real-life implementation, and for usage with Continuous Au-
thentication.
The data and the results also demonstrates how the system can be used for a gradient-
scale authentication scheme, to restrict user access rights depending on the latest recog-
nition score.
5.3.1
Pros and cons
Whilst the results are very impressive and highlights the potential for a lightweight and
more affordable solution, there are a number of problematic factors to keep in mind:
• Neither the algorithm nor the data was optimised beyond rudimentary data pro-
cessing, and inserted into a Nearest-Neighbour classification (using Keras). This
may lead to potential errors.
• The volunteers all shared a similar physiological stature. Additionally, the only
shoe available may have resulted in poor data acquisition due to slight shoe size
differences.
• Little to no deep investigation on the topic of potential Overfitting of the model
- this again was not the explicit purpose of the project, but rather something to
note.
• In order to accommodate the volunteers to the greatest extent, the data acquisition
had to be done close to their homes. This meant that the distance they walked
may not have been completely level and smooth.
On the other hand, some positives were also evident:
• The data and subsequent neural network for classification was made for a much
more complex scenario/model, than a likely implementation of the system. As
mentioned previously, the model only needs to be certain of one individual’s iden-
tity, not to classify more than 10 different people.
• Very little data has been gathered. Between 100 and 300 seconds worth of data
was acquired for each data subject. An absolutely minuscule amount of data, in
comparison to contemporary works. This means that whilst the amount of data
for training and testing is very modest, the model had little to no issues achieving
100% recognition rate for multiple data subjects.
• Despite only using 6 data vectors (three force sensors, three axis), of which 3 were
minuscule in the final result, very consistent and assured results were produced.
==PAGE:44==
30
5 Results & Evaluation
5.4
Considerations of platform characteristics
In order to better analyse the aspects of the new platform, the listed system improve-
ments in section 1.2 are obvious to look into. It should be reiterated that none of the
following systems were ready for an industrial production. Thus, some leeway should be
given when considering their respective weaknesses.
In order to provide a fair comparison between the WBAS and its contemporaries,
the most similar system(s) will be used. These are the Raspberry Pi 2B-based system
by Yeh et al. [Yeh+18], the custom board of Ivanov et al. [Iva+20] and Huang et al’s
micro controller-based proposal. These two were chosen, as they are both wearable by
the Data Subject and similar in shape.
To quantify the different aspects of the three systems, table 5.2 presents a number
of differences between the three.
(Weighted 1-5, 1 = Worst)
WBAS
Yeh
Ivanov
Huang
System architecture
Monolithic
Modular
Modular
Modular
Number of force sensors
Three
Six
Nine
Four
Physical shape
Secondary sensors
Gyroscope
None
None
Yes1
Power consumption
4
2
5
52
Weight
5
4
5
4
Price of components
4
3
2
4
Security/hardiness
4
2
1
2
Ease of installation
3
2
4
3
Ergonomics
4
2
4
4
Total points
24/30
15/30
21/30
22/30
Table 5.2: Simple comparison chart of the three systems proposed between this paper,
Yet et al. [Yeh+18], Ivanov et al. [Iva+20], and Huang et al. [Hua+06]. Note how Yeh’s
system utilises two data collectors, one for each foot.
5.4.0.1
System architecture
Only the WBAS has adopted a monolithic architecture, whereas Yeh’s, Ivanov’s and
Huang’s proposals use their wearable systems as simple data loggers and transports. The
1Gyroscope, Pressure sensor, Tilt angle sensor, Bend sensor and Accelerometer.
2Not disclosed. An ATmega 8535 is used as the micro processor for the board, so a very low power
draw is estimated.
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Considerations of platform characteristics
31
design choice to go with this type of system architecture has far reaching consequences for
a number of the following characteristics. The outcomes for a multitude of parameters
is discussed below.
5.4.0.2
Sensory equipment
The WBAS, Huang’s, and Yeh’s uses just three, four, and six force sensors respectively
to gather the necessary data.
Meanwhile, Ivanov proposal sits in the far end with
nine separate sensors. Both the WBAS and Huang’s proposal use secondary sensors
to compliment the primary force sensors - Huang’s surpasses the WBAS in this regard,
however.
5.4.0.3
Power consumption
Another important aspect is the power consumption. Whereas Ivanov’s minuscule data
gathering processor board only draws 3 mA, the WBAS draws around 32 mA [Tan].
Huang did not disclose the system’s wattage, but somewhere around those two points
are to be expected. Meanwhile, Yeh’s Raspberry Pi-based system draws between 320 to
450 mA [Gee]. This is partly due to the more advanced processor architecture, and the
fact that an - albeit lightweight - Linux kernel runs the data gathering. Whilst not the
most eﬀicient method of performing, the WBAS has ample opportunity to tweak the
board’s sensors for further improvements on the already impressive eﬀiciency. Some of
these includes the various unused sensors, as touched in section 8.2.
5.4.0.4
Weight
All four platforms are very lightweight, making for only a small potential impact on the
wearer’s gait. Whilst Yeh’s platform may weigh somewhere around 55 grams, and the
WBAS around 35 grams (excluding the battery), Ivanov’s smaller data collecting unit
would undoubtedly weigh even less3. Huang’s work offered no details on this, but from
the provided images, it should be in the region of Yeh’s platform.
5.4.0.5
Costs
Whilst the complete WBAS can be acquired for around $52.004, assuming a cost of
around $7.00 per sensor [Ada]5 at the time of writing and a cost of around $31.00 for
the Arduino [Ardb]. Meanwhile, Yeh’s system would cost around $77.00, assuming a
Raspberry pi cost of $35.00. The data processing server is not counted as an expenditure,
3No oﬀicial weight was disclosed, estimate between 20 and 30 grams including a CR2032 button
battery.)
4The following prices were gathered using single-device costs. A full standardisation and production
would result in lowered costs. A price range around 25% lower is deemed a fair estimate.
5This price will be used for calculating the costs of the other systems as well.
==PAGE:46==
32
5 Results & Evaluation
as the job can be taken up by a workstation or server. Huang’s platform with its four
sensors would be at least $28.00. Whilst there are no concrete details on the specific
sensors in use on the platform, a fair estimate would be between $20-$25 of additional
costs, putting the platform up around $48-$53. Lastly, whilst Ivanov’s processing board
only consists of inexpensive components like a radio sender, a small battery and a wireless
proprietary System on a Chip (SoC), the amount of sensors alone pushes the price for
the system up to $63.00. In conjunction with the necessary custom data logging system,
Ivanov’s proposal is the most expensive in terms of materials.
5.4.0.6
Security & Hardiness
Considering the security aspects of both physical design and communication channels,
the WBAS has much greater capacity for security built in, than its contemporaries.
Both Ivanov’s and Yeh’s platforms are exposed to outside physical tampering. Ivanov’s
platform has a slight edge in comparison to Yeh’s due to the Raspberry Pi’s many USB
ports and physical interfaces. However, both of these fall short in relation to the security
of the communication channels they employ. Ivanov’s platform have no mentioned meth-
ods of encryption or verification of message integrity. Meanwhile, while Yeh’s platform
does support this, due to its UNIX kernel, there are no mentions on the possibilities of
hardening its data communications. Huang describes a capacity to use Forward Error
Correction (FEC) to help reduce transmission error and improve the wireless commu-
nication reliability. There are no other mentions of security measures on board of the
system. The WBAS supports both encryption of the data on the chip (Advanced En-
cryption Standard (AES)-128), usage of up to 16 separate keys/certificates with ECDHE
and integrity checks using SHA-256. Also worth mentioning is the potential for a very
small physical footprint, as also discussed later on in section 8.2. It is safe to assume
that the WBAS has much greater potential for secure and hardy communications as the
crypto chip ensures that no secrets are ever exposed in plain-text [Arda].
5.4.0.7
Ease of installation
Ivanov’s proposal is incorporated directly into the shoe sole, and connects to the smallest
and lightest processing board. Both WBAS and Huang’s system requires only minimal
gluing of sensors to a shoe sole and the processor board to the shoe itself. The wires
are short and kept minimal. Lastly, Yeh’s proposal is arguably the most fragile, with
multiple dangling wires and a loose slipper as a platform. To top it off, the processing
board is tied to the data subject’s leg with a shoe string. It should again be mentioned
how none of the platforms were made with this purpose in mind. It was however included,
to debate the prospects of the platforms.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Considerations of platform characteristics
33
5.4.0.8
Ergonomics
In extension of the prior section, similar conclusions can be made. WBAS and Huang
are both incorporated directly onto the shoe and beneath the shoe sole, so any physical
restrictions are kept minimal. Likewise, by having a shoe sole with all the sensors directly
embedded, the impact is virtually non-existent. Lastly, while Yeh’s proposal is kept light,
the many wires, the unfastened flipper and the usage of potentially unstable securing of
the processor may influence the data subject’s walking pattern.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 6
Security Analysis & Threat
model
To properly assess the individual components of the proposed system, a structured
and oﬀicially recognised framework. For that purpose, the methodology and tasks in
the NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF) was chosen. Originally created by the
American National Institute of Standards and Technology as a tool to ”identify, manage
and organise risk management and compliance efforts” [NIS], the RMF will serve as a
great tool for this project’s analysis work.
Typically, risk management is compromised of three distinct segments:
• Risk assessment - The determining of the extent of potential threats, and their
associated risks. ”Risk is a function of the likelihood of a given threat-source’s
exercising a particular potential vulnerability, and the resulting impact of that
adverse event on the organisation.” [Men].
• Risk mitigation - The designing and implementation of controls and barriers to
help mitigate the identified
• Evaluation - The process of evaluating the effectiveness of the identified mitiga-
tion methods against the potential threats.
Due to time and resource-based constraints, this analysis will only focus on the risk
assessment and a short appraisal of the proposed mitigation controls. A thorough eval-
uation of the overall system is not possible within the project’s schedule.
The analysis composed is based on SP 800-30 Rev. 1 [Ros]. Lastly, when referencing
proper information security principles, the Confidentiality, Integrity & Availability (CIA)
and Authentication, Authorisation & Accounting (AAA) are used as a baseline to be
considered best practices, unless explicitly expanded upon.
6.1
Assumptions
6.1.1
Vulnerability Analysis assumptions
As part of the Vulnerability Analysis, it is assumed that all individual components of
the system are susceptible to physical damage. Said damage may be through weaponry
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Classification of information & assets
35
or simple savagery applied onto the devices. In continuation hereof, it is also assumed
that some measure of physical access restrictions exists as a barrier between the systems
and a potential perpetrator of beforementioned violence.
6.1.2
Control analysis assumption
In order to properly assess every aspect of the system from a neutral and detailed stand-
point, it is assumed that the system runs in a rudimentary fashion. This entails that
no additional barriers and controls are put in place to prevent a threat from escalating
into a hazard. This is done so that the analysis may be done without caveats and com-
promise. In summary, the system is assumed to function in its basic rendition without
additional security measures to help ensure CIA and AAA.
6.2
Classification of information & assets
Part of the project analysis involves various information with different degrees of classi-
fied information and assets. Ordered by importance and sensitivity, they are:
1. Personal Identifiable Information (PII)1, access rights, and confidential information
(including logs).
2. Pseudononymised biometric models.
3. Unrelated or non-personal information.
For ease of analysis and relevance, only category 1 & 2 information classes will be
considered and discussed in the analysis.
Additionally, various types of assets may also be granted to a requestor. Examples
of such include:
• Physical access through doorways or entrances.
• Physical access to materials or reports.
• Viewing of recordings, sound, files, etc.
• Permission to execute various programs, tasks or queries.
1As defined by the American Department of Labor as ”Any representation of information that
permits the identity of an individual to whom the information applies to be reasonably inferred by either
direct or indirect means.” [DOL].
==PAGE:50==
36
6 Security Analysis & Threat model
6.3
System characterisation
Due to the system’s place as an alternative to a password or other biometric-based
authentication method, the system is relatively easy to portray. As shown in figure
6.1, the three components communicate back and forth between each other. The exact
implementation of the communication is left out on purpose, and should be considered
to function for the basic use case, described in section 3.
Figure 6.1: System design of components with their respective associated data of interest.
Note the differing gradient denoting the amount of inherent trust in the components.
The greater the trust placed in the component, the greater criticality for the integrity
of the overall system they hold. This means the system could manage the loss of several
WBASs, or even SMs, whilst the loss of the PA would result in the complete nullification
of system integrity. Each component of the system holds some amount of (potentially)
sensitive information and has some ability to share such or to grant assets.
6.3.1
Proof Authority
The PA is the single most trusted entity in the system, as its sole responsibility is request-
ing, validating and granting the users’ authentication scores. The PA may be viewed as
a software-service located on a centrally placed server at the facility it services. As per
section 6.1.2, no encryption on messages sent, integrity checks of said messages via hash-
ing, or verification of the requestor’s credibility are done. There are no cross-referencing
or analysis of the requestors movement and access patterns, or the SM involved. The
system uses an internal database when crosschecking whether a requestor needs to send
in a new authentication score.
The system communicates with many different entities as part of its operations, but
there are no separation or isolation between entities from one another.
==PAGE:51==
6.4 Threat Identification
37
6.3.2
Sub-Module
The SM component is an entity within the system, responsible for handing over confiden-
tial materials or access rights to select users, upon confirming their authenticity to the
PA. The SM is not strictly necessary, should the FBS be utilised solely for Continous
Authentication2. The component may exist in the shape of a door lock, a file server
located somewhere, the encryption program on an employee laptop, or similar entities
otherwise restricting access to a confidential element of interest.
The component does not concern itself with who requests the restricted elements, nor
the details surrounding the request. Such details could be the time of request, potential
inconsistencies with other SMs, etc. Instead, the component relies entirely on the PA to
aﬀirm the requestor’s authenticity.
6.3.3
Wearable Biometric Authentication System
The WBAS is placed inside the sole of an ordinary shoe, along with sensors, an adequate
battery package for one day’s work and a trained model for the designated user’s walking
pattern. Do note, the small crypto chip built into the processing board is not equipped
with an established key pair for future key exchanging securely between entities. This
is, again, due to the system configuration described in 6.1.2. In a real-world scenario,
this would of course not be the case.
The system only concerns itself with the model of its designated user, and none other.
6.4
Threat Identification
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) RMF has described the
purpose of the process of Threat Identification to be ”the creation of a threat statement
containing a list of threat sources that could exploit a system vulnerability” [NIS]. In
summary, the process seeks to identify and clarify any and every possible Threat and
their associated Threat Sources, to exploit a Vulnerability, for the purpose of determining
the level of concern of the resulting consequences.
For this analysis, a threat is to be regarded as the potential for a threat source to
successfully exercise a particular vulnerability that exists within a system, as dictated
by Stoneburner et. al. [SGF]. This intangible concept may occur through direct ex-
ploitation or by accidental ignorance. Thus, threats are classified into two immutable
categories:
• Intentional and malicious: These threats are specifically designed and employed
by a hostile threat source to exploit a targeted vulnerability within a system.
2It was decided to include the SM in the FBS regardless, as it provides substantial opportunity to
monitor data subjects’ utilisation of company assets. This in turn helps to greatly improve the system’s
resilience and security.
==PAGE:52==
38
6 Security Analysis & Threat model
• Accidental and ignorant: These threats occur unknowingly and without inten-
tion by the unknowing threat source, outside of a desire to cause the exploitation
of a vulnerability within a system.
Regardless, the resulting consequences of a vulnerability remains static. In continu-
ation hereof, this analysis regards a threat source to be powerless and thus without risk
to the system, if there is no initial vulnerability to exploit at all.
For now, this section will discuss the threats against the proposed system as a whole.
The associated likelihood of a threat successfully exploiting a vulnerability will be dis-
cussed later on, in section 6.7.
6.4.1
Threat-Source Identification
In order to properly identify the relevant types of threats possible against the system, a
number of considerations for the original sources of various threats should be considered.
The NIST RMF dictates that there are three classes of threats, based on their source:
• Naturally occurring threats: These threats include natural disasters. These
may be floods, earthquakes, tornadoes, landslides, avalanches, electrical storms,
and other potential threats outside the influence of an attacker3.
• Man-made threats: These threats are solely caused by the actions of a human’s
actions or inactions. Active-actions threats include network-based attacks, mali-
cious software uploads, overruling of roles/rights, social engineering, etc. Inactive-
action threats include accidental data leaks, failing to follow protocol, falling for
phishing messages, etc.
• Environmental threats: These threats occur within the immediate surround-
ing environment of the system, or its subsidiaries. These include power failures,
pollution, fires, chemical spills, and liquid intrusion.
6.4.2
Relevant threats
Having now explained all of the potential threats to a system, as per NIST, we may now
assess which threats have the potential to influence the FBS in a negative manner.
Concerning the first category of threats, the naturally occurring, few threats are likely
to have potential to influence a system such as the FBS. Whilst the system may be
implemented in a number of areas and locations, the likelihood of such affecting the
system is low. Locations may be built up high to avoid floods, have added dampeners
to resist earthquakes and moved away from potential landslides or avalanches.
The one threat that has the potential to influence the system, would be an electrical
3For the most part - it would technically be possible to trigger a flood with a suﬀicient nuclear
warhead, but for the sake of simplicity, we will ignore this scenario for now.
==PAGE:53==
6.4 Threat Identification
39
storm. Whilst the sole-part of the system has its own attached power source, the station-
ary elements would need an Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) to remain operational.
In summary, naturally occurring threats are very unlikely to influence the system. In
addition, various methods to either avoid, mitigate or recover from these exists. For
these reasons, naturally occurring threats are regarded as a low level concern. They
should still be within the scope of possible threats due to the inherent uncertainty of
scale and unpredictability associated with these.
Concerning human threats, the threat landscape is much more diverse for the FBS.
Given the human interaction necessary with the elements within the system, there is
bound to be potential for both an adversary to knowingly exploit, and an unfortunate
user to accidentally make a mistake. Given that the system would be used as a barrier
against unauthorised access to restricted materials or areas, there is a great incentive to
target the system for said access. Likewise, a legitimate user compromising the system
accidentally would have as equally great consequences. In a similar vein, due to the
system involving a great number of subsystems and user systems, a threat may involve
one or more systems, instead of ”just” concerning the Proof Authority of the System.
For this reason, the threats posed by human actors are classified as a high level concern.
The barriers to remedy these should be at the forefront of measures to be made.
The NIST RMF contains a listing of five individual types of human threat actors. These
actors have their own backgrounds, sources, motivations, and potential to cause harm
to a system. They may be motivated by politics, money, chaos or a combination of the
three. In no particular order:
• Terrorist/militia groups.
• Industrial espionage (such as rival companies, foreign governments, state sponsored
actors, etc).
• Cyber criminal groups (not directly aﬀiliated with neither terrorist/state sponsors).
• Hackers/crackers (again, not directly aﬀiliated with neither terrorist/state sponsors
- less coordinated than the dedicated criminal groups).
• Malicious insider(s) (employees with either poor training, a grudge against the
company, a malicious intent, gross negligence or dishonest nature, or former em-
ployees).
Given the wide range of potential use cases, situations and applications of the Foot
Biometric System, it is not possible to eliminate any actors at the current time. Rather,
the NIST RMF stresses that factors such as the system location, current state of opera-
tion, and present environmental situation are all factors to consider when estimating the
severity of various threats. In conclusion, some actors have a higher chance of causing a
greater consequence than others, depending on the circumstances.
Finally, are the environmental threats to be considered. Power failures and pollution
will most likely never influence any part of the system, due to the ease of which redundant
measures can be installed in a stationary building. Likewise, chemical spills and liquid
==PAGE:54==
40
6 Security Analysis & Threat model
intrusion are both unlikely, as long as the facilities are up to proper code and standards.
The only considerable threat would be a fire. Whilst the system should be relatively
trivial to shut down, the consequences of the system’s integration into the company’s
access controls now becomes a surprisingly alarming feature. The Foot Biometric System
is intended to be used as a tool for authentication for various means, including door
panels and entry ways. Should the system be forced into an emergency shutdown due
to a fire breaking out, the system must be overridden and allow for passing of both
entering and exiting personnel regardless of clearance. This factor is non-negotiable, as
human life and well being takes priority. Otherwise, the installation would hinder both
evacuation and fire fighting efforts, meaning a violation of standard fire code. For this
reason, this type of threat is to be classified as a moderate level concern, whilst the other
environmental threats are classified as a low level concern.
6.5
Vulnerability Identification
NIST describes the purpose of the Vulnerability Identification process as the pursuit of
gathering a list of system vulnerabilities that has potential to be invoked by a threat-
source. In other words, based on the previous threat actors, what possible vulnerabilities
within the various systems can potentially be exploited?
A given from this process, is that limitations of the contemporary barriers are dis-
cussed in detail.
This allows for a thorough evaluation of the current measures, in
contrast to the present threat landscape.
6.5.1
Proof Authority
Given that the the PA monitors and communicates with a - possibly - substantial amount
of SM and even more WBAS, there is potential for an intruder to impede, influence or
even infiltrate the overall system through this.
Given the complete lack of security
measures (see section 6.1.2), an intruder may:
• Spoof their identity to be a benign SM or WBAS and thereby gain access to
confidential assets.
• Sniff vulnerable packages to map out the system’s assets and the usage of said
items.
• Modify or delay the retrieval and sending of messages back and forth.
• Trigger false alarms or warnings, i.e. unusual usage patterns, fire alarms, handover
of assets, etc.
• Use inconsistent movement patterns within the facility (i.e. exiting the facility,
before entering the facility). There are no checks on users’ requests or the ”logic”
of these requests.
==PAGE:55==
6.6 Control Analysis
41
• Compromise the hosting hardware, i.e. via USB keys or similar.
It is evident that a vulnerable and insuﬀiciently secured PA would be a prime target
of an attack, and could render the entire system void.
6.5.2
Sub-Module
Given that the SM may be both physical (doors, locking systems, etc.) or a software-
based system, there is a greater number of access vectors for an adversary to infiltrate
the system.
Given the complete lack of verification of other entities it communicates with, the
module would be highly susceptible to spoofing attacks. Essentially having zero ways of
confirming the identities of its communication partners, anyone could acquire access to
assets or be restricted from such.
6.5.3
Wearable Biometric Authentication System
All things considered, the WBAS is the most limited in scope, and potentially the most
diﬀicult to compromise. This is because an intruder would have to either intercept the
communication between the shoe and other entities, or replace the entire verification
model. Replacing an entire data subject would be nigh impossible to recreate the same
authentication scores, especially in conjunction with a certificate to authenticate the
sender’s identity. In addition, the usage of the model, if extracted, is of very limited use
and criticality due to its pseudo-anonymised shape.
In conclusion, due to the great reliance of communications back and forth, the sys-
tem mandates a strong encryption scheme to help prevent a majority of the potential
vulnerabilities.
6.6
Control Analysis
As touched on previous in section 6.1.2, it is assumed that no existing controls existed
within the system. This was a deliberate choice, to highlight the need for such in the
previous section. This section will thus focus on the controls that are missing, and the
few controls that may be assumed to be in place to help the system facilitate its basic
function of communication.
Finally, each section will outline a general approximation of potential attack vectors
left out, due to the lack of implemented controls.
6.6.1
Proof Authority
The following controls were found missing in the Proof Authority:
==PAGE:56==
42
6 Security Analysis & Threat model
• No authentication checks, integrity checks or confidentiality checks on Proof Au-
thority communication with partners.
• No checkups on message travel times or message coherence with typical usage
patterns.
• No verification of receival or returning of assets to and from users.
• No established emergency procedures in case of an incident (break-in), or an envi-
ronmental threat (fire, etc.).
• No logical cross-referencing of the users’ usage patterns.
The following controls are assumed to be present in the Proof Authority:
• Message sending and receival are presumed to be present, to ensure messages are
received (TCP-like protocol)
Given the obvious lack of proper CIA concepts implemented into the system com-
munication, there is ample opportunity for an attacker to directly influence the system
functionality. A lack of asset control means little to no idea of which users presently has
access to, or has accessed assets within the facility. This again means that assets may
become unaccounted for and subsequently lost. Furthermore, the lack of concrete op-
erating procedures in case of a major incident may drastically worsen the consequences
and potentially endanger human lives.
Finally, the lack of cross-referencing the logic of users’ patterns may allow an attacker
to gain access into areas they are not cleared for, or which are ”out of expected order
of operations”. What is meant by this, is that an attacker may request access to an
confidential asset or area inside the facility, whilst never having requested outside access
to the facility to begin with. This means that an attacker does not even need to be
physically present at the facility, to be allowed access to otherwise restricted materials
or assets.
6.6.2
Sub-Module
The following controls were found missing in the Sub-Module4:
• No authentication checks, integrity checks or confidentiality checks on Sub-Module
communication with partners.
• No established emergency procedures in case of an incident (break-in), or an envi-
ronmental threat (fire, etc.).
The following controls are assumed to be present in the Sub-Module:
4Note that whilst the Sub-Module may take many different shapes and administer many different
types of assets, the core concept of the entity is the same, and is analysed as such.
==PAGE:57==
6.7 Likelihood Determination & Impact Analysis
43
• Message sending and receival are presumed to be present, to ensure messages are
received (TCP-like protocol)
• Some measure of restricting access to be limited to only be allowed upon verifica-
tion. Anyone requesting access must request so.
An attacker may impersonate a trusted entity or user within the system, and be
granted access to confidential materials or assets. This means that, as with the Proof
Authority, an intruder does not need to be physically close to the Sub-Module, or have
verified themselves to another authority prior to requesting access from the Sub-Module.
Similarly, a lack of procedure for handling an incident could allow an intruder to
exploit the systems in case of emergency.
6.6.3
Wearable Biometric Authentication System
The following controls were found missing in the WBAS:
• No authentication checks, integrity checks or confidentiality checks on WBAS com-
munication with partners.
The following controls are assumed to be present in the WBAS:
• Restricted physical access to processing board by design.
• Very limited use of pseudo-anonymised data model if exfiltrated.
• No other PII present on shoe - only a clientID and shoe size may be deducted.
• Potentially limited longivity of data model - data subject’s walking pattern may
potentially change over time. See section 3.4.1 for further discussion.
Not surprisingly, the WBAS is the most sturdy in the eyes of an attacker.
The
number of controls from its physical design restricts many conventional attack vectors
typically found through physical access.
However, there are still ways for an attacker to exploit the system. The ever present
lack of any message encryption or checks on the validity of communication partners
hinders any secure operations for the system.
6.7
Likelihood Determination & Impact
Analysis
For this section, the likelihood of an attacker initiating an attack, and the frequency by
which such an attack is expected to occur will be assessed.
==PAGE:58==
44
6 Security Analysis & Threat model
Additionally, the impact of such an attack will be analysed, in relation to the com-
ponents criticality for the FBS and associated data.
These three parameters are based on NIST’s Summary of Key Activities (Task 2-4),
which again is based on NIST’s semi-quantitive scale of likelihood and impact:
1. VERY LOW (0-19)
2. LOW (20-39)
3. MEDIUM (40-59)
4. HIGH (60-79)
5. VERY HIGH (80-100)
A full description of the assessments utilised in this work can be viewed in appendix
A.5.
6.7.1
Proof Authority
Being the centre piece of the FBS, the PA is most likely hosted and serviced at the
facility’s IT department, on internal hardware. Given the importance and trust of the
PA within the architecture, as well as the many communication channels expected to
be active, there is a High likelihood for an attacker to initiate a threat event on this
system.
It is debatable how often such an attack may occur. However, given the availabil-
ity of methods to circumvent Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA) measures [And], the
assessment derives a High likelihood for an attack to occur, meaning between 10-100
times a year.
The impact of such an attack may alternate, depending on the force of the attack
and the degree of reliance of the system for authenticating the staff. However, in the
worst case scenario, the PA would be put out of commission and the organisation’s staff
would have to rely on less convenient measures for authenticating themselves. There is a
potential for an intruder to exploit this, by using a sniffed password, or similar methods.
For that reason, the scenario is deemed to be a Moderate impact on the organisation.
If the threat event is initiated or occurs, it is somewhat likely to have adverse impacts.
6.7.2
Sub-Module
The SM has an overall lower criticality score towards the FBS. Whilst still being the pri-
mary barrier between a requestee and an asset, it holds less significance for the system’s
overall integrity, and the asset(s) it protects are more compartmentalised. On the other
hand, it is more open to physical tampering, and may be situated in a more exposed
physical manner than the PA. For that reason, there is a Moderate likelihood of an
attacker initiating a threat event.
==PAGE:59==
6.7 Likelihood Determination & Impact Analysis
45
Again, it is diﬀicult to gauge the occurrences of an attack against such a system,
as the lower importance may both be an advantage (less interest for an adversary to
initiate a threat event), or a detriment (less interest means less motivation for the IT
department to monitor for threat events occurring). Given these circumstances, it is
deemed of a Low likelihood for an attack to occur - less than once a year, but more
than once every 10 years.
Finally, concerning the impact, that is of a low concern. Should the SM be put
out of commission for whatever reason, a requestee would just have to authenticate
themselves through another mean. This may be via a strong password, a smart phone
with MFA or similar.
However, as mentioned previously, should a fire occur within
the facility, any SM obstructing doorways or entryways must be instructed to cease
mandating authentication, so as to ensure safe and eﬀicient evacuation. For that reason,
assuming such measures is in place and tested to be functional, the SM is deemed to
have a Low impact score, meaning that it would be unlikely to have adverse impacts
should the system be compromised.
6.7.3
Wearable Biometric Authentication System
The WBAS has the lowest criticality for the system’s overall operation. Of course, it
is a given that should said system be compromised, the user would be unable to utilise
the features of the platform. Likewise, the PA and SM would be unable to authenticate
them, or send requests for Continuous Authentication. Given the limited usability of the
platform for an adversary and the pseudo-anonymised nature of the data model, there
is a Low likelihood of a threat initiation.
Similarly, a Low likelihood of threat occurrence is determined to be present. Addi-
tionally, an intruder would need to spoof a number of parameters to such a degree, that
it would be extremely diﬀicult to accomplish, if not nigh impossible for all but state
actors.
Lastly, the impact of the compromisation of an WBAS is a deemed a Low impact as
well. Whilst the wearer would have to rely on more mundane authentication methods,
the effect of such should be manageable until a replacement system can be procured.
6.7.4
Risk of attacks
Having now established the likelihood of threat initiation and occurrence of a threat
event, as well as the impact of said event, a final risk determination can be made.
For the PA, the risk determination is determined to be of a Moderate risk.
For the SM, the risk determination is determined to be of a Low risk.
Finally, for the WBAS, the risk determination is determined to be of a Low risk.
==PAGE:60==
46
6 Security Analysis & Threat model
6.7.5
Control Recommendations
As shown in the Control Analysis (section 6.6), given a FBS setup as described in
section 6.1.2, a number of controls should be implemented immediately.
The most
crucial of which is the usage of proper communication encryption and handling methods,
as dictated by the AAA and CIA especially.
Some of these include strong message
encryption, integrity checks using hashing, request logs, redundancy of infrastructure,
as well as certificates from either trusted 3rd party or from within the company.
The installation of this would eliminate a great number of the concerns raised in
section 6.5.
On a similar note, a system dedicated solely to checking Event Consistency would be
a tremendous advantage to add. This proposed system would verify the consistency of
various events invoked by a user, meaning if the user invokes an exit request from an oﬀice,
they must have invoked an entry request prior to this. By checking for inconsistencies
of actions and typical patterns, a system would be keenly aware of any abnormalities
within the facility. In a way, this would serve as a typical Intrusion Detection System
(IDS), in that intruders would inevitably make an unusual action or request, and thus
have the system raise an alert.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
A fundamental part of the project process, is the discussion of the many prospects and
concerns identified over the duration of the work.
In this segment, a number of various concerns or discussion topics will be presented
and argued for or against, according to the author’s opinion.
7.1
Usability in edge cases
’Given the reliance of the platform on steady and precise measurements, the
data subject must always carry themselves within a given spectrum of patterns
that may be used for authentication.’
In essence, what this means is that in order for the system to function, the data
subjects cannot utilise a movement pattern that goes too far outside the data model’s
expected training. This would include skipping, running, stomping or otherwise moving
their legs in an unusual pattern (please see figure 7.1 for further details).
Figure 7.1: Very silly gait patterns may be unrecognisable
for the WBAS - Monty Python’s Flying Circus, series 2,
episode 1, ”Face the Press”.
An argument could be
made that this may impede
the autonomy of the data
subject, or force a distinct
way of movement in order
for them to reliably authen-
ticate themselves.
However, this notion is
rejected
as
it
is
almost
assured that a data sub-
ject,
for
the
large
part
of their daily movements,
would walk in a predictable
and
recognisable
pattern.
Additionally, the data mod-
els would allow for some le-
niency in the model read-
ings.
==PAGE:62==
48
7 Discussion
7.2
Stepping outside the usual scope of
binary biometrics
’Biometrics are inherently binary in nature for a reason. A gradient of au-
thentication is useless/detrimental to system security.’
The idea of authenticating a person’s identity in a binary manner stems from the
concept of secret passwords - either an individual knows the passphrase and is allowed
access, or they do not and is thus prevented access. Whilst this concept is useful in
some scenarios, the idea of a gradient score of recognition is as much a measure for
access control, as it is continual persistence of personnel identification after logging in -
i.e. Continuous Authentication.
Imagine a scenario in which a user ”only” achieved an authentication score of 86%.
The system is not absolutely certain whether the data subject is who they claim to be,
but the system is suﬀiciently sure to allow the user an - albeit limited - range of permis-
sible actions. The subject might not be allowed entry into a strictly confidential area of
the facility, but they may access the cafeteria or the open oﬀice space. This limitation
can be a dynamic concept, allowing for greater freedom once a higher authentication
score can be made.
7.3
Viability of solutions involving machine
learning - Exceedingly complex?
’The introduction of an entire machine learning-based platform for capturing
biometrics is excessive, as more feasible and cheap analogue methods exists.’
The argument that alternative methods for authenticating individuals using multiple
analogue sensors can be made, for the case of the FBS. Instead of using a dedicated
machine learning module, as that of the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense, implementing
more sensors and analogue metrics could be used instead.
However, the advantage of the WBAS design is that its reliance on a data model
means it requires fewer sensors to properly authenticate a user. As seen in Yeh et al.’s
work [Yeh+18], using just six sensors provide ample data to identify and authenticate an
individual. Should the machine learning be removed, more sensors would be necessary to
capture suﬀicient amounts of data to uniquely verify the user. Additionally, the notion
of time is lost - a machine learning model captures the progression of data values over
time, whilst the analogue rendition would have to rely on singular peak values of metrics
in comparison to other metric values.
What this means is that the machine learning approach is capable of capturing more
facets of the data being generated, using fewer sensors and with greater flexibility for
==PAGE:63==
7.4 Viability of biometrics in the modern age
49
input variation. For this reason, a machine learning-based approach is perfectly sound
considering the alternative.
Lastly, considering that every single related work discussed in section 2 uses some
measure of machine learning or deep learning, the viability and feasibility of using data
models has already been proven suﬀiciently.
7.4
Viability of biometrics in the modern age
’Whilst biometrics are increasingly growing in prevalence, society as a whole
should be vary of potential data leaks of sensitive PII.’
The notion that biometrics are growing increasingly pervasive in society is not some-
thing new. In fact, as described by Jain et al. [JRP], with the prevalence of high-speed
networking, faster processing and smaller physical footprints, biometrics are carried
through by its features as much as its ease of implementation through technology. Sim-
ilarly, the combination of the previously discussed pseudo-anonymised Data Model, and
the FBS’s resilience against some of the conventional attack vectors (as touched on in
section 7.5) strengthens the prospects of the use of this type of biometrics.
7.5
Introducing IoT into security may worsen
current situation
’Over the recent years, IoT devices have become an important aspect of
society’s IT infrastructure. However, such devices are too insecure for the
tasks mandated by the FBS.’
It is no secret that IoT has caught the sight of malicious entities, as global botnets
spanning multiple different IoT systems have emerged. Thanh et al. [Tha+21] describes
a number of concerning developments within the space of IoT, primarily focusing on the
threats currently attacking conventional systems. This seemingly cements the original
notion that IoT is unsuited for even rudimentary security operations, much less as a
central part of a MFA scheme.
However, the survey found that the primary causes of these attacks stemmed from a
lack of proper security updates and poor hardware implementation. In fact, going by the
typical biometric attack vectors, described by Ratha et al. [RCB] and Jain again [JRP],
the platform described in this thesis actually circumvents or even directly prohibits these
methods. Just to name a few ways in which the platform’s strengths comes to light:
• There is no communication with secondary systems to verify the model result.
• The model is exceedingly diﬀicult to fake and even more tricky to feed spoofed
data to generate a response.
==PAGE:64==
50
7 Discussion
• The platform is diﬀicult to extract model data from.
• The platform has potential to implement measures to prevent sniﬀing data pack-
ages sent to the PA.
• The localisation of the data model directly within the processing board’s onboard
storage results in great diﬀiculties with overriding both the feature extraction and
matching the process.
From this, it is concluded that if the IoT devices are designed to work in conjunction
with high degrees of security, and maintained with present-day measures, there should
be no hindrances from using said devices.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Future work
Over the course of the project, a number of potential areas of improvement has been
identified. These promising possibilities came to mind, either in the design phase, the
prototyping/developmental phase, or the analysis phase.
Additionally, concerning actual feasibility of these proposals, this element was in-
cluded in the considerations when discussing the viability and potential for the propos-
als.
8.1
Improving the current sole’s circuit
Immediately, a number of improvements can be made to the existing circuit to improve
the resistance against electro-magnetic noise as discussed in section 4.1. Likewise, the
circuitry of the sensors could be improved to avoid running along the whole length of
the sole and potentially alternating the readouts slightly.
8.2
Improving the processing unit
Over the course of the designing and prototype development, it was evident that a
noticeable amount of functionality available in the chosen Arduino board was left unused.
Whilst the central processing unit and machine learning components were to be
expected, as would the:
• Cryptographic co-processor (ATECC608A).
• WiFi/Bluetooth 5 connectivity.
• 9-axis accelerometer (LSM9DS1).
• At least six pins for:
– Three analogue pins to read the measured voltage.
– The VIn and ground pins to supply the board with an external power source,
like a rechargeable button cell battery.
– The 3.3 VOut pin to supply the variable resistors with a voltage.
==PAGE:66==
52
8 Future work
On the opposite end, the combined barometer and temperature sensor (LPS22HB),
the relative humidity sensor (HTS221), the Digital proximity/Ambient light/RGB/Ges-
ture sensor (APDS-9960) and the digital microphone (MP34DT05) would remain un-
touched for the purposes described in this paper. Some of these could however also
be used to accurately measure environmental circumstances in order to compensate for
variations. This includes the temperature offset, as discussed in section 3.4.4.
A similar pattern of unutilised functionality could be found in Yeh et al.’s paper
[Yeh+18], wherein a fully functional Raspberry Pi 2B was used as part of the project’s
data gathering. This unit alone contained:
• A fully operational - albeit stripped down - GNU/Linux kernel.
• A quad-core 32-bit processor with 1 GB of RAM.
• 40 seperate GPIO pins.
• A full-size HDMI port, along with a 3.5mm audio jack/composite video port and
four USB ports.
• Both a camera/display interface (CSI/DSI respectively).
Given the need for readily available hardware and established capacity to gather
data, a commercial SoC helps alleviate a lot of the expected headaches associated with
developmental work. However, it also lends a hand in designing a dedicated and purpose-
built system for this purpose. Using the oﬀicial data sheet of the Arduino Nano 33 BLE
Sense [Arda], a rough sketch of a potential replacement can be made, as shown in figure
8.1
Figure 8.1: Proposal for optimised processing platform instead of the Arduino Nano 33
BLE Sense.
The proposed system design seeks to both minimise the footprint of the circuit and
its pin I/O, as well the limiting the amount of unused components present on the circuit.
==PAGE:67==
8.3 Adopting entirely new sensor platform
53
The circuit shown in 8.1 utilises only the components listed in the first list of this section,
focusing solely on the functionality of the task currently present1.
In figure 8.2, a comparison between the footprint of the original circuit and the new
proposed circuit may be viewed. Note how the improved circuit is only about one half
the size of the original circuit.
(a) Original Arduino circuit
(b) Proposed optimised circuit
Figure 8.2: Comparison of the original Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense, and a potential
replacement.
It is natural to opt for a pre-established and cheap processing board like the Arduino
Nano 33 BLE Sense for a task such as this. However, there is ample opportunity to
either commission or fabricate a new line of circuits for the task, as the components
used are neither expensive or in need of particular precautions.
On a different note, the circuitry’s reliance of recharable batteries could be negated
somewhat through local energy generation.
Measures such as a small thermal/solar
panel, as described by Orfanidis et al. [Orf+19], or through the very pressure exerted
by the foot sole, detailed by Chaudhary and Azad [CA20].
8.3
Adopting entirely new sensor platform
Another new potential way of improving the system would be to shift the platform
entirely. The French company, FeetMe™, recently launched a shoe sole called the InSole,
capable of capturing pressure data and transferring the data to smartphone. With a built
in battery, and Bluetooth connectivity, the platform is an obvious potential contender
for a modular approach to the WBAS system.
1Please note that the placement of the resistors and components are not necessarily representative
of a functional version of the circuit, but rather to add flavour to the proposal. The diagram is only to
present the physical dimensions of the components necessary to function for the Foot Biometric System.
==PAGE:68==
54
8 Future work
8.4
Adding additional sensors
During the development and implementation of the WBAS, the circuitry became sus-
ceptible to noise when too many sensors was added.
Whilst the exact reason for this noise was not conclusively identified, it is possible the
additional sensors was adding too much current to the Arduino’s analogue pins (as also
touched on in section 4.3). Another possibility could be that the board’s internal power
circuit was not able to handle this many external sensors at once on its 3.3VOut pin.
Regardless of the cause, it is very possible that the noise may be alleviated to allow for
more sensors. This would heighten the amount of data available to the Arduino, and in
turn, allow for deeper Data Models to be generated for the Data Subjects. One method
of achieving this would be to include a buffer into the circuit, described in section 4.1. A
driver chips, such as ULN2003 or a simpler IC 4050 could act as an intermediary buffer
to help alleviate the analogue pins on the Arduino, thus preventing the same strain on
the circuitry.
8.5
Adding an additional foot
Given the Arduino board’s built-in Bluetooth communication, it would technically be
possible to have both feet collaborate on calculating authentication score, in a manner
similar to Ivanov’s proposal. This combined score could then be sent as authentication
to a PA, with an even greater degree of entropy. This addition is probably one of the
most feasible, as the entire platform could be mirrored onto a secondary sole, leaving
only the connectivity and the fusion of results up to one of the two shoes.
8.6
Prospects of Continuous Authentication
Given the low inferencing time achievable, as well as the minuscule effect on the wearer’s
movement, the platform has potential for being utilised for continually authenticating
personnel. With the addition of a rechargeable battery as discussed earlier, the shoe
could operate over the course of a full work-day, constantly verifying the wearer’s iden-
tity. Further work to create a functional platform to constantly request and verify the
authentication score could be a worthwhile endeavour to showcase the deeper potential
of the proposal.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This work sought out to investigate the potential for a more security-oriented platform
for plantar biometrics, than the present contemporaries. As discussed earlier, this was
done in a three-pronged method, so as to best cover the potential areas of interest herein.
It was found that the related papers rarely discussed the potential security flaws of the
platform, and if so, hardly debated their platform’s potential for secure operating.
In order to showcase the potential for an improved rendition of the plantar platform,
a functional biometric platform was constructed, with the ability to differentiate be-
tween a number of Data Subject. The work highlighted the potential for power-eﬀicient,
lightweight, and secure platforms for the task at hand.
Finally, a NIST-based analysis was done to highlight the overall threats and potential
weaknesses of a generic plantar biometric platform.
This was to argue the case of
the conventional attack vectors of biometrics, and how the proposed platform helps
neutralise these.
In conclusion, this paper found that plantar biometrics are an eligible method of
authenticating people in a multifactor-scheme, and as a method of Continuous Authen-
tication, all the while retaining operational system security.
9.1
Conflict of interests
The author declares no conflict of interest with this paper, the papers chosen for com-
parison and evaluation, their results, or the conclusions drawn thereof. The choice of
3rd party service providers was not in any way influenced, or paid for, by said provider.
Limited funding for materials and hardware directly related to the project was offered by
DTU, and made available for the work produced. Handed out materials were returned
to DTU upon completion of the project.
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Data gathering - Code
1 #include <Arduino_LSM9DS1.h>
2 #define CONVERT_G_TO_MS2
9.80665f
3 #define FREQUENCY_HZ
50
4 #define INTERVAL_MS
(1000 / (FREQUENCY_HZ + 1))
5
6 static unsigned long last_interval_ms = 0;
7
8 //Analog reading pins
9 int analogPin0 = A0;
10 int analogPin1 = A1;
11 int analogPin2 = A2;
12
13 //Valuemetrics
14 int val0 = 0;
// variable to store the value of pin0
15 int val1 = 0;
// variable to store the value of pin1
16 int val2 = 0;
// variable to store the value of pin2
17
18
19 void setup() {
20
Serial.begin(115200);
21
Serial.println("Started");
22
23
if (!IMU.begin()) {
24
Serial.println("Failed to initialize IMU!");
25
while (1);
26
}
27 }
28
29 void loop() {
30
float x, y, z;
31
32
if (millis() > last_interval_ms + INTERVAL_MS) {
33
last_interval_ms = millis();
34
35
IMU.readAcceleration(x, y, z);
36
37
Serial.print(x * CONVERT_G_TO_MS2);
38
Serial.print(", ");
39
Serial.print(y * CONVERT_G_TO_MS2);
==PAGE:71==
A.2 Foot pressure - Heatmap
57
40
Serial.print(", ");
41
Serial.print(z * CONVERT_G_TO_MS2);
42
Serial.print(", ");
43
Serial.print(String(analogRead(analogPin0)));
44
Serial.print(", ");
45
Serial.print(String(analogRead(analogPin1)));
46
Serial.print(", ");
47
Serial.println(String(analogRead(analogPin2)));
48
}
49 }
A.2
Foot pressure - Heatmap
Figure A.1: Identified pressure areas, figure is courtesy of Keatsamarn and Pintavirooj
[KP18].
==PAGE:72==
58
A Appendix
A.3
Final circuit wiring
Figure A.2: Final wiring of the Arduino microcontroller’s circuit board.
A.4
Information letter and consent form
==PAGE:73==
Informationsbrev til deltageren
Kære deltager,
I dette brev oplyser vi dig om eksperimentets form˚al og fremgangsm˚ade. Det er
vigtigt, at du læser brevet omhyggeligt. Hvis du har spørgsm˚al eller andet du er i
tvivl om, er du velkommen til at kontakte os (Mads Stege, s165243@student.dtu.dk).
Dine rettigheder som deltager
Din deltagelse i dette eksperiment er frivillig. Det betyder, at du til enhver tid
kan forlade eksperimentet uden at det har nogle konsekvenser for dig, og uden
at du behøver at give en begrundelse. Data, der er behandlet i forskningspro-
jektet inden du trækker dit samtykke tilbage, vil ikke blive slettet. Personlige
oplysninger vil naturligvis blive slettet. Vi vil bede dig om en underskrevet erk-
læring om informeret samtykke til at deltage, efter at du er blevet informeret
om eksperimentet.
Form˚alet med forskningsprojektet
I dette forskningsprojekt undersøger vi en ny platform til at opfange og bear-
bejde fod-baseret biometrik. Vi benytter os af en kombination af data fra tre
separate tryksensorer og et gyroskop, for at opfange og bearbejde data. Form˚alet
med dette er at genkende og sidenhen autentificere brugernes identitet. Til dette
eksperiment vil du blive bedt om at iføre dig en specialbygget sko og g˚a en kort
distance i et afslappet og normalt tempo.
Lagring og h˚andtering af data Alt registreret forskningsdata (trykm˚alinger
og gyroskopværdier) vil blive opbevaret pseudo-anonymiseret. Det vil sige at
data ikke vil have nogen direkte forbindelse til dit navn, kontaktinformation
eller nogle andre oplysninger som ville gøre det muligt at identificere dig. For at
imødekomme dette, opbevares din data under en nøglekode, som kun forskerne
er bekendt med, og som sammen med data vil blive slettet, n˚ar disse ikke er
nødvendig længere (efter dataanalysen). Personlige oplysninger som dit navn
og din e-mailadresse, vil blive opbevaret separat af forsøgslederen.
Edge Impulse™, et firma lokaliseret i USA vil f˚a overdraget de pseudo-anonymiserede
data indhentet i løbet af forsøgene. Disse data vil herefter bruges til at træne og
teste en række datamodeller til brug ifm. evaluering af biometrik-platformen.
1
==PAGE:74==
Edge Impulse™vil ikke blive informeret omkring de pseudo-anonymiserede datas
oprindelse, forsøgets metodik, værktøjer, involverede testpersoner, eller disses
data, eller nogen anden information indhentet herudover i løbet af forsøget.
Selv om informationerne omhandlende din identitet aldrig bliver sendt afsted
sammen med sensorm˚alingerne, vil det teknisk set være muligt at identificere
dig igennem de indsamlede forskningsdata.
Risikoen for dette vurderes som
værende meget lav, grundet kompleksiteten af de opsamlede data.
Dataopsamling ved hjælp af skoen
I løbet af forsøget, vil vi som nævnt tidligere opsamle data fra skoens sensorer.
Disse sensorer opsamler udelukkende informationer omkring trykket der trykkes
ned med i skos˚alen, n˚ar du træder ned. Gyroskopet bagerst p˚a skoen opsamler
informationer omkring ændringer i skoens hældning.
Ingen af sensorerne vil p˚a nogen m˚ade forhindre dig i at g˚a naturligt. Ej heller
vil opsamlingen af data for˚arsage smerte, eller p˚a anden vis gøre skade p˚a din
krop. Som følge af forsøgets metode til at indsamle data, vil en projektforsker g˚a
ved siden af dig med en bærbar computer. Denne er forbundet direkte til skoens
kredsløb via et kabel. P˚a grund af forsøgets m˚al om at undersøge muligheden
for at anvende en skos˚al til biometrik, er det vigtigt, at du g˚ar og bevæger dig
naturligt i løbet af forsøget. Dette indebærer at du ikke løber, hopper, eller p˚a
anden m˚ade bevæger dig unormalt i forhold til din normale gangart. Derudover
bedes du undg˚a at læne, vippe eller p˚a anden m˚ade flytte din vægt atypisk i
forhold til dit normale gangmønster. Du bedes iføre dig en almindelig sko p˚a
den anden fod under forsøget, for at forhindre uregelmæssigt tryk.
Skulle du have spørgsm˚al til eksperimentet, de anvendte metoder eller din egen
sikkerhed samt dine rettigheder, er du velkommen til at kontakte os per e-mail
(s165243@student.dtu.dk).
Med venlig hilsen,
Mads Stege, Ansvarlig forfatter/projektleder.
2
==PAGE:75==
Erklæring om informeret samtykke
Jeg bekræfter at:
• Jeg er blevet fyldestgørende informeret om det p˚agældende forsøg, s˚avel
mundtligt, som skriftligt i form af informationsbrevet.
• Jeg har haft muligheden for at fremlægge spørgsm˚al vedrørende forsøget
og at disse spørgsm˚al er blevet besvaret p˚a tilfredsstillende vis.
• Jeg har overvejet min deltagelse i eksperimentet omhyggeligt.
• Jeg deltager af min egen fri vilje.
Jeg er enig i at:
• Mine data vil blive indsamlet og opbevaret til videnskabelige form˚al som
nævnt i informationsbrevet i pseudo-anonymiseret tilstand, dvs. med en
nøglekode som kun forskerne er bekendt med.
• Mine data m˚a blive delt i en offentlig forskningsdatabase i pseudo-anonymiseret
tilstand, med en tilfældig nøglekode, der ikke er kendt af forskerne. Dette
inkluderer r˚a sensor- og gyroskopdata.
Navn, alder, køn og kontakto-
plysninger, mv. vil IKKE blive delt i førnævnte offentlige database.
Jeg forst˚ar at:
• Min deltagelse er frivillig og jeg har ret til at trække mig fra eksperimentet
til enhver tid uden at give en begrundelse.
• Hvis jeg tilbagekalder min deltagelse i forsøget, m˚a mine indsamlede forskn-
ingsdata stadigvæk anvendes til forskningsform˚al.
• Mit privatliv er beskyttet i henhold til gældende lovgivning og europæiske
retningslinjer (GDPR; EU 2016/679).
• Der er en risiko for, at nogen muligvis kan identificere mig p˚a baggrund
af offentligt delte forskningsdata.
• Min samtykke gælder kun dette eksperiment.
3
==PAGE:76==
Undertegnede giver hermed samtykke til at deltage i det førnævnte eksperiment:
Fulde navn
E-mailadresse
Dato, Underskrift
4
==PAGE:77==
Subject Information Letter
Dear participant,
In this letter we will inform you about the purpose of the experiment and the
procedures.
It is important that you read the letter carefully.
If you have
any questions, do not hesitate to contact the project researcher (Mads Stege,
s165243@student.dtu.dk) for clarification.
Your rights as a participant
Your participation in this experiment is voluntarily. This means that you can
leave the experiment at any time without consequences for yourself, and without
informing us about your reasons. Likewise, should the thesis paper be published,
you will be informed of this, and any consequences hereof to your biometric data.
Data processed in the research project before you withdraw your consent will
not be deleted. Any personal identifiable information will of course be deleted.
We will ask you for a signed consent formula to participate after you have been
informed about the experiment.
Purpose of the research project
In this research project we are investigating a new platform for capturing plantar
(feet) biometrics, for the purpose of uniquely identifying and thereby authenti-
cating an individual. We will use a combination of three separate force sensors,
and a gyroscope embedded into a sole, to capture the data using a conventional
shoe. For the experiment, you will be asked to walk a small distance whilst
wearing the experimental footwear.
Data storage and handling
All research data (pressure and gyroscope readings) will be pseudo-anonymised,
that is, stored not in connection with your name, contact information, or any
other information that would allow a third party to identify you.
For this,
your data will be stored under a handle (key code), which is only known to the
experimenter and will be destroyed when it is no longer needed (i.e. after data
analysis and evaluation). Personal information such as your name, and email
will be stored separately and kept safe by the experimenter. Edge Impulse™, a
US-based company, will be handed the readings collected from the experiment
5
==PAGE:78==
for training of the data models used in the evaluation of the platform. Edge
Impulse™will not be given any information as to the origins of the data, the
experiment’s methodology, the subjects involved or any information pertained
hereof.
Although information about your identity is never disclosed, biometric data
would still make it possible that someone will be able to identify you through
the research data. The chance of this occuring is deemed to be is exceedingly
unlikely, due to the complexity of the data sets.
Data capturing using the shoe
Over the course of the experiment, we will record the data generated by the
shoe’s sensors.
These sensors only capture the pressure exerted by the foot
during walking. Similarly, the gyroscope lies in an internal sensor on the shoe
sole’s processing board and is responsible for capturing data related to the
orientation of the shoe whilst in motion.
None of the sensors used will hurt or otherwise harm your foot, leg or other parts
of your body. Due to the method of collecting data, a researcher will walk besides
you with a laptop connected to the sole’s processing board. Given the project’s
objective of comparing walking patterns of individuals and the delicate sensors,
it is important that you walk naturally whilst the experiment is underway. This
entails that you may not perform any acts of skipping, jumping, running or other
unusual walking patterns. Additionally, you are asked to refrain from leaning,
yawing or otherwise shifting your weight in an unusual manner compared to
your normal walking pattern.
You are asked to wear one of your normal-wear shoes to help simulate a complete
pair of shoes.
If you have any questions about the experiment, the methods or your safety and
rights, do not hesitate to contact us per email (s165243@student.dtu.dk).
Kind regards, Mads Stege, Lead author/project researcher.
6
==PAGE:79==
Informed Consent Form
I confirm that:
• I was satisfactorily informed about the study as well both verbally and in
writing by means of the subject information letter.
• I have had the opportunity to put forward questions regarding the study
and that these questions have been answered satisfactorily.
• I have carefully considered my participation in the experiment.
• I participate of my own free will.
I agree that:
• My data will be acquired and stored for scientific purposes as mentioned
in the subject information letter in pseudo anonymised form (i.e. using a
key only known to the experimenter).
• My data may be shared in public scientific database in a pseudo anonymised
state using a random key not stored by the experimenter (this includes
raw sensor data, gyroscope recordings).
Metadata such as name, mail
address, etc. will not be shared.
I understand that:
• My participation is voluntary, and I have the right to withdraw from the
experiment at any time without obligation to provide a reason.
• Should I withdraw from the experiment, my biometric data may still be
used for research purposes.
• My privacy is protected according to applicable Danish law and European
guidelines (GDPR; EU 2016/679).
• There is a risk that someone might be able to identify me in publicly
shared research data.
• My consent covers this experiment only.
7
==PAGE:80==
I hereby give my consent to take part in this experiment:
Full name
E-Mail address
Date, Signature
8
==PAGE:81==
A.5 NIST assessment descriptions
67
A.5
NIST assessment descriptions
Figure A.3: Summary of Key Activities [Ros]. For easiness sake, Table G-1 has not
been included for this thesis, as it mostly concerns the likelihood based on a specific
organisation scenario.
Figure A.4: Table G-2 Assessment scale - likelihood of threat event initiation [Ros]
Figure A.5: Table G-3 Assessment scale - likelihood of threat event occurrence [Ros]
==PAGE:82==
68
A Appendix
Figure A.6: Table G-4 Assessment scale - likelihood of threat event resulting in adverse
impacts [Ros]
Figure A.7: Table G-5 Assessment scale - overall likelihood [Ros]
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[Aca+18]
Abbas Acar et al. “WACA: Wearable-Assisted Continuous Authentication.”
und. In: (2018).
[Ada]
Adafruit. Round Force-Sensitive Resistor (FSR) - Interlinkv 402. https:
//www.digikey.com/en/products/detail/interlink-electronics/30-
81794/2476468. Accessed: 2022-03-17.
[And]
Andy H. Hacking Two Factor Authentication: Four Methods for Bypassing
2FA and MFA. https://securityboulevard.com/2022/01/hacking-two-
factor-authentication-four-methods-for-bypassing-2fa-and-mfa/.
Accessed: 2022-03-22.
[Arda]
Arduino. Nano 33 BLE Sense. https://docs.arduino.cc/hardware/
nano-33-ble-sense. Accessed: 2022-02-12.
[Ardb]
Arduino.cc. Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense. http://store-usa.arduino.
cc/products/arduino-nano-33-ble-sense. Accessed: 2022-03-17.
[AS18]
Ananya and Saurabh Singh. “Keystroke Dynamics for Continuous Authen-
tication.” In: (2018), pages 205–208. doi: 10 . 1109 / CONFLUENCE . 2018 .
8442703.
[Bae]
Baeldung. F-1 Score for Multi-Class Classification. https://www.baeldung.
com/cs/multi-class-f1-score#f-1-score. Accessed: 2022-03-15.
[Bas+21]
Shakila Basheer et al. “FESD: An Approach for Biometric Human Footprint
Matching Using Fuzzy Ensemble Learning.” eng. In: Ieee Access 9 (2021),
pages 26641–26663. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3057931.
[CA20]
Parul Chaudhary and Puneet Azad. “Energy Harvesting Using Shoe Embed-
ded with Piezoelectric Material.” eng. In: Journal of Electronic Materials
49.11 (2020), pages 6455–6464. issn: 1543186x, 03615235. doi: 10.1007/
s11664-020-08401-6.
[CAP90]
RM CAPLAN. “HOW FINGERPRINTS CAME INTO USE FOR PER-
SONAL IDENTIFICATION.” In: Journal of the American Academy of Der-
matology (1990), pages 109–114. doi: 10.1016/0190-9622(90)70194-m.
[Car+10]
Sergio Cardoso et al. “Quality standards in Biobanking: Authentication by
genetic profiling of blood spots from donor’s original sample.” In: European
Journal of Human Genetics (2010). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.16.
==PAGE:84==
70
Bibliography
[DOL]
DOL. Guidance on the Protection of Personal Identifiable Information |
DOL. https://www.dol.gov/general/ppii. Accessed: 2022-01-01.
[Edg]
Edge Impulse ™. Edge Impulse’s oﬀicial website. https://www.edgeimpulse.
com/. Accessed: 2022-03-22.
[Ele]
Interlink Electronics. FSR 400 Series Data Sheet. Oﬀicial website. Accessed:
2022-02-16.
[Gee]
Jeff Geerling. Power Consumption Benchmarks | Raspberry Pi Dramble.
https://www.pidramble.com/wiki/benchmarks/power-consumption.
Accessed: 2022-03-17.
[Hua+06]
Bufu Huang et al. “Intelligent shoes for human identification.” eng. In: 2006
Ieee International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, Robio 2006
(2006), page 4141934. doi: 10.1109/ROBIO.2006.340268.
[Impa]
Edge Impulse. Data forwarder docs, v1.5| Edge Impulse. https://docs.
edgeimpulse.com/docs/cli-data-forwarder. Accessed: 2022-02-19.
[Impb]
Edge Impulse. Raw Data. https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/raw.
Accessed: 2022-02-25.
[Impc]
Edge Impulse. Spectral features. https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/
spectral-features. Accessed: 2022-02-25.
[Iva+19]
Kamen Ivanov et al. “Design of a Sensor Insole for Gait Analysis.” In: (2019),
pages 433–444. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-27538-9_37.
[Iva+20]
Kamen Ivanov et al. “Identity Recognition by Walking Outdoors Using Mul-
timodal Sensor Insoles.” eng. In: Ieee Access 8 (2020), pages 150797–150807.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3016970.
[JK01]
Joseph Jankovic and Asha S. Kapadia. “Functional decline in Parkinson
disease.” In: Archives of Neurology 58.10 (2001), pages 1611–1615. doi: 10.
1001/archneur.58.10.1611.
[JRP]
Anil K. Jain, Arun Ross, and Sharath Pankanti. “Biometrics: A tool for
information security.” In: (). doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2006.873653.
[KD12]
Kapil KumarNagwanshi and Sipi Dubey. “Biometric Authentication using
Human Footprint.” und. In: International Journal of Applied Information
Systems 3.7 (2012), pages 1–6. doi: 10.5120/ijais12-450568.
[Kel]
Kelly Smith. Biometrics History. https://www.hsdl.org/?view&did=
463907. Accessed: 2021-09-06.
[KNS18]
Riti Kushwaha, Neeta Nain, and Gaurav Singal. “Detailed analysis of foot-
print geometry for person identification.” eng. In: Proceedings - 13th Interna-
tional Conference on Signal-image Technology and Internet-based Systems,
Sitis 2017 2018- (2018), pages 229–236. doi: 10.1109/SITIS.2017.47.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
71
[KP18]
Tanapon Keatsamarn and Chuchart Pintavirooj. “Footprint Identification
using Deep Learning.” eng. In: Bmeicon 2018 - 11th Biomedical Engineering
International Conference (2018), page 8609926. doi: 10.1109/BMEiCON.
2018.8609926.
[KS21]
Rohit Khokher and Ram Chandra Singh. “Footprint Identification: Review
of an Emerging Biometric Trait.” eng. In: Macromolecular Symposia 397.1
(2021), page 2000246. doi: 10.1002/masy.202000246.
[KSK15]
Rohit Khokher, Ram Chandra Singh, and Rahul Kumar. “Footprint recog-
nition with principal component analysis and independent component anal-
ysis.” eng. In: Macromolecular Symposia 347.1 (2015), pages 16–26. doi:
10.1002/masy.201400045.
[Lan10]
Andreas Lanitis. “A survey of the effects of aging on biometric identity
verification.” In: International Journal of Biometrics 2.1 (2010), pages 34–
52. doi: 10.1504/IJBM.2010.030415.
[MB13]
Soumik Mondal and Patrick Bours. “Continuous authentication using mouse
dynamics.” In: (2013). issn: 16175468.
[Men]
Weizhi Meng. 02192 - Lecture 2: Security and Threats. https://cn.inside.
dtu.dk/cnnet/filesharing/download/edc51f4e- e13a- 41eb- aef3-
6ed110976514. Accessed: 2021-12-28.
[NIS]
NIST. Risk Management Framework | NIST. https://www.nist.gov/
cyberframework/risk-management-framework. Accessed: 2021-12-29.
[NRD17]
Abhijit Nag, Arunava Roy, and Dipankar Dasgupta. “Continuous Authen-
tication.” In: (2017), pages 235–279. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-58808-7_6.
[Orf+19]
Charalampos Orfanidis et al. “Towards battery-free LPWAN wearables.” In:
(2019), pages 52–53. doi: 10.1145/3362053.3363488.
[Pal+]
Basker Palaniswamy et al. “Continuous authentication for VANET.” In: ().
doi: 10.1016/j.vehcom.2020.100255.
[RCB]
Nalini K. Ratha, Jonathan H. Connell, and Ruud M. Bolle. “An analysis of
minutiae matching strength.” In: (). doi: 10.1007/3-540-45344-x_32.
[Riv]
Martin Riva. Interpretation of Loss and Accuracy for a Machine Learning
Model. https://www.baeldung.com/cs/ml-loss-accuracy#loss. Ac-
cessed: 2022-03-15.
[Ros]
Ronald S. Ross. NIST Special Publication 800-30 Revision 1. https://
nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-
30r1.pdf. Accessed: 2021-12-28.
[SB14]
James M. Scott and James A. Browne. “Hip dysplasia.” In: Sports Her-
nia and Athletic Pubalgia: Diagnosis and Treatment 9781489974211 (2014),
pages 67–74. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-7421-1_6.
==PAGE:86==
72
Bibliography
[SGF]
G Stoneburner, A. Goguen, and A. Feringa. Risk Management Guide for
Information Technology Systems - Recommendations of the National Insti-
tute of Standards and Technology. https://www.ucop.edu/information-
technology- services//initiatives/resources- and- tools/sp800-
30.pdf. Accessed: 2022-01-09.
[Tan]
Gilbert Tanner. Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Overview. https://gilberttanner.
com/blog/arduino-nano-33-ble-sense-overview. Accessed: 2022-03-17.
[Ten]
Tensorflow. Tensorflow Oﬀicial Install. https://www.tensorflow.org/
install. Accessed: 2022-03-20.
[Tha+21]
Simon Nam Thanh et al. “Survey on botnets: Incentives, evolution, detection
and current trends.” In: (2021). doi: 10.3390/fi13080198.
[Tok]
A. Aylin Tokuç. Underfitting and Overfitting in Machine Learning. https:
//www.baeldung.com/cs/ml-underfitting-overfitting#what-are-
underfitting-and-overfitting. Accessed: 2022-03-15.
[UW08]
Andreas Uhl and Peter Wild. “Footprint-based biometric verification.” eng.
In: Journal of Electronic Imaging 17.1 (2008), page 011016. doi: 10.1117/
1.2892674.
[VK21]
Gnana Abhinay Vadlamudi and Kondaveeti Hari Kishan. “Security Authen-
tication using Brain Waves.” eng. In: 2021 7th International Conference on
Advanced Computing and Communication Systems, Icaccs 2021 1 (2021),
pages 104–107. doi: 10.1109/ICACCS51430.2021.9441992.
[Wan+08]
S. Goya Wannamethee et al. “Tissue plasminogen activator, von willebrand
factor, and risk of type 2 diabetes in older men.” In: Diabetes Care 31.5
(2008), pages 995–1000. doi: 10.2337/dc07-1569.
[Yeh+18]
Kuo Hui Yeh et al. “I Walk, Therefore i Am: Continuous User Authentica-
tion with Plantar Biometrics.” eng. In: Ieee Communications Magazine 56.2
(2018), pages 150–157. doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2018.1700339.
[Yun+07]
Jaeseok Yun et al. “Biometric user identification with dynamic footprint.”
eng. In: 2007 2nd International Conference on Bio-inspired Computing: The-
ories and Applications, Bicta 2007 (2007), pages 225–230. doi: 10.1109/
BICTA.2007.4806456.
[Zvo]
Enes Zvornicanin. Relation Between Learning Rate and Batch Size. https:
//www.baeldung.com/cs/learning-rate-batch-size#learning-rate.
Accessed: 2022-03-15.
