==PAGE:1==
TCR-pMHC binding prediction by molecular modeling and Graph
Neural Networks
Master thesis, M.Sc. Eng. Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
Sebastian Nymann Deleuran (s163691@student.dtu.dk)
Supervisor:
Associate Professor Paolo Marcatili (pamar@dtu.dk)
AI for Immunological Molecules
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
March 2022
==PAGE:2==
I
Abstract
T cells constitute an integral part of the immune system, and thus accurate modeling of their interac-
tion with non-self peptides provides a highly useful method of directing development of immunothera-
peutics. This task remains challenging due to issues pertaining to data quality and availability, which
is reflected in the performance of current state-of-the-art methods for predicting T cell receptor (TCR)
and peptide-MHC (pMHC) interaction. While these primarily employ sequence based approaches, the
use of structural TCR-pMHC data has been largely unexplored due to the lack of solved TCR-pMHC
structures. However, advances in modeling of TCR-pMHC complexes from sequence data has allowed
the implementation of structure based prediction methods, which are explored in this thesis. Here, we
present a graph neural network (GNN) based approach for predicting TCR-pMHC interaction, which
achieves state-of-the-art performance on both redundant and non-redundant data. Performance com-
parison to sequence and computational force field-based methods reveals that structural data yields
better generalization to non-redundant data, despite inaccuracies stemming from the TCR-pMHC
modeling pipeline. We finally demonstrate that advances in structural modeling of TCR-pMHC com-
plexes and data availability will likely improve predictive performance, as these factors appear to be
the current primary bottlenecks for achieving accurate prediction of TCR-pMHC interaction.
i
==PAGE:3==
II
Preface
Project title: TCR-pMHC binding prediction by molecular modeling and Graph Neural Networks
ECTS: 30
Name: Sebastian Nymann Deleuran
Student ID: s163691
Start date: 23/08/2021
End date: 08/03/2022
Supervisor: Associate Professor Paolo Marcatili (pamar@dtu.dk)
Code is available at: https://github.com/larsbonde/masters
ii
==PAGE:4==
III
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank Paolo Marcatili for excellent supervision and support during the conception of this
thesis. I am especially grateful for the high degree of flexibility given during challenging times. Ad-
ditionally, I want to thank Joakim Clifford and Jakob Stiesmark for providing great feedback on the
written part of the thesis.
iii
==PAGE:5==
IV
Abbreviation list
Abbreviation
Explanation
AUC
Area under the ROC curve
CDR
Complementarity determining region
CV
Cross-validation
DC
Dendritic cell
ESM
Sequences embedded using the ESM-1b transformer
ESM+PS
Concatenated PS and ESM embeddings
FN
False negative
FP
False positive
GNN
Graph neural network
LOO
Leave-one-out validation
LSTM
Long short term memory
MCC
Matthew’s correlation coefficient
MHC
Major histocompatibility complex
PS
Structures embedded using the ProteinSolver GNN
Quad LSTM
4 parallel LSTMs specific for peptide, MHC and TCRαβ chains
RNN
Recurrent neural network
ROC
Receiver operator characteristic
Single LSTM
Single bidirectional LSTM
TCR
T cell receptor
TCR-pMHC
TCR and pMHC complex
TN
True negative
TP
True positive
Triple LSTM
3 parallel LSTMs specific for peptide and CDR3αβ chains
pMHC
Peptide-MHC complex
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
I
Abstract
i
II Preface
ii
IIIAcknowledgements
iii
IV Abbreviation list
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview of T cell development and activation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
T cell receptor binding governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Advances and approaches in predicting T cell receptor binding
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Overview of TCR-pMHC structure prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Graph neural networks for protein structure representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Long short-term memory networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Materials & Methods
9
2.1
Generation and overview of TCR-pMHC structure dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Paired CDR3α, CDR3β and peptide sequence data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Molecular modeling of TCR-pMHC complexes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Computation of FoldX and Rosetta energy terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
ProteinSolver and ESM-1b fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Protein structure embedding using ProteinSolver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Amino acid sequence embedding using ESM-1b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Baseline methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
biLSTM with positional encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Parallel LSTMs for each TCR-pMHC chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Parallel LSTMs for CDR3 and peptide residues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.4
ProteinSolver transfer learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Hyperparameter selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Training and validation schemes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.1
Nested 5-fold cross-validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.2
Peptide-specific leave-one-out validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Extraction of proxy attributes for TCR-pMHC model quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.7
Performance evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Results
17
3.1
Dataset visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Structure and sequence embeddings perform similarly in a 5-fold cross-validation scheme 18
3.2.1
Swapped negatives do not significantly impact model performance
. . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Structure and sequence embeddings achieve similar precision and recall estimates 21
3.2.3
Peptide abundance is positively correlated with predictive performance
. . . .
22
v
==PAGE:7==
3.2.4
Relaxation of TCR-pMHC structures using FoldX and Rosetta does not improve
performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Structure embeddings improve performance when evaluating on non-redundant data .
24
3.3.1
Quad LSTM models achieve high recall but low precision
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.2
Stratifying predictive performance by peptide reveals poor generalization
. . .
27
3.3.3
Data filtering improves predictive performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Model quality is significantly correlated with prediction error . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Discussion
32
4.1
Graph neural network derived protein structure embeddings provide state-of-the-art
performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Data availability and quality is a major bottleneck of predictive performance
. . . . .
32
4.3
TCR germline bias may inflate model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Considerations on graph neural network architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Conclusion
34
A MMseqs2 CDR3β sequence clustering
39
B ESM-1b amino acid sequence embedding
39
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
T cells constitute an integral part of the adaptive immune response by antagonizing cellular abnor-
malities. The T cell receptor (TCR) binds exogenous peptides presented by major histocompatibility
complexes (MHC) with high specificity and initiates a cascade of cellular expansion and differentia-
tion in order to maintain immunological homeostasis (figure 1). Manipulating this event forms one of
the core elements of immunotherapy and thus the understanding of rules governing this interaction
is essential to rational development of immunotherapy strategies [1]. The extreme diversity of TCRs
allows for recognition of a wide range of antigens, but in turn renders the modalities of their anti-
gen specificity highly complex [2, 3]. Consequently, our understanding of the mechanisms detailing
TCR and peptide-MHC (pMHC) interactions remains lacking, which is reflected in the precision of
state of the art machine learning methods modeling this event. Thus, while current in silico tools
for predicting T cell epitopes allow for high throughput screening of genomic and peptidomic data,
accurate identification of novel immunogenic antigens is a task which still remains largely unsolved
[4]. As the amount of available immunological data in databases such as IEDB and VDJdb has in-
creased, so has the predictive performance of methods aiming to solve this task [5, 6, 4, 7]. These
primarily utilize amino acid sequence data, and the use of structural data has not been explored to the
same degree, owing to a lack of solved TCR structures [8]. However, recent advances in TCR-pMHC
complex homology modeling has allowed for accurate reconstruction of TCR-pMHC structures which
amplifies the viability of structure based prediction methods [9]. In conjunction with work presented
by Strokach et al. 2020, we aim to leverage protein structure representations learned from a large
set of non-immunological protein data in order to obtain information rich embeddings of TCR-pMHC
structures [10]. By exploiting these developments we present a graph neural network based approach
which utilizes annotated TCR-pMHC structures in order to predict TCR-pMHC binding. Its pre-
dictive performance will be compared to a natural language processing approach utilizing sequence
data as well as a computational force field based method utilizing energy terms computed in the
TCR-pMHC complex modeling pipeline.
Figure 1: Left: Ribbon representation of the TCR-pMHC complex. TCRα and -β chains are red and salmon
colored respectively, the MHC class I molecule is colored orange and the peptide, located in the MHC binding
cleft, is white.
Right: Close-up of the TCR-pMHC binding interface.
The CDR3 loops and peptide are
emphasized. In both images, the peptide is NLVPMVATV and the MHC is haplotype HLA-A*02:01
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1
Overview of T cell development and activation
T cell progenitors develop in the bone barrow and migrate to the thymus, where regulatory signaling
directs their maturation towards either αβ or γδ lineages. Here, the majority of cells commit to the
former and will as a result undergo further specification into either CD4+ helper or CD8+ effector T
cells. The TCR is a heterodimeric protein composed of an α and β chain, each containing variable
and constant domains expressed from the TCRα and -β loci [11]. These loci are highly recombinant
as they contain numerous variable (V), diversity (D) and joining (J) gene segments that undergo
somatic rearrangement in order to yield the heterodimeric variable region of the receptor (figure 3)
[12]. Following recombination of the β loci, the β chain is expressed on the surface of the cell with a
surrogate α chain. Provided that the complex is viable, CD4 and CD8 expression is upregulated and
rearrangement of the α locus commences, yielding many different T cells from a single progenitor [13].
Upon productive rearrangement, the now double positive CD4+CD8+ T cell expresses the TCR in
complex with the CD3 co-receptor which mediates intracellular TCR signaling. T cells that interact
with intermediate avidity for self-pMHC complexes undergo positive selection and irreversibly commit
to either CD4+ or CD8+ lineages [13]. Finally, the T cell undergoes additional exposure to self-pMHC
complexes and T cells expressing TCRs with high affinity for self-antigens are eliminated.
Upon recognition of pathogen-associated or damage-associated molecular patterns, dendritic cells
(DCs) undergo maturation leading to the upregulation of antigen uptake pathways as well as co-
stimulatory capabilities [14].
This allows for antigen presentation to naive T cells through MHC
class I and II pathways.
Antigens derived from cytosolic synthesis and exogenous antigens taken
up via the cross-presentation pathway are presented in complex with MHC class I molecules, while
endocytic antigens are presented via with MHC class II molecules. While our current understanding
of details governing the cross-presentation pathway remains lacking, it is nonetheless essential for
the manipulation of CD8+ T cell based immunization [15]. The mature DC travels to a lymph node
where T cell activation will occur. DC mediated expression of chemokines recruit naive T cells from the
peripheral to the lymph node where they are sequestered upon recognition of their cognate antigen.
In the contact area between the DC and T cell the immunological synapse is formed, comprising
numerous TCR-pMHC and co-receptor complexes as well as additional factors required for providing
a sufficiently strong signal for T cell activation [16]. TCR, co-stimulatory and cytokine signaling from
the DC promote survival, proliferation and differentiation in the T cell and the now activated T cells
may home to peripheral tissue in order to exert their immunological function [17].
Upon clearance of the antagonizing antigen, the vast majority of clonally expanded CD8+ T cells
undergo apoptosis, leaving only a small population of long-lived memory cells. This immunological
memory is mediated and maintained by CD4+ T cells [18, 19]. Upon subsequent antigen exposure,
the rapid recall response of memory T cells allow for swift exertion of cytotoxic effector functions,
which form the basic principles of vaccine mediated immunization.
1.2
T cell receptor binding governance
The TCR is composed by membrane bound disulfide-linked α and β chains and is expressed in complex
with the invariant CD3 co-receptor (figure 2). Antigen specificity of the receptor is modulated by the
variable domain which is a product of somatic rearrangement of Vα, Jα, Vβ, Dβ and Jβ gene segments
(figure 3). Additional variability at junctional sites massively amplifies the TCR rerpetoire diversity
2
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2: Left: Diagram of the T cell receptor. Right: Ribbon representation of a T cell receptor, with CDRα
and CDRβ loops colored orange and red respectively. Left figure originates from Janeway’s Immunobiology
2017 [28].
with estimates of a lower bound of 1e8 clonotypes existing in a single individual [20]. The majority
of this diversity is restricted to the six hypervariable complementarity determining regions (CDRs)
which compose pMHC binding sites, with the CDR3β loop being the most variable of all in terms of
both sequence and length (figure 2). The CDR1 and CDR2 loops are thought to primarily interact
with the MHC, while the primary site of antigen contact is located on the CDR3 loops [21] (figure
1). Physicochemical properties of residues in these regions modulate antigen specificity by generating
strong TCR-pMHC interaction upon formation of non-covalent interactions with key residues in the
antigen peptide [22]. Additionally, structural properties of each interactor in the binding interface
must also be satisfied in order to accommodate conformational changes of the TCR upon docking [23].
Scott et al. 2011, demonstrates the steric constraints imposed on key peptide residues, as the CDR3α
loop forms electrostatic interactions with MHC α1-helix residues [24]. Here, the loop must undergo
conformational changes leading to tight packing along the peptide, which may only be achieved if
steric properties of proximal residues allow for this. This example gives rise to the concept of hot
spots in TCR binding, wherein structural and chemical properties of certain key positions dictate
binding specificity, while more diversity is permitted at remaining sites [25].
Consequently, TCR
binding is highly selective but due to variability at non-key residues, a single TCR may bind more
than a million antigens which is essential for the efficiency of our TCR repertoire, but complicates the
task of modeling TCR interactions [26, 27].
1.3
Advances and approaches in predicting T cell receptor binding
In silico prediction of T cell epitopes allows for high-throughput screening of genomic and peptidomic
data in order to direct development of immunotherapeutic biologics. Current state of the art methods
primarily employ sequence based approaches, but differ greatly in their exact implementations and
applications [8]. One set of methods predict MHC ligands as a proxy for T cell epitopes, as the antigen
presentation pathway imposes high selectivity on peptides and drastically reduces the epitope search
space [30]. Additionally, while MHC class II ligands are significantly more variable in length and
sequence, MHC class I ligands confer a strong anchor position motif which allows for highly accurate
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 3: A and B: Variable (V), diversity (D) and joining (J) gene segments are rearranged through VDJ
recombination in order to generate variability in TCR antigen specificity.
C and D: Antigen specificity is
determined by hypervariable CDRs found in the variable domain of TCRs. Figure originates from Laydon et
al. 2015 [29].
ligand prediction [31, 32, 33]. The caveat to this approach is that most peptides predicted to be MHC
binders are in fact not immunogenic when experimentally validated [34]. It has been suggested that
considering peptide binding affinity may improve prediction of immunogenicty, however there is no
clear consensus at this point [35, 36]. State of the art methods for this task tend to employ variations
of shallow feed-forward networks, which are suitable for the mostly fixed length of MHC class I ligands.
The second set of models aim to predict TCR-pMHC binding using paired TCR and epitope sequence
data [7, 37, 38].
These methods primarily utilize combinations of CDR3α and CDR3β sequences
to represent the TCR, as they appear to be the prime modulator of TCR specificity.
However,
CDR1 and -2 loops have also shown to carry information relevant to prediction of TCR specificity,
which aligns with the paradigm of considering the complete binding interface when attempting to
understand TCR interactions [23, 39, 40]. As data availability is biased heavily towards the most
prevalent MHC haplotypes, these models are usually only trained on epitope data for a single MHC
haplotype, often the HLA-A*02 allele group [5].
While these models circumvent the assumption
that MHC ligands necessarily are TCR ligands, they suffer from limitations on data availability and
quality [7, 8]. Montemurro et al. 2021, demonstrates a significant correlation between peptide-specific
predictive performance and the number of positive binder examples in their dataset, suggesting that
a major bottleneck of predictive power is the lack of available data for a sufficiently broad range
of peptides. Consequently, generalization to novel peptides will be poor as only a small degree of
epitope diversity is covered by available data, which in turn severely limits the applications of the
model. These methods employ machine learning models suitable for sequence analysis such as long
short-term memory networks, 1-dimensional convolutional neural networks as well as more complex
natural language processing approaches such as transformer models.
4
==PAGE:12==
The structural and energetic dynamics of TCR-pMHC interaction would appear to be prime carriers
of information relevant to TCR-pMHC binding prediction. However, development of machine learning
based approaches utilizing this type of data has been largely unexplored, primarily owing to the lack
of available structural TCR-pMHC data [8]. Methods based on computational force fields have been
proposed, although with poor predictive performance and high computational complexity. Lanzarotti
et al. 2018, describes a method based on task-specific optimization of existing force fields, where pMHC
and TCR structures were scored together using a modified energy function [41]. They demonstrated
that interaction energies could be utilized to identify cognate peptides for a given TCR, and that
improvements in predictive performance could be obtained from optimizing scoring function weights.
Although the method was not able to achieve high accuracy, it did demonstrate the latent information
in structural TCR-pMHC data.
1.4
Overview of TCR-pMHC structure prediction
While sequence variability within the CDR loops is enormous, the conformations these loops can
assume are far more restricted and is in fact largely determined by loop length and the properties of
key residues [42]. These conformations are denoted canonical structures, which comprise a definite set
of structures we know these loops to assume. This property allows for high accuracy prediction of TCR
and B cell receptor structures through template based modeling [43]. In LYRA presented in Klausen et
al. 2015, framework templates for each chain in the TCR are identified, after which canonical structures
are selected for the CDRs. CDR template structures are grafted onto the framework template and
side chains are packed in order to yield the final TCR model. In order to obtain a high quality model,
however, a template structure with high similarity to the query sequence must be available. This
provides challenges in modeling the CDR3β loop, as the extreme variability exhibited in this region
renders both template selection difficult and additionally limits the set of available canonical structures
[43]. TCR-pMHCmodels presented in Jensen et al. 2019, is a pipeline for structural modeling of TCR-
pMHC complexes utilizing LYRA to model the TCR and MODELLER, also a homology modeling tool,
to model the pMHC structure [9, 44]. Finally, TCR and pMHC docking is performed by MODELLER
using a TCR-pMHC template, obtaining a median Cα root-mean-square-deviation (RMSD) of 2.31Å
with respect to native structures. While individual TCR and pMHC structures can be modelled with
RMSDs generally well below 2Å and 1Å respectively, the TCR-pMHC docking procedure provides a
greater challenge. Here, on average 50% of native residue-to-residue contacts in the binding interface
are lost, which may obfuscate essential details relating to the structural dynamics of the interaction.
Consequently, models for predicting TCR-pMHC interaction trained on such data may exhibit poor
predictive performance.
1.5
Graph neural networks for protein structure representation
The following sections will focus on properties of machine learning models central to the thesis. For
a general introduction to machine learning concepts such as feed-forward networks, backpropagation
and regularization, the reader is referred to reviews Emmert-Streib et al. 2020 and Kukačka et al.
2018 [45, 46]. Graph neural networks (GNN) represent an efficient method of applying a machine
learning framework to graph structured data. Due to the inherent graph-like properties of protein
structures, the application of GNNs to model protein structure data seems apparent, which is indeed
corroborated by their current rise in popularity within computational biology [47, 48, 49, 50, 10]. A
5
==PAGE:13==
powerful property of GNNs is their native invariance to graph isomorphism and their applicability
to graphs of arbitrary topology and scale [51]. Owing to this, unlike convolutional neural networks
which have previously been applied to tasks of geometric nature, GNNs are able to process point
cloud data in a rotational invariant manner without explicitly encouraging this behavior [52]. That
is, the absolute orientation of a graph does not influence the output of the GNN, which is a desirable
feature when operating on data types where high degrees of isomorphism may be exhibited such as
structures of protein-protein interactions. Additionally, GNNs are flexible in how their learned graph
representations can be utilized, as inference can be performed on individual nodes, sub-graphs, edges
or on the full graph by aggregating information from all nodes [51].
Figure 4: Graph convolutions (right) are analogous to 2D convolutions (left). The kernel of the 2D convolution
compresses information from a neighbourhood of nodes similarly to how neighborhood nodes in an unordered
graph are used to generate new node embeddings. Figure originates from Wu et al. 2019 [53].
GNNs process graphs using the concept of message passing. Input features of nodes and edges are
passed through message passing layers which compress information from local nodes and edges in order
to generate abstract node embeddings in a process called graph convolution (figure 4) [53]. In a graph
convolutional layer, the representations of each node are simultaneously aggregated and updated using
the general formalism:
h(k+1)
i
= f(k)(h(k)
i
, g(k)({h(k)
j , ∀j ∈N(i)}))
where k is the current time step or layer, hi denotes the current node, hj denotes nodes belonging
to the neighborhood N(i), g is an permutation invariant function aggregating information from N(i)
and f is an update function that combines the current representation of hi with the aggregated
neighborhood states. Both f and g are static or learnable differentiable functions which may assume
many forms, such as simple mean or max function, linear transformations and multilayer perceptrons
[53]. Variations of this operation that incorporate edge attributes into the aggregation and update
steps are also employed [54, 55]. Continuously applying additional graph convolutional layers and
thus expanding the computational graph of hi will update its attributes with information from second-
degree neighbours, third-degree neighbours and so on. Increasing the number of layers may decrease
discriminatory power of the network as the computational graphs for each node homogenize and
discard any notion of locality in the graph representation [56].
Following graph convolution, the
learned representations of nodes and edges may be used for inference.
In the case of graph-wise
inference, a permutation invariant aggregation function is used to collapse node representations into
a vector of fixed size.
6
==PAGE:14==
We can represent a protein as a graph by letting nodes represent residues and edges represent spatial
interactions between those nodes, annoated by an N ∗N sized adjacency matrix where N is the length
of that protein. A graph convolutional neural network presented by Strokach et al. 2020, denoted
ProteinSolver, utilizes this representation in order to perform protein sequence design given some
desired protein topology [10].
Here, the model generates sets of highly diverse protein sequences
that that are assumed to satisfy the structural constraints given as input, by performing node-wise
predictions of which amino acids are most likely to occupy positions in the protein sequence. The
model utilizes a series of modified edge convolutional layers, which perform updates to edge and node
embeddings using the following expressions:
e(k+1)
ij
= gk(hk
i
hk
j
 ek
ij)
h(k+1)
i
=
X
j∈N(i)
fk(e(k+1)
ij
, hn
i )
where eij denotes an edge between nodes hi and hj, g is a multilayer perceptron and f is a linear
transformation both of which are updated during training [54]. In the first expression, edge attributes
are updated using concatenated states of the connected nodes as well as the current edge attributes.
Then, in the second expression attributes for hi are aggregated along with the updated attributes of
each edge connecting hi, in order to update attributes for hi. An overview of the full architecture is
given in figure 5.
Figure 5: Overview of the ProteinSolver architecture. Edge and node attributes of the input structure are
embedded using a learned linear transformation. Then, a series of edge convolutions (ECA blocks) are performed
in order to update edge and node embeddings. Finally, node embeddings are used to predict node labels in the
graph. Figure originates from Strokach et al. 2020 [10].
While the intended purpose of this model does not seem to align with the aim of predicting TCR-pMHC
interaction, we may still leverage that the model has learned to build information rich representations of
protein structures, similarly to how pretrained protein language models have been utilized previously
[57, 58]. This allows us to utilize features that apply to proteins in general, learned from a large
dataset, and apply them to enrich a task-specific model that is otherwise hindered by limitations in
data availability.
1.6
Long short-term memory networks
As the output of the GNN is a 2-dimensional vector of size N ∗128 where N is the sequence length
of the input protein, a model architecture suitable for sequence analysis would be applicable for fine-
tuning the model. In this thesis, long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) were employed for this
purpose. LSTMs are a variant of recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and excel at sequence analysis
7
==PAGE:15==
due to their ability to capture long range dependencies between positions in a sequence [59]. RNNs
suffer from poor long term memory retention due to issues with vanishing and exploding gradients
during backpropagation, which is remedied in LSTMs by the introduction of gate units that modulate
information flow (figure 6).
Figure 6: Diagram of an LSTM unit. C is the cell state, H is the hidden state, X is the input, t is the current
time step, × denotes element-wise multiplication, + denotes element-wise multiplication, σ denotes a sigmoid
function and f denotes a hyperbolic tangent function. Figure originates from Oualil et al. 2016 [60].
Data passes through an RNN by sequentially computing a hidden state for each position in the
sequence. The hidden state of the previous position as well as the current input are used for computing
the next hidden state, thus allowing the network to retain memory of previous positions. In order to
control the rapidly changing context and increase longevity of dependencies, an internal cell state Ct
is introduced to manage what information is forgotten and what is passed to the next unit [60]. The
following computations are performed for each LSTM unit, with bias terms omitted to simplify the
notation:
it = σ(WiiXt + WhiHt−1)
ft = σ(WifXt + WhfHt−1)
ot = σ(WioXt + WhoHt−1)
gt = tanh(WigXt + WhgHt−1)
Ct = ft × Ct−1 + it × gt
Ht = ot × tanh(Ct)
where i, f, o and g are input, forget, output and cell state gates, X is input, H is the hidden state,
Wij is a learned parameter matrix for elements ij and t is the current time step. σ and tanh denote
the sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent functions. From the expressions, it follows that the cell state Ct
is modulated by the gates, which in turn modulate how memory is managed between units.
8
==PAGE:16==
2
Materials & Methods
2.1
Generation and overview of TCR-pMHC structure dataset
The dataset used in this thesis was composed of paired CDR3α and CDR3β sequences that in con-
junction with corresponding epitope, MHC molecule and full V and J gene sequences were used to
generate structures of TCR-pMHC class I complexes. This section largely describes work performed
by Montemurro et al. and Meitil.
2.1.1
Paired CDR3α, CDR3β and peptide sequence data
Paired CDR3 and epitope amino acid sequences were obtained from Montemurro et al.
2021 [7].
Positive data was obtained from IEDB and VDJdb in August 2020 [5, 6]. The selection was restricted to
data where both CDR3α and CDR3β sequences were available with lengths of 8-18 residues, and were
determined to bind HLA-A*02:01-specific peptides of length 9. Negative data was obtained from 10X
Genomics Chromium Single Cell Immune Profiling from 4 healthy donors, where the same restrictions
as with the positive data were applied in order to filter the data [61]. The overlap of peptides in the
positive and negative sets contained CDR3αβ-peptide interactions for 18 unique peptides. Finally,
data redundancy reduction was performed on the positive and negative sets separately using the
Hobohm 1 algorithm based on the Levenshtein similarity of CDR3 sequences.
2.1.2
Molecular modeling of TCR-pMHC complexes
In order to perform structural modeling from the sequence data, the full TCRα- and β sequences
had to be obtained. In the work by Meitil 2021, sequences for V and J genes corresponding to the
paired CDR3αβ data were obtained from IEDB and VDJdb and were subsequently combined and
aligned to a hidden markov model in order to form the full TCR sequences [62, 43]. The sequence of
haplotype HLA-A*02:01:01 was used as the MHC class I sequence and was obtained from the IPD-
IMGT/HLA database [63]. The composition of the resulting dataset was 2355 positives and 8251
negatives, totalling 10606 examples.
Additional negatives were added to the dataset in order to increase the variation of CDR3 and peptide
sequence combinations.
These were generated by swapping the CDR3 sequences of each positive
example to another randomly selected peptide, in order to prevent certain CDR3 sequences from
existing only as positive examples. This added an additional 2355 negative examples, bringing the
total size of the dataset to 12961 examples.
Structural models of TCR-pMHC complexes were generated using TCRpMHCmodels, which uses
homology modeling through LYRA to model the TCR structure from TCRα- and β sequences, and
MODELLER to model the pMHC structure from a peptide and MHC sequence [9, 43, 44]. Finally,
MODELLER performs docking between the TCR and pMHC structures to form the final complex.
As not all examples could be modelled successfully, the final dataset was composed of 1810 positives,
6710 true negatives and 1811 swapped negatives, totalling 10331 structures. This was the dataset on
which most of the analysis was performed.
9
==PAGE:17==
2.1.3
Computation of FoldX and Rosetta energy terms
The 10331 TCR-pMHC structures were relaxed using both FoldX 5.0 and the Rosetta Energy Func-
tion 2015 using their RepairPDB and relax protocols, respectively [64, 65]. The FoldX RepairPDB
function was used with default parameters, except –water was set to CRYSTAL. Energy terms for each
complex were obtained using the AnalyseComplex function. Relaxation with Rosetta was performed
with default settings. Energy terms for each complex were obtained using the score_jd2 command.
Relaxation and energy term computation was also performed for TCR and pMHC chains individu-
ally. Energy terms for each residue in each complex were computed using the per_residue_energies
command. FoldX and Rosetta energy terms include properties such as van der Waals forces, penaliza-
tions due to van der Waals’ clashes, electrostatic interactions, solvation properties and hydrogen bond
properties. One-hot encoded amino acid residues as well as a 4 bit positional encoding indicating if
the residue belonged to the peptide, MHC, TCRα or -β chain, were concatenated to the embedding of
each position resulting in an embedding size of 139. Not all models could be successfully relaxed and
scored and so the energy term, FoldX-relaxed-model and Rosetta-relaxed-model datasets contained
9991, 8339 and 8338 examples respectively.
2.2
ProteinSolver and ESM-1b fine-tuning
The graph neural network (GNN) and transformer models used in the project were applied using a
fine-tuning approach. Here pretrained models, namely the ProteinSolver graph convolutional network
presented by Strokach et al. and the ESM-1b transformer presented by Rives et al., were used to
create a dataset of embeddings representing protein structure or sequence data respectively, which
were then used to train task-specific models (figure 7) [10, 58]. Additionally, models were trained
on joint ProteinSolver and ESM-1b embeddings, concatenated along the embedding dimension. All
models were implemented using PyTorch 1.9.1 and PyTorch Geometric 2.0.1 in Python 3.8 [66, 67].
2.2.1
Protein structure embedding using ProteinSolver
The GNN was instantiated using a PyTorch state file containing the pretrained ProteinSolver model
obtained from the ProteinSolver GitLab repository during September 2021 [68]. Preprocessing of PDB
files containing TCR-pMHC complexes into a graph representation was performed using tools from
the ProteinSolver and kmtools packages [69]. Node attributes corresponded to amino acid residues
represented by an integer, while edges corresponded to the shortest distances between pairs of residues
within 12 Å of each other. All heavy atoms were considered. Edge attributes described the distances
in Cartesian space as well as the number of residues separating the given pair of amino acids along
the protein sequence. As the preprocessing methods expected a single chain as input, and given that
each TCR-pMHC complex was comprised of a TCRα, TCRβ, MHC and a peptide chain, a python
function for modifying per-residue chain annotation in each PDB file was implemented. In the default
ProteinSolver implementation, the output of the final graph convolution layer was passed through a
densely connected feed-forward layer, thereby reducing the size of the embedding dimension from 128
to 20. It was determined that the higher dimensional output would be more suitable for use in a
fine-tuning application and thus the final feed-forward layer was bypassed when creating the protein
structure embeddings. The embedding of each protein resulted in a 2-dimensional 128 ∗N array,
where N is the amino acid sequence length. Finally, 4 bit positional encoding was concatenated to
10
==PAGE:18==
Figure 7: Overview of the ProteinSolver and ESM-1b fine-tuning approach. TCR-pMHC complexes were
represented using both structure and sequence embedding methods, which were used in downstream binary
classification tasks to predict TCR-pMHC binding.
the embedding of each residue, indicating if the residue belonged to the peptide, MHC, TCRα or -β
chain.
2.2.2
Amino acid sequence embedding using ESM-1b
The ESM-1b transformer was obtained from the Evolutionary Scale Modeling GitHub repository
during October 2021 [70]. Amino acid sequences for TCRα, TCRα, MHC and peptide chains were
concatenated and embedded by extracting the sequence representation from the final layer of the
transformer (appendix B). The sequences were embedded in a per-residue manner, resulting in an
1280-dimensional vector for each position in the sequence, resulting in a 2-dimensional 1280 ∗N
array for each sequence, where N is sequence length. Additionally, a 4 bit positional encoding was
concatenated to the embedding of each residue similarly to the structure embeddings.
2.3
Baseline methods
In order to properly describe the predictive performance of the GNN and transformer embeddings,
they were compared to previously employed methods. Thus, models were trained on sequences encoded
using the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix, resulting in an embedding size of 20. Additionally, models
were trained on computational force field data derived from FoldX and Rosetta structure relaxation
processes, resulting in an embedding size of 135.
Parameters relating to model architecture and
training were identical to those previously described, with the exception of the number of nested k-
fold epochs for the BLOSUM50 models which was set to 250, due to slow convergence when training
in this manner.
11
==PAGE:19==
2.3.1
biLSTM with positional encoding
A bidirectional LSTM was instantiated with an input size of 142, 1284, 1412, 139 and 21 equaling
the size of the ProteinSolver, ESM-1b, joint ProteinSolver/ESM-1b, computational force field and
BLOSUM embeddings plus 4 bit positional encoding, respectively. Two LSTM layers were used each
with a hidden size of 256 nodes. The final hidden state of the forward and backward layers were
concatenated and passed through two densely-connected feed-forward layers. Between the two linear
layers, 1-dimensional batch normalization, a leaky ReLU activation function and a dropout layer were
applied. The output of the final linear layer was a scalar value indicating some certainty of the input
structure belonging to either the "binder" or "non-binder" class.
During training, a 60% dropout was used in both the LSTM and linear layers. The model was trained
over 150 epochs using binary cross-entropy as the optimization criterion. An early stopping scheme
was implemented to select the model with the lowest validation set loss across all epochs. Training
was performed using a stochastic gradient descent approach implemented using the Adam optimizer,
in which L2 regularization was applied. Here, weight gradients were scaled inversely proportional to
their scaled L2 norms, using scaling value λ = 1e−3 [71]. Additionally, a small batch size of 8 was used
as an implicit regularization measure and as a means to increase training loss stability. The initial
learning rate was 5e −5 and was modulated using the MultiplicativeLR scheduler which multiplied
the learning rate with a factor of 0.995 following each epoch.
2.3.2
Parallel LSTMs for each TCR-pMHC chain
It was hypothesized that constructing an LSTM for each chain in the TCR-pMHC complex might
allow the model to become more sensitive to changes in input embeddings at specific regions of the
complex. Additionally, it was thought that splitting the input into smaller segments might allow the
LSTM to better retain information in regions away from the terminals of the input data. Thus a model
architecture was created wherein 4 LSTMs specific for each chain in the input structure were trained
in parallel (figure 8). The final hidden state of each LSTM was concatenated into a 2-dimensional
hidden_size∗4 vector, which was subsequently passed through 2 densely connected feed-forward layers
in order to output a scalar value for use in binary classification, in the same manner as described in
section 2.3.1. During training, the error would be backpropagated through the linear layers and then
each through individual LSTM in parallel. As the 4 bit positional encoding scheme was no longer
necessary due to the architecture of the model, the size of the input dimension matched embedding
sizes described in sections 2.2 and 2.3. Each LSTM module was constructed using 2 layers each with
a hidden size of 128 nodes. Parameters relating to model training and optimization are identical to
those specified in section 2.3.1.
2.3.3
Parallel LSTMs for CDR3 and peptide residues
Given the role of the CDR3 loop in modulating TCR epitope specificity, it was hypothesized that
isolating input data to the peptide and CDR3 loops would increase the signal-to-noise ratio by enforcing
an increased focus on the conformation of the binding interface as opposed to the full complex. Indices
of the structure and sequence embeddings corresponding to CDR3αβ loops were extracted and passed
through a model equivalent to that described in section 2.3.2, however only employing an LSTM for
the peptide and two CDR3 loops. This model was trained for 100 epochs using an initial learning rate
12
==PAGE:20==
Figure 8: Architecture of the quad LSTM model implemented to fine-tune ProteinSolver and ESM-1b models
in order to predict TCR-pMHC binding. The model was additionally trained on energy term and BLOSUM50
embeddings. The model employs 4 parallel LSTMs for each chain in the TCR-pMHC complex, from which the
hidden state of the final layers are concatenated and passed through 2 feed-forward layers. Finally a sigmoid
function scales the output to the range [0, 1].
of 1e −4 and a learning rate decay of 0.99. Remaining parameters relating to model training were
kept similar to those described in section 2.3.1
2.3.4
ProteinSolver transfer learning
Additionally, a transfer learning approach was applied wherein the ProteinSolver network was modified
in order to perform binary classification directly on the TCR-pMHC dataset without the use of any
down stream task-specific models.
In order to convert the dimension of the model output from
128 ∗N, where N is amino acid sequence length, to a single scalar value suitable for classification, the
architecture of the final layers of the model was altered. Following the final graph convolution layer,
a global mean pooling function was applied in order to perform node-wise averaging across the entire
graph. This collapsed the 128 ∗N output of the graph convolution layers to a fixed 128 dimensional
vector which could then be passed through a newly instantiated feed-forward layer, in order to output
a scalar value. The network was trained over 400 epochs using a batch size of 16. Learning rate and
learning rate decay was set to 1e−5 and 0.9999 respectively. Remaining parameters relating to model
training were as specified in section 2.3.1.
2.4
Hyperparameter selection
Due to time restrictions extensive hyperparameter selection for each model could not be performed.
Instead, a series of low-resolution grid searches were implemented, iterating over a small set of hidden
sizes, number of layers and then dropout probabilities, L2 weight decay factors, learning rates and
learning rate decay factors. Performance was quite similar for most combinations, resulting in almost
identical configurations between models of similar type.
13
==PAGE:21==
2.5
Training and validation schemes
All models were trained and evaluated using both nested 5-fold cross-validation and peptide-specific
leave-one-out validation, which simulated different environments in which the models would be applied.
The k-fold cross-validation scheme was used to evaluate how well the model performed on peptides
and TCRs similar to those previously encountered, while the leave-one-out validation scheme was used
to assess how well the model generalized to entirely novel data (figure 9).
Figure 9: Left: Diagram of the nested 5-fold cross-validation scheme employed during model training. Training
partitions from the outer loop are used in an inner loop to train and evaluate 4 models, of which the best
performing model is selected for evaluation on the test partition. Right: Diagram of the leave-one-out validation
scheme employed during model training. Data is stratified on peptide sequence. Models are trained on data
excluding a single peptide, which subsequently are used to predict on data belonging to that peptide.
A
validation set is constructed from each training partition by random sampling and homology reduction across
training and validation partitions.
2.5.1
Nested 5-fold cross-validation
A nested 5-fold cross-validation scheme was implemented in order to allow for model selection within
a cross-validation framework without the need for an external test dataset (figure 9, left). Dataset
partitioning was performed using a threshold of 80% CDR3β sequence similarity between partitions.
The MMseqs2 easy-cluster tool was used to cluster sequences, by setting the minimum sequence
identity of clusters to 80%, defined by a similarity score of the local alignment divided by the maximum
of the lengths of the two locally aligned sequence segments. Additionally, a criterion of minimum 50%
alignment coverage was used, defined as the number of aligned residues divided by the length of the
target sequence (appendix A)[72]. Each cluster of sequences were subsequently sorted according to
size and assigned to the 5 partitions in a round-robin fashion, beginning with the largest cluster.
The resulting partitions were of roughly equal size. This manner of partitioning was performed both
14
==PAGE:22==
including and excluding swapped negatives.
In the nested 5-fold cross-validation setup, an outer loop was constructed to generate 5 combinations
of partitions wherein each combination contained 4 partitions of training data and 1 partition of test
data to be used for performance evaluation. Swapped negatives were removed from the test partition.
In an inner loop, the 4 partitions were subsequently used to generate 4 additional combinations of
training and validation partitions, wherein each combination contained 3 partitions of training data
and 1 partition of validation data. In order to maintain the threshold of CDR3β sequence similarity
between partitions, partitions were kept intact.
During training, the model’s performance on the
validation data was used as a criteria for early stopping, as a method of regularizing the model. The
early stopping implementation selected the model with the lowest validation loss over the course of all
epochs. Of the 4 models resulting from the inner training and validation scheme, the model with the
lowest validation loss was saved and evaluated on the outer test data partition. Test data predictions
for each partition were concatenated in order to compute performance metrics across all folds, and
thus achieve an overall performance measure for a model.
2.5.2
Peptide-specific leave-one-out validation
A leave-one-out validation scheme was implemented, wherein data for one of the unique peptides in
the dataset was used as a test set, while remaining data was used for training and validating the model
(figure 9, right). A model was trained in this manner for each peptide in the dataset, excluding peptides
ILKEPVHGV and CLGGLLTMV as no positive examples for these were present. Swapped negatives
were removed from the test partition. Additionally, data in the training partition containing CDR3β
sequences present in the test partition was excluded.
Early stopping similar to that described in
section 2.5.1 was employed as a measure of model regularization, and thus training data was split into
training and validation partitions in order to use validation data loss as a stopping criterion. Here,
20% of the training partition was randomly sampled without replacement to be used as validation
data. Following this, MMseqs2 was used as described in section 2.5.1 to cluster data based on CDR3β
sequence similarity, using an identity threshold of 50% (appendix A). Training data with >50% CDR3β
sequence similarity to data found in the validation partition was removed as a means of increasing
prediction difficulty of the validation data. As with the k-fold cross-validation scheme, this manner
of training and evaluating was performed including and excluding swapped negatives.
Additional
leave-one-out validation schemes were implemented, such as a nested leave-one-out scheme and a
leave-one-out scheme with an inner 5-fold cross-validation loop for model selection. Neither yielded
results significantly different from the method described above, and thus they were not included in
this report.
2.6
Extraction of proxy attributes for TCR-pMHC model quality
In order to perform analyses describing the relation between TCR-pMHC model quality and proper-
ties of predictive performance, a series of parameters functioning as proxies for model quality were
computed. Due to the nature of CDR loops in TCR binding, the sequence sequence similarity between
each CDR loop template sequence and query sequence were used as a measure of how well the loop
structure could be modeled in the TCRpMHCmodels pipeline. The sequence similarity was computed
by aligning template and query sequences using a BLOSUM50 substitution matrix, and then dividing
15
==PAGE:23==
the alignment score by the maximum length of either the template or query sequence. A higher align-
ment scores indicated higher sequence similarity, and thus presumably a more accurately modeled
loop.
2.7
Performance evaluation metrics
The metrics used to evaluate model performance were the the Matthew’s correlation coefficient (MCC)
and the area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUC). Additionally, the precision and recall
metrics were used as a means to evaluate how well positive examples were retrieved. As the output
of the models were a continuous scalar in the range [0, 1], a threshold controlling when a prediction
would be considered belonging to the positive class was set to a value of 0.15. The value was derived
from the rough proportion of positive to negative examples in the data. Precision and recall were
computed as:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
where TP, FP, and FN denote the number of true positives, false positives and false negatives respec-
tively. Both metrics assume the range [0, 1]. Recall describes how well the model retrieves all positives
found in the dataset, while precision describes the proportion of correctly retrieved positives out of
the predicted set of positives.
The MCC describes a correlation between predicted and true labels, by considering both true and
false positives and negatives. It is computed as:
MCC =
TP · TN −FP · FN
p
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
The metric can assume values in the range [-1, 1] where -1 indicates opposite correlation between
predicted and true labels, 0 indicates random prediction and 1 indicates perfect predictions. Contrary
to the precision and recall scores, the MCC also considers correct predictions of true negatives and
thus considers the total balance of each type of prediction.
Precision, recall and MCC metrics require a threshold to separate classes, for which the optimal value
may vary between models and datasets. The AUC circumvents this metric by evaluating predictions
for all prediction thresholds and assumes values in the range [0, 1]. It is based on the relation between
recall and the false positive rate for different thresholds, where a score of 0 indicates perfect opposite
predictions, a score of 0.5 indicates random predictions and a score of 1 indicates perfect predictions.
The false positive rate is computed as:
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
16
==PAGE:24==
3
Results
A set of models for predicting TCR-pMHC binding were trained on an annotated dataset of TCR-
pMHC complexes, embedded using structure-, sequence- and computational force field based methods.
The models were trained and evaluated using both 5-fold cross-validation (section 3.2) and peptide-
specific leave-one-out validation (section 3.3), simulating different degrees of data redundancy and
prediction difficulty.
Subsequently, a series of analyses were performed in order to elucidate how
certain dataset properties drive predictive performance.
3.1
Dataset visualization
The dataset used in the analysis was composed of 10331 structures of TCR-pMHC complexes, of
which 1810 were positives, 6710 were true negatives and 1811 were swapped negatives (figure 10).
All structures were in complex with the same MHC class I molecule of haplotype HLA-A*02:01:01.
The data contained TCR-pMHC structures for 18 unique 9-mer peptides. Two infrequent peptides
CLGGLLMTV and ILKEPVHGV did not contain any positive and were thus left out of the leave-
one-out validation scheme. The dataset exhibited a large bias in the number of data points for each
peptide. The most dominant peptide GILGFVFTL comprised 60.2% of the dataset, while the 2nd
and 3rd most dominant peptides GLCTLVAML and NLVPMVATV comprised 16.1% and 11.7% of the
dataset. Consequently, models trained on this data may generalize poorly to data for other peptides
as the dataset only covers a small segment of T cell epitope diversity.
Figure 10: Distribution of peptides in the dataset, where orange denotes the proportion of positive examples
for a given peptide. Note that the y-axis is log-scaled to prevent squashing of less prevalent peptides.
As with the distribution of peptides in the data, the V and J genes of TCRs in the dataset also
17
==PAGE:25==
exhibited a significant bias towards specific germlines (figure 11). While Vα germlines were evenly
distributed, biases could be observed in the composition of germlines for the remaining genes. The
dominant germlines for Vα, Jα, Vβ and Jβ were TRAV27*01, TRAJ42*01, TRBV19*01 and TRBJ2-
7 respectively. Examining data for the positive examples in the dataset, the bias becomes heavily
exacerbated for all genes, wherein Vβ germline TRBV19*01 is found in almost 50% of TCRs. This
is to a lesser extent also the case for the remaining V and J genes, creating a strong bias towards a
specific type of TCR. Consequently, models trained on this data may suffer from poor generalization
to data comprised of TCRs that deviate from the dominant type observed in the dataset. Due to
the heavy prevalence of data for GILGFVFTL, the germline bias is largely driven by data for this
particular peptide.
Figure 11: Distribution of TCR germlines in the dataset. Colors within a bar indicates the proportion of a
single germline. Note that the color-coding does not carry meaning across genes. The dominant germlines for
Vα, Jα, Vβ and Jβ are TRAV27*01, TRAJ42*01, TRBV19*01 and TRBJ2-7 respectively.
3.2
Structure and sequence embeddings perform similarly in a 5-fold cross-validation
scheme
A nested 5-fold cross-validation scheme was constructed as described in section 2.5.1, simulating an
environment in which a high degree of data redundancy is expected between training and novel data.
Predictive performance on the inner validation partitions were used for model selection, by acting as
a criterion for early stopping. Data was partitioned using an 80% CDR3β sequence similarity thresh-
old in order to reduce homology between partitions and thereby increase prediction difficulty of the
test partitions. Predictions for each partition were concatenated in order to compute overall AUC
and MCC scores. Four different model architectures were trained on a range of datasets, namely a
bi-directional LSTM (single LSTM), a model with 3 parallel LSTMs specific for the peptide, CDR3α
and -β loops (triple LSTM), a model with 4 parallel LSTMs training on peptide, MHC, TCRα and -β
chains (quad LSTM) and a pretrained GNN modified and finetuned to perform binary classification
(GNN). The TCR-pMHC dataset was processed using 5 different methods. TCR-pMHC structures
were embedded using a pretrained GNN (PS). TCR-pMHC sequence data was embedded using a pre-
trained transformer and the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix ("ESM" and "BLOSUM50", respectively).
Computational force field energy terms were derived from TCR-pMHC model relaxation with FoldX
and Rosetta (energy terms). And finally, structure and transformer-derived sequence embeddings were
concatenated (ESM+PS).
Initially, models were trained on data including swapped negatives, generated as described in section
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 12: Performance of different model architectures trained on TCR-pMHC structure and sequence em-
beddings, using a nested 5-fold cross-validation scheme. Swapped negatives were included in the training data.
Single LSTM: bidirectional LSTM, triple LSTM: Parallel LSTMs specific for CDR3α -β and peptide data,
quad LSTM: Parallel LSTMs specific for TCRα -β, MHC and peptide data, GNN: pretrained GNN modified
for binary classification. PS: ProteinSolver GNN structure embedding, ESM: ESM-1b transformer sequence
embedding, ESM+PS: concatenated PS and ESM embeddings, BLOSUM50: BLOSUM50 substitution matrix
sequence embedding, energy terms: Energy terms derived from structure relaxation with FoldX and Rosetta
force fields.
2.1.2 (figure 12). Most model architecture and embedding combinations achieve high predictive per-
formance with respect to both AUC and MCC, with a maximum of 0.885 and 0.579 for the highest
performing model, which utilizes the triple LSTM architecture trained on a combination of Protein-
Solver and ESM-1b embeddings. Disregarding differences in datasets and data partitioning methods,
this is on par with the performance of state-of-the-art models for predicting TCR-pMHC interaction
[7][37]. While performance differences between embedding methods are minor and may simply be due
to variances in convergence, we generally see a minor performance boost when using protein struc-
ture embeddings over a simple BLOSUM50 encoding scheme. ESM-1b sequence embeddings perform
slightly better than structure embeddings and combining these with the structure embeddings pro-
vides the highest performance of all embedding types. However, differences in performance are minor
which suggests that sequence data alone is sufficient to accurately predict TCR-pMHC interaction
when evaluating on redundant data. Models trained on computational force field data perform poorly
19
==PAGE:27==
with all model architectures. However, using the same dataset but with differing model architecture,
Meitil 2021 reports an AUC and MCC of 0.84 and 0.63 respectively. Differences in performance may
be attributed to differences in training scheme and model architectures, however further analysis is
required in order to explain why this set of models converge poorly. Expert selection of important
energy terms may improve performance as opposed to utilizing all, however this was not explored in
this thesis. It should be noted that not all structures could be relaxed with FoldX and Rosetta, and
thus the dataset used for training and evaluating energy term models is a subset of the full dataset.
This may impact comparability to other models.
Differences in performance between model architectures are similarly minor, achieving peak AUCs of
0.860, 0.885, 0.882 and 0.873 for the single LSTM, triple LSTM, quad LSTM and GNN respectively.
MCCs are similarly close between architectures. However, while the triple LSTM achieves the highest
performance of all model architecture and embedding combinations, the performance floor of the quad
LSTM is higher and averaging AUCs across embeddings reveals an average AUC of 0.875 for the quad
LSTM and 0.864 for the triple LSTM (disregarding energy term performance). While this method
of comparing model performance is dubious due to lack of significance testing, it may suggest that
considering the full TCR-pMHC structure or sequence may be beneficial for identifying interacting
complexes.
Despite being crudely modified to perform binary classification, the pretrained GNN
achieves comparable performance to the rest of the models and in fact achieves the highest MCC of
all, demonstrating the high level of information contained in TCR-pMHC structural data.
3.2.1
Swapped negatives do not significantly impact model performance
Swapped negatives were added as a method for obtaining additional negative examples, and to ensure
that certain TCRs did not only exist as positive examples. However, it was speculated that adding
additional negatives to an already unbalanced dataset could worsen model performance by imposing
a bias for the negative class onto the model [73]. Additionally, while unlikely, swapping peptides and
TCRs could in fact generate positive examples, due to the highly cross-reactive nature of TCRs and
thereby introduce mislabeled data to the dataset. Thus, performance when training on data with and
without swapped negatives was evaluated (figure 12 and 13). In all cases, swapped negatives were
removed from test partitions.
Including and excluding swapped negatives do not appear to impact model performance greatly as
AUC and MCC values are very similar between swapped and non-swapped negative models, and
differences in performance may simply be due to random variance. Performing a paired t-test revealed
that the presence of swapped negatives did not significantly impact model performance at any common
significance levels and thus they were removed from any subsequent analyses, following parsimonious
principles. Additionally, as preliminary results indicated the quad LSTM architecture to be superior,
the following analyses were performed on results from models utilizing this architecture.
20
==PAGE:28==
Figure 13: Performance of various model architectures trained on TCR-pMHC structure and sequence em-
beddings, using a nested 5-fold cross-validation scheme. Swapped negatives were excluded from the training
data. See figure 12 for legend explanation.
3.2.2
Structure and sequence embeddings achieve similar precision and recall estimates
Plotting ROC curves and confusion matrices for the quad LSTM models reveals similar precision and
recall dynamics, with the exception of the computational force field model which performs compara-
tively poorly (figure 14). From the ROC curves we see it is possible to set a prediction threshold that
will generate a low number of false positives while still maintaining a high recall, which is a desirable
property for high throughput methods. Using a prediction threshold of 0.15 the BLOSUM50 model
obtains the highest precision of 0.55, while obtaining a recall of 0.77, which is slightly lower than other
models. In all cases, barring the energy term model, recalls range between 0.77 to 0.81 indicating that
the models are capable of capturing most positives while still achieving fair separation of negatives
and positives.
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 14: Top: ROC curves the quad LSTM architecture trained on TCR-pMHC structure and sequence
embeddings. Bottom: confusion matrices for each embedding, using a prediction threshold of 0.15. See figure
12 text for legend explanation.
3.2.3
Peptide abundance is positively correlated with predictive performance
The predictive performance of each quad LSTM model was stratified by peptide in order to elucidate
which peptides primarily drive model performance (figure 15). Despite the high overall performance,
all models perform poorly for most peptides, achieving AUCs corresponding to slightly better than
random prediction. In most cases, ProteinSolver and ESM-1b embeddings or a combination thereof
provide the best performance, however for low abundance peptides performance varies heavily be-
tween models and no model is clearly superior. Performance on dominant peptides GILGFVFTL,
GLCTLVAML and to lesser extent FLYALALLL, is high for both structure and sequence embedding
models. These peptides primarily drive the overall performance, which suggests a relationship between
peptide abundance and predictive performance. A significant Pearson correlation of r = 0.647 with
p < 0.001 was found between the number of examples for each peptide and per-peptide AUCs (figure
16). This suggests that the amount of available data for a peptide is a significant bottleneck for achiev-
ing high performance and that poor generalization to data differing from the abundant peptides is to
be expected. It was speculated that the dominance of GILGFVFTL was imposing a significant bias
onto the models leading to poor performance of peptides differing in their physiochemical properties.
However, no significant correlation could be determined between BLOSUM50 sequence similarity of
GILGFVFTL and other peptides and per-peptide AUCs (figure 16). It should be noted that this anal-
ysis is quite naive in its implementation, as it does not consider differences and likenesses in sterical
dynamics of each peptide when in complex with a TCR and MHC molecule.
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 15: Per-peptide performance for the quad LSTM model architecture using nested 5-fold cross validation.
Peptides are sorted according to abundance in the dataset. Peptides KLQCVDLHV and KVAELVHFL are not
included due to the low number of positive examples. See figure 12 text for legend explanation.
Figure 16: Pearson correlation between the log transformed number of examples per peptide, peptide sequence
similarity to GILGFVFTL and peptide-specific AUCs for quad LSTM models. Sequence similarity was com-
puted by aligning each peptide to GILGFVFTL using the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix. Values for each
model are concatenated when calculating the correlation in order to improve statistical power. See figure 12
text for legend explanation.
3.2.4
Relaxation of TCR-pMHC structures using FoldX and Rosetta does not improve
performance
It was hypothesized that relaxing structures using FoldX and Rosetta could reduce the number of
structural artefacts stemming from the TCR-pMHC modeling pipeline and thus provide improved
representations of the binding interfaces. Contrarily, it was also hypothesized that performing relax-
ation might homogenize structures by reconfiguring them to adhere to an idealized structure, and thus
reduce the signal to noise ration found between positive and negative examples. Thus, quad LSTM
and GNN models were trained on structure embeddings generated from relaxed structures (figure 17).
With respect to the AUC, using relaxed structures appears to yield decreases in performance for all
models. The drop in performance is more pronounced for the models exclusively utilizing structural
data, which signify that structure relaxation may decrease separability of positive and negative exam-
ples. However, this trend is not observed for all MCC values and thus the variations in performance
may simply be due to differences in convergence. It should be noted that not all structures could
be relaxed, and thus the test and training data for relaxed models are a subset of the non-relaxed
23
==PAGE:31==
structure test and training data. This impairs the comparability between models trained on either
data and may be the primary reason for differences in performance. Whether the structure relaxation
or dataset differences drive the performance will be explored further in section 3.3.3.
Figure 17: Performance of quad LSTM and GNN models trained on structures relaxed using the FoldX and
Rosetta structure repair protocols. See figure 12 text for legend explanation.
3.3
Structure embeddings improve performance when evaluating on non-redundant
data
The k-fold cross validation setup mimics circumstances where a high degree of redundancy is expected
between known and novel data.
This does not capture the actual vastness of peptide and TCR
diversity and consequently does not provide a confident estimate of generalization to non-redundant
data. Thus models were evaluated using a peptide-specific leave-one-out validation setup, wherein
a model was trained on data excluding all examples from a single peptide and then testing on the
excluded data (figure 18). Additionally, homology reduction with respect to CDR3β sequences was
performed between the test and training partitions and swapped negatives were excluded from both
training and test data.
As expected, the performance for each model is much lower than the 5-fold cross validation perfor-
mance, as redundancy between training and test partitions has been reduced, leading to increased
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 18: Performance of different model architectures trained on TCR-pMHC structure and sequence em-
beddings, using a peptide-specific leave-one-out validation scheme. Swapped negatives were excluded from the
dataset. Single LSTM: bidirectional LSTM, triple LSTM: Parallel LSTMs specific for CDR3α -β and peptide
data, quad LSTM: Parallel LSTMs specific for TCRα -β, MHC and peptide data, GNN: pretrained GNN modi-
fied for binary classification. PS: ProteinSolver GNN structure embedding, ESM: ESM-1b transformer sequence
embedding, ESM+PS: concatenated PS and ESM embeddings, BLOSUM50: BLOSUM50 substitution matrix
sequence embedding, energy terms: FoldX and Rosetta force field computations.
prediction difficulty.
While most models achieve AUCs and MCCs corresponding to random pre-
diction, we now see that models utilizing structure embeddings achieve slightly better than random
performance, with the exception of the GNN. The best model with respect to AUC, namely the
quad LSTM trained on concatenated ProteinSolver and ESM-1b embeddings, achieve an AUC and
MCC of 0.593 and 0.084 respectively, which is in line with current state of the art performance on
non-redundant data [37]. The single LSTM trained on ProteinSolver embeddings achieves by far the
highest MCC of 0.174, while obtaining the second highest AUC. This suggests that this model might
in fact be superior in certain aspects of precision and recall dynamics compared to the quad LSTM
model, however preliminary results indicated the quad LSTM architecture to be superior in all aspects,
and thus subsequent analysis was performed using this architecture. While the performance obtained
here is still not far above random prediction, this demonstrates that structural data may be essential
for achieving high predictive performance in future TCR-pMHC interaction classifiers. Interestingly,
many of the sequence based methods achieve below random performance, which could indicate that
25
==PAGE:33==
sequence data alone results in a form of overfitting when using a leave-one-out training and validation
scheme. However, further discussion in section 3.3.2 reveals that this poor performance may stem
primarily from poor performance on data for the most common peptide GILGFVFTL, which the
sequence based methods struggle to predict correctly with high accuracy.
3.3.1
Quad LSTM models achieve high recall but low precision
Plotting confusion matrices for the quad LSTM models shows that all models with the exception
of the model trained on ESM-1b embeddings, achieve high recall but very low precision using a
prediction threshold of 0.15 (figure 19).
Most models predict approximately 70% of the data as
positives which is completely out of line with the proportions of true positives and negatives found in
the dataset, which severely limits any practical application of these models. While additional tuning to
the prediction threshold is warranted in order to rectify this bias, ROC curves show that no threshold
exists in which high precision and even moderate recall can be achieved.
The model trained on
concatenated ProteinSolver and ESM-1b embeddings which achieved the highest AUC, also achieves
the highest precision of 0.232 and a recall of 0.834, which is similar to other models. While differences
in performance are minor, this suggests again that structure embeddings may provide an edge when
evaluating on non redundant data.
Figure 19: Top: ROC curves the quad LSTM architecture trained on TCR-pMHC structure and sequence
embeddings. Bottom: confusion matrices for each embedding, using a prediction threshold of 0.15. See figure
18 text for legend explanation.
26
==PAGE:34==
3.3.2
Stratifying predictive performance by peptide reveals poor generalization
Performance of quad LSTM models was stratified by peptide in order to elucidate the primary drivers
of predictive performance (figure 3.3.2). Per-peptide performance does not reveal a clear trend in which
embedding types provide the greatest performance, as model rankings alternate heavily between pep-
tides. While embedding methods utilizing sequence data appear to have the most occurrences in which
they achieve the highest performance, the structure based methods achieve the highest performance
on the most abundant peptide GILGFVFTL. Due to the nature in which the overall AUC and MCC
for leave-one-out validation is computed, this accounts for the overall performance observed in fig-
ure 18. Interestingly, the BLOSUM50 embedding method performs quite well on peptides other than
GILGFVFTL, and heavily outperforms structure based methods on peptides FLYALALL, KTWGQY-
WQV and YLLEMLWRL. However, due to the low number of positive examples for these peptides,
small variations in how accurately positives are identified heavily impact performance which reduces
the validity of these comparisons. Thus more data is required in order to obtain confident performance
estimates. Despite this limitation, the high variation in performance between peptides suggest poor
generalization to novel data for all models.
Figure 20: Per-peptide performance for the quad LSTM model architecture using leave-one-out validation.
Peptides are sorted according to abundance in the dataset. Peptides KLQCVDLHV and KVAELVHFL are not
included due to the low number of positive examples. See figure 18 text for legend explanation.
3.3.3
Data filtering improves predictive performance
Due to the small edge in predictive power seemingly provided by utilizing structure embeddings, it
was once again investigated whether training models on TCR-pMHC relaxed with FoldX and Rosetta
would improve performance (figure 21). Here, we see an obvious improvement in performance for both
quad LSTM models trained on structure embedding methods, with the ProteinSolver embeddings of
FoldX relaxed structures alone achieving an AUC and MCC of 0.644 and 0.198. However, as not all
structures could be relaxed, the dataset used for training and evaluating this model is a subset of the
full dataset, which could be the primary reason for the observed performance gain. Thus a models were
trained on ProteinSolver embeddings of non-relaxed structures, restricted to the subset of structures
that could be relaxed. Here, we obtain slightly better performance with an AUC of 0.649 and MCC
of 0.221, suggesting that the performance increase cannot be attributed to the relaxation process, but
instead to the data filtering derived from the relaxation pipeline. Presumably, low-quality structures
could not be relaxed and thus filtering these structures from the dataset provides a clearer signal for
discriminating binders and non-binders. Further exploration of the relationship between model quality
27
==PAGE:35==
and prediction error is given in section 3.4. Interestingly, while we obtain performance increases for the
model utilizing joint structure and sequence embeddings as we relax structures, the performance is lost
entirely when we apply data filtering to unrelaxed structures, going from an AUC of 0.640 to 0.568.
Why this is the case is not entirely clear, as we would expect dynamics similar to the model trained
only on structure embeddings.
However, during model development it was observed that models
utilizing joint embeddings were very sensitive to initialization and variations during training, which
may have resulted in this particular model not converging properly. Additional analysis is required
in order to determine why we observe these results. The GNN decreases drastically in performance
when training on relaxed structures, achieving an AUC of 0.357, well below random prediction. Why
this is the case is not entirely clear, as we would expect similar changes to the ones observed for
the structure based LSTMs. Applying data filtering to unrelaxed structures restores performance to
random prediction, suggesting FoldX relaxation of structures imposes a bias onto the model. While
differences in relaxation protocols between Rosetta and FoldX may contribute to this difference, it is
not entirely clear why FoldX relaxation results in such poor performance.
Figure 21: Performance of quad LSTM and GNN models on trained structures relaxed using the FoldX and
Rosetta structure repair protocols. Repaired model subset indicates that a model was trained on unrelaxed
structures but restricted to the subset of structures that could be repaired using FoldX and Rosetta. See figure
18 text for legend explanation.
Plotting confusion matrices for the relaxed structure and data subset quad LSTM models reveals clear
28
==PAGE:36==
increases in precision but decreases in recall (figure 22). Now, the best model with respect to AUC
achieves a precision of 0.315 and recall of 0.683, signifying a clear reduction in the number of false
positives obtained. The model trained on joint structure and sequence embeddings which exhibited
poor performance when applying data filtering, suffers from low recall. This appears to be the primary
driver of poor performance for this model, as most positives are not captured. From the ROC curves,
it appears that most models achieve a threshold where the true positive rate is significantly larger
than the false positive rate. This allows for capturing a sizeable amount of true positives while still
correctly classifying most negatives.
Figure 22: Top: ROC curves for the quad LSTM architecture trained on embeddings of TCR-pMHC structures
relaxed with FoldX and Rosetta, as well as joint structure and sequence embeddings. Bottom: confusion matrices
for each method, using a prediction threshold of 0.15. See figure 21 for further clarification on relaxed structures.
Performance of the best performing model was stratified per peptide in order to determine whether
29
==PAGE:37==
the same performance dynamics as observed in the previous leave-one-out sections apply here (figure
23). Comparing performance of this model to the quad LSTM trained on the full set of structures, we
see similar performance dynamics wherein the overall performance is almost entirely dictated by the
dominant peptide GILGFVFTL. For this peptide we see a significant increase in AUC from 0.590 to
0.718, which is the primary source of the overall performance increase. Additionally, clear improve-
ments in performance is observed for almost all remaining peptides, demonstrating that applying data
filtering yields better generalization.
Figure 23: Per-peptide AUCs for the quad LSTM architecture trained on TCR-pMHC structures embedded
using ProteinSolver.
Peptides are sorted by abundance in the dataset.
PS: trained on the full dataset of
unrelaxed structures.
PS (repaired model subset): Trained on a dataset that was filtered to only include
structures that could be relaxed with FoldX and Rosetta, however the structures themselves were not relaxed.
3.4
Model quality is significantly correlated with prediction error
Due to the findings in section 3.3.3, it was hypothesized that a significant factor contributing to poor
predictive performance was the low quality of some TCR-pMHC structures found in the dataset. As
these models were obtained by protein modeling, traditional measures of model quality could not be
utilized. Thus, a series of parameters functioning as proxies for model quality were computed, namely
sequence similarities of template and query sequences for CDR loop modeling, as suggested by Jensen
et al.
2019 (figure 24) [9].
Due to the bimodal distribution of prediction losses for negative and
positive examples, only losses for positives were included in this analysis. Computing the Spearman
rank correlation of sequence similarities and L1 losses reveals significant correlations for all CDRs.
For the CDR3 loops we see moderate but highly significant negative correlations of -0.157 and -0.127
for α and β loops respectively, with p < 0.001 in both cases.
Due to the nature of their role in
determining antigen specificity, poor quality loop models may obfuscate details in peptide and TCR
interactions, which in turn compromises the inductive bias of models trained on this data. Whether
removing structures with low CDR template/query sequence similarity from the dataset improves
model performance requires further exploration. Interestingly, CDR1a and CDR2a loops exhibit a
positive correlation between alignment score and prediction loss. However, this may be an artefact of
the bimodal nature of alignment scores for these loops.
In order to determine if these proxies could explain the difference in predictive performance observed
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 24: Spearman rank correlation of L1 losses for positive examples and CDR template/query BLOSUM50
alignment score normalized by sequence length. Higher score indicates better alignment.
when filtering the dataset as described in section 3.3.3, a series of Wilcoxon rank-sum tests comparing
the two sets were performed. Here, model qualities between filtered data and the remaining dataset
were compared in order to determine whether these to sets can be assumed to be derived from the
same distribution (table 1). From the analysis we see that there is no significant difference in L1 loss
between predictions from the two sets at any common significance threshold. Thus, the difference
performance does not appear to be due to difference in the number of difficult-to-predict examples.
Additionally there are no significant differences in CDR template/query alignment scores, indicating
that model quality is not a significant factor driving the difference in performance observed between
models trained and tested on the full dataset versus the data subset. Further analysis is required in
order to explain the difference in performance. It should also be considered that these parameters
could be poor descriptors of model quality and that further analysis corroborating their merit as model
quality proxies is required.
Parameter
Test-statistic
p-value
L1 loss (positives)
-0.812
0.416
L1 loss (negatives)
1.848
0.065
CDR1a
0.249
0.803
CDR2a
0.119
0.904
CDR3a
1.088
0.276
CDR1b
1.226
0.219
CDR2b
-0.4094
0.682
CDR3b
1.1329
0.257
Table 1: Two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test comparing model quality proxies (CDR template/query BLO-
SUM50 alignment score) between filtered data and the remaining dataset, related to results described in section
3.3.3. Data was filtered if the TCR-pMHC structure could not be relaxed with FoldX or Rosetta. L1 loss of
predictions for negative and positive examples between the two datasets is also included.
31
==PAGE:39==
4
Discussion
4.1
Graph neural network derived protein structure embeddings provide state-
of-the-art performance
Multiple models for predicting TCR-pMHC interaction were trained using a range of methods to
embed TCR-pMHC complex data. It was shown that in a 5-fold cross validation setup, most methods
achieved high performance due to high interpartitional redundancy, revealing minor differences in
performance between sequence and structure data. However, when models were trained and evaluated
using leave-one-out validation wherein a much lower degree of data redundancy could be observed,
GNN generated TCR-pMHC structure embeddings proved to offer superior predictive performance.
During 5-fold cross-validation an AUC of 0.885 was achieved, which is almost identical to an AUC of
0.89 obtained by NetTCR-2.0 described by Montemurro et al. 2021, [7]. This model was trained and
evaluated on a dataset resembling the one used in this thesis, which allows for a rough comparison
of model performances, though computing performance measures from identical test sets would be a
more rigorous method of comparison. It should be noted that the NetTCR-2.0 model was trained and
evaluated using a 90% CDR3αβ sequence similarity threshold between cross-validation partitions,
while a similarity threshold of 80% CDR3β was used in this thesis.
Presumably, interpartitional
redundancy is lower using the latter method, leading to an increased prediction difficulty for the
models presented here. This suggests these models might outperform NetTCR-2.0 when evaluated
on identically partitioned datasets. Though, differences in exact methods of data partitioning leaves
this comparison dubious at best. During leave-one-out validation, the best model achieved an AUC
of 0.649. Models for predicting TCR-pMHC interaction are rarely evaluated on non-redundant data,
and thus few models exists to which this performance measure can be compared. ERGO, presented
by Springer et al. 2020, is evaluated under a similar testing scheme, wherein their model is tested on
data for which neither TCR nor peptide are present in the training data [37]. They report a maximum
AUC of 0.669, however due to the differences in the testing data and setup, a direct comparison cannot
be made. The ERGO model achieves an AUC of 0.86 when evaluating on redundant data, seemingly
without any interpartitional homology reduction. As a higher AUC is reported in this thesis when
testing in this manner despite a more stringent homology reduction scheme, models presented here
may outperform ERGO if tested on identical, non-redundant datasets.
4.2
Data availability and quality is a major bottleneck of predictive performance
With the recent rise of GNNs for protein structure representation, robust, high performance methods
for applying deep learning to protein structure data are now available [47, 48, 49, 50, 10]. Thus, the
current primary limitation for accurate prediction of TCR-pMHC interaction using structural data is
the lack of high quality TCR-pMHC structures. This is demonstrated in section 3.2.3, where predictive
performance is shown to be significantly correlated with the amount of available data as corroborated
by Montemurro et al. 2021 [7]. While the number of solved TCR-pMHC structures is still abysmal at
the time of writing, advances in structural modeling of TCR-pMHC complexes provide an avenue for
exploiting the rise in paired TCR and peptide sequence availability. From the time the dataset used
in this thesis was constructed, the number of paired CDR3αβ and peptide sequences meeting criteria
described in section 2.1.1 available from VDJdb and IEDB has almost doubled, which would likely
32
==PAGE:40==
provide a performance increase if processed into a new dataset on which models are retrained. Negative
examples however, are not abundant on these databases, as non-interacting TCR and peptide pairs are
rarely reported. Thus other approaches are required such as the 10X genomics dataset utilized in this
thesis, which comprise the negative portition of the dataset. However, as suggested by Montemurro
et al. 2021, the quality of this data may be low due to the infancy of their MHC-barcode platform.
Swapped artificial negatives provide an avenue of obtaining a large amount of negative data, but
issues pertaining to TCR cross-reactivity and compositional bias prevent this method from being
ideal [7]. Beyond these considerations, the issue of data and structural modeling quality still stands
and as described in section 3.4, low model quality may compromise the inductive bias of the model.
Additionally, any biases and artefacts from the modeling pipeline are directly imposed onto the model,
which may further reduce predictive capabilities. More stringent data filtering is thus warranted in
order to rectify these issues, until further advancements in TCR and pMHC modeling and docking
procedures are made.
4.3
TCR germline bias may inflate model performance
While not discussed to a great extent in the results section, the dataset composition is heavily biased
towards specific TCR germlines, with a single germline comprising approximately half of the Vβ genes
for positive examples (figure 11). This naturally imposes a heavy bias towards a specific type of TCR
onto the model, which undoubtedly affects generalization to novel data. While redundancy reduction
was performed between partitions in both the 5-fold cross-validation and leave-one-out schemes, some
degree of redundancy was unavoidably still present due to the heavy compositional bias of the data.
Thus, while efforts were made in order to obtain more realistic performance estimates, the performance
demonstrated here, may not necessarily translate to completely novel data. Additionally, as only a
single MHC haplotype was included in the dataset, models may generalize poorly to pan-allelic data.
This is not only due to the bias imposed by the limited repertoire of peptide-MHC interaction but also
to the limited set of TCR-MHC interactions, which comprise an important step of TCR and pMHC
docking [24].
4.4
Considerations on graph neural network architectures
Due to the nature of employing a pretrained model, options for integrating task-specific features into
the GNN used for protein structure embedding were quite limited. While using this model allows
for leveraging protein structure representations learned from a large dataset, the intended purpose of
the ProteinSolver model differs wildly from the task of predicting TCR-pMHC interaction and thus
other graph neural network architectures may be more suitable. A model proposed by Baranwal et
al. 2020 (preprint) predicts protein-protein interaction with high accuracy, using a graph attention
network wherein the attention mechanism serves as a method of evaluating residue interactions in
the binding interface [74]. Utilizing protein representations learned from this model or implementing
a similar feature for TCR-pMHC prediction may allow for emphasis on key interactors in the TCR-
pMHC interface, as opposed to considering the complete structure of the complex. Li et al. 2021,
proposes a graph attention network for protein-ligand affinity prediction, which utilizes a pairwise
interactive pooling layer to capture atomic interactions between the protein and ligand [75]. This
supposedly enhances the capture of long-range intermolecular protein-ligand interactions in order to
obtain more accurate affinity prediction. However, due to the high degree of residue interactions that
33
==PAGE:41==
are lost during structural modeling of TCR-pMHC complexes, such a fine-grained method may not be
suitable until further advances in TCR-pMHC modeling are made, or until more solved TCR-pMHC
structures become available.
5
Conclusion
A set of models for predicting TCR-pMHC interaction were trained on protein structure and se-
quence embeddings, as well as energy terms derived from computational force fields. In a 5-fold cross-
validation setup, structure and sequence embeddings yielded similarly high predictive performance
with AUCs of 0.85-0.88 and MCCs of 0.54-0.60, suggesting structural data is not required when test-
ing on highly redundant data. Evaluating models using a peptide-specific leave-one-out validation
scheme revealed that utilizing structural data may yield increased predictive power on non-redundant
data, increasing performance from random prediction to an AUC and MCC of 0.65 and 0.22, respec-
tively. However in most cases models were plagued by low precision, severely limiting application to
any immunotherapy development pipelines and demonstrating that TCR-pMHC interaction prediction
remains a largely unsolved task. In both setups, the best performing models achieved performance
similar to state-of-the-art models for the same task, however more rigorous performance comparison
setups are required. Analysis of model performance and dataset properties revealed that lack of data
and poor data quality are significant drivers of low performance. Additionally, compositional bias
in the dataset compounds this issue, which compromises generalization to novel data. This suggests
that advances in TCR data availability and structural modeling of TCR-pMHC complexes may be
the primary drivers of future developments in TCR-pMHC interaction prediction.
34
==PAGE:42==
References
[1]
Alessandro Sette and Rino Rappuoli. “Reverse Vaccinology: Developing Vaccines in the Era
of Genomics”. In: Immunity 33.4 (2010), p. 530. doi: 10.1016/J.IMMUNI.2010.09.017.
[2]
Harlan S. Robins et al. “Comprehensive assessment of T-cell receptor β-chain diversity in α
β T cells”. In: Blood 114.19 (2009), pp. 4099–4107. doi: 10.1182/BLOOD-2009-04-217604.
[3]
Cheng Zhu et al. “Insights from in situ analysis of TCR–pMHC recognition: response of an
interaction network”. In: Immunological reviews 251.1 (2013), p. 49. doi: 10.1111/IMR.12016.
[4]
Bjoern Peters, Morten Nielsen, and Alessandro Sette. “T Cell Epitope Predictions”. In:
Annual Review of Immunology 38 (2020), pp. 123–145. doi: 10 . 1146 / ANNUREV - IMMUNOL -
082119-124838.
[5]
Dmitry V. Bagaev et al. “VDJdb in 2019: database extension, new analysis infrastructure and
a T-cell receptor motif compendium”. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 48.D1 (2020), pp. D1057–D1062.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz874.
[6]
Randi Vita et al. “The immune epitope database (IEDB): 2018 update”. In: Nucleic Acids Res.
47.D1 (2019), pp. D339–D343. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1006.
[7]
Alessandro Montemurro et al. “NetTCR-2.0 enables accurate prediction of TCR-peptide
binding by using paired TCRα and β sequence data”. In: Communications Biology 2021 4:1 4.1
(2021), pp. 1–13. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02610-3.
[8]
Anna Lisa Schaap-Johansen et al. “T Cell Epitope Prediction and Its Application to Im-
munotherapy”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 12 (2021), p. 2994. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2021.
712488/BIBTEX.
[9]
Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen et al. “TCRpMHCmodels: Structural modelling of TCR-pMHC
class I complexes”. In: Scientific Reports 2019 9:1 9.1 (2019), pp. 1–12. doi: 10.1038/s41598-
019-50932-4.
[10]
Alexey Strokach et al. “Fast and Flexible Protein Design Using Deep Graph Neural Networks”.
In: Cell Systems 11.4 (2020), 402–411.e4. doi: 10.1016/J.CELS.2020.08.016.
[11]
Ian A. Wilson and K. Christopher Garcia. “T-cell receptor structure and TCR complexes”.
In: Current Opinion in Structural Biology 7.6 (1997), pp. 839–848. doi: 10 . 1016 / S0959 -
440X(97)80156-X.
[12]
David B. Roth. “V(D)J Recombination: Mechanism, Errors, and Fidelity”. In: Microbiology
spectrum 2.6 (2014). doi: 10.1128/MICROBIOLSPEC.MDNA3-0041-2014.
[13]
Ute Koch and Freddy Radtke. “Mechanisms of T Cell Development and Transformation”.
In: Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 27 (2011), pp. 539–562. doi: 10.1146/
ANNUREV-CELLBIO-092910-154008.
[14]
Jorge A. Soto et al. “The Role of Dendritic Cells During Infections Caused by Highly Prevalent
Viruses”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 11 (2020), p. 1513. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2020.01513/
BIBTEX.
[15]
Maria Embgenbroich and Sven Burgdorf. “Current concepts of antigen cross-presentation”.
In: Frontiers in Immunology 9.JUL (2018), p. 1643. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2018.01643/BIBTEX.
[16]
Anna Onnis and Cosima T. Baldari. “Orchestration of Immunological Synapse Assembly by
Vesicular Trafficking”. In: Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 7 (2019), p. 110. doi:
10.3389/FCELL.2019.00110/BIBTEX.
35
==PAGE:43==
[17]
J. Rodrigo Mora and Ulrich H. von Andrian. “T-cell homing specificity and plasticity:
new concepts and future challenges”. In: Trends in Immunology 27.5 (2006), pp. 235–243. doi:
10.1016/J.IT.2006.03.007.
[18]
Matthew A. Williams and Michael J. Bevan. “Effector and memory CTL differentiation”.
In: Annual Review of Immunology 25 (2007), pp. 171–192. doi: 10.1146/ANNUREV.IMMUNOL.
25.022106.141548.
[19]
Brian J. Laidlaw, Joseph E. Craft, and Susan M. Kaech. “The multifaceted role of CD4+
T cells in CD8+ T cell memory”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 16.2 (2016), pp. 102–111. doi:
10.1038/NRI.2015.10.
[20]
Qian Qi et al. “Diversity and clonal selection in the human T-cell repertoire”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111.36 (2014), pp. 13139–
13144. doi: 10.1073/PNAS.1409155111.
[21]
Jamie Rossjohn et al. “T Cell Antigen Receptor Recognition of Antigen-Presenting Molecules”.
In: Annual Review of Immunology 33 (2015), pp. 169–200. doi: 10.1146/ANNUREV-IMMUNOL-
032414-112334.
[22]
S Hausmann et al. “Peptide recognition by two HLA-A2/Tax11-19-specific T cell clones in rela-
tionship to their MHC/peptide/TCR crystal structures.” In: Journal of immunology (Baltimore,
Md. : 1950) 162.9 (1999), pp. 5389–97.
[23]
Nishant K. Singh et al. “Emerging concepts in T cell receptor specificity: rationalizing and
(maybe) predicting outcomes”. In: Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950) 199.7 (2017),
p. 2203. doi: 10.4049/JIMMUNOL.1700744.
[24]
Daniel R. Scott et al. “Disparate degrees of hypervariable loop flexibility control T-cell recep-
tor cross-reactivity, specificity, and binding mechanism”. In: Journal of molecular biology 414.3
(2011), pp. 385–400. doi: 10.1016/J.JMB.2011.10.006.
[25]
Jarrett J. Adams et al. “Structural interplay between germline interactions and adaptive
recognition determines the bandwidth of TCR-peptide-MHC cross-reactivity”. In: Nature im-
munology 17.1 (2016), pp. 87–94. doi: 10.1038/NI.3310.
[26]
Linda Wooldridge et al. “A single autoimmune T cell receptor recognizes more than a million
different peptides”. In: The Journal of biological chemistry 287.2 (2012), pp. 1168–1177. doi:
10.1074/JBC.M111.289488.
[27]
Andrew K. Sewell. “Why must T cells be cross-reactive?” In: Nature reviews. Immunology
12.9 (2012), pp. 669–677. doi: 10.1038/NRI3279.
[28]
Kenneth Murtphy and Casey Weaver. Janeway’s Immunobiology. Ed. by Taylor Francis
Group. 2017.
[29]
Daniel J. Laydon, Charles R.M. Bangham, and Becca Asquith. “Estimating T-cell reper-
toire diversity: limitations of classical estimators and a new approach”. In: Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 370.1675 (2015). doi: 10.1098/RSTB.2014.
0291.
[30]
Jonathan W. Yewdell and Jack R. Bennink. “Immunodominance in major histocompati-
bility complex class I-restricted T lymphocyte responses”. In: Annual review of immunology 17
(1999), pp. 51–88. doi: 10.1146/ANNUREV.IMMUNOL.17.1.51.
[31]
Hans Georg Rammensee et al. “SYFPEITHI: database for MHC ligands and peptide motifs”.
In: Immunogenetics 50.3-4 (1999), pp. 213–219. doi: 10.1007/S002510050595.
36
==PAGE:44==
[32]
Birkir Reynisson et al. “NetMHCpan-4.1 and NetMHCIIpan-4.0: improved predictions of
MHC antigen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution and integration of MS MHC
eluted ligand data”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.W1 (2020), W449–W454. doi: 10.1093/
NAR/GKAA379.
[33]
Timothy J. O’Donnell et al. “MHCflurry: Open-Source Class I MHC Binding Affinity Pre-
diction”. In: Cell Systems 7.1 (2018), 129–132.e4. doi: 10.1016/J.CELS.2018.05.014.
[34]
Mahesh Yadav et al. “Predicting immunogenic tumour mutations by combining mass spec-
trometry and exome sequencing”. In: Nature 2014 515:7528 515.7528 (2014), pp. 572–576. doi:
10.1038/nature14001.
[35]
Anne Mette Bjerregaard et al. “An analysis of natural T cell responses to predicted tumor
neoepitopes”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 8.NOV (2017), p. 1566. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2017.
01566/FULL.
[36]
Fei Duan et al. “Genomic and bioinformatic profiling of mutational neoepitopes reveals new
rules to predict anticancer immunogenicity”. In: The Journal of experimental medicine 211.11
(2014), pp. 2231–2248. doi: 10.1084/JEM.20141308.
[37]
Ido Springer et al. “Prediction of Specific TCR-Peptide Binding From Large Dictionaries of
TCR-Peptide Pairs”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 11 (2020), p. 1803. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.
2020.01803/BIBTEX.
[38]
Yao Tong et al. “SETE: Sequence-based Ensemble learning approach for TCR Epitope binding
prediction”. In: Computational Biology and Chemistry 87 (2020), p. 107281. doi: 10.1016/J.
COMPBIOLCHEM.2020.107281.
[39]
Pradyot Dash et al. “Quantifiable predictive features define epitope-specific T cell receptor
repertoires”. In: Nature 2017 547:7661 547.7661 (2017), pp. 89–93. doi: 10.1038/nature22383.
[40]
Esteban Lanzarotti, Paolo Marcatili, and Morten Nielsen. “T-cell receptor cognate target
prediction based on paired α and β chain sequence and structural CDR loop similarities”. In:
Frontiers in Immunology 10.AUG (2019), p. 2080. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2019.02080/BIBTEX.
[41]
Esteban Lanzarotti, Paolo Marcatili, and Morten Nielsen. “Identification of the cognate
peptide-MHC target of T cell receptors using molecular modeling and force field scoring”. In:
Molecular immunology 94 (2018), p. 91. doi: 10.1016/J.MOLIMM.2017.12.019.
[42]
Bissan Al-Lazikani, Arthur M. Lesk, and Cyrus Chothia. “Canonical structures for the
hypervariable regions of T cell α β receptors”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 295.4 (2000),
pp. 979–995. doi: 10.1006/JMBI.1999.3358.
[43]
Michael Schantz Klausen et al. “LYRA, a webserver for lymphocyte receptor structural
modeling”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 43.Web Server issue (2015), W349. doi: 10.1093/NAR/
GKV535.
[44]
András Fiser and Andrej Šali. “Modeller: Generation and Refinement of Homology-Based
Protein Structure Models”. In: Methods in Enzymology 374 (2003), pp. 461–491. doi: 10.1016/
S0076-6879(03)74020-8.
[45]
Frank Emmert-Streib et al. “An Introductory Review of Deep Learning for Prediction Models
With Big Data”. In: Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence 3 (2020), p. 4. doi: 10.3389/FRAI.2020.
00004/BIBTEX.
[46]
Jan Kukačka, Vladimir Golkov, and Daniel Cremers. “Regularization for Deep Learning:
A Taxonomy | OpenReview”. In: Preprint (2018).
37
==PAGE:45==
[47]
Alex Fout et al. “Protein Interface Prediction using Graph Convolutional Networks”. In: Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (2017).
[48]
Vladimir Gligorijević et al. “Structure-based protein function prediction using graph convo-
lutional networks”. In: Nature Communications 2021 12:1 12.1 (2021), pp. 1–14. doi: 10.1038/
s41467-021-23303-9.
[49]
Fang Yang et al. “Graph-based prediction of Protein-protein interactions with attributed signed
graph embedding”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 21.1 (2020), pp. 1–16. doi: 10.1186/S12859-020-
03646-8/TABLES/4.
[50]
Xiao Wang, Sean T. Flannery, and Daisuke Kihara. “Protein Docking Model Evaluation
by Graph Neural Networks”. In: Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences 8 (2021), p. 402. doi: 10.
3389/FMOLB.2021.647915/BIBTEX.
[51]
Justin Gilmer et al. “Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry”. In: Proceedings of The
34th International Conference on Machine Learning 70 (2017). doi: 10.5555/3305381.3305512.
[52]
Nguyen Anh Mac and Hung Son Nguyen. “Rotation Variance in Graph Convolutional Net-
works”. In: Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Computer Science and Intelligence Systems,
FedCSIS 2021 (2021), pp. 81–90. doi: 10.15439/2021F140.
[53]
Zonghan Wu et al. “A Comprehensive Survey on Graph Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 32.1 (2019), pp. 4–24. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.
2020.2978386. arXiv: 1901.00596v4.
[54]
Yue Wang et al. “Dynamic Graph CNN for Learning on Point Clouds”. In: ACM Transactions
on Graphics 38.5 (2018), p. 13. doi: 10.1145/3326362. arXiv: 1801.07829.
[55]
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. “Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolu-
tional Networks”. In: 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017 -
Conference Track Proceedings (2016). arXiv: 1609.02907.
[56]
Chen Cai and Yusu Wang. “A Note on Over-Smoothing for Graph Neural Networks”. In:
Preprint (2020). arXiv: 2006.13318.
[57]
Roshan Rao et al. “Evaluating Protein Transfer Learning with TAPE”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 32 (2019). arXiv: 1906.08230.
[58]
Alexander Rives et al. “Biological structure and function emerge from scaling unsupervised
learning to 250 million protein sequences”. In: bioRxiv (2020), p. 622803. doi: 10.1101/622803.
[59]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory”. In: Neural Com-
putation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–1780. doi: 10.1162/NECO.1997.9.8.1735.
[60]
Youssef Oualil et al. “Long-short range context neural networks for language modeling”. In:
EMNLP 2016 - Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Proceedings
(2016), pp. 1473–1481. doi: 10.18653/V1/D16-1154. arXiv: 1708.06555.
[61]
Dagmar Walter et al. “A new way of immunity exploration by linking highly multiplexed anti-
gen recognition to immune repertoire and phenotype”. In: JOURNAL FOR IMMUNOTHER-
APY OF CANCER. Vol. 7. BMC CAMPUS, 4 CRINAN ST, LONDON N1 9XW, ENGLAND.
2019.
[62]
Ida Meitil. “Using deep learning for improving TCR homology modeling and its application to
immunogenicity prediction”. Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2021.
[63]
James Robinson et al. “IPD-IMGT/HLA Database”. In: Nucleic acids research 48.D1 (2020),
pp. D948–D955. doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKZ950.
38
==PAGE:46==
[64]
Joost Schymkowitz et al. “The FoldX web server: an online force field”. In: Nucleic acids
research 33.Web Server issue (2005). doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKI387.
[65]
Rebecca F. Alford et al. “The Rosetta All-Atom Energy Function for Macromolecular Model-
ing and Design”. In: Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 13.6 (2017), pp. 3031–3048.
doi: 10.1021/ACS.JCTC.7B00125/SUPPL_FILE/CT7B00125_SI_002.ZIP.
[66]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Ed. by H Wallach et al. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
[67]
Matthias Fey and Jan E Lenssen. “Fast Graph Representation Learning with PyTorch Ge-
ometric”. In: ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds. 2019.
[68]
ProteinSolver git repository. https://gitlab.com/ostrokach/proteinsolver. 2021.
[69]
kmtools git repository. https://gitlab.com/kimlab/kmtools/-/tree/master. 2021.
[70]
ESM git repository. https://github.com/facebookresearch/esm. 2021.
[71]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization”.
In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track
Proceedings (2015). arXiv: 1412.6980.
[72]
Martin Steinegger and Johannes Söding. “MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence
searching for the analysis of massive data sets”. In: Nature Biotechnology 35.11 (2017), pp. 1026–
1028. doi: 10.1038/NBT.3988.
[73]
Justin M. Johnson and Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar. “Survey on deep learning with class im-
balance”. In: Journal of Big Data 6.1 (2019), pp. 1–54. doi: 10.1186/S40537- 019- 0192-
5/TABLES/18.
[74]
Mayank Baranwal et al. “Struct2Graph: A graph attention network for structure based pre-
dictions of protein-protein interactions”. In: bioRxiv (2020), p. 2020.09.17.301200. doi: 10.1101/
2020.09.17.301200.
[75]
Shuangli Li et al. “Structure-aware Interactive Graph Neural Networks for the Prediction of
Protein-Ligand Binding Affinity”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Confer-
ence on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 21 (2021), pp. 975–985. doi: 10.48550/arxiv.
2107.10670. arXiv: 2107.10670.
A
MMseqs2 CDR3β sequence clustering
mmseqs easy-cluster cdr3b_seqs.fasta clusterRes tmp –min-seq-id 0.8 -c 0.8 –cov-mode 1
mmseqs easy-cluster cdr3b_seqs.fasta clusterRes tmp –min-seq-id 0.5 -c 0.8 –cov-mode 1
B
ESM-1b amino acid sequence embedding
python extract.py esm1b_t33_650M_UR50S ful_seqs.fasta out_dir –include per_tok
39
