==PAGE:1==
 
 
                                               
 
                          
                                   
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Abstract  
The engineering of microbial cells to produce and secrete therapeutics directly in the human body, 
known as advanced microbial therapeutics, is an exciting alternative to current drug delivery routes. 
These living therapeutics can be engineered to sense disease biomarkers and, in response, produce a 
therapeutic. This allows for a controlled and self-regulating delivery of a therapeutic that adapts to 
the disease state of the individual patient. Numerous sensing-systems have been characterized for 
use in prokaryotes, but a very limited number of advanced microbial therapeutics have incorporated 
such sensors to create “smart” microbes. In this study, we incorporated and characterized 9 different 
sensors that respond to physiologically relevant conditions and molecules found in the human body, 
using the probiotic Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 (EcN). The resulting sensors are functional in aerobic 
and anaerobic conditions and were demonstrated to be functional under gut-like conditions using the 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) as an in vivo model. We show how bacterial sensors 
can also be used to report on changes in the intestinal environment of C. elegans by developing a 
sensor that responds to the endogenous bile acid-like molecule Δ4-Dafachronic acid. Furthermore, we 
demonstrated how biosensors can be used to provide a cost-effective method for quantifying 
metabolites from human blood samples in an ex vivo assay. This work substantially increases the 
available tools for research using EcN as an advanced microbial therapeutic.  
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
I would like to express my most sincere gratitude to my supervisor Ruben Vazquez-Uribe for your 
involvement and engagement in the course of this project. You have been an outstanding mentor 
throughout the entire project, in all things big and small. Thank you for always having a million ideas 
and great input, whilst (ALWAYS) reminding me of staying focused and on track. I am very happy you 
somehow agreed to importing a bunch of microscopic worms from Minnesota, which no one had prior 
experience with. It has been an absolute pleasure working with you.  
Thank you to the whole group of Bacterial Synthetic Biology, and in particular the best office mates 
Alex, Carmen, Hitesh and Vibeke, for making every day at CfB enjoyable. A special thanks to Alex for 
always saving my cells whenever my daughter was sick, and I could not come in.  
I would like to thank Professor Mogens Kilstrup for good input and sparring throughout the project, I 
aways enjoy our meetings. Thank you to Professor Morten Sommer for having created a fantastic work 
environment where big ideas and creativity are allowed to thrive.  
Thank you to the Novo Scholarship program for the financial aid during my thesis.  
Lastly, I want to thank my girlfriend Caroline for your endless support and only being moderately tired 
of listening to me rambling on about bacteria and worms. I could not have done this without you.  
==PAGE:4==
 
 
Contents 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................ 1 
The therapeutic potential of the microbiome ................................................................................ 1 
Bacterial sensor systems ................................................................................................................. 3 
Results ..................................................................................................................................................... 7 
In silico design of biosensors ........................................................................................................... 7 
Aerobic characterization of small-molecule sensors ...................................................................... 8 
Construction of a novel butyrate sensor ...................................................................................... 11 
Aerobic characterization of pH sensor .......................................................................................... 13 
FNR-based oxygen sensors ........................................................................................................... 14 
Anaerobic characterization of small-molecule sensors ................................................................ 15 
C. elegans as in vivo model ........................................................................................................... 17 
Ex vivo application of caffeine biosensor ...................................................................................... 19 
Discussion.............................................................................................................................................. 21 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................. 25 
Materials and methods ......................................................................................................................... 25 
References ............................................................................................................................................ 28 
Supplementary material ....................................................................................................................... 34 
S1: Plasmid maps and sequences used for EcN biosensors .................................................................. 34 
S2: Aerobic plate reader data for small molecule sensors ................................................................... 43 
S3: Aerobic performance of pH sensor raw data .................................................................................. 50 
S4: Anerobic plate reader data for small molecule sensors ................................................................. 51 
S5: Additional images of C. elegans colonized with EcN biosensors .................................................... 57 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
1 
 
Introduction 
 
The therapeutic potential of the microbiome  
The human microbiome can be defined as the collection of the microorganisms, including bacteria, 
archaea, viruses, and fungi that reside on, or within, the human body. These microorganisms live in 
complex multi-species communities that are highly adapted to life in the anatomical site in which they 
reside, most often existing in a symbiotic relationship with their human host1. The human microbiome 
consists of an estimated 10-100 trillion microbes, the bulk of which reside in our gastro-intestinal (GI) 
tract1. Here, they play a crucial role in the digestion of otherwise inaccessible calories liberated from 
dietary fibers2. However, the importance of the microbiome far exceeds that of simply enhancing our 
digestive efficacy. Research from the last two decades has unveiled a strong interconnectedness 
between the microbiome and the human host, which has prompted some researchers to re-think the 
microbiome as “the last undiscovered human organ”.  
The decreasing cost of DNA-sequencing has rapidly accelerated our understanding of the importance 
of the microbiome in almost all aspects of human health and psychological well-being3.  Already prior 
to being born, humans develop a unique microbiome4, including various commensal microbes crucial 
for maturation and homeostasis of our immune system5,6 . While the exact mechanisms are still not 
well-understood, dysbiosis of the gut microbiome has been linked to various autoimmune and 
inflammatory diseases (type I diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, obesity, 
inflammatory bowel diseases, etc.)7. In addition, the link between the microbiome and various 
psychiatric and neurological disorders has recently been elucidated upon8,9, and it is now a well-
established fact that the bacteria that reside in our gut can directly affect the function and 
development of our brain and central nervous system10, a term coined the gut-brain-axis. Some gut 
bacteria are capable of producing neuroactive molecules, such as serotonin11 and γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)12, that can directly interact with brain cells, thus affecting mood, behavior, anxiety levels and 
sleeping patterns13.  
Evidently, the microbiome is implicated in many aspects of both human health and disease, and thus 
research aiming to manipulate the microbiome for therapeutical purposes is of increasing interest. 
Several avenues of investigation are now being explored for additive or subtractive strategies to 
manipulate the microbiota with a specific medical goal. Such approaches range from the use of 
specialized dietary approaches to stimulate the growth of beneficial bacteria, known as prebiotics14, 
to the transfer of whole microbial communities from fecal matter of healthy donors into patients with 
a dysbiotic microbiota, as seen in patients with recurrent Clostridium difficile infections15. More 
==PAGE:6==
2 
 
recently, scientist have begun exploring the rational design of genetically engineered commensal 
bacteria modified to produce therapeutic molecules of interest16. In essence, this approach allows the 
use of living bacteria as drug delivery vehicles and can be considered as an alternative to the 
established delivery routes of drugs through oral dosing or parenteral administration. In the context 
of this thesis, this approach of using engineered microbiomes for therapeutic applications will be 
referred to as advanced microbial therapeutics (AMTs). 
Different chassis have been investigated for their potential to be used as AMT vehicles in the human 
body, including gram-positives such as Lactococcus lactis17, the gram-negative Escherichia coli Nissle 
191718, and more recently, the eukaryotic subspecies of baker’s yeast Saccharomyces boulardii19. 
AMTs are currently being developed to treat a plethora of conditions, including obesity20, diabetes 
mellitus21, inflammatory bowel diseases22 and the treatment of cancer 23.  
It is generally accepted that oral delivery is the more desirable administration route for therapeutic 
agents with intrabody targets24, as it avoids the pain and risk of infection associated with injection-
based administration. However, even with highly developed pharmaceutical formulations, there are 
still certain drawbacks associated with oral dosing, such as the loss of active ingredient in the transition 
through the GI-tract25 and high fluctuations of drug-levels in plasma24,26 . It is hypothesized that the 
use of AMTs for drug delivery has the potential to circumvent these drawbacks, by allowing for a 
controlled release of the drug at a specific rate, based on the requirements of an individual patient. In 
this manner, AMTs would allow for in situ production of a drug, achieving maximal therapeutic effect 
without adverse effects arising from exposure to concentrations outside tolerable levels (fig. 1).  
==PAGE:7==
3 
 
 
Fig. 1 │ Pharmacokinetics of drugs administered with oral dose and AMTs. Hypothetical plasma concentration-time 
profile from conventional oral dose (a) and drugs delivered by AMTs (b). Arrows indicate time of dosing. The use of a 
microbial delivery platform could provide a sustained production-rate and a more desirable pharmacokinetic profile than 
orally dosed drugs. The use of AMTs can mitigate dosing-concentrations above the tolerable levels and concomitant side 
effects (red area), or lack of therapeutic effects by sub-optimal concentrations (grey area). 
Pertinent to the application of AMTs is the ability of engineering microbes to respond to certain 
environmental cues, so-called sensor systems, that couple the production of a therapeutic to a disease 
biomarker16,27,28. Such sensor-systems could allow a dynamic and intelligent drug-delivery platform, 
that adapts to the disease state of the individual patient.   
Bacterial sensor systems  
Prokaryotes have evolved highly complex and diverse regulatory systems which allows the cells to 
adapt to conditions in their immediate environment and mount the appropriate intracellular response 
29. The common architecture of most sensor systems is comprised of a sensing domain, capable of 
sensing environmental conditions or ligands, and an output domain that translates this stimulus into 
==PAGE:8==
4 
 
an intracellular response30. Depending on their mode of action, these sensor-systems can be broadly 
categorized into one-component system (OCS) (fig. 2a) and two component-systems (TCS) (fig. 2b). 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 │One-component and two-component signal transduction systems in prokaryotes. a, one-component 
systems is a single protein comprised of a sensing domain and a response domain, which contains no His-Asp 
phosphotransfer domains. b, a prototypical two-component system in which a sensor histidine kinase is activated by binding 
of a small molecule, activating the histidine kinase inducing auto-phosphorylates at a specific histidine residue. The high-
energy phosphoryl group (P) is then transferred to a specific aspartate residue in the receiver domain of a response regulator. 
This regulator modifies cellular behavior through an effector domain, most often via modulation of expression levels of target 
genes29,30. 
Together, these systems allow individual cells to respond to a broad range of environmental stimuli, 
typically through modulation of gene-expression at the DNA level. In fact, 87% of the sequenced 
output domains in two-component systems and 84% in one-component regulators contain the DNA-
binding helix-turn-helix (HTH) domains30 capable of binding to DNA, thus up- or down-regulating target 
gene expression. For decades, scientist have been utilizing various sensors in the context of 
heterologous protein expression, such as the lac promoter that can be induced with the use of 
Isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactoside (IPTG)31 or the tetracycline promoter TetR using anhydrotetracycline 
(aTc)32. While these systems offer great control over biological processes in an in vitro setting, they 
==PAGE:9==
5 
 
are not compatible with use in in vivo, as both compounds are toxic upon ingestion33. While the idea 
of engineering microbes to serve as personalized medical factories certainly holds great promise, there 
has (to the best of the authors knowledge) been no AMTs in clinical trials that use sensors for disease 
biomarkers as of today34, and the realization the vision of a fully autonomous and “intelligent” 
microbially-based therapeutic is still forthcoming. While rapid advances in synthetic biology have led 
to a dramatic increase in availability of biosensors responding to a wide range of stimuli 35,36, the level 
of characterization and availability of the necessary genetic components in the relevant publications 
are of varying quality, calling for a more systematic approach of characterizing biosensors with in vivo 
relevance, under gut-like conditions. This will allow researchers to couple their microbially produced 
therapeutic with a relevant external signal, with minimal effort.  
The objective of this project was to identify relevant biosensors for use in vivo and do an in-depth 
characterization of the performance of each sensor in gut-relevant conditions. Specifically, sensors 
were selected for use in the probiotic E. coli Nissle 1917 (EcN), currently used as an AMT for delivery 
of various therapeutics in several projects in the Bacterial Synthetic Biology group of Morten Sommer. 
By utilizing the plasmid-based expression system currently employed to drive the expression of 
therapeutics in EcN (fig. 3), the findings of this work can easily be integrated into existing projects. The 
expression platform is based on the native pMUT2 plasmid of EcN, a cryptic plasmid that has been 
demonstrated to impose no metabolic burden37 or detectable phenotypic difference under laboratory 
conditions. This plasmid has a copy number of 97 ± 3638 and has been demonstrated to remain stable 
in passage through the gut for several generations39.  
==PAGE:10==
6 
 
 
Fig. 3 │ Plasmid map of the pMUT2 based expression system. Schematic representation of the pMUT plasmid used 
for production of therapeutics in EcN. The plasmid contains an ColE2-like replication origin and has been engineered to 
contain a kanamycin resistance cassette for selection and the Hok/Sok toxin-antitoxin system for improved stability. The 
transcription factors were placed in a counter-clock fashion to the reporter gene and its respective promoter. The same 
ribosome binding site was used for translation of mCherry in all constructs.  
 
 
==PAGE:11==
7 
 
Results 
In silico design of biosensors  
A literature search was carried out to identify previously studied biosensors that could be relevant for 
use in the human body and compatible with use in EcN. A total of 9 biosensors and their relevant 
genetic components were identified (table 1). In addition, we designed a novel butyrate sensor 
(pPcphA), based on the findings of Bai & Mansell (2020), in which a double-positive feedforward loop 
was used to detect the presence of butyrate 40. It was hypothesized that a such a system is a redundant 
use of genetic components, and that the detection of butyrate could be achieved by using the 
endogenous PchA promoter (the first regulated promoter in their double-feedforward loop). A full list 
detailing the annotated DNA-sequences can be found in fig. S1.  
Table 1 │ Biosensors identified for use in vivo  
Strain 
Sensor input 
Regulation 
Plasmid 
name 
Total size of circuit 
(bp) 
Ref. 
EcN-pAto::mCherry 
Acetoacetate  
Activator 
pAto 
235 
41 
EcN-pLac::mCherry 
Lactate 
Activator  
pLac 
1133 
42 
EcN-pCaf::mCherry 
Caffeine 
Activator 
pCaf 
1525 
43 
EcN-pTcpP::mCherry 
Primary bile acids 
Activator 
pTcpP 
1710 
44 
EcN-pVtrA::mCherry 
Secondary bile acids 
Activator 
pVtrA 
1918 
44 
EcN-pPchA::mCherry 
Butyrate 
Activator 
pPcphA 
418 
40 
EcN-pFF-41.5::mCherry 
Oxygen 
Repressor 
pFF-41.5 
104 
45 
EcN-pF8::mCherry 
Oxygen 
Repressor 
pF8 
51 
46 
EcN-pCadBA::mCherry 
pH 
Activator 
pCadBA 
150  
47 
 
The necessary genetic elements were cloned into the pMUT-based plasmid. The transcription factors 
and respective output promoters were either amplified directly from EcN for endogenous systems, 
synthesized as codon-optimized gBlocks or ordered as plasmids from Addgene. The coding sequences 
of the necessary transcription factors were placed next to the promoter and reporter gene but in 
opposite transcription direction to ensure insolation of the reporter gene and its promoter. The red 
fluorescent protein mCherry was used as reporter gene to quantify gene expression levels. The strain 
of EcN used for this work harbors a constitutively expressed superfolder GFP (sfGFP) integrated into 
the genome, allowing for a ratio-metric normalization of the mCherry reporter signal, in cases where 
==PAGE:12==
8 
 
OD600 cannot be used as a reliable measure of growth (i.e., when the growth medium is opaque from 
high concentrations of inducers). 
 
Fig. 4  │ Molecular and genetic schematic of EcN in vivo biosensors. Acetoacetate, the transmembrane AtoS histidine 
kinase autophosphorylates in the presence of acetoacetate and the phosphate group is transferred to the response regulator 
AtoC that drives expression from pAto promoter. Lactate, lldR is expressed from a constitutive pTac promoter and represses 
the activity of plldR promoter. In the presence of lactate, lldR derepress and activate the expression from plldR promoter. 
Primary bile acid,  CadC-TcpP fusion protein dimerizes upon binding of primary bile acid and activates expression CadBA 
promoter. Secondary bile acid,  CadC-VtrA fusion protein dimerizes upon binding of primary bile acid and activates 
expression CadBA promoter. Oxygen, the transcriptional activator FNR exist in an equilibrium between the reduced and 
oxidized form. Upon exposure to oxygen, a surface exposed Fe-S cluster reacts with cytoplasmic oxygen and the FNR 
becomes inactivated, thus inhibiting transcription from FNR-dependent promoters. Butyrate, the presence of butyrate 
activates transcription from the pPchA promoter through unknown mechanisms. pH, the one-component transmembrane 
protein CadC dimerizes in lower pH and activates transcription from the CadBA promoter. Caffeine, CadC-VHH caffeine fusion 
protein dimerizes upon binding of caffeine and activates expression of CadBA promoter. 
Aerobic characterization of small-molecule sensors 
The dynamics of each sensor were investigated by exposing cells of EcN harboring the various plasmids 
to different concentrations of inducers in aerobic conditions. Overnight cultures were reinoculated in 
microtiter plates and the OD600, mCherry and sfGFP signal were recorded for 40 hours of growth. The 
mCherry signal was normalized to the OD600 to account for differences in growth parameters when 
exposed to the various compounds, and the gene expression in normalized relative fluorescent unit 
(RFU) was used to parameterize the performance of each sensor. To account for variations in the 
performance during the 40-hour period the mean of the normalized signal was computed as area 
under the curve (AUC) for each condition tested. The results are displayed in fig. 5 and table 2, 
together with the physiologically relevant concentrations (shaded blue area in the plots). Note that 
levels of acetoacetate and caffeine displayed are from serum-concentrations, as intestinal 
concentrations of these compounds are not available.  
All sensors showed a dose dependent response when exposed to their cognate inducer (fig. 5). The 
dynamic range was lowest for the primary bile acid sensor pTcpP with a 2.8-fold increase in expression 
between lowest fluorescence (ymin) and highest fluorescence (ymax). The highest dynamic range was 
==PAGE:13==
9 
 
observed for the secondary bile acid sensor pVtrA when exposed to lithocholic acid, with a 19-fold 
increase. Interestingly, the pVtrA circuit showed a differential response when induced with secondary 
bile acids tested in this study, with the highest sensitivity to the conjugated secondary bile acid 
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), with an EC50 value of 0.18 mM. Most sensors displayed a weak 
cooperative behavior (2 > k > 1), with the notable exception of pVtrA induced with deoxycholic acid 
that displayed a strong cooperative behavior with a coefficient of 4.5. Sensors for acetoacetate, 
lactate, caffeine and secondary bile acid had an operational range (the range of inducer 
concentrations in which a concentration dependent response is observed) that falls within the 
concentrations found in the human body. The primary bile acid sensor was only activated at 
concentrations >2 mM which exceeds the normal range of concentrations reported in literature. It 
should however be noted that both the primary and secondary bile acid sensors are activated by 
multiple types of bile acids, and thus it would be more logical to compare the operational range of 
these sensors to the pooled concentration of primary and secondary bile acids found in the intestines.  
==PAGE:14==
10 
 
 
Fig. 5│ Aerobic dose-response functions. The response function of biosensors responding to small molecules are shown 
in colors corresponding to those delineated in fig. 4. The lines represent the best fit to a 4-parameter log-logistic model 
displayed with the 95% confidence interval, calculated from the mean of three biological replicates in the presence of 
different concentrations of inducer (black circles) computed from AUC of normalized mCherry signal during aerobic growth. 
The computed parameters for each sensor are provided in table 2. Shaded area behind graphs indicates the physiologically 
relevant concentrations of small molecules for a, acetoacetate 48 (serum), b,  lactate 49 (stool), c, taurodeoxycholic acid 
(duodenal content)50, d, caffeine51 (serum), e, deoxycholic acid50,52(duodenal content), f, lithocholic acid50,52(duodenal 
content) g, tauroursodeoxycholic acid50(duodenal content). 
==PAGE:15==
11 
 
Table 2 │ Dose-Response parameters of EcN biosensors in aerobic conditions  
Ligand 
Sensor 
ymax 
(RFU) 
ymin 
(RFU) 
Dynamic 
range 
EC50 
Cooperativity 
coefficient (k) 
Acetoacetate 
EcN-pAto::mCherry 
325 
54 
6 
8.6  mM 
1.9 
Lactate 
EcN-pLac::mCherry 
1300 
137 
9.5 
37.65 mM 
1.9 
Caffeine 
EcN-pCaf::mCherry 
11648 
2410 
4.8 
1.67 μM 
 
1 
Taurocholic acid 
EcN-pTcpP::mCherry 
1200 
423 
2.8 
25.8 mM 
1.2 
Deoxycholic acid 
EcN-pVtrA::mCherry 
32316 
2549 
12.7 
2.3 mM 
4.5 
Lithocholic acid 
EcN-pVtrA::mCherry 
4250 
220 
19.3 
0.85 mM 
1.5 
Tauroursodeoxycholic 
acid 
EcN-pVtrA::mCherry 
22500 
2462 
9.1 
0.18 mM 
1.2 
 
Construction of a novel butyrate sensor  
Next, we wanted to evaluate the performance of a novel butyrate sensor by growing cells of EcN-
pPchA::mCherry in presence and absence of butyrate. Initially, cells were exposed to a concentration 
of 20  mM sodium-butyrate, but several experiments yielded no differences in mCherry signal between 
the negative and positive samples (data not shown). A last attempt was made using a saturated 
solution of 100 mM butyrate in LB, and cells were inoculated from a microtiter plate containing cells 
incubated in 20 mM butyrate from the previous experiment, that had been sitting for 2 days. In this 
attempt, we saw a very slight but significant increase in the expression levels from the cells exposed 
to butyrate (data not shown). When processing the data, it was identified that a single well (from 
triplicates) showed a much higher expression of the reporter gene mCherry in the presence of 
butyrate and was also growing to a higher final OD600 with a higher growth rate (fig. 6). It was deemed 
most likely that this was simply an artifact arising from an error with the plate reader and the specific 
well, but nevertheless the cells were isolated and saved as a cryo-stock for further analysis. The 
experiment was repeated for a third time, with cells properly prepared from overnight cultures of the 
original version (V1) and the newly isolated strain (V2) and exposed to butyrate, as well as the C3 short 
chain fatty acid (SCFA) propionate, to ensure that any upregulation of the reporter gene was not 
simply an artefact arising from stressing the cells with high concentrations of SCFA.  
==PAGE:16==
12 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 │ Development of a novel butyrate sensor. a, OD600 measurements of the original strain (V1) and subsequently 
isolated strain (V2) over 24 hours represented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM), with a zoomed view of the first 
5 hours of growth. b, Expression levels of EcN_pPchA::mCherry (V1) and  EcN_pPchA::mCherry (V2) in LB alone and 
supplemented with 100 mM propionate or butyrate. Data presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) of the 
normalized mCherry signal computed from AUC over 24 hours. Overall difference in mean determined with ANOVA and post-
hoc analysis of comparison between groups using Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference test: (ns) p > 0.05, *p ≤ 0.05, 
**p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001. 
Interestingly, the V2 strain showed improved growth over the original V1 strain (fig. 6a), and also 
showed an almost 2-fold increase in normalized mCherry expression (fig. 6b) over the 24-hour time-
==PAGE:17==
13 
 
course of the experiment. The plasmids from both strains were isolated and sent for sequencing, but 
there were no differences in the PchA promoter or mCherry reporter gene that could explain this 
newfound responsiveness to butyrate in the V2 strain (data not shown). This could be indicative of 
genomic mutations arising from the long incubation time in 20 mM butyrate (from the first failed 
experiment), leading to improved fitness of the V2 strain in presence of butyrate, and concomitant 
differences in the regulatory mechanisms between the PchA promoter and its associated transcription 
factor LRP. This will be further investigated by whole-genome sequencing of the V2 strain.  
Aerobic characterization of pH sensor 
Next, we wanted to study the effect of pH on expression levels from the native promoter pCadBA, in 
conditions that resemble the intestinal luminal pH in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) during 
flareups. Overnight cultures of EcN-pCadBA::mCherry were reinoculated into 100 mM HEPES-LB 
buffered to pH 7 and grown to OD600 of 0.3, after which the pH of the media was confirmed with pH 
strips. The cells were then collected and resuspended in fresh pH 7 LB media and 100 mM Acetic acid 
buffered LB adjusted to pH 4. After 10 hours, the pH was confirmed to remain unchanged with pH 
strips. 
Although pH 4 is outside of the tolerable levels for EcN to replicate, we saw a ~ 3-fold increase in 
expression levels from the pCadC promoter when compared to expression levels at pH 7 (fig. 7). The 
expression also proved to be stable over the 10-hour period tested (fig. S3). This is especially relevant, 
as the CadC system has been demonstrated to revert to low levels of expression after prolonged 
exposure to low pH due to a build-up of cadaverine, the end-product of the CadBA operon 53. This 
could limit the functionality of using such system in an in vivo setting in patients with IBD, as flareups 
associated with decreased pH can last from hours to several days or even weeks.  
 
==PAGE:18==
14 
 
 
Fig. 5│ Aerobic performance of pH sensor. Relative expression of levels of EcN-pCadBA::mCherry in LB buffered to pH 
4 and pH 7. Data represented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) of the normalized mCherry signal measured over 
10 hours after reinoculation into pH 4 and pH 7 buffered media, from 3 biological replicates. Significance was determined 
using paired t-test: (ns) p > 0.05, *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001. 
FNR-based oxygen sensors  
Two different oxygen sensors, pF8 and pFF-41.5, were tested and evaluated for their expression levels 
in the presence and absence of oxygen during growth in LB. As the mCherry reporter used in this study 
requires oxygen for final maturation and fluorescence, it was not possible to directly monitor the 
kinetics of the anaerobic cultures. Instead, overnight cultures were reinoculated into anaerobic and 
aerobic conditions, and samples were taken at different timepoints. Immediately after sampling 
chloramphenicol was added to inhibit any further growth or protein translation, whilst allowing the 
pool of already translated but yet unfolded mCherry to mature. The kinetics were followed until the 
mCherry signal had reached saturation and the expression was calculated as the AUC of the 
normalized mCherry signal. Aerobic cultures were treated identically to allow direct comparison.  
Both promoters follow a similar pattern of expression, with a clear increase in expression levels when 
grown under anaerobic conditions (fig. 8). The expression levels remained relatively stable over the 
24-hour period in aerobic conditions, but the baseline expression (or leakiness) was around 2.5 times 
higher for the F8 promoter. When computed on the 24h measurement, the difference between 
aerobic and anaerobic expression levels was also very similar for both promoters, with the pF8 and 
pFF-41.5 promoters showing a fold-increase of 4.1 and 3.75 respectively.  
 
==PAGE:19==
15 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8│ Characterization of two oxygen-sensors. Relative expression levels of EcN-PF8::mCherry (left) and EcN-pFF-
41.5::mCherry (right) during 24 hours of growth in aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Data represented as mean ± standard 
error of the mean (SEM) of the AUC of the normalized mCherry signal from samples taken at different timepoints and treated 
with chloramphenicol.  
Anaerobic characterization of small-molecule sensors  
As the goal of this project is to evaluate biosensors for in vivo applications, it is imperative to prove 
and understand their functionality in anaerobic conditions, like those found throughout most of the 
human GI-tract. To do so, the characterization of small-molecule sensors was performed in anaerobic 
conditions. To elucidate the dose-response function of the biosensors, cells were first adapted to 
anaerobic conditions on plates, reinoculated into liquid media and subsequently reinoculated into 
liquid media with different concentrations of inducers. The cells were grown for 40 hours, after which 
they were treated with chloramphenicol and the kinetics were followed. The response of each sensor 
was computed as previously described for the aerobic characterization.  
All sensors tested in anaerobic conditions showed a dose-dependent increase in fluorescence when 
the corresponding inducer was present (fig. 9 and table 3). While the dynamic range for most sensors 
was lower in anaerobic conditions, the opposite trend was observed for the sensors responding to 
acetoacetate and primary bile acid TCA. Generally, the sensors were less sensitive (inferred from an 
increase of the EC50 value) when used in anaerobic conditions, except for the acetoacetate and lactate 
sensors (fig. 9a and 9b).  
The secondary bile acid EcN-pVtrA::mCherry was grown in the presence of deoxycholic acid in multiple 
attempts but failed to grow in the relevant concentrations tested (fig. 9e). Furthermore, normalization 
of mCherry to OD600 was not possible in the experiment using EcN- pVtrA::mCherry grown in the 
presence of lithocholic acid (fig. 9f), as this solution was highly opaque even at low concentrations 
==PAGE:20==
16 
 
after growth in anaerobic conditions, likely due to changes in the pH of the medium. Instead, the 
constitutively expressed sfGFP was used as a proxy for cell growth, based on the assumption that this 
signal should, to some degree, correlate with cell density.  
 
Fig. 9│Anaerobic dose-response function. The response function of biosensors responding to small molecules are 
shown in colors corresponding to those delineated in fig. 4. The lines represent the best fit to a 4-parameter log-logistic 
model displayed with the 95% confidence interval, calculated from the mean of three biological replicates in the presence 
of different concentrations of inducer (black circles) computed from AUC of normalized mCherry signal during anaerobic 
growth. The computed parameters for each sensor are provided in table 2. Shaded area behind graphs indicates the 
physiologically relevant concentrations of small molecules for for a, acetoacetate 48 (serum), b,  lactate 49 (stool), c, 
taurodeoxycholic acid (duodenal content)50, d, caffeine51 (serum), e, deoxycholic acid50,52(duodenal content), f, lithocholic 
acid50,52(duodenal content) g, tauroursodeoxycholic acid50(duodenal content). 
==PAGE:21==
17 
 
 
 
Table 3 │Dose-Response parameters of EcN biosensors in anerobic conditions 
Ligand 
Sensor 
ymax 
(RFU) 
ymin 
(RFU) 
Dynamic 
range 
EC50 
Cooperativity  
(Slope of the hill) 
Acetoacetate 
pAto 
5500 
620 
8.9 
5.3 mM 
1.3 
Lactate 
pLac 
3772 
1750 
2.2 
0.12 mM  
1.1 
Caffeine 
pCaf 
3300 
1384 
2.4 
11.38 uM 
1.8 
Taurocholic acid 
pTcpP 
3900 
796 
5 
115 mM 
5.7 
Deoxycholic acid 
pVtrA 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Lithocholic acid 
pVtrA 
0.7* 
0.26* 
2.7 
4.35 mM 
3 
Tauroursodeoxycholic acid 
pVtrA 
25000 
9928 
2.5 
0.23 Mm  
1.5 
* Note: RFU normalized as RFUmCherry/RFUsfGFP 
C. elegans as in vivo model 
The differences in performance of the biosensors under aerobic and anaerobic conditions highlights 
the context-specific nature of such bacterial sensor systems. Therefore, we wanted to demonstrate 
the functionality of our bacterial sensors in a more complex environment that better approximates 
the conditions found in the GI-tract of humans. For this purpose, the nematode C. elegans was 
employed as an in vivo model. C. elegans was monoxenically grown for 5 days on NGM plates seeded 
with the different strains of EcN biosensors and followingly moved to an NGM plate containing the 
relevant inducer. After 24 hours of exposure to the inducer molecule, adult worms were anesthetized 
and imaged using an IncuCyte S3 Live-Cell Analysis System. Brightfield, red and green fluorescence 
images were acquired, with the aim of being able to normalize the reporter mCherry signal to the 
constitutively expressed sfGFP, in a ratio-metric manner. A clear difference in the mCherry signal was 
observed when the inducer was present for all biosensors tested (fig. 10). This highlights the fact that 
cells of EcN located within the intestine of C. elegans are able to detect and respond to the changes 
in the environment. Unfortunately, it became evident that the autofluorescence from the worms in 
the green channel far exceeded that of the signal emitted by EcN, making any normalization of the 
fluorescence from the actual sensor signal unfeasible. Thus, it was not possible to quantify the 
mCherry signal in any meaningful manner, as any increase in signal intensity could simply be due to a 
higher bacteria load in the given area.  
==PAGE:22==
18 
 
 
Fig. 10 │ C. elegans as in vivo model. Representative images of C. elegans N2 colonized with strains of small-molecule 
sensing EcN in the presence (+) or absence (-) of inducer molecules. 5-10 adult worms were transferred from NGM plates 
containing engineered EcN strains onto NGM plates containing a, 20 mM acetoacetate, b, 100 mM lactate, c, 186 mM 
taurocholic acid, d, 77 μM caffeine, e, 5.2 mM deoxycholic acid, f, 3.2 mM lithocholic acid, g, 1 mM tauroursodeoxycholic 
acid. After 24 hours on induction plates, 3 adult worms were transferred to a separate NGM plate containing 1 mM 
levamisole as anaesthatic, and imaged using a IncuCyte S3 Live-Cell Analysis System with 4x objective and 300 ms exposure 
for red and green flourescence images. Three induced and non-induced animals were imaged for each biosensor(fig. S5).  
==PAGE:23==
19 
 
Interestingly, the worms grown on EcN-VtrA::mCherry without addition of any secondary bile acids 
also showed a strong fluorescence (fig. 10e-g), especially in the intestinal area just adjacent to the 
pharynx. This begs the question whether the sensor is responding to an endogenous C. elegans 
molecule, or whether it is simply an experimental artifact. As the leakiness of this sensor did display 
some variation throughout the different experiments (table 2 + 3), additional experiments were 
required to investigate the hypothesis that this sensor might actually be able to respond to a native 
molecule in C. elegans. A literature search identified that several bile acid-like molecules are produced 
by C. elegans, one of which is the steroid hormone called dafachronic acid. To further elucidate on the 
response of the EcN-pVtrA::mCherry to this molecule, overnight cultures where reinoculated into LB 
with different concentrations of Δ4-Dafachronic acid and grown for 40 hours under aerobic conditions. 
The secondary bile acid sensor EcN-pVtrA::mCherry demonstrated a clear dose-dependent increase in 
mCherry signal when exposed to the bile-acid like molecule Δ4-Dafachronic acid from C. elegans (Fig. 
11). These results support the hypothesis that this sensor was able to detect and report on 
endogenous levels of bile-acid like molecules in C. elegans, as seen for worms grown on EcN-
pVtrA::mCherry without the addition of any external secondary bile acids (Fig 10, panel e-g).  
 
 
Fig. 11│Detection of native bile-acid like molecule. a, Expression levels of EcN-pVtrA::mCherry In LB supplemented 
with different concentrations of Δ4-Dafachronic acid. Data presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) of the 
normalized mCherry signal computed from AUC over 40 hours of growth from 3 biological replicates. b, Dose-response 
function obtained from fitting the normalized RFU to a 4-parameter log-logistic model displayed with the 95% confidence 
interval.  
 
Ex vivo application of caffeine biosensor 
Finally, we wanted to demonstrate how bacterial sensors can also be utilized as diagnostic for the 
human body and sought to investigate whether the caffeine sensor (EcN-pCaf::mCherry) could be used 
to detect and quantify levels of caffeine in the bloodstream. As a proof of concept, we wanted to see 
if the sensor could be used to distinguish serum levels of caffeine before and after intake of a normal 
==PAGE:24==
20 
 
cup of coffee, equivalent of ~ 100 mg of caffeine. To do so, the author abstained from drinking coffee 
for 24 hours, after which a blood sample was drawn. Then, a cup of coffee was ingested, and a blood 
sample was taken 100 minutes after. The blood was allowed to coagulate, spun down and the serum 
was collected and mixed in different ratios with an overnight culture of EcN-pCaf::mCherry 
resuspended in fresh LB. The kinetics of expression were followed for 40 hours, and RFU was 
calculated using AUC of the normalized mCherry signal, as previously described. With a 7-fold increase 
in expression (fig. 7a), a significant difference could be observed between the serum sample pre- and 
post- coffee intake. This result indicate that this sensor is able detect relevant blood-level 
concentrations of caffeine, even in a complex sample such as serum.  
 
 
Fig. 12│ Quantification of caffeine in human blood sample. a, Expression levels of EcN-pCaf::mCherry, incubated in 
blood sample drawn before and after ingestion of coffee. Data presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) of the 
normalized mCherry signal computed from AUC over 40 hours. Significance was determined using paired t-test: (ns) p > 0.05, 
*p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001. . b, microtiter plate of overnight EcN-pCaf:mCherry culture mixed in 
different ratios of serum from blood samples drawn pre- and post- ingestion of coffee.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
21 
 
Discussion 
The ability to implement sensing systems into AMTs is frequently used as an argument for the superior 
potential of AMTs over existing drugs and drug delivery platforms54,55. The creation of a safe, 
autonomous, and self-regulating cell-based therapy is the aspiration of many scientists developing the 
next generation of AMTs. In that manner, a plethora of endogenous and synthetic sensing systems 
have been developed through the last decade, but the implementation of many of these biosensors 
for use in vivo has yet to be accomplished. In this study, our goal was to design, build and test 
biosensors for therapeutic applications in vivo. 
In the process of designing the biosensors in silico for this study, it became evident that the field of 
synthetic biology is still lacking a standardized format of reporting relevant genetic parts. Indeed, 
information on crucial elements such as ribosome binding site (RBS), or even what promoter is used 
to drive the expression of relevant components is, in some cases, omitted. For instance, the paper by  
Bai and Mansell40, which the butyrate sensor was based on, does not provide any information on the 
promoter or RBS used. Instead, it includes the list of primers used to generate the necessary fragments 
with little instructions on how to recreate their work40. A similar situation ensued when reconstructing 
the acetoacetate sensor from a plasmid map deposited to Addgene by Rutter et al.41. In this case, the 
promoter (pAto) was wrongly annotated and included a 58 bp sequence of the adjacent gene. This 
extra sequence happened to include an open reading frame with a very strong RBS (predicted by the 
UTR designer by Seo et al.56), meaning that an extended version of mCherry was produced. In our 
study, initial attempts with this construct also showed that the biosensor was unresponsive to 
acetoacetate (data not shown). However, when this extra sequence was removed from the construct 
the biosensor became functional (fig. 5a + fig 9a). The lack of a systematic approach of reporting 
genetic elements when publishing new biosensors ultimately makes it challenging to reproduce or 
build on top of existing work, greatly hampering the applicability of any newly discovered genetic 
elements. Efforts are being made to ameliorate these problems by establishing guidelines on how to 
report and exchange information on biological designs (synthetic biology open language, SBOL57). 
These efforts have certainly improved the exchange of information within the field of synthetic 
biology, but the lack of formal requirements from journals within the field undeniably leads to high 
variation in what genetic parts are being reported.  
In this study, we chose the probiotic EcN as chassis to evaluate biosensors under gut-like conditions. 
The sensors for the small molecules acetoacetate, lactate, caffeine, primary and secondary bile acids 
all showed a dose-dependent increase in promoter activity, both under aerobic (fig. 5) and anaerobic 
conditions (fig. 9). The difference in the performance when characterized in an aerobic and anaerobic 
conditions (table 2 + 3) clearly demonstrates the importance of characterizing biosensors in the 
==PAGE:26==
22 
 
relevant conditions in which they are to be employed, and that oxygen availability is one crucial aspect 
that can affect the behavior of genetic parts. This is an aspect of biosensor design that is often 
overlooked, in fact, of all the small molecule sensors characterized in this paper, only the circuit 
employed in our lactate sensor (EcN-pLac::mCherry) has been tested in anaerobic conditions. The lack 
of relevant literature that report on behavior of biosensors in anaerobic conditions also make it 
difficult to assess whether the decreased sensitivity and dynamic range observed is a common 
phenomenon, or simply an artefact arising from the employed method. The anaerobic 
characterization only provides a snapshot of the expression levels after growing cells for 40 hours and 
is thus more prone to variation than when we can monitor the kinetics over the whole time-course of 
the experiment. Ideally, we would like to incorporate reporter genes that do depend on oxygen for 
maturation. A newly developed reporter system, Fluorescence-Activating and Absorption-Shifting Tag 
Protein (FAST)58, has been established for this exact purpose, and could replace the mCherry reporter 
used in this study. Implementation of this anaerobic fluorescent reporter would allow a more direct 
comparison between the aerobic and anerobic characterization and could elucidate whether the 
genetic circuits employed in this study is subject to some form of oxygen regulation.  
Several sensors employed in this study were developed based on a novel concept in which the 
transmembrane and DNA-binding domain of the one-component CadC transcription factor is fused to 
new DNA-binding domains 43. This chimeric protein is thus able to bind to the CadBA promoter and 
activate transcription but is engineered to respond to new stimuli. This modular platform could 
substantially ease the development of new biosensors, and the versatility of the platform has already 
been demonstrated by enabling robust sensing systems of caffeine as well as primary and secondary 
bile acids43,44. The ability for us to directly employ these circuits in a different strain of E. coli, and 
under different conditions, also emphasizes the robust nature of these chimeric sensing systems. In 
future work, it would be interesting to explore new ligand-binding domains in this platform, and 
further expand the sensing repertoire of EcN.  
All sensors except the primary bile acid sensor EcN-pTcpP::mCherry were operational and responsive 
in a range of concentrations within physiologically relevant levels, meaning that they could be directly 
incorporated into existing AMTs for use in vivo, without further modifications. As an example, the 
concentration of lactate in stool is usually <3 mM but has been reported to reach concentrations as 
high as 100 mM in certain gut disorders, such as ulcerative colitis during flareups59,60. EcN has 
previously been engineered to produce several anti-inflammatory compounds such as trefoil factors61 
or cystatin from the rodent nematode Acanthocheilonema viteae62. The production of these anti-
inflammatory and wound-healing compounds could be coupled to the presence of high 
concentrations of lactate to ensure that production of the therapeutic occurs only during flare-ups. 
==PAGE:27==
23 
 
Another example of an application is the use of an individual’s bile-acid levels to identify and respond 
to progression in various liver diseases. Clinical studies have revealed that homeostasis of bile acids is 
impaired in patients with liver diseases, and thus bile acid profile has been used as a diagnostic 
biomarker for liver diseases such as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NALFD)63,64. Several AMTs are 
being explored for their therapeutic potential in manipulating the gut-liver axis65 , and the ability to 
distinguish and respond to levels of bile acids could be valuable tool in the development of such 
therapies. The primary bile acid sensor could also be a relevant in such application but require more 
optimization as it is currently only responsive at very high concentrations. In the original publication 
by Chang et al.44, several rounds of targeted evolution were performed to increase the systems 
sensitivity and dynamic range. These experiments identified 4 amino-acid residues that are crucial in 
sensing of primary bile acids by the TcpP protein, and it would be interesting to try different 
combinations of these residues in a high-throughput manner. Chang et al.44 also demonstrated that 
the expression levels of the TcpH (Fig S1), a cofactor that protects TcpP from proteolytic cleavage upon 
dimerization, is another crucial parameter that influences the behavior of this system. Expressing this 
from a weaker and stronger promoter could be a logical starting point for optimizing this circuit with 
the aim of increasing the sensitivity to concentrations that are relevant in vivo.  
In general, a crucial impediment to the application of the small-molecule sensors is the fact that 
information on physiologically relevant concentrations in the intestine is scarce due to the inaccessible 
nature of sampling in this area, and the fact that “normal” concentrations vary greatly within 
individuals. This could be problematic when coupling the production of a therapeutic to 
pathophysiological biomarkers. Interestingly, a recent paper by Inda et al.66 demonstrated how 
bacterial sensors can be incorporated into small ingestible devices that wirelessly transmit a signal in 
response to the presence of specific biomarkers. The biosensors developed in this study could be 
incorporated into such a system. This technology could dramatically increase our understanding of the 
chemical composition in the GI-tract, by allowing for a non-invasive and real time monitoring of 
biomarkers in both healthy and diseased individuals.  
In this study, we employed the model organism C. elegans to validate functionality of the biosensors 
under gut-like conditions. In the intestinal environment of C. elegans, the bacterial cells are exposed 
to a plethora of stressful physical and chemical conditions67, which in turn affects the behavior of the 
bacterial cells. In fact, the transcriptomic profile of E. coli when grown in vitro and in vivo in C. elegans 
only shows 47% similarity68, highlighting how this small and easily implemented model organism can 
be used to characterize biosensors in a context that is greatly different to those found when grown in 
vitro in LB media. By colonizing C. elegans with our EcN biosensors and exposing them to the 
concentrations that gave rise to the highest level of induction in vitro, we were able to induce a clear 
==PAGE:28==
24 
 
response for all small-molecule sensors. Thus, we were able to prove functionality of all circuits under 
gut-like conditions, although only in a qualitative fashion. Due to the autofluorescence of the worms 
in the green channel it was not possible to characterize the biosensors in a quantitative manner (as 
the reporter signal could not be normalized) with the current setup. Other imaging options should be 
explored in the future, as quantifying the response of the biosensors would provide valuable 
information on how the increased complexity of the environment affects the performance of the 
sensors. Interestingly, while testing the biosensor for secondary bile acids (EcN-VtrA::mCherry) we 
discovered that it was able to sense and respond to the presence of a native bile acid-like molecule, 
Δ4-Dafachronic. The presence of this molecule in C. elegans is a relatively recent discovery69, and hence 
many studies are still attempting to unravel the role of this small molecule involved in controlling 
lifespan, lipid metabolism and dauer formation in C. elegans and other nematodes70–72. Current 
methods for quantification of sterols in C. elegans, rely on highly specialized and labor-intensive 
procedures such as gas Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry, which also require the 
cultivation of large numbers (~105) of animals72. The utilization of the EcN-VtrA::mCherry biosensor 
could allow real-time detection and reporting of bile acid-like molecules levels in situ. This is, to best 
of the authors knowledge, the first example of a bacterial biosensor that can be used to study C. 
elegans biology.  
Lastly, we exemplified how bacterial sensors can be used ex vivo to quantify serum levels of caffeine 
(Fig 12). After 24 hours of incubation, we observed an increase in the mCherry signal in the post-coffee 
samples, and with a 7-fold increase in expression levels it was evident that the sensor was able to 
detect serum-levels of caffeine after the ingestion of a cup of coffee. While this sensor was mainly 
chosen as a proof of concept (as it is relatively easy to control the levels of caffeine by abstaining from 
intake of caffeinated substances), there is potential for more impactful use for this sensor. Recently, 
metabolomic analysis of patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) has shown that serum levels of caffeine 
and its 9 downstream metabolites are significantly lower than those of healthy subjects, unrelated to 
the total intake of caffeine73. This implicates that caffeine, and its downstream metabolites, can be 
used as a diagnostic biomarker for PD, even in patients with early PD. The quantification of these 
metabolites currently relies on liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry, which pose a high 
operational cost and cannot be used as a point-of-care test. Our caffeine biosensor could be a 
promising alternative for a cheap and easily implemented point-of-care procedure, that only require 
very small volumes of analyte.  
==PAGE:29==
25 
 
Conclusion  
Our study demonstrated how the probiotic EcN can be engineered to respond to a range of chemical 
and environmental stimuli under relevant gut-like conditions, in vivo and ex vivo. Numerous sensor 
systems have been discovered in the past decades, but the behavior of such sensors are highly context 
and species dependent and thus require characterization in conditions relevant to the application. By 
incorporating and characterizing 9 different sensing systems in EcN under gut-like conditions, we 
significantly increase the available tools for research working with EcN as an AMT. Furthermore, we 
exemplified how bacterial biosensors can be used to report on changes in C. elegans in situ, by 
developing a sensor that responds to the bile acid-like hormone Δ4-Dafachronic acid, a valuable tool 
for future C. elegans biology research. An ex-vivo application of the caffeine-detecting biosensor was 
also demonstrated, highlighting how the sensitivity of biological system can be used to provide cost-
effective analysis of human metabolites.  
Materials and methods  
Strain construction. The plasmids generated in this study were created with USER-cloning or Gibson 
assembly, using E. coli top 10 as cloning-host. The necessary transcription factors, promoters and 
backbone plasmids were amplified with Q5® High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England Biolabs) 
with Uracil-containing primers where necessary. For USER cloning, purified PCR-fragments were 
treated with 0.5 μL USER enzyme (NEB, cat. no. M5505S) in 1x Cut Smart buffer (NEB, cat. no. B7204S), 
and subsequently incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C in a thermocycler and 1 hour at room temperature. 
2µL of this USER mixture was then used to transform One ShotTM TOP10 Chemically Competent E. 
Coli (Thermofisher) according to the instruction of the supplier (One ShotTM TOP10 Thermofisher 
Catalog Numbers C4040-10). Gibson assembly was performed according to the instruction of the 
supplier (Gibson Assembly® Protocol (E5510)). Transformed cells were plated on selective culture 
media and colonies were verified with colony PCR and subsequent sequencing. A positive colony was 
inoculated into 2 mL of LB with antibiotic and grown for 16 hours, after which the plasmid was 
extracted using NucleoSpin Plasmid EasyPure extraction kit (Macherey Nagel, ref. 740727.250). 
Purified plasmid was used to transform electrocompetent cells of E. coli Nissle (Tn7:GFP+, StrepR) by 
electroporation. A detailed map of the plasmids together with the relevant sequences are available in 
fig. S1.  
Chemical inducers. The following chemicals were used as inducers in this study: Lithium acetoacetate 
≥90% purity from Sigma Aaldrich (A8509), Caffeine from Sigma Aaldrich (C0750), Sodium butyrate 
≥98.5% purity from Sigma Aaldrich (B5887), Sodium L-lactate ~98% purity (L7022), Taurocholic acid 
sodium salt hydrate ≥95% purity from Sigma Aaldrich (T4009), Lithocholic acid ≥95% purity from Sigma 
==PAGE:30==
26 
 
Aaldrich (L6250), Tauroursodeoxycholic Acid ≥95% purity from Cayman Chemicals (Item No. 20277), 
Deoxycholic acid ≥98% purity from Sigma Aaldrich (D2510). Δ4-Dafachronic Acid ≥95% purity from 
Cayman Chemicals (Item No. 14100).  
Response function in aerobic conditions  
Glycerol stocks of EcN biosensor strains were inoculated in LB with relevant antibiotics and grown at 
37°C and 900 rpm overnight. Overnight cultures were diluted 1:100 in Greiner CELLSTAR® 96 -well 
microtiter plates (Sigma-Aldrich product number M0812) containing LB, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, 50 
µg/mL kanamycin spiked with various concentrations of inducer. The plate was sealed using 
BreathEasy film (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and incubated in a Synergy H1 plate reader 
(BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA) at 37 °C, 1,000 rpm. OD600, mCherry (Excitation λ 583, Emission λ 613) and 
sfGFP (Excitation λ 485, Emission λ 510) for 48h hours. All samples were grown in triplicates (n = 3), 
and kinetics were measured in 5 minutes intervals. The RFU of mCherry was normalized against the 
OD600 to consider any differences in growth arising from exposure to the inducer molecules. Area 
under the curve of the normalized mCherry signal was used to compute the average response during 
40 hours of growth.  
Response function in anerobic conditions  
Glycerol stocks of EcN biosensors strains were streaked onto pre-reduced LB-agar plates containing 
100 µg/mL streptomycin and 50 µg/mL kanamycin and acclimatized to anaerobic conditions for 16 
hours. A single colony was inoculated into liquid media and grown overnight. From this overnight 
culture, cells were diluted 1:100 in 2 mL Eppendorf tubes containing LB, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, 50 
µg/mL kanamycin spiked with various concentrations of inducer. Cells were allowed to grow for 40 
hours in a static incubator at 37 °C, after which 100 µg/mL of chloramphenicol was added to inhibit 
further growth and protein translation. Cells were transferred to microtiter plate and read in a Synergy 
H1 plate reader as described for aerobic experiments. All media used in anaerobic experiments was 
pre-reduced for a minimum of 48 hours.  
Computational methods  
The dose-response was modeled using a 4-parameter log-logistic function in the DRC package in R74, 
with the model function displayed in equation 1.  
𝑓(𝑥, (𝑏, 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑒) = 𝑐+
𝑑−𝑐
(1+𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑏(𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑥)−𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑒))))                       (1) 
where b = steepness of dose response curve (cooperativity coefficient), c = ymax, d = ymin, e = EC50, x = 
concentration of inducer and 𝑓(𝑥, (𝑏, 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑒) = mean of normalized RFU calculated as AUC from 
biological triplicates during 40 hours of growth.  
==PAGE:31==
27 
 
C. elegans strains and handling  
All experiments using C. elegans were carried out using the wild-type N2 Bristol strain, kindly provided 
by the CGC, which is funded by NIH Office of Research Infrastructure Programs (P40 OD010440). 
Worms were maintained at room temperature on NGM plates seeded with the auxotroph lab strain 
E. coli OP50 following standard procedures75 unless stated otherwise.  
EcN Biosensor colonization and induction in C. elegans  
5-10 adult worms were transferred from OP50-seeded NGM plates to NGM plates seeded with EcN 
biosensors. After 5 days, 5-10 adult worms were transferred either to fresh unseeded NGM-plates 
(negative controls) or unseeded plates containing the relevant inducer (20 mM acetoacetate, 100 mM 
Lactate, 186 mM Taurocholic acid, 77 μM Caffeine, 5.2 mM Deoxycholic acid, 3.2 mM Lithocholic acid 
or 1 mM Tauroursodeoxycholic acid). After 24 hours of induction, worms were transferred to Greiner 
Bio-One 6 well cell culture plates (Item No.: 657160) containing 200 µL NGM with 0.2% levamisole as 
anesthetic. Worms were imaged using a IncuCyte S3 Live-Cell Analysis System with 4x objective and 
300 ms exposure for red and green fluorescence images.  
Ex vivo caffeine detection  
Caffeinated substances were avoided for 24 hours prior to drawing of a 5 mL blood sample. 
Immediately after, a normal cup of coffee was ingested, containing around 40-120 mg of caffeine. 
After 100 minutes the serum levels of caffein should be peaking, and a second 5 mL blood sample was 
drawn. Blood was allowed to coagulate for 1 hour and spun down at 6000g in a centrifuge to separate 
the clot from the resulting supernatant (serum). The serum was carefully collected using a 1 mL pipette 
tip, and mixed in different ratios (1:1, 1:2, 1:3, 1:10) with an overnight culture of caffeine biosensor. 
Overnight cultures of EcN-pCaf::mCherry were centrifuged and resuspended in equal volume of fresh 
LB media containing relevant antibiotics prior to mixing with serum. The expression kinetics and OD600 
of the samples were followed using a synergy plate reader, as described above.  
 
 
==PAGE:32==
28 
 
References  
1.  
Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Hamady M, Fraser-Liggett CM, Knight R, Gordon JI. The Human 
Microbiome Project. Nature 2007 449:7164. 2007;449(7164):804-810. 
doi:10.1038/nature06244 
2.  
Oliphant K, Allen-Vercoe E. Macronutrient metabolism by the human gut microbiome: major 
fermentation by-products and their impact on host health. Microbiome 2019 7:1. 
2019;7(1):1-15. doi:10.1186/S40168-019-0704-8 
3.  
Malla MA, Dubey A, Kumar A, Yadav S, Hashem A, Allah EFA. Exploring the human 
microbiome: The potential future role of next-generation sequencing in disease diagnosis and 
treatment. Frontiers in Immunology. 2019;10(JAN):2868. 
doi:10.3389/FIMMU.2018.02868/BIBTEX 
4.  
Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu R, Petrosino J, Versalovic J. The placenta harbors a unique 
microbiome. Science Translational Medicine. 2014;6(237). 
doi:10.1126/SCITRANSLMED.3008599/SUPPL_FILE/6-237RA65_SM.PDF 
5.  
Wiertsema SP, van Bergenhenegouwen J, Garssen J, Knippels LMJ. The Interplay between the 
Gut Microbiome and the Immune System in the Context of Infectious Diseases throughout 
Life and the Role of Nutrition in Optimizing Treatment Strategies. Nutrients. 2021;13(3):1-14. 
doi:10.3390/NU13030886 
6.  
Owaga E, Hsieh RH, Mugendi B, Masuku S, Shih CK, Chang JS. Th17 Cells as Potential Probiotic 
Therapeutic Targets in  Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences 2015, Vol 16, Pages 20841-20858. 2015;16(9):20841-20858. 
doi:10.3390/IJMS160920841 
7.  
Lazar V, Ditu LM, Pircalabioru GG, et al. Aspects of gut microbiota and immune system 
interactions in infectious diseases, immunopathology, and cancer. Frontiers in Immunology. 
2018;9(AUG):1830. doi:10.3389/FIMMU.2018.01830/BIBTEX 
8.  
Iannone LF, Preda A, Blottière HM, et al. Microbiota-gut brain axis involvement in 
neuropsychiatric disorders. https://doi.org/101080/1473717520191638763. 
2019;19(10):1037-1050. doi:10.1080/14737175.2019.1638763 
9.  
Geuking MB, Cahenzli J, Lawson MAE, et al. Intestinal Bacterial Colonization Induces 
Mutualistic Regulatory T Cell Responses. Immunity. 2011;34(5):794-806. 
doi:10.1016/J.IMMUNI.2011.03.021 
10.  
Rutsch A, Kantsjö JB, Ronchi F. The Gut-Brain Axis: How Microbiota and Host Inflammasome 
Influence Brain Physiology and Pathology. Frontiers in Immunology. 2020;11:3237. 
doi:10.3389/FIMMU.2020.604179/BIBTEX 
11.  
Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Mind-altering microorganisms: the impact of the gut microbiota on brain 
and behaviour. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2012 13:10. 2012;13(10):701-712. 
doi:10.1038/nrn3346 
12.  
Pokusaeva K, Johnson C, Luk B, et al. GABA-producing Bifidobacterium dentium modulates 
visceral sensitivity in the intestine. Neurogastroenterology & Motility. 2017;29(1):e12904. 
doi:10.1111/NMO.12904 
==PAGE:33==
29 
 
13.  
Jenkins TA, Nguyen JCD, Polglaze KE, Bertrand PP. Influence of Tryptophan and Serotonin on 
Mood and Cognition with a Possible Role of the Gut-Brain Axis. Nutrients 2016, Vol 8, Page 
56. 2016;8(1):56. doi:10.3390/NU8010056 
14.  
Davani-Davari D, Negahdaripour M, Karimzadeh I, et al. Prebiotics: Definition, Types, Sources, 
Mechanisms, and Clinical Applications. Foods. 2019;8(3). doi:10.3390/FOODS8030092 
15.  
Mullish BH, Quraishi MN, Segal JP, et al. The use of faecal microbiota transplant as treatment 
for recurrent or refractory Clostridium difficile infection and other potential indications: joint 
British Society of Gastroenterology (BSG) and Healthcare Infection Society (HIS) guidelines. 
Gut. 2018;67(11):1920-1941. doi:10.1136/GUTJNL-2018-316818 
16.  
Mimee M, Citorik RJ, Lu TK. Microbiome therapeutics — Advances and challenges. Advanced 
Drug Delivery Reviews. 2016;105:44-54. doi:10.1016/J.ADDR.2016.04.032 
17.  
Rezende RM, Oliveira RP, Medeiros SR, et al. Hsp65-producing Lactococcus lactis prevents 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice by inducing CD4+LAP+ regulatory T 
cells. Journal of Autoimmunity. 2013;40(1):45-57. doi:10.1016/J.JAUT.2012.07.012 
18.  
May-Zhang LS, Chen Z, Dosoky NS, et al. Administration of N-Acyl-Phosphatidylethanolamine 
Expressing Bacteria to Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor−/− Mice Improves Indices of 
Cardiometabolic Disease. Scientific Reports 2019 9:1. 2019;9(1):1-13. doi:10.1038/s41598-
018-37373-1 
19.  
Li R, Wan X, Takala TM, Saris PEJ. Heterologous Expression of the Leuconostoc Bacteriocin 
Leucocin C in Probiotic Yeast Saccharomyces boulardii. Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins 
2020 13:1. 2020;13(1):229-237. doi:10.1007/S12602-020-09676-1 
20.  
Chen Z, Guo L, Zhang Y, et al. Incorporation of therapeutically modified bacteria into gut 
microbiota inhibits obesity. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2014;124(8):3391-3406. 
doi:10.1172/JCI72517 
21.  
Robert S, Gysemans C, Takiishi T, et al. Oral delivery of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)-65 
and IL10 by Lactococcus lactis reverses diabetes in recent-onset NOD mice. Diabetes. 
2014;63(8):2876-2887. doi:10.2337/DB13-1236 
22.  
Steidler L, Hans W, Schotte L, et al. Treatment of murine colitis by Lactococcus lactis secreting 
interleukin-10. Science. 2000;289(5483):1352-1355. 
doi:10.1126/SCIENCE.289.5483.1352/SUPPL_FILE/1047997S2_THUMB.GIF 
23.  
Huang X, Pan J, Xu F, et al. Bacteria-Based Cancer Immunotherapy. Advanced Science. 
2021;8(7):2003572. doi:10.1002/ADVS.202003572 
24.  
Alqahtani MS, Kazi M, Alsenaidy MA, Ahmad MZ. Advances in Oral Drug Delivery. Frontiers in 
Pharmacology. 2021;12:62. doi:10.3389/FPHAR.2021.618411/BIBTEX 
25.  
Gavhane YN, Yadav AV. Loss of orally administered drugs in GI tract. Saudi Pharmaceutical 
Journal : SPJ. 2012;20(4):331. doi:10.1016/J.JSPS.2012.03.005 
26.  
Chapter 8. Multiple-Dosage Regimens | Applied Biopharmaceutics & Pharmacokinetics, 6e | 
AccessPharmacy | McGraw Hill Medical. Accessed February 20, 2022. 
https://accesspharmacy.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=513&sectionid=41488026 
==PAGE:34==
30 
 
27.  
Claesen J, Fischbach MA. Synthetic Microbes As Drug Delivery Systems. ACS Synthetic Biology. 
2014;4(4):358-364. doi:10.1021/SB500258B 
28.  
Cao Z, Lin S, Liu J. Bacteria-Based Microdevices for the Oral Delivery of Macromolecules. 
Pharmaceutics 2021, Vol 13, Page 1610. 2021;13(10):1610. 
doi:10.3390/PHARMACEUTICS13101610 
29.  
Koretke KK, Lupas AN, Warren P v., Rosenberg M, Brown JR. Evolution of Two-Component 
Signal Transduction. Molecular Biology and Evolution. 2000;17(12):1956-1970. 
doi:10.1093/OXFORDJOURNALS.MOLBEV.A026297 
30.  
Ulrich LE, Koonin E v., Zhulin IB. One-component systems dominate signal transduction in 
prokaryotes. Trends in microbiology. 2005;13(2):52. doi:10.1016/J.TIM.2004.12.006 
31.  
Marbach A, Bettenbrock K. lac operon induction in Escherichia coli: Systematic comparison of 
IPTG and TMG induction and influence of the transacetylase LacA. Journal of biotechnology. 
2012;157(1):82-88. doi:10.1016/J.JBIOTEC.2011.10.009 
32.  
Baumschlager A, Rullan M, Khammash M. Exploiting natural chemical photosensitivity of 
anhydrotetracycline and tetracycline for dynamic and setpoint chemo-optogenetic control. 
Nature Communications 2020 11:1. 2020;11(1):1-10. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17677-5 
33.  
Benitz KF, Diermeier HF. Renal Toxicity of Tetracycline Degradation Products: 
https://doi.org/103181/00379727-115-29082. 2016;115(4):930-935. doi:10.3181/00379727-
115-29082 
34.  
Vargason AM, Anselmo AC. Clinical translation of microbe‐based therapies: Current clinical 
landscape and preclinical outlook. Bioengineering & Translational Medicine. 2018;3(2):124. 
doi:10.1002/BTM2.10093 
35.  
Tanna T, Ramachanderan R, Platt RJ. Engineered bacteria to report gut function: technologies 
and implementation. Current Opinion in Microbiology. 2021;59:24-33. 
doi:10.1016/J.MIB.2020.07.014 
36.  
Singh A, Kumar V. Recent advances in synthetic biology–enabled and natural whole-cell 
optical biosensing of heavy metals. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry. 2021;413(1):73-
82. doi:10.1007/S00216-020-02953-6/TABLES/2 
37.  
Zainuddin HS, Bai Y, Mansell TJ. CRISPR-based curing and analysis of metabolic burden of 
cryptic plasmids in Escherichia coli Nissle 1917. Engineering in life sciences. 2019;19(6):478-
485. doi:10.1002/ELSC.201900003 
38.  
Zainuddin HS, Bai Y, Mansell TJ. CRISPR‐based curing and analysis of metabolic burden of 
cryptic plasmids in Escherichia coli Nissle 1917. Engineering in Life Sciences. 2019;19(6):478. 
doi:10.1002/ELSC.201900003 
39.  
Kan A, Gelfat I, Emani S, Praveschotinunt P, Joshi NS. Plasmid Vectors for in Vivo Selection-
Free Use with the Probiotic E. coli Nissle 1917. ACS Synthetic Biology. 2021;10(1):94-106. 
doi:10.1021/ACSSYNBIO.0C00466/SUPPL_FILE/SB0C00466_SI_003.XLSX 
40.  
Bai Y, Mansell TJ. Production and Sensing of Butyrate in a Probiotic Escherichia coli Strain. 
International journal of molecular sciences. 2020;21(10). doi:10.3390/IJMS21103615 
==PAGE:35==
31 
 
41.  
Rutter JW, Dekker L, Fedorec AJH, et al. Engineered acetoacetate-inducible whole-cell 
biosensors based on the AtoSC two-component system. Biotechnology and Bioengineering. 
2021;118(11):4278-4289. doi:10.1002/BIT.27897 
42.  
Chien T, Harimoto T, Kepecs B, et al. Enhancing the tropism of bacteria via genetically 
programmed biosensors. doi:10.1038/s41551-021-00772-3 
43.  
Chang HJ, Mayonove P, Zavala A, et al. A Modular Receptor Platform to Expand the Sensing 
Repertoire of Bacteria. ACS Synthetic Biology. 2018;7(1):166-175. 
doi:10.1021/ACSSYNBIO.7B00266/SUPPL_FILE/SB7B00266_SI_001.PDF 
44.  
Chang HJ, Zúñiga A, Conejero I, et al. Programmable receptors enable bacterial biosensors to 
detect pathological biomarkers in clinical samples. Nature Communications 2021 12:1. 
2021;12(1):1-12. doi:10.1038/s41467-021-25538-y 
45.  
Barnard AML, Green J, Busby SJW. Transcription Regulation by Tandem-Bound FNR at 
Escherichia coli Promoters. Journal of Bacteriology. 2003;185(20):5993. 
doi:10.1128/JB.185.20.5993-6004.2003 
46.  
Moser F, Borujeni AE, Ghodasara AN, Cameron E, Park Y, Voigt CA. Dynamic control of 
endogenous metabolism with combinatorial logic circuits. Molecular Systems Biology. 
2018;14(11):e8605. doi:10.15252/MSB.20188605 
47.  
Haneburger I, Eichinger A, Skerra A, Jung K. New Insights into the Signaling Mechanism of the 
pH-responsive, Membrane-integrated Transcriptional Activator CadC of Escherichia coli. The 
Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2011;286(12):10681. doi:10.1074/JBC.M110.196923 
48.  
Stephens JM, Sulway MJ, Watkins PJ. Relationship of Blood Acetoacetate and 3-
Hydroxybutyrate in Diabetes. Diabetes. 1971;20(7):485-489. doi:10.2337/DIAB.20.7.485 
49.  
Belenguer A, Duncan SH, Holtrop G, Anderson SE, Lobley GE, Flint HJ. Impact of pH on lactate 
formation and utilization by human fecal microbial communities. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology. 2007;73(20):6526-6533. doi:10.1128/AEM.00508-07/ASSET/DA595DFB-A00A-
4953-AC05-DA45DA232BA7/ASSETS/GRAPHIC/ZAM0200782570003.JPEG 
50.  
Humbert L, Rainteau D, Tuvignon N, et al. Postprandial bile acid levels in intestine and plasma 
reveal altered biliary circulation in chronic pancreatitis patients. Journal of Lipid Research. 
2018;59(11):2202-2213. doi:10.1194/JLR.M084830 
51.  
Ohmichi T, Kasai T, Shinomoto M, et al. Quantification of Blood Caffeine Levels in Patients 
With Parkinson’s Disease and Multiple System Atrophy by Caffeine ELISA. Frontiers in 
Neurology. 2020;11:1774. doi:10.3389/FNEUR.2020.580127/BIBTEX 
52.  
Keller S, Jahreis G. Determination of underivatised sterols and bile acid trimethyl silyl ether 
methyl esters by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry-single ion monitoring in faeces. 
Journal of Chromatography B: Analytical Technologies in the Biomedical and Life Sciences. 
2004;813(1-2):199-207. doi:10.1016/j.jchromb.2004.09.046 
53.  
Haneburger I, Fritz G, Jurkschat N, et al. Deactivation of the E. coli pH Stress Sensor CadC by 
Cadaverine. Journal of Molecular Biology. 2012;424(1-2):15-27. 
doi:10.1016/J.JMB.2012.08.023 
54.  
Rottinghaus AG, Amrofell MB, Moon TS. Biosensing in Smart Engineered Probiotics. 
Biotechnology Journal. 2020;15(10):1900319. doi:10.1002/BIOT.201900319 
==PAGE:36==
32 
 
55.  
Amrofell MB, Rottinghaus AG, Moon TS. Engineering microbial diagnostics and therapeutics 
with smart control. Current opinion in biotechnology. 2020;66:11. 
doi:10.1016/J.COPBIO.2020.05.006 
56.  
Seo SW, Yang JS, Kim I, et al. Predictive design of mRNA translation initiation region to control 
prokaryotic translation efficiency. Metabolic Engineering. 2013;15(1):67-74. 
doi:10.1016/J.YMBEN.2012.10.006 
57.  
Madsen C, Goñi Moreno A, P U, et al. Synthetic Biology Open Language (SBOL) Version 2.3. 
Journal of integrative bioinformatics. 2019;16(2). doi:10.1515/JIB-2019-
0025/MACHINEREADABLECITATION/RIS 
58.  
Streett HE, Kalis KM, Papoutsakis ET. A Strongly Fluorescing Anaerobic Reporter and Protein-
Tagging System for Clostridium Organisms Based on the Fluorescence-Activating and 
Absorption-Shifting Tag Protein (FAST). Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 
2019;85(14):1-15. doi:10.1128/AEM.00622-19/SUPPL_FILE/AEM.00622-19-S0001.PDF 
59.  
Vernia P, Caprilli R, Latella G, Barbetti F, Magliocca FM, Cittadini M. Fecal Lactate and 
Ulcerative Colitis. Gastroenterology. 1988;95(6):1564-1568. doi:10.1016/S0016-
5085(88)80078-7 
60.  
Hove H, … INAS journal of, 1994 undefined. Faecal DL-lactate concentration in 100 
gastrointestinal patients. Taylor & Francis. 2009;29(3):255-259. 
doi:10.3109/00365529409090473 
61.  
Praveschotinunt P, Duraj-Thatte AM, Gelfat I, Bahl F, Chou DB, Joshi NS. Engineered E. coli 
Nissle 1917 for the delivery of matrix-tethered therapeutic domains to the gut. Nature 
Communications 2019 10:1. 2019;10(1):1-14. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-13336-6 
62.  
Whelan RA, Rausch S, Ebner F, et al. A transgenic probiotic secreting a parasite 
immunomodulator for site-directed treatment of gut inflammation. Molecular Therapy. 
2014;22(10):1730-1740. doi:10.1038/MT.2014.125/ATTACHMENT/766FBF90-9EA8-42EF-
BA7C-CAB8921FB1BF/MMC1.PDF 
63.  
Sugita T, Amano K, Nakano M, Masubuchi N, Sugihara M, Matsuura T. Analysis of the serum 
bile acid composition for differential diagnosis in patients with liver disease. Gastroenterology 
Research and Practice. 2015;2015. doi:10.1155/2015/717431 
64.  
Chu H, Duan Y, Yang L, Schnabl B. Small metabolites, possible big changes: a microbiota-
centered view of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Gut. 2019;68(2):359-370. 
doi:10.1136/GUTJNL-2018-316307 
65.  
Russell BJ, Brown SD, Saran AR, et al. Intestinal Transgene Delivery with Native E. coli Chassis 
Allows Persistent Physiological Changes. doi:10.1101/2021.11.11.468006 
66.  
Inda M, Jimenez M, Liu Q, et al. Ingestible capsule for detecting labile inflammatory 
biomarkers in situ. bioRxiv. Published online February 16, 2022:2022.02.16.480562. 
doi:10.1101/2022.02.16.480562 
67.  
Dimov I, Maduro MF. The C. elegans intestine: organogenesis, digestion, and physiology. 
doi:10.1007/s00441-019-03036-4 
==PAGE:37==
33 
 
68.  
Chan JP, Wright JR, Wong HT, et al. Using Bacterial Transcriptomics to Investigate Targets of 
Host-Bacterial Interactions in Caenorhabditis elegans. Scientific Reports 2019 9:1. 
2019;9(1):1-12. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-41452-2 
69.  
Motola DL, Cummins CL, Rottiers V, et al. Identification of Ligands for DAF-12 that Govern 
Dauer Formation and Reproduction in C. elegans. Cell. 2006;124(6):1209-1223. 
doi:10.1016/J.CELL.2006.01.037 
70.  
Ayoade KO, Carranza FR, Cho WH, et al. Dafachronic acid and temperature regulate canonical 
dauer pathways during Nippostrongylus brasiliensis infectious larvae activation. Parasites and 
Vectors. 2020;13(1):1-15. doi:10.1186/S13071-020-04035-Z/FIGURES/6 
71.  
Ma G, Wang T, Korhonen PK, et al. Dafachronic acid promotes larval development in 
Haemonchus contortus by modulating dauer signalling and lipid metabolism. PLOS 
Pathogens. 2019;15(7):e1007960. doi:10.1371/JOURNAL.PPAT.1007960 
72.  
Aguilaniu H, Fabrizio P, Witting M. The Role of Dafachronic Acid Signaling in Development and 
Longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans: Digging Deeper Using Cutting-Edge Analytical Chemistry. 
Frontiers in Endocrinology. 2016;7(FEB):12. doi:10.3389/FENDO.2016.00012 
73.  
Fujimaki M, Saiki S, Li Y, et al. Serum caffeine and metabolites are reliable biomarkers of early 
Parkinson disease. Neurology. 2018;90(5):e404-e411. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000004888 
74.  
Ritz C, Baty F, Streibig JC, Gerhard D. Dose-Response Analysis Using R. Published online 2015. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0146021 
75.  
Stiernagle T. Maintenance of C. elegans. WormBook : the online review of C elegans biology. 
Published online 2006:1-11. doi:10.1895/WORMBOOK.1.101.1 
  
 
 
==PAGE:38==
34 
 
Supplementary material  
S1: Plasmid maps and sequences used for EcN biosensors  
Strain 
Sensor input 
Regulation 
Plasmid 
name 
Total size of circuit 
(bp) 
Ref. 
EcN-pAto::mCherry 
Acetoacetate  
Activator 
pAto 
235 
41 
EcN-pLac::mCherry 
Lactate 
Activator  
pLac 
1133 
42 
EcN-pCaf::mCherry 
Caffeine 
Activator 
pCaf 
1525 
43 
EcN-pTcpP::mCherry 
Primary bile acids 
Activator 
pTcpP 
1710 
44 
EcN-pVtrA::mCherry 
Secondary bile acids 
Activator 
pVtrA 
1918 
44 
EcN-pPchA::mCherry 
Butyrate 
Activator 
pPcphA 
418 
40 
EcN-pFF-41.5::mCherry 
Oxygen 
Repressor 
pFF-41.5 
104 
45 
EcN-pF8::mCherry 
Oxygen 
Repressor 
pF8 
51 
46 
EcN-pCadBA::mCherry 
pH 
Activator 
pCadBA 
150  
47 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
35 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
36 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
37 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
38 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
39 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
40 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
41 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
42 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
43 
 
S2: Aerobic plate reader data for small molecule sensors 
All data presented as mean  ± standard error of the mean  
a, EcN-pAto::mCherry (Acetoacetate):  
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
44 
 
b, EcN-pLac::mCherry (Lactate):  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
45 
 
c, EcN-pTcpP::mCherry (Primary bile acid – Taurocholic acid): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
46 
 
d, EcN-pCaf::mCherry (Caffeine) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
47 
 
e, EcN-pVtrA::mCherry (Secondary bile acid - Deoxycholic acid) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
48 
 
f, EcN-pVtrA::mCherry (Secondary bile acid - lithocholic acid  
 
 
==PAGE:53==
49 
 
e, EcN-pVtrA::mCherry (Secondary bile acid  - tauroursodeoxycholic acid) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
50 
 
S3: Aerobic performance of pH sensor raw data 
EcN-pCadBA::mCherry in reinoculated into LB buffered to pH 4 and pH 7. Data presented as mean 
 ± standard error of the mean  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
51 
 
S4: Anerobic plate reader data for small molecule sensors 
All data presented as mean  ± standard error of the mean  
a, EcN-pAto::mCherry (Acetoacetate):  
 
 
==PAGE:56==
52 
 
b, EcN-pLac::mCherry (Lactate):  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
53 
 
c, EcN-pTcpP::mCherry (Primary bile acid – Taurocholic acid): 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
54 
 
d, EcN-pCaf::mCherry (Caffeine) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
55 
 
f, EcN-pVtrA::mCherry (Secondary bile acid - lithocholic acid) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
56 
 
e, EcN-pVtrA::mCherry (Secondary bile acid  - tauroursodeoxycholic acid) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
57 
 
S5: Additional images of C. elegans colonized with EcN biosensors  
 
EcN-pAto::mCherry (20 mM Acetoacetate): 
Red 
BF + Green  
Green + Red  
 
==PAGE:62==
58 
 
EcN-pAto::mCherry (Negative) 
Red 
BF + Green  
Green + Red  
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
59 
 
EcN-pLac::mCherry (100 mM Lactate)  
Red 
BF + Green  
Green + Red  
 
==PAGE:64==
60 
 
EcN-pLac::mCherry (negative): 
Red 
BF + Green  
Green + Red  
 
==PAGE:65==
61 
 
EcN-pTcpP::mCherry ( 186 mM Taurocholic acid): 
Red 
BF + Green  
Green + Red  
 
==PAGE:66==
62 
 
EcN-pTcpP::mCherry (Negative): 
Red 
BF + Green  
Green + Red  
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
63 
 
EcN-pVtrA::mCherry (Secondary bile acid  - top: 5.2 mM deoxycholic acid, middle: 3.2 mM 
lithocholic acid, bottom: 1 mM tauroursodeoxycholic acid)  
Unfortunately, the images of remaining replicates of animals colonized with EcN-pVtrA::mCherry and 
induced with secondary bile acids were lost due to technical problems. 
Red 
BF + Green  
Green + Red  
 
==PAGE:68==
64 
 
EcN-pVtrA::mCherry (Negative):  
Red 
BF + Green  
Green + Red  
 
 
 
 
 
