==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of health Technology 
 
  
 
Adipose Tissue Lipolysis- and Inflammation Phenotype in Lean 
and Obese Ossabaw Mini Pigs 
 
Thesis to obtain the Master of Science Degree in  
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering 
30 ETCS 
Philip Martin Bjerre 
s144068 
Supervisor: 
Peter M. H: Heegaard (DTU) 
1th of September 2021 - 12th of Marts 2022 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Health Technology 
Kemitorvet  
Building 202 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Acknowledgments 
I would like to thank professor Peter M. H. Heegaard for his guidance during my project. 
In the lab experiments, lab technician Henriette Vorsholt and research assistant Catarina 
Ventura have been a tremendous help and I am very grateful for their assistance.  I 
would also like to thank Phd student Yaolei Zhang for his assistance with the genome of 
the Ossabaw pig when designing primers to analyze gene expression.  
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Contents 
Abstract 
6 
Abbreviations 
7 
Chapter 1 
10 
Introduction 
10 
Motivation 
10 
Objectives and Outline 
10 
Chapter 2 
12 
Background 
12 
Obesity and Metabolic syndrome 
12 
Obesity and inflammation 
16 
Obesity in Big Animal Model 
19 
Ossabaw miniature pig 
20 
Biomarkers for inflammation 
21 
ORM1 
21 
SAA 
22 
Adipose tissue 
23 
Lipolysis 
26 
Lipogenesis 
29 
Insulin’s effect on adipose tissue 
30 
Major adipokines 
31 
Leptin 
31 
Adiponectin 
32 
Chapter 3 
34 
Materials and Methods 
34 
Animal models 
34 
RT-qPCR Workflow 
34 
Primer Design 
35 
RNA Purification 
35 
RNA quality check 
36 
cDNA synthesis and Pre-amplification 
36 
RT-qPCR 
37 
Data analysis 
40 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
ELISA Experiments 
41 
Protein extraction from adipose tissue 
42 
Chapter 4 
43 
Results 
43 
Gene expression analysis 
43 
Real-time High Throughput qPCR 
47 
ABHD5 
47 
Leptin 
49 
ORM 
51 
TNF⍺ 
52 
ELISA PAGP 
56 
Summary of Results 
57 
Chapter 5 
58 
Discussion and Conclusion 
58 
Chapter 6 
61 
Future perspectives 
61 
Litterature 
62 
APPENDIX 
69 
Appendix A: qPCR primer design 
69 
Appendix B: Protocol for RNA purification 
74 
Appendix C: Protocol for Bioanalyzer 
76 
Appendix D: Protocol for cDNA synthesis 
81 
Appendix E: Protocol for Pre-amplification 
83 
Appendix F: Protocol for Rotor-Gene 
85 
Appendix G: Fluidigm 192.24 chip - qPCR 
88 
Appendix H: PAGP- Competitive ELISA 
93 
Appendix I : Rotor-Gene Q setup 
97 
Appendix J : Fluidigm chip setup 
98 
Appendix K: heat map of a 192.24 Fluidigm chip 
102 
Appendix L: List of gene analyzed 
103 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
Abstract 
The dramatic increase of obesity throughout the world and all the associated health problems has 
created an urgent need to understand how to prevent and treat the ailments that accompany obesity. 
Adipose tissue is now known to have major endocrine functions, and dysregulation of these functions is 
thought to be a major driver of the pathogenesis of obesity, but the mechanisms that drive this 
dysregulation is complex and poorly understood.  Using the Ossabaw mini pig, this project investigated 
how expression of genes central to adipose tissue functions and endocrine communication change with 
obesity.  Subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue (SAT and VAT) was extracted from 6 lean and 9 obese 
pigs that were respectively subjected to a control diet and a high fat high fructose diet for 11 weeks. 
These tissue samples were analyzed with qPCR to see if any genes were differentially expressed.  
This project shows that the expression of adipose leptin receptors (LEPR) decreases with obesity, 
suggesting that lower LEPR expression could be a possible explanation of a resistance to leptin could 
develop a well-known characteristic of obesity. The study also shows that adipose Orosomucoid (ORM) 
expression is substantially downregulated with obesity, especially SAT. And this downregulation is 
reflected by a decreased ORM serum concentration indicating that SAT is contributing source of serum 
ORM.  
This project also found 3 pro-inflammatroy genes (Il1β, SAA and LCN2) are more expressed in VAT while 
the anti-inflammatory ADIPOQ is less expressed in VAT, suggesting VAT is more inflamed than SAT and a 
bigger contributor to the chronic inflammation seen in obesity.  
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
Abbreviations 
 
 
AC 
Adenylyl cyclase 
ACC1 
Acetyl-CoA carboxylases 
ACLY 
ATP-citrate lyase 
ANP 
Atrial natriuretic peptide 
APP 
Acute phase protein 
APR 
Acute phase response 
AR 
Adrenergic receptor 
AT   
Adipose tissue 
ATM 
Adipose tissue macrophages 
ATGL  Adipose triglyceride lipase 
BAT 
Brown adipose tissue 
BBB 
Blood brain barrier 
BMI 
Body mass index 
BNP 
Brain-type natriuretic peptide 
cDNA Complementary DNA 
CNP 
C-type natriuretic peptide 
CRP 
C-reactive protein 
Cq 
Quantification cycle 
Ct 
Threshold cycle 
DC 
Dendritic cell 
DNA 
Deoxyribonucleic acid  
DNL 
De novo lipogenesis 
dsDNA Double stranded DNA 
FABP 
Fatty acid binding protein 
FASN 
Fatty acid synthase 
FFA   
Free fatty acid 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
gDNA Genomic DNA 
HFD 
High fat diet 
HFHF 
High fat high fructose 
HSL 
Hormone-sensitive lipase 
IL 
Interleukin 
LCN2 
Lipocalin-2 
LEP 
Leptin 
LEPR 
Leptin receptor 
MCA 
Melt curve analysis 
MCP-1 Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1 
MetS 
Metabolic syndrome 
MGL 
Monoacylglycerol lipase 
NCD  
Non-communicable disease 
NEFA 
non-esterified fatty acids 
NP 
Natriuretic peptide 
NPR 
Natriuretic peptide receptors 
NTC 
Non control template 
OA 
Osteoarthritis 
ORM 
Orosomucoid 
PAGP Porcine alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 
PAMP Pathogen-associated molecular pattern 
PCR 
Polymerase chain reaction 
PKA 
protein kinase A 
PKB 
Protein kinase B 
PKG 
Protein kinase G 
PRR 
Pattern recognition receptor 
qPCR 
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Also called RT-qPCR 
RIN 
RNA integrity number 
RNA 
Ribonucleic acid 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
-RT 
non-revers transcription 
SAT  
Subcutaneous adipose tissue 
SAA 
Serum Amyloid A 
ssDNA Single-stranded DNA 
SEM 
Standard error of the mean 
SVF 
Stromal vascular fraction 
TCA 
Tricarboxylic acid cycle 
T2D  
Type2 diabetes 
TG  
Triglycerides 
TLR 
Toll-like receptors 
TNF⍺ 
Tumor necrosis factor alpha 
UCP-1 Uncoupling protein-1 
VAT  
Visceral adipose tissue 
VLDP 
Very low density lipoproteins 
WHO 
World health organization 
 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
 
Motivation 
Obesity is a rapidly growing health problem in the world with the global rate of obesity tripling since 
1975 and in the same period overweight and obesity in 5-19 year olds went from 4% - 18%.  Overweight 
is defined as having a body mass index over 25 Kg/m2 and obesity over 30 Kg/m2 [1] .Obesity in 
childhood is usually maintained into adulthood, indicating that the prevalence of obesity is going to 
increase in the future. [2] Obesity increases one’s risk for a host of diseases, especially cardiovascular 
diseases (CVDs), diabetes and cancer. Depending on the severity, obesity takes 3.3-18.7 years of a 
person’s life expectancy. A BMI at 30-35 takes 2-4 years of a person’s life, while at 40-45 one’s life 
expectancy is reduced by 8-10 years. [3] These premature deaths are normally preceded by many years 
of struggling with the debilitating effects of obesity. This is marked by reduced quality of life, a decrease 
in productivity and prolonged burden placed on a nation's healthcare systems. A 2014 study estimated 
that obesity globally costs 2 trillion US$ or 2.8% of the world’s GDP. [4] 
With such fatal individual consequences and the societal burden associated with obesity, it is necessary 
to understand how to prevent and treat the comorbidities of obesity.  The processes behind obesity’s 
pathogenesis are complex and still poorly understood and contributing to our understanding of it will be 
part of the way to solve the obesity crisis that the world is facing. A big problem with researching 
obesity has been the lack of appropriate animal models to investigate the effects of obesity. The vast 
majority of animal models used for research rodent models due to their low cost and ease-of-use. But 
these animal models do not always translate well to humans because of the different physiology. In a 
disease as complex as obesity, it is critical to use an animal model that can mimic the development of 
obesity in humans.[5]  Swine models are seen as a great candidate to investigate obesity, due to their 
similar size and physiology to humans. Moreover, the widespread use of pigs as production animals 
means readily available expertise in handling pigs and a lower cost than other animals of a similar size. 
[6] 
 
Objectives and Outline 
The purpose of this project was to examine the effects of obesity in big animal models. This was done by 
analyzing how gene expressions change in visceral- and subcutaneous adipose tissue between lean and 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
obese Ossabaw mini pigs. The main focus is on genes essential for basic adipocyte functionality and their 
systematic communication with the rest of the body, see Appendix K for list of genes analyzed.. The 
tissue used in this study were extracted from 6 lean Ossabaw pig and 9 obese Ossabaw pigs that were 
on a 11 week diet experiment. The reason for using the porcine model to investigate obesity changes in 
adipocytes is that the pig’s physiology is far closer to humans than murine models which has shown that 
results from murine models don’t always correlate well to humans.  The genes in focus are related to 
adipocytes lipolysis, some biomarkers for inflammation, hormone receptors and adipokines/cytokines. 
The dysregulation of these functions is hypothesized to be what causes obesity’s pathogenesis.   
Obese patients are known to display chronic low-level inflammation, increased concentration of 
lipolysis’s metabolites, elevated serum leptin while showing weaken or no effect to leptin. This has lead 
to the hypothesis is that obese pigs should have a higher expression of lipolytic genes, inflammation 
markers and leptin while reduced expression of leptin receptors. Since visceral adipose tissue is known 
to be more lipolytic active it is also expected to find higher expressions of lipolytic genes in visceral fat 
compared to subcutaneous adipose tissue.  Of the porcine breeds, the Ossabaw pig shows a close 
correlation to humans when it comes to the progression of the Metabolic Syndrome (MetS) and obesity 
comorbidities, and is considered one of the better porcine models to study obesity. MetS is a cluster of 
risk factors associated with obesity that greatly increases the risk of CVDs and metabolic disorders. 
Getting a better understanding on what kind of changes obesity induces in the gene expression of 
adipocytes is a step in getting a better understanding behind the mechanisms that drive the progression 
of obesity’s comorbidities. The dysregulation that adipose tissue displays in its metabolism is 
hypothesized to be central to the chronic inflammation and development of the MetS that accompanies 
obesity.  
The actual analysis of the gene expression is done using high throughput real time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR).  
 
 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
Chapter 2  
Background  
 
Obesity and Metabolic syndrome 
Throughout most of humanity’s history, disease has been one of the, if not the biggest killers that 
humans faced.  These diseases have historically been transmissible diseases that spread through 
humans to human or animal to human contact, but the vaccinations and antibiotics of our modern world 
means that they are minor threats to human health these days. Now humanity is faced with a new type 
of killer, diseases that are not spread through human-to-human interaction, but stem from a person's 
environment, lifestyle and/or genetic disposition. These are non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and are 
responsible for more than 70% of all premature deaths in the world today. NCDs are diseases such as 
cancer, cardiovascular disease (CVD), neurological disorders, metabolic disorders, joint and skeletal 
disorders. Obesity is linked to most NCDs, showing a high propensity for obese patients to have one or 
more NCDs.  [7] The World Health Organization defines overweight as having a body mass index (BMI) 
over 25 Kg/m2 , while obesity is having a BMI above 30 kg/m2 and having an excessive amount of fat that 
is a risk to one’s health [1]. Historically obesity has had a low prevalence in humans, being reserved for 
people wealthy enough to consume enough calories for obesity to occur. But the post World war 2 
societies have increasingly had an overabundance of cheap processed calorie dense food, high in 
saturated fat, sugar and low in fiber becoming available to the common person. The so-called “Western 
Diet '', named because it first arose in western nations. Combined with the far more sedentary lifestyle 
that was becoming more common, obesity rates slowly began to climb in the 80s. At first this 
phenomenon was first seen in the western world, especially the US, but as the western diet and lifestyle 
spread through the world high rates of obesity have become a global phenomenon [8]. The global rate 
of obesity has tripled since 1975, with 39% of adult being overweight and 13 % obese in 2016. The rate 
of overweight and obesity in young people (5-19 year) has gone from 4% to 18% in the same period. 
Childhood obesity is very likely to continue into adulthood indicating that the rate of obesity is still going 
to increase in the future. [2].  
 
Obesity is often described together with the Metabolic syndrome (MetS), a cluster of risk factors for 
CVDs and a host of metabolic diseases. These risk factors are an increased visceral fat (waist 
circumference), raised blood pressure, raised fasting plasma glucose, reduced HDL cholesterol and 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
raised triglycerides. These risk factors usually go hand in hand with weight gain, the International 
Diabetes Federation suggests that having 2 of the risk factors combined with a large waist is sufficient to 
be diagnosed as having the metabolic syndrome. [9] People diagnosed with Mets have a large increased 
risk of getting type 2 diabetes, CVDs, neurological disorders, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and 
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). [10] A person with MetS carries a far larger risk for these diseases 
than having the individual disorders would suggest. CVDs a almost twice as likely while type 2 diabetes is 
5 times as likely for a person diagnosed with Mets. [11] 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1: risk factor for the metabolic syndrome and the diseases that are associated with it. 
HDL-c: high density lipoprotein cholesterol, NASH: nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, PCOS: polycystic ovary 
syndrome, TG: triglycerides [10] 
 
While it is well known that obesity is linked to a wide range of metabolic disorders that lead to a host of 
diseases, what is not clearly understood is the mechanism that drives these disorders.  
Since an increase in fat is the hallmark of obesity, the mechanism is likely related to the adipose tissue 
and its functions. Adipose tissue (AT) was originally primarily thought of as an organ for storing energy-
rich lipid for later use and isolation and cushioning as a secondary function. However, it has become 
very apparent that AT is a highly active endocrine organ that secretes hormones, cytokines and growth 
factors regulating the body’s homeostasis. These signaling molecules secreted from AT are collectively 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
called adipokines.[12] It is the dysregulation of these adipokines that is thought to be central to the 
development of the diseased state associated with obesity.  
How adipocytes respond to a prolonged caloric surplus and the consequences of the response falls 
under The adipose tissue expandability hypothesis, an intellectual framework used as an attempt to 
explain how obesity contributes to the emergence of so many diseases. This hypothesis suggests that 
the harmful effects of obesity is not just a simple function of increased adipose tissue mass, but that the 
adipocytes have a limit of how much fat can be stored without consequences. 
 AT is able to increase in size (hypertrophy) and (hyperplasia) amount in response to a surplus of energy. 
This expansion is not a simple process. It requires the recruitment of immune cells for the development 
of new vasculature and extracellular matrix for proper oxygenation, management of nutrition and 
waste. This expansion is not something the body is capable of doing infinitely in a sustainable way. 
When this limit is reached, metabolic abnormalities associated with obesity begin to negatively affect 
the body. [13,14] 
 This limit for AT expansion is thought to be individual since excessively obese patients can still be 
metabolically healthy while overweight subject can have metabolic disorders.[15] While the process that 
drives the development of obesity associated comorbidities are complex and not clearly understood, the 
Adipose tissue expandability hypothesis offers a possible explanation of the underlying mechanisms.  
 In a normal state adipocytes are capable of creating and storing triglycerides (TG) during a calorie influx, 
and hydrolyzes TG into glycerol and free fatty acids (FFAs) when fasting. These FFAs and glycerol are 
released into the blood circulation, which are taken up by other tissues and oxidized to create energy in 
the form of ATP, mainly by muscle tissue. This is the normal equilibrium between lipolysis and 
lipogenesis, but in obesity, this equilibrium is broken. When a high caloric surplus first starts, the 
adipocyte still functions normally, just with a higher storage of TG than is released leading to an 
increased adiposity. Muscle tissue still maintains a high sensitivity to insulin at this initial stage. If the 
caloric surplus is maintained, adiposity continues to increase and the endocrine function of adipocytes 
starts being affected.  
Enlarged adipocytes secrets increased amounts of Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1 (MCP-1) which 
recruits macrophages into AT.  AT in lean patient normally have 5-10% macrophages while obese patient 
have up to 50%. [16] These recruited macrophages together with adipocytes secrete large amounts of 
cytokines such as IL1b and TNFα. This inhibits lipogenesis while promoting lipolysis resulting in elevated 
levels of FFA in circulation. The excess FFAs in the blood causes fat to accumulate in abnormal tissue, 
such as muscle, ꞵ-cells and the liver, these fat deposits outside AT is called ectopic fat. [17] 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2:  Interaction between adipocytes and muscle tissue. A) In a lean state adipocytes, depending as energy demands 
stores as FFAs as TG or releases FFAs so muscle can generate ATP. B) Adipocytes increase in size when weight gain first start, 
maintaining normal function. C) Increase adiposity causes adipocytes to secrete MCP-1 to recruit macrophages. D) Large 
amounts of TNFα begins being secreted, promoting lipolysis and inhibiting TG synthesis. The increased FFAs results in ectopic 
fat in the muscle causing disruption in insulin induced glucose uptake, which starts insulin resistance. [17] 
 
 
 
This ectopic fat in muscle tissue disrupts the glucose uptake that insulin promotes, causing elevated 
levels of circulating glucose. FFA metabolites activate a group of serine/threonine kinases that inhibit IRS 
and PKB/akt, two different steps in the insulin-signaling pathway. This weakens insulin effect to 
transport GLUT4 to the surface membrane [18]. FFA have also demonstrated to suppress GLUT4 gene 
expression [19].  In response to high levels of plasma glucose, more insulin is released eventually 
resulting in hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance.  In the liver, the ectopic fat stimulates the 
production of glucose, TG and very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDP), which promote atherosclerosis. [20] 
Ectopic fat in muscle cells has been linked to insulin resistance while in the liver it is linked to hepatic 
steatosis and insulin resistance. Ectopic fat in muscle cells has been linked to insulin resistance while in 
the liver it is linked to hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance. [21] 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
Insulin also promotes the production of leptin, so the increased insulin leads to an increase in plasma 
leptin. An adipokine that suppresses appetite and has a strong proinflammatory effect on the immune 
cells.[22] In obese patients, their appetite is not suppressed despite having elevated plasma  leptin, this 
is called leptin resistance. But it seems that most other effects of leptin are not diminished, the so called 
selective leptin resistance.[23] So elevated leptin levels still have their pro inflammatory effect.   
 
There is a clear correlation between obesity, FFAs and insulin resistance. A 2015 study involving over 
3000 patients compared the circulating FFA and glycerol in the morning after overnight fasting. It 
demonstrated that obese patient have elevated levels of FFA (26%) and glycerol (47%)  in the blood , 
demonstrating a clear correlation with body weight [24]. 
In 2019 the same group demonstrated that metabolically healthy obesity and overweight, that is, they 
do not display any clinical signs of insulin resistance or other metabolic disorders, had adipocytes with a 
significantly lower insulin response compared to adipocytes from lean subjects. This suggest that the 
dysregulation of AT begins at an early stage than obesity and calls into question the idea of a healthy 
overweight or obese state. [25] 
 
 
There currently still lacks a clear explanation of the underlying mechanism that drives the progression of 
MetS and obesity’s related comorbidities. One of the issues in properly studying obesity is the over 
reliance on murine models to research the pathologies of obesity. It is increasingly seen that results in 
murine models fail to translate to human subjects due to differences in physiology. Large animal models, 
especially pigs present a model that has a physiology far more similar to humans and could have less 
translatory errors to human subjects. 
Obesity and inflammation 
 There exists a wide range of immune cells inside AT that produce a number of anti- and pro-
inflammatory cytokines. In healthy individuals, the immune cells maintain a careful balance 
between them to ensure proper energy homeostasis and a correct inflammatory response 
against cell damage or harmful pathogens. This balance is disturbed in obesity, leading to an 
increase in pro inflammatory immune cells while anti-inflammatory immune cells are 
decreased.  Mice fed a high fat diet showed a marked increase in the number of neutrophils 
and Macrophages. Neutrophils are immune cells that are the most numerous in the blood. 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
Neutrophils secreted numerous molecules, one of them being elastase.  It was shown that mice 
treated with an elastase inhibitor or knocking it out improved the inflammation and insulin 
resistance, implying that neutrophils play a role in the inflammation and insulin resistance seen 
in obesity. [26]  Adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs) exist as M1 and M2 types. M1 are known 
to promote AT inflammation and insulin resistance, expressing pro inflammatory cytokines such 
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), TNFα and IL-1ꞵ . M1 macrophages are induced by IFNγ, which are 
mainly expressed on T cells, Th1 and CD8 T cell. The AT of obese subjects have snown elevated 
levels of TH1 and CD8 T cells.[27]  Murine studies where CD8 T cells are depleted, TNF⍺ and M1 
macrophages  are reduced and show improved insulin sensitivity[28].  Another study shows 
high fat diet fed mice have elevated numbers CD8 T cells and TNF⍺ expressed, yet IFNℽ 
knockout mice fed the same diet had no change the AT mass, inflammation or glucose 
tolerance.[27] 
 
Figure 2.3: Immune cells of AT maintaining a balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory cells in healthy 
individuals to control homeostasis. In obese AT proinflammatory immune cells dominate leading to AT 
dysfunction.  [29] 
The immune cells that are anti-inflammatory include M2 macrophages, which inhibit M1 macrophage 
function by blocking nitric oxide generation. M2 secretes LK-10, which have shown to improve insulin 
resistance in adipocytes cause by TNF⍺. M2 macrophage are induced by STAT6 activation, which is 
caused by Th2 type cytokines, like IL-4. Mice treated with IL-4 have shown to relieve inflammation and 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
insulin sensitivity in obese mice.  In AT IL-4 mainly comes from eosinophils. Obese mice that are 
eosinophil defect have displayed lower levels of M2 macrophage, indicating that eosinophils protect 
against insulin resistance and inflammation through the recruitment of M2 macrophages.[26] Treg cells 
protect against inflammation through the secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokines and cell-cell 
interaction. Both mouse models and obese patients have shown to have a reduced amount of Treg in 
adipose tissue. In mice deficient in Treg cell displayed more severe insulin resistance and higher levels of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines in adipose tissue when fed a high fat diet. [31] 
The interaction between the immune system and obesity is a complex one that ends op induces a 
chronic state of inflammation.  Understanding these interactions could for the development of 
treatment that alleviate the chronic inflammation in obesity. For example, MCP-1 could be inhibited or 
anti-inflammatory immune cells could be promoted, like Tregs or M2.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
 Obesity in Big Animal Model 
Animal models have been vital for our understanding of biological processes and the development of 
medicine and treatments. Animal models can be broken into 4 categories: non-mammalian models, 
rodent models, large animal models and Non-human primate models. The two major parameters that 
determine which model that is appropriate to one’s experiment are throughput and similarities to 
human physiology. Non-mammalian models have the highest throughput due to their large quantity of 
offspring, short life cycle and low cost, but have a very different physiology and anatomy to humans. 
Non-human primate models on the other hand, have a low throughput due to being very costly, long life 
cycles and only having a single offspring per pregnancy, but are the most similar to human physiology of 
all animal models. Rodent and Large animal models lie in between the non-mammalian models and non-
human primate models [5], see figure 2.4. 
 
Figure 2.4: Advantages and disadvantages of the 4 different types of animal models [5] 
The similarity to human physiology can have a large impact on whether the results from one's animal 
model can be applied to humans. There have been several studies on adipokines that show rodents and 
humans respond very differently to many adipokines. [32]. A more poignant example of lack of 
translation between rodent models and humans is that in the gene expression response to 
inflammation, the mapping between human and mouse orthologs is close to random. [33] In obese mice 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
models the development of obesity shows large differences to human obesity, mice generated new fat 
cells once the adipocytes reach their upper limit[34,35], whereas in humans, the metabolic disorders 
related to obesity due to obesity is solely caused by enlargement of adipocytes.  The most optimal 
animal model to use would be the non-human primate since it’s close similarity insures a low risk that 
one’s result can’t translate to human trials. However, it’s large cost and difficulty in handling make Large 
animal models such as pigs or dogs the best alternative to studying obesity and the metabolic 
syndrome.[5]  
 
Swine models carry several advantages to rodent models when looking at metabolic syndrome and 
diabetes.  Pigs physiology is very similar to human physiology, they are omnivores and monogastric like 
humans, have a similar lipoprotein profile to humans whereas rodents and dogs have different profiles. 
Their large size means that there are plenty of tissue samples that can be collected. Exercise studies 
show that pigs' cardiovascular systems have the same adaptations as humans’ when exposed to 
exercise, these adaptations are not seen in smaller mammals. The pig’s cardiovascular system has a 
similar overall anatomy, heart rate at 50-60 bpm (rodents have 300-500 bpm) giving rise to similar 
metabolic demands on the heart as humans. Same atherosclerotic development as in humans, whereas 
the vascular disease seen in rodents have a different progression. The hearts of mini swine have the 
same size as a humans’ allowing for trials on pigs' hearts to be easily translated to human trials. Pig 
kidneys have similar morphology and function as human kidneys. However, using swine models has 
some disadvantages as well. Due to their far larger size and far lower usage as models, far fewer people 
and the expertise and resources to deal with them. Their large size also means that developmentally 
drugs that only exist in small quantities can’t be used for systemic drug delivery trials. There exists few 
selective reagents, such as antibodies for swine, whereas many such reagents exist for rodents due to 
their popularity. The longer gestation time for pigs results in longer and more expensive studies 
involving gene-editing. Diabetes doesn’t naturally occur in swine, but can be reliably induced. [6] 
Ossabaw miniature pig  
However some pig breeds are better to use since some mimic more of the symptoms of the metabolic 
syndrome and obesity that humans experience. The Ossabaw minipig shows the closest progression 
from insulin sensitivity to T2DM as humans. When placed on an obesity inducing diet, the Ossabaw pig 
displays insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, Dyslipidemia, Hypertension, T2D and CVDs. The Ossabaw 
pig has been isolated on Ossabaw island in Georgia, USA, for over 500 years. The island ecology 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
fluctuates between abundance and scarcity of food, which selected for “thrifty” genes in the Ossabaw 
pig. These thrifty genes allow the ossabaw pig to consume more food during the food abundance, 
storing it as fat deposits for times of scarcity.  This thriftiness gives the Ossabaw pig  a tendency for 
obesity, if allowed, the Ossabaw can acquire the highest amount of fat stores of any terrestrial mammal. 
Making it the ideal swine model for studying obesity.  [6] It is thought that humans possess the same 
thrifty gene that was beneficial when we were hunter-gatherers and face the same large fluctuations in 
food availability. But is now a detriment with excessive availability of high caloric food in the modern 
world. [36] In 2021 the full genome of the Ossabaw miniature pig was published allowing for a more 
detailed investigation of the obesity prone pig. [37] 
 
 
Biomarkers for inflammation 
In response to an injury, infection, inflammation or stress the body's innate immune system starts a 
systematic defense system in an attempt to fight off, contain and/or heal the threat present in the 
organism. This response is called the acute phase response (APR) and involves a wide range of changes 
within the body. One of the things that happens during the APR is a host of different plasma protein 
changes in concentration, the acute phase proteins (APP). APPs that show a large fold increase during 
the APR can be used to diagnose an ongoing inflammation in a patient, these are biomarkers for 
inflammation. The classic biomarker for inflammation is c-reactive protein (CRP) which is widely used to 
diagnose infection. [38] While most APPs are produced in the liver, some are produced in adipocytes 
which have interesting to study in relation to obesity. Two such APPs are Orosomucoid (ORM) and 
Serum amyloid A (SAA). 
ORM1 
Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein or Orosomucoid (ORM) is a protein from the acute phase protein (APP) family. 
APPs are proteins that react quickly to inflammation, they respond either by increasing or decreasing in 
concentration, called positive and negative acute phase protein respectively.  For most species that 
ORM1 is studied in, it is a positive APP, but in swine it appears to be a negative APP. [39] Specifically, the 
Göttingen and Ossabaw mini pigs had a lower serum ORM and a lower ORM1 expression in liver. [40] 
ORM exists as two isoforms in humans (ORM1 and ORM2) while porcine only has one isoform (ORM1). 
[43]ORM is mainly produced in the liver, but secretion of ORM happens in adipose tissue as well. How 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
the production of ORM responds to stimuli varies depending on where the production happens.  For 
example, mice fed with a high fat diet (HFD) show an increased ORM expression in AT while no change 
in the liver tissue. Conversely, the ORM expression in AT doesn’t change when injected with 
lippolysaccharide (LPS), but the expression did increase in the liver. [41] These differences in ORM 
responsiveness suggest that liver and AT ORM are regulated by different mechanisms when exposed to 
pathophysiological conditions. ORM has shown to inhibit proinflammatory gene expression and 
pathways in adipocytes in obese mice, indicating that ORM plays a role in regulating the immune 
response to shield AT from an overactive inflammation and/or metabolic dysfunction. The level of ORM 
is elevated in serum in obese humans, mice and Ossabaw pigs. Based on the murine study that HFD only 
affects the ORM expression in adipose tissue, it is suspected that this increase in serum ORM must be 
from adipose tissue. [41]  
Sun, T. et al has shown that ORM1 binds non-competitive to the LepR, activating the same pathway as 
leptin( the JAK2 and STAT3 pathway in the hypothalamus).  ORM, by being an agonist for LepR, regulates 
food intake and energy homeostasis,  just like leptin does. And like leptin, the serum levels of ORM1 
shows a significant decrease in fasting mice. And an increase after the mice have fed. By injecting mice 
with OMR the appetite dampening effect can easily be demonstrated.  ORM injected mice subjected to 
2h,8h and 24h fasting showed a lower food intake when allowed to feed again, this decrease was also 
observed with mice’s spontaneous food intake.  These results were duplicated in HFD-induced obese 
mice and leptin defective mice, but not mice that didn’t have a functional LepR, indicating that ORM acts 
via LepR. By breeding mice with a defect ORM1, it becomes clear how many things ORM1 regulates 
based on the host of things that goes wrong. The ORM1 defective mice have an increased fat mass, liver 
mass that mainly is adiposity. The mice also show significantly elevated levels of insulin and leptin, but 
the lack of effectiveness suggests a resistance to both hormones. [42] When testing the relation 
between ORM serum levels and obesity in porcine models, the only breed that shows elevated serum 
levels when obesity is the Ossabaw minipig whereas the other breeds showed a decrease in ORM when 
obese [43] 
SAA 
Serum amyloid A (SAA) acute-phase protein that is a major marker of inflammation because of how 
responsive it is to inflammation. Serum level of SAA can increase by a 1000 fold within 1-2 day after an 
injury or infection and return to normal level within 14 days. [44]  It has been shown that obese humans 
have increased levels of plasma SAA and adipose expression. Which is what would be expected given 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
that obese is characterized by a chronic low level inflammation.  SAA production is induced from the 
increased pro- inflammatory cytokines such as TNF⍺ and IL-6 which themselves are increased in obesity.  
SAA has been shown to itself be a proinflammatory and pro-lipolytic cytokine when isolated cultures are 
treated with SAA without other increased cytokines present. Thereby SAA acts as an amplifier of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and increased release of FFA as part of a positive feedback loop. [45] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adipose tissue 
Adipose tissue (AT) is a special connective tissue that is composed mainly of adipocytes and the stromal 
vascular fraction (SVF) which is made up of stem cells, preadipocytes, endothelial cell and a host of 
immune cells. To date there have been discovered four different types of AT, white adipose tissue 
(WAT), brown adipose tissue (BAT), beige and pink adipose tissue.   
WAT makes up the majority of the AT in humans, playing a central role storing energy in the form of 
energy-rich lipid, endocrine communication and regulation of insulin sensitivity. White adipocytes 
contain a single large lipid droplet that dominates most of its volume.[46] 
Brown AT is prevalent in human infants but mostly disappears with age, it is mainly found in the upper 
back of adult humans. Brown adipocyte have a high concentration of mitochondria and many small lipid 
droplets throughout the cell. BAT regulates temperature through its ability to generate heat. BAT’s heat 
generation ability comes from the uncoupling protein 1 (UCP-1) in the mitochondria. UCP-1 is a proton 
transporter that hijacks the protons gradient normally used for the production of ATP, allowing protons 
back into the mitochondrial matrix, releasing the energy used to create ATP as heat instead.[34]  
Beige adipocytes seem to be an intermediate between white and brown, having large lipid droplets and 
having a lot of mitochondria.[46] 
Pink AT has only been found in pregnant mice and is thought to be related to lactation since milk 
droplets are observed in them, it is not known if they exist in humans. [47] 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
 
 
Figure 2.5: The different types of adipose tissue, their location in the body and key features associated with them. 
[29] 
Of the four types of AT, WAT is the only one that really expands to accommodate excessive calories 
thereby being the most type interesting concerning obesity.  
 
WAT can be subdivided into many types based on location. The fat just below the skin is called 
subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT). Fat surrounding the abdominal organs is called visceral adipose 
tissue (VAT). More specifically, VAT is the fat surrounding the kidneys (perirenal), fat behind the 
intestine (retroperitoneal), in front of the intestines (omental) and fat intermingled with the intestine 
(mesenteric). [29]Other than different locations, these two types of WAT display different lipolytic 
activity, response to hormones and their endocrine secretion. When fat accumulation initially occurs it is 
stored in SAT without any metabolic repercussions, but there is a limit to how much expansion SAT can 
undergo. Once this limit is reached fat starts accumulating outside SAT, both in VAT and non-adipose 
tissue.[48] Because VAT is located around the abdominal organs, the blood from VAT is carried directly 
to the liver via the portal vein, whereas the blood from SAT first goes through the systemic circulation. 
This could suggest that the FFAs and adipokines from VAT to have a far greater inflammatory effect on 
the liver.[49] VAT also displays more lipolytic activity than SAT due to having a higher concentration of 
the lipolytic Adrenoceptor Beta 1 and 2 while having a lower concentration of the antilipolytic insulin 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
receptors and Adrenoceptor Alpha 1. [50] Small adipocytes readily absorb FFAs and TGs after a meal 
while large adipocytes are less able to absorb FFAs and TGs from the blood due to being more lipolytic 
and resistant to insulin. The accumulation of VAT is associated with hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, 
hypertriglyceridemia and imparied glucose tolerance. Excessive VAT carries an increased risk of  
diabetes.[51] In T2D patients, VAT has shown to have a higher expression of pro-inflammatory 
adipokines such as TNFα, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP) and IL-8. [52] VAT accumulation has 
shown to be a far better predictive factor of T2D and CVDs than body weight alone. [49]  
 
There are 2 ways in which the expansion of AT happens, through hypertrophy (adipocytes increase in 
size) or hyperplasia (number of adipocytes increase).  
It is suggested that hypertrophy expansion is causing dysregulation in adipocytes. There are several 
characteristics that have been observed in  enlarged adipocytes. They display necrotic dead adipocytes 
that hamper AT function and induce inflammation [53]. They show a higher secretion of pro-
inflammatory cytokines, like tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 ( 
MCP-1) and interleukins (IL-6 and IL-8). [54] These cytokines enable the serine phosphorylation of insulin 
receptor substrate-1 that induce the development of insulin resistance. The cytokines also recruit 
immune cells like macrophages and T cells.  Hypertrophia also causes hypoxia due to low levels of 
vascularization. Hypoxia causes an upregulation in inflammatory and angiogenic genes. A major 
transcription factor, hypoxia- inducible factor 1 α (HIF1α) regulating the response to hypoxia causes 
fibrosis and increases the inflammatory response in the expanded AT [55]. The enlarged adipocytes also 
show an increase in basal lipolysis and thus leakage of free fatty acids (FFAs).[56]  The leaked FFAs are 
then absorbed by other tissue, like muscles or organs which can cause abdominal fat accumulation and 
lipotoxicity.  
FFAs have been shown to have the ability to bind to Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). TLRs are pattern 
recognition receptors( PRRs) that can bind to molecular patterns that are characteristic of certain 
pathogens, the pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP). When a TLR binds a PAMP it activates 
the innate immune system by stimulating the transcription of many proinflammatory genes. TLR4 
normally binds to lipopolysaccharides (LPS) but Shi H et. al showed that common FFAs are capable of 
activating TLR4’s signaling pathway. They also showed that obese mice that are TLR4 deficiency display a 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
degree of protection against insulin resistance. [57] This indicates that FFAs interaction with TLR4 is 
another potential mechanism behind the development of obesity’s chronic inflammation.   
 
Lipolysis 
For the body to use the energy stored as triglyceride (TG) it has to breakdown TG into its component 
parts in a process called lipolysis. Lipolysis is the hydrolysis of a TG into glycerol and free fatty acids 
(FFAs). This is done through a series of enzymatic reactions. First TG is converted to diacylglycerol (DG), 
DG is then converted to monoacylglycerol (MG), during each enzymatic step a FFA is released. The 
adipose TG lipase (ATGL) is the enzyme converting TG to DG and is the slowest reaction of the entire 
lipolytic pathway, thus it is the rate-limiting enzyme. Hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) is the enzyme 
responsible for the second reaction in the pathway while monoglyceride lipase (MGL) is catalyzing the 
last reaction. See figure 2.6 . 
 
 
Figure 2.6: the reactions of the lipolysis pathway. TG = triglyceride, DG= diacylglycerol, MG = monoacylglycerol, 
ATGL= adipose triglyceride lipase, HSL=  Hormone- sensitive lipase MGL= monoglyceride lipase and FFA= free fatty 
acid. 
Since the TG to DG is the step limiting reaction the entire process is regulated by regulating the activity 
of ATGL. In resting state ATGL has a low level of activity, hydrolyzing a small amount of TG. ATGL has a 
co-activator CGI-58 (ABHD5) that is normally bound to PLIN1. Through the phosphorylation of PLIN1, 
CGI-58 is released and binds to ATGL, drastically increasing ATGL activity.  
The phosphorylation of PLIN1 is primarily regulated via catecholamines, natriuretic peptides (NPs) and 
insulin. See figure 2.7.Adrenaline and noradrenaline are the catecholamines that regulate lipolysis, 
capable of both simulation and inhibition depending on the receptor that they bind to. They are ligands 
to the adrenergic receptors (ARs) , which can be divided into the prolypolitic β-ARs and the antilipolytic 
ɑ2-AR. Both receptor types are G-protein-coupled receptors that sit in the membrane of adipocytes. The 
β-ARs contains the Gs subunit and ɑ2-AR contains the Gi subunit. Activation of the ARs causes the G 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
subunits to interact with adenylyl cyclase (AC), Gi as an inhibitor and Gs as a stimulant of AC.  When AC is 
activated it converts ATP to cAMP, elevated levels of cAMP activates protein kinase A (PKA) which 
phosphorlyates PLIN1 and HSL.[58] 
Of the NPs, there exist three different types, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), brain-type natriuretic 
peptide (BNP) and C-type natriuretic peptides (CNP). Likewise there exist three natriuretic peptide 
receptors (NPR), NPR1, NPR2 and NPR3. ANP and BNP are agonists to NPR1 and CNP is an agonist to 
NPR2 , when binding to NPR1, both activation of NPR1 and NPR2 converts GTP into cGMP, cGMP 
activates protein kinase G (PKG) that like PKA phosphorylates PLIN1, initiating the lipolysis pathway. 
NPR3 can bind to all 3 NPs, which degrades them, acting as a lipolysis inhibitor.  [58,59] 
Insulin acts as a major anti lipolytic hormone. When insulin binds to an insulin receptor (IR), the IR auto 
phosphorlates which in turn leads to the phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 and 2 (IRS 1/2 ). 
The activated IRSs leads  to the activation of PI3K which converts PIP2 to PIP3 , PIP3 activated PDK which 
in turn phosphorylates PKB/Akt, PKB/Akt at last activates PDE3b which degrades cAMP to 5’-AMP. This 
cAMP degradation blocks the lipolysis pathway initiated by the adrenergic receptors but does not affect 
the lipolysis pathway that is initiated by the NPs. Insulin also inhibits the transport of fatty acid through 
the mitochondrial wall, lowering the oxidation of fatty acids.  
It promotes glucose transport protein, like GLUT4, to migrate from intracellular storage to the cell 
surface, which increases glucose uptake in the cell. This increase in glucose uptake combined with the 
activation of hexokinase and 6-phosphofructokinase promotes glycolysis.Insulin also promotes glycogen 
synthesis while blocking glycogenolysis in AT, muscle and liver tissue [60] 
 
 
 The pro-inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-ɑ (TNFɑ) have been shown to have multiple 
effects on the lipolytic pathway. The  protein expression of PDE3B in human fat cell is markedly 
decreased by TNFa and in rats, the inhibitory effect of ɑ2-AR is reduced via TNFɑ’s degradation of the Gi 
subunit in the ɑ2-AR. The combined inhibitory effect on the ɑ2-AR and insulin-signaling pathway results 
in higher levels of cAMP leading to increased PKA-mediated lipolysis. [58] 
 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
 
Figure 2.7: primary lipolysis pathway and the major regulation of it. TG = triglyceride, DG= diacylglycerol, MG = 
monoacylglycerol, ATGL= adipose triglyceride lipase, HSL=  Hormone- sensitive lipase MGL= monoglyceride lipase, 
FFA= free fatty acid. IR= insulin receptor, IRS= insulin receptor substrate  [58] 
Fatty acid binding protein (FABP) is a protein family that can reversibly bind to hydrophobic molecules, 
like fatty acids. FABP4 is found in adipocytes and macrophages and transports fatty acids around the cell 
to different organelles or releases them outside the cell.  [58] FABP4 is capable of binding to HSL and 
activating it thereby directly regulating lipolysis. FABP4 might function as an adipokine outside of 
adipocytes. It has shown to increase liver glucose production both in vivo and in vitro in mice[61]. 
Elevated levels of circulating FABP4 is correlated to obesity and its comorbidities. Mice with a knockout 
FABP4 showed a protection against insulin resistance, atherosclerosis and hyperglycemia. FABP4 could 
be a possible biomarker for obesity’s comorbidities. [62] 
 
Lipolysis plays a major role in the normal function of adipocytes. Gene expression in the major enyzmes 
seem to be affected in obese patients and weight loss normally accompanies changes in these gene 
expressions.Kupczewaka et. al. showed in 2020 that obese patients show significant differences in gene 
expression of many of the proteins involved in lipolysis, (ATGL, HSL, MGL, PLIN1 and CGI-58), 
demonstrating that obesity affects the gene expression of proteins involved in the lipolysis pathway. it 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
was also shown that most patients show an improved insulin sensitivity after weight loss, those who 
didn’t, displayed elevated levels of expression of pro lipolytic protein indicating that increased lipolysis 
play a large role in the pathogenesis of diabetes.  [63] Getting a better understanding on how the 
gene expression of proteins involved in lipolysis differs in lean and obese states could help our 
understanding of how obesity drives the development of so many diseases.   
 
 
Lipogenesis 
Fatty acids that exist in AT can come from two sources, circulating TG or de novo lipogenesis.  The 
intestine and liver can synthesize TGs, package them in lipoprotein and send them into circulation. To 
enter adipocytes, TGs are hydrolyzed into non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA) which can be transported 
into adipocytes by transporter proteins. With de novo lipogenesis (DNL), glucose is converted into fatty 
acids. In response to high levels of blood glucose insulin activates insulin receptors, which activates the 
protein Glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4) to transport glucose into the adipocyte. In the cytosol glucose 
is converted into pyruvate through Glycolysis. The pyruvate is transported to the mitochondria when the 
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) converts it to citrate which is exported back to the cytosol where it 
undergoes four enzymatic reactions to turn into fatty acids.First ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY) converts it to 
acetyl-CoA which is converted to malonyl-CoA by acetyl-CoA carboxylases 1 (ACC1). Third step converts 
malonyl-CoA into the fatty acids palmitate by fatty acid synthase (FASN) which is the step limit enzyme 
in DNL. From palmitate all other fatty acids can form through a series of enzymatic elongation or 
desaturation steps. Metabolites from Glycolysis activates ChREBP-⍺ which activates a signal cascade that 
results in the transcription of the proteins needed for DNL. 64  
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
 
Figure 2.8: The reactions of lipogenesis. [64] 
Lipogenesis is part of a careful balance that maintains proper bodily function, and dysregulation of this 
balance carries serious health issues. DNL in WAT is known to decrease with obesity and selectively 
restoring it shows that it can reverse obesity caused insulin resistance. The opposite is seen with liver 
DNL, it increases with obesity and with metabolic disorders associated with obesity.[65]  
One of the major adipokines, leptin, has been shown to inhibit lipogenesis and promote FFA oxidation. 
In vitro  murine studies have shown leptin injections lead to lower levels of TG in muscle and pancreas 
issues without circulating FFA increasing indicating oxidation happening inside the cells. The same 
experiments done on mice with mutations on the leptin receptors (LEPR) showed leptin administrations 
had no effect. This demonstrates that the anti-lipolytic effect of leptin is mediated directly through the 
LEPR.  [66] 
Insulin’s effect on adipose tissue 
Insulin plays a major role in the dynamics between lipolysis and lipogenesis. It functions as a major anti 
lipolytic hormone by suppresses lipolysis through the inhibition of the enzyme hormone-sensitive lipase 
(HSL), one of the major enzymes that hydrolyze TG, this results in a decrease in FFAs. By inhibiting the 
transport of fatty acid through the mitochondrial wall, insulin also lowers the oxidation of fatty acids.  
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
It promotes glucose transport protein, like GLUT4, to migrate from intracellular storage to the cell 
surface, which increases glucose uptake in the cell. This increase in glucose uptake combined with the 
activation of hexokinase and 6-phosphofructokinase promotes glycolysis.Insulin also promotes glycogen 
synthesis while blocking glycogenolysis in AT, muscle and liver tissue [60] 
 
 
 
 
Major adipokines 
 
Leptin 
Leptin was the first adipokine to be discovered and plays a major role in energy homoeostasis and 
regulation of body weight. Though binding to leptin receptors in the hypothalamus promotes the 
secretion of appetite suppressors and inhibits appetite inducing signaling molecules.  [67] 
Increasing the leptin concentration in plasma is known to lead to a reduction in food intake and weight 
loss. However, one of the characteristics of obesity is an elevated leptin levels in plasma, and yet leptin’s 
weight loss and appetite suppression is clearly lacking in obese patients. This phenomenon is called 
leptin resistance. The mechanisms behind leptin resistance are not well understood but several are 
suggested. LEPR expression could be reduced, LEPR signaling pathway could be disrupted, or leptin’s 
ability to reach LEPR could be hampered. [68] The transportation of leptin across the blood brain barrier 
(BBB) depends on shortened LEPR to transport leptin across the BBB. These LEPR transporters do not 
increase with leptin plasma and the ability to transport leptin through the BBB has shown to decrease at 
high plasma leptin levels. [69]  This suggests that leptin resistance only limits the effect of leptin in the 
brain, meaning it’s to suppress appetite while leptin's other effects of leptin are not hampered.  
Besides its effect on the brain, leptin is reported to have a host of other effects in the body 
Leptin receptors are found on adipocytes allowing leptin to directly affect their processes in several 
ways. It has been reported to induce apoptosis in adipocytes, promoting lipolysis adipocytes, both 
through the sympathetic nervous system and LEPR on the adipocytes. LEPR are found on preadipocytes, 
leptin has shown to induce adipogenesis in them.[70] 
 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
Leptin is a major regulator of immune cells, being seen as a major promoter of immune cells  and the 
secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Leptin acts on DC, NK cells, macrophages, basophils, 
eosinophils, B cells, T cells, Treg cells. Its effect on these immune cells vary from development, 
proliferation, maturation, activity level and increasing survival.Seeing how low-grade chronic 
inflammation is a major part of obesity,  leptin seems to play a major role in its pathogenesis.[71]  
Getting a better understanding on how leptin and leptin receptor expressions change with obesity 
would help with furthering the understanding obesity’s pathogenesis 
 
Adiponectin 
Adiponectin is a 244 amino acid protein, it is the peptide that adipocytes secrete in the largest 
quantities. Adiponectin exists in 4 isoforms, a homo-, -trimer, -hexamer ,-multimer (12-18 monomers) 
and a globular form that is a cleaved form of the trimer. The monomer is not detected in circulation. 
Obese patients have lower levels of adiponectin circulating, low levels have been link with insulin 
resistance, chronic inflammation, increased oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction.[72] The 
reduction in circulating adiponectin that accompany the progression of insulin resistance is seen in 
humans, rodents and monkeys. [73,74] 
There exist receptors that adiponectin is an agonist for, Adipo1 receptor that is mainly in skeletal muscle 
and Adipo2 receptor that is primarily found in the liver. Activation of the 2 receptors initiates a signaling 
cascade that activates the PPAP-⍺, PPAR-𝛾 and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). The AMPK 
activation is associated with insulin-sensitizing liver and muscle tissue. Glucose and fatty acid 
metabolism are regulated through AMPK and PPAR. Adiponectin has shown to regulate several immune 
cells.  It suppresses cytokines that are pro-inflammatory (TNF⍺ , CCL3 and IL-6) which stops the 
proliferation of M1 macrophages and promotes M2 macrophages instead together with M2 anti-
inflammatory secretion. [67] 
In murine studies, adiponectin has been demonstrated to promote adipocyte differentiation, increase 
adipocytes ability to accumulate TG and improve their insulin sensitivity. It also reduced  the amount of 
lipid found in the liver. This suggests that adiponectin prevents ectopic fat accumulation by storing FFAs 
in newly created adipocytes in SAT.[75]Adiponectin also have an anti-atherosclerotic effect. It does this 
by inhibiting the adhesion of monocytes to endothelial cells by blocking the effect of TNF⍺, and by 
prevent lipid accumulation in endothelial cells.[76] What role adiponectin play in cancer is not known 
but low levels of circulating decreased in several types of cancer. This includes gastric cancer, prostate 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
cancer, endometrial cancer, colorectal cancer and breast cancer. This suggests that adiponectin has a 
role on cancer pathogenesis.[77]  
Adiponectin seems to a have protective function against obesity related diseases and it’s serum levels 
are decreased in relation to a lot of these diseases. But for other diseases, there is seen an increased 
adiponectin in circulation and seems to be exacerbated by adiponectin. There is the case for rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA). OA patients have heightened levels of adiponectin compared to 
control individuals. The exact role that adiponectin plays is not certain since there is contradictory data, 
adiponectin has both been linked with erosive OA and OA severity, and shown to have no connection to 
erosive OA.  Adiponectin has some date shown it has protective properties, while others show a pro-
inflammatory and catabolic effect that hastes the progression of OA. Adiponectin has the same 
ambiguous results with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). RA patients also show elevated levels of adiponectin. 
In vitro data suggests that adiponectin worsen RA while in vivo data suggest a protective role. [67]  
Adiponectin seems to mainly play a protective role in obesity’s comorbidities and its circulation is 
downregulated but a more contrary picture is shown for some diseases.  These diverging effects of 
adiponectin could due to its many isoforms playing different roles. More research into adiponectin is 
needed to fully understand its affects, but it is clear that it plays a large role in the pathogenesis of 
obesity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
Chapter 3 
 
Materials and Methods 
Animal models 
In order to better understand the changes in gene expression that obesity induces and how MetS 
progresses, an obesity experiment with the best animal model ( the Ossabaw minipig) was previously  
conducted.  The experiment lasted 14 week and consisted of 15 Ossabaw pigs, 6 lean pigs as a control 
group and 9 obese pigs. The lean group consisted of 3 pigs, 6 months old and 3 8 month old pigs that 
were fed a standard diet. The obese group consist of 9 pigs, 4 pigs being 6 months and 5 being 5 months 
old, they started on the standard diet for 1 week before transitioning into a high fat high fructose diet 
(HFHF), 25% fat, 23 % fructose, 0,5% cholesterol and 13% protein (Aarhus University diet no. 44448888-
7). The transitioning happen over a period of 2 weeks, starting with a 25% HFHF / 75 standard fed diet, 
then a 50% / 50 %, lastly 75% HFHF / 25 % Standard fed before having them on a 100% HFHF for the 
remainder of the experiment. The pigs were fed twice a day for the duration of the experiment.  At the 
end of the week 14 the pigs were terminated and tissue samples were extracted ( see Table 3.1 .  
 
Table 3.1: overview of Ossabaw diet experiment 
 
RT-qPCR Workflow 
In order to analyze the gene expression of the extracted tissue, several wet lab processes have to be 
performed to enable quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and to ensure the results are 
standardized. The first step is determining which genes and their expressions are of interest. This was 
determined through the theory in the background. Once the genes of interest have been determined, 
the primers for said genes have to be designed.  The RNA has to be extracted from the tissue sample, 
the extracted RNA to be reverse-transcribed to cDNA. The designed primers are then used to amplify 
the desired genes in the cDNA to ensure enough RNA is present. RT-qPCR can then be performed and 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
the data is then analyzed. Any good RT-qPCR workflow would include a RNA verification step to ensure 
the extracted RNA is of a good quality , in this case the RNA was spectrophotometrically analyzed and 
RIN was acquired as well.Since RNA can very easily be degraded by RNase, an enzyme that exists pretty 
much everywhere special precaution is necessary when working with RNA. Gloves are to be worn at all 
time, pipettes and their tips have to be RNase- and DNase free, as well any tubes or reagents in contact 
with the samples. The workspace and any other tools have to be wiped down with a disinfecting agent 
(70% ethanol/ microsol or similar). Samples should be stored in RNAlater at -80 C, and when in use 
should be kept in ice whenever possible. [78] 
Primer Design 
While most primers used were already designed for the previous master student working on the 
Ossabaw minipigs, there were 5 genes that we didn’t have primers for that were of interest to our 
project. These were RAB18, GLUT4, GCG,PRGN and PRKAG3. The Ossabaw genes were acquired through 
Peter’s PhD student, Yaolei Zhang, who has mapped the entire Ossabaw genome. The webtool 
Primer3Web (v.4.1.0) was used to design the primers. Setting the parameters for our primers PCR 
product to be 80-200 nucleotides in size, the melting temperature (TM) to be between 59℃  - 61℃ and 
for the thermodynamic parameters Brealauer et al., 1986 was chosen.  The optimal primer design would 
be to find a suitable primer that spans over an intron to prevent amplification of gDNA. If no suitable 
primers could be found this way, Primer3Web could automatically find primers that fit the given 
parameters, however these primers rarely span any intron. The primers for gene PRKAG3, GLUT4 and 
RAB18 were designed automatically, twice, while PRGN and GCG were designed manually. The full 
protocol can be found in appendix A.  
RNA Purification 
In order to analyze the gene expression of any tissue extracted from the Ossabaw pigs the RNA in the 
tissue has to be extracted/purified. The RNeasy Lipid Tissue Mini Kit from Qiagen was used to extract 
RNA.  Using the phenol/guanidine based lysis, “QIAzol”, which is specifically designed to lysis fatty tissue 
and inhibit RNases. The tissue is homogenized together with QIAzol on the GentleMACS.  To spareated 
the RNA from DNA and proteins in the sample, chloroform is added to the homogenized solution and 
centrifuged. This results in 3 phases, the top aqueous phase, the bottom organic phase and a white 
interphase in the middle. RNA is in the aqueous phase, proteins in the organic phase and DNA in the 
interphase.  The aqueous phase is separated and mixed with ethanol to improve binding.  The sample is 
then spun in a RNeasy Mini spin column and washed with two different buffers to remove phenol and 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
other contaminants while the RNA is stuck to the membrane. The RNA is eluted with RNase-free water.  
In the washing steps, the samples are treated with DNase to remove any eventual DNA. [79] For detailed 
protocol, see Appendix B  
RNA quality check  
Before continuing with the purified RNA, the purity and integrity of the extracted RNA must be 
established. For the purity, the extracted RNA was analyzed with the NanoDrop(NanoDropTM One/ OneC 
microvolume UV-Vis Spectrophotometer). A 0.5 µl drop of the purified RNA solution was tested for 
optical absorption at wavelength 230,260 and 280 nm. The absorption at 260 nm is proportional to the 
nucleic acid concentration in solution. The ratio between the absorption at 260nm and 280nm 
(A260nm/A280nm) gives an indication of the sample's purity, protein contamination lowers this ratio while 
RNA contamination increases the ratio. The (A260nm/A230nm) indicates contamination of several different 
substances, including salts, carbohydrates, non-ionic detergents and phenol.  RNA samples with 
A260nm/A280nm and A260nm/A230nm > 1.8 are considered to be of a suitable quality to use for further 
work.[80,81] 
To verify the integrity of the RNA it was analyzed on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with Agilent RNA 6000 
Nano kit. The Bioanalyzer uses microfluidics-based electrophorese systems, which instead of using 
traditional gel electrophoresis, automatically separates the RNA, allowing for the observation of the 
bands for different sizes of RNA.  The bands for the ribosomal subunit 28 and 18 are very distinct and 
thus the 28S/18S ratio is used to determine how intact the RNA is. The Bioanalyzer classifies the RNA 
quality as RNA Integrity Number (RIN) in a 1-10 scale, 1 being degraded and 10 being intact. In a perfect 
intact RNA sample only the peaks at S18 and S28 should be observed, many peaks indicating degraded 
RNA.Since 28S and 18S only exist in eukaryotes, the 28S/18S ratio is only applicable to eukaryotic 
cells.[81] 
cDNA synthesis and Pre-amplification 
Now that the extracted RNA has been proved to be of sufficient quality, the next step necessary in order 
to do RT-qPCR is creating complementary DNA (cDNA) from the extracted RNA. The synthesis of cDNA 
was done following the procedure described in Appendix C. The procedure is performed using 
QuantiTectRevers Transcription kit (Qiagen), to synthesize cDNA from RNA by reverse transcription.  
Duplicate from each RNA sample is made to mitigate any human/technical error that may occur.  
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
While Qiagen claims that this protocol is optimized for RNA ranging from 10pg to  1 µg, we needed a 
standardized amount to use since the following step, pre-amplification, needs an exact amount of 
cycles. Too few and there is not enough DNA to be detected in qPCR, too many cycles and the sample is 
oversaturated, and nothing can be analyzed. The chosen  amount of RNA for the synthesis is 500 ng RNA 
while 100 ng RNA is the minimum accepted for the synthesis. The required volume of RNA solutions is 
calculated based on the detected concentration from NanoDrop. [81,82] 
The last step before qPCR is pre-amplification, where the amount cDNA is increased to ensure that there 
is enough to pass the limit of detection in the qPCR machine, but not too much as to oversaturate the 
detection machine.  TaqMan PreAmp mix (Applied BIosystems) and Exonuclease I (New England Biolabs) 
was used in the process. All the primers that were to be tested in qPCR were mixed together with Low-
EDTA TE buffer and TaqMan PreAmp master Mix.  This mixture was added to individual cDNA from 
unique samples, which then underwent 21 cycles of PCR. After the PCR cycles the samples were then 
treated with exonuclease to remove all excess primers.[83] See Appendix D for the detailed procedure. 
 
RT-qPCR 
To analyze the gene expression in the tissue samples RT-qPCR, two different methods of RT-qPCR were 
employed during this project, high precision and high throughput RT-qPCR . The Rotor-Gene Q and the 
Fluidigm Biomark, respectively, were used for each method.  
The Rotor-Gene Q allows for quick and simple high-precision RT-qPCR, but can only test a single assay 
for a given sample. This makes Rotor-Gene Q unsuitable if one needs to analyze many assays on a large 
number of samples. Say for example, wanting to analyze gene expression of 24 genes on multiple tissue 
samples from different pigs. This would take an unreasonable amount of time to analyze on Rotor-Gene 
Q. So Rotor-Gene was only used to valid the primers before moving on to high throughput qPCR.  
The Fluidigm Biomark allows for analysis of large quantities of samples and assay within a reasonable 
timeframe. It uses nanofluidic chips, which allows for large quantities of reactions between individual 
assays and samples to take place.  E.g a 192.24 fluidigm chip can test 192 samples for 24 assays each, 
resulting in a total of 4608 reactions taking place on the chip.   
Both the RotorGene and BioMark Fluidigm measure the amount of amplified DNA using fluorescence. 
Intercalating dyes and Oligonucleotide Probes are two methods to get fluorescence in the presence of 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
DNA. Intercalating dyes are small molecules that can bind to double stranded DNA, when bound to 
dsDNA the dyes emit light that can be detected, the more DNA present the higher the light intensity.  
Intercalating dyes are cheap and easier to set up since only a correct design of primers is necessary 
before the experiment can be performed. The downside of intercalating dyes is that it binds to all dsDNA 
present, thus both primer dimers and non-desired DNA can bind to the dyes, emitting light instead of 
the desired product. So it is necessary to spend more time on data analysis, one needs to do a melting 
curve analysis to ensure that the correct sequence has been amplified. If any primer dimer or 
contaminated DNA is present, the Cq value can be skewed. SYBR Green and EvaGreen are examples of 
intercalating dyes.  The other method uses oligonucleotides that have been labeled with fluorescently 
motifs at the 5’ and the 3’ ends, one named reporter and the other quencher. The quencher absorbs the 
light from the reporter, DNA polymerase 5’- hydrolyses the oligonucleotide so the reporter and 
quencher are seperated and the light from the reporter can be detected.  The specificity of the probe 
means that only the desired product will be amplified and less time will be needed in data analysis. The 
probe is however more expensive and requires more time during the experimental setup.[84] 
Both methods have a minimum concentration needed before enough fluorescence is produced for it to 
be detected, the lower limit of detection. Likewise, there is a maximum concentration where the 
fluorescence becomes oversaturated and the light intensity no longer is proportional to DNA.  This is 
why choosing the amount of cycles in the pre-amplification step is important.  
By having fluorescence produced proportionally to the amount of dsDNA present, it is possible to 
measure how much mRNA of a given gene was originally in the analyzed tissue.  This is done in the PCR 
software where the number of cycles performed before the concentration of the amplicon exceeds the 
lower limit of detection is recorded. This number is the quantification cycle (Cq), Cq is also known as 
threshold cycle (Ct), crossing point(Cp) or take-off point(TOP). The lower the Cq, the less amplification 
cycles were needed before luminance could be detected, thus the more mRNA of the targeted gene in 
the tissue. Each assay-primer reaction will have a recorded Cq, and since it is done with EvaGreen for 
Fluidigm and SYBR Green for RotorGene a melt curve analysis has to be performed to ensure that the 
right sequence has been amplified in each assay-primer reaction. Ideally, each PCR cycle would result in 
a doubling of the amount of PCR product, giving an 100% amplification efficiency. The efficiency is an 
indication of how well the polymerase has converted the reagents to PCR product. If the efficiency 
deviates too much from 100% it is a sign that there are problems with the PCR.  A low efficiency can be a 
sign of poorly designed primers, contamination, inhibitors, wrong temperature, and amplicons with 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
secondary structures. An efficiency above 100%  is an indication of nonspecific amplicons or primer 
dimers. [81] Since an intercalating dye was used, a melt curve analysis ( MCA) has to be performed as 
well. This adds an extra step to the qPCR protocol, the different phases of a qPCR with MCA protocol is 
shown in figure 2.9. 
 
Figure 2.9: The protocol for qPCR+MCA. The y-axis is the temperature in Celsius while the x-axis is time in seconds. 
The protocol has four phases: the Thermal Mix that is ensures the right conditions for the reaction, The UNG 
(uracil-DNA glycosylase) and hot start phase, the UNG prevents DNA contamination to carryover between PCR 
reactions and the hot start activates DNA polymerase and denaturates the dsDNA to ssDNA allowing the 
amplification to begin. The PCR cycle phase is where the amplification takes place, annealing back to dsDNA for the 
fluorescence to be recorded and repeated for the desired amount of cycles. The Melting phase is where all the 
amplicons are dsDNA again at 60 C, slowing raising the temperature recording when the fluorescence disappears, 
indicating the dsDNA is anealed or melted at a given temperature. [85] 
In order to determine the efficiency of each primer with each type of tissue sample, a dilution serie was 
created from a pool that contained all samples of the same tissue type, in this case, SAT, VAT and liver 
samples. Since the dilution series contains a known quantity of cDNA a standard curve can be created 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
from measure Ct on the y-axis against the known log10 cDNA concentration. This should give a linear 
slope from which the efficiency can be calculated.  In order to correct for any possible technical variation 
one should always use reference genes to normalize all the samples against. The ideal reference genes 
are genes that have a constant level of expression throughout all ones experimental conditions so any 
variation observed is for example due to different levels of cDNA in the samples. [81]. There should 
always be two types of controls in a rt-qPCR experiment, assay reactions that contain no reverse 
transcriptase (-RT) to detect any genomic DNA contamination and a non template control (NTC) to 
detect for any external DNA contaminations. [86] The full protocol for the Fluidigm 192.24 chip can be 
found in Appendix G 
Data analysis 
The initial data analysis was done with the Rotor-Gene Q Series and the Fluidigm Real-time PCR Analysis 
software to confirm that the amplicon is the desired product by looking at the individual melt curve. Any 
assay-sample reactions that had the wrong melting temperature were discarded. Likewise, any reaction 
that had a considerable amount of dsDNA that have a melt temperature below the product (primer 
dimer) or any detectable amount above (genomic contamination) was discarded. The -RT controls were 
compared with the same samples with RT to ensure that the -RT controls did not have the same melting 
temperature, if they did they had to have a significantly lower Cq. If not, the entire primer had to be 
discarded, the same applied if there are no non-empty NTCs. Once all invalid reactions had been 
discarded, the efficiency (E: 10(-1/slope)-1) could be determined from the dilution series. The optimal 
efficiency would be 100%, but efficiencies between 80% - 120%  with R2 higher than 0.95 were 
acceptable. Further analysis was done in GenEx(MultiD) v7. Here all the Ct values were corrected for 
efficiency, any repeat cDNA samples were averaged, and all Ct values were normalized to the chosen 
reference genes. The Cq values were then made relative to each other using: ΔCq=2(highest assay Cq - actual sample 
Cq), this set the sample with the highest Cq value to one with the rest being higher than 1. This 
transformed the data into relative quantification, which allows for an easier visualization and 
comparison of the data.  
Once this post processing was done in GeneEx the data exported to the software, Prism v9 where 
statistical analysis could be performed and the data could be visually presented in graphs. Before doing 
any statistical analysis the data looked through to remove any abnormal outliers, abnormal outliers are 
easier to spot in a graph rather than sifting through rows of numbers in an excel sheet. The statistical 
analysis also required the numbers be converted to a log2 scale. A normality test was then conducted on 
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
all the primers to see if the data followed a normal distribution. If the primers passed the normality test, 
a parametric unpaired t-test was performed to see if any of the differences observed between the tissue 
types are statistically significant. If any sample group in a primer didn’t pass the normality test, an 
nonparametric t-test ( Mann-Whitney test) was done on all sample groups to determine significance. A 
difference was determined to be significant if the t-test gave a P <0.05 and a fold change > 2. [87] 
 
ELISA Experiments  
For this project an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA) analysis was performed on serum and 
AT samples from the Ossabaw pigs to test for Porcine alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (PAGP) concentrations. 
For both sample types, a competitive ELISA was used.  In this ELISA, a plate with 96 wells was first 
coated with a monoclonal antibody specific for PAGP antigens. The plate was then incubated with milk 
solution to block the rest of the plate from binding to anything else. Next, a serum (KVL) with a known 
concentration is added to the last two columns and diluted samples are added to the remaining 
columns.  The KVL and sample serum were then 2 fold diluted down the rows on the plate.  A 
biotinylated PAGP antigen was then added to all the wells and incubated together with the samples and 
KVL serum. Here any PAGP antigen present in the sample or KVL will compete with the added 
biotinylated PAGP antigen to bind with the coated antibody. Anything not bound will be washed away.  
Streptavidin conjugated with the enzyme horseradish peroxidase (HRP) is added and incubated to allow 
streptavidin to bind to the biotin on the added PAGP antigen.   TMB is added which is a substrate for 
HRP, the enzymatic reaction between the two slowly colors the solution blue.  The rate at which this 
reaction occurs is inversely related to how much PAGP antigen was in the samples. To prevent all the 
substrate from having reacted with HRP, sulfuric acid was added to stop the reaction before it becomes 
too blue, this turns the blue color yellow. The more yellow the concentration the less PAGP was in the 
sample.  The optical density (OD) from each well was measured on Multiskan EX from Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, from these measurements the concentration of PAGP was calculated based on the standard 
curve made from the KVL serum. These calculations were made using Ascent software v.2.6, from 
Thermo Scientific. If any samples had OD values that were outside the standard curves, the 
concentrations could not be calculated and a new ELISA assay with different dilutions had to be done. 
The full protocol can be found in appendix H 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
Protein extraction from adipose tissue 
Before any PAGP protein levels in adipose tissue could be analyzed, the protein first needed to be 
extracted from the adipose tissue. 
To do this, extracted adipose tissue was added to a M-tube containing a buffer used to lyse mammalian 
cells ( RIPA buffer, Thermo Scientific) and a mixture of protease inhibitors ( cOmplete™ ULTRA Tablets, 
Mini, EDTA-free, EASYpack Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche) to prevent the released proteases to 
degrade anything.  The Adipose tissue was homogenized using gentle MACSTM Octo Dissociator (Miltenyi 
Biotec). Then the lysed tissue was centrifuged so the fat gathered on the top, The supernatant was then 
transferred, avoiding the fat,  to a new eppendorf tube. This is repeated until no more fat can be seen 
collecting on the top of the solution.  
The resulting solution was then analyzed with ELISA, but unfortunately the RIPA buffer interfered with 
the competitive ELISA giving a false positive. To fix this problem the RIPA buffer with PBS solution. This 
was first done by exchanging the solutions using a vivaspin tube (Sartorius) containing a filter. The filter 
retains protein while letting the RIPA buffer and PBS pass through. This method proved very time 
consuming and gave suboptimal results.  A far more effective method was using dialysis to remove the 
RIPA buffer. The RIPA solution that results from centrifuging is instead placed in a dialysis tube which is 
placed in a 2L flask filled with PBS and left overnight. Now the protein is dissolved/suspended in PBS 
which does not interfere with the ELISA. 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
 
Chapter 4 
Results 
Gene expression analysis  
In this project the analysis of two 192.24 Fluidigm chips was performed. The first 192.24 chip was run 
with a mixture of cDNA created by the previous master student and cDNA made from RNA that I had 
extracted.  The data from the first chip had very inconclusive results, the old cDNA seemed to have a 
more discarded samples while there was not enough of my newly extracted cDNA to draw any statically 
relevant conclusions. It was decided that a second chip would be run with cDNA coming only from RNA 
that I had recently extracted from tissue that came from the Ossabaw diet experiment.  The number of 
primers for unique genes on the second chip was narrowed down, with genes deemed interesting 
having one or more alternative primer variants.   
For the finally gene expression analysis only the data from the 2nd 192.24 Fluidigm chip was used.The 
Results from the genes SAA (101) and PNPLA2 from the second are not shown due to no data on those 
were obtained due to technical error. See Appendix K for a heat map of the 2nd chip results. SAA4 (162) 
showed contamination in it -RT sample while the RAB18 primer didn’t get an acceptable efficiency so 
these two primers are not part of the analysis either.  Of all the primers ORM and FABP4 did not pass a 
normality test, so they were tested with a non-parametric t-test. 
The data from the Rotor-Gene Q is not shown in the results, as the purpose of running the rotor-Gene Q 
was to evaluate if the selected/designed primers that were to be analyzed actually worked. The primers 
were tested 3 times, once on a production pig, once on a lean Ossabaw pig. And once on an Ossabaw pig 
injected with LPS to see if the inflammation related primers had more conclusive results. The Rotor-gene 
Q experiments were carried out on a 72 rotor-disc. The samples used for the Rotor-gene went through 
the same prerequisite steps as the Fluidigm experiment. That is, both experiments used the same cDNA, 
created from the extracted RNA that was quality controlled with NanoDrop and Bioanalyzer. The 
dilution cDNA also underwent the same cycles of pre-amplification to ensure similar concentrations for 
experiment setups.  
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
One of Peter’s previous master students, Michelle Dyhrberg Adamsen, ran both a 48.48 and 96.96 to 
determine the amount of ng RNA and  number of pre-amplification cycles that gave the best results for 
the 192.24 Fluidigm Chip. Based on her experiments, 300 ng of extracted RNA was to make the cDNA of 
the tissue sample while 21 cycles of pre-amplification were carried out on the cDNA prior to the 192.24 
chip experiments in this project. [88] 
The first 192.24 chip was run with a mixture of cDNA created by the previous master student and cDNA 
made from RNA that I had extracted.  The data from the first chip had very inconclusive results, the old 
cDNA seemed to have a far higher error rate while there was not enough of my newly extracted cDNA to 
draw any statically relevant conclusions. It was decided that a second chip would be run with cDNA 
coming only from RNA that I had extracted from the Ossabaw diet experiment.  The number of primers 
for unique genes on the second chip was narrowed down, with genes deemed interesting having one or 
alternative primer variants.   
For those primers where it was possible, a comparison to the data from the previous master student 
was performed. However the data had to be normalized again since it seemed like the SAT and VAT 
tissues were normalized and given relative values separately instead of  doing SAT and VAT combined. 
This meant that any comparison between SAT and VAT tissue couldn’t be done before a proper 
normalization had been done. 
For the ORM protein levels in adipose tissue the finally results presented in this chapter are  
The data for the ORM protein levels in adipose tissue were gotten first by extracting all proteins from 
adipose tissue and then analyzed with ELISA to determine the concentration of ORM protein in the 
adipose tissue.  This work was carried out by lab technician Henriette Vorsholt and research assistant 
Catarina Ventura based on a method that I first tried out on the adipose tissue of production pigs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
 
 
 
 
Primers tested in the 2nd 192.24 chip: 
 
Table 4.1: list of primers used in the 2nd 192.24 chip run. 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
47 
 
Real-time High Throughput qPCR 
ABHD5 
The data analysis of the gene expression of ABHD5 showed no real difference in the level of expression 
between lean and obese statein the ossabaw pig. While a 2 fold increase could be seen in VAT in 
comparison to SAT, statistical analysis showed no significant difference between any of the groups. The 
data analysis of the previous master student’s data showed a similar trend but again with no statistical 
significant difference.  
 
Figure 4.1: Gene expression of the ABHD5 gene in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The relative mRNA 
values for visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states.  The miniature graph 
is a comparison with the data from the former master student.  The error bars show the standard error 
of the mean (SEM). 
 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
The analysis of the gene FABP4 involved two different primers pairs for the gene. Primer 135 and 136, 
and for primer 135 there exists data from the former master student to make a comparison.    For FABP4 
(135) there no significate difference between SAT and VAT nor the lean or obese states. The data from 
the former master student shows the same lack of any significant difference.  But in the FABP4 (136) 
primer have a 30% higher FABP4 (136) expression in SAT obese than in SAT lean that is statistic 
significant while there a 2 fold increase in Vat obese compared to VAT lean which is also statically 
significant. 
 
Figure 4.2: Gene expression of the FABP4 gene in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The relative mRNA 
values for visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states for primer FABP4 135 
and 136. The miniature graph is a comparison with the FABP 135 data from the former master student.  
The error bars show the s (SEM), * indicates a P value <0.05, **indicates a P < 0.01. 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
Leptin 
For the data analysis of Leptin two different primers pairs for the LEP gene was used, LEP 133 and LEP 
161. For the LEP 133 primer there exists corresponding data from the former master student so a 
comparison could be made. In my chip run both the primers showed no difference in neither SAT and 
VAT nor lean and obese.  While Michelles’ data shows twice the expression in SAT vs VAT and close to a 
2 fold increase in the obese state for both tissue, but only significant for the VAT lean vs VAR obese 
 
 
Figure 4.3: Gene expression of the LEP gene in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The relative mRNA values for 
visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states for primer LEP 133 and 161. The miniature 
graph is a comparison with the LEP 133 data from the former master student.  The error bars show SEM, * 
indicates a P value <0.05. 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
 
The LEPR gene had four different primer variants used in its analysis, LEPR 134, LEPR 158, LEPR 159 and 
LEPR 160. Data for the LEP 134  was also available from the previous master student to make a 
comparison. All the four primers generally show the same trends with varying fold changes and 
statistical significance. In the lean tissue VAT has between a 2-17 fold higher expression of LEPR than 
SAT tissue. The obese tissue, VAT has between 6-20 fold higher expressions of LEPR than SAT tissue. 
Looking only at the SAT tissue there between a 3-20 fold downregulation in the obese tissue and in VAT 
the obese samples has a 1.7–4 fold downregulation compared to the lean samples. 
 
 Figure 4.4: Gene expression of the LEPR gene in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The relative mRNA 
values for visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states for primer LERP 134, 
158, 159 and 160. Comparison with the LEPR 134 data from the former master student.  The error bars 
show SEM, * indicates a P value <0.05, ** indicate a P<0.01, *** indicates a P< 0.005 ,**** indicates 
P<0.001.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
51 
 
ORM 
In the data analysis of ORM it was necessary to the results in Log 2 because of the large difference in Cq 
value in the different tissues.  There is a 9 log2 difference in SAT Lean vs obese which translates to an 
over 500 fold downregulation in SAT obese which is statistically significant. The 7 log2 difference 
between SAT lean and VAT lean translates to 128 fold higher expression of ORM in SAT lean which is 
statistically significant. The 2 log2 difference between VAT lean and VAT obese translation to a 4 fold 
downregulation in VAT obese.  The gene expression in the liver doesn’t significantly change between 
lean and obese. 
Liver Lean
Liver Obese
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
ORM Liver
Relative vaules
 
Figure 4.5 : Gene expression of the ORM gene in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The relative mRNA 
values for visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states for primer ORM as well 
as liver expression .  The error bars show SEM, * indicates a P value <0.05, ** indicate a P<0.01.  
 
 
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
TNF⍺ 
The analysis of TNF⍺  expression showed a significant 7 fold higher expression in lean SAT than lean VAT. 
Similar a very significant 7 fold higher expression was seen in SAT obese compared to VAT obese. In both 
tissues, a slight downregulation in the obese state was observed, but not significant difference was 
found. 
 
Figure 4.6 : Gene expression of the TNF⍺ gene in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The relative mRNA 
values for visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states for primer TNF⍺   The 
error bars show SEM, * indicates a P value <0.05, **** indicate a P<0.001.  
 
 
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
The analysis of the data for the IL1b shows a 13 fold higher expression in VAT lean compared to SAT lean 
and 7 fold higher expression i VAT obese over SAT obese, both these difference are statistically 
significant. No real difference between expression in the obese and lean states were observed in both 
tissue types. 
For the analysis of SAA a downregulation in the obese state is observed in both SAT (4 fold) and 
VAT(40%) but not of statistical significance.  A statistically significant 8 fold higher expression was found 
in the VAT obese compared to SAT obese. 
 
 
Figure 4.7: Gene expression of the IL1b  and SAA genes in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The relative 
mRNA values for visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states for IL1b and SAA   
The error bars show SEM, * indicates a P value <0.05, **** indicate a P<0.001. 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
The data analysis for the gene expression of ADIPOQ and LCN2 shows that 2 ADIPOQ is 2 fold more 
expressed in SAT Lean than in VAT lean. While in LCN2 the expression in VAT obese is twice as high 
compared to SAT obese.  
 
Figure 4.8: Gene expression of the ADIPOQ and LCN2 genes in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The 
relative mRNA values for visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states for 
ADIPOQ and LCN2.  The error bars show SEM, * indicates a P value <0.05, **** indicate a P<0.001. 
==PAGE:55==
55 
 
 
Figure 4.9: Gene expression of the GLUT4 gene in 6 lean and 9 obese Ossabaw Pigs. The relative mRNA 
values for visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissue in the two states for GLUT4  The error 
bars show SEM, * indicates a P value <0.05. 
 
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
 
ELISA PAGP 
The result of the ELISA analysis of serum from lean and obese Ossabaw pigs show a 50% decrease in 
PAGP levels in the obese pigs with a P valve below 0.005. 
 
 
Figure 4.10: ORM protein serum concentrations between 6 lean and 9 obese ossabaw pigs. 
 
SAT lean
SAT obese
VAT lean 
Vat obese 
0
1
2
3
4
Adipose ORM protein
Relative ORM protein
✱✱✱
✱✱
 
Figure 4.11: ORM protein concentration extracted from SAT and VAT in 6 lean and 9 obese ossabaw 
pigs. The error bars show SEM, ** indicates a P value <0.01, *** indicate a P<0.005. 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
57 
 
 
Summary of Results 
When looking at all the primers, they can be divided into groups with differences in tissue type, group 
with differences in obese/lean states and groups with no differences.  
The genes ABHD5, LEPR, IL1b and SAA are higher expressed in visceral adipose tissue than subcutaneous 
adipose tissue. For FABP4, ORM TNF⍺  and ADIPOQ have a lower expression in VAT. The genes LEP and 
GLUT4 have no difference in the two tissue types observed.  
The genes that saw a downregulation in the obese state were LEPR, ORM and SAA. While only FABP4 
saw an upregulation in the obese state. The genes ABHD5, LEP, TNF⍺, IL1ꞵ, ADIPOQ and LCN2 saw no 
change between the lean and obese state.  
A quick overview of the VAT/SAT and obese/lean expressions have been summarized in the table below: 
Gene 
VAT vs SAT 
Obese vs Lean 
ABHD5 
Higher 
No difference 
FABP4  
Lower 
Small increase 
LEP 
No difference 
No difference 
LEPR 
Much higher 
Decrease 
ORM 
Much lower 
Very decreased 
TNF⍺ 
Much lower 
No difference  
IL1b 
Much higher 
No difference  
SAA 
Higher 
No difference 
ADIPOQ 
Lower 
No difference 
LCN2 
Increase  
No difference 
GLUT4 
No difference 
SAT decrease 
Table 4.2: Observed VAT/SAT and obese/lean difference or lack of, for all primers tested  
The ELISA analysis also showed that ORM levels in serum decreases by about 50 % in the obese Ossabaw 
pigs.  The ELISA analysis on proteins extracted from adipose tissue showed a 2 fold decrease in the 
obese pigs both for SAT and VAT. The protein levels between SAT and VAT were almost identical in both 
the lean and obese state.  
 
 
==PAGE:58==
58 
 
Chapter 5 
Discussion and Conclusion 
 
A thing to be aware of when discussing gene expressions is that protein levels and the expression of the 
gene encoding the protein are not necessarily correlated.  A 2009 study showed that 30 to 85% of all 
protein variation was due to variation in mRNA expression and the remaining variation is likely because 
post transcriptional or post-translational regulation. [89] Of the 11 genes analyzed, only 4 showed 
significant difference between the lean and obese states. While it is possible that there is no real change 
occurring in these gene expressions, there are several reasons why a difference is not seen in the results 
of this project. The tissue extracted only display contain the gene expression at the end of the 11-week 
diet experiment, the genes could have been differentially expressed earlier in the experiment and 
reverted again. It could be that more time is needed before the changes are expressed. It could also 
simply be that 6 lean and 9 obese pigs do not give enough data points to be statically significant for 
those genes.  
 The expression of ORM in the Ossabaw pig displays a dramatic change between the lean and obese 
state in both tissue types as well large difference between the two tissue types.  The obese state is 
associated with a 500 fold decrease in ORM expression in the SAT and a 4 fold decrease in the VAT. And 
a 128 fold higher expression in lean SAT compared to lean VAT. The large downregulation that is shown 
in the obese state during this project is somewhat contradictory to the known fact that ORM serum 
levels in obese humans is increased nor are there any difference in ORM expression between SAT and 
VAT. [41] Increased ORM expression in adipose tissue and serum protein is also seen in obese mice.  [96] 
But there is some data that suggests that ORM acts as a negative APP in swine in contrast to all other 
mammals studied. When exposed to infection or inflammation the Ossabaw pig displayed a decrease in 
serum ORM and in ORM expression in liver tissue [40]. Previous data (non published) that was 
reproduced in this master project showed that serum ORM is decreased about 50% in obese Ossabaw 
pigs in the short-term diet experiment. The ORM protein levels in adipose tissue also display a twofold 
decrease in the obese state for both SAT and VAT, but no difference between SAT and VAT were seen. It 
is interesting that this project found ORM to be downregulated at both the gene expression level and 
protein level in adipose tissue as well as at the protein level in serum. While the ORM expression in liver 
tissue doesn’t change between lean and obese. The very large downregulation on the gene expression 
==PAGE:59==
59 
 
level (especially in SAT) is very muted on adipose protein and serum level. This suggests is that some of 
the ORM protein in adipose tissue and in serum could be derived from outside the adipose tissue, likely 
from the liver. It could be that some post transcriptional or post-translational regulation is occurring 
causing a 500 fold downregulation to become a 2 fold decrease on protein level. ORM mRNA could be 
degraded before protein translation occurs or the proteins could degrade quickly after translation. 
MicroRNA could inhibit ORM mRNA from being translated at all. Another possibility is that some of the 
ORM protein in adipose tissue could be derived from outside the adipose tissue. Perhaps adipose tissue 
could have storage pools of ORM that can be released as needed. These pools could compensate for the 
decrease in gene expression making the downregulation less pronounced on protein level. Regardless of 
the discrepancy between changes in ORM gene expression and changes in adipose protein level, there 
seem to be a good correlation between adipose ORM protein levels and ORM levels in serum, a 2 fold 
decrease in adipose protein and a 50% decrease in serum ORM. This may reflect that ORM secreted 
from adipose tissue is contributing to the total serum ORM at significant level. But ORM produced in the 
liver is likely the biggest contributor (hepatic ORM expression was not affected by obesity). Previous 
studies have also shown the opposite, that obese Ossabaw pigs showed an increased ORM serum level. 
It should be noted that this was with a different diet and duration for the diet experiment. The same 
study saw no change in ORM serum concentration in Göttingen breed nor in production pigs between 
the lean and obese state [43].  In conclusion, serum ORM levels are influenced by both hepatic and 
extrahepatic sources and the regulation of ORM is likely complex and depends on both diet type and 
dieting duration. 
The LEPR expressions analysis of 4 different variants of LEPR primers all showed the same trend. The 
obese pigs had a 3-20 fold higher LEPR expression in VAT and 6-20 fold higher in SAT. Both in the lean 
and obese state, LEPR was more expressed in VAT, 3-20 fold higher expression for the lean pig and 6-20 
for the obese pigs. Leptin resistance is well known to be associated with obesity but the mechanisms are 
still not well understood. One of the hypothesis of what drives leptin resistance is a reduction in LEPR 
expression.[68] The findings of this project are in concordance with this hypothesis.  A 2014 paper that 
analyzed gene expression in 15 obese patients and 15 lean patient found similar results. LEPR was more 
than 2 times more expressed in VAT than SAT and both tissue saw a downregulation in the obese state. 
The paper however, did not find any of these differences significant. [90] There remains the question of 
which came first, is the reduced LEPR expression caused by obesity, or does the reduced LEPR 
expression help cause obesity via leptin resistance? Since leptin levels are known to be elevated with 
obesity, it was expected to see LEP expressions in adipose tissue to be increased in the obese Ossabaw 
==PAGE:60==
60 
 
pigs. However, the results from this project show no significate difference between the lean and obese 
states. The results from the previous master student show 2 fold increases in the obese state is what 
would be expected. The short duration of the diet experiment could mean that hyperleptinemia 
normally seen with obesity had not had enough time to properly manifest in the 11 weeks the ossabaw 
pigs were on the HFHF diet. There needs to be leptin studies at protein level, to see if adipose protein 
levels are correlated with LEP expression or if circulating leptin are derived from other tissue than 
adipose tissue. 
One of the more surprising results comes from the analysis of TNF⍺. The gene expression of TNF⍺ 
showed no difference between lean and obese states and showed a 7 fold higher expression in SAT 
compared to VAT. This goes against the fact that TNF⍺ expression is known to be increased in adipose 
tissue of obese swine (Tongcheng and Dabia breeds) and murine models. [91,92]. TNF⍺’s prominent role 
in inducing insulin resistance and inflammation in human obesity[17] and the fact that VAT is far more 
associated with obesity pathology [51] would suggest that TNF⍺ expression should be higher in VAT 
compared to SAT. That the data from this project are the opposite from what is expected is most 
confusing and suggest further investigation into TNF⍺ expression in obesity. 
Some primers showed no difference between the obese and lean state, but had statistical significant 
differences between SAT and VAT.  The expression of LCN2, IL1β and SAA were all higher in VAT 
compared to SAT while ADIPOQ had a lower expression in VAT.  The LCN2 expression in VAT obese is 2 
fold higher than SAT obese.  IL1β shows a 13 fold higher expression in VAT lean compared to SAT lean 
and a 7 fold higher expression in VAT obese compared to SAT obese. SAA expression is 8 fold higher in 
VAT obese compared to SAT obese. ADIPOQ expression shows a 2 fold decrease in VAT lean compared 
to SAT lean.  LCN2 is an APP that is increased in many diseases that it is seen as a potential biomarker.  
LCN2 is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that induces insulin resistance and promotes atherosclerosis. [93] 
IL1β is a powerful cytokine that is mainly produced by innate immune cells in response to PAMPs 
binding to PRRs [94]. SAA is also a major biomarker for inflammation that has pro-inflammatory 
properties. [45] While ADIPOQ has anti-inflammatory properties.  That this project found higher 
expression of 3 pro-inflammatory genes in VAT and a lower expression of 1 anti-inflammatory gene is 
indicative of VAT being more inflamed than SAT. This suggests that VAT plays a bigger role than SAT in 
the chronic low level inflammation that accompanies obesity. The accumulation of VAT is known to be 
associated with many of the criteria of MetS, such as hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, 
hypertriglyceridemia and impaired glucose tolerance. [51] 
 
==PAGE:61==
61 
 
Chapter 6 
Future perspectives 
Moving forward from this project, it could be interesting to investigate differential gene expression in 
Ossabaw pigs on shorter diet experiments to see if there are any very brief changes that are already 
undetectable by week 11. Doing long-term diet experiment, for example 5 years or longer could be 
interesting. The changes resulting from years of obesity could be markedly different from short-term 
obesity and would be more in line with how obesity progresses in humans. Most humans do not become 
obese through very rapid weight gain, but it happens slowly over the course of many years or decades.  
The most optimal diet experiment would be long-term where tissue could be extracted at many time 
points throughout the experiment to better follow the progression of obesity. While this kind of 
longditudal study is doable for SAT, it is far more questionable if it is possible to keep pigs alive after VAT 
extractions. There are also possible ethical issues that could arise with continuous tissue extractions of 
living pigs. A solution could be to include imaging technology (PET or MRI) to follow the metabolism of 
the pigs throughout their obesity. A 2009 paper showed that it is possible to use PET scanning to 
evaluate bone metabolism. [95] Doing the opposite type of experiment, a weight loss experiment to see 
if the changes occurred during obesity are reversible would also be interesting to investigate. 
Researching how/if different types of obesogenic diets affect the body differently could very helpful in 
preventative and curative treatments of obesity. This could be obesogenic low fat, high sugar or high fat, 
low sugar diets, the level of fiber, the level of saturated fat or the level of protein are parameters that 
could be adjusted in the diets.  
Analyzing the gene expressions in different biological pathways might be an interesting avenue to 
pursue.  For example, investigating gene expression related to adipogenesis and adipocyte 
differentiation are pathways very relevant to obesity. Moreover, there are still many more genes related 
to lipolysis and lipogenesis that can analyzed.  Relevant to the lipolysis and lipogenesis genes would be 
to analyze the enzymatic activity of the protein encoded to see if any changes occur with obesity 
And the enzymatic activity by the proteins encoded by said genes would be interesting to see if any 
change occurs  
It is not a given that gene expressions and protein levels are actually correlated. Investigating protein 
levels and between obese and lean states could be a good area to pursue to corroborate any data 
==PAGE:62==
62 
 
gotten from gene expression analysis. Another interesting area of interest would be receptor sensitivity, 
both for leptin and insulin receptors. This could be done with assays testing binding affinities between 
receptor and ligands at different stages of obesity. Another possibility would be an assay that tests the 
effectiveness of the receptor signaling pathways. 
It could also be interesting to study preadipocytes and how the differentiation of them change with 
obesity. Currently if one has to study preadipocytes it has to be done as soon as tissue samples have 
been taken and the culture created are difficult to maintain and usually have a short lifespan. These 
limitations make the study of preadipocytes difficult.  However, studies indicate that it is possible to 
isolate preadipocytes and freeze them with cryoprotective agents which allows for normal 
differentiation after thawing. [96] This enables longitudinal studies of adipocytes and their functionality, 
including how they response to pro-inflammatory cytokines and other factors.  
Other areas that could be of interest to explore: 
An analysis of the whole transcriptome which includes miRNA, noncoding RNA and epigenetic patterns 
and how it changes with obesity. 
Studies with acute inflammation and comparison with chronic low-level inflammation seen in obesity. 
 
 
 
 
Litterature 
 
1. www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight Accessed: 6 Feb. 2020 
2. Sahoo K, Sahoo B, Choudhury AK, Sofi NY, Kumar R, Bhadoria AS. Childhood obesity: causes and 
consequences. J Family Med Prim Care. 2015;4(2):187-192. doi:10.4103/2249-4863.154628 
3. Engin A. (2017). The Definition and Prevalence of Obesity and Metabolic Syndrome. Advances in 
experimental medicine and biology, 960, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-48382-5_1 
4. Tremmel M, Gerdtham UG, Nilsson PM, Saha S. Economic Burden of Obesity: A Systematic 
Literature Review. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(4):435. Published 2017 Apr 19. 
doi:10.3390/ijerph14040435 
5. Kleinert M, Clemmensen C, Hofmann SM, et al. Animal models of obesity and diabetes mellitus. 
Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2018;14(3):140-162. doi:10.1038/nrendo.2017.161 
==PAGE:63==
63 
 
6. Sturek M, Alloosh M, Sellke FW. Swine Disease Models for Optimal Vascular Engineering. Annu 
Rev Biomed Eng. 2020 Jun 4;22:25-49. doi: 10.1146/annurev-bioeng-082919-053009 
7. Blüher M. Obesity: global epidemiology and pathogenesis. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2019;15(5):288-
298. doi:10.1038/s41574-019-0176-8 
8. Kopp W. How Western Diet And Lifestyle Drive The Pandemic Of Obesity And Civilization 
Diseases. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2019;12:2221-2236. Published 2019 Oct 24. 
doi:10.2147/DMSO.S216791 
9. Han TS, Lean ME. A clinical perspective of obesity, metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular 
disease. JRSM Cardiovasc Dis. 2016;5:2048004016633371. Published 2016 Feb 25. 
doi:10.1177/2048004016633371 
10. Mendrick DL, Diehl AM, Topor LS, et al. Metabolic Syndrome and Associated Diseases: From the 
Bench to the Clinic. Toxicol Sci. 2018;162(1):36-42. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfx233 
11. Grundy SM. Metabolic syndrome pandemic. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008;28(4):629-636. 
doi:10.1161/ATVBAHA.107.151092 
12. Leszek Szablewski (July 29th 2019). Introductory Chapter: Adipose Tissue, Adipose Tissue - An 
Update, Leszek Szablewski, IntechOpen, DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.88420. Available from: 
https://www.intechopen.com/chapters/68341 
13. Gray SL, Vidal-Puig AJ. Adipose tissue expandability in the maintenance of metabolic 
homeostasis. Nutr Rev. 2007;65(6 Pt 2):S7-S12. doi:10.1111/j.1753-4887.2007.tb00331.x 
14. Carobbio S, Pellegrinelli V, Vidal-Puig A. Adipose Tissue Function and Expandability as 
Determinants of Lipotoxicity and the Metabolic Syndrome. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2017;960:161-196. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-48382-5_7 
15. Moreno-Indias I, Tinahones FJ. Impaired adipose tissue expandability and lipogenic capacities as 
ones of the main causes of metabolic disorders. J Diabetes Res. 2015;2015:970375. 
doi:10.1155/2015/970375 
16. Weisberg SP, McCann D, Desai M, Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL, Ferrante AW Jr. Obesity is 
associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. J Clin Invest. 2003;112(12):1796-
1808. doi:10.1172/JCI19246 
17. Guilherme A, Virbasius JV, Puri V, Czech MP. Adipocyte dysfunctions linking obesity to insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008;9(5):367-377. doi:10.1038/nrm2391 
18. Mukherjee B, Hossain CM, Mondal L, Paul P, Ghosh MK. Obesity and insulin resistance: an 
abridged molecular correlation. Lipid Insights. 2013;6:1-11. Published 2013 Apr 1. 
doi:10.4137/LPI.S10805 
19. Armoni M, Harel C, Bar-Yoseph F, Milo S, Karnieli E. Free fatty acids repress the GLUT4 gene 
expression in cardiac muscle via novel response elements. J Biol Chem. 2005;280(41):34786-
34795. doi:10.1074/jbc.M502740200 
20. McCracken E, Monaghan M, Sreenivasan S. Pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome. Clin 
Dermatol. 2018;36(1):14-20. doi:10.1016/j.clindermatol.2017.09.004 
21. Scherer T, O'Hare J, Diggs-Andrews K, et al. Brain insulin controls adipose tissue lipolysis and 
lipogenesis. Cell Metab. 2011;13(2):183-194. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2011.01.008 
22. Tsai M, Asakawa A, Amitani H, Inui A. Stimulation of leptin secretion by insulin. Indian J 
Endocrinol Metab. 2012;16(Suppl 3):S543-S548. doi:10.4103/2230-8210.105570 
23. Mark AL. Selective leptin resistance revisited. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 
2013;305(6):R566-R581. doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00180.2013 
==PAGE:64==
64 
 
24. Arner P, Rydén M. Fatty Acids, Obesity and Insulin Resistance. Obes Facts. 2015;8(2):147-155. 
doi:10.1159/000381224 
25. Rydén M, Petrus P, Andersson DP, et al. Insulin action is severely impaired in adipocytes of 
apparently healthy overweight and obese subjects. J Intern Med. 2019;285(5):578-588. 
doi:10.1111/joim.12887 
26. Talukdar S, Oh DY, Bandyopadhyay G, et al. Neutrophils mediate insulin resistance in mice fed a 
high-fat diet through secreted elastase. Nat Med. 2012;18(9):1407-1412. doi:10.1038/nm.2885 
27. Rocha VZ, Folco EJ, Sukhova G, et al. Interferon-gamma, a Th1 cytokine, regulates fat 
inflammation: a role for adaptive immunity in obesity. Circ Res. 2008;103(5):467-476. 
doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.177105 
28. Nishimura S, Manabe I, Nagasaki M, et al. CD8+ effector T cells contribute to macrophage 
recruitment and adipose tissue inflammation in obesity. Nat Med. 2009;15(8):914-920. 
doi:10.1038/nm.1964 
29. Choe SS, Huh JY, Hwang IJ, Kim JI, Kim JB. Adipose Tissue Remodeling: Its Role in Energy 
Metabolism and Metabolic Disorders. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2016;7:30. Published 2016 
Apr 13. doi:10.3389/fendo.2016.00030 
30. Wu D, Molofsky AB, Liang HE, et al. Eosinophils sustain adipose alternatively activated 
macrophages associated with glucose homeostasis. Science. 2011;332(6026):243-247. 
doi:10.1126/science.1201475 
31. Feuerer M, Herrero L, Cipolletta D, et al. Lean, but not obese, fat is enriched for a unique 
population of regulatory T cells that affect metabolic parameters. Nat Med. 2009;15(8):930-939. 
doi:10.1038/nm.2002 
32. Arner P. Resistin: yet another adipokine tells us that men are not mice. Diabetologia. 
2005;48(11):2203-2205. doi:10.1007/s00125-005-1956-3 
33. Seok J, Warren HS, Cuenca AG, et al. Genomic responses in mouse models poorly mimic human 
inflammatory diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110(9):3507-3512. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1222878110 
34. Joe AW, Yi L, Even Y, Vogl AW, Rossi FM. Depot-specific differences in adipogenic progenitor 
abundance and proliferative response to high-fat diet. Stem Cells. 2009;27(10):2563-2570. 
doi:10.1002/stem.190 
35. Wang QA, Tao C, Gupta RK, Scherer PE. Tracking adipogenesis during white adipose tissue 
development, expansion and regeneration. Nat Med. 2013;19(10):1338-1344. 
doi:10.1038/nm.3324 
36. NEEL JV. Diabetes mellitus: a "thrifty" genotype rendered detrimental by "progress"?. Am J Hum 
Genet. 1962;14(4):353-362. 
37. Zhang Y, Fan G, Liu X, Skovgaard K, Sturek M, Heegaard PMH. The genome of the naturally 
evolved obesity-prone Ossabaw miniature pig. iScience. 2021;24(9):103081. Published 2021 Sep 
3. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2021.103081 
38. Cray C, Zaias J, Altman NH. Acute phase response in animals: a review. Comp Med. 
2009;59(6):517-526. 
39. Ramsay, T. G., Stoll, M. J., Blomberg, l., & Caperna, T. J. (2016). Regulation of cytokine gene 
expression by orosomucoid in neonatal swine adipose tissue. Journal of animal science and 
biotechnology, 7, 25. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40104-016-0081-0 
==PAGE:65==
65 
 
40. Heegaard PM, Miller I, Sorensen NS, Soerensen KE, Skovgaard K. Pig α1-acid glycoprotein: 
characterization and first description in any species as a negative acute phase protein. PLoS One. 
2013;8(7):e68110. Published 2013 Jul 2. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068110 
41. Alfadda, A. A., Fatma, S., Chishti, M. A., Al-Naami, M. Y., Elawad, R., Mendoza, C. D., Jo, H., & 
Lee, Y. S. (2012). Orosomucoid serum concentrations and fat depot-specific mRNA and protein 
expression in humans. Molecules and cells, 33(1), 35–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10059-012-
2181-9 
42. Sun Y, Yang Y, Qin Z, et al. The Acute-Phase Protein Orosomucoid Regulates Food Intake and 
Energy Homeostasis via Leptin Receptor Signaling Pathway. Diabetes. 2016;65(6):1630-1641. 
doi:10.2337/db15-1193 
43. Rødgaard, T., Stagsted, J., Christoffersen, B. Ø., Cirera, S., Moesgaard, S. G., Sturek, M., Alloosh, 
M., & Heegaard, P. M. (2013). Orosomucoid expression profiles in liver, adipose tissues and 
serum of lean and obese domestic pigs, Göttingen minipigs and Ossabaw minipigs. Veterinary 
immunology and immunopathology, 151(3-4), 325–330. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vetimm.2012.11.002 
44. Zhao Y, He X, Shi X, et al. Association between serum amyloid A and obesity: a meta-analysis and 
systematic review. Inflamm Res. 2010;59(5):323-334. doi:10.1007/s00011-010-0163-y 
45. Yang RZ, Lee MJ, Hu H, et al. Acute-phase serum amyloid A: an inflammatory adipokine and 
potential link between obesity and its metabolic complications. PLoS Med. 2006;3(6):e287.  
46. Richard AJ, White U, Elks CM, Stephens JM. Adipose Tissue: Physiology to Metabolic 
Dysfunction. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Boyce A, et al., eds. Endotext. South Dartmouth (MA): 
MDText.com, Inc.; April 4, 2020. 
47. Giordano A, Smorlesi A, Frontini A, Barbatelli G, Cinti S. White, brown and pink adipocytes: the 
extraordinary plasticity of the adipose organ. Eur J Endocrinol. 2014;170(5):R159-R171. 
Published 2014 Apr 10. doi:10.1530/EJE-13-0945 
48. Freedland ES. Role of a critical visceral adipose tissue threshold (CVATT) in metabolic syndrome: 
implications for controlling dietary carbohydrates: a review. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2004;1(1):12. 
Published 2004 Nov 5. doi:10.1186/1743-7075-1-12 
49. Ibrahim MM. Subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue: structural and functional differences. 
Obes Rev. 2010;11(1):11-18. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2009.00623.x 
50. Arner P. Differences in lipolysis between human subcutaneous and omental adipose tissues. Ann 
Med. 1995;27(4):435-438. doi:10.3109/07853899709002451 
51. Lemieux S, Després JP. Metabolic complications of visceral obesity: contribution to the aetiology 
of type 2 diabetes and implications for prevention and treatment. Diabete Metab. 
1994;20(4):375-393. 
52. Samaras K, Botelho NK, Chisholm DJ, Lord RV. Subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue gene 
expression of serum adipokines that predict type 2 diabetes. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2010;18(5):884-889. doi:10.1038/oby.2009.443 
53. Cinti S, Mitchell G, Barbatelli G, et al. Adipocyte death defines macrophage localization and 
function in adipose tissue of obese mice and humans. J Lipid Res. 2005;46(11):2347-2355. 
doi:10.1194/jlr.M500294-JLR200 
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
54. Jernås M, Palming J, Sjöholm K, et al. Separation of human adipocytes by size: hypertrophic fat 
cells display distinct gene expression. FASEB J. 2006;20(9):1540-1542. doi:10.1096/fj.05-5678fje 
55. Trayhurn P. Hypoxia and adipose tissue function and dysfunction in obesity. Physiol Rev. 
2013;93(1):1-21. doi:10.1152/physrev.00017.2012 
56. Wueest S, Rapold RA, Rytka JM, Schoenle EJ, Konrad D. Basal lipolysis, not the degree of insulin 
resistance, differentiates large from small isolated adipocytes in high-fat fed mice. Diabetologia. 
2009;52(3):541-546. doi:10.1007/s00125-008-1223-5 
57. Shi H, Kokoeva MV, Inouye K, Tzameli I, Yin H, Flier JS. TLR4 links innate immunity and fatty acid-
induced insulin resistance. J Clin Invest. 2006;116(11):3015-3025. doi:10.1172/JCI28898 
58. Nielsen, T. S., Jessen, N., Jørgensen, J. O., Møller, N., & Lund, S. (2014). Dissecting adipose tissue 
lipolysis: molecular regulation and implications for metabolic disease. Journal of molecular 
endocrinology, 52(3), R199–R222. https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-13-0277 
59. Schlueter, N., de Sterke, A., Willmes, D. M., Spranger, J., Jordan, J., & Birkenfeld, A. L. (2014). 
Metabolic actions of natriuretic peptides and therapeutic potential in the metabolic syndrome. 
Pharmacology & therapeutics, 144(1), 12–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.04.007 
60. Dimitriadis G, Mitrou P, Lambadiari V, Maratou E, Raptis SA. Insulin effects in muscle and 
adipose tissue. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011;93 Suppl 1:S52-S59. doi:10.1016/S0168-
8227(11)70014-6 
61. Cao H, Sekiya M, Ertunc ME, et al. Adipocyte lipid chaperone AP2 is a secreted adipokine 
regulating hepatic glucose production. Cell Metab. 2013;17(5):768-778. 
doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2013.04.012 
62. Xu A, Wang Y, Xu JY, et al. Adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein is a plasma biomarker closely 
associated with obesity and metabolic syndrome. Clin Chem. 2006;52(3):405-413. 
doi:10.1373/clinchem.2005.062463 
63. Karczewska-Kupczewska M, Nikołajuk A, Majewski R, et al. Changes in adipose tissue lipolysis 
gene expression and insulin sensitivity after weight loss. Endocr Connect. 2020;9(2):90-100. 
doi:10.1530/EC-19-0507 
64. Song Z, Xiaoli AM, Yang F. Regulation and Metabolic Significance of De Novo Lipogenesis in 
Adipose Tissues. Nutrients. 2018;10(10):1383. Published 2018 Sep 29. doi:10.3390/nu10101383 
65. Eissing L, Scherer T, Tödter K, et al. De novo lipogenesis in human fat and liver is linked to 
ChREBP-β and metabolic health. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1528. doi:10.1038/ncomms2537 
66. Shimabukuro M, Koyama K, Chen G, et al. Direct antidiabetic effect of leptin through triglyceride 
depletion of tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94(9):4637-4641. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.94.9.4637 
67. Francisco V, Pino J, Gonzalez-Gay MA, et al. Adipokines and inflammation: is it a question of 
weight?. Br J Pharmacol. 2018;175(10):1569-1579. doi:10.1111/bph.14181 
68. Obradovic M, Sudar-Milovanovic E, Soskic S, et al. Leptin and Obesity: Role and Clinical 
Implication. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021;12:585887. Published 2021 May 18. 
doi:10.3389/fendo.2021.585887 
==PAGE:67==
67 
 
69. Philbrick KA, Wong CP, Branscum AJ, Turner RT, Iwaniec UT. Leptin stimulates bone formation in 
ob/ob mice at doses having minimal impact on energy metabolism. J Endocrinol. 
2017;232(3):461-474. doi:10.1530/JOE-16-0484 
70. Martínez-Sánchez N. (2020). There and Back Again: Leptin Actions in White Adipose 
Tissue. International journal of molecular sciences, 21(17), 6039. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21176039 
71. Matarese G., Procaccini C., Pucino V., Mantzoros C. (2015) Leptin, Immune Function, and 
Inflammation. In: Dagogo-Jack, MD S. (eds) Leptin. Springer, Cham. https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1007/978-3-319-09915-6_11 
72. Malin SK, Bena J, Abood B, et al. Attenuated improvements in adiponectin and fat loss 
characterize type 2 diabetes non-remission status after bariatric surgery. Diabetes Obes Metab. 
2014;16(12):1230-1238. doi:10.1111/dom.12376 
73. Arita Y, Kihara S, Ouchi N, et al. Paradoxical decrease of an adipose-specific protein, adiponectin, 
in obesity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999;257(1):79-83. doi:10.1006/bbrc.1999.0255 
74. Hotta K, Funahashi T, Bodkin NL, et al. Circulating concentrations of the adipocyte protein 
adiponectin are decreased in parallel with reduced insulin sensitivity during the progression to 
type 2 diabetes in rhesus monkeys. Diabetes. 2001;50(5):1126-1133. 
doi:10.2337/diabetes.50.5.1126 
75. Fu Y, Luo N, Klein RL, Garvey WT. Adiponectin promotes adipocyte differentiation, insulin 
sensitivity, and lipid accumulation. J Lipid Res. 2005;46(7):1369-1379. doi:10.1194/jlr.M400373-
JLR200 
76. Ouchi N, Kihara S, Arita Y, et al. Adiponectin, an adipocyte-derived plasma protein, inhibits 
endothelial NF-kappaB signaling through a cAMP-dependent pathway. Circulation. 
2000;102(11):1296-1301. doi:10.1161/01.cir.102.11.1296 
77. O’Leary V.B., Kirwan J.P. (2017) Adiponectin, Obesity, and Cancer. In: Reizes O., Berger N. (eds) 
Adipocytokines, Energy Balance, and Cancer. Energy Balance and Cancer, vol 12. Springer, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-41677-9_2 
78. Wagner EM. Monitoring gene expression: quantitative real-time rt-PCR. Methods Mol Biol. 
2013;1027:19-45. doi:10.1007/978-1-60327-369-5_2 
79. Qiagen, “RNeasy Ⓡ Lipid Tissue Mini Handbook. “ pp 1-44, 2018 
80.  G.Koetsier and E.Cantor, “A Practical Guide  to Analyzing Nucleic Acid Concentration and 
 
Purity with Microvolume Spectrophotometers,” New England Biolabs, pp. 1–8, 2019 
81. Taylor, S., Wakem, M., Dijkman, G., Alsarraj, M., & Nguyen, M. (2010). A practical approach to 
RT-qPCR-Publishing data that conform to the MIQE guidelines. Methods (San Diego, Calif.), 
50(4), S1–S5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2010.01.00 
82. QuantiTect,“QuantiTect®Reverse Transcription Kit,”2016. [Online]. 
Available: 
www.qiagen.com/HB-0189 
83. Korenková V, Scott J, Novosadová V, et al. Pre-amplification in the context of high-throughput 
qPCR gene expression experiment. BMC Mol Biol. 2015;16:5. Published 2015 Mar 11. 
doi:10.1186/s12867-015-0033-9 
==PAGE:68==
68 
 
84. Tajadini M, Panjehpour M, Javanmard SH. Comparison of SYBR Green and TaqMan methods in 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis of four adenosine receptor subtypes. 
Adv Biomed Res. 2014;3:85. Published 2014 Feb 28. doi:10.4103/2277-9175.127998 
85. ThermoFisher, “Real-time PCR  handbook,”  2015.9 
86. Nolan T, Hands RE, Bustin SA. Quantification of mRNA using real-time RT-PCR. Nat Protoc. 
2006;1(3):1559-1582. doi:10.1038/nprot.2006.236 
87. Brogaard L, Klitgaard K, Heegaard PM, Hansen MS, Jensen TK, Skovgaard K. Concurrent host-
pathogen gene expression in the lungs of pigs challenged with Actinobacillus 
pleuropneumoniae. BMC Genomics. 2015;16(1):417. Published 2015 May 28. 
doi:10.1186/s12864-015-1557-6 
88. Adamsen MD  (2021). Adipose functionality in a big animal model of obesity. Ex vivo study of 
adipocytes from the obese Ossabaw pig, Adipocytfunktionalitet i en stordyrsmodel for fedme. Ex 
vivo studie af fedtceller fra fede Ossabawgrise. DTU Department of Health Technology. 
89. de Sousa Abreu R, Penalva LO, Marcotte EM, Vogel C. Global signatures of protein and mRNA 
expression levels. Mol Biosyst. 2009;5(12):1512-1526. doi:10.1039/b908315d 
90. Viesti A Collares R, Salgado W Jr, Pretti da Cunha Tirapelli D, dos Santos JS. The expression of 
LEP, LEPR, IGF1 and IL10 in obesity and the relationship with microRNAs. PLoS One. 
2014;9(4):e93512. Published 2014 Apr 1. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0093512 
91. Hotamisligil GS, Spiegelman BM. Tumor necrosis factor alpha: a key component of the obesity-
diabetes link. Diabetes. 1994;43(11):1271-1278. doi:10.2337/diab.43.11.1271 
92. Chen XD, Lei T, Xia T, Gan L, Yang ZQ. Increased expression of resistin and tumour necrosis 
factor-alpha in pig adipose tissue as well as effect of feeding treatment on resistin and cAMP 
pathway. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2004;6(4):271-279. doi:10.1111/j.1462-8902.2004.0346.x 
93. Moschen AR, Adolph TE, Gerner RR, Wieser V, Tilg H. Lipocalin-2: A Master Mediator of 
Intestinal and Metabolic Inflammation. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2017;28(5):388-397. 
doi:10.1016/j.tem.2017.01.003 
94. Lopez-Castejon G, Brough D. Understanding the mechanism of IL-1β secretion. Cytokine Growth 
Factor Rev. 2011;22(4):189-195. doi:10.1016/j.cytogfr.2011.10.001 
95. Foldager CB, Bendtsen M, Bünger C. PET scanning for evaluation of bone metabolism. Acta 
Orthop. 2009;80(6):737-739. doi:10.3109/17453670903487040 
96. Lee YS, Choi JW, Hwang I, et al. Adipocytokine orosomucoid integrates inflammatory and 
metabolic signals to preserve energy homeostasis by resolving immoderate inflammation. J Biol 
Chem. 2010;285(29):22174-22185. doi:10.1074/jbc.M109.085464 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
69 
 
APPENDIX  
Appendix A: qPCR primer design  
Guidelines for qPCR primer design for gene expression analysis (mRNA) 
 
1. Open two tabs in browser: 1) Ensembl Genome Browser - http://www.ensembl.org/, 2) Primer 3 
- https://bioinfo.ut.ee/primer3-0.4.0/ (Primer 3 URL sometimes changes, google “Primer 3” if this 
one is outdated)  
2. In Ensembl: ”Search:” drop-down menu, choose relevant species – “for”, type gene of interest. 
Press Go. Select gene from results list (typically top result) 
 
 
 
 
3. Check table, this will show how many splice variants exists – hopefully only one, otherwise you 
have to identify regions that are identical across splice variants if you want primers to amplify all 
splice variants 
 
There are three splice variants in this example, but they differ only in the 5’ end, so it should be 
possible to identify primers that will amplify all splice variants 
 
 
4. Click on relevant link under Transcript ID in the table – in this example it could be any of them. 
==PAGE:70==
70 
 
5. Left-hand menu (close to the bottom), click “Export data”. Output format should be FASTA. Select 
only cDNA to be exported. No need to change other settings. Click “Next” 
6. Export format: choose “Text”. New tab will open, the top sequence will be the cDNA sequence 
(identifier includes “cdna:protein_coding”). Copy/paste this sequence to Primer 3 
 
 
7. Go back to Ensembl tab, left-hand menu, click on “Exons” 
8. Rules of thumb for designing forward primer: 
a. keep 3’ end GC rich, approx. 3 out of 6 bases at the end should be G or C. 
b. design primers that amplify sequences close to the 3’ end of cDNA – most reverse 
transcription methods employ oligo(dT) primers (that anneal to the poly(A) tail of mRNA) 
to prime the synthesis of cDNA, so the 3’ end of mRNA is generally more likely to be 
successfully reverse transcribed. If the reverse transcription also employs random primers 
(which could possibly anneal anywhere to the mRNA), one can be less strict regarding 
staying close to the 3’ end. 
c. firstly try to design a forward primer over the first intron, i.e.  half of the primer on either 
side of the intron. If not possible, design a primer on the 5’ side of an intron and have 
Primer 3 pick a reverse primer on the 3’ side, so that the product includes an intron. In 
this case, remember to check where the reverse primer is located; sometimes Primer 3 
will pick a reverse primer that is partially located in two exons (like the over-intron design 
– this is good, and the primer name should thus indicate “oi” rather than “i”, see naming 
instructions below). If this also fails, move on to the next intron and try and design a 
forward primer over this intron. 
d. when deciding whether to try and design an over-intron primer or an including-intron 
primer type, generally chose the type that allows you to stay the closest to the 3’ end. 
e. when designing two primer pairs for the same gene, make sure that the products do not 
overlap – or at least make sure to make a note of it if it cannot be avoided. 
9. Forward primer design example, over-intron: pick approx. half of the primer sequence (3’ half) 
on the 3’ side of an exon: 
==PAGE:71==
71 
 
 
 
Then pick the 5’ half of the primer from the 5’ side of the exon: 
 
 
Combine sequences as input in Primer 3 as forward (left) primer: 
 
 
Leave field for reverse (right) primer empty and let Primer 3 define this. Make sure that 
thermodynamics settings are set to Breslauer 
 
 
Change a few of the setting before continuing, product size range should be 80-120, Primer Tm 
should be Min = 59.0, Opt = 60.0, Max = 61.0 – this is primarily important when designing assays 
for the BioMark (Fluidigm) platform, as all assays should then have same Tm and similar 
amplicon sizes ensures that different targets will be amplified with similar efficiency. If using a 
different (more conventional) qPCR platform, then these rules are less important. 
 
 
 
10. Click ”Pick Primers”. Adjust primer length and GC content until Tm is acceptable and no 
secondary structures are predicted. Primer 3 will suggest a primer pair and show you where in 
the sequence it has defined the reverse primer 
==PAGE:72==
72 
 
 
 
 
11. Assign a name to the primer pair that includes organism, gene designation, primer design, and 
product size. E.g. in the example above we designed primers the porcine (Sus scrofa, ssc) LIPE 
gene, where one primer is designed over an intron (oi), and it yields an 83 nt product and the 
primers should therefore be named ssc_LIPE_oi_83_F and ssc_LIPE_oi_83_R, respectively.  
12. Over-intron primers are preferred as they can only amplify cDNA and not genomic DNA. 
However, if it is impossible to design acceptable over-intron primers, then design a primer pair 
where forward and reverse primers are places on either side of an exon. If the assay is 
amplifying contaminating genomic DNA, then this will be distinguishable as a secondary peak in 
the melt curve analysis. Example on including-intron primer pair for the ssc LIPE gene: 
Define a forward primer close to the intron and copy this to Primer 3: 
 
 
Let Primer 3 pick the reverse primer like before; if you have placed the forward primer close 
enough to the intron then the reverse primer will placed on the other side of the intron. Primer 
3 output will show you primer sequences, product size, etc. and also show where the reverse 
primer anneals: 
==PAGE:73==
73 
 
 
 
 
Naming of these primers will then be ssc_LIPE_i_117_F and ssc_LIPE_i_117_R, respectively. 
 
13. Some genes don’t have introns. In those cases you just paste the cDNA sequence into Primer 
3 and let it pick both forward and reverse primers. If you are designing more than one primer 
pair for an intron-less gene then make sure that you pick assays from Primer 3 that amplify 
non-overlapping amplicons. 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
74 
 
 
Appendix B: Protocol for RNA purification 
Protocol: Purification af miRNA and mRNA fra tissue (RNA later) using GentleMACS 
Kit: 
 
 
miRNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, # 217004) 
 
 
 
Rnase-Free DNase set (Qiagen) 
Homogenizer:  
GentleMACS + M-tubes + samples in RNAlater at -20 degrees. 
 
1. Calibrate the centrifuge to 4 C 
2. Wash the lab area with 0.5% NaOH-opløsning of find homogenizer, scalpel, weighting 
trays, tweezers, pipettes and tips. 
3. Dilute RPE/RW1 buffer with 100% EtOH when using it for the first time. 
4. Remove the sample from the freezer (-20 C) 
5. Transfer 1 ml QIAzol Lysis Reagent to the desired number M-tubes. 
6. Dissect approx. 30 mg tissue with scalpel (a small piece of about 3x3 mm), cut into 
smaller pieces and transfer to M-tube with QIAzol Lysis Reagent. It is important that the 
tissue is placed on the edge of the orange blade to ensure sufficient homogenization. 
Scalpel and tweezers are washed with 0.5% NaOH between each sample.  
7. THe tissue is homogenized on programRNA_02_01 (fresh tissue). Leave tubes with 
homogenate at room for 5 minutes  ( or until the other sample are finished).  
8. Add 200 µl of chloroform to each M tuve, close the lid of the tube and shake vigorously 
for 15 seconds. The tube is left at room for 2-3 min.  
9. Transfer homogenate mix to a 1.5 mltube ( found in kit) and centrifuge at 12000 
g/14000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. Switch off the cooling function afterwards. 
10. The homogenate is now divided into 3 phases. From the top pase is take approx. 300 µl 
(2 x 150 µl) for a 2ml tube (found in kit). 450 µl (1:1.5) of 100% ethanol is added in the 
tube. The homogenate is mixed with the pipette and the pipette tip is left in the tube to 
be reused in step 11-12. 
11. Pipette up to 600 µl of sample into a RNeasy Mini Spin COlumn in a 1.5ml collection 
tube (found in kit). Close the lid and centrifuge at 8000g/10000 rpm for 15 sec at room 
temp. Discard the flow-through. 
12. Repeat step 11 with the rest of the sample (max 600 µl). 
13. Pipette 350 µl RW1 buffer (check that buffer solute is not precipitated) to the column 
and centrifuge at 8000 g / 10000 rpm for 15 sec at room temp. Discord the flow-
through. 
14. MIx DNase I  incubation mix: per sample, mix 10 µl  DNase I stock solution with 79 µl 
DNA Digestion buffer. E.g. for 12 samples, mix 120 µl DNase I stock solution with 840 µl 
DNA Digestion Buffer. MIxgently with pipette. 
==PAGE:75==
75 
 
15. Pipette 78 µl DNase I incubation mix directly onto the RNeasy silica gel membrane and 
place the column at room temperature for 15 min (minimum). 
16. Pipette 350 µl RW1 buffer to the column and centrifuge at 8000 g/ 10000 rpm for 1 min 
at room temp 
17. Add 500 ul of RPE buffer to the column and centrifuge at 8000 g /10000 rpm for 15 sec 
at room temp. Discard the flow-through 
18. Add 500 ul of RPE buffer again to the column and centrifuge at 8000 g /10000 rpm for 2 
min  at room temp. Discard the flow-through. 
19. Transfer column to a new collection tube (regular tube with lid cut off). Centrifuge at 
8000 g/ 10000 rpm for 1 min to dry the column. 
20. To elute, transfer the column to a new 1.5 ml tube, then add 50 µl of RNase free water 
to the RNeasy gel membrane. Centrifuge at 8000 g/ 10000 rpm for 1 min at room temp. 
21. Flow-through (contains the RNA!) is collected and pipetted again on the membrane, 
after which the column is centrifuged at 8000 g/ 10000 rpm for 2 at room temp ( same 
1.5 ml tube) 
22. Placed at - 80°C for storage. 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
76 
 
Appendix C: Protocol for Bioanalyzer 
Measurement of RNA integrity 
  
Needed:     
Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Kit 
RNase-free water                               
 
Micro centrifuge 
Heating block for ladder/sample denaturation 
Program: 2100 expert Eukaryote Total RNA Nano 
  
1. Gel, dye, and marker must equilibrate for 30 min to room temperature before use. Protect dye 
and dye mixtures from light. 
2. If necessary, prepare dilutions of RNA in RNase-free water to approx. 100 ng/µl. 
3. Vortex RNA 6000 Nano dye and add 1μl of dye into a 65μl aliquot of filtered gel – this is 
sufficient for two chips. 
4. Vortex the gel-dye mix and centrifuge for 10 min at 13.000 x g (room temperature). Make sure 
lid points upwards. 
5. Samples (100 ng/µl, min. 3 µl) are heated for 2 min at 70 °C. Place on ice until use. If the ladder 
is being used for the first time, then heat the entire ladder along with the samples – otherwise 
just thaw it and keep it on ice. 
6. Place a RNA 6000 Nano chip in the priming station (setting C). Make sure the plunger is set at 1 
ml. 
7. Add 9µl gel-dye to the black G well. 
==PAGE:77==
77 
 
 
 
  
8.  
 Close the priming station and press the plunger to just below the clip. Leave for 30 seconds and 
release the plunger by pulling the handle. Let the plunger rise by itself for 5 seconds and the pull 
it all the way up to 1 ml again. Open the priming station. 
9. Add 9µl gel-dye to the other two G wells. 
  
10.  
 Add 5 µl RNA 6000 Nano Marker to all sample and ladder wells. Add 6 µl if a well is to be left 
empty. 
 
11.  
 Add 1 µl RNA 6000 Ladder to the ladder well and 1 µl sample to each sample well. 
==PAGE:78==
78 
 
 
12.  
 Shake chip in chip vortex for 1 min. 
13. Add 350µl RNase-free water to a random well in the clear cleaning chip and rinse the electrodes 
for 10 seconds followed by air-drying for 10 seconds. 
14. Place chip in the Bioanalyzer, select the appropriate program (the one that fits the chip type), 
and start analysis. 
15. Enter sample names. 
 
 
  
  
==PAGE:79==
79 
 
Decontaminating the Electrodes 
To avoid decomposition of your RNA sample, follow this electrode decontamination procedure on a 
daily basis before running any RNA Nano assays. 
1. Slowly fill one of the wells of an electrode cleaner with 350 µl RNaseZAP. 
2. Open the lid and place electrode cleaner in the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 
3. Close the lid and leave it closed for about 1 minute. 
4. Open the lid and remove the electrode cleaner. Label the electrode cleaner and keep it for 
future use. You can reuse the electrode cleaner for all 25 chips in the kit. 
5. Slowly fill one of the wells of another electrode cleaner with 350µl RNase- free water. 
6. Place electrode cleaner in the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 
7. Close the lid and leave it closed for about 10 seconds. 
8. Open the lid and remove the electrode cleaner. Label it and keep it for further use. 
9. Wait another 10 seconds for the water on the electrodes to evaporate before closing the lid. 
  
Cleaning after a RNA 6000 Nano Chip Run 
1. Slowly fill one of the wells of the electrode cleaner with 350µl RNase- free water. 
2. Open the lid and place the electrode cleaner in the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 
3. Close the lid and leave it closed for about 10 seconds.  
4. Open the lid and remove the electrode cleaner. 
5. Wait another 10 seconds to allow the water on the electrodes to evaporate before closing the 
lid. 
After 5 chip runs, empty and refill the electrode cleaner. 
After 25 chip runs, replace the used electrode cleaner by a new one. 
  
Preparing the Gel (making aliquots) 
==PAGE:80==
80 
 
1. Allow all reagents to equilibrate to room temperature for 30 minutes before use. 
2. Place 550 µl of Agilent RNA 6000 Nano gel matrix (red ) into the top receptacle of a spin filter. 
3. Place the spin filter in a micro centrifuge and spin for 10 minutes at 
1500 g ± 20 % (for Eppendorf micro centrifuge, this corresponds to 4000 rpm). 
4. Aliquot 65 µl filtered gel into 0.5 ml RNase- free microfuge tubes that are included in the kit. 
Store the aliquots at 4 °C and use them within one month. 
  
For proper handling of the ladder (order no.: 5067-1529), following steps are necessary: 
1.  After reagent kit arrival, pipette the ladder in RNase- free vial. 
2. Heat denature it for 2 min at 70 °C. 
3.  Immediately cool down the vial on ice. 
4.  Prepare aliquots in RNase- free vials with the required amount for a typical 
daily use. 
5.  Store aliquots at - 70°C. 
6.  Before use, thaw ladder aliquots and keep them on ice (avoid extensive 
warming upon thawing process). 
  
  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
81 
 
Appendix D: Protocol for cDNA synthesis 
 
cDNA synthesis, QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen) 
 
1. Take gDNA Wipeout Buffer, RT Buffer, and RT Primer Mix out of the freezer and let it 
thaw at room temp. Leave Reverse Transcriptase in the freezer – it doesn’t freeze solid. 
2. Best result is achieved by using 500 ng RNA per synthesis – preferable not below 100 ng 
per synthesis. Calculate necessary volume of RNA solution containing desired amount of 
RNA. 
3. Prepare one 0.2 ml tube per reaction and mark it with cDNA number (Cxxx). Remember 
tubes for –RT controls. 
4. Add 2 µl gDNA Wipeout Buffer to each tube. 
5. Add the above calculated amount of RNA to each tube. 
6. Add RNase-free water to each tube to achieve a total volume of 14 µl. 
7. Incubate for 2 min at 42 °C to eliminate genomic DNA. 
8. Prepare a reverse transcriptase master mix for all samples (NOT –RT controls) – make an 
extra 15 % to account for loss: 
 
MM for cDNA 
synthesis 
1 reaction 
_____ reactions (incl. 15 % 
extra) 
Reverse 
Transcriptase 
0.75 µl 
_____ µl 
RT Primer Mix 
1 µl 
_____ µl 
RT Buffer 
4 µl 
_____ µl 
RNase-free water 
0.25 µl 
_____ µl 
 
In case of preparing a large number of –RT controls a master mix can also be prepare for these: 
MM for –RT 
controls 
1 reaction 
_____ reactions (incl. 15 % 
extra) 
==PAGE:82==
82 
 
RT Primer Mix 
1 µl 
_____ µl 
RT Buffer 
4 µl 
_____ µl 
RNase-free water 
1 µl 
_____ µl 
 
9. Add 6 µl master mix to each tube containing gDNA Wipeout Buffer treated RNA. 
10. Incubate for 15 min at 42 °C followed by 3 min at 95 °C. 
11. Prepare 0.2 ml tubes for 1:10 dilutions of cDNA; mark them with dilution number (Fxxx) 
corresponding to the cDNA number (Cxxx). 
12. Dilute the cDNA 1:10 in low-EDTA TE buffer (2 µl cDNA, 18 µl buffer). 
13. Store both undiluted and diluted cDNA at -20 °C. 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
83 
 
Appendix E: Protocol for Pre-amplification 
 
Pre-amplification of cDNA 
Needed: 
Primer mix (200 nM) 
 
 
TaqMan PreAmp Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, PN 4391128) 
 
 
Low-EDTA TE buffer (VWR) 
 
 
Exonuclease I (New England Biolabs, PN MO293L) 
 
1. Step 2-5 is carried out in LAF bench – wipe surface with Microsol before and after use. 
2. Prepare a 200 nM primer mix containing all primer pairs to be used in subsequent qPCR: 
a. A 20 µM primer pair dilution is made by combining 10 µl forward primer (100 
µM), 10 µl reverse primer (100 µM), and 30 µl low-EDTA TE buffer. 
b. Primer mix is made by combining 5 µl 20 µM primer pair dilution of all primer 
pairs and adding low-EDTA TE buffer to a total volume of 500 µl. 
3. Prepare 0.2 ml tubes for all pre-amplification reaction, mark them with PA numbers 
(PAxxx) that correspond to the Cxxx/Fxxx numbers. 
4. Prepare pre-amplification master mix, make an extra 10 % to compensate for loss during 
pipetting: 
 
 
1 reaction 
_____ reactions (incl. 10 % 
extra) 
TaqMan PreAmp 
Master Mix (DO 
NOT VORTEX) 
3 µl 
_____ µl 
Low-EDTA TE 
buffer 
2 µl 
_____ µl 
200 nM primer 
mix 
2.5 µl 
_____ µl 
 
5. Add 7.6 µl pre-amplification master mix to each 0.2 ml PA-marked tube – use the Kary 
Mullis multipipette. 
6. Step 7- is carried out on table top. 
7. Add 2.5 µl cDNA (1:10 diluted, Fxxx tubes) to PA tubes containing pre-amplification 
master mix, mix with pipette. 
==PAGE:84==
84 
 
8. Incubate for 10 min at 95 °C followed by ___ cycles of 15 sec at 95 °C and 4 min at 60 °C. 
9. Prepare Exonuclease I master mix (don’t make extra, loss already compensated for):Add  
 
 
1 reaction 
_____ reactions 
RNase-free water 
3.5 µl 
_____ µl 
Reaction Buffer 
0.5 µl 
_____ µl 
Exo 20U 
1 µl 
_____ µl 
 
10. 4 µl Exonuclease I master mix to the 10 µl pre-amplified cDNA, mix with pipette. 
11. Incubate for 30 min at 37 °C followed by 15 min at 80 °C. 
12. Prepare relevant pools of undiluted pre-amplified, exonuclease treated cDNA (combine 
1 µl of each sample) to use for dilution series. 
13. Each pre-amplified, exonuclease treated cDNA sample is diluted 1:10 in low-EDTA TE 
buffer (2 µl cDNA, 18 µl buffer) in tubes marked with the numerical part (xxx) of the 
C/F/PAxxx numbers (for use in qPCR). 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
85 
 
Appendix F: Protocol for Rotor-Gene 
Protocol 5: mRNA qPCR 
Team 1, 2, 5 and 6 
  
Materials: 
RotorGene Q (real time qPCR machine) 
Sybr Green Jumpstart Taq ReadyMix without MgCl2 (Sigma) 
Vortexer 
RNase-free water 
  
Components: 
1. HotStart Taq DNA Polymerase, dNTPs, and SYBR Green I dye included in mastermix 
2. Primers team 1 and 5 (IL-8 forward and reverse) team 2 and 6 (IL-6 forward and reverse) 
3. Magnesium chloride solution, 25 mM 
4. Diluted template cDNA   
 
1.   Thaw your 16 samples of diluted cDNA + dilution series, master mix and primer mix at room 
temperature. 
  
In clean room (K206A ) 
2.   Mix the individual components according to the table below, you need to prepare 2 qPCR 
replicates of each sample. 
  
1 reaction                      
____ reactions + (10 %) 
MilliQ water 
1,5 µl 
  
==PAGE:86==
86 
 
2 x SYBR Green Jumpstart mix 
12,5 µl 
  
MgCl2 (25mM) 
3 µl 
  
FW and RW primer mix (10µM) 
3 µl 
  
Total volume (µl) 
20 µl 
_________________________  
  
3.   Pipette 20 µl master mix into each reaction tube placed in the 72 well loading block according to 
the sample setup layout (handed out). 
In RNA lab (K206B) 
4.   Pipette 5 µl diluted cDNA into each tube according to the sample setup layout 
5.   Add 5 µl RNase-free water to NTC. 
qPCR reaction setup at the RotorGene Q 
6.   Insert the reaction tubes into the correct rotor and ensure that each tube sits correctly into 
place. In order to achieve maximum temperature uniformity, each position in the rotor must 
contain a tube. 
7.   Remember the rotor locking ring and insert the rotor into the Rotor-Gene 6000 chamber by 
clicking it into place. 
8.   Once the rotor and locking ring have been set in place, close the lid and begin setting up the run 
profile in the Rotor-Gene software 
9.   Select the desired run template 
10.   Select rotor type, click at locking ring attached and enter the reaction volume (25 µl). 
11.  Check RUN/Temperature Profile should be: 
10 min at 94 °C, followed by 40 cycles with 
1.   denaturing for 15 s at 95 °C and 
==PAGE:87==
87 
 
2.   annealing and elongation 1 min at 60 °C. Goto 1 
Melting curves (from 50 °C to 99 °C, increasing 1 °C/ 5 s). 
12.  Once the run has begun, you can enter sample types and descriptions while you wait for it to 
complete. 
  
Data analysis 
13.  Press rotor-gene 6000 icon. 
14.  Quatitative analyse 
Auto find treshold 
Export data/Cq to Excel 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
88 
 
 Appendix G: Fluidigm 192.24 chip - qPCR 
Materials: 
10% Microsol 
Primer pairs (20µM) 
TaqMan Gene Expression Master mix (Applied Biosystems, PN 4369016) 
EvaGreen 20X (VWR, BTIU31000) 
Low EDTA TE-Buffer (Bio Nordika) 
Dynamic array/chip BMK-M-192.24 (Fluidigm) 
Assay loading kit (Fluidigm) 
Actuation Fluid and Pressure Fluid (Fluidigm) 
DNA binding Dye solution (Fluidigm) 
                                          
1.      Turn on the RX IFC controller, let the 20X DNA Binding Dye thaw in the refrigerator in the clean 
PCR room. 
2.      Wipe your work bench with 10% Microsol. 
3.      Prepare ASSAY plate: Dispense 2.4 µl 2X Assay loading Reagent assay master mix in a microtiter 
plate – left three columns. Add 2.4 µl 20µM primer pairs to the plate. Apply foil on top of the 
microtiter plate and place it in the refrigerator until use. 
4.      Prepare a pre sample mix by following the schedule below and subsequently pipet 3.6 µl pre-
sample mix to 2 other microtiter plates. 
Pre sample mix 
x 1 
x 180 
2X TaqMan Gene Expression 
Mastermix 
3 µl 
540 µl 
==PAGE:89==
89 
 
20X DNA binding Dye 
0.3 µl 
54 µl 
EvaGreen 20X 
0.3 µl 
54 µl 
1 x low EDTA TE-Buffer 
0.9 µl 
162 µl 
  
5.      Prepare SAMPLE plates: Add 1.2 µl pre-amplified cDNA (10xdiluted samples and the dilution 
curves) to the 3.6 µl pre-sample mix in a lab outside the clean PCR room and place it in the 
refrigerator. 
6.      Add control line fluid to the top of the dynamic array (Acc2), use the syringe to check that the 
valve is movable, inject the fluid while pushing slightly on the valve, the fluid must run relatively 
easy through the valve. 
7.      Remove the protection foil from the dynamic array. 
8.      Place the dynamic array on a dark surface with the ”cut” corner (A1) at the upper left. Vortex 
assay/primer mix and spin down (60 sec at RT and 1000 rpm) and add (3.5 µl) to the left and 
right side of the dynamic array using an 8 channel multi pipette. 
9.   Vortex sample mix and spin down (60 sec at RT and 1000 rpm), and add (3.5 µl) using an 8 
channel multi pipette to the left and right side of the dynamic array. 
10.  Check for air bubbles. 
11.  Pipet 150 µl Actuation Fluid into P1 well on the IFC. 
12.  Pipet 150 µl of Pressure fluid into the P2 and P3 wells. 
13.  Pipet 20 µl of Pressure Fluid into the P4 and P5 wells. 
  
  
 
 
==PAGE:90==
90 
 
Check for air bubbles 
cDNA plate A – left                                                
cDNA plate B – right 
  
A1=1, B1=13 osv                                                   
A1=1, B1=13 osv 
A2=2, B2=14 osv                                                   
A2=2, B2=14 osv 
A3=3, B3=15 osv                                                   
A3=3, B3=15 osv 
A4=4, B4=16 osv                                                   
A4=4, B4=16 osv 
A5=5, B5=17 osv                                                   
A5=5, B5=17 osv 
A6=6, B6=18 osv                                                   
A6=6, B6=18 osv 
A7=7, B7=19 osv                                                   
A7=7, B7=19 osv 
  
14.  Place the dynamic array in the RX IFC controller and run the program. It takes approximately 30 
min. Transfer the dynamic array to BioMark shortly after the loading program has ended. 
  
15.  Turn on the BioMark right after placing the dynamic array in the RX IFC controller, turn on the 
computer and click on ”data collection” (it takes a while for the program to start), double click 
on ”turn on lamp” at the bottom of the window. 
  
16.  After completing the loading and mixing in the RX IFC controller, remove dust from the top of 
the dynamic array using Scotch tape (3M green) and place the dynamic array in the BioMark. 
Click on START NEW RUN, and use the following parameters 
New chip run name: Assay Tech. January 2018 
Application type: Gene expression 
                   
Passive ref: ROX 
                   
Single probe 
                   
Probe type: EvaGreen 
==PAGE:91==
91 
 
Thermal cycling protocol: GE 192.24 PCR+Melt Mette 
C\programfiles\Fluidigm\BioMarkdatacollection\Aplicationdata\Protocols\ 
  
  
 
 
==PAGE:92==
92 
 
 
  
==PAGE:93==
93 
 
 Appendix H: PAGP- Competitive ELISA 
Test of PAGP – competitive ELISA (version 130120, not ready) 
  
Materials: 
ELISA plates: Maxisorp cat. no.: NUNC 4-42404 
  
Coating buffer, 1 L: 
Na2CO3                                                                     
1.75 g 
NaHCO3                                                                    
2.86 g 
Dissolve in 500 mL MilliQ water 
Adjust pH to 9.6 
Add Phenol Red                       
 
Add MilliQ water to 1 L 
  
  
Washing buffer: 
PBS                                               
5 L 
Tween 20 (0.05%)                   
12.5ml of a 20% solution Tween 20. 
  
Blocking buffer: 
5% skimmed milk/PBS/TWEEN (0,05%) 
  
  
Dilution buffer for samples and biotinylated PAGP: 
1% skimmed milk/PBS/TWEEN (0,05%) 
  
  
Dilution buffer for Streptavidin HRP P397 (PBS-T-BSA): 
BSA (1%)                                     
10g 
Tween 20 (0.05%)                   
2.5ml of a 20% solution Tween 20. 
Add PBS to 1 L 
  
Color substrate: 
==PAGE:94==
94 
 
TMB PLUS2 ready to use, KEM EN TEC 
  
Stop: 
H2SO4 0.5M, VWR 
  
  
  
  
Procedure: 
  
Coating: 
Dilute the Purified 1.62 monoclonal antibody (homemade) 2µg/ml in carbonate buffer and add 
100µl/well. Add sealing tape and incubate overnight 4°C. 
  
Wash: 
Wash the plate 4x in washing buffer. 
  
Blocking: 
Ad 200µl/well blocking and dilution buffer and incubate the plate, with a lid, on shaker for 30 
min at 37°C. 
  
Wash: 
Wash the plate 4x in washing buffer. 
  
Dilution and application of standard, samples and biotinylated antibody: 
  
Standard: The standard row should also be in double determinations. KVL (serum) 2.55mg/ml. 
Dilute the standard 1/250. Do a 2-fold dilution on the plate vertically, from A to G, and leave 
only buffer in the H-wells. After titration there will be 50µl in each well. See the scheme below. 
  
Samples: Prepare always for double determinations. Generally dilute your sample 1/1000.  Ad 
50µl diluted sample/well. 
  
==PAGE:95==
95 
 
Biotinylated PAGP antigen: Dilute the purified and biotinylated antigen PAGP 1/500 
(Batch080119) 
Add 50µl/well on the whole plate. 
Now there, in total will be 100µl in each well. 
Incubate the plate, with a lid, for 1 hour on shaker at 37°C. 
  
Wash: 
Wash the plate 4x with washing buffer. 
  
HRP conjugated streptavidin: DAKO P397, dilute 1/8000. Add 100µl/well on the whole plate. 
Incubate, with a lid, on shaker at 37°C for 1 hour. 
  
Wash: 
Wash the plate 4x with washing buffer. 
  
Develop: 
Add 100µl TMB to all the wells. The time for develop is depending on the color intensity. Keep 
an eye on the standard, and stop the plate with 100µl 0.5M H2SO4 to each well. 
  
==PAGE:96==
96 
 
  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
1
0 
11 
12 
  
A 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Std. 
100µl/we
ll 
Std. 
100µl/we
ll 
Transfer 50µl 
to the next row  
(         
µg/ml) 
B 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Buffer 
50µl/well 
Buffer 
50µl/well 
 MIX ® Transfer 
50µl to the 
next row   (         
µg/ml) 
C 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Buffer 
50µl/well 
Buffer 
50µl/well 
MIX ® 
Transfer50µl 
to the next row  
(     
µg/ml) 
D 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Buffer 
50µl/well 
Buffer 
50µl/well 
MIX ® Transfer 
50µl to the 
next row          (   
 
µg/ml) 
E 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Buffer 
50µl/well 
Buffer 
50µl/well 
MIX ® Transfer 
50µl to the 
next row          (   
 
µg/ml) 
F 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Buffer 
50µl/well 
Buffer 
50µl/well 
MIX ® Transfer 
50µl to the 
next row        (     
 
µg/ml) 
G 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Buffer 
50µl/well 
Buffer 
50µl/well 
MIX ® 50µl 
OUT 
                      
 
(    
 
µg/ml) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Buffer 
50µl/well 
Buffer 
50µl/well 
  
 
 
==PAGE:97==
97 
 
Appendix I : Rotor-Gene Q setup 
 The same setup was run on production pigs and ossabaw pigs exposed to LPS. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
98 
 
Appendix J : Fluidigm chip setup 
 
==PAGE:99==
99 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
100 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
101 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
102 
 
Appendix K: heat map of a 192.24 Fluidigm chip 
 
The two horizontal black lines are primer PNPLA2 and SAA (101) that have no data from any of 
the samples.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
103 
 
Appendix L: List of gene analyzed 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference Genes
Gene
Protein
8
ACTB
Beta-actin
9
HPRT1
Hypoxanthine Phosphoribosyl Transferanse l
10
PPIA
Peptidylprolyl Isomerase A
11
TBP
TATA Box Binding Protein
Genes of interest
Gene
Protein
1
ABHD5
α/β-hydrolase Domain Containing Protein 5
2
LIPE
Hormone-sensitive lipase
3
IL1β
Interleukin 1 beta
4
IL6
Interleukin 6
5
TNFα
Tumor necrosis factor alpha
6
ORM
Orosomucoid
7
SAA1
Serum amyloid A
12
IRS
Tumor necrosis factor alpha
13
LEP
Leptin
14
LEPR
Leptin Receptor
15
FABP4
Fatty acid-binding Protein 4
16
PNPLA2 Patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein 2/ Adipose 
triglyceride lipase 
17
ADIPOQ
Adiponectin
18
LCN2
Lipocalin-2
19
PRKAG3
5'-AMP-activated protein kinase subunit gamma-3
20
PRGN
Progranulin 
21
GCG
Proglucagon
22
GLUT4
Glucose transporter type 4
23
RAB18
Ras-related protein RAB-18
24
INFλ3
Interferon Lambda 3
