==PAGE:1==
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
Using cohesive zone modelling to predict crack growth
under fatigue loading
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
Using cohesive zone modelling to predict crack growth under fatigue loading
Master Thesis
March, 2022
By
Daniel Søndergaard Rasmussen, s164378
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nils Koppels Allé, Building
404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 6.5 months at the Department of Mechanical Engi-
neering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of fracture mechanics and
composite materials.
Daniel Søndergaard Rasmussen - s164378
Signature
Date
ii
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This paper investigates adhesive failure between glass fiber laminates and epoxy structural
adhesive, typically used in the shear web and spar cap joint of large wind turbine blades.
The problem has been investigated using finite element methods based on Linear Elastic
Fracture Mechanics using Crack Surface Displacement Extrapolation technique and a non-
linear method using Cohesive Zone Modelling for both quasi-static and fatigue loading.
Cohesive law and fatigue damage parameters have been characterized under mixed-mode
conditions using the Double Cantilever Beam under Uneven Bending Moments test method.
The J-integral approach has been applied to extract critical energy release rates and direct
measurements have been used to successfully characterize the traction separation response
of the cohesive zone models, in good agreement with experimental results. A fatigue dam-
age model has been implemented to account for the deleterious effects of fatigue loading.
Cohesive zone models for fatigue are highly phenomenological and fatigue damage param-
eters have been established by comparison of the numerical and experimental results until
good agreement was achieved.
A Modified Tear Test has been used to investigate the crack problem both under quasi-
static loading and fatigue loading, to validate the proposed numerical models and their
input parameters. By exploiting in-plane membrane forces in the laminates, the mode-
mixity changes during crack propagation in the Modified Tear Test. This test method
enables testing of a broad spectrum of mode mixity variation during a single test, thus
capable of validating modelling parameters for a wide range of mode-mixities.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Throughout my studies and writing of this thesis I’ve received great support and invaluable
help, that I would like to acknowledge.
First and foremost I must thank my supervisor, prof. Christian Berggreen, for his great
insights and contributions to almost any subject of the thesis. Your encouragement and
acknowledgements along the way has been truly motivational, and has aspired me work
even harder and achieve more than I thought possible.
Thank you to my co-supervisor, laboratory engineer Mehrtash Manouchehr, for his great
supervision and support in the laboratory and his many contributions to discussions
throughout the entire thesis. You always seem to have a solution in the sleeve to any
given problem, and the experimental work of this thesis had not been possible without
your guidance.
Also I would like to thank my co-supervisor, Postdoc Ignacio Vidal Pérez, who tirelessly
helped me through many struggles during the numerical work of this thesis. Learning
from your methods has been truly inspirational.
Thanks to everyone at Bladena, for your open arms, and the opportunity to work on such
an exiting project. Thank you to Global Wind for manufacturing test specimens for the
experimental tests. Also thank you to the technicians in building 119, especially Jørn,
Claus, Brian, Michael and Ian, whose welcoming attitude has been overwhelming and
their help has been invaluable to my experimental work.
My colleagues, Jacob Mortensen and Luijin Lin, provided a great atmosphere in the oﬀice
and many great discussions, your company has been cherished, and I’m glad to have been
on this journey by your sides
Lastly I would like to thank my friends and family, for always being helpful and supportive.
I would especially like to thank my parents for their endless support, Silje and Emil, for
their emotional support in times of struggle, my grandmother, Erika, for always reminding
me to be grateful and happy in life, and my late mother-in-law, Inge, who throughout my
studies shaped me more than anyone and gave me the confidence to tackle anything in
life, you are dearly missed.
iv
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
CORTIR
Cost, Risk and Transition zone Innovative Reinforcement
CAR tool
Cost And Risk tool
EUDP
Energy Technology Development and Demonstration Program
HAWT
Horisontal Axis Wind Turbine
EUDP
Public fund for technological development projects in the energy sector
SIF
Stress intensity factor
ERR
Energy release rate
CERR
Critical Energy Release Rate
DCB
Double Cantilever Beam
DCB-UBM
Double Cantilever Beam under Unequal Bending Moments
STT
Sandwich Tear Test
MTT
Modified Tear Test
FEM
Finite Element Method
XFEM
Extended Finite Element Method
LEFM
Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics
CSDE
Crack Surface Displacement Extrapolation
ENF
End Notch Flexture
4PB
Four Point Bending
SLJ
Single Lap Joint
LDB
Laminated Doublers in Bending
BK
Benzeggagh-Kenane criterion
CCT
Center Cracked Tension
DENT
Double Edge Notched Tension
Nomenclature
L
[mm]
Specimen length
w
[mm]
Specimen width
tl
[mm]
Specimen thickness
tul
[mm]
Upper laminate thickness
tll
[mm]
Lower laminate thickness
ta
[mm]
Adhesive thickness
a0
[mm]
Initial crack length
a
[mm]
Crack length
∆a
[mm]
Crack extension
A
[mm2]
Crack surface area
M1
[Nm]
Moment arm 1
M2
[Nm]
Moment arm 2
MR
-
Moment ratio between M1 and M2
θ
[◦]
Tip rotation angle
P
[N]
Applied load
Ei
[MPa]
Elastic Modulus
Gij
[MPa]
Shear modulus
νij
−
Poisson’s ratio
ψ
[◦]
Mode-mixity angle or phase angle
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
v
==PAGE:8==
Π
[J]
Potential energy
W
[J]
External energy
U
[J]
Strain energy
G
[J/m2]
Energy release rate
Gc
[J/m2]
Critical energy release rate
GIc
[J/m2]
Critical energy release rate in pure mode I
GIIc
[J/m2]
Critical energy release rate in pure mode II
JR
[J/m2]
Fracture resistance
JSS
[J/m2]
Steady state fracture resistance
J0
[J/m2]
Initial interface fracture resistance
T
[MPa]
Cohesive traction
T0
[MPa]
Maximum cohesive traction
K
[N/m3]
Initial stiffness of the traction separation response
δ
[mm]
Deformation
δn,δy
[mm]
Opening deformation
δs,δx
[mm]
Sliding deformation
δ0
[mm]
Deformation at the onset of damage
δmax
[mm]
Deformation at the onset of failure
δ∗
[mm]
End opening of fiber bridging zone
α
-
Power law parameter / Fatigue damage parameter
β
-
Power law parameter / Fatigue damage parameter
η
-
Benzeggagh-Kenane parameter
ε
-
Strain
εn
-
Normal strain
εs
-
Shear strain
εmax
-
Maximum strain
εth
-
Threshold strain
tcz
[mm]
Cohesive element thickness
lcz
[mm]
Cohesive element length
D
-
Damage
∆D
-
Damage per time step
N
-
Number of cycles
∆N
-
Number of cycles per time period
vi
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations & Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Wind energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Wind turbine blade design and development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Wind turbine blade damage and failure phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
CORTIR II project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory
11
3.1
Cohesive and adhesive failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Fiber bridging and R-curve effects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Fatigue crack growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Cohesive Zone Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Determination of the cohesive law parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Test and specimen configurations using CSDE
27
4.1
Characterisation tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Sub-component I tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Experimental testing
36
5.1
Characterisation tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Sub-Component I tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Test plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Cohesive Zone Modelling
48
6.1
Cohesive zone modelling for quasi-static analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Fatigue analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Results and discussion
59
7.1
General observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Phase angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Cohesive law parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.4
Fatigue damage parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
8
Conclusion
75
9
Future Work
76
9.1
CORTIR-II Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
9.2
Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
78
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
vii
==PAGE:10==
A J integral approach for asymmetric bonded DCB-UBM specimen with
reinforcements
1
B Experimental testing
7
B.1
DCB-UBM test protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
B.2
MTT testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
B.3
Work drawings for MTT test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
C Numerical models
18
C.1 CSDE analysis of DCB-UBM specimen with doublers
. . . . . . . . . . . .
18
C.2 CZM fatigue damage model comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
D Results
22
D.1 Test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D.2 Static response comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
D.3 Fatigue response comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
viii
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Worldwide high demand for clean and renewable energy, has resulted in an increased
demand for wind turbines during the past decades. The increased interest has pushed
manufacturers to develop larger wind turbines that are able to produce more energy at
a lower cost, compared to smaller wind turbines. The continuous increase in size of the
wind turbine blades leads to higher loads, and requires further strengthening of the blades,
which is solved by adding a third shear web. In the transition zone of the wind turbine
blade, large deflections of the aerodynamic skins near the third shear web are present. This
leads to a failure phenomenon called shear web disbonding, were cracks in the adhesive
interface between the shear web footing and spar cap initiate and propagate. Eventually
the crack can reach a critical length, were the global deflections of the blade becomes large
enough for the blade to hit the tower, causing complete failure of the wind turbine as it
collapses.
Bladena has in collaboration with wind turbine owners and operators, Aalborg University
and DTU initiated the CORTIR-II project devoted to investigate shear web disbonding
in large wind turbine blades.
This thesis is a part of the initial phases of the CORTIR-II project and is mainly con-
cerned with the development of numerical models based on Cohesive Zone Modelling, to
analyse quasi-static and fatigue crack propagation in the adhesive interface between fiber
laminates and structural epoxy adhesive. Modelling parameters will be determined based
on experimental results using Double Cantilever Beam under Uneven Bending Moments
(DCB-UBM) testing, a novel test method for mixed-mode fracture characterisation. The
developed numerical modelling setup is compared and validated in sub-component testing
using a novel test method, name the Modified Tear Test (MTT).
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
2.1
Wind energy
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
0
200
400
600
800
Figure 1: The annual cumulative global wind energy production from 2001-2020 [1].
The first wind turbine able to produce energy was developed in 1887 by James Blyth in
Scotland at Anderson’s College (now Strathclyde University) [2]. For almost a century,
wind turbines were mostly used to power stand alone generators. During the oil crisis
of the 70s and the hence coming interest in alternative and renewable sources of energy,
wind turbines started to generate electricity for the established electrical grid. It was also
during this period that many of the technologies used in the HAWT wind turbines we are
familiar with today were pioneered.
The annual cumulative energy supply from wind energy has increased significantly the past
two decades as shown in Figure 1. Today wind energy is the largest source of renewable
energy, covering 6.7% of the global energy consumption [3], and in Denmark it covered
48% of the total electricity consumption in 2019, the highest ever recorded in any country
[4, 5]. Last year alone, new wind power installations increased 50% compared to the year
before [6].
2.2
Wind turbine blade design and development
Figure 2: Comparison in layout between smaller and larger blades, with a 3rd shear web
typically added in blades longer than 60m.
A wind turbine blade consists of the externally visible aerodynamic shell, and shear webs
connecting the upwind and downwind sections of the shell, which are also bonded to each
2
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:13==
other at the leading and trailing edges. At the location of the shear web a load carrying spar
cap made as a sandwich composite is incorporated in the aerodynamic shells. Typically
two individual shear webs are present running almost the entire length of the blade, or
the spar cap and shear webs are combined to shape a box section.
In the longitudinal direction, the blade can be split into 3 sections, denoted the root zone,
the transition zone and the aerodynamic zone. The shear web fish mouth, is located in
the transition zone of the blade, and marks the beginning of the shear webs. The shear
web runs from the shear web fish mouths and almost the entire length of the blade.
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Figure 3: Average rotor diameter of new wind turbines from 1990-2019 [7].
The increased demand in wind energy, is met by the wind turbine manufacturers who
continue to improve the eﬀiciency of their wind turbines. To do so manufacturers have
realized that larger rotor diameters are more cost eﬀicient to develop, considering their
relative energy output. During the past 30 years the average wind turbine rotor diameter
has increased from 23 m to 129 m, as seen in Figure 3. The largest wind turbines currently
being developed have a tip height of 260 m, and a blade length of more than 100 m [8].
Mass, inertia and aerodynamic loads increase as blades become larger, requiring changes
Figure 4: Representative section view of a large wind turbine blade.
in blade designs to make them capable of handling the increased loads. It’s generally
adopted by all major manufacturers to include a 3rd shear web in blades longer than 60
m, to limit the compliance and deflections of the blade. The 3rd shear web is located
near the trailing edge, with its fish mouth located in the transition zone of the blade, as
shown in Figure 2 and 5. A mini spar cap is added to the skin, where the 3rd shear web
is located. A typical section view of a large blade can be seen in Figure 4.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
3
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Wind turbine blade damage and failure phenomena
Many types of damage and failure modes can occur in wind turbine blades, caused by
many different factors [9]
• External factors: Hail, lightning and bird strikes, extreme temperatures or harsh
environment
• Geometrical factors: Buckling, large deflections, crushing or folding
• Material factors: Plasticity, fracture, rupture or cracking damage
• Manufacturing and design factors: Poor design, residual stresses, imperfections
in bond-lines, poor injection and bubbles in laminates
• Dynamic factors: Inertia effects or instability
• Age-related factors: Fatigue damage and cracking
All of these factors contribute to damage and failure observed in the field. A number of
damage and failure modes have been suggested by Jensen [10] and categorized by Skriver
[11], to be the most critical in larger wind turbine blades:
• Interlaminar failure due to the brazier effect and high bending moments
• Transverse cracks from trailing edge or on the blade surface caused by poor design
• Shear web disbonding caused by the brazier effect, high bending moments and poor
design
• Fatigue failure in root transition area due to poor design
• Lightning damage
• Tower stroked by blade due to large tip deflections
• Complete separation
2.3.1
Shear web disbonding
Figure 5: Brazier effect (breathing) in the transition zone near the 3rd shear web fish
mouth.
This thesis is part of the CORTIR phase II project, which will investigate shear web
disbonding of the 3rd shear web of large wind turbine blades. The failure phenomenon is
a result of the brazier effect, where the aerodynamic skins of the pressure and suction side
near the trailing edge simultaneously deforms outwards and inwards. The phenomena is
also called breathing and is illustrated in Figure 5. Breathing is caused by the torsion of
the blade which occur due to the combined cyclic gravitational load and constant wind
load applied to the blade, as illustrated in Figure 6.
4
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:15==
Figure 6: Global blade deflection induced by a combination of constant wind load and
cyclic gravitational load, resulting in torsion of the blade.
Breathing takes place in front of the 3rd shear web fish mouth, causing peeling stresses
that initiate and propagate cracks in the adhesive interface between the shear web footing
and spar cap.
This phenomenon is often referred to as shear web disbonding.
Once
such a crack has initiated it will develop until it eventually is repaired or otherwise causes
complete failure of the wind turbine. Shear web disbonding increase the global compliance,
that eventually will cause the wind turbine to deform enough to strike the tower under
operation which can cause the entire wind turbine to collapse.
This type of damage and failure is not uncommon, but since wind turbines with a 3rd
shear web installed are still quite new, they have only been observed in recent years, and
hence only limited efforts have been made to understand the problem in detail, which is
the aim of the CORTIR phase II project.
2.4
CORTIR II project
This thesis is part of the Cost, Risk and Transition zone Innovative Reinforcement (COR-
TIR) phase II project, a 2 year project that investigate the underlying physics of shear
web disbonding and its implications on the global structural integrity of the blade.
The project is managed by Bladena, an engineering consultancy advising wind turbine
owners on blade inspections, maintenance and repairs.
The project is funded by The
Danish Energy Agency through the Energy Technology Development and Demonstration
Program (EUDP). Other partners in the project include manufacturers, a service company
and a larger group of wind turbine owners and operators.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
5
==PAGE:16==
DTU is responsible for performing the experimental tests in all phases of the project,
while statistical models to predict uncertainty are developed by Aalborg University, that
are created in order to establish the damage tolerance which is applied to develop a Cost
And Risk (CAR) Tool, which can help decision making when faced with a failure in the
real world.
To investigate the problem in detail, the project is split into 4 different stages. The project
begins at the lowest level called characterisation, and is then progressed to sub-component
testing of increasing geometric detail, followed by large scale testing as illustrated in Figure
7.
Figure 7: CORTIR project diagram
In the characterisation stage, material properties and modelling parameters are established
through various experimental tests, where some are based on standardized test methods
and others have been specifically developed to extract certain bi-material interface prop-
erties for the given interface.
Characterisation is closely linked to the first sub-component tests, since the models de-
veloped for this stage are purely designed to validate the parameters determined in the
characterisation stage.
Sub-component II tests will exhibit a closer resemblance to the section of the blade where
shear web disbonding occur. Thus the knowledge and modelling setup developed in char-
acterisation and sub-component I stages is applied to a more representative geometry.
Testing in large scale will be carried out on a 15 m long blade section. The section extends
from the root zone into some of the aerodynamic zone, of an originally 34 m long blade.
Since this is a small blade, as illustrated in Figure 2, it does not originally have a 3rd shear
web installed. This will be retrofitted, and loads will be applied, based on the deflection
levels observed in the field on full scale blades. Appropriate scaling factors are used to
make sure that the applied displacements represent those in full scale.
6
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:17==
Figure 8: D-String®and RTZ-solution attached to the up- and downwind aerodynamic
shells in the vicinity of the shear web fish mouth and between the trailing edge.
2.4.1
Retrofit solution
The CORTIR-II project will also include testing of a retrofit solution which prevents
breathing and thus the risk of shear web disbonding.
The solution is called the RTZ
solution, similar to the D-string®product, a patent-pending solution developed by Bladena.
The D-Strings connect the two sides of the aerodynamic shell with wires/strings, and
prevent them in moving away from each other, limiting crack propagation in the trailing
edge bond line, as illustrated in Figure 8. The RTZ solution will also use strings mounted
in front of the shear web fish mouth, where the largest out-of plane deformations take
place, and thus limiting the peeling stresses at the shear web footing, such that crack
initiation is avoided. The solution should ideally be used as an alternative to conventional
repairs, and can prevent cracks from further propagation.
Both sub-component II and large scale testing will include the RTZ solution in some
of the tests, to compare the D-String®solution against the original configuration. This
will be used to quantify its performance and cost advantage compared to conventional
repairs. Investigations should also consider the crack length ratios (the length of the crack
compared to the length of the shear web), where the RTZ solution is applicable.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
7
==PAGE:18==
2.5
Problem formulation
To fully understand the fracture process present in shear web disbonding, both the loading
and boundary conditions at the crack tip and the fundamental fracture characteristics must
be well understood. In this thesis emphasis is put towards understanding the interface
fracture characteristics of shear web disbonding. Fracture parameters will be determined
experimentally and applied to simple numerical models based on cohesive zone modelling.
This thesis aims to conduct level 0-1 testing to characterize and validate the fracture
processes and parameters of the bi-material interface of materials similar to those used in
the shear web footing and mini spar assembly of a real wind turbine blade.
Both quasi-static and fatigue loading is considered. Quasi-static tests and numerical mod-
els are used to obtain the cohesive law parameters, and fatigue tests and models are used
to obtain the fatigue damage parameters. Both quasi-static and fatigue frameworks are
proposed, see Figures 9 and 10, which introduce and outline the work and deliverables of
this thesis.
2.5.1
Quasi-static framework
Inputs
Before any testing or numerical simulations can be carried out, representative material
data should be known. The initial phase of the project will also investigate the specimen
dimensions, that will be best suited for testing.
Initial numerical modelling
To establish approximate specimen behavior under testing, Linear Elastic Fracture Me-
chanics (LEFM) based methods are used to determine good specimen configurations, and
establishing the expected energy release rate, G and mode-mixity phase angles, ψ under
specific loading conditions, that finally will be used in testing.
Testing
Both characterisation and validation tests are performed in this thesis. To characterise the
fracture processes and selecting the cohesive laws under controlled mixed mode conditions
the Double Cantilever Beam under Uneven Bending Moments (DCB-UBM) test method
is applied.
The fracture energies are determined using the J-integral approach. Cohesive tractions
are determined directly from end opening considerations, and the initial stiffness of the
cohesive zone is selected through a combination of analytical considerations and fine tuning
processes.
To validate the obtained cohesive laws, a Modified Tear Test (MTT) method is applied,
based on the novel Sandwich Tear Test (STT), where the mode-mixity change with in-
creasing crack lengths.
Cohesive Zone Modelling
Obtained cohesive laws from pure mode tests are applied in the cohesive zone models, and
results between numerical simulations and experiments are compared.
Once a good fit is seen for pure mode conditions, an appropriate mixed-mode failure
criteria that best represent mixed-mode failure is selected.
Validation and output
Cohesive law parameters established through DCB-UBM testing in MTT models are used
to finally validate the ability of the models and input parameters to describe fracture
processes under varying mode-mixity conditions and for different specimen geometries
and boundary conditions.
8
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:19==
Figure 9: Quasi-static framework for obtaining cohesive law parameters.
2.5.2
Fatigue framework
Inputs
The obtained cohesive law parameters found in using the Quasi-static framework along
with material data and specimen geometries are applied in the numerical fatigue models.
Testing
Both DCB-UBM and MTT specimen are tested under fatigue at different load levels. The
crack length vs number of cycles and crack growth rate vs energy release rate are obtained
for DCB-UBM tests.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 10: Flowchart of the steps required for obtaining fatigue damage parameters.
Numerical
Fatigue fracture processes of bi-material interfaces are still highly phenomenological, and
numerical fatigue damage parameters cannot be directly obtained through testing or an-
alytical methods.
Instead they must be obtained by comparing the experimental and
numerical Paris-law curves, until parameters that provide matching results are obtained.
Validation
Once fatigue damage parameters that provide good fit with experimental DCB-UBM tests
are obtained, the same parameters are applied to MTT models, to be validated.
10
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:21==
3
Theory
3.1
Cohesive and adhesive failures
(a) Cohesive failure
(b) Adhesive failure
(c) Adhesive failure kinking
Figure 11: Distinction of failure types in adhesives and adhesive bonds. Blue: Adhesive,
Grey: Glass fiber laminates.
In this thesis cohesive and adhesive failures will be distinguished, as they inherently posses
different characteristics, as depicted in Figure 11. Only adhesive failure is investigated, as
this is the most likely failure to occur.
3.2
Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics
Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) origins from the ideas of Griﬀith, who at-
tempted to determine fracture strength of materials, by applying the first law of thermo-
dynamics to crack problems in brittle materials [12]. Griﬀith suggested that cracks occur
due to sudden loss of traction, and that a crack will only grow if the total energy decreases
or remains constant. Griﬀith applied the first law of thermodynamics to define the elastic
potential for a cracked body
Π = W −U
(3.1)
where Π is the potential energy, W is the work performed by the external forces and U is
the strain energy stored in the body. An increased amount of energy is therefore required
in order for a crack to overcome the surface energy. Irwin and Kies developed Griﬀith’s
analysis by introducing the energy-release rate, which is a measure of the energy available
for a crack to grow [13]. Irwin realised that for small plastic zones, the energy required for
crack growth to occur, has limited dependency of the stress state, and the energy release
may therefore be described by the purely elastic solution
G = −dΠ
dA
(3.2)
where dA is the area of incremental crack growth. Thus a crack will initiate once the
external work equals the critical energy needed to create new surfaces
Gc = −dWs
dA
(3.3)
where Gc is the critical energy release rate or fracture toughness and Ws is the energy
required to create new surfaces. When the energy release rate exceeds the fracture tough-
ness, G > Gc, crack growth will occur.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
11
==PAGE:22==
3.2.1
Fracture modes
(a) Mode I
(opening)
(b) Mode II
(in-plane shear)
(c) Mode III
(out-of-plane shear)
Figure 12: Basic fracture modes
A crack may propagate by one of three basic fracture modes, or a combination of the
different modes. The basic fracture modes can be seen in Figure 12.
Although a crack may advance under any given mode, in homogeneous materials it will
typically kink towards a path where pure mode I exists, since the fracture energy is
typically lower for this mode compared to the others. However when dealing with bi-
material interface cracks or cracks in orthotropic materials, the crack will propagate under
mixed-mode conditions, as it will often require more energy for the crack to advance away
from the interface or bridge between laminates. The mode-mixity therefore becomes a
governing parameter when considering the fracture toughness and design limits of an
interface. The energy release rate must also be denoted as a combination of the different
modes
G = GI + GII + GIII
(3.4)
where GI, GII and GIII are the energy release rates for each of the basic opening modes
respectively. In the following sections, the applied theories are applied to 2D cases for
simplicity, and thus only mode I and mode II are present.
Different methods based on LEFM have been proposed to determine the mode-mixity and
energy release of crack problems in bi-material interface crack problems, including Virtual
Crack Extension method (VCE)[14, 15], Virtual Crack Closure Technique (VCCT)[16,
17], the Crack Surface Displacement method (CSD)[18] and finally Crack Surface Dis-
placement Extrapolation method (CSDE)[19]. All methods have previously been applied
to bi-material interface crack problems. The CSDE method accounts for oscillatory phe-
nomena close to the crack tip, and can therefore easily be applied to automated routines
linked to commercial finite element methods, which is a strong advantage, especially for
parametric analyses. The CSDE method will be described briefly in the following section,
but has been thoroughly covered by Saseendran [20].
3.2.2
Bi-material fracture mechanics
Hutchinton and Suo [21] developed expressions extracting energy release rates, G, and
mode-mixity angles, ψ, using the crack flank displacements, δx and δy, see Figure 13. The
expressions are based on the Lekhnitskii-Eshelby-Stroh (LES) 2-D bi-material displace-
ment field, originally developed for interfaces with isotropic elastic characteristics [21]. It
12
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:23==
Figure 13: Crack tip of a bi-material interface crack, with sliding, δx, and opening, δy,
displacements defined.
has later been modified to deal with in-homogeneous orthotropic interfaces. The extrac-
tion of these expressions are not covered here, since it is not the main aspect of this thesis.
Descriptions of the analytical derivation of these expressions can be found in literature,
for example [20].:
G = π(1 + 4ε2)
8H11|x|
(
H11
H22
δ2
y + δ2
x
)
(3.5)
ψ = tan−1
(√
H22
H11
δx
δy
)
−ε ln
(|x|
h
)
+ tan−1(2ε)
(3.6)
where H11 and H22 are bi-material constants
H11 =
[
2nλ1/4√
S11S22
]
1 +
[
2nλ1/4√
S11S22
]
2
(3.7)
H22 =
[
2nλ−1/4√
S11S22
]
1 +
[
2nλ−1/4√
S11S22
]
2
(3.8)
S11, S22 and S12 are components of the compliance matrix, n and λ are material con-
stants expressed by the components of the compliance matrix for each of the materials
respectively
S11 = 1
E1
,
S12 = S21 = −ν12
E1
,
S22 = 1
E2
and S66 =
1
G12
(3.9)
λ = S11
S22
and n =
√
1
2 + 2S12 + S66
4√S11S22
(3.10)
Above expressions are defined for plane stress conditions, ¯E = E. For plane strain the
compliance matrix should be slightly modified [20].
ε is the oscillatory index
ε = 1
2π ln
(
1 −β
1 + β
)
where β =
[
S12 + √S11S22
]
2 −
[
S12 + √S11S22
]
1
√H11H22
(3.11)
3.2.3
Crack Surface Displacement Extrapolation
Both the energy release rate and mode-mixity were found by Williams [22] to display
oscillatory behavior in the region very close to the crack tip (in the order of 10−6 of the
crack length [23]). This behavior is non-physical as it would imply interpenetration of
the crack flanks. The CSDE method introduced by Berggreen et al. [19] circumvents
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 14: Illustrative representation of the CSDE method.
the problem of oscillatory behavior. The CSDE method calculates G and ψ using the
crack flank displacements using the expressions in Equations 3.5 and 3.6. The method
emphasises that both G and ψ vary linearly in the K-dominant zone close to the crack
tip before the oscillatory behavior occur, represented in Figure 14. This linear behavior is
exploited to extrapolate G and ψ from the slope in the K-dominant zone.
Assuming Dundurs’ parameter β = 0, problems of oscillatory behavior is eliminated [20].
Assuming the oscillatory index ε = 0 the stress-field becomes square root singular [20].
Using these assumptions a reduced formulation of ψ may be expressed as
ψR = tan−1
(δx
δy
)
(3.12)
where pure mode I corresponds to a phase angle of ψ = 0◦, and pure mode II corresponds
to a phase angle of ψ = 90◦. Similarly the energy release rate may be expressed with the
above mentioned assumptions
G = π(δ2
x + δ2
y)
2x(c1 + c2)
(3.13)
where x is the distance from the crack tip, c1 and c2 are stiffness parameters of material
1 and 2
cm = κm + 1
Sm
(3.14)
κm is Muskhelishwili’s constant given by κm = (3 −4νm) for plane strain and κm =
(3 −νm)/(1 + νm) for plane stress, num is Poisson’s ratio and Sm is the shear modulus,
m = 1 and 2 denoting which material is referred to.
14
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Fiber bridging and R-curve effects
(a) Fiber bridging
(b) R-curve
Figure 15: Fiber bridging creates tractions between the crack flanks and improves the
strength of the interface.
This phenomena results in large R-curve effects, with large
difference in fracture resistance between initial crack growth and steady state crack growth.
Crack instability is closely related to fibre-bridging, which can occur in fibrous materi-
als behind the crack tip, as illustrated in Figure 15a. The bridged fibres in the interface
between the crack flanks create tractions, which increase the fracture toughness. This phe-
nomena can be represented by the R-curve (resistance curve), which describe the relation
between the fracture resistance and the relative crack extension, ∆a or the end opening,
δ∗. The R-curve is illustrated in Figure 15b for different magnitudes of the R-curve effect.
For cracks with no R-curve effects, crack propagation initiate and reaches steady state
almost simultaneously, and the fracture resistance is independent of the crack extension.
This is typically the case for brittle fracture. Specimens with some R-curve effects present
will first obtain it’s steady state after a small crack extension is present. This is typically
the case for ductile fracture processes, where the process zone is larger and must first
initially be developed. When large R-curve effects are present, it may be due to large
scale fiber bridging being present at the crack flanks.
When R-curve effects are present a crack will begin to propagate when the energy release
rate reaches the initial interface fracture resistance, J0. As the crack extends a higher
energy release rate is required to propagate the crack. At a certain crack extension the
fracture resistance will reach a steady state value, JSS, which also marks the maximum
critical energy release rate. At this point the process zone will be fully developed, and a
steady state crack propagation rate is reached.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
15
==PAGE:26==
3.4
Fatigue crack growth
Figure 16: Typical S-N curve, displaying the relation between number of load cycles and
the material strength.
Fatigue life is typically characterized using S-N curves, a curve showing the relation be-
tween strength and number of load cycles, as illustrated in Figure 16. The S-N curve
displays how fatigue loading deteriorates the strength of the material or interface. The
S-N curve characterize the strength at a given number of fatigue load cycles, and may also
depict an endurance limit, which sets the upper limit of stress, for which no failure will
occur regardless of the number of cycles.
Paris et. al [24] originally suggested that fatigue crack growth could be described by the
stress intensity factor. Later Paris and Erdogan [25] suggested that the crack growth rate
and stress intensity factor relation could be described by a straight line in a log-log plot,
for a specific range of stress intensity factors, also denoted the Paris’ Law regime. Fatigue
crack growth behavior is typically divided into 3 regions.
• Region I: Near threshold
• Region II: Paris’ Law regime
• Region III: Near toughness
.
The 3 regions are represented in Figure 17. The curve originally described the relation
between the stress intensity factor and crack growth rate, da/dN. The stress intensity
factor may be replaced by the energy release rate, which is more appropriate for the
problem studied in this thesis.
In the near threshold region, loading causes little to no crack growth. The threshold limit
is denoted ∆Gth, and energy release rates below this value result in no crack propagation.
In the Paris’ Law regime, the Paris-Erdogan relation is valid and the relation between
SIF/ERR and crack growth rate may be described by
da
dN = C(∆G)m
(3.15)
where C and m are material parameters, which are typically determined by performing
power regression of experimental fatigue crack propagation rates. In the near toughness
regime sudden failure will occur after only few cycles, or if the critical energy release rate
is exceeded may occur immediately.
16
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:27==
Figure 17: Fatigue crack growth rate and energy release rate relation represented in a
log-log plot.
Depending on the nature of the crack problem, the energy release rate will typically either
increase or decrease during crack propagation. If the energy release rate is increased during
crack propagation, it can eventually lead to sudden failure, also called unstable crack
growth. The crack growth rate may also decrease the energy release rate during crack
growth, until crack growth may completely arrest. For DCB-UBM tests, pure bending
moments are applied to the specimen, which leads to stable energy release rate, that does
not vary with crack propagation.
3.5
Cohesive Zone Modeling
Cohesive Zone Modeling (CZM) can be used to model and predict initiation and prop-
agation of cracks in a wide range of different applications, and is especially applied to
problems where LEFM cannot be assumed. CZM originates from the 1960’s and is based
on the ideas of Dugdale and Barenblatt [26, 27]. During the past two decades CZM has
gained increasing interest from researchers, due to its applicability in finite element mod-
elling. Since the CZM introduce non-linear behavior of the constitutive response of the
material, it is able to predict failure for ductile crack problems with large process zones.
The process zone length is an important aspect of the fracture process as it can indicate
whether the fracture is ductile or brittle. Brittle fracture takes place if the process zone
is much smaller compared to other characteristic lengths of the specimen, crack length,
specimen length and width etc.
CZM has previously been used to study a wide variety of failures, in both concrete, metals,
composites and bi-material interfaces and adhesive joints. The cohesive zone is typically
represented by a single layer of cohesive elements, which must be placed along the expected
path of crack propagation.
3.5.1
Traction-Separation law
The constitutive response of a cohesive element is governed by a traction-separation curve,
which utilize of a strength-based failure criterion to predict initiation of damage and a
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
17
==PAGE:28==
(a) Bi-linear
(b) Exponential
(c) Trapezoidal
Figure 18: Commonly applied traction-separation curves.
fracture-based criterion to predict failure. When the element is deformed, the traction, T
or stress in the element is increased, until maximum traction (T0) onsets damage of the
element and softening of the constitutive response is initiated. Softening will continue un-
til maximum separation (δmax) is reached, at which point complete failure of the element
occur and the crack propagates. The area under the traction-separation curve is equal to
the critical energy release rate or the fracture energy, Gc.
It is generally agreed that the fracture energy is the most important parameter of the cohe-
sive zone model, followed by the maximum cohesive stress. While many authors disregard
the shape of the traction-separation curve, and report that the shape of the softening
region of the traction separation curve has little to no influence on results [28, 29, 30],
others argue that the shape has a significant influence on results [31, 32, 33]. In literature
the predominant traction-separation curve is the bi-linear (Figure 18a). Other commonly
used traction separation curves are the exponential (Figure 18b) and the trapezoidal (Fig-
ure 18c). Previous studies have shown that the bi-linear model was able to predict the
macroscopic response of a push-out test, and the exponential model did not [31]. Another
study investigated the computational influence of the bi-linear and exponential models
and suggests that the exponential model is preferred, due to its continuity [33]. It is gen-
erally accepted that the the fracture energy and cohesive stress have a larger influence on
results compared to the shape of the traction-separation curve. In this project, both the
bi-linear and exponential shapes have been applied for comparison.
The bi-linear traction-separation law, may be described as a piece-wise function
T(δ) =



K1δ
0 ≤δ ≤δ0
−K2δ + T1
δ0 < δ ≤δmax
0
δmax < δ
(3.16)
where K1, K2 and T1 are cohesive parameters governed by
K1 = T0
δ0
,
K2 =
T0
δmax −δ0
and T1 =
δmax
δmax −δ0
T0
(3.17)
The fracture energy is the area under the curve thus
Gc =
∫δmax
0
T(δ)dδ
(3.18)
18
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:29==
3.5.2
Process zone length
The process zone is widely regarded to be dependent of the elastic modulus, critical energy
release rate and cohesive strength
lpz = κKGc
t2
0
(3.19)
where κ is a proportionality factor, K is the elastic modulus, Gc is the critical energy
release rate and t0 is the cohesive strength. Many different suggestions to the value of the
proportionality factor exist in literature [13, 26, 27, 34, 35, 36]. The factor depends on
the traction-separation response, which is also the reason why the numerical and exper-
imental process zone lengths usually don’t compare and the numerical models are based
on idealized traction-separation curves. In bi-material interface failures, considerations
should also be made regarding the chosen elastic modulus.
Salih et. al [36] proposed that the elastic modulus should be chosen as the elastic mod-
ulus of the bulk in the normal direction relative to the crack surface, and proposed a
proportionality constant of κ = 9π
32 . Allegri [35] suggested that E should be chosen as an
equivalent modulus between the elastic modulus of the two materials the crack is located
between. For a linear softening law Allegri proposed a proportionality factor of κ = 0.731
and for an exponential softening law κ = 2.92. In this thesis a bi-linear cohesive zone
model is used, thus Allegri’s suggested method is applied and later compared to numerical
results.
3.5.3
Mixed mode cohesive laws
Figure 19: Mixed mode traction separation response, determined by the chosen damage
and failure criteria.
For most interface fractures mode-mixity is present, as the energy required to propagate
into the bulk materials under pure mode conditions is often higher, than propagation under
mixed mode conditions in the interface. In order to establish the mixed mode behavior
of the cohesive zone, both damage and failure criteria must be specified, to determine the
cohesive strength and fracture energy at specific mode-mixities. A visual representation
of the mixed-mode cohesive law is shown in Figure 19, where the actual cohesive strength
and fracture energy at different mode-mixities are governed by the chosen damage criteria
and failure criteria respectively.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
19
==PAGE:30==
Damage criteria
When defining the cohesive laws, the onset of damage may be defined by the maximum
stress criterion, in 2D as:
max
{⟨Tn⟩
T0n
, Ts
T0s
}
= 1
(3.20)
where Tn and Ts are the normal and shear stresses respectively, T0n and T0s are the maxi-
mum normal and shear stresses respectively. ⟨⟩are the Macaulay brackets, signifying that
pure compressive stresses do not initiate damage.
Damage initiation may also be defined by a quadratic interaction function between the
normal and shear traction, in order to more accurately represent mixed-mode behavior
(⟨Tn⟩
T0n
)2
+
( Ts
T0s
)2
= 1
(3.21)
Both criteria may also be defined by use of strains instead of stresses.
Failure criteria
Figure 20: Interaction fracture behavior of Benzegagagh-Kenane (BK) and power law
fracture criteria.
Similar to the damage criteria, a failure criteria must also be chosen, in order to define the
mixed-mode failure conditions of the cohesive zone under mixed mode loading. The failure
criteria directly depicts the fracture energy at a given mode-mixity, based on the fracture
energies in pure mode I and II, GIC and GIIC. Several failure criteria exist in literature,
most of which are based on the power-law criterion and the Benzeggagh-Kenane criterion.
The power-law criterion, is often defined with two power law parameters, α and β
( GI
GIC
)α
+
( GII
GIIC
)β
= 1
(3.22)
β = α is often chosen for simplicity. When α = β > 1, convex interaction fracture be-
havior between GI and GII is present, while for α = β < 1, concave interaction fracture
behavior is present. When the power is equal to 1, α = β = 1 a linear non-interaction
fracture behavior between GI and GII is present, as shown in Figure 20.
The power-law criterion is limited by the condition GI < GIC for any amount of GII.
However many fracture problems exhibit that GI > GIC when some amount of GII is
20
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:31==
present. A modification of the power law fracture criterion has been proposed to remove
this limitation.
By introducing GIC = G∗
IC(GI, GII) and GIIC = G∗
IIC(GI, GII), the
critical energy release rates are allowed to vary depending on the mode-mixity, and thus
the limitations of the model can be circumvented. Alternatively another failure criterion
must be used.
Widely adopted in literature is the Benzeggagh-Kenane criterion (BK crtierion) [37] that
is able to predict GI > GIC under mixed-mode conditions, as seen in Figure 20
GI + GII
GIC + (GIIC −GIC)
(
GII
GI+GII
)η = 1
(3.23)
The criteria uses a single parameter η, which must be determined based on experiments.
Generally this criterion provides accurate results for a wide variety of fracture problems in
composites, and is therefore also ASTM’s recommended method to be used for interlaminar
failure in composites [38].
3.5.4
Cohesive zone modeling for fatigue crack propagation
Many researchers have used cohesive zone models to simulate fatigue crack initiation and
propagation [36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44]. The basic concept of most fatigue models are
identical and remain largely phenomenological, and require different parameters to be
chosen to fit experimental data.
A critical review of different fatigue failure models available in literature have been pre-
sented by Pascoe [45] including stress/strain based, LEFM, CZM and XFEM methods.
The study concludes that most models are phenomenological and suggests that a better
understanding of the physical mechanisms is needed. Another review of available cohesive
zone fatigue models has been presented by Liu et al. [46]. The study suggests that 3 impor-
tant aspects must be considered when using a cohesive zone model; ”unloading-reloading
path, damage evolution and crack surface-contact and -friction behavior”. The study also
reviewed different methods of determining the cohesive parameters for ductile and brittle
materials. Although the study acknowledge that CZM has been able to predict experi-
mental fatigue behavior, the study agrees that damage mechanics and underlying physics
should be better understood, before the methods can be applied to practical engineering
problems.
Despite the concerns of applying cohesive zone models in fatigue for practical engineering
tasks, it has been pointed out by researchers that fatigue damage models are mostly sen-
sitive to variations in material properties, and has shown that the modelling parameters
are less sensitive to geometric variations. Khoramishad et al. [40] successfully developed
a fatigue damage model to predict interface crack initiation and propagation of single lap
joints (SLJ) and laminated doublers in bending (LDB) with equal material systems. For
both models the cohesive parameters and fatigue damage parameters remained identical,
and both models were in good agreement with experimental results. Based on this obser-
vation, the above mentioned fatigue damage model has been applied to study DCB-UBM
and MTT test specimens in this thesis. In the following sections the fatigue damage model
developed by Khoramishad [40] will be presented, including the modifications proposed
by other researchers.
Fatigue damage model
Material degradation introduced by prolonged cyclic loading may be accounted for by de-
grading the traction-separation response. This has been done using a strain based fatigue
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 21: Linear degradation of the traction-separation response with increasing number
of cycles.
damage model, which introduce a damage parameter, D, that with increased number of
cycles decrease the cohesive strength and fracture energy as illustrated in Figure 21.
The damage parameter is governed by the following damage evolution law, proposed by
Khoramishad et. al [40].
∆D
∆N =
{ α(εmax −εth)β
εmax > εth
0
εmax ≤εth
(3.24)
where ∆D is the amount of accumulated damage over ∆N-number of cycles, α, β and εth
are material parameters which must be calibrated against experimental results and εmax
is the maximum strain defined as
εmax = εn
2 +
√(εn
2
)2
+
(εs
2
)2
where εn = δn
tcz
and εs = δs
tcz
(3.25)
where εn and εs are the normal and shear strains respectively, δn and δs are normal and
shear deformations respectively, tcz is the thickness of the cohesive zone.
Initially the damage parameter is zero for any element in the cohesive zone, and is only
increased if the maximum strain, εmax, exceed the threshold strain, εth.
The damage
parameter is stored as a field variable, ranging from 0 to 1, where D = 0 denotes no
damage, and D = 1 denotes complete loss of traction, thus
Ti = DiT0
GC,i = DiGC,0
(3.26)
where i denotes the current time step, and T0 and GC,0 is the initial cohesive strength and
fracture energy respectively. The influence of the fatigue damage parameters, α, β and
εth is illustrated in Figure 22. Within a common range of strain values, it is observed that
increasing α also increases the damage rate, while increasing both β and εth will decrease
the damage rate.
Khoramishad pointed out that although the SLJ and LDB specimen exhibited slight dif-
ferences in mode-mixities, the fatigue damage model did not account for different damage
parameter values for different mode-mixities. It was proposed that the model should be
applied to different tests, with varying mode-mixity ratios, to examine it’s applicability
under different mode-mixity conditions.
Hosseini et al. [47] applied the above mentioned fatigue damage model to predict fatigue
failure in double cantilever beam (DCB), end notch flexture (ENF) and mixed mode
22
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:33==
Figure 22: Fatigue damage parameters influence on the damage rate, depending on the
maximum strain.
bending (MMB) specimens, and thus examined the performance of the models proposed
by Khoramishad over the full variety of mode-mixity conditions. They concluded that
different fatigue damage parameters were required to predict fatigue failure under different
mode mixities, and proposed a formulation to determine mixed-mode damage parameters
to characterize mixed mode influence, based on the obtained parameters under the pure
mode conditions and a single mixed-mode condition with a mixed-mode ratio 50%.
log(αm) = log(α)I + βmix log(αI/II) + β2
mix log
( αII
αI/II
)
βm = βI + βmixβI/II + (βII −βI −βI/II)β2
mix
where
βmix = εs
εn
εthm = εthI/II + (εthII −εthI)βη
mix
(3.27)
where the constants αI, αII, βI, βII, εthI and εthII are mode I and II fatigue damage pa-
rameters respectively, αI/II, βI/II and εthI/II are mixed-mode fatigue damage parameters
obtained at exactly 50% mixed mode ratio and η is a material parameter. The mixed-mode
ratio βmix is the test dependable variable, which must be updated during the numerical
simulation.
In this thesis, the fatigue damage model introduced by Khoramishad et al. [40] is applied,
and results are compared to another fatigue damage model developed by Harper and Hallet
[42]. Mixed-mode fatigue damage parameters have not been established in this thesis, but
is encouraged for future work.
3.6
Determination of the cohesive law parameters
The traction separation curve cannot be extracted directly from experimental results.
Instead idealized traction-separation curves, for example those presented in Section 3.5.1
are defined based on obtainable parameters. The governing parameters of the traction
separation curves are often denoted the cohesive law parameters.
In this section, some of the methods available to extract the cohesive law parameters
are presented. The presented methods are split into 3 different categories; direct methods
obtaining parameters directly from experimental tests, indirect methods comparing exper-
imental and numerical results and analytical methods. The different methods presented
may not provide all of the cohesive parameters required to define the traction separation
curve, but may only provide a single parameter or parameters under pure mode condi-
tions etc. Several different methods are therefore often adopted to define the cohesive law
parameters.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
23
==PAGE:34==
3.6.1
Direct methods
Experimental traction separation curve
Experimental tests of Center Cracked Tension (CCT) and Double Edge Notched Tension
(DENT) test specimen and the J-integral approach, presented later, has been used by
Fuchs and Major [48] to develop cohesive zone models, which depict the actual response
through an experimental traction separation curve. Their method assumes LEFM is ap-
plicable.
Pull test
A specially designed pull test, where the material or interface is pulled apart has been
developed to determine the maximum tractions of an interface.
In the middle of the
specimen the bonded area of the specimen is well defined as illustrated in Figure 23, and
reduced in order to control where the fracture occur. The specimen is pulled apart in the
direction corresponding to the desired fracture mode. The stress distribution is assumed
to be uniform, and thus the cohesive strength is found directly as the peak load over the
reduced cross sectional area. The assumption of uniform stress distribution is in many
cases dubious, since stress concentrations at edges or imperfections can lead to disturbed
results.
Figure 23: Typical pull test used for direct characterisation of the cohesive strength.
This method has been applied by Coz et. al. [49] for 3-D woven graphite/epoxy compos-
ites, by Li et al. [50] for bonding of glass fibre composites and Moslemi and Khoshravan
[51] for E-glass/epoxy interface delamination. The latter also used the tests results in
conjunction with data reduction methods to determine the fracture energies in pure mode
I.
End opening considerations
In this thesis, the separations of the cohesive zones are determined using end opening con-
siderations. Tracking the opening between the two crack flanks at the initial crack length,
the end opening seen when initial crack growth occur relates directly to the separation
at maximum traction, thus δ∗= δ0. Once steady state crack propagation initiate, the
observed end opening relates to the maximum separation thus δ∗= δmax. This approach
is better suited for ductile interfaces with long process zones, as the separations in such
cases are much larger, and thus easier to measure compared to brittle interfaces with small
process zones.
Indirect method
Indirect methods are the most commonly applied methods to determine the cohesive pa-
rameters, and the procedure has been described by several authors [52, 53, 54]. It involves
comparing experimental results to numerical cohesive zone models. The cohesive param-
eters are varied until a good fit between experimental and numerical results are obtained.
Typically the global response such as displacement or crack extension is used as compari-
son.
24
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:35==
The critical energy release rate is widely considered to be the most critical parameter of
the cohesive zone model, as it is the parameter which depicts when failure will occur. It
also greatly influences the global response of a model, and thus the indirect method often
provides good results.
3.6.2
Analytical methods
Beam theory approach
Several methods exist on extracting the critical energy release rates from analytical ex-
pressions, some utilize basic beam theory considerations which include the compliance
calibration method [55, 56], direct beam theory [57] and the corrected beam theory [58,
59]. The basics of these methods are fundamentally the same. Moura et. al [58] described
the fracture energy of a pure mode I DCB test specimen as
GIc =
3Pδ
2w(a + |∆|)
(3.28)
where P is the load, w is specimen width, a is crack length and |∆| is a crack length
correction parameter, specific to the corrected beam theory approach, to account for crack
tip rotations and deflections, and is determined through linear regression of the compliance
against crack length data, which relation is governed by
C1/3 = 2(a + |∆|)
h(E1b)1/3
(3.29)
where C is the compliance of the specimen, determined from beam theory.
J-integral
Another analytical method applied to determine cohesive laws is the J integral approach
J =
∫
Γ
Wdy −δijnj
∂ui
∂x dS
(3.30)
where σij is the stress tensor, dS is an incremental length along the closed path Γ, nj is an
outward normal vector and ui is the displacement vector. W is the strain energy density:
W = 1
2σxεx.
This approach was first used by Li and Ward [60] to derive cohesive laws. They proposed
the relation between the end opening of the cohesive zone and the path independent J
integral
∂JR
∂δ∗= σ(δ∗)
(3.31)
where JR is the fracture resistance which reach steady state, JSS, once the deflection at
the end of the cohesive zone, δ∗, reaches critical deformation, δmax.
For mixed-mode characterisation, typically a combination of DCB (mode I), MMB (mode
I/II) and ENF (mode II) specimen are used in conjunction with the J-integral approach
to determine the fracture resistance under different mixed-mode conditions.
Sørensen and Jacobsen [61] applied the same method for DCB-UBM specimen with large
process zones, where closed form solutions of the J integral exist, thus the fracture resis-
tance may be directly related to the energy release rate, J = G.
Saseendran et al. [62] applied the J integral approach to determine the energy release
rate of a DCB-UBM sandwich composite specimen with attached doublers. The concept
remains identical for bonded laminates, and the method may also be applied to specimen
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 24: Superposition scheme and J-integral path of the DCB-UBM specimen with
reinforcement layer and uneven upper and lower laminate thicknesses.
without added reinforcements. The J integral may be calculated along the closed path
shown in Figure 24 using the general expression in Eq. 3.30
J =
10
∑
p=1
∫
Γ
−1
2
¯Epσ2
xdy
(3.32)
The critical energy release rate may be determined using this approach by inputting the
critical loads, at which point crack propagation initiates. The analytical solutions derived
by Saseendran et al. assume symmetry around the mid-plane of the specimen. In Appendix
A the J integral solution for asymmetric bi-material interfaces in DCB-UBM specimens
has been derived, based on the same approach as presented by Saseendran et al., however
without the assumption of symmetry along the mid-plane of the specimen.
26
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:37==
4
Test and specimen configurations
using CSDE
For both DCB-UBM and MTT tests a parametric study based on LEFM has been con-
ducted using the Abaqus commercial finite element software using the implicit solver.
Since both test methods are novel, no test standards have been proposed. The primary
objective of this study is to initially determine the geometric configurations of the test
specimens, based on different criteria, that should provide good and reliable experimental
results.
The purpose of these models has been to discover and investigate trends, and estimate
the performance of different test setups and specimen configurations. The results of these
studies would eventually be used to determine the final configurations of the test specimen.
It is acknowledged that LEFM is not well suited for the specific interface studied in this
thesis, and results are only indicative.
The CSDE method was applied on 2D models, to extract strain energy release rates, G,
and mixed-mode angles, ψ. A mesh refinement scheme was applied near the crack tip,
as proposed by Berggreen et. al [19], represented in Figure 26, with the near crack tip
mesh size 100 times smaller than the adhesive layer thickness. CPE8R quadratic plain
strain elements were applied on all parts of the models, and each part was bonded to
adjoint parts using tie constraints. The laminates were assumed to be homogeneous and
orthotropic and the adhesive was assumed homogeneous and isotropic.
Table 4.1: Approximate elastic material properties applied for specimen configurations,
all moduli denoted in GPa.
Laminate properties
E1
E2
E3
ν12
ν13
ν23
G12
G13
G23
14.393
12.000
13.082
0.494
0.3
0.3
9.978
5.406
5.406
1: Longitudinal, 2: Through thickness, 3: Transverse
Adhesive Properties
Fracture energy
Ea
νa
Ga
GIC
GIIC
3.500
0.33
2.100
500J/m2
3000J/m2
Since no material data were available prior to testing, these had to be assumed. The elastic
properties of the laminates were based on the properties of the glass fiber laminate skins of
the sandwich panels tested in the CORTIR-I project. The elastic properties of the epoxy
adhesives were determined by the average values from the matweb material database of
epoxy adhesives [63], and the fracture energies were conservatively assumed to be high;
500 J/m2 in pure mode I and 3000 J/m2, based on reference values from literature, which
are generally lower for similar adhesive-composite interfaces [64, 65]. It has been shown by
researchers that the fracture energy of composite bonded joints are strongly dependent of
the ductility of the applied adhesive [65], and thus the actual fracture energies may differ
significantly from the assumed values. The material properties initially used may be seen
in Table 4.1.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
27
==PAGE:38==
4.1
Characterisation tests
To determine the DCB-UBM specimen configuration, a parametric framework developed
by Ignacio Vidal Peréz, was applied and modified to investigate the behavior of the test
specimens. The different configurations were investigated in terms of the expected mo-
ments required to propagate a crack, the compressive stresses and tip rotations at different
mode-mixity angles.
Figure 25: Geometry of the DCB-UBM test specimen.
The fundamental dimensions of the DCB-UBM specimens can be seen in Figure 25. Most
of the dimensions were predetermined, primarily by the test machine capabilities, but also
by the time and cost related to manufacturing the test panels. The constraint dimensions
can be seen in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Constraints when designing the test specimen configuration
l
lsupport
w
ts
tl
Mmax
450 mm
50 mm
30 mm
6 mm
<20 mm
220 N m
ts is the thickness of steel doublers, Mmax is the peak torque of the test machine, and thus
critical that static crack propagation would occur with applied moments below this value.
The general FEM-modelling setup of the DCB-UBM specimen can be seen in Figure 26.
Figure 26: Modelling setup for CSDE analysis of DCB-UBM specimen, with a crack in
the interface between upper laminate and adhesive layer.
In the parametric study the thicknesses of the upper and lower laminates and the adhesives
were varied, and the mode-mixity angles and energy release rates were determined for
different moment ratios. It was also investigated whether it would be necessary to use steel
stiffeners bonded to the laminates, in order to limit the tip rotations and eliminate critical
compressive stresses in the laminates, which could cause the specimens to fail elsewhere
prior to crack propagation. The primary findings of this study was that moments required
to propagate a crack at any given phase angle was expected to be lower than the test
28
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:39==
machine capabilities, even with attached steel stiffeners and conservative estimates of the
critical energy release rate.
Mixed mode angle vs Moment Ratio
MR = -1.1
MR = -1.6
MR = -2.3
MR = -3.6
MR = -6.9
MR = -25
MR = 15
MR = 6
MR = 3.5
MR = 2.4
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
 [ °]
a = 50mm
a = 150mm
a = 250mm
Figure 27: Mode-mixity angle for different moment ratios.
The final panel configuration which was used for both DCB-UBM and MTT test specimens
can be seen in Table 5.1, and consists of a 10.2 mm upper laminate, 2.4 mm adhesive layer
and a 6.8 mm lower laminate. With this configuration the moment ratios required to
propagate the crack at 10 different mode-mixity angles were determined, as shown in
Figure 27. In this study the full formulation was applied in the CSDE analysis, with the
characteristic length set to the thickness of the adhesive layer. This use of full vs reduced
formulation is further discussed later. It can be seen that only negligible variation in phase
angle occur with increasing crack length, which is one of the primary advantages of the
DCB-UBM test method. With the moment ratios established, the moments required to
Energy release rate G vs MR.
MR = -1.1, M1 = -15.5Nm
MR = -1.6, M1 = -22.5Nm
MR = -2.3, M1 = -28Nm
MR = -3.6, M1 = -34Nm
MR = -6.9, M1 = -40Nm
MR = -25, M1 = -46Nm
MR = 15, M1 = -51Nm
MR = 6, M1 = -55Nm
MR = 3.5, M1 = -56.5Nm
MR = 2.4, M1 = -57.5Nm
0
500
1000
1500
G [J/m 2]
a = 50mm
a = 150mm
a = 250mm
Figure 28: Energy release rates for the given M1 moments and moment ratios.
propagate cracks at the different phase angles were explored, assuming that fatigue crack
propagation would occur below 50% of the assumed fracture energy, thus at 250 J/m2
in pure mode I and at 1500 J/m2 in pure mode II. The moments applied to the upper
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
29
==PAGE:40==
laminate, M1, based on the assumed required energy release rates can be seen in Figure
28. Like the phase angle, the energy release rate is independent of the crack length.
Tip Rotation vs. Mixed mode angle
 = 0 °
 = -10 °
 = -20 °
 = -30 °
 = -40 °
 = -50 °
 = -60 °
 = -70 °
 = -80 °
 = -90 °
0
5
8
10
15
20
25
Tip Rotation [
°]
a = 50mm
a = 150mm
a = 250mm
Figure 29: Tip rotations of DCB-UBM specimen at different mode-mixity angles and crack
lengths.
With the moments defined, the tip rotations of the specimens at different crack lengths
were investigated. In order to avoid issues with non-linear effects from large deflections,
the tip rotation of the DCB-UBM specimen should be no more than 8 −10◦. As shown
in Figure 29, the tip rotations are higher than 8◦for mode-mixities above 40◦with the
crack propagated more than 150 mm, and only below 8◦for crack lengths of 250 mm for
mode-mixity angles below 10◦.
Due to the applied bending moments, compressive failures of the laminates should be
considered. This would ensure that failure would not occur in other regions of the specimen
before or during crack propagation. 600 g/m2 Biax glass fiber composites has a compressive
strength of 175 MPa [66].
The compressive stresses were recorded at the paths of maximum compression of the lower
and upper laminates, see Figure 30, and the recorded compressive stresses can be seen in
Figure 31. The stresses are shown only for crack lengths of 50 mm, since the compressive
stresses were found to be independent of the crack length for DCB-UBM specimen. The
compressive stresses obtained at any mode-mixity is well below the reported compressive
strength of biax laminates. However, typically the compressive stresses in laminates are
carried by the matrix material. Typical epoxy resins have compressive strengths between
70 to 120 MPa, which is similar to the results obtained for phase angles between 40◦−90◦.
Different types of failures may therefore still occur in the laminates, such as fibre-matrix
failure, matrix cracking, buckle delamination etc. These types of laminate failures have
not been further investigated in this thesis, however actions to mitigate potential issues
regarding laminate failure have been considered and is presented below.
Using steel doublers
To avoid high tip rotations steel doublers bonded to the upper and lower laminates, as
illustrated in Figure 25, are often used on DCB-UBM specimen. Another advantage of
using steel doublers is that they carry almost any compressive stresses. When the speci-
mens are loaded, the laminates are entirely on the tension side of the neutral axis, with
the exception of the lower laminates in tests where MR > 0, but even in this case the
30
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:41==
(a) MR < 0
(b) MR > 0
Figure 30: Compressive stress paths depending on the moment ratio.
-60
-40
-20
0
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Upper laminate
-60
-40
-20
0
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Lower laminate
 = 0 °
 = -10 °
 = -20 °
 = -30 °
 = -40 °
 = -50 °
 = -60 °
 = -70 °
 = -80 °
 = -90 °
Distance from crack tip [mm]
11 [MPa]
Figure 31: Paths of highest compressive stresses in the upper and lower laminates respec-
tively, for different mode-mixity angles.
compressive stresses in the laminates are reduced significantly. The moments required to
reach the same energy release rates are higher, due to the added stiffness.
The maximum tip rotation for a pure mode II test with a crack length of 250 mm de-
creased from 22◦to 6◦, by using steel doublers. Also the maximum compressive stress was
reduced from ∼120 MPa to ∼50 MPa even as M1 increased from 57.5 to 170 Nm. All the
results can be seen in Appendix C.1.
The primary concerns of using steel doublers for DCB-UBM specimens, is the time con-
suming bonding process of attaching doublers to specimens and the higher moments that
are required due to the added bending stiffness. This could lead to bending moments
required to be higher than what the test rig is designed to handle (max. 220 Nm). With
doublers attached to the selected specimen configuration and conservative estimates of the
critical energy release rates, it was found that the moments required to propagate a crack
under any mode-mixity condition would not be greater that the test machine limits.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
31
==PAGE:42==
Due to the uncertain values of the fracture energies steel doublers might be unnecessary,
or only necessary for specific tests, such as static testing or pure mode II tests. Steel
doublers would therefore only be applied, if tests could not be completed without.
4.2
Sub-component I tests
A parametric study has been applied to initially investigate different options for sub-
component I test setups, with the objective of developing a test setup with varying phase
angles during crack propagation. In this study the CSDE method was applied, based on
the same parametric framework developed by Ignacio Vidal Pérez.
From the different setups investigated (including 4PB, MMB, SCB, MTT) it was found
that MTT provided the largest mixed-mode variations of up to 45◦for most of the con-
figurations investigated, and was therefore quickly chosen as the sub-component I test
method.
The Modified Tear Test developed for sub-component I phase of the CORTIR-II project
is based on the Sandwich Tear Test [67]. The specimens were developed to fit the same
test setup as used in the experimental work performed by Arash [68]. The geometry of
this setup can be seen in Figure 32.
Figure 32: MTT specimen geometry.
The constraint dimensions based on the test setup can be seen in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Constraints configuring the test specimen.
l
lend
lload
w
tl
500700 mm
50 mm
50 mm
50 mm
< 20 mm
Since the specimen geometry and boundary conditions were symmetric around the center,
only half of the specimen was modeled and a symmetry boundary condition was applied
in the center. The loaded part was restricted from rotating and moving laterally. The
crack tip was positioned between the upper laminate and the adhesive layer, with mesh
refinement scheme similar to the DCB-UBM model. The initial crack length was set to 50
mm. The modelling setup can be seen in Figure 33.
From the parametric study it was concluded that the mode-mixity variation was largely
independent of the specimen length and thickness of the laminates. The most significant
influence on the mode-mixity variation during crack propagation was the compliance re-
lation between the upper and lower parts of the specimen (split by the crack tip). A less
32
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:43==
Figure 33: Modelling setup of the MTT specimen.
compliant upper part, compared to the lower part, provided more variation, while a more
compliant top part provided less. It was also found that the center clamp length, lcenter,
influenced the mode-mixity angle for short crack lengths, which could be utilized to tune
the obtained mode-mixity variation curve.
Both force and displacement controlled loading have been considered. For a force con-
trolled test it was obtained, throughout the parametric studies, that the energy release rate
inherently increase as the crack propagates, potentially leading to unstable crack growth.
For static testing the tests should therefore be carried out with displacement controlled
loading, since it would require more displacement to propagate a crack at longer crack
lengths.
For fatigue testing the peak value of force/displacement for each cycle should remain con-
stant during a test. Since the displacement required to propagate a crack at shorter crack
lengths are much lower than for longer cracks, displacement controlled testing would be
impossible to use in fatigue. For fatigue testing, force controlled loading should be applied,
and whether the crack will propagate under stable conditions will depend on the variation
in fracture energy with respect to mode-mixity. In literature the fracture energy in pure
mode II is typically between 2-10 times higher than in pure mode I. This relation, and
the mixed-mode critical energy release rates are paramount for the stability of the crack
growth under fatigue loading, as illustrated in Figure 34.
Figure 34: Illustrative comparison of G vs GC between two different rates of fracture
energy variation with respect to mode-mixity angle.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
33
==PAGE:44==
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
a [mm]
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
 [ °]
Mixed mode angle vs Crack length
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
a [mm]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
G [J/m²]
Energy release rate vs Crack length
Figure 35: Mode-mixity angle and energy release rate at different crack lengths constant
loading of 800N.
In the presented results the panel configuration in Table 5.1 is also used for DCB-UBM
specimen, a total specimen length of 600 mm and a center clamp length of 70 mm was
used. With this configuration the mode-mixity angle varies from 0◦at an initial crack
length of 50 mm to 43◦at a fully propagated crack length of 200 mm, which can be seen
in Figure 35.
It can also be seen in Figure 35 that the obtained energy release rates
varie from ∼200 J/m2 to ∼900 J/m2, or 4.5 times higher for a crack length of 200 mm
compared to a crack length of 50 mm. This rate of change is larger than the expected rate
of change in fracture energy over the amount of mode-mixity variation.
Figure 36: Contour plot of the stress component in the longitudinal direction of the
specimen.
In the laminates, compressive stresses should be checked, in order to make sure that
critical failure does not occur prior or during crack propagation. Generally the stresses
were highest in the top laminate. Compressive stresses are located in the lower surface
of the laminate near the loading region, with stress singularities near the edge of the the
load bar. Compressive stresses were also present in the top surface of the upper laminate
above the crack tip. The compressive stresses in the lower laminate were generally lower
compared to the upper laminate, but depend on the compliance relation between the upper
and lower regions of the test specimen. The compressive stresses increases as the crack
length is increased. In Figure 36 a contour plot of the stresses in the longitudinal direction
34
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:45==
can be seen for a fully propagated crack length of 200 mm.
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Upper laminate
Upper path
Lower path
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
Lower laminate
a = 50mm
a = 75mm
a = 100mm
a = 125mm
a = 150mm
a = 175mm
a = 200mm
a [mm]
11 [MPa]
Figure 37: Stresses along the paths of largest compressive stress.
The stress along the paths described above can be seen for different crack lengths in Figure
37. With exception of the singularities found near the crack tip and the loaded region,
the stress levels found in the specimen are acceptable.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
35
==PAGE:46==
5
Experimental testing
Two different fracture mechanical tests are presented in this thesis. The Double Can-
tilever Beam under Uneven Bending Moments (DCB-UBM) test method is introduced to
characterize the cohesive damage and failure parameters of different mixed-mode loading
conditions under quasi-static and fatigue loading. A novel test method based on the Sand-
wich Tear Test (STT) here denoted as the Modified Tear Test (MTT) is introduced for
Sub-component level 1 testing, in order to verify the cohesive parameters characterised by
the DCB-UBM tests.
Finally a test setup for Sub-component II testing is also proposed for future work in Section
9.1, based on the experience gained conducting the above mentioned tests.
5.1
Characterisation tests
(a) Mode I: DCB test.
(b) Mixed: MMB test.
(c) Mode II: ENF test
(d) Mode I: DCB-UBM test.
(e) Mixed: DCB-UBM test.
(f) Mode II: DCB-UBM test
Figure 38: Different tests typically used for mixed-mode fracture characterisation.
When characterizing mixed-mode cohesive parameters, 3 different test methods are typ-
ically required to load specimens under different mixed mode conditions [65, 69, 70, 71,
47]. Typically a combination of Double Cantilever Beam (DCB) testing for pure mode I,
Mixed Mode Bending (MMB) or Single-Leg Bending (SLB) testing for mixed-modes and
End Notch Flexture (ENF) testing for pure mode II loading is adopted by researchers,
see Figure 38. Various modifications of the above mentioned test methods have been pro-
posed, but regardless still require 3 different test setups to characterize the mixed-mode
cohesive parameters.
The DCB-UBM test presented by Sørensen et. al [72] apply uneven bending moments to
the tip of each crack flank of the specimen. Depending on the ratio between the moments
exerted on the tips, the crack may be propagated under various fracture modes, from pure
mode I to pure mode II, as illustrated in Figure 38. DCB-UBM tests thereby replace the
need for 3 different characterisation tests, which makes the test method very attractive
for fracture characterisation in general. The test rig used for DCB-UBM testing can be
seen in Figure 39.
36
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:47==
Figure 39: DCB-UBM test machine.
As the load acting on the specimen is purely from bending moments, the energy release
rate and mode-mixity angle is independent of the crack length. For large process zones
another advantage of loading with pure bending moments is that the load exerted, will
be constant over the entire process zone. Bent F. Sørensen [61] originally applied the
DCB-UBM test method to study fracture processes with large scale bridging, specifically
to have the same load over the entire fiber bridging zone.
5.1.1
Specimen configuration and preparation
Configuration of the specimens was based on initial studies, using CSDE analysis to com-
pute mode mixity angles and energy release rates, as described in Section 4.1. The con-
figuration itself is based on the premise, that reinforcing steel doublers should ideally be
avoided for most tests, as they are time consuming to apply. The panel configuration used
for DCB-UBM specimen can be seen in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Layups of DCB-UBM and MTT test specimen.
Upper laminate
Adhesive
Lower laminate
Thickness
Layup
Name
Thickness
Thickness
Layup
Name
10 mm
8[45/0/-45/ ± 45]
Triax/Biax
2 mm
6.8 mm
10[±45]
Biax
In order to fix the specimens to the test machine, a recess was cut into the specimen,
where threaded steel inserts would be placed and bolted to the clamps inserted in the load
fixture of the test machine, as seen on Figure 40.
Initial tests revealed that this clamping arrangement made the specimen prone to exhibit
interlaminar failure near the clamping area. Besides, the tip rotations became exceedingly
high, due to the removal of material in the loaded region of the specimen as seen on Figure
40.
Reinforcing steel doublers
Reinforcing steel doublers can be applied to the specimen to limit large deformations and
further limit compressive stresses in the laminates. It is generally accepted that the tip
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 40: Deformation of loaded DCB-UBM specimen with steel inserts and no reinforce-
ments.
(a) Specimen without clamps, with detach-
ment between specimen and doubler.
(b) Added clamps to prohibit doubler detach-
ment concludes the final test and specimen
configuration for DCB-UBM testing.
Figure 41: Adaptation to account for doubler detachments.
rotation of the specimen should be below 8 −10◦to avoid non-linear effects influencing
results.
38
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:49==
Due to the high tip rotations and poor fixation options, exhibited on specimens, doublers
had to be applied. Doublers are bonded to the top and bottom surfaces of the speci-
men using Araldite 2015-1 structural adhesive. The specimen and doublers are clamped
together while the adhesive cures for 24 hours.
The interface within the specimen revealed to be stronger than the interface between the
reinforcing doublers and the specimen, see Figure 41a. A clamp has been installed, to
prohibit cracks from initiating between the specimen and doublers, as seen in Figure 41b.
Data acquisition
Moments and rotations of the loading arms are extracted directly from the sensors of the
testmachine using the MTS data acquisition system.
(a) Reference lengths in the picture.
(b) Reference coordinate frame.
Figure 42: Calibration procedure of the iMetrum Video Measurement system.
Further data is acquired using the iMetrum Non-Contact Video Measurement live-tracking
software.
In order to get representative measurements using the iMetrum system, the software must
first be calibrated. To calibrate the tracked measurements, a coordinate reference frame
is defined, which relate pixels in different areas of the picture to actual lengths on the
crack surface plane. Since the image plane is parallel to the plane of the crack surface, the
coordinate frame is calibrated using two orthogonal in-plane reference lengths, here tape
rulers were used in the longitudinal direction, and the thickness of the reinforcing doublers
in the vertical direction, as seen in Figure 42a. The coordinate frame is afterwards rotated
such that the x-direction runs along the crack path, as shown in Figure 42b.
Afterwards desired measurements are defined. The crack path and initial crack length
must be very accurately defined, as seen in Figure 43 in order for the automatic crack
propagation tracking algorithm to work, especially for mode II crack propagation, since
the software is originally meant to be used for DCB specimen, and therefore not designed
to handle moving crack paths, which is pronounced in mode II. Other measurements such
as displacements and rotations should ideally be located near areas that are easy to track,
for example in high contrast areas of the specimen.
The tracked crack flank displacements used to determine the phase-angle should also be
tracked close to the crack tip near the crack flank surface. Tracking deflections very close
to the crack flank surface, did however result in distorted or failing measurements, since
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 43: Definition of different measurements being conducted using the iMetrum sys-
tem.
the tracking area would track on both sides of the crack tip. In order to get more reliable
results, crack flank displacements were therefore measured further away from the crack
surface. Since the laminates are less compliant compared to the interface, the differences
between the two measurements are assumed to be minor.
Analogue signals may also be inputted, such that all necessary data can be found in a
single text-file with the same sampling frequency, which eases the post-processing effort.
For static DCB-UBM tests the following data are tracked/stored using the iMetrum soft-
ware
• Crack length
• End opening/Crack flank displacement
• Tip displacement
• Tip rotations
• Analogue inputs of applied moments
5.1.2
Quasi-static testing
Quasi-static tests are completed in order to determine the governing parameters of the
cohesive laws. Moment ratios were determined based on the desired phase angles 0◦, 15◦,
30◦and 90◦, which would provide both a pure mode I and II test and two mixed mode tests
covering the mode mixities seen in MTT tests. Moments that would provide the desired
phase angles were determined using the CSDE method, calculating the phase angle using
the full formulation with characteristic length set to the thickness of the adhesive, see
Figure 44.
Unintentionally the full formulation was used to determine the moment ratios used in
test, and a shift in phase-angle between the full and reduced formulation is approximately
40
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:51==
MR = -0.83
MR = -1.4
MR = -2.5
MR = 1.9
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
 [ °]
a = 50mm
a = 150mm
a = 250mm
Figure 44: Phase angles at the tested moment ratios, based on the full formulation using
CSDE.
30◦. A comparison and discussion of the different methods to obtain the phase angles are
presented and further discussed in section 7.2.
When testing quasi-statically, the loading is controlled by the rotation of moment arm 1,
and is set to rotate 1◦/min. The moment on arm 2 follows the loading of arm 1, depending
on the specified moment ratio. The input moment ratios used in the test machine, is the
inverse of those applied in the numerical models, thus a conversion must be made. An
overview of the converted moment ratios can be seen in Table 5.2
Table 5.2: Moment ratios, and station in moment ratios, along with the fatigue adjusted
station input moment ratios.
Actual
MR
-0.83
-1.4
-2.50
1.90
Station input
1/MR
-1.2048
-0.7143
-0.4
0.526
Fatigue adjusted
1/MRf
-1.45
-0.86
The crack flank displacements will be used to determine the experimental mode-mixity
angles.
The end opening is also used to determine the cohesive tractions and initial
stiffness, and could also be used for plotting the R-curve. For that the crack extensions
are used. The tip rotations, tip deflections and crack length may all be used to compare
experimental results and numerical modelling predictions.
5.1.3
Fatigue testing
In fatigue, the crack propagation rate is determined at different load levels. Specimens are
tested in fatigue at load levels that correspond to 60%, 70% and 80% of the critical energy
release rate. Moments that will achieve the desired energy release rate, are determined
using the relation between moments and energy release rate as depicted by the J-integral
approach, and can be seen in Table 5.3. Note that it was never planned to run fatigue
analysis in pure mode II conditions.
The moment of arm 2 is calibrated as a follower load of arm 1, and since some time delay
is present, the actual moment ratio between moment arm 1 and 2 underestimates the
moment on arm 2. Therefore the input moment ratio used for fatigue must be calibrated,
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
41
==PAGE:52==
Table 5.3: Moments of arm 1, M1, at different energy release rates given in % relative to
the critical energy release rate at each mode-mixity.
MR
−0.83
−1.4
−2.5
GC
83.0 Nm
110.0 Nm
115.7 Nm
80%
74.4 Nm
98.2 Nm
103.5 Nm
70%
69.6 Nm
91.8 Nm
96.8 Nm
60%
64.4 Nm
89.7 Nm
85.3 Nm
until the actual moment ratio is equal to the moment ratio used for quasi-static tests. The
input moment ratios that were used for fatigue testing can be seen in Figure 5.2. Note
that fatigue tests were only carried out at moment ratios of MR = −0.83 and MR = −1.4.
Since the DCB-UBM specimens move back and forth 10 to 20 mm in the longitudinal
direction for each load cycle, the live-tracking features used for quasi-static tests, are not
applicable for fatigue tests. Instead the crack propagation rate is determined using an
OLYMPUS OM-D E-M5 II mirror-less camera shooting time lapses capturing up to 1000
photos per test. If one test is set to complete 2000 cycles a photo may be taken every 2nd
cycle, while a test of 20.000 cycles will have a photo taken every 20th cycle. The crack
length at a given number of cycles may thereby be determined simply by the photo number.
The crack length may thereby be tracked manually, to obtain the crack propagation rate.
Comparing the Paris’ Law curves, the fatigue damage parameters may be tuned until a
good fit is obtained between numerical and experimental results.
5.2
Sub-Component I tests
The purpose of the sub-component I level tests is to replicate the shear web disbond phe-
nomenon experienced in real life, using a simple test setup and simple specimens. The
model should be able to be numerically represented by a 2D model, such that computa-
tional times are reduced when calibrating the numerical models to the experimental test
results. This also ensures that the applied numerical methods and parameters are matured
such that when applied to more complex problems, they should still provide good results.
Another benefit of having a simple initial model is that less resources are required to test
many specimens.
Although it is generally assumed that shear web disbonding occur under mode I conditions,
mode mixities may be present due to membrane forces in the aerodynamic shells, or from
the torsional shear induced by the global loading of the wind turbine blade. In order to
investigate how this may influence the problem it was desired to find a test method, where
the mode-mixity would change during crack propagation, in order to verify the modelling
parameters under different mode-mixity angles, without doing an abundance of tests.
Different test methods and geometries were considered for the sub-component I tests,
including three- and four-point bending (3PB & 4PB), mixed mode bending (MMB),
single cantilever beam (SCB) and a test method based on the sandwich tear test (STT).
The latter proved to provide the desired characteristics.
5.2.1
Modified Tear Test
The Modified Tear Test (MTT), is based on a method called Sandwich Tear Test (STT),
used to test interface failure between the core and face sheets under varying mixed mode
42
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:53==
Figure 45: Modified Tear Test.
Figure 46: MTT test setup in the test machine.
conditions. The idea behind the test is that in-plane membrane forces become exceedingly
higher as the upper skin of the sandwich panel is pulled upwards. Increasing in-plane
membrane forces cause the mode-mixity angle to increase, from an initially pure mode I
condition. Whether this phenomena would also be present in much thicker laminates was
initially investigated and verified. These investigations are presented in Section 4.2.
A new test setup has been designed and manufactured to account for the differences
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
43
==PAGE:54==
between the bonded laminate specimens tested in this thesis, and the sandwich specimen
tested using a STT setup. The final design of the modified setup can be seen in Figure
45. While a few parts were reused from the STT setup, most have been redesigned and
manufactured for this project. Work drawings of the parts specifically designed for this
test setup can be found in Appendix B.3. In Figure 46 the test setup can be seen installed
in the test machine.
5.2.2
Specimen preparation
Figure 47: Preparation of MTT specimen.
Specimen are prepared with an initial crack length of 150 mm in the center of the specimen
that is introduced during manufacturing of the panels by use of teflon. Holes are cut for
fixing the specimen in either end. Holes are also pre-drilled for the construction screws
and slotted holes are cut for the claws to hold on to the specimen. Steps of the preparation
process can be seen in Figure 47.
In order to reuse as much as possible of the test setup used for the STT tests, almost
all dimensions remain equal to the dimensions of the STT test. The CSDE method was
applied using a parametric study, varying the laminate and adhesive thicknesses, length
and width of the specimen and the applied loading and boundary conditions in order to
investigate the influence of these parameters on the mode mixity response. The parametric
study is presented in 4.2. The phase angle would generally vary from 0◦to 45◦.
Data acquisition
The iMetrum Non-Contact Video Measurement was used for extracting data from the
MTT tests. Since the image plane could not be set parallel to the crack plane, due to
one of the test machine columns blocking the view, another calibration process had to
be applied. Instead of defining lengths in the image, lengths between the camera and
positions on the crack plane were defined, which along with information on the focal
length of the lens, defines the coordinate frame of the image plane. To increase the size of
the crack plane in the image plane, a thin steel plate is temporarily inserted in front of the
specimen. Lengths between the corners and center of the steel plate and the camera lens
is measured as reference lengths, see Figure 48a. The software calibrates the coordinate
frame accordingly, which can be checked against the steel plate, see Figure 48b. Once
calibration is complete, the steel plate is removed before testing.
Both crack length and displacements were tracked using the live tracking feature, and the
applied load was inputted as an analogue input, to obtain all measurements with the same
44
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:55==
(a) Reference distances from the camera lens.
(b) Reference coordinate frame.
Figure 48: Calibration of the crack plane coordinate reference frame, using a steel plate.
sampling frequency.
Quasi-static testing
The tests are conducted using a four column MTS 810 test machine with a worktable to
clamp the setup against, using M20 bolts. In the test machine load is exerted using a 100
kN load cell.
Quasi-static tests are carried out under displacement control, as this will ensure the most
stable crack propagation characteristics, since the energy release rate will increase with
increasing crack lengths, and thus less loading is expected to be required to propagate the
crack.
Fatigue testing
Fatigue testing was conducted at 3 different load levels at high, medium and low intensity,
compared to the maximum attained load level from the quasi-static tests.
The crack
growth was initially tracked using the iMetrum tracking software.
Due to the cyclic
behavior a high tracking frequency was required, for the software to follow the opening
and closure of the crack tip, in order to avoid too much closure at the crack tip, the
minimum load was set between 20-30% of the maximum load in all tests. Tracking of the
crack length under fatigue using the iMetrum tracking software, was inherently unreliable.
If the software failed to track the crack length in a single cycle, it would most often fail to
track the crack length for the rest of the test, which meant that poor data was available
when tracking crack lengths using this technique.
Instead photos were taken at a given frequency, and the crack length would be tracked
manually, as in DCB-UBM tests.
5.2.3
Specimen and test labeling
Figure 49: Labeling scheme for specimen and tests.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
45
==PAGE:56==
To keep track of data from each test, both specimens and tests must carry a label that is
used when processing data. Two types of tests may be conducted, and each of those are
tested under both quasi-static and fatigue loading. Numbers in the naming label denote
the specimen ID and the test ID respectively, if several tests are conducted on a simple
test. The labeling scheme can be seen in Figure 49.
46
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:57==
5.3
Test plan
In Table 5.4 the proposed test plan for CORTIR-II chracterisation and sub-component
I testing is presented. Since limited time was available for testing, only 1-3 of each of
the proposed tests have been conducted. An extended number of tests are planned to be
conducted in the future, to decrease the statistical uncertainty.
Table 5.4: Test plan for all different types of tests. Red text marks tests where no tests has
yet been completed. Number in parenthesis marks number of successful tests completed
during this thesis.
DCB-UBM
Number
of
tests
Moment
ratio
Loading
Control type
Loading
rate
Acquisition
Quasi-static
7 (3)
−0.83
Until full crack
propagation
Rotations arm 1
1◦/min
iMetrum
7 (2)
−1.4
7 (3)
−2.5
7 (3)
−1.9
Fatigue
3 (1)
−0.83
80% GC
Moment arm 1
0.1Hz/cycle
Photos
3 (2)
−0.83
70% GC
3 (1)
−0.83
60% GC
3 (1)
−1.4
80% GC
3 (1)
−1.4
70% GC
3 (1)
−1.4
60% GC
3 (0)
−2.5
80% GC
3 (0)
−2.5
70% GC
3 (0)
−2.5
60% GC
MTT
Number of tests
Loading
Control type
Loading
rate
Acquisition
Quasi-static
7 (2)
Until full crack
propagation
Displacement
1mm/min
iMetrum
Fatigue
2 (0)
2.00kN
Force
2Hz/cycle
Photos/DIC
2 (0)
2.25kN
-
2 (1)
2.50kN
2 (1)
2.75kN
2 (1)
3.00kN
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
47
==PAGE:58==
6
Cohesive Zone Modelling
A cohesive zone model may either be applied as a thin single element layer, sandwiched
between two bulks or as a contact behavior between the two bulks, thus no cohesive
elements exist, but instead a cohesive contact behavior is imposed. Both methods are
illustrated in Figure 50.
(a) Element based
(b) Contact based
Figure 50: General implementation of cohesive zones in FEM.
In the presented models, the element based method is used, as field variables are readily
applied to the material definition of the cohesive elements, which is essential for the fatigue
damage models.
The crack path should be known in advance, since the crack is only able to propagate
along the cohesive zone. In cases where the crack path is unknown or irregular, CZM can
be implemented using extended finite element (XFEM), where the crack path is free to
propagate in any direction.
CZM is applied to study both quasi-static and fatigue loading. For quasi-static models
the Abaqus implicit solver is used, while fatigue models use the explicit solver. Most of
the modelling setup is shared between the solvers, which can be seen in Figure 51. Their
dissimilarities are described in the following sections. Analysis results presented in this
section are only representative, to study the influence of various modelling parameters on
the results. All presented results in this section are based on GIIC = 1200 J/m2. This
value is closer to the values expected in experimental tests, all other material parameters
are carried over from the CSDE analysis, and can be seen in Table 4.1.
6.1
Cohesive zone modelling for quasi-static analysis
The cohesive zone has been widely applied for quasi-static fracture problems, and can
both predict damage initiation and crack propagation. For quasi-static analysis Abaqus/
Standard has been used, with non-linear effects from large displacements included using
the standard Newton-Raphson method.
For the cohesive zone, COH2D4, a 4-node two dimensional cohesive element is used. Vis-
cous damping is enabled to dampen the non-linear effects and increase stability of the
solution, to avoid that the analysis aborts prematurely due to convergence issues. Ele-
ment deletion is enabled, removing a cohesive element once failure has occurred, which
48
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:59==
Figure 51: CZM implemented in 2D models of the DCB-UBM and MTT specimen.
makes it possible to track the crack length and propagation rates. For the remaining parts
of the model, CPE8R quadratic plain strain elements are used.
6.1.1
Meshing
Using Abaqus implicit solver, only limited modeling settings can influence the results. The
two primary settings that can influence results, are the viscous damping of the cohesive
elements, and the mesh size. The global mesh size is governed by the mesh size of the
cohesive elements. In some areas of the models a coarser mesh is applied, to reduce the
computational times. The influence of mesh size on the global response is shown in Figure
52.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Figure 52: Influence of global mesh size on the modeling results, represented by the crack
length vs M1 for a pure mode I DCB-UBM analysis.
A finer mesh will generally provide better results, at the expense of computational time.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
49
==PAGE:60==
In this thesis a global mesh size of 1 mm has been applied in all implicit models, as it
exhibits a good fit with results from simulations running using an even finer mesh, with
acceptable computational times.
6.1.2
Viscous damping
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Figure 53: Influence of viscous damping on the modeling results, represented by the crack
length vs M1 for a pure mode I DCB-UBM analysis.
Viscous damping is enabled for the cohesive elements, in order for the implicit models
to converge. A convergence study has been completed, to investigate various values of
viscous damping on the modelling results. With no damping, the model terminates at the
onset of initial crack growth. Other researchers have stated that a viscous damping value
of 1e-05, has negligible influence on the modelling results [40]. While some influence could
be seen in the present study, lower values of viscous damping would not always converge,
depending on other modelling settings. A viscous damping value of 1e-05 was found to be
the most reliable value, providing the lowest amount of influence on results.
6.2
Fatigue analysis
The cohesive zone model introduced for quasi-static loading, is expanded and modified
to model fatigue loading.
Fatigue models will be simulated using the explicit solver,
which is typically beneficial when running highly non-linear, dynamic and time dependent
problems. This also implies that the modelling setup is different from the quasi-static
models.
Several modelling parameters influence the accuracy and computational time in the explicit
solver, including the load representation, time incrimination, load rate and kinematic
influence, which must all be considered, for the explicit solver to run eﬀiciently while
providing predictable and accurate results.
In the following sections specific modelling setup considerations when running fatigue are
described.
Using the MTT fatigue model convergence studies are performed on all of
the influencing parameters in the explicit solver. Since the final data were not available
when conducting the convergence studies, both cohesive laws and fatigue parameters were
selected based on those applied in literature by similar studies [40, 47], see Table 6.1.
Since material degradation cannot be directly specified in Abaqus, a VUSDFLD sub-
routine has been implemented to introduce deleterious effects from fatigue loading to
50
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:61==
Table 6.1: Representative cohesive law and fatigue damage parameters.
Cohesive Law Parameters
GIC
GIIC
TI0
TII0
KI
KII
0.3 J/m2
1.2 J/m2
3.0 MPa
12.0 MPa
3.5 MPa
12.0 MPa
Fatigue Damage Parameters
α
β
εth
3
1.4
0.005
progressively degrade the cohesive tractions and fracture energies during the analysis.
Since cohesive zone modeling for fatigue is almost purely phenomenological, the fatigue
parameters must be selected by comparing results from numerical models and experiments,
until a good fit has been achieved. A framework of the steps required to obtain fatigue
parameters is proposed and described, along with the practical aspects of running fatigue
cohesive zone models with sub-routines in the cluster. The applied fatigue damage model
is compared to the results of another fatigue damage model and experimental results of a
DCB specimen under even bending moments, and is presented in Appendix C.2.
6.2.1
Pseudo-loading
Often it’s practically impossible to simulate fatigue loading cycle-by-cycle, as it would
require days or weeks of computational time. Many different methods have been proposed
to represent the load with less computational efforts. This often involves representing sev-
eral real load cycles by a single load cycle numerically. The damage captured in the single
load cycles is afterwards multiplied by the number of real load cycles that it represents. In
this thesis two methods have been investigated, the fast track method and load envelope
method, illustrated in Figure 54.
(a) Fast track
(b) Load envelope
Figure 54: Methods to introduce representative loading with reduced computational cost.
Fast track
Salih et. al [36], introduced a fast track method, where one time period would include
one load cycle, replacing several actual load cycles, ∆N, as illustrated in Figure 54a.
The damage is calculated for the single cycle and multiplied by the number of cycles it
represents, thus measuring strains based on the state at the beginning of the time period,
and introducing damage at the end of the time period.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
51
==PAGE:62==
Load envelope
The load envelope method, also bundles multiple load cycles into a single time period and
has been used by several researchers [46]. Instead of simulating cyclic loading, the load is
kept constant at the maximum load, as illustrated in Figure 54b. This method limits the
kinetic energy, and in theory provides more stable results. It has however been found that
once crack propagation occurred spurious vibrations appeared in the results. It would
require more time increments or introduction of material damping in order to avoid these
effects.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
50
100
150
200
250
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 55: Comparison of response between Load envelope and Fast track methods. With
stable increment: 2.5e-06, global mesh size: 1mm and time period: 1s.
Using identical modelling parameters, the difference in global results between applying
the load envelope and fast track method can be seen in Figure 55. Results are quite far
from each other, thus implying that fatigue parameters rely on the chosen loading method.
Computational time is not influenced by the chosen loading method. Since the fast track
method generally produce more stable results, it has been applied throughout the thesis.
0
20
40
60
80
100
50
100
150
200
250
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 56: Influence of ∆N on the simulation results, with stable increment: 5e-06, global
mesh size: 1mm and time period: 1s.
52
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:63==
With current computational resources, introducing several load cycles in one time period,
is almost inevitable when investigating fatigue problems using CZM. The accuracy of
models with different ∆N cannot be directly compared against each other, since ∆N is a
prerequisite value when determining other fatigue parameters, meaning that if a specific
∆N has been chosen, the fatigue parameters that provide good fit between data, is only
valid for the selected ∆N. It can however be shown, that ∆N only has limited influence
on results when comparing models in terms of time instead of load cycles, given the same
fatigue parameters, see Figure 56.
6.2.2
General considerations using the explicit solver
The explicit solver is contrary to the implicit solver time dependent, and is suitable when
simulating dynamic and highly non-linear problems. The explicit solver is conditionally
stable, meaning that Abaqus determines the stable time increment required for the model
to converge based on the following equation
tincr = ∆tstable = Le
cd
(6.1)
where Le is the shortest dimension of the smallest element in the model and cd is a material
constant, cd =
√
E/ρ. The time increments are often very small, typically between 10−7
to . Smaller increment size results in longer computational times.
Different methods exist to make fatigue simulations using the explicit solver run faster,
but may also affect the accuracy of the models, which is important to limit through
convergence studies and energy considerations.
Mass scaling
Mass scaling can be used to automatically adjust the time increment, and is the most eﬀi-
cient way of reducing computational time in the explicit solver. Mass scaling is introduced
in the step module. Using mass scaling the density of the material in the critical elements
are automatically selected such that the minimum specified time increment is met. Mass
scaling may also be introduced using a scaling factor.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
50
100
150
200
250
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Figure 57: Influence of mass scaling on the crack length and maximum displacement.
Results shown for MTT specimen with ∆N = 100, global mesh size: 1mm, time period:
1s.
Mass scaling should be used with caution, since it contradicts the actual physical nature
of the material, which is especially critical for dynamic problems, where inertia effects
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
53
==PAGE:64==
are considerable. Increasing the stable time increment may also produce converging but
unstable solutions with spurious vibrations, due to the increased inertia of the accelerating
parts, that can disturb the results. In this project, the loading rate is slow, and kinematic
effects can be neglected, thus the material density has limited influence on the results, if
mass scaling is applied correctly.
In Figure 57, the influence of mass scaling using different stable time increments is shown.
It can be seen that all models provide similar results at short crack lengths, but as the
displacement and thus accelerations increase spurious vibrations caused by high inertia
forces are present for models with larger time increments, leading to unstable results. It
can be seen for a stable time increment of 7.5e −06 that resonance can also occur, as the
frequency of the spurious vibrations interfere with a natural frequency of the system.
The stability of the solution is also largely dependent on the loading rate, which is con-
trolled by the time period length. The time period length is discussed later in this section,
but with a selected time period of 1 second, it is seen that a stable time increment less
than 5e-06 provides good results with limited influence from inertia. Only ∼3% of the
increments required to run the a simulation without mass scaling is needed when applying
mass scaling with a time increment of 5e-06. Nearly the same reduction in computational
time is achieved.
Kinematic influence
Dynamic effects may influence the results, which is not desired in this type of analysis, as
it will lead to unpredictable results. To limit the dynamic effects, the loading rate should
be low enough for the kinetic energy to be neglected. In the Abaqus documentation it
is recommended that the kinetic energy is less than 5% of the total energy, for dynamic
effects to be neglected [73]. The kinetic energy is mostly dependent on the load rate and
mass scaling, but also by the loading method. For cyclic loading, the load rate is controlled
by the length of the time period of each cycle.
Figure 58: Kinetic energy and total energy compared for different time period lengths.
With ∆N = 100, Mesh size: 1mm, time period: 1s, Stable time increment: 5e-06.
The kinetic energy may also be influenced by mass scaling, since larger time increments are
a result of artificially increased material density, leading to higher inertia under dynamic
motion. The influence of time increment and time period length on the total energy and
54
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:65==
kinetic energy of the model can be seen in Figure 59.
Figure 59: Kinetic energy and total energy compared for different time increments. With
∆N = 100, Mesh size: 1mm, time period: 1s.
The load envelope and fast track method apply load in two fundamentally different ways,
which also influence the kinetic energy of the models, as shown in Figure 60.
0
10
20
30
40
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
10
20
30
40
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Figure 60: Kinetic energy and total energy compared for different loading methods. With
∆N = 100, Mesh size: 1mm, time period: 1s.
Meshing
Since the stable time increment is dependent on the smallest element in the model, it is
generally important that the mesh pattern is not irregular in size. If that would be the
case, a higher number of time increments would be required to complete the simulation.
The problem has been simulated using 4 different mesh sizes, in order to establish the
general mesh size that gives the best compromise between accuracy and computational
time, which can be seen in Figure 61. For smaller mesh sizes, a smaller time increment is
required to perform simulations under stable conditions. The results presented above use
the same mass scaling, which causes the finer mesh to provide less accurate results. It is
generally considered that the element size that provides good results is primarily governed
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
55
==PAGE:66==
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
50
100
150
200
250
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
2
4
6
8
Figure 61: Comparison of the tip deflection and crack length with respect to number of
cycles of a DCB-UBM model under pure mode I loading, for different mesh sizes.
by the process zone length. Researchers suggest that a minimum of 8 elements should be
present in the process zone [42], to achieve reliable results.
Data management
Storing data to the output data file is computationally costly, and should be reduced as
much as possible, both in terms of the field variables stored, and the number of times data
is stored per time period. This can reduce the overall computational time significantly
while only influencing the resolutions of the results, not the accuracy.
56
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:67==
6.2.3
VUSDFLD subroutine
Figure 62: Numerical fatigue framework, with implemented VUSDFLD subroutine
Fatigue damage cannot be directly applied in Abaqus, thus a user subroutine must be
applied. In literature researchers have applied fatigue damage using USDFLD, VUSDFLD
and UMAT subroutines in Abaqus. In this thesis the fatigue damage criteria proposed by
Khoramishad et. al [40] has been introduced using a VUSDFLD subroutine [74].
To introduce damage, a field variable is added to the cohesive parameters in the material
module.
The field variable can range from 0 to 1, and is initially set to 0, meaning
that no fatigue damage has been introduced. The value of the field variable depends on
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
57
==PAGE:68==
the calculated damage and is updated at the end of each time period. The damage is
calculated in the VUSDFLD subroutine, based on the maximum strains in each element
of the current time period.
The steps required to perform fatigue analyses and obtain the desired fatigue damage
parameters are presented in Figure 62, along with a description of how the VUSDFLD
subroutine is incorporated.
File hierarchy and interactions running fatigue simulations
Many different files are required when running fatigue simulations.
When changing a
parameter, it must be changed in several different files, each with their own purpose. In
order to make sure that all parameters are consistent amongst all of the files used for a sin-
gle analysis, a Matlab-script has been developed. The Matlab-script named Launcher.m,
creates a sub-folder for each analysis, and modifies all master-files with the selected mod-
elling parameters, and stores them in the analysis sub-folder. This ensures that all files
are organised and always contain consistent modelling parameters in all of the required
files. Finally a Matlab-script, named Post.m, is used to post-process data of the selected
analyses. All master-files along with Matlab scripts to launch and post-process data for
all cohesive zone models presented in this thesis can be found as attached appendices to
the hand-in of this thesis.
Figure 63:
The different files required to run fatigue simulations and their inter-
dependencies.
58
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:69==
7
Results and discussion
The following section will present the experimental results, the selection process of the
numerically applied cohesive and fatigue damage parameters. Numerical and experimental
results are also compared and discussed.
7.1
General observations
(a) MR = −0.83
(b) MR = 1.9
Figure 64: DCB-UBM propagated under different moment ratios
It was found that the interface failure was dominated by large scale fiber bridging, both
when testing under quasi-static and fatigue loading, and for both test methods presented,
as seen in Figure 65. It reveals that the inter-laminar strength of the provided specimen is
weaker than the strength of the adhesive interface itself. This indicates that the adhesive
bonds tested in this project are of much higher quality than those inspected in the field
where large-scale fiber bridging is a rare phenomena, and failure occur purely in the
laminate/adhesive interface.
Under no circumstances did the crack propagate away from the laminate/adhesive inter-
face, but fiber pullouts would be present on the entire crack surface. Air bubbles in the
adhesive, caused imperfections in the laminate/adhesive bond-lines, which could cause the
crack to kink into the the opposite interface than the location of the pre-crack, as seen
on Figure 66. This was observed on both MTT and DCB-UBM test specimen, and would
invalidate a test.
Fiber bridging was present in all of the tested modes, but had the largest influence on the
response near mode I. This surprisingly resulted in the steady state fracture resistance
near pure mode I conditions to be larger compared to near mode II fracture.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure 65: MTT specimen with full crack propagation on both sides of the applied load
in the center of the specimen.
(a) DCB-UBM specimen.
(b) MTT specimen.
Figure 66: Crack kinking into the other interface, due to imperfections.
Pictures taken for tracking the fatigue crack growth rate can be seen in Figure 67. In
DCB-UBM tests, vibrations were present in the test rig for most fatigue tests, which was
mitigated by ensuring a tight fit between the rollers and the specimen. In many cases
this caused friction, due to imperfections or slight curvatures on the specimen. Eventually
issues with vibrations were resolved by changing some control settings and reducing the
cycle frequency to 0.1 Hz. This resulted in many tests that had to be aborted, and only
a handful of good tests ware conducted within the time limits of this project.
For MTT testing fatigue crack propagation remained for the most part stable, even at high
loads. The results of the MTT were therefore quite predictable, and produced similar and
expected results in all fatigue tests, with little influence from the setup itself.
60
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:71==
(a) 10 cycles
(b) 100 cycles
(c) 3000 cycles
(d) 15000 cycles
Figure 67: DCB-UBM specimen under fatigue loading.
7.2
Phase angle
To ensure that the obtained test results appropriately characterize the cohesive law pa-
rameters, knowing the phase angles or mode-mixing ratios is key. In the initial stages
of the project, phase angles were determined using the CSDE method based on LEFM.
As previously stated, these models would only provide indicative results, that should be
checked afterwards. By fault the phase angles were determined using the full formulation.
In the full formulation, the phase angle is shifted such that the lowest energy release rate
is obtained at a phase angle of 0◦. Instead the reduced formulation should have been used,
which retain its physical meaning. Comparing the full and reduced formulation reveals
that phase angles were approximately 25 to 30◦apart for all of the tested moment ratios,
see Figure 68.
Phase angles have been determined both numerically using the CZM models and in the
experimental tests by tracking the crack flank displacements.
Tracking the crack flank displacements using the iMetrum software, enabled the mode-
mixity angle to be directly determined using the reduced formulation (Eq. 3.12). In Figure
69 the experimentally obtained mode-mixity angles are plotted for representative tests at
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
61
==PAGE:72==
MR = -0.83
MR = -1.4
MR = -2.5
MR = 1.9
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
 [ °]
Figure 68: Comparison of the phase angles obtained using the full (ψF ) and reduced (ψR)
formulation using CSDE analysis and phase angles obtained from the mode-mixing ratios
from numerical simulations using CZM (ψCZM).
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
-90
-75
-60
-45
-30
-15
0
Figure 69: Mode-mixity angles of completed tests. Note a positive phase angle in all tests
are due to a mirrored coordinate frame, compared to the numerical coordinate frame.
each of the tested moment ratios. All measurements are presented in Appendix D.1.2.
Results reveal a closer fit to the phase angles that have been determined using the full
formulation. These measurements were however plagued with issues;
• The tracked displacements must be relatively close to the crack tip, where tracking
repeatedly failed, since the tracking area would cover both crack flanks.
• As soon as the crack would propagate from its original position the crack flank
displacement data would become obsolete for phase angle characterisation.
62
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:73==
• Vibrations in the test rig or camera during loading would cause errors in the tracked
displacements.
• Crack flank displacements near the crack tip are very small and even small distur-
bances would cause unpredictable results.
Because of the above issues the measurements are merely indicative. The measurements
were tracked far from the actual crack surfaces, and may not relate well to the phase angles
in the first place.
Instead of relying on the ambiguous results obtained experimentally, Phase angles have
been determined directly in the cohesive zone models. These phase angles provide direct
information on the mode-mixity as interpreted by Abaqus, and will be used to apply the
correct cohesive laws in the numerical models. To find the phase angles in the cohesive
zone models, a field output has been used to display the mode-mixing ratio in the cohe-
sive elements. The mode-mixing ratio is 0 for pure mode I and 1 for pure mode II, which
may directly be converted to the phase angle interpretation. The field output does not
distinguish between positive and negative mode-mixing ratios. The phase angles as de-
termined by the CZM, ψCZM have been compared to full and reduced formulation phase
angles, ψF and ψR respectively, and presented in Figure 68. The significant difference be-
tween the LEFM predicted phase angles and phase angles present in the CZM numerical
models resulted in limited mixed-mode data, since both moment ratios MR = −0.83 and
MR = −1.4 were very close to pure mode I conditions.
7.3
Cohesive law parameters
7.3.1
Critical energy release rate
Based on the DCB-UBM tests, the fracture resistance has been determined using the J-
integral approach. The R-curve effect revealed to have a significant influence due to large
scale bridging behind the crack tip, which increased tractions during crack propagation.
The initial fracture resistance, J0, and steady state fracture resistance, JSS, are found
from R-curves, see Figure 70. For each mode-mixity, the results have been presented for
single test specimen, that has been loaded and unloaded 2-5 times, depending on the
iMetrums ability to track all parameters during the test. If the tracking of a parameter
failed during the test, it would be stopped, to complete another test on the same specimen,
resetting measurements and tracking. In the provided data, restarting a test would show
as a loading-unloading path in the R-curve results. Only slight hysteresis in the unloading-
loading path were found.
From the R-curve plots, it can be clearly seen that the R-curve effects are more pronounced
at lower mode-mixities.
This clearly shows that fiber-bridging creates larger tractions
under mode I loading, compared to mode II. The initial fracture resistance is highest
for mode II, and lowest under mixed-mode conditions, while the steady state fracture
resistance is highest for pure mode I and low mixed-mode conditions. This contradicts
the general rule that cracks usually have the lowest critical energy release rate in mode I.
The R-curves also reveal that the process zone lengths are large. The process zone lengths
are largest in mode I, where it is approximately 60 to 70 mm. Under mixed-mode condi-
tions and pure mode II the process zone length is approximately 30 mm.
The values obtained from the R-curve plots of all tests are presented in Table 7.1 for each
of the tested moment ratios. The results are also plotted in Figure 71
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
63
==PAGE:74==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
(a) MR = −0.83
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
(b) MR = −1.4
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
(c) MR = −2.5
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
(d) MR = 1.9
Figure 70: R-curves obtained at different moment ratios.
MR = −0.83
MR = −1.4
MR = −2.5
MR = 1.9
min
mean
max
min
mean
max
min
mean
max
min
mean
max
J0
344
374
427
326
338
350
235
313
424
618
618
618
JSS
1159
1185
1209
1152
1202
1246
466
689
822
838
944
1014
Table 7.1: Fracture resistance [J/m2], as evaluated by the R-curves at different moment
ratios.
7.3.2
Traction and initial stiffness
Due to large scale fiber bridging, tractions behind the crack tip must be accounted for
in the traction separation curve. Final failure will be denoted as the point where fiber
bridging no longer contributes to the traction between the two crack flanks, and fibre
bridging will denote the softening region. This also implies that the crack length may be
interpreted as either the initiation point of fibre bridging or as the point where bridged
fibers fail and no longer contribute with tractions. Experimentally it’s nearly impossible
to determine at which point bridged fibers fail, as failed bridged fibers do not visually
diverge much from the ones who haven’t.
The onset of fiber bridging may easily be
determined, as it is revealed by the actual crack tip, which can easily be tracked visually.
Conversely the numerical crack length using cohesive elements is defined as the point where
tractions become zero, hence when bridged fibers fail. To better compare experimental and
64
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:75==
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
500
1000
1500
Figure 71: The fracture resistance with respect to the phase angles obtained in the cohesive
zone models.
Figure 72: The crack tip as observed experimentally correlates well with the position of
the peak traction in the numerical models, as the maximum stresses appear just in front
of the crack tip. The numerical interpretation of the crack tip is the point where bridged
fibers fail.
numerical results, a new crack length criteria will be based on the location of the maximum
traction within the cohesive zone, thus just in front of the experimentally observed crack
tip. The interpretation of crack length between experimental observations and the traction
separation law can be seen in Figure 72.
The displacement between the two crack flanks has been tracked at the initial crack tip
using the iMetrum Video Measurement. The displacement, also referred to as the end
opening, represents the separation magnitude at maximum traction, δ0, once initial crack
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
65
==PAGE:76==
growth occurs. Once steady state crack propagation initiates, the end opening represents
the maximum separation, δmax.
Knowing the separations and fracture resistance, the
tractions may be determined, depending on the selected traction-separation curve shape.
(a)
Idealised
theoretical
traction-separation curve
(b) Bi-linear softening curve.
(c) Exponential softening curve.
Figure 73: Exponential softening curve.
Considering the un-damaged region and damaged region as individual entities, two differ-
ent values of the traction are found, since a sudden drop in traction occurs once the crack
propagates, meaning that the traction imposed by bridged fibers is significantly smaller
than the uncracked interface. This may be represented by the traction-separation curve
as presented in Figure 73a, simply using trigonometry to determine the peak tractions of
the undamaged interface and bridged interface
T0 = 2J0δ0
,
T1 = 2(JSS −J0)(δmax −δ0)
(7.1)
Such a traction separation curve could present issues with convergence in numerical simu-
lations, and would require a large value of viscous damping, which in turn could make the
results unreliable. Further such a traction-separation curve is not supported in Abaqus for
mixed-mode cohesive laws. Alternatively a bi-linear traction-separation curve may simply
be used, where the maximum traction is determined by
T0 = 2JSSδmax
(7.2)
This will smear out the influence of fibre bridging, which looses some of the physical
meaning behind the onset of fiber bridging, but still capture the global effects and provide
stable numerical models.
Alternatively an exponential softening law may be applied,
which theoretically better capture the drop in traction, compared to the linear softening
response. The crack extension length at the point of stable crack growth roughly provides
the process zone length, which can be utilised to determine the initial stiffness, K, using
equation 3.19. The obtained separations and corresponding tractions and initial stiffnesses
can be seen in table 7.2 for the presented traction-separation curves (Figure 73) in both
mode I and mode II.
Using the experimentally obtained cohesive laws, hence JSS = GC, T0 and K in the
numerical models reveal a decent fit between experimental and numerical results. In Figure
75, a comparison of the crack extension between numerical and experimental results can
be seen. Note that specimen have been loaded and unloaded during tests.
Generally the best fit is seen between the bi-linear model and experimental results. The
bi-linear model generally predict the initial crack length at lower moments than obtained
66
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:77==
Table 7.2: Table showing the experimentally obtained process zone lengths [mm], and
end opening separations [mm] at initial crack propagation and at stable crack growth.
Calculated tractions [MPa] and initial stiffnesses [MPa] of each of the presented traction-
separation curves as inputted in the numerical models for mode I and II respectively.
Mode I
Tri-linear
Bi-linear
Exponential
lpz
δ0
δmax
T0
T1
T0
K
T0
K
60
0.055
0.88
13.6
1.23
2.69
146.7
2.69
55.8
Mode II
Tri-linear
Bi-linear
Exponential
lpz
δ0
δmax
T0
T1
T0
K
T0
K
30
0.057
0.38
21.7
2.08
5.10
120
5.10
45
experimentally, since the numerically crack tip is represented by the location of the maxi-
mum stress, which travels away from the initial crack tip, before crack growth is initialized.
The steady state crack growth regime is well represented by the bi-linear models.
The exponential model predicts initial crack growth better in mode II, but generally per-
forms worse than the bi-linear model.
7.3.3
Mixed-mode failure criteria
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Figure 74: Predicted mixed-mode failure envelopes using the Power-law and Benzeggagh-
Kenane mixed-mode failure criteria, with different failure envelope parameters, compared
to experimentally obtain fracture resistance represented at the CZM determined phase
angles.
In Figure 74 the fracture resistance is represented with respect to the numerically de-
termined phase angles, and compared to the available mixed mode failure criteria with
different parameters. The Power-law and Benzeggagh-Kenane failure criteria have both
been developed to represent failure envelopes where pure mode I fracture resistance is lower
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
67
==PAGE:78==
than mode II fracture resistance, and where those also represent minimum and maximum
values of the mixed-mode fracture resistance respectively. They therefore provide poor
representation of the mixed-mode behavior observed in this project.
Generally it was found that the Power-law was best suited for mixed-mode conditions,
while both criteria provide similar results under pure-mode conditions. By varying the
power-law parameter for different mode-mixity conditions, good agreement could be ob-
tained between experimental results. This is however poor practice and should be avoided
in future, since this cannot provide good results when the mixed-mode condition is varied
during a test. This was the best option with the data currently available. Other options
are proposed in Section 9.2.3, to apply better methods in future.
7.3.4
Experimental and numerical comparison
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
20
40
60
80
100
(a) MR = −0.83, Power law: α = 1
0
50
100
150
0
50
100
150
200
(b) MR = −1.4, Power law: α = 0.3
0
50
100
150
0
50
100
150
200
(c) MR = −2.5, Power law: α = 0.375
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
(d) MR = 1.9, Power law: α = 1
Figure 75: Numerical and experimental comparison of crack extensions for DCB-UBM
tests at different mode-mixities under quasi-static loading.
The obtained cohesive law parameters have been evaluated by comparing the experimental
and numerical crack extensions with respect to applied moments on arm 1, as shown in
Figure 75. The shape of the crack propagation curves generally fit well with experimental
results. It should be noted that the test at MR = −0.83 was stopped at the onset of
unstable crack growth, due to limitations of the rotation of moment arm 1, and would be
expected to follow the numerical results, if the test could have continued. The test rig
has now been adjusted to test at higher rotations in the future, but time did not allow for
68
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:79==
more tests to be completed.
A comparison of the global response, represented by the tip displacement and rotations for
MR = −1.4, are shown in Figure 76 for the same parameters as used above in Figure 75.
For other moment ratios, the comparison of the global response is presented in Appendix
D.2.
0
50
100
150
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
50
100
150
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 76: MR = −1.4, Power law: α = 0.3
The tip rotations and deflections initially agree well for all mode-mixities, but as the crack
propagates, results show that more compliance is present in experiments compared to the
numerical results. This may be explained by the boundary conditions, which numerically
is modelled as a perfectly fixed cantilever beam, while during tests, the specimen may
slightly rotate and move relative to the rollers, thus resulting in higher deflections and
rotations.
For the numerical model to better predict the moments of initial crack propagation and
stable propagation, first the exact elastic and shear moduli of the glass fiber laminates
should be known, before correcting the cohesive law parameters. Also more and better test
data should be provided, in order to ensure, that the compared data are representative.
Especially to establish a better understanding of the mixed-mode conditions.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
69
==PAGE:80==
7.3.5
Validation
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Figure 77: Experimentally applied load vs displacement in the quasi-static displacement
controlled tests.
The cohesive law parameters determined through DCB-UBM tests and models, have been
used to compare experimental tests and numerical models of the MTT setup. The tests
generally exhibited stable crack growth in the beginning of the tests. Towards the end
onset of unstable crack growth arise, which can be seen on the load-displacement curves
in Figure 77.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Figure 78: Crack length vs center displacement. Comparison between experimental results
and numerical model.
On Figure 78 the crack lengths with respect to the center displacements are compared
between numerical models and experimental results. The numerical models are generally
70
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:81==
well able to capture the response obtained in tests. Eventually crack stops growing in the
numerical model.
Figure 79: Phase angle as interpreted by CZM numerical models for the MTT specimen
Considering the phase angles as predicted by the numerical CZM model, reveals that
the mode-mixity quickly shifts to pure mode II, see Figure 79, resulting in phase angles
far from those predicted in the CSDE analysis. This sudden shift towards pure mode II
conditions occur at around the same crack length, as where the the crack propagation
arrests in the numerical models. This was initially believed to be cause to the sudden
stabilization against crack growth, as the predicted CERR increases when the phase angle
approaches 90◦when α < 1, as previously illustrated in Figure 74.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Figure 80: Crack length vs applied load.
Considering the loads during crack propagation, as presented in Figure 80, another cause of
the sudden arrest in crack propagation is revealed. The load applied numerically suddenly
increase rapidly, which suggests that a boundary condition may prohibit the specimen
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
71
==PAGE:82==
from deforming further. This would better explain the sudden crack arrest, but has not
been further investigated, due to limited time towards the end of the project.
7.4
Fatigue damage parameters
7.4.1
Experimental Paris’ law parameters
For DCB-UBM experimental testing, fatigue crack propagation rates have been determined
at two moment ratios of MR = −0.83 and MR = −1.4. For each moment ratio, the
material dependent Paris’ law equation parameters have been determined, see Table 7.3.
MR
C
m
-0.83
3.53
14.65
-1.4
4.41
14.05
Table 7.3: Paris’ law parameters
Values were determined only considering steady state crack propagation, since the crack
propagated very quickly during the first part of the fatigue tests due to the low initial
fracture toughness of the interface. The Paris’ law curve obtained for DCB-UBM tests at
MR = −0.83 was used to select appropriate fatigue damage parameters.
7.4.2
Selecting fatigue damage parameters
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.4
10-3
10-2
10-1
Figure 81: Plot used to select fatigue damage parameters, based on the obtained results
using previously selected fatigue damage parameters.
One of the key diﬀiculties of selecting appropriate fatigue damage parameters, is that
they must be obtained through an iterative process, until at good fit can be seen between
the Paris’ Law curve and the numerical models. Many different combinations of fatigue
damage parameters have been tested, to find a good fit between the experimental Paris’
law curve and numerical results.
Damage parameters were selected based on the results of the previous simulations, by
plotting the predicted damage at the strain levels obtained in previous analyses. New pa-
rameters could then be evaluated compared to the previously selected damage parameters,
as illustrated in 81. While this did not provide a direct relation to the crack propaga-
72
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:83==
tion rate, it enabled the possibility to quickly evaluate a wide variety of different damage
parameter combinations.
7.4.3
Evaluating fatigue damage parameters
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
10-3
10-2
10-1
Figure 82: Paris’ Law curve of various combinations of fatigue damage parameters, com-
pared to experimental results and their respective Paris’ law curve, for DCB-UBM tests
with MR = −0.83
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
10-3
10-2
10-1
Figure 83: Paris’ Law curve of various fatigue damage parameters for DCB-UBM tests
with MR = −1.4
It proved diﬀicult to obtain a straight curve for the numerical results that could follow
the slope the Paris’ law curve obtained from experimental tests. It was found that high
values of the power parameter β provided curve that came closer to a straight line. It
was eventually chosen to test two combinations of fatigue damage parameters against
experimental results at MR = −1.4, which is presented in Figure 83.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
73
==PAGE:84==
Using the values α = 50000, β = 14 and εth =1e-06 revealed to generally provide the best
fit both at MR = −0.83 and MR = 1.4. The global response between experimental and
numerical results have been compared in Appendix D.3.
Comparing the experimental results between the two moment ratios, show more spread in
results for tests conducted at MR = −0.83. This indicates that one or more source errors
have been present in some of the tests. Possible errors could be large vibrations while
testing, or friction between the specimen and rollers.
7.4.4
Validating fatigue damage parameters
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
0
50
100
150
200
250
Figure 84: Fatigue crack propagation comparison, between numerical models and experi-
mental results of MTT tests.
To further investigate the ability of the fatigue damage parameters to predict failure under
different mode-mixities, experimental and numerical crack lengths of MTT specimens at
different load levels have been compared. The same fatigue damage parameters α = 50000,
β = 14 and εth =1e-06 have been applied, and the results can be seen in Figure 84.
The results have been compared at 85%, 78% and 72% of the maximum load obtained
under static tests.
The numerical loads are corrected to the same percentage of the
maximum load obtained from numerical static tests, which were slightly lower than those
obtained experimentally. The results generally show poor fit between the experimental and
numerical results. Especially at lower loads, where the numerical model under-predicts
fatigue crack growth, but also at higher loads where the numerical model over-predict
fatigue crack growth towards the end of crack propagation, which verify that another
mixed-mode failure envelope should be developed.
The results clearly show that the fatigue damage law used in this thesis has limitations
in terms of which conditions it is able to represent. The numerical model could achieve
a straight line in the Paris’ law regime for the given crack propagation rate, which yield
the highly unstable solution shown above.
It was however found that for 78% of the
maximum load, a decent fit between the numerical model and experimental results was
obtained. The full plot of the experimental crack propagation can be seen in Appendix
D.3.
74
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:85==
8
Conclusion
This project has investigated crack initiation and propagation under mixed-mode condi-
tions in the epoxy adhesive to glass fiber laminate interface, of typical materials applied in
wind turbine blades. The investigations consisted of experimental tests carried out under
quasi-static and fatigue conditions. On basis of the experimental results, state of the art
non-linear numerical methods using cohesive zone modelling were developed to predict the
bi-material interface failure processes.
A good test setup was developed to perform mixed-mode validations of the selected co-
hesive laws and fatigue damage parameters, that presented reliable and predictable crack
propagation under both quasi-static and fatigue loading.
Due to time restrictions, it was only possible to complete a limited amount of tests, and the
presented results merely serve as a conceptual framework, exhibiting methods to obtain
cohesive law parameters directly from test results and analytical methods. Tests generally
displayed large scale fiber bridging, resulting in ductile fracture processes, that could not
be captured by LEFM. This was confirmed when comparing the phase angles determined
using the LEFM based CSDE method, to experimental phase angles and phase angles
determined in the cohesive zone models, where a poor agreement was seen. This should
in future be accounted for in earlier stages sooner than what was possible in this project.
Cohesive zone models present many qualities, that has gained increasing interest from re-
searchers in the past decades. Its ability to both predict crack initiation and propagation,
along with its numerical compatibility and fatigue capabilities makes this method attrac-
tive. However cohesive laws are diﬀicult to obtain experimentally, and no standardized
test methods have yet been proposed, and fatigue cohesive zone models remain almost
purely phenomenological.
A good fit between the experimental and numerical results was obtained in DCB-UBM
tests, both for quasi-static and fatigue loading.
MTT numerical models applying the
cohesive laws obtained from DCB-UBM tests initially showed good agreement under quasi-
static loading, but eventually crack propagation would arrest in the numerical models,
while the experimental crack propagation rate increased. This influence carried over in
the fatigue results, which had no physical resemblance to the experimental results.
It was found that the mixed-mode behavior obtained from tests was ill represented by the
available mixed-mode failure criteria, which likely explains the dissimilarities seen between
some of the numerical and experimental results. More work should in future be dedicated
to characterize a well representing mixed-mode failure envelope.
While more work is still required to reach the goals of the CORTIR-II project, all intended
research aspects have been covered in this thesis. Key observations required to produce
good experimental data are presented. Many aspects for future exploitation of cohesive
zone modelling have been settled, covering many elementary but yet important aspects
specific to this kind of numerical models.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
75
==PAGE:86==
9
Future Work
9.1
CORTIR-II Project
9.1.1
Testing
First and foremost, this thesis has only completed very limited amount of tests, to display
the capabilities and limitations of the developed numerical cohesive zone models. To lower
the statistical uncertainty, more tests should generally be completed applying identical or
similar methods as proposed in this thesis.
9.1.2
Numerical models
Future numerical cohesive zone models are supposed to describe more complicated geome-
tries, which imply that the developed models should be extended to handle 3D geometries.
9.1.3
Sub-Component II
The next step in the CORTIR-II project is to design a test setup for sub-component II
testing. The purpose of the sub-component II tests, is to better replicate the actual geom-
etry of the shear web and spar cap interface, with representative component thicknesses.
In Figure 85 an illustration of a suggested test setup for Sub-Component II testing is
proposed.
Figure 85: Sub-component II test setup proposal
Not only is the geometry in the sub-component II tests important, so is the boundary
conditions. The loading should be applied, such that it best represents how the interface is
loaded in an actual blade. Here it is proposed to distribute the load across the entire width
of the specimen, as breathing of the skins takes place in the entire area that surrounds the
shear web fish mouth. The load is applied to a rod, able to rotate on an axle, to increase
76
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:87==
the number of DOF’s and to theoretically achieve a statically determinate structure. The
shear web is cut at the center, such that a symmetry boundary condition may be applied
at the clamped bottom of the test specimen in the numerical models.
9.2
Research
9.2.1
Reducing computational time
To lower the computational time it has been suggested to replace tie constraints with par-
titions, since the interaction calculations imposed by tie constraints are computationally
heavy to run.
9.2.2
Investigate different traction separation curves
Only two different traction separation curves are available for mixed-mode cohesive zone
modeling in Abaqus. To better represent the physical behavior seen on the studied bi-
material interface, a tri-linear traction separation curve would theoretically better predict
damage and failure.
To implement such traction separation curve, another user sub-
routine should be implemented, which shapes the traction-separation response according
to the experimental results. This could be developed in conjunction with mixed-mode
considerations, as presented below.
9.2.3
Mixed-mode failure envelope
The failure criteria available in the Abaqus standard software was not able to well predict
the mixed-mode failure conditions observed in this project.
Abaqus also allows for a
tabular definition of the mixed-mode failure envelope, where critical energy release rates
are specified at their given mode-mixing ratios.
The numerical models developed for this thesis have been prepared to use the tabular
function, but revealed to provide poor results, with the currently very limited amount
of data available to define the tabular failure envelope. For future exploitation of the
tabular method, it is highly recommended to perform more mixed-mode tests, with various
moment ratios.
A more representative tabular failure envelope could then be set up,
avoiding the need to use a failure criteria entirely.
9.2.4
Mixed-mode fatigue damage envelope
Akin to the behavior of fracture resistance, the mode-mixity also influences the crack
growth rates in fatigue, which inherently require different fatigue damage parameters for
different mode-mixities. In future, a formulation to account for the mode-mixity on the
fatigue damage parameters, should be implemented, for example based on the formulations
and methods proposed by Hosseini et al. [47].
9.2.5
Investigate other fatigue damage models
In literature many different fatigue failure criteria have been proposed for cohesive zone
modelling. While most are purely phenomenological, some models put emphasis on defin-
ing the fatigue damage parameters based on values obtained experimentally [42].
9.2.6
Comparing DCB-UBM with standard test methods
DCB-UBM testing has many advantages. It requires less test setups, compared to tradi-
tional test methods for mixed-mode fracture characterisation. The energy release rate and
phase angle is independent of the crack length and closed form solutions of the J-integral
exist specifically for the boundary conditions of DCB-UBM tests. However, DCB-UBM
testing has yet to be standardized, and some practical aspects makes the test rig prone
to certain issues, especially friction and vibrations under cyclic loading. To investigate
the influence of these effects, it is suggested that identical specimen are tested both using
the DCB-UBM test method and standardized test methods such as DCB, MMB and ENF
tests.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
77
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
[1]
GWEC. Global Wind Report 2021. url: https://gwec.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/
03/GWEC-Global-Wind-Report-2021.pdf.
[2]
Zachary Shahan. History of Wind Turbines, Renewable Energy World. url: https:
//www.renewableenergyworld.com/storage/history-of-wind-turbines/#gref.
[3]
IEA. Global Energy Review 2021, IEA, Paris. url: https://www.iea.org/reports/
global-energy-review-2021.
[4]
A record year: Wind and solar supplied more than half of Denmark’s electricity in
2020. 2021. url: https://stateofgreen.com/en/partners/state- of- green/news/a-
record-year-wind-and-solar-supplied-more-than-half-of-denmarks-electricity-in-2020/.
[5]
M. Jaganmohan. Approximate wind energy penetration in leading wind markets in
2019, by select country. url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/217804/wind-
energy-penetration-by-country/.
[6]
Global Wind Report 2021. 2021. url: https://gwec.net/global-wind-report-2021/.
[7]
Fraunhofer. Entwicklung der Anlagendimensionen, Wind Monitor. url: http : / /
windmonitor.iee.fraunhofer.de/windmonitor_en/bilder_javascript.html?db_communicate=
%5C%27Windenergieeinspeisung.daten%5C%27&img_id=427%5C&p_lang=eng.
[8]
Anmar Frangoul. A ‘quantum leap’: Monster wind turbines are going to get even
bigger. 2021. url: https://www.cnbc.com/2021/04/16/a-quantum-leap-monster-
wind-turbines-are-going-to-get-even-bigger.html.
[9]
K. Branner and A. Ghadirian. “Database about blade faults”. In: DTU Wind Energy
no. 0067 (2014).
[10]
F.M. Jensen. “Change in Failure type when Wind Turbines blades scale up”. In: in
Sandia Wind Turbine Workshop (2012).
[11]
S. Skriver. “Hvor længe lever en vindmølle (Eng: How long will a wind turbine live)”.
In: (2011).
[12]
A. A. Griﬀith. “The phenomena of rupture and flow in solids”. In: Philosophical
transactions of the royal society of London. Series A, containing papers of a math-
ematical or physical character vol. 221 (1921), pp. 163–198.
[13]
G. Irwin and J. Kies. “Fracturing and fracture dynamics”. In: Welding journal vol.
31, no. 2 (1952), pp. 95–100.
[14]
P.P.L. Matos et al. “A Method for Calculating Stress Intensities in Bi-material Frac-
ture”. In: Int. Journal of Fracture vol. 40, no. 4 (1989), pp. 235–254.
[15]
P.G. Charalambides and W. Zhang. “An Energy Method for Calculating the Stress
Intensities in Orthotropic Bimaterial Fracture”. In: Int. Journal of Fracture vol. 76,
no. 2 (1995), pp. 97–120.
[16]
E.F. Rybicki and M.F. Kanninen. “A Finite Element Calculation of Stress Intensity
Factors by a Modified Crack Closure Integral”. In: Engineering Fracture Mechanics
vol. 9, no. 4 (1977), pp. 931–938.
[17]
J.L. Beuth. “Separation of Crack Extension Modes in Orthotropic Delamination
Models”. In: Int. Journal of Fracture vol. 77, no. 4 (1996), pp. 305–321.
[18]
R.E. Smelser. “Evaluation of Stress Intensity Factors for Bimaterial Bodies using
Numerical Crack Flank Displacement Data”. In: Int. Journal of Fracture vol. 15, no.
2 (1979), pp. 135–143.
[19]
C. Berggreen, B.C. Simonsen, and K.K. Borum. “Experimental and Numerical Study
of Interface Crack Propagation in Foam-cored Sandwich Beams”. In: Journal of
Composite Materials vol. 41, no. 4 (2007), pp. 493–520.
78
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:89==
[20]
V. Saseendran. Fracture Characterization and Analysis of Debonded Sandwich Com-
posites. Technical University of Denmark, 2017. isbn: 8774755242.
[21]
J.W. Hutchinson and Z. Suo. “Mixed Mode Cracking in Layered Materials”. In:
Advances in Applied Mechanics Hutchinson, J.W. and Wu, T.Y. (eds) (1992), pp. 63–
191.
[22]
M. Williams. “The stresses around a fault or crack in dissimilar media”. In: Bulletin
of the seismological society of America vol. 30, no. 2 (1959), pp. 199–204.
[23]
F. Erdogan. “Stress distribution in a non-homogeneous elastic plane with cracks”.
In: Journal of applied mechanics vol. 30, no. 2 (1963), pp. 232–236.
[24]
P.C. Paris, M.P. Gomez, and W.E. Anderson. “A rational analytic theory of fatigue”.
In: The Trend in Engineering vol. 13 (1961), pp. 9–14.
[25]
P.C. Paris and F. Erdogan. “A critical analysis of crack propagation laws”. In: Jour-
nal of Basic Engineering vol. 13 (1963).
[26]
D.S. Dugdale. “Yielding of steel sheets containing slits”. In: Journal of the Mechanics
and Physics of Solids vol. 8, no. 2 (1960), pp. 100–104.
[27]
G.I. Barenblatt. “The mathematical theory of equilibrium cracks in brittle fracture”.
In: Advances in Applied Mechanics vol. 7 (1962), pp. 55–129.
[28]
V. Tvergaard and J.W. Hutchinson. “The relation between crack-growth resistance
and fracture process parameters in elastic plastic solids”. In: Journal of Mechanical
Physics and Solids vol. 40 (1992), pp. 1377–1392.
[29]
I. Mohammed and K.M. Liechti. “Cohesive zone modeling of crack nucleation at
bimaterial corners.” In: Journal of Mechanical Physics and Solids vol. 48 (2000),
pp. 735–764.
[30]
P. Rahulkumar et al. “Cohesive element modeling of viscoelastic fracture: application
to peel testing of polymers”. In: International Journal of Solids and Structures vol.
37 (2000), pp. 1873–1897.
[31]
N. Chandra et al. “Some issues in the application of cohesive zone models for metal–
ceramic interfaces.” In: International Journal of Solids and Structures vol. 39 (2002),
pp. 2827–2855.
[32]
J.G. Rots. Strain-softening analysis of concrete fracture. In: Wittmann, F.H. (Ed.),
Fracture toughness and fracture energy of concrete, p.137-148. Elsevier Science Pub-
lishers, 1986.
[33]
K.Y. Volokh. “Comparison between cohesive zone models”. In: Communications in
Numerical Methods in Engineering vol. 20.no. 11 (2004), pp. 845–856.
[34]
A. Hillerborg, M. Modéer, and P.E. Petersson. “Analysis of crack formation and
crack growth in concrete by means of fracture mechanics and finite elements”. In:
Cement and Concrete Research vol. 6.no. 6 (1976), pp. 773–781.
[35]
G. Allegri. “A unified formulation for fatigue crack onset and growth via cohesive
zone modelling”. In: Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids vol. 138 (2020).
[36]
S. Salih, K. Davey, and Z. Zou. “A computationally eﬀicient cohesive zone model
for fatigue”. In: Fatigue & Fracture of Engineering Materials & Structures vol. 42
(2019), pp. 518–532.
[37]
M.L. Benzeggagh and M. Kenane. “Measurement of Mixed-mode Delamination Frac-
ture Toughness of Unidirectional Glass Epoxy Composites with Mixed-mode Bend-
ing Apparatus”. In: Composites Science and Technology vol. 56.no. 4 (1996), pp. 439–
449.
[38]
ASTM International. “Standard Test Method for Mixed Mode I/Mode II Interlam-
inar Fracture Toughness of Unidirectional Fiber Reinforced Polymer Matrix Com-
posites”. In: ASTM D6671-01 (2001).West Conshohocken, PA, USA (2001).
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
79
==PAGE:90==
[39]
R.H.J. Peerlings et al. “Gradient-enhanced damage modelling of high-cyclic fatigue”.
In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering vol. 49 (2000),
pp. 1547–1569.
[40]
H. Khoramishad et al. “Predicting fatigue damage in adhesively bonded joints using
a cohesive zone model”. In: International Journal of Fatigue vol. 32 (2010), pp. 1146–
1158.
[41]
Y.J. Liang, C.G. Davila, and E.V. Iarve. “A reduced-input cohesive zone model
with regularized extended finite element method for fatigue analysis of laminated
composites in Abaqus”. In: Composite Structures vol. 275 (2021).
[42]
P.W. Harper and S.R. Hallett. “A fatigue degradation law for cohesive interface
elements – Development and application to composite materials”. In: International
Journal of Fatigue vol. 32 (2010), pp. 1774–1787.
[43]
K.L. Roe and T. Siegmund. “An irreversible cohesive zone model for interface fa-
tigue crack growth simulation”. In: Engineering Fracture Mechanics vol. 70 (2003),
pp. 209–232.
[44]
P. Robinson et al. “Numerical simulation of fatigue-driven delamination using in-
terface elements”. In: International Journal of Numerical Methods vol. 63 (2004),
pp. 1824–1848.
[45]
J.A. Pascoe, R.C. Alderliesten, and R. Benedictus. “Methods for the prediction of
fatigue delamination growth in composites and adhesive bonds – A critical review”.
In: Engineering Fracture Mechanics vol. 112-113 (2013), pp. 72–96.
[46]
J. Liu, J. Li, and B. Wu. “Review Article - The Cohesive Zone Model for Fatigue
Crack Growth”. In: Advances in Mechanical Engineering (2013).
[47]
H. Hosseini-Toudeshkya et al. “Prediction of interlaminar fatigue damages in ad-
hesively bonded joints using mixed-mode strain based cohesive zone modeling”. In:
Theoretical and Applied Fracture Mechanics vol. 106 (2020).
[48]
P.F. Fuchs and Z. Majorm. “Experimental Determination of Cohesive Zone Models
for Epoxy Composites”. In: Experimental Mechanics vol .51 (2011), pp. 779–786.
[49]
B. Cox, M. Dadkhah, and W. Morris. “On the tensile failure of 3D woven com-
posites”. In: Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing (Incorporating
Composites and Composites Manufacturing vol. 27.no. 6 (1996), pp. 447–458.
[50]
S. Li et al. “Use of mode-I cohesive-zone models to describe the fracture of an
adhesively-bonded polymer-matrix composite”. In: Composites Science and Tech-
nology vol. 65.no. 2 (2005), pp. 281–293.
[51]
M. Moslemi and M. Khoshravan. “Cohesive Zone Parameters Selection for Mode-I
Prediction of Interfacial Delamination”. In: Journal of Mechanical Engineering vol.
61.no. 9 (2015), pp. 507–516.
[52]
S.H. Song, G.H. Paulino, and W.G. Buttlar. “Experimental Determination of Cohe-
sive Zone Models for Epoxy Composites”. In: Experimental Mechanics vol. 132.no.
11 (2006), pp. 1215–1223.
[53]
A. Turon et al. “An engineering solution for mesh size effects in the simulation of
delamination using cohesive zone models”. In: Engineering Fracture Mechanics vol.
74.no. 10 (2007), pp. 1665–1682.
[54]
J.L. Min et al. “Determination of cohesive parameters for a mixed-mode cohesive
zone model”. In: International Journal of Adhesion and Adhesives vol. 30.no. 5
(2010), pp. 322–328.
[55]
A. Akhavan-Safar et al. “Mode II fracture energy characterization of brittle adhe-
sives using compliance calibration method”. In: Fatigue and Fracture of Engineering
Materials and Structures vol. 43.no. 9 (2020), pp. 1928–1937.
80
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:91==
[56]
M.F. Kanninen. “An augmented double cantilever beam model for studying crack
propagation and arrest”. In: International Journal of Fracture vol. 9.no. 1 (1973),
pp. 83–92.
[57]
B. Blackman et al. “Measuring the mode I adhesive fracture energy, GIC, of struc-
tural adhesive joints: the results of an international round-robin”. In: International
Journal of Adhesives vol. 23.no. 4 (2003), pp. 293–305.
[58]
M.F.S.F. de Moura, R.D.S.G. Campilho, and J.P.M. Goncalves. “Crack equivalent
concept applied to the fracture characterization of bonded joints under pure mode I
loading”. In: Composites Science and Technology vol. 68 (2008), pp. 2224–2230.
[59]
B. Blackman. “Determination of the mode I adhesive fracture energy, GIC, of struc-
tural adhesives using the double cantilever beam (DCB) and the tapered double
cantilever beam (TDCB) specimens”. In: ESIS(TC4) Protocol Version 00-06 (2000),
pp. 293–305.
[60]
V.C. Li and R.J. Ward. “A novel testing technique for post-peak tensile behaviour
of cementitious materials”. In: Mihashi H., Takahashi H., Wittmann F.H., editors.
Fracture toughness and fracture energy––testing methods for concrete and rocks,
Balkema Publishers. Rotterdam: A.A. (1989), pp. 183–195.
[61]
B.F. Sorensen and T.K. Jacobsen. “Determination of cohesive laws by the J integral
approach”. In: Engineering Fracture Mechanics vol. 70 (2003), pp. 1841–1858.
[62]
V. Saseendran, C. Berggreen, and L.A. Carlsson. “Fracture Mechanics Analysis of
Reinforced DCB Sandwich Debond Specimen Loaded by Moments”. In: AIAA Jour-
nal vol. 56.no. 1 (2018), pp. 83–92.
[63]
MatWeb Material Property Data. Overview of materials for Epoxy Adhesive. url:
http://www.matweb.com/search/datasheettext.aspx?matguid=c1ec1ad603c74f628578663aaf44f261.
[64]
N. Blanco et al. “Mixed-mode delamination growth in carbon-fibre composite lami-
nates under cyclic loading”. In: International Journal of Solids & Structures vol. 41
(2004), pp. 4219–4235.
[65]
M.A.S. Santos and R. D. S. G. Campilho. “Mixed-mode fracture analysis of com-
posite bonded joints considering adhesives of different ductility”. In: International
Journal of Fracture vol. 207 (2017), pp. 55–71.
[66]
aplTec. Wind Patch Biax Technical Data Sheet, 600g/m2. url: https : / / www .
compositepatch.com/pdf/ft-WIND%5C%20PATCH%5C%20BIAX-19092016.pdf.
[67]
R. Moslemian and C. Berggreen. “Interface fatigue crack propagation in sandwich
X-joints – Part I: Experiments”. In: Journal of Sandwich Structures and Materials
vol. 15.no. 4 (2013), pp. 429–450.
[68]
F. Arash. Disbond Damage in Aircraft Sandwich Structures, PhD thesis. Technical
University of Denmark, 2019. isbn: 8774755471 and 9788774755470.
[69]
Z. P. Zhong and H. Liu. “Mode II Fracture of GFRP Laminates Bonded Interfaces
under 4-ENF Test”. In: Advances in Materials Science and Engineering vol. 2017
(2017).
[70]
Z. Jiang et al. “Determination of mode-I fracture toughness and non-uniformity for
GFRP double cantilever beam specimens with an adhesive layer”. In: Engineering
Fracture Mechanics vol. 128 (2014), pp. 139–156.
[71]
F. Moroni and A. Pirondi. “Cohesive zone model simulation of fatigue debonding
along interfaces”. In: Procedia Engineering vol. 10 (2011), pp. 1829–1834.
[72]
B.F. Sørensen et al. “DCB-specimen loaded with uneven bending moments”. In:
International Journal of Fracture vol. 141 (2006), pp. 163–176.
[73]
Abaqus Documentation. Energy balance. url: https://abaqus-docs.mit.edu/2017/
English/SIMACAEGSARefMap/simagsa-c-qsienergybal.htm.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
81
==PAGE:92==
[74]
CAE-assistant. VUSDFLD subroutine. url: https://www.compositepatch.com/pdf/
ft-WIND%5C%20PATCH%5C%20BIAX-19092016.pdf.
[75]
S. Suo and J.W. Hutchinson. “Interface crack between two elastic layers”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Fracture vol. 43 (1990), pp. 1–18.
82
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:93==
A
J integral approach for asymmetric
bonded DCB-UBM specimen with
reinforcements
The following J integral approach was originally derived by Saseendran et. al [62] for
symmetric DCB-UBM sandwich specimen, hence the facesheets of the sandwich compos-
ite have equal thicknesses and are made of the same materials. The following extends
Saseendrans analytical derivation to account for the effects of asymmetry by having dif-
ferent thicknesses of the upper and lower laminates.
Figure 86: Superposition principle and load conventions
Through superposition Suo and Hutchinton [75] showed that the number of loads control-
ling stress singularity can be reduced to two, the axial force P and moment acting on the
disbonded part of the specimen, Md, which may be defined as
M3 = M1 −M2
P = −c2M3
Md = M1 −c3M3
(A.1)
where c2 and c3 are constants depending on the specimen geometry and elastic material
properties, determined later. From equilibrium M∗may be expressed using Md and P as
M∗= Md + P∆1
,
∆1 = y0 + y3 + δd −δs
(A.2)
where y-coordinate positions are defined in Figure 87, δs and δd are the relative position
of the neutral axis with respect to the bottom of the substrate and disbonded regions
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
1
==PAGE:94==
respectively, as shown in Figure 87, which may be determined by
δ =
∑Ekhkδk
∑Ekhk
(A.3)
where k is the layer index, and δk is the position of the neutral axis of the k’th layer
relative to the bottom of the region. Note that k = 1, 2, 3 for the substrate region and
k = 4, 5 for the disbonded region according to Figure 87.
Figure 87: The base, substrate and disbonded beam regions. Along with the y-coordinates
of the base defined relative to the mid-plane y = 0.
The forces and moments per unit width are given by
Nx = Aε0
x + Bκx
Mx = Bε0
x + Dκx
(A.4)
where ε0
x and κx are mid-plane strain and curvature respectively, A, B and C are the
extension, coupling and bending stiffnesses respectively
A =
n
∑
k=1
¯
Ek(yk −yk−1)
B = 1
2
n
∑
k=1
¯
Ek(y2
k −y2
k−1)
D = 1
3
n
∑
k=1
¯
Ek(y3
k −y3
k−1)
(A.5)
where n is the number of layers. ¯Ek =
Ek
1−ν for plane strain and ¯Ek = Ek for plane stress
and Ek denotes the elastic modulus of the k’th layer of the specimen. yk is the coordinate
between the layers k and k1, relative to the geometric mid-plane, see Figure 87.
The
neutral axis distance from the mid-plane of a multilayered beam of uniform width may be
determined by the extension stiffness and the extension-bending coupling stiffness
e = B
A
(A.6)
In the case of pure bending (Nx = 0) i.e. at the neutral axis of the beam, provides the
mid-plane strain
0 = Aε0
x + Bκx ⇒ε0
x = −Bκx
A
(A.7)
2
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:95==
Inserting the expression into the moment equation provides the curvature
Mx = −B Bκx
A
+ Dκx ⇒κx =
Mx
D −B2
A
(A.8)
where Mx = M3 for the undamaged base of the specimen, since only bending moments
are applied to the specimen. The stresses in each part may be defined using Hooke’s law
(σx)k = ¯
Ekεx
(A.9)
where
εx = ε0
x + κxy
(A.10)
As only bending moments are present in the base region ε0
x = 0, thus
εx =
Mx
D −B2
A
y
,
(σx)k =
¯
EkM3
D −B2
A
y
(A.11)
Now the force P acting on the disbonded part is obtained by integrating the stress
P =
∫y5
y3
σxdy = −c2M3
(A.12)
where
c2 =
¯
Ef(y2
4 −y2
3) + ¯
Er(y2
5 −y2
4)
2
(
D −B2
A
)
(A.13)
The moment acting on the disbonded beam is given by
Md = M1 −
∫y4
y3
(σx)4(y −(y3 + δd))dy −
∫y5
y4
(σx)5(y −(y3 + δd))dy
Md = M1 −c3M3
(A.14)
where integration yields
c3 =
¯
Ef
D −B2
A
(1
2y2
4 −1
2y2
3 + (y4 −y3)(−y3 −δd)
)
+
¯
Er
D −B2
A
(1
2y2
5 −1
2y2
4 + (y5 −y4)(−y3 −δd)
)
(A.15)
As the loads have now been determined, the J integral may now be determined using the
general expression
J =
∫
Γ
Wdy −σijnj
∂ui
∂x dS
(A.16)
where σij is the stress tensor, dS is an incremental length along the closed path Γ, nj is an
outward normal vector and ui is the displacement vector. W is the strain energy density:
W = 1
2σxεx.
Figure 88: Path of the J integral.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
3
==PAGE:96==
The J integral may be calculated along the closed path shown in Figure 88 using the
general expression A.16.
J =
10
∑
p=1
∫
Γ
1
2σxεxdy =
10
∑
p=1
∫
Γ
1
¯
Ep
σ2
xdy
(A.17)
where no traction along the horizontal paths is present as dy = 0, and only the vertical
paths along the left side produce nonzero J integral terms, thus J = G = JΓ1 + JΓ2 +
JΓ3 + JΓ9 + JΓ10 must be calculated.
Disbonded region
Figure 89: Coordinate definition of disbonded beam.
In the disbonded region, consisting of the upper laminate and the upper reinforcement
layer, the J integral of the paths JΓ9 and JΓ10 must be calculated. In Figure 89 the dis-
bonded region is represented with definitions of the y-coordinates used for in this section.
The stresses in this region are expressed by
σx = −P ¯
Ep
( ¯Eh)d
+ Md ¯
Ep
Hd
(y −ed)
(A.18)
where the index l denotes the region and
( ¯Eh)d =
n
∑
l=1
¯Elhl
Hd = Dd −B2
d
Ad
(A.19)
The J integral of the respective paths in the disbonded beam may now be determined by
inserting Eq. A.18 into Eq. A.17
JΓ9 = 1
2 ¯
Er
∫y1
y2
(
−P ¯
Er
( ¯Eh)d
+ Md ¯
Er
Hd
(y −ed)
)2
dy
=P 2 ¯
Erhr
2( ¯Eh)2
d
+ M2
d ¯
Erhr
2H2
d
[ 1
12
(
3h2
fu + h2
r
)
−edhfu + e2
d
]
−PMd ¯
Erhr
2( ¯Eh)dHd
(
−hfu + 2ed
)
JΓ10 = 1
2 ¯
Ef
∫y0
y1
(
−P ¯
Ef
( ¯Eh)d
+ Md ¯
Ef
Hd
(y −ed)
)2
dy
=P 2 ¯
Efhfu
2( ¯Eh)2
d
+ M2
d ¯
Efhfu
2H2
d
[ 1
12(h2
fu + 3h2
r) + edhr + e2
d
]
+ PMd ¯
Efhfu
2( ¯Eh)dHd
(
hr + 2ed
)
(A.20)
4
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:97==
where the J integral of the disbonded beam becomes
JDisbonded = JΓ9 + JΓ10 =
P 2
( ¯Eh)2
d
L1 + M2
d
H2
d
L2 +
PMd
( ¯Eh)dHd
L3
(A.21)
where
L1 =1
2( ¯
Erhr + ¯
Efhfu)
L2 =
¯
Erhr
2
[ 1
12(3h2
fu + h2
r) −edhfu + e2
d
]
+
¯
Efhfu
2
[ 1
12(h2
fu + 3h2
r) + edhr + e2
d
]
L3 =
¯
Erhr
2
(−hfu + 2ed) −
¯
Efhfu
2
(hr + 2ed)
(A.22)
Substrate beam
Figure 90: Coordinate definition of substrate beam.
The stress in the substrate beam may be determined as
σx = P ¯
Em
( ¯Eh)s
−M∗¯
Em
Hs
(y −es)
(A.23)
where the index m denotes the region and
( ¯Eh)s =
n
∑
m=1
Emhm
Hs = Ds −B2
s
As
(A.24)
In Figure 89 the disbonded region is represented with definitions of the y-coordinates used
for in this section. For each path (Γ1 −Γ3) the J integral may be calculated
JΓ1 = 1
2 ¯
Ea
∫y2
y3
(
P ¯
Ea
( ¯Eh)s
−M∗¯
Ea
Hs
(y −es)
)2
dy
=P 2 ¯
Eaha
( ¯Eh)2s
+ M∗2 ¯
Eaha
2H2s
[ 1
12
(
3h2
r + 6hrhfl + h2
a + 3h2
fl
)
−es(hfl + hr) + e2
s
]
−PM ∗¯
Eaha
( ¯Eh)sHs
(
−hfl −hr + 2es
)
(A.25)
JΓ2 = 1
2 ¯
Ef
∫y1
y2
(
P ¯
Ef
( ¯Eh)s
−M∗¯
Ef
Hs
(y −es)
)2
dy
=P 2 ¯
Efhfl
( ¯Eh)2s
+ M∗2 ¯
Efhfl
2H2s
[ 1
12
(
3h2
r −6hrha + 3h2
a + h2
fl
)
−es(hr −ha) + e2
s
]
+ PM ∗¯
Efhfl
( ¯Eh)sHs
(
ha −hr + 2es
)
(A.26)
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
5
==PAGE:98==
JΓ3 = 1
2 ¯
Er
∫y0
y1
(
P ¯
Er
( ¯Eh)s
−M∗¯
Er
Hs
(y −es)
)2
dy
=P 2 ¯
Erhr
( ¯Eh)2s
+ M∗2 ¯
Erhr
2H2s
[ 1
12
(
h2
r + 3h2
a + 6hahfl + 3h2
fl
)
+ es(ha + hfl) + e2
s
]
+ PM ∗¯
Erhr
(2 ¯Eh)sHs
(
ha + hfl + 2es
)
(A.27)
Summing the contributions of the individual layers gives the J integral of the substrate
beam
JSubstrate = JΓ1 + JΓ2 + JΓ3 =
P 2
( ¯Eh)2
d
V1 + M∗2
H2
d
V2 +
PM ∗
( ¯Eh)dHd
V3
(A.28)
where
V1 =1
2( ¯
Eaha + ¯
Efhfl + ¯
Erhr)
V2 =
¯
Eaha
2
[ 1
12
(
3h2
r + 6hrhfl + h2
a + 3h2
fl
)
−es(hfl + hr) + e2
s
]
+
¯
Efhfl
2
[ 1
12
(
3h2
r −6hrha + 3h2
a + h2
fl
)
−es(hr −ha) + e2
s
]
+
¯
Erhr
2
[ 1
12
(
h2
r + 3h2
a + 6hahfl + 3h2
fl
)
+ es(ha + hfl) + e2
s
]
V3 =
¯
Eaha
2
(−hfl −hr + 2es) +
¯
Efhfl
2
(ha −hr + 2es) +
¯
Erhr
2
(ha + hf + 2es)
(A.29)
Summing J of the two regions gives the total energy
J = G = JDisbonded + JSubstrate
(A.30)
which described in terms of the loads P and Md and the parameters defined above L1,
L2, L3, V1, V2, V3 becomes
G =P 2
(
L1
( ¯Eh)2
d
+
V1
( ¯Eh)2s
+ V2∆2
1
H2s
+
V3∆1
( ¯Eh)sHs
)
+ M2
d
( L2
H2
d
+ V2
H2s
)
+ MdP
(2V2∆1
H2s
+
L3
( ¯Eh)dHd
+
V3
( ¯Eh)sHs
)
(A.31)
6
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:99==
B
Experimental testing
B.1
DCB-UBM test protocol
B.1.1
Quasi-static
Table B.1: Initial state of each DCB-UBM test under quasi static loading. Propagation
moments are noted for the point where crack propagation was auditorily determined.
ID
Initial state
Propagation
Comments
DCB-UBM- M1 [Nm] M2 [Nm] R1 [◦] R2 [◦]
M1
M2
MR = −0.83
R2 max. 9◦
QS-1-1
-
-
-
-
-
-
Trial test
QS-1-2
-0.6
1.5
0.4
0.2
90
-101
QS-1-3
-0.1
0.1
0
0.5
86
-100
QS-1-4
-1.3
1.8
0.1
0.4
-
-
Load rate: 0.5◦/min
MR = 1.9
QS-2-1
1.3
0.6
-2.0
1.5
109
56
QS-2-2
-1.1
1.1
-1.3
0.7
110
57
QS-2-3
0.3
0.2
-0.7
0.6
110
57
QS-2-4
2.3
2.7
0.0
0.0
113
58
QS-2-5
1.8
2.2
0.2
-0.1
110
57
MR = −2.5
QS-3-1
-1.0
0.4
-1.9
1.1
68
-27
QS-3-2
1.0
-1.1
-1.0
1.0
84
-33
Lower in readings
QS-3-3
-2.4
1.6
-1.8
1.2
99
-39
MR = −1.4
QS-4-1
-1.8
1.7
-2.4
0.7
70
-50
QS-4-2
0.6
-1.7
-1.6
1.0
83(94)
-58(-66)
(More pronounced)
QS-4-3
0.9
-1.7
-1.2
1.1
96
-67
QS-4-4
0.9
-1.7
-1.1
1.1
96
-67
QS-4-5
0.8
1.8
-0.9
1.2
100
-70
QS-4-6
0.9
-1.6
-0.8
1.2
95
-67
QS-4-7
0.9
-1.7
0.0
1.2
102
-71
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
7
==PAGE:100==
Table B.2: Initial state of each DCB-UBM test under quasi static loading. Propagation
moments are noted for the point where crack propagation was auditorily determined.
ID
Initial state
Propagation
Comments
DCB-UBM- M1 [Nm] M2 [Nm] R1 [◦] R2 [◦]
M1
M2
MR = −0.83
R2 max. 9◦
QS-5-1
0.4
-0.5
-2.7
0.9
45
-53
QS-5-2
-0.1
-2.9
-2.6
1.6
53
-64
QS-5-3
0.3
-2.9
-2.8
2.1
57
-67
QS-5-4
-0.3
-2.4
-2.8
2.1
59
-70
QS-5-5
-0.9
0.5
-2.7
1.7
64
-75
QS-5-6
0.8
-4.2
-2.6
2.9
73
-87
MR = 1.9
QS-6-1
0.3
-0.4
-2.9
1.3
113
59
Observed by iMetrum
QS-6-2
1.8
1.9
0.7
-0.1
121
63
QS-6-3
1.3
1.3
0.8
0.7
122
64
QS-6-4
0.1
0.5
0.8
0.7
126(130)
66(68)
(More pronounced)
QS-6-5
1.2
1.0
1.4
0.7
130
68
Plastic deformation
of doubler
MR = −2.5
QS-7-1
-0.3
-0.4
0.1
0.2
86
-34
QS-7-2
0.1
-0.3
-1.4
1.7
88
-35
QS-7-3
0.3
0.9
-1.3
1.8
94
-36
Doubler detachment
QS-7-4
1.3
-1.2
0.0
1.1
105
-41
Doubler detachment
MR = −0.83
QS-8-1
0.4
0.2
-2.9
1.6
40
-47
QS-8-2
0.3
0.8
-1.5
2.8
-
-
QS-8-3
-0.5
0.4
0.5
0.5
-
-
MR = −1.4
QS-9-1
1.8
0.6
-1.3
-0.8
52
-36
QS-9-2
3.2
-0.3
0.3
-0.6
-
-
QS-9-3
0.4
-0.1
0.5
-0.8
-
-
−2.5
QS-10-1
-0.5
0.3
-0.4
-0.9
64
-25
QS-10-2
1.2
0.2
1.6
-1.0
-
-
MR = 1.9
QS-11-1
2.4
2.7
0.1
-0.9
-
-
QS-11-2
2.2
2.7
4.6
-2.0
-
-
8
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:101==
B.1.2
Fatigue
Table B.3: Initial state, options and comments to each DCB-UBM test in fatigue.
ID
G
Cycles Camera
Crack length
Comments
DCB-UBM- vs GC
N
N/frame a0 [mm] aend [mm]
MR = −0.83
Wrong MR
F-1-1
80%
2000
2
118
115
F-1-2
80%
10000
10
125
155
F-2-1
80%
2000
2
50
132
F-2-2
80%
13926
20
132
195
Doubler detachment
F-3-1
70%
1000
1
50
87
High vibrations
F-3-2
70%
1000
20
87
102
Crack out of frame
F-3-5
70%
2000
10
204
-
F-4-1
90%
500
20
50
128
F-4-2
90%
500
10
128
133
F-4-3
90%
2000
10
133
145
F-4-4
90%
15000
15
145
284
MR = −1.4
F-5-1
80%
500
2
50
110
F-5-2
80%
5751
20
110
50
F-8-1
70%
5000
10
50
109
F-8-2
70%
10000
10
109
123
High friction
F-9-1
60%
20000
20
50
-
Doubler detachment
F-10-1
60%
1000
10
50
165
Doubler detachment
F-111
60%
1000
4
50
115
0.1 Hz
F-112
60%
7500
10
115
140
0.1 Hz
MR = −0.83
F-6-1
80%
461
10
50
full
F-3-3
70%
20000
20
102
172
F-3-4
70%
4000
10
172
204
F-113
70%
10000
10
140
210
0.1 Hz, Air bubbles
F-7-1
60%
10000
10
50
156
F-7-2
60%
5000
10
156
176
F-7-3
60%
10000
10
176
193
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
9
==PAGE:102==
B.2
MTT testing
B.2.1
Quasi-static
Table B.4: Quasi-static MTT tests
ID
Initial State
End State
Side of full
Comments
MTT-
u [mm]
P [kN]
u
P
crack propagation
QS-1
-0.003
-1.55
12.57
3.13
-
No iMetrum
QS-2
0.009
0.21
12.02
3.50
-
No iMetrum
QS-3
0.007
0.01
11.79
3.87
Recorded
QS-4
0.012
0.26
12.60
3.48
Non-recorded
B.2.2
Fatigue
Table B.5: Fatigue MTT tests.
ID
Settings
Initial State
Comments
MTT-
P [kN]
N
u0 [mm]
P0 [kN]
iMetrum tests
F-test-1
2.5
1000
0.00
0.07
F-test-2
2.5
1991
-0.06
-0.02
F-1-1
2.5
4000
0.00
-0.46
F-1-2
2.5
5000
0.06
-0.25
Crack tracking failed
F-1-3
2.5
5000
1.48
0.50
min load 1kN
F-1-4
2.5
5000
2.90
1.00
min load 1kN
F-1-5
2.5
1475
0.00
0.00
Crack tracking failed
F-1-6
2.5
1113
0.01
-4.00
Crack tracking failed
F-1-7
2.5
5000
-0.30
-5.00
Data lost
F-1-8
2.5
3714
-0.39
-5.82
Crack tracking failed
F-2-1
3.0
107
0.00
0.12
Tracking failed
F-2-2
3.0
5000
0.05
-0.44
Aborted
F-2-3
3.0
5000
-0.113
-4.50
Camera tests
F-3-1
2.5
50000
0.00
-0.14
100 cycles / photo
F-4-1
2.75
14671
0.00
0.09
20 cycles / photo
F-5-1
2.75
20000
0.00
-0.14
20 cycles / photo
F-6-1
3.0
4255
0.00
-0.27
20 cycles / photo
F-7-1
2.5
50000
0.00
-0.03
50 cycles / photo
10
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:103==
B.3
Work drawings for MTT test setup
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
11
==PAGE:104==
 120,0 
 10,0 
 (25,0) 
 70,0 
 
4,0 
 (30,0) 
 (90,0) 
 (60,5) 
 (35,0) 
 (40,0) 
 15,0 
 29,75 
 47,5 
 
9,0
8,5 
 15,0 
 17,5 
 20,0 
 
5,5 
A
A
SECTION A-A
3.1x45
3.1x45
3.1x45
1.0x45
1.0x45
1.0x45
2x to be manufactured
Questions:
Daniel Rasmussen 
call: 28117982
e-mail: s164378@student.dtu.dk
Project number:
76562-21-4100-014
2x
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: DIN ISO 2768-1 m
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Plain Carbon Steel
WEIGHT: 586.53
Bottom_bracket
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
12
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:105==
 150,0 
 55,0 
 10,0 
 
20,5 
+
 
0,5
0,0 
 (30,0) 
 12,5 
 15,0 
A
A
B
B
M8 thru
 120,0 
 28,0 
 (110,0) 
 20,0 
SECTION A-A
1.0x45
1.0x45
 (90,0) 
SECTION B-B
1.0x45
1x to be manufactured
Questions: 
Daniel Rasmussen
call: 28117982
e-mail: s164378@student.dtu.dk
Project number:
76562-21-4100-014
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: DIN ISO 2768-1 m
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Plain Carbon Steel
WEIGHT: 2244.12
Bottom_center_fixture
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
13
==PAGE:106==
 150,0 
 10,00 
 50,0 
 
20,5 
+
 
0,5
0,0 
 20,0 
A
A
B
B
M8 blind
 50,0 
 36,0 
 (110,0) 
SECTION A-A
1.0x45
1.0x45
 (25,0) 
 12,50 
 15,0 
 21,0 
SECTION B-B
1.0x45
2x
2x to be manufactured
Questions: 
Daniel Rasmussen
call: 28117982
e-mail: s164378@student.dtu.dk
Project number:
76562-21-4100-014
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: DIN ISO 2768-1 m
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Plain Carbon Steel
WEIGHT: 1025.89
Bottom_fixture
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
14
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:107==
 55,0 
 8,0 
 35,0 
 10,0 
 5,0 
A
A
M5 thru
 16,0 
 6,0 
 2,5 
SECTION A-A
1.0x45
4x
4x to be manufactured
Questions: 
Daniel Rasmussen
call: 28117982
e-mail: s164378@student.dtu.dk
Project number:
76562-21-4100-014
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: DIN ISO 2768-1 m
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Plain Carbon Steel
WEIGHT: 39.07
Clamp
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
15
==PAGE:108==
 50,0 
 4,0 
 50,0 
 
8,5 
 12,5 
A
A
SECTION A-A
0.5x45
2x to be manufactured
Questions: 
Daniel Rasmussen
call: 28117982
e-mail: s164378@student.dtu.dk
Project number:
76562-21-4100-014
2x
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: DIN ISO 2768-1 m
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Plain Carbon Steel
WEIGHT: 74.35
End_bracket
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
16
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:109==
 10,0 
 120,0 
 
4,0 
 15,0 
 55,0 
 (90,0) 
 (25,0) 
 
4,0 
 
5,5 
 (60,5) 
 (30,0) 
 (35,0) 
 (40,0) 
 29,75 
 47,5 
 7,5 
 10,0 
 12,5 
A
A
M8 thru
SECTION A-A
3.1x45
3.1x45
3.1x45
1.0x45
1.0x45
1.0x45
1.0x45
1.0x45
2x
2x to be manufactured
Questions: 
Daniel Rasmussen
call: 28117982
e-mail: s164378@student.dtu.dk
Project number:
76562-21-4100-014
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: DIN ISO 2768-1 m
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Plain Carbon Steel
WEIGHT: 482.00
Top_bracket
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
17
==PAGE:110==
C
Numerical models
C.1
CSDE analysis of DCB-UBM specimen with doublers
Mixed mode angle vs Moment Ratio
MR = -0.85
MR = -1.15
MR = -1.65
MR = -2.5
MR = -4.4
MR = -10.5
MR = 22
MR = 5.2
MR = 2.9
MR = 1.9
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
 [ °]
a = 50mm
a = 150mm
a = 250mm
Figure 91: Mode-mixity angle for different moment ratios.
Energy release rate G vs MR.
MR = -0.85, M1 = -48.28Nm
MR = -1.15, M1 = -68Nm
MR = -1.65, M1 = -85Nm
MR = -2.5, M1 = -102Nm
MR = -4.4, M1 = -119Nm
MR = -10.5, M1 = -136Nm
MR = 22, M1 = -149.6Nm
MR = 5.2, M1 = -161.5Nm
MR = 2.9, M1 = -164.9Nm
MR = 1.9, M1 = -170Nm
0
500
1000
1500
G [J/m 2]
a = 50mm
a = 150mm
a = 250mm
Figure 92: Energy release rates of DCB-UBM specimen with attached doublers at different
moment ratios.
18
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:111==
Tip Rotation vs. Mixed mode angle
 = 0 °
 = -10 °
 = -20 °
 = -30 °
 = -40 °
 = -50 °
 = -60 °
 = -70 °
 = -80 °
 = -90 °
0
2
4
6
8
10
Tip Rotation [
°]
a = 50mm
a = 150mm
a = 250mm
Figure 93: Tip rotations of DCB-UBM specimen at different mode-mixity angles and crack
lengths
0
0.5
1
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Upper laminate
-60
-40
-20
0
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Lower laminate
 = 0 °
 = -10 °
 = -20 °
 = -30 °
 = -40 °
 = -50 °
 = -60 °
 = -70 °
 = -80 °
 = -90 °
Distance from crack tip [mm]
11 [MPa]
Figure 94: Paths of highest compressive stresses in the upper and lower laminates respec-
tively, at different mode-mixity angles.
C.2
CZM fatigue damage model comparison
In order to verify that the fatigue framework is indeed able to predict failure, it has been
compared to another cohesive fatigue damage model developed by Harper and Hallet
[42], who numerically applied pure bending moments to a DCB specimen and successfully
compared their models to experimental results.
The applied boundary conditions are
applied to the end of the specimen, as illustrated in Figure 95. All specimen properties
are obtained directly from Harper and Hallet’s study, and can be seen in Table C.1.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
19
==PAGE:112==
Figure 95: Standard specimen dimensions.
Table C.1: Material parameters and cohesive laws used in the comparison models.
Specimen dimensions
Blanco’s Paris law
L
a0
h
w
CI
mI
150 mm
35 mm
1.55 mm
20 mm
2.1
5.09
Laminate properties
E1
E2, E3
ν12, ν13
ν23
G12, G13
G23
120 GPa
10.5 GPa
0.3
0.51
5.25 GPa
3.48 GPa
1: Longitudinal, 2: Through thickness, 3: Transverse
Interfacial properties
GIC
GIIC
tI,0
tII,0
KI
KII
0.26 J/m2
1.002 J/m2
15 MPa
30 MPa
The problem studies interlaminar failure in fibre composites, which share many common
physical principles with adhesive failures studied in this thesis, and is thus applicable to
verify that the modelling settings are capable of representing physical phenomena.
The specimen is represented by a 2D model with uniform mesh size of 0.25 mm throughout
the models, as reported by Harper and Hallet to be suﬀicient for the studied problem.
Figure 96: Numerical FEM model used to compare the damage model proposed by Kho-
ramishad against previous investigations of DCB with even bending moments.
The model setup can be seen in Figure 96. The global modelling response can be seen
in Figure 97, and the Paris’ Law curve comparison can be seen in Figure 98 for various
fatigue damage parameters.
20
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:113==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
104
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
104
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Figure 97: Crack length and tip deflections vs number of cycles at different load levels.
0.1
1.0
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
Figure 98: Paris Law curve comparison between Harper & Hallet [42] fatigue damage law
and different fatigue damage parameters using Khoramishad fatigue damage law [40].
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
21
==PAGE:114==
D
Results
D.1
Test data
D.1.1
Moments, rotations, displacements and crack lengths
0
200
400
600
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
0
200
400
600
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 99: Moment and rotations of loading arms during tests with MR = −0.83. (Positive
rotation: Crack flank is rotated outwards)
0
200
400
600
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
200
400
600
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Figure 100: Crack flank displacements and crack length for tests with MR = −0.83.
22
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:115==
Figure 101: Moment and rotations of loading arms during tests with MR = −1.4. (Positive
rotation: Crack flank is rotated outwards)
0
200
400
600
800
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
200
400
600
800
50
100
150
200
250
Figure 102: Crack flank displacements and crack length during tests with MR = −1.4.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
23
==PAGE:116==
0
100
200
300
400
500
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
100
200
300
400
500
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 103: Moment and rotations of loading arms during tests with MR = −2.5. (Positive
rotation: Crack flank is rotated outwards)
0
100
200
300
400
500
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0
100
200
300
400
500
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Figure 104: Crack flank displacements and crack length during tests with MR = −2.5.
24
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:117==
Figure 105: Moment and rotations of loading arms during tests with MR = 1.9. (Positive
rotation: Crack flank is rotated outwards)
0
200
400
600
800
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
200
400
600
800
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Figure 106: Crack flank displacements and crack length during tests with MR = 1.9.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
25
==PAGE:118==
D.1.2
Phase angles
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
(a) MR = −0.83
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
(b) MR = −1.4
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
(c) MR = −2.5
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
(d) MR = 1.9
Figure 107: Phase angles extracted from experimental tests. Note that the coordinate
frame of the results presented here are reversed compared to numerical results, thus phase
angles would compare to negative phase angles in the numerical models.
26
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:119==
D.2
Static response comparison
0
50
100
150
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
50
100
150
0
2
4
6
8
10
(a) MR = −0.83, Power law: α = 1
0
50
100
150
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
50
100
150
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
(b) MR = −2.5, Power law: α = 0.375
0
50
100
150
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
50
100
150
0
2
4
6
8
10
(c) MR = 1.9, Power law: α = 1
Figure 108: Numerical and experimental comparison of tip deflections and rotations.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
27
==PAGE:120==
D.3
Fatigue response comparison
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 109: Comparison of crack length vs number of cycles and numerical maximum
displacement vs number of cycles. For MR = −0.83
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 110: Comparison of crack length vs number of cycles and numerical maximum
displacement vs number of cycles. For MR = −1.4.
28
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
==PAGE:121==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
104
0
50
100
150
200
250
Figure 111: Fatigue crack propagation comparison, between numerical models and exper-
imental results.
Cohesive web joints in wind turbine blades
29
==PAGE:122==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk
