==PAGE:1==
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
Master Thesis
p
g
g
==PAGE:2==
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
Master Thesis
March, 2022
By
Sarthak Arvind Bhole
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering
Automation and control, 348, Ørsteds Pl., 2800 Kongens Lyngby Den-
mark
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at Department of Electrical Engineering,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Sarthak Arvind Bhole - s192280
Signature
Date
ii
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
A good understanding of Crowd dynamics in public transport can help in improving and
shaping the available knowledge to develop better and more sustainable public transport
infrastructure in regards to consumer comfort.
An investigation of crowd dynamics is conducted on the example of train coaches. Num-
ber of people at a given moment in a train coach has been counted through object de-
tection method of Convolutional Neural Networks framework of Darknet and algorithm of
YOLOv4. Sensing methods used are visible and infra red spectra. An attempt is made
to develop a better understanding of crowd dynamics and inside enclosed environments
based on the acquired data and methodology used in this project and an extent to which
the knowledge can help.
Keywords: CNN, Object detection, Crowd dynamics, Crowd density mapping
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
For guidance,
Søren Hansen, Associate Professor, Thesis Supervisor
Department of Electrical Engineering
Automation and Control
iv
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement & Objective: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature Review and its Analysis
2
3
Setup Proposition
4
4
Theory
7
4.1
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Yolov4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
mAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.5
Gaussian distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
5
Results
11
6
Discussion
20
6.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7
Conclusion
24
Bibliography
25
A Title
27
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Trains are extensively used and after cars remains preferred mode of transport globally
in both urban and non-urban settings. Overcrowding of trains is an ever increasing issue
especially in Asia. In these lights, it has become necessary to rethink designing of train
coaches. In recent years Machine learning(ML) has made huge strides in understanding
crowd dynamics and these techniques can help inside a train too. Movement of crowds
for larger part has been studied outdoors but working with the crowds in an environment
as train can reveal some important insights.
1.1
Problem statement & Objective:
This thesis aims at achieving an understanding of crowd dynamics inside trains. For this
purpose, we have come up with the following objectives:
• Detection and counting people inside train coaches
• Localization of people as individual
• Extracting significant insights from the acquired data
Example: Crowd density, localizing crowd clusters
1.2
Motivation
The title has found itself to be relevant in the recent energy crisis that is seen around the
world. The project can help identifying the extent of utilization of the public transport which
will translate into efficient deployment of the train services resulting in saved energy.
This can also be of importance to Architects and locomotive design engineers based on
people’s movement and utilization of inner space and fittings to increase effectiveness
and travel comfort.
So the data collected and findings will be in alignment with UN’s SDG number 9, on build-
ing resilient, sustainable and inclusive infrastructure specifically 9.1.2 as some losses can
be mitigated with increased efficacy.
My personal motivation was mainly by the thought can it be useful and does it have any
potential to impact. When I was presented with this topic among others. This one piqued
my interest as this was topic more of an investigative in nature and results were certainly
unknown in comparison to others. And after giving it a thought I realised the reasons
mentioned above.
1.3
Thesis structure
First chapter introduces to the title and reveals what are the objectives of the project.
Second chapter is literature review where relevant research is discussed and analyzed to
form an understanding for the project. Third chapter proposes the setup and arguments
are stated to justify the proposed setup. Fourth chapter goes briefly through the theoretical
side of the concepts applied in the project. Fifth chapter explains the workflow and process
of methodology. Sixth chapter showcases results and seventh chapter discusses the
results and outcomes. Eighth chapter concludes the thesis followed by references.
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Literature Review and its Analysis
Upon deciding the title and area for research and, conducting a thorough search on sev-
eral search engines with keywords ’crowd dynamics’, ’train’ and ’object detection’, An
article, Jakob Schöttl and Köster 2019 which concerns with the pattern in behaviour of
passenger seating is found. They proposed a simulation model to predict passenger’s
seating preference for seating types of window, aisle, forward and backwards. They col-
lected data through a mobile app to log data and collect data to record seating. The
quantitative distribution of seating matched their simulation model developed based on
cognitive heuristics.
Other than this there were no articles or studies to be seen specifically on crowd behaviour
inside trains but many were in relation to crowd behaviour on trains stations mainly ad-
dressing the issues of congestion and emergency evacuation, which is not in alignment
with the case matter of this thesis.
Isolating crowd dynamics studies in itself show numerous studies dating back to 1970s(
Freedman, Klevansky, and Ehrlich 1970 and Freedman, Klevansky, and Ehrlich 1971mainly
focusing on urban infrastructure planning and designing evacuation models. These are
focused more on generating, simulating and predicting the models than sensing/detection,
data acquisition and analysis.
From these studies one thing which can be concluded is crowd behaviour has a psycho-
logical component to it; let it be choosing seat based on its proximity to exit or be it the
rudimentary response of our species in emergency and danger situations.
Well apart from that, analysis of such studies can be helpful. These analysis mainly focus
on flow of crowd as one unit often utilising fluid dynamics tools.
But as there isn’t much dynamic flow of crowd happening inside trains and neither the num-
ber of people and their positions change instantly in real-time. It will most often change
just before the arrival of station and just after departure of train before it typically settles
for the journey in between.
The static crowd characteristics mainly has three dimensions count of the number of peo-
ple or strength and density. Density itself can give an idea of one another attribute which
is distance between people Brunyé et al. 2014. This has fairly came under importance
given the recent pandemic and subsequent social distancing needs.
Now coming to the crowd detection component of the review. Here too, numerous studies
can be found on crowd perception. Most of the studies use vision based system for crowd
perception. In Rahmalan, Nixon, and Carter 2006 Cheriyadat and Radke 2008 Kilambi
et al. 2008 Silveira Jacques Junior, Musse, and Jung 2010, image processing is mainly
used for feature extractions to estimate crowd size and movement. A Saleh, Suandi,
and Ibrahim 2015 study does an excellent survey of all the crowd density estimation and
counting published research. The textbook Marana covers estimation of density by tex-
ture based analysis based on meta analysis from several other studies. Here texture is
pixel patch. And from the same meta study Liang, Zhu, and H. Wang 2014 successfully
counts number of people. It does so by isolating feature points which are moving at least
once in every three frames. And then clustering and differentiating the feature points
which are moving in same direction.
2
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:9==
There are also two more examples where Sundaram et al. 2020 and Weppner and Lukow-
icz 2013 tried to gauge crowd density based on Users smartphone data; GPU location and
Bluetooth. But these articles can come under the scrutiny of using data from personal de-
vices.
But these methods are outcompeted by contemporary deep learning methods in which
convolutional neural network or CNN in short are used for object detection n.d. These
studies Gao et al. 2020 estimates crowd size and density after training dataset over
crowded images. These models are trained in a way not only to detect concentrated
groups of people but also to omit empty spots. And as a result these systems do not
focus on individual count and perform inaccurately in estimating number of people when
back propagated and therefore are more suitable for highly dense crowd estimations in-
volving applications.
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
3
==PAGE:10==
3
Setup Proposition
Keeping the aim of this project in mind to achieve acceptable results certain ideas were
explored and . An idea where a count can be determined by installing infra red lasers in
the door way and every time someone gets off or on the train the continuous stream of
photons break and that can be sensed as a count+ or count-. Two parallel ones can be
installed to determine whether someones alighting or boarding based on which laser gets
cuts off first. But without much critical thinking its easy to spot out the problems here that
it will fail where multiple people are exiting or entering at the same time and false positives
generated by suitcases.
Speaking of lasers, one can think why not LIDAR’s. From research point of view it could
work very well but from applications point of view commercial LIDARs are way too expen-
sive at the moment. Sure, there are cheap LIDARs available but they lack in resolution
and range to work with.
Another method floor based pressure sensing pads. But covering the all of train floor
could easily stack up price making it expensive. As its price is directly proportional to the
increasing area. Furthermore it would be a whole different subsystem on its own from and
not integration friendly to existing train coaches.
Object detection method was chosen because in recent years accuracy of object detection
has increased significantly n.d. Cameras are inexpensive, are mass manufactured and
are already installed inside train coaches.
Keeping the feasibility of deployment in mind, an intentional effort at keeping the setup
light is made, this factor does results in limitations on versatility of what this setup can
achieve and what cannot. The setup proposed is enough and capable of achieving the
mentioned objectives1.1.
Setup:
The availability of security or cctv cameras in contemporary train coaches seems to be
very prevalent. So the proposed sensing and data acquisition instrument are these visible
spectra cameras.
Hardware for detection and processing Nvidia’s Jetson nano embedded development
board is chosen.
• It is the Cheapest AI/ML developmental board available. Therefore suitable for han-
dling inference with its CUDA cores.
• It works on Power over Ethernet(PoE) Therefore easy to integrate within existing
systems
• Additionally having a Nvidia GPU gives access to power of TensorRT https://developer.
nvidia.com/tensorrt, which is an inference tool developed by Nvidia to optimize infer-
ence performance exclusively for its GPUs. Its framework speeds up performance
by up to 3 times.
Algorithm for detection: YOLOv4 https://github.com/AlexeyAB/darknet which stands for
You Only Look Once version 4 is the the neural network algorithm chosen for detection. It
is open source and published in 2020. Preforms on par with state of the art systems and is
less computationally heavy which is suitable for this job Bochkovskiy, C. Wang, and Liao
4
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:11==
2020. There are definitely better algorithms which perform better. But many of the others
require higher resolution images i.e. require more memory computationally demanding
for a good performance. Whereas, Yolov4 performs very well with lower resolutions. And
for this particular application it is fine as people appear large in image frame and the
application does not require detecting smaller objects.
For the purpose of investigation, the setup will also be tested
• with a less computationally heavy version of YOLOv4 algorithm which is YOLOv4
tiny which has less CNN layers
• with Infrared camera as the input. As some security camera come with built in night
vision capabilities
Choosing the datasets for training: As its assumed the camera used for sensing would be
the pre-installed security cameras for detection. Some important information regarding
video feed can be deduced:
• Camera position will be fixed and will typically be in top corners and top centre
attached to the roof of the coach. So a set perspective
• Resolution will be HD 720p
• FPS will be 30 or under 30
A set perspective ascertains the assumption that people’s torso would be more or less
occluded and their heads would be more visible. Also the heads being smaller in size and
volume it will yield better approximation for localization of position. With that information,
a decision was made to include two classes for detection, one would be humans and
other being their heads. It turned out that there were not many datasets that had labelling
for both persons and heads together. It was easier to find datasets for just persons. For
heads alone there were only few. Of these few the datasets of SCUT-Head https://github.
com/HCIILAB/SCUT-HEAD-Dataset-Release lacked diversity and were only recorded in
one setting. The dataset ’HollywoodHead dataset’ though diverse only has heads and
the ’Brainwash dataset’ is not open source.
Open Image dataset v6 https://storage.googleapis.com/openimages/web/index.html has both
labels for heads as well as people but on careful observation, it came across that when
there was a denser group of people or crowd, it would detect heads as a group of heads
making it impossible to localize each head and to get a count as can be seen from the
figure below.
Finally it was down to only available dataset with both labels available together, The
CrowdHuman Dataset https://www.crowdhuman.org. Its claims are showcased below in
the chart:
For themal image dataset there was only one available option therefore FLIR Dataset
https://www.flir.com/oem/adas/adas-dataset-form/ is used. It is collected from video footage
from a camera attached to a car. So it mainly covers streets.
Privacy, GDPR and storage: There is an ethical concern and a risk of violation of general
data protection regulaion(GDPR) about storing and processing users data. After going
through the GDPR guidelines, under the Article 13.1 https://gdpr-info.eu/art-6-gdpr/ it is
allowed to process the data for legitimate interest.
So keeping that in mind, the setup is designed. The image frames from video will only be
processed when going through the detection and inference model but the data stored will
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
5
==PAGE:12==
be locally only on the train. And the data will be free from any personal information. It will
be just the location of people as coordinates in 2D plane and the count of people. And
that data can be accessed remotely or transferred to study and analyze.
Cost based feasibility for the setup: The cost of jetson nano is 100 euros. For a train
assuming there are 10 coaches, and around four in each coach depending on length and
compartments. The estimated cost could be 4000 Euros, the feasibility issue is subject to
the individual train company or city or country’s local government if it is public transport.
Figure 3.1: Comparison of Crowd Human Datasets with other w.r.t. classes
Figure 3.2: Comparison of the visible ratio between our CrowdHuman and CityPersons
dataset. Visible Ratio is defined as the ratio of visible bounding box to the full bounding
box.
6
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:13==
4
Theory
4.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks are neural networks especially designed to work on im-
ages. They focus on tasks like segmentation, detection and localization. Neural networks
as the name suggest are networks which are biologically inspired to mimic structure of net-
work of neurons in the brains. It was first conceived in 1950s in hopes that it would learn
just like human brains do. This could mean computing can be done in newer way than to
hard code step-wise instructions. But these networks works need massive memory and
computing power.
By the end of the first decade of 21st century computing power had risen many folds and
it made possible to apply and perceive these networks on new level. This gave to the rise
of new field called deep learning. In 2012 at a competition called Imagenet , this deep
learning approach gave a major breakthrough in image recognition in where millions of
images were fed for learning. The error rate dropped to less than 50%. And in just few
years these networks performed super-humanly at recognizing patterns.
How these network work:
Neural network take input in the form of vectors. First we can try and understand how a
single neuron works. Suppose it has an input and one output. The output will be fired
when when neuron crosses a certain threshold. Now to perceive this we can imagine a
perception space where the space is divided into active and inactive spaces. For one
input we can say the space is one dimensional and a threshold line divides it into active
and inactive regions. As soon as the input crosses the threshold the output is fired. And
we can train this threshold line as needed.
Figure 4.1: Neuron
Figure 4.2: Space and region
For multiple inputs in a form of a vector neurons arrange themselves in a perception
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
7
==PAGE:14==
space in varying regions in multiple dimensions. These input vectors can be anything
that we want the network to perceive. For image recognition these would be pixel values
analogous to how we perceive individual photons which fires individual photo sensitive
cells for recognition. The input vector gives a linear separation in perception space which
divides data points. Multiple neurons gives the ability to carve perception space into many
regions into active and inactive regions. We can say these regions are concept space.
Figure 4.3: Neural network
Biological brains layers of neuron activation to process. This layering is crucial. Layering
gives higher number of regions. This adds on depth to the network. Making activation
in perception space, complex pattern of linear partitions. These complex patterns for
activation layer after layer is the reason neural network works so incredibly.
Between each layer weights are assigned to the connections to
4.2
Yolov4
Yolo stands for you only look once. Therefore this neural network model takes the input
vector as an array of pixels of the image frame and feeds it to the network. It is a lo-
calizer and classifier It passes a kernel, where kernel is a matrix of number and perform
convolution operation over the the image as shown in: 4.4.
Figure 4.4: kernel convolution
Basically when Convolution happens in layers this is what is happening as mathematical
operation. Convolution simply is averaging out. Each matrix element is added to its
corresponding matrix element and then is divided by the total number of elements or
kernel size.
8
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:15==
Figure 4.5: Darknet
The Image is fed into the framework shown above. It is nothing but CNN layers stacked
one on one.
4.3
mAP
mAP stands for mean average of precision values.
Figure 4.6: kernel convolution
These values are used to make a sense of validation of weights on trained data.
4.4
Clustering
K-means clustering is a clustering algorithm used to cluster data into k sections. Assuming
having an input vector with data points, X. A cluster is made up of data points which are
closer to each other.
µk represents the ’centroid’, the center of the cluster for each group k = 1, ..., K. The
algorithm starts with the initialization of the µk values. We introduce for each point i a
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
9
==PAGE:16==
binary variable zik describing which cluster k = 1, ..., K observation i belongs to.
zik =
{
1 if k = arg minh||xi −µi||2
2
0 otherwise
(4.1)
The next step is to update the µk values by:
µk = ΣN
i=1zikxi
ΣN
i=1zik
(4.2)
Then the data points are assigned to closest centroid. Then this keeps repeating until a
point is reached where the clusters do not change anymore.
The distance between centroid and data point is calculated by eucaldian method,
d(p, q) =
√
(p1 −q1)2 + (p2 −q2)2
(4.3)
4.5
Gaussian distribution
A gaussian kernel is used to acquire spatial density of the localized points. A 2D gaussian
function be visualized by:
Figure 4.7: A 2D Gaussian Kernel
It is passed over to visualize Mathimatically a 2D gaussian function is written as:
G(x, y) =
(
1
2πσ2
)
e−x2+y2
2σ2
10
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:17==
5
Results
To showcase the results I have decided to showcase two examples5.1 and 5.2
Figure 5.1: Prediction results Yolov4 Heads ans Persons
Figure 5.2: Prediction results Yolov4 Only Heads
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
11
==PAGE:18==
The prediction results can be seen below:
Figure 5.3: Prediction results Yolov4 Heads and Persons
Figure 5.4: Prediction results Yolov4 Heads and Persons
12
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:19==
Isolating Heads:
Figure 5.5: Prediction results Yolov4 Heads Only
Figure 5.6: Prediction results Yolov4 Heads Only
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
13
==PAGE:20==
Plotting centre of heads in pixel frame
Figure 5.7: Heads pose in Pixel frame
Figure 5.8: Heads pose in Pixel frame
14
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:21==
The pixel frame coordinates needs to be converted into world frame to get more closer
to the ground truth positions. It can be done by linear homogeneous transformation ma-
trix. But for each train, the rotation and translation parameters would be different. So the
implementation of clustering and density mapping on done in image frame in pixel coor-
dinate system. where Y axis goes from top to bottom from oth pixel to 720th pixel and x
axis goes from 0th to 1280th pixel.
Clustering:
Figure 5.9: Clustering1
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 5.10: Clustering2
Density mapping:
Figure 5.11: Density1
16
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:23==
Figure 5.12: Density2
Yolov4 Tiny predictions:
Figure 5.13: Prediction results Yolov4 Tiny Heads and Persons
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5.14: Prediction results Yolov4 Tiny Heads and Persons
18
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:25==
Prediction results for infrared sensing:
Figure 5.15: Thermal Detection
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
19
==PAGE:26==
6
Discussion
Because there is a lack of specific previous studies done on this particular matter, there is
not much to compare to this particular objective of understanding crowd behaviour inside
trains. So it is better to look at this study from point of view of an application of object
detection inside trains to perceive crowd data. So this can be put under the scrutiny based
on its objective fulfilment and its robustness given the chosen hardware and methods.
Clustering can give an important insight when it comes to analyzing crowd. Clustering
is only applied on head coordinates as it is small less occluded and It can tell us where
people gather and on which side. What are the preferred locations. Which entrance gets
more used and which gets less. We can also see the centroid of the crowd. In 5.9 and
5.10
Density maps can help recognize overused or underused spots and the head count that’s
gained would help in explaining the distribution of people.
Figure 6.1: mAP of Yolov4 Crowd Human
20
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:27==
Figure 6.2: mAP of Yolov4 Tiny Crowd Human
Figure 6.3: mAP of Yolov4 Tiny FLIR
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 6.4: mAP of Yolov4 FLIR
Coming to the question of the matter: How does it performs. The validity check has been
done to test the training weights.
In above graphs, in red mAP is plotted. It can be seen that mAP is lower for Yolov4 tiny
and its evident that Yolov4 performs better than Yolov4tiny. This can also be seen from
the prediction Yolov4 tiny that it fails to recognize heads in the back which are smaller.
But as it has faster latency and less memory needs it was investigated. In 5.14 it also
mistakes fist for a head, which is not a case for Yolov4.
In graphs, the blue colour plots C IOU loss. Usually when trained on few thousand images,
the loss gets down below 1. But this was not the case here for CrowdHuman dataset.
Loss stayed very high. Attempts were made in training dataset few times with times with
different input batch sizes and number of training iterations but it never fell down and
settled. And it has its effect in all the detections hence, in 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.13, 5.14 if
looked closely it is observed that bounding boxes drawn around heads and people show
are not tightly fitted. At some places the sides are few pixels off, either they cut the object
or overshoots.
Ultimately this can have an effect on pose estimation and density mapping but it still has
a very good accuracy 73% its detections are still valid.
This is due to lack of good datasets for heads. Yolov4 has achieved good performance
metrics on more common and standard datasets like COCO https://cocodataset.org dataset.
For the testing the set up first coco dataset was trained and it had phenomenal results it
was able to detect every person in many of the frames tested, even in heavy occlusion.
But as that was dataset was not trained for crowds. It was not chosen for this project.
And in investigation rather CrowdHuman datset was chosen as it claimed it performed
22
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:29==
better than other crowd datasets. A more recent crowd detection model called Crowd-
Det https://github.com/Purkialo/CrowdDet claims to have to have best performance with
CrowdHuman dataset. But as it was very recent and released in last quarter of the previ-
ous year and is still has some issues it was not tried.
Results of FLIR dataset which was trained is also shown in 5.15. Yolov4 algorithm works
quite well on this dataset. It shows tight bounding boxes as its C IoU loss is very less in
expected range in 6.3. But there is no further analysis shown on its result as its extremely
hard to find crowd infrared images to train as well as test on.
6.1
Limitations
While working on this project a lot of questions arose. And at times there were not clear
answers for them. Here are some thoughts worth mentioning that were missed in the
hindsight or are difficult to answer.
• This project fails to mention a comparison of results from inexpensive LIDARs that
how their low resolution and lesser range has bad inferior outcomes for this project’s
objective, resulting in less robust reasoning in not experimenting with them. Also
there were very less accounts of implementations with these LIDARs.
• Due to increasing prevalence of internet availability in trains around the world and
satellite internet, one can argue why not send the data over cloud and infer
• This project lacks field-study. No particular train is studied. Trains, both urban and
long distance are generalized.
• Train companies and local governments can be hesitant to use such systems due
to varying privacy laws and varying economic freedom around the globe.
• Data can be visualised on constant basis for monitoring but this was not made part of
the project. Analysing and discussing live monitoring perspective could have been
an important for the area of research.
Note: Above drawbacks are in no way to undermine the credibility of work carried out in
this project but to draw an unbiased conclusion which could be helpful for extended future
development and work. This was author’s personal take, and surely there can be
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
23
==PAGE:30==
7
Conclusion
Although lacking in robustness the outcomes of this project are satisfactory. A certain
method was adopted and tried to study train environment. Definitely insights are gained
with this research. Objectives decided at the start of the thesis are achieved. This has cer-
tainly given a direction for future studies to make the data from train more meaningful.This
project when implemented can help in determining crucial design shortcomings/flaws to
boost health of public transport infrastructure. Information can also be useful in policy
designing. After some more advancements in the area of field of crowd research inside
closed spaces, especially in datasets from inside trains, we can see further development.
24
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:31==
Bibliography
Jakob Schöttl, Michael J. Seitz and Gerta Köster (2019). “Investigating the Randomness
of Passengers’ Seating Behavior in Suburban Trains”. In: URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7515084/#B32-entropy-21-00600.
Freedman, Jonathan L., Simon Klevansky, and Paul R. Ehrlich (1970). “The Effect of
Crowding on Human Task Performance1”. In: Journal of Applied Social Psychology
1.1, pp. 7–25. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1971.tb00350.x. URL: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1971.tb00350.x.
– (1971). “The Effect of Crowding on Human Task Performance1”. In: Journal of Applied
Social Psychology 1.1, pp. 7–25. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559- 1816.1971.
tb00350.x. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1971.
tb00350.x. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1971.
tb00350.x.
Brunyé, Tad T. et al. (2014). “Seeing the Crowd for the Bomber: Spontaneous Threat
Perception From Static and Randomly Moving Crowd Simulations”. In:
Rahmalan, H., M.S. Nixon, and J. N. Carter (2006). “On Crowd Density Estimation for
Surveillance”. In: 2006 IET Conference on Crime and Security, pp. 540–545.
Cheriyadat, Anil M. and Richard J. Radke (2008). “Detecting Dominant Motions in Dense
Crowds”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 2.4, pp. 568–581.
DOI: 10.1109/JSTSP.2008.2001306.
Kilambi, Prahlad et al. (2008). “Estimating pedestrian counts in groups”. In: Computer
Vision and Image Understanding 110.1, pp. 43–59. ISSN: 1077-3142. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cviu.2007.02.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1077314207000392.
Silveira Jacques Junior, Julio Cezar, Soraia Raupp Musse, and Claudio Rosito Jung
(2010). “Crowd Analysis Using Computer Vision Techniques”. In: IEEE Signal Process-
ing Magazine 27.5, pp. 66–77. DOI: 10.1109/MSP.2010.937394.
Saleh, Sami Abdulla Mohsen, Shahrel Azmin Suandi, and Haidi Ibrahim (2015). “Recent
survey on crowd density estimation and counting for visual surveillance”. In: Engineer-
ing Applications of Artificial Intelligence 41, pp. 103–114. ISSN: 0952-1976. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2015.01.007. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0952197615000081.
Liang, Ronghua, Yuge Zhu, and Haixia Wang (2014). “Counting crowd flow based on
feature points”. In: Neurocomputing 133, pp. 377–384. ISSN: 0925-2312. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2013.12.040. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0925231214000630.
Sundaram, Vignesh et al. (2020). “A Crowd Density Estimation Approach Using GPS
Mobility for Its Dynamics and Predictions”. In: 2020 3rd International Conference on
Communication System, Computing and IT Applications (CSCITA), pp. 67–72. DOI:
10.1109/CSCITA47329.2020.9137804.
Weppner, Jens and Paul Lukowicz (2013). “Bluetooth based collaborative crowd density
estimation with mobile phones”. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications (PerCom), pp. 193–200. DOI: 10.1109/PerCom.2013.
6526732.
(N.d.). URL: https://www.kurzweilai.net/how-bio-inspired-deep-learning-keeps-winning-
competitions.
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
25
==PAGE:32==
Gao, Guangshuai et al. (2020). “Cnn-based density estimation and crowd counting: A
survey”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12783.
Bochkovskiy, Alexey, Chien-Yao Wang, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao (2020). “YOLOv4: Op-
timal Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection”. In: CoRR abs/2004.10934. arXiv: 2004.
10934. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10934.
26
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
==PAGE:33==
A
Title
Detection of Crowd Dynamics in trains
27
==PAGE:34==
Technical
University of
Denmark
348, Ørsteds Pl.
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.elektro.dtu.dk
