==PAGE:1==
Machine Learning Model for Prediction of
Cylinder Temperatures in a 2-stroke Inter-
nal Combustion Engine
Andy Mathias Petersen (s164359)
Master of Science in Engineering
2021
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Machine Learning Model for Prediction of Cylinder Temperatures in a 2-stroke Internal Combustion
Engine
Report written by:
Andy Mathias Petersen (s164359)
Advisor(s):
Søren Hansen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Mark Hoffmann, Senior research engineer at MAN Energy Solutions
Javier Blázquez Moreno, R&D engineer at MAN Energy Solutions
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
20/9-21 - 20/3-22
ECTS:
35
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Mechanical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Andy Mathias Petersen, 2021
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this project it is studied whether machine learning can be used for prediction of the
temperatures of the components in a 2-stroke combustion engine for marine application
as a potential addition/replacement to an already existing physical model. A data-set
was constructed based on information gathered from a database owned by MAN Energy
Solutions. For the project four different machine learning algorithms were constructed
as well as a machine learning workflow optimized for high performance computing. Pa-
rameter studies were conducted for the different algorithms in order to determine their
optimal performance and the best model for predicting the engine temperatures. This
resulted in a random forest algorithm being chosen for the further studies. The algo-
rithm was then tested on the components yielding a general relative error bellow 5%
for the most well described temperature ranges evaluated with a 10 fold cross valida-
tion. Finally the algorithm was reviewed against the existing physical model showing
better performance for the more regular cases while lacking behind in the more unique
ones. Machine learning is concluded to have a good potential for predicting the temper-
atures in a combustion engine performing well on standard engines but showing reduced
performance for the most extreme cases.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Analysis
3
2.1
introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Description of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
The machine learning workflow
17
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
The workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
The algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Model selection
23
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Parameter studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
35
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Performance for components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Heatload comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Results analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Future work
51
6.1
Further results analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Improving the data-set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Work on the algorithms and the workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.4
Implementation in the R&D workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:8==
iv
Contents
7
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The processes inside a combustion engine is one of high complexity. The large amount
of heat produced, the turbulent flow and the moving piston are some of the things that
make the process so diﬀicult to understand and model. One thing in the combustion
engine that is of high interest is the temperatures of the components inside the combus-
tion chamber. What gives this such interest is the high influence it has on the lifetime
of the components as it influences both stresses and wear. Furthermore knowing them
is important for the design of the cooling system as this has to be designed to most
eﬀiciently counter the before mentioned effects.
Currently the temperatures in the engine are predicted using physical models with
varying levels of complexity, incorporating fx. thermodynamic calculations of the tem-
peratures of the combustion gas, CFD-simulations of the flow velocities found in the
cylinder and FE-models to predict the temperature in the components. The high com-
plexity of the combustion process makes so that a number of simplifications have to be
made in the physical models in order to be able to incorporate them in an eﬀicient R&D
setup. These simplifications of course have an impact on the precision of the prediction.
An alternative to these physical models are the completely data driven models used in
machine learning. Such models have the potential of being much less time consuming
to run and to catch behaviours that are not understood enough to incorporate in the
physical models.
The aim of this project is to construct such a machine learning model that can be used
for predicting the temperature of the components in the cylinder of a MAN 2-stroke
internal combustion engine used for marine application(see figure 1.1). The goal is that
the model will be able to predict the temperature in multiple points of the cylinder for a
wide range of engines based on information regarding fx. the configuration, setting and
load of the engine.
In this project different machine learning models have been tested to see if they
are able to make predictions with an acceptable level of error and the optimal models
performance was compared to the one for the currently used physical model. The project
was done in cooperation with MAN Energy Solutions and the models were trained on
the data that they posses from tests of their engines.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Illustration of a 2-stroke combustion engine for marine application
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
2.1
introduction
In this section an in-depth analysis of the problem at hand will be made. As a first
step the problem will be described with the current solution to the problem, in this
the requirement of what would be a good solution will be determined. Following this
the capabilities of the current solution will be investigated together with how machine
learning could be used.
Following this it will be determined what parameters will be necessary to give a good
prediction and how well suited the available data is to be used for machine learning. The
distributions of the different parameters will be investigated and the correlations between
them will be determined.
2.2
Description of the problem
2-stroke combustion engines for marine application are engines of a tremendous size and
a vital part of the global infrastructure as they power most of the worlds large cargo
ships. Therefore it is important to ensure as problem free running as possible as the size
of the engines make part-replacement complicated and time consuming which is of big
consequences for the shipping companies and their clients. The most at-risk components
in the combustion engine are the ones in the combustion chamber as they are exposed
to the combustion and the resulting exhaust gases.
An important parameter when it comes to the wear of the parts in the combustion
chamber is the temperature of these components. One of the reasons for this is the
risk of cold- or hot-corrosion. Cold corrosion occurs when the sulphur in the fuel reacts
with oxygen and water to form sulphuric acid which will condensate on the liner walls
if the temperatures get to low. Hot corrosion occurs due to the presence vanadium and
sodium in the fuel oil which form corrosive elements at high temperatures that adhere
to the surfaces of the engine[Wan22].
The reason for the extra focus on the liner is due to the many problems that can occur if
its temperature goes beyond what is desired. Besides being the component most at risk
for cold corrosion, having to high temperatures negatively affect the lubrication oil, the
piston rings and the cast-iron material. Therefore being able to predict the temperature
of the liner is of high importance as the target temperature band is quite small. Another
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Analysis
important reason to know the component temperatures is due to the stresses exerted
on the components due to temperature gradients. High temperature gradients lead to
stresses in the materials that can potentially lead to stress fractures. It is therefore
important to be aware of the temperatures within the materials.
2.2.1
The solution
Due to some design changes MAN needed a quick and flexible tool to predict the tem-
peratures and fluxes within the engine as the tool used at that point didn’t live up to
these criteria. This led to the development of the ”heatload project”. With the heatload
project a 0D-simulation is used to determine the state and temperature of the gas within
the engine. This is then used to calculate the heat release from the combustion chamber
which is used as boundary conditions to a Finite element model so the temperatures
and stresses within the liner and cover can be determined. Among other things this also
helps in the design of the cooling system for the engine.
With this project another possible solution to this problem is suggested in the use of
machine learning. A high amount of temperatures measured on MAN’s engines while
being tested in test-bed has been collected and stored in an internal database called
EPOS together with the configuration and performance data for the tested engine. with
this available data-source machine learning seemed to be a possible solution.
Machine learning is most well suited for prediction on data that is not beyond the range
spanned by the training data. As such it doesn’t seem to well suited with R&D where
changes from the norm often occur. It was however judged that due to the small incre-
mental changes that happen within the development of the used engines the machine
learning algorithms would still be well suited. Furthermore machine learning posses the
ability to easily include new parameters that can possibly explain the change that has
occurred to the design or operation.
An advantage in the use of machine learning is the speed in prediction it enables. Where
a physical model needs to do calculations for every given setting, most machine learning
algorithms will only need to be trained once after which they are able to make quick
predictions. Furthermore machine learning is potentially able to predict the outcome of
complicated processes without needing the full physical understanding.
To solve this problem the goal for this project is to do the following:
• Construct tools for building data files with data collected from a central SQL-
database(EPOS)[Mic22]
• Construct machine learning algorithms that are able to be used eﬀiciently on both
PC’s and cluster
• Construct tools for evaluating the performance of machine learning algorithms on
a given data-set
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Data analysis
5
• Review the ability of a number of machine learning algorithms to predict the
temperatures on the liner, cover, piston and exhaust valve
• Compare performance of machine learning with the currently used tool the heat-
load project
2.3
Data analysis
2.3.1
The engine layout
Figure 2.1:
Illustration
of cylinder[Sol22]
The four components for which to determine the tem-
peratures together form the closed space that is the
combustion chamber.
The arrangement of the com-
ponents
can
be
seen
in
figure
2.1.
Starting
from
the top the component marked with the number 9
is
the
exhaust
valve.
The
component
in
contact
with the exhaust valve(when closed) forming the top
of
the
chamber
is
the
cover(here
marked
with
the
number
8).
The
piston
is
here
seen
in
the
top-
position
marked
with
the
number
6.
The
move-
ment
of
the
piston
goes
as
far
down
as
the
bot-
tom
of
the
inlets
seen
at
the
bottom
of
the
pic-
ture.
The final component,
the liner(marked 7),
is
the surface surrounding the piston as it moves up and
down.
The temperature data that will be used for this project orig-
inates from two different depths in the material of the four
components. The points closest to the combustion chamber
are placed 5mm into the material and will throughout this
report be referred to as the ”hot points”. To be able to understand the heat-flux through
the material a second group of points are also placed deeper into the material(35mm for
the liner). This second group of points will be refereed to as the ”cold points”. In figure
2.2 the positions of the different measurement points for the four components can be seen.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Analysis
(a) Liner
(b) Cover
(c) Piston
(d) Exhaust valve
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the position of the temperature measurement-points for the
different components
2.3.2
Choice of parameters
When choosing parameters to base the predictions on it was chosen to focus on including
physical values that are known to have an influence on the temperature of the combus-
tion process and/or directly influences the component temperatures. After consideration
the parameters shown in table 2.1 were chosen. The parameter T_avg is the tempera-
ture to be predicted. For each component a minimum and maximum temperature limit
has been chosen since values beyond these are either very extreme cases or measurement
errors. A common minimum temperature was chosen for all the components as this
was supposed to be the lowest possible temperature in the engine. Different maximum
temperatures were chosen for the four components. for the liner an extra temperature
criteria was set. It was chosen not to include temperature points if their value deviated
more than a set value from the average of the points at the same height. The reason for
this is due to the fact that it is known that the temperature of the liner shouldn’t show
high deviations, so measurement points showing this trend are most likely faulty.
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Data analysis
7
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the combustion process in a 2 stroke MAN engine(Diesel
cycle)[Sol18]
The first part of the process in a MAN 2-stroke engine is the scavenging process as
shown in the left pane in figure 2.3. To describe this the scavenge pressure(pscav) and
temperature(tscav) were included.
The air amount(kg/kJ)(airamt) says something
about the amount of scavenging done and therefore about the amount of ”cool” air that
is led past the components. A parameter that further influences the gas temperature
is the exhaust gas re-circulation rate(EGR-rate)(egr) as higher EGR-rate reduces the
temperatures reached in the engine by increasing the heat capacity of the gas in the
engine.
After the scavenging the compression starts, here described with the compression pres-
sure ratio(pcpsc) which is the ratio between the scavenge pressure and the compression
pressure.
The parameters pscav and pcpsc together with the compression volume
(compvol) say something about the temperature and pressure in the chamber before
combustion and how much air is captured.
The second part of the process to describe is the combustion seen in the middle pane of
figure 2.3. To have an idea of the way the fuel is injected into the engine the number of
fuel valves(n_fv) was included. This tells about the distribution of heat in the engine
as increasing the number of injection points distributes the heat release more. To de-
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Analysis
scribe the amount of energy released during the combustion process the mean effective
pressure(mep) is included as a parameter. The eﬀiciency of the combustion process
is described through the inclusion of the maximum pressure(pmax) as a higher max
pressure will lead to a higher eﬀiciency. Furthermore the maximum pressure together
with the scavenge pressure and pcpsc(toghether they give the compression pressure)
describe the pressure rise from the combustion and therefore the time of injection. this
tells about the time of exposure to the hot gases from the combustion.
To describe the size of the engine the stroke to bore ratio(sb) and the bore(bore) it
self was included as well. The reason to include the stroke-bore-ratio instead of just the
stroke was that it has some influence on how engines are run as a higher stroke-to-bore-
ratio fx. leads to higher friction for a given speed and increased torque of the engine at
lower revs.
The speed(speed) was included foremost as a time scale parameter. Furthermore as
some of the processes in a combustion engine reacts different to increases in speed it has
some effect on the process as well.
To account for the effect of the different cooling water temperatures used in the tests a
parameter called dT_cool was introduced. This parameter describes the effect of the
cooling water on the temperature at a given point. The value of the parameter was de-
termined to be the difference in the cooling water temperature(TCW) from the reference
cooling water temperature(TCW,ref = 80◦C) multiplied with a factor(k) of either 0.8 0.3
or 0 based on the position of he measurement point(see equation 2.1). The factor of 0.8
was used for the highest placed points since these are the ones most exposed to the effect
of the cooling water, the factor of 0.3 to the transition points further down with limited
effect from the cooling water and 0 to the lowest points which are not water cooled.
dTcool = k · (TCW −TCW,ref)
(2.1)
The position of the measurement points in the engine is chosen to be expressed in
Cartesian coordinates (x_pos y_pos z_pos) to prevent that the algorithm sees two
adjacent points as distant which is possible for cylindrical coordinates at angle 359◦and
0◦. To make so that temperatures could be compared across engine sizes the positions
were normalized. For the x- and y-coordinate half of the bore was used for all components
except for the exhaust valve where the distance to the outer most measurement point
from the center line(marked with 1 in figure 2.2d) was used instead. For the z-coordinate
the stroke was used.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Data analysis
9
No
Attribute
Unit
Type
1
T_avg
◦C
Continuous interval
2
pscav
Pa
Continuous ratio
3
tscav
◦C
Continuous ratio
4
airamt
kg/kJ
Continuous ratio
5
egr
%
Continuous ratio
6
pcpsc
-
Continuous ratio
7
compvol
L
Continuous ratio
8
n_fv
-
Discrete ratio
9
mep
Pa
Continuous interval
10
pmax
Pa
Continuous ratio
11
sb
-
Continuous ratio
12
bore
m
Continuous ratio
13
speed
rpm
Continuous ratio
14
x_pos
-
Continuous interval
15
y_pos
-
Continuous interval
16
z_pos
-
Continuous ratio
17
dT_cool
◦C
Continuous interval
Table 2.1: Parameters used for the machine learning model with their type and unit
For the hot and cold points of the four components the amount of data points shown
in table 2.2 were reached.
Component
Cold points
Hot points
Liner
50807
70136
Cover
74572
74572
piston
46621
81881
Exhaust valve
5753
24518
Heatload comparison
62987
82316
Table 2.2: Number of hot and cold points in the data-sets for each component
2.3.3
Data distribution
To understand the distributions of the data for the four different components box-plots
and particle distribution plots where made for the normalized data. The resulting figures
from the hot data points can be seen in figure 2.4 to 2.7. It was chosen to only include
the plots for the hot points as the distributions of the data should be more or less the
same for the cold points.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Analysis
Figure 2.4: Point distribution for the hot points on the liner
Figure 2.5: Point distribution for the hot points on the cover
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Data analysis
11
Figure 2.6: Point distribution for the hot points on the piston
Figure 2.7: Point distribution for the hot points on the exhaust valve
When looking at the point distributions it can be seen that the parameters other than
the average temperature, are not always seeming very evenly distributed even though
they should be continuous. The reason for this is that there generally is 40+ temper-
ature measurement points per test which means that for each test there is the same
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Analysis
number of points with the same performance and engine setting data. This appears as
the clear blue lines that can be seen in the figures.
Looking at the distribution plots it can be seen that the EGR-rate is mostly 0 as only
outliers are shown at higher values on the boxplot. This can have some influence on the
machine learning models ability to notice the effects of the EGR-rate.
When comparing the distribution of values of T_avg some differences can be seen be-
tween the components. The liner is seen to have a high density in the lower to medium
temperature values with the density decreasing towards the top. The covers shows a
quite symmetrical distribution. For the piston it seems a cluster of points appear at
the lower temperatures. This cluster is most likely due to points being placed in the
topland and the ring grooves1. These points are not exposed as directly to the combus-
tion process and are therefore significantly colder than the ones seen on the top of the
piston. The exhaust valve is seen to have a longer tail towards the low temperatures
with a small amount of points creating a cluster at the lowest temperature values. These
points are deemed to be from unique measurement-points on the stem of the exhaust
valve2 that have been introduced in some engine tests. Both the temperatures in the
topland and ring grooves of the piston and on the stem of the exhaust valve show signif-
icant deviation from the remaining temperatures measured and are only seen as being
a small part of the dataset. Such a trend could likely lead to bad predictions on these
data-points however these points are all having significantly different values of z_pos
than the remaining data as the points in the topland of the piston are placed very low
relative to the other points and the points on the stem of the exhaust valve placed very
high. This leads to the believe that the machine learning algorithms will be able to
distinguish them somewhat easily.
2.3.4
Principal component analysis
To give an initial estimate of how the different parameters seem to be influencing each
other a principal component analysis(PCA) was done on the data-sets for the compo-
nents(again it is only shown for the hot data points for simplicity). The results of the
PCA’s can be seen in figure 2.8 to 2.11. For the shown PCA-plots only the PC-axii
needed to describe 90% of the data variance were included. This lead to 8-9 axii being
included for each component. How much of the variance is explained by the PC-axii can
be seen in figure 2.12.
1The points marked as 13-16 in figure 2.2c.
The topland is the volume above the piston rings
between the piston and the liner and the ring grooves are the grooves for the piston rings
2These points are not showed in figure 2.2d as they are not common
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Data analysis
13
Figure 2.8: PC analysis for the hot points on the liner
Figure 2.9: PC analysis for the hot points on the cover
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Analysis
Figure 2.10: PC analysis for the hot points on the piston
Figure 2.11: PC analysis for the hot points on the exhaust valve
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Data analysis
15
(a) Liner
(b) Cover
(c) Piston
(d) Exhaust valve
Figure 2.12: Variance explained by the PC-axii for the hot points on the different
components
Looking at the component coeﬀicients of the x and y position it can be seen that
they generally show limited correlation with any other parameters than each other(due
to the fact that they describe the positions on a surface). For the liner no real correlation
with non-position parameters is seen, for the cover and piston some appear and finally
for the exhaust valve it seems that the x- and y-position is of some importance to the
measured temperature.
Some expected trends are seen in the first PC-axis for the different components.
This axis seem to catch the trends of increasing load on the engine. As load increases
an increase in the values of T_avg, pscav, tscav, pmax,mep and speed is expected and
a decrease in the value of pcpsc and airamt.
The second PC-axis seem to catch some of the size trends as big positive coeﬀicients
are seen for n_fv, bore and compvol and big negative coeﬀicients for sb and speed. The
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Analysis
explanation of these is that engines with a higher bore generally has more fuel-valves and
have a bigger compression volume. The negative coeﬀicient for the speed is explained by
the fact that bigger engines generally run at lower speeds. The seen negative coeﬀicient
for the stroke-bore-ratio is not fully understood as this is not necessarily a design crite-
ria, but might be caused by a skewered distribution of stroke-bore ratio based on the
bore size. T_avg seems to be slightly correlated with the size of the engine which may
be due to the fact that an increase in engine volume results in a lower surface-volume
ratio. The energy released in the volume of the engine therefore has to be lead through a
smaller surface leading to a higher heat flux and therefore a higher surface temperature
depending on the amount of the released energy being converted into work.
For all the components except the cover, it seems the third PC-axis deals mainly with
the positions influence of the temperature as the two main biggest coeﬀicients are seen
for the temperature and the z-position. For most of the components changing the z-
position can move away from the combustion process, most of the points on the cover
however is at all points fully exposed to the combustion process3 and therefore doesn’t
show the big dependence on the z-position that the other components show.
A number of correlations are seen to have opposite correlations than what is physi-
cally expected. fx. a positive correlation is seen between T_avg and egr for the third
PC-axis for all components but the cover, though the opposite would be expected as a
higher EGR-rate would reduce the temperature. It might however be effects of how the
included data is distributed that causes such effects to appear.
2.4
Summary
In this section it has been described how the temperatures of the components is of interest
due to their influence on the component lifetime and the design of the cooling system.
Machine learning is described to be a possible tool for determining these temperatures
as MAN has an internal database with large amounts of available data that can facilitate
the use of this. Following this the parameters to include in the data-set were described
and an analysis of the distribution and correlations of the used data was conducted. The
analysis of the data showed generally good distributions though it seems that the EGR
is very lightly represented. The PCA showed expected correlations in the load, size and
position effects. Some unexpected trends were though seen that might be due to the
distribution of the data-points.
3The lowest points on the cover are not exposed at the beginning of the process
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
The machine learning
workflow
3.1
Introduction
In this chapter the build workflow for using machine learning will be described with the
build algorithms. The machine learning workflow made for this project was generally
written in python[fou22] with the algorithms written in cython[SBe22] or C++[C22]
with a cython wrapper.
3.2
The workflow
3.2.1
The data-files
The data used for the machine learning models were mainly pulled from a central SQL-
database(EPOS) that is used internally within MAN-ES. From this database the tem-
perature data, performance and engine data can be retrieved(in most cases). To ease
the retrieval of data a python module was constructed that made retrieval possible by
supplying the datas position within the SQL-database. Since not all data was presen-
t/correct in the database methods for easy filtering and manual specification of values
were build.
The data was put in python dictionaries and the chosen method of storage was txt-files.
Though storage in txt-files increases memory usage it was deemed that the advantage
of storing data in a human readable format out weighted the performance losses.
3.2.2
Performance review
To review the performance of machine learning models the method of cross validation[22]
was used. To run cross validation on a datafile with a given set of models the cross val-
idation method first had to be determined. The build setup enabled that both regular
and nested cross validation could be used. The way of how to split the supplied data
into test and training data was determined by a supplied splitting function. This way
of splitting the data was chosen to increase flexibility of how to do the splits as it might
==PAGE:26==
18
3 The machine learning workflow
be wanted to introduce a bias. for general performance review however K-fold cross
validation with random sampling was used.
When a choice of cross validation is found a cross-validation file is generated. This file
is a json-file[jso22](CV-file) describing which data-points from a given data-file are to be
used as training and testing data in each fold, the data-points being described by their
index in the data-file. This way of doing the cross validation was chosen as it eased
the comparison of multiple models and furthermore made it possible to back trace any
given data-point used for training or being predicted. An added benefit was that the
generation of random splits in large data-sets is very time consuming so only having to
generate a test-split once therefore increased the execution speed.
Which models to use when running the cross validation is decided by a model file. The
model file contains information about which algorithm to use, a description of the algo-
rithms and what parameters are to be used to define the model. The model files were
also chosen to be json-files.
Due to the large size of the data-sets being used, running locally on the used computer
was not feasible as run-time would be too long and memory usage would exceed what
is available. Therefore the running of the cross validation was optimized for being done
on an HPC cluster. For each run it was made possible to specify both the number of
wanted array jobs to be run and the number of threads to be made available for each job.
For initial runs the folds needed to be run were spread over the array jobs so that each
model was equally represented in each job. After each run a run-time for a given model
was saved in the model file. this run-time is then used to optimize the distribution of
folds to the array jobs for subsequent runs with the same model file.
When an array job finishes it saves its results in a json-file with a structure similar to
the CV-files(though only containing data from the folds in the array job). After all the
jobs finish running the data is gathered in a final json-file(results-file). In the format of
the results file there was again focus on making it possible to retrace the results found so
that a given prediction error found in a results file could be back traced to the original
data-point in the data-file. The choice of json-files for the results file was again made
due to the feature of human readability, however the size of the generated files reached
a size so that most editors were unable to open them, thereby negating the advantage.
In the future the file-type might be changed to HDF5[HDF22].
3.3
The algorithms
The machine learning algorithms made for this project were mainly written in C++
with a wrapper in Cython to make the algorithms useable for python. This method was
chosen to increase the general execution speed of the algorithms and allow the algorithms
to use multi-threading as python is limited by the Global Interpreter Lock[Wik22d].
==PAGE:27==
3.3 The algorithms
19
3.3.1
Ridge regression
Ridge regression[Wik22g] is a type of regression where a damping parameter is intro-
duced. For regular linear regression the coeﬀicient for making predictions are calculated
as follows:
β =
(
XTX
)−1 XTy
(3.1)
But for ridge regression a damping parameter is introduced to prevent extreme responses
so the coeﬀicients are calculated as:
β =
(
XTX + kIp
)−1 XTy
(3.2)
With X denoting the independent variables, y the dependent and kIp the damping
parameter multiplied with the identity matrix. To make a prediction for a given data-
set X the following calculation is done:
Y = Xβ
(3.3)
For ridge regression an implementation was made in simple python code using Numpy[Num22a]
as the speed of doing matrix operations using Numpy showed to be no slower than what
could be achieved using C++. The main strength of ridge regression is the high execu-
tion speed, though the method is lacking in ability to predict complicated trends. As
the given parameters can be put into different powers it is possible to catch non-linear
trends however this comes at the risk of over-fitting to the training data.
3.3.2
K-nearest neighbour
K-Nearest neighbour(KNN)[THe21][Wik22f] is a simple method that guesses based on
the values of the K nearest points. The nearest points are determined based on the
euclidean distance[Wik22c] calculated as follows:
d(p, q) =
√
(p1 −q1)2 + (p2 −q2)2 + ... + (pn −qn)2
(3.4)
With pn and qn denoting the n-th parameter of the points p and q. There are different
ways of determining the prediction that the KNN-algorithm will make. For this project
it was chosen that the predicted value is calculated as the weighted mean of the distances
with K denoting the number of neighbours to use:
Tp =
K
∑
n=1
Tn
d(p,qn)
K
∑
n=1
1
d(p,qn)
(3.5)
Tp is here the prediction for the point p with qn and Tn denoting the closest neighbour
points and temperatures respectively.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 The machine learning workflow
The strengths of the KNN algorithm is its ability to follow complicated trends. Worth
noting is that the algorithm doesn’t yield extreme results if a given point p goes beyond
the space extended by the training data. This trend prevents extreme predictions hap-
pening the way they would with fx.
linear regression.
A weakness with the KNN
algorithm is the high computational effort needed and the fact that the highest com-
putational effort is done during prediction in contrast to most other algorithms were
the training is the most intensive. This does so that the run-time increases extensively
with the number of predictions done. Another weakness is the risk of over-fitting on the
training data if the value of K is set to low.
Due to the high computational effort needed for the KNN algorithm, the algorithm was
written in C++ with the possibility of using multi-threading. This was implemented by
separating the training data into equal parts sending each part to one thread. The data
was configured with each parameter filling a column of a gsl-matrix[Fou22a]. This way
of configuring the data was chosen so that when looping over the parameters in each
point, point by point the iteration followed the gsl-matrix structure in memory as gsl-
matrix-data is stored in row-major order[Fou22b]. Each thread then finds the K-nearest
neighbours to the given point in each part of the data after which the K nearest of these
selected points are found(after the threading).
3.3.3
Regression tree
The regression tree[THe21] is an algorithm where binary splits of the training data are
done recursively until a stop criterion is reached. Predictions are then made based on
the average value of the data at the end of the splits. The way the binary splits of the
data are decided is based on which split is resulting in the highest purity gain. The way
this is done is by ordering the data points in the data-set based on the size of the values
of one of its parameters and then calculating the purity gain that would result from all
the possible splits based on this parameter. This process is done for all of the data-set
parameters. The impurity of each part of the split is calculated as:
I =
n
∑
i=1
(Ti −T)2
n
(3.6)
with Ti being the temperature values of the n given data points and T being the mean
of the given data. The impurity of each part is then used to calculate the Purity gain
as follows:
∆I = Ir −
(
Ilow · nlow
nr
+ Ihigh · nhigh
nr
)
(3.7)
With n denoting the number of points and subscript ”low”, ”high” and r denoting the low
part of the split, the high part and the unsplit data respectively. The stop criterion used
in this implementation was the depth of the splits, the maximum allowed impurity of
the split and the minimum impurity gain. Any possible mix of the criteria could be used.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Summary
21
The regression tree algorithm share all of the strengths of the KNN algorithm in the
fact that its also able to follow complicated trends and doesn’t give extreme predictions
if a point to predict is outside the given training data point space. It does however have
additional strength in the fact that it has significantly lower computational needs and
only needs to be trained once. as with the KNN algorithm there is however also a risk
of over-fitting on the training data leading to reduced predictive performance.
The regression tree algorithm was implemented in C++ with the possibility of using
multi-threading as well. The Multi-threading was done by letting each thread calculate
the possible purity gains for the splitting of one parameter. The best possible split for
each parameter was then saved in an array and at the end of the threading the best of the
splits was determined. Due to the different way of looping through the data compared to
the KNN-algorithm(through the values in each parameter, not each point) it was chosen
to put the values of each parameter in a gsl-matrix row so that the iterations were done
over adjacent points in memory.
3.3.4
Random forest regressor
The random forest regressor(RFR)[THe21] is a further evolution of the regression tree.
In the RFR a number of regression trees are trained on random samples(with replace-
ment) of the training data. The predictions of the RFR is then the averaged prediction
of all the trained trees. To make so that the trees are less correlated possible splits are
also only done for a selected number of parameters chosen at random.
The RFR has much of the strengths of the regression tree and improves on the perfor-
mance by reducing the chance of over-fitting by using bagging[Wik22b]. As a trade of it
has a higher computational need as usually more than 100 regression trees are trained
to create the RFR.
The RFR was implemented in C++ as a further development of the regression tree al-
gorithm. It was wished to counter the high run-time by enabling mutli-threading. The
most speed eﬀicient method was letting each threat train a tree however this implemen-
tation showed to have high memory requirements as the best possible implementation
would require multiple data-sets to be made and kept in memory. It was therefore cho-
sen to use the multi-threading capabilities of the regression tree algorithm to the largest
extend possible and then if the number of threads exceeds the number of parameters,
train extra trees simultaneously but still reading from the same data to reduce memory
usage. This implementation was thought to yield the highest performance to memory
usage ratio by increasing the performance with multi-threading but keeping the memory
usage as low as possible with the given number of threats used.
3.4
Summary
In this section the machine learning workflow and algorithms have been described with
the thoughts behind their construction. The workflow is build in python with the al-
==PAGE:30==
22
3 The machine learning workflow
gorithms being build in cython and C++. For building the data-files python modules
have been constructed to retrieve data from a MAN SQL-database. Cross validation
splits of the data is saved in json-files and scripts have been build for running the cross
validation as array jobs on MAN’s cluster. The algoritms that have been made are ridge
regression, K-nearest neighbours, regression tree and random forest regressor. In the
design of all the algorithms focus has been on achieving high performance and reducing
run-time as much as possible by enabling multi-threading when possible.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Model selection
4.1
Introduction
In this section the performance of the build models will be reviewed and an optimal
model for the further work will be selected.
4.2
Parameter studies
To determine the performance of the different machine learning models parameter studies
were conducted on the machine learning algorithms. The algorithms were tested on the
liner dataset with ”hot” point values and reviewed with nested cross validation.
4.2.1
Ridge regression model
For the ridge regression model the parameters to investigate were the powers(P) that
the input parameters were lifted to and the damping parameter(L). Through initial
studies it was found that higher values of P and very low values of L resulted in better
performance. The parameters chosen for the study was then P=[10,13,15,17,20] and
L=[0,1e-11,1e-9,1e-7]. 20 was chosen as the maximum number of powers since higher
values resulted in a singular matrix which prevented a solution from being found.
The nested cross validation found the model with the damping of 1e-9 and 20 powers as
being the best model. The results of this can be seen in table 4.1. A very low damping
gave the best results, where the extremely low or undamped models showed god results
for many of the tests, but for some showed a huge error that made the models unviable.
A comparison of the performances of an undamped and damped model can be seen in
figure 4.1.
Outer fold
Model
Gen. error
1
regr_L1e-09_P20
242.07
2
regr_L1e-09_P20
250.65
3
regr_L1e-09_P20
253.80
4
regr_L1e-09_P20
252.03
5
regr_L1e-09_P20
256.94
Table 4.1: Model choices from nested cross validation for ridge regression algorithm
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Model selection
(a) L=0
(b) L=1e-9
Figure 4.1: Test errors from the nested cross validation for the damped and undamped
regression with the highest number of powers(20)
The results of the two lowest damped models(1e-11 and 1e-13) showed results similar
to the undamped models with generally okay values but some values with extreme errors.
To review the effect of the different parameters on the model the average of the test and
training errors of the inner folds1 were plotted against the number of powers with the
lines describing a given damping value. The lowest damped and undamped regression
models are showed in a separate plot due to the extreme values of the average error.
The results can be seen in figure 4.2a and 4.2b.
1this method of determing errors is also used in the following plots
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Parameter studies
25
(a) Regular damping
(b) Lowest and no damping
Figure 4.2: Test and training error based on the chosen number of powers and damp-
ing(lowest and no damping)
From the results it can be seen that an increase in the number of powers lead to a
higher performance. Furthermore it can be seen that the testing error generally follows
the training though with the training error being a bit lower. It therefore seems that
over-fitting is countered well by the damping.
4.2.2
K-nearest neighbour
For the KNN algorithm the only parameter to vary is the number of nearest neighbours
used to make a prediction. It was chosen to use the range KNN=[3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10]. From
the nested cross validation the models seen in table 4.2 were found to be the optimal.
Outer fold
Model
Gen. error
1
KNN6
380.62
2
KNN7
400.52
3
KNN6
386.71
4
KNN6
396.49
5
KNN6
403.00
Table 4.2: Model choices from nested cross validation for K nearest neighbour algorithm
It can be seen that the optimal number of neighbours were found to be 6 in almost
all cases. To investigate how the number of neighbours affects performance the number
of neighbours were plotted against the test- and training error, the results being shown
in figure 4.3.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Model selection
Figure 4.3: Test and training error based on the chosen number of neighbours
From the figure a clear optimum performance can be seen at around 6 near neighbours
with the performance decreasing at both higher and lower numbers. As expected there
is no training error as the nearest point will always be a perfect match. The performance
of the KNN algorithm is seen not to be as good as for the other algorithms.
4.2.3
Regression tree
The regression tree has three different ways of controlling tree size; maximum impurity,
purity gain and number of splits. To investigate the effect of the choice of stop criterion
the following ranges of them were used I=[5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 25](impurity), d=[0.1, 1,
3, 5, 7, 9](purity gain) and n=[15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25](number of splits). The results
of the nested cross validation can be seen in table 4.3. From this it can be seen that only
the number of splits have been used as stop criterion with the optimal number being in
the range of 16-18 splits.
Outer fold
Model
Gen. error
1
RT_n16
62.42
2
RT_n17
66.31
3
RT_n18
60.21
4
RT_n18
60.33
5
RT_n17
61.15
Table 4.3: Model choices from nested cross validation for regression tree algorithm
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Parameter studies
27
To further understand the performance based on the stop criterion the test and
training error was plotted against the stop criteria values. The results can be seen in
figure 4.4 to 4.6.
Figure 4.4: Test and training error based on the maximum Impurity value
Figure 4.5: Test and training error based on the maximum purity gain value
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Model selection
Figure 4.6: Test and training error based on the maximum number of splits
Looking at the three parameter studies a clear peak performance is seen in all cases.
All the testing errors curves have clear minima with higher errors on both sides. For
the parameter studies with maximum impurity and purity gain similar curves are seen
with the highest performance reached at very low training errors(approximately 3.5 and
6 respectively) and a minimum testing error of about 72. For the maximum splits stop
criterion a different curve shape is seen with the minimum generalization error of 70
being found at a higher training error of 17.
A possible reason for the better performance of the maximum splits stop criterion might
be that the data has some parts where over-fitting is reached at a different level of
impurity than others. Using the number of splits as a stop criterion can then possibly
allow that in the areas with high uncertainty the mean is taken over a larger amount
of points and in the less uncertain areas less points can be used. As the regression
tree algorithm assumes that the behaviour of the variable to predict can be completely
predicted by the given parameters this could potentially be caused by some unknown
parameter being the reason for the variance in the data. The regression tree algorithm
will attempt to explain the variance with one of the known parameters which will be
wrong and potentially lead to a bigger error.
4.2.4
Random forest
For the random forest algorithm three different parameters have to be defined. The
same as for the regression tree a stop criterion has to be defined. Based on the results
for the regression tree parameter study it was chosen to only use the maximum number
of splits(n) as stop criterion as it showed significantly better performance. The second
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Parameter studies
29
parameter to define is the number of parameters to include at each split decision. For
this study this parameter is defined as the number of parameters to remove(rm). The
third parameter to define is the number of trees to train(t).
For each of these parameters the following ranges were gone through; n=[20, 25, 27,
30, 33], rm=[0, 1, 2, 3] and t=[100, 200, 300]. All possible mixes of the values were
attempted. The results of the nested cross validation can be seen in table 4.4. From
this it can be seen that the optimum number of trees in all cases were chosen to the
maximum number and that the optimal number of parameters to remove is 1 for most
cases. Another noteworthy trend is that the optimal number of splits seem to be in the
range 27-33 which is significantly higher than what was seen for the regression tree. The
reason for this behaviour is most likely found in the the bagging used for the random
forest algorithm. Since every tree in the random forest is trained on different datasets
overfitting on each dataset is not problematic as the prediction is still based on the
averaged prediction of all the trained trees.
Outer fold
Model
Gen. error
1
RF_n30_t300_rm2
33.83
2
RF_n33_t300_rm1
35.32
3
RF_n30_t300_rm1
34.93
4
RF_n27_t300_rm1
32.13
5
RF_n27_t300_rm1
33.23
Table 4.4: Model choices from nested cross validation for random forest algorithm
To understand the performance impact of the different parameters in the random
forest algorithm a study of the different parameters were conducted. As a first step the
influence of the number of removed parameters were investigated. For this the errors
were plotted for all possible values of rm for different values of t, all for which the
maximum number of splits per tree was set to n = 27. The plot can be seen in figure
4.7.
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Model selection
Figure 4.7: Test and training error based on the number of trees and removed param-
eters for model with n=27
From this it can be seen that removal of 1-2 parameters give a clear increase in
performance while removing more starts decreasing performance relative to the model
with no removed parameters. as supported by the results of the nested cross validation
it seems the optimal number of parameters to remove is 1.
To understand the influence of the maximum number of splits and the number of trees
the errors were plotted against the number of splits for different numbers of trees(with
rm=1) and for different numbers of removed parameters(with t=300). The results can
be seen in figure 4.8 and 4.9.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Parameter studies
31
Figure 4.8: Test and training error based on the maximum number of splits and number
of trees for model with rm=1
Figure 4.9: Test and training error based on the maximum number splits and removed
parameters for model with t=300
From figure 4.8 it can be seen clearly that an increase in the number of trees lead
to an increase in performance. However it seems the performance gain decreases as the
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Model selection
number of trees increase. For all numbers of trees it seems that there is no advantage in
doing more than 27 splits. However the trend of the performance stagnating at above 27
splits might suggest that the regression trees are fitting to an extend where there is very
little variance left to explain. Since the number of possible splits is based on the number
of data points, this might suggest that a higher number of splits might be optimal for
a different size of data-set. To test this a simple 10 fold cross validation was done for
models with higher numbers of maximum splits. The values of the maximum number
of splits for this study was chosen to n=[27, 33, 40, 45, 50], the value for the number of
features to remove set to rm=1 and the number of trees set to t=300. The test errors
for this study can be seen in figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Test errors for comparison of
From these results it can be seen that there is a small performance advantage in
increasing the value of the maximum number of splits. though only up to 40 as the
performance then seems to stagnate again.
Due to time constraints it was however
chosen to remain with the 27 splits.
4.2.5
Evaluation of models
From the parameter studies it seems the least suited model is the K-nearest neighbour
algorithm. With a minimum generalization error of 380.62 reached for the first fold the
performance was significantly worse than the others. The KNN algorithm shares some
traits with the regression tree algorithm in that it bases its estimate on an mean of
nearby points, the difference in this case mainly being the way that the mean was cal-
culated, as the KNN-algorithm uses a distance weighted mean as described in equation
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Summary
33
3.5 while the regression tree uses a equally weighted mean. This might suggest that a
better performance of the KNN-algorithm might be possible to achieve with a change
in the way of averaging.
Third best was the linear regression algorithm reaching a minimum generalization error
of 242.07. For this model the optimal performance showed to be with the maximum
number of powers which was naturally limited by the the matrix shown in parenthesis
in equation 3.2 becoming singular at higher powers preventing it from being inversed.
The damping showed to be of very high importance in this case as to low a damping
resulted in huge errors for certain values.
The regression tree algorithm showed good performance by reaching a minimum general-
ization error of 60.21 and improving to 32.13 when used in the random forest algorithm.
For the pure regression tree over-fitting had to be controlled by the number of necessary
splits where for the random forest it seemed overfitting didn’t reduce performance but
to some extend increased it. Increasing the number of trees used for the random forest
seemed to lead to an increase in performance as well though with the performance ad-
vantage dropping as the number increases.
Based on the studies for the different models it is chosen to continue with the random
forest algorithm as the optimal model as it is seen to give significantly better results
than the other algorithms. For parameters it is chosen to use t=300 trees, n=27 maxi-
mum splits and rm=1 parameter to remove. The reason for settling at 300 trees is that
the performance does not seem to increase significantly after this point compared to the
increase in computation time. It does however seem that there is something to gain from
an increase. Therefore when it comes to implementing the models in the R&D process
it might be chosen to train a bigger number of trees on the available data as this will
only be trained once. Time constraints are however limiting from going higher. When it
comes to maximum number of splits it was chosen to settle with 27 as this was shown to
give good performance relative to the number of splits. A small increase in performance
might be achieved by increasing the number of splits, but again it was deemed that for
this project the gain was not worth the increase in complexity and computation time.
4.3
Summary
In this section the different machine learning algorithms have been tested and the optimal
choice of parameters found. The study was conducted by doing nested cross validation
for the models with a range of different values for the input-parameters. Through this
it was determined that the random forest regressor had the best performance and will
be used for the further studies.
==PAGE:42==
34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Introduction
In this chapter the performance of the chosen optimal machine learning model will be
evaluated for each component and against the currently used tool the heatload project.
For the comparison against the heatload project the performance will be evaluated by
looking at the performance of both methods on the prediction on the hot and cold points
on the liner.
5.2
Performance for components
In this section the performance of the machine learning models will be reviewed on the
data-set retrieved from the EPOS-database. Evaluations will be made for both the cold
points and the hot points on each component. The performance review is done by a 10
fold cross validation with random sampling from the data-set.
5.2.1
Cylinder liner
To review the performance of the machine learning model on the liner the relative error
of the prediction was plotted against the normalized temperature to be predicted. The
results for the hot and cold points respectively can be seen in figure 5.1a and 5.1b.
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Results
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.1: Relative error for predictions on the liner based on the normalized temper-
ature
It can be seen that generally the error of the predictions is bellow 5%. For the hot
points it can be seen on the distribution that the error is unlikely to exceed 10% with a
larger uncertainty appearing at the lowest and highest temperatures. Especially for the
cold points a big spread in the precision of the prediction is seen with the error exceed-
ing 30% for some measurements. A possible reason for the high uncertainty at the high
temperatures is the low density of points. The low density can affect the performance by
increasing the influence of the lower temperature points on the prediction or by lowering
the models ability to explain what causes high temperatures.
5.2.2
Cylinder cover
To analyse the performance of the machine learning algorithms predicting on the cover
the errors were plotted against the normalized temperature the same way as for the liner.
The plots can be seen in figure 5.2a and 5.2b.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Performance for components
37
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.2: Relative error for predictions on the cover based on the normalized tem-
perature
A notable trend in the predictions is the very high error at low temperatures for both
the hot and cold points. Though uncertain it is possible that this is due to the lower
temperature boundary being too low as the points of the cover are highly exposed to the
combustion process and therefore should in general have a higher temperature. Besides
the errors seen at the lowest temperatures the error is seen to on average be bellow 5%
with a high certainty of being bellow 10%. The performance at the highest temperatures
is here seen to be better than what what seen for the liner. This is possibly due to the
slightly higher density than what was seen for the liner.
5.2.3
Piston
For the piston the same plots were made as for the liner and cover with the plots being
seen in figure 5.3a and 5.3b.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Results
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.3: Relative error for predictions on the piston based on the normalized tem-
perature
The results for the piston shows a higher error around the lower temperatures on the
hot points. This might be due to having set the lower temperature limit to low as was
theorized for the cover or also possibly due to the inclusion of the points in the piston
topland in the data-set. It is noteworthy that the prediction on the cold points doesn’t
show the same low performance at lower temperatures. This might suggest that the
drop in performance is due to the loose temperature constraints as wrongful predictions
due to the points being in the topland would show for both the hot and cold points.
For the high temperatures a higher error is seen for the hot points and the same goes
for the cold points. a trend worth noting is the high difference between the mean and
the median for the cold points with the mean being 10-15% and the median around 5%.
This seems to suggest that a large portion of the predictions are quite good while a small
portion are having very high errors(seen to go up to around 50%).
5.2.4
Exhaust valve
For the exhaust valve again the plots of the prediction error were made. These are visible
in figure 5.4a and 5.4b.
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Performance for components
39
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.4: Relative error for predictions on the exhaust valve based on the normalized
temperature
For the hot points on the valve the lowest temperatures show very high mean errors
above 150%(not shown here due to the plot scaling) though the median is still bellow
5%. Again the low temperature boundaries can be at fault, though they are to some
extend necessary due to the inclusion of the points on the stem that should show signifi-
cantly lower temperatures. Beyond the lowest temperature points the prediction on the
valve shows quite good performance. Even for the highest temperatures the error is on
average less than 5%.
When it comes to the cold points a less optimal performance is seen. For the lowest
temperatures the mean error is around 15% with the median being around 5-10%. Also
for the high temperatures the mean error is seen to be around 15% here though with the
median being the same suggesting that the maximum relative error is generally higher
though with smaller maximum deviation. Only for a limited temperature interval in the
middle is seen a performance comparable to the generally seen performance with a rela-
tive error bellow 5%. It seems here that the low performance at the lower temperatures
is caused mainly by low point density.
5.2.5
review
Looking at the results in general the performance of the algorithm seems to suggest
that good predictions can be achieved on all the components. The most troublesome
temperatures to predict seem to be those for the cold points on the exhaust valve and
to some extend the hot points on the piston. Mainly it seems the reasons for high rela-
tive errors and high uncertainty is low point densities and to conservative temperature
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Results
limits. For both the piston and the exhaust valve is seen some higher errors in the
lower temperature points. Common for these components is that they include signifi-
cantly different positioned points that should show significantly lower temperatures(the
topland for the piston and the stem for the exhaust valve). This might be the reason
for the low performance at low temperatures as such it might in the future be worth
separating these from the data-set. Beyond separating the points from each other it
also allows imposing stricter temperature boundaries that might remove some otherwise
missed wrongful temperature measurements.
5.3
Heatload comparison
5.3.1
Setup
To do a comparison with the heatload project it was necessary to find results from tests
of the heatload project on real engine tests where there was data usable for the machine
learning algorithms as well. For the heatload project a test suite has been build where
performance data and temperature data for a number of engine tests have been stored.
This data will serve as what will be used for comparison. A problem for this however
was that for many of the engines in this test suite the temperature data was not listed
in the EPOS-database used for collecting data for the machine learning algorithms. As
such a special data-set had to be constructed for the comparison. This data-set consist
of the data available from the EPOS-database and the data in the heatload project.
To make it so that a comparison could be made, the temperatures and performance
data from the testsuite was modified to be usable for the machine learning algorithms.
In the test suite the temperatures are only given as an average of the temperatures at a
specific height on the liner. To make this data mimic the format of the machine learning
data-set the average temperature at each height of the liner was assigned to 6 evenly
distributed points around the circumference of the liner. A further limitation came in
the retrieval of the performance data. Not all the wanted performance data was defined
in the test suite so the data was instead retrieved from the simulations from the heatload
project. For most of the data these values are assumed to be very close to the real ones.
Only for the cooling water is this not the case as the cooling water temperature has just
been assumed to be the reference temperature(setting dT_cool=0) in all cases. This
however had to be accepted to allow a comparison. The hot and cold point data-sets
ended up consisting of 82316 and 62987 data-points respectively.
For the comparison with the heatload project two different methods of comparison were
chosen. The first setup of the performance test for the machine learning algorithm was
to do a leave-one-out cross validation for every test that the heatload project has been
evaluated on, meaning that all the data-points for the given test were used as test-data
and the remaining dataset were used as training data. With this setup the maximum
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Heatload comparison
41
number of training data was made available to the machine learning algorithm.
As there has often been conducted multiple tests on the same engine at the same con-
ditions it could be argued that, with the first setup, the model is given data that is to
close to what is wanted to predict. Therefore the results may not prove that the model
is able to predict on unknown engines. To be able to evaluate the models performance
in predicting for unknown engines a second setup was made where again a leave-one-out
cross validation was done for every test in the heatload project, but here only tests from
different engines were included in the training data. With these setups it should be possi-
ble to see what is necessary to make good predictions using the machine learning models.
A point worth noting is that the heatload test-suite has a high number of tests meant
to challenge the physical model(the heatload project). The review on this dataset is
therefore also a review of the algorithms ability to predict on some of the more extreme
cases.
5.3.2
Results
To compare the performance of the heatload project and the machine learning model
boxplots of the generalization error for each engine were made. The generalization error
here calculated as the average of the error of each point along the height of the liner
to the second power. The boxplots for the hot and cold points with the first setup can
be seen in figure 5.5a and 5.5b and for the second setup in figure 5.6a and 5.6b. To
determine whether there is a significant difference between the errors of the heatload
project and the machine learning algorithm a t-test [Wik22h] was made for the achieved
errors. The results of the t-tests can be seen in table 5.1 and 5.2.
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.5: Boxplot of the generalization errors for each test in the heat load test suite
for first setup
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Results
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.6: Boxplot of the generalization errors for each test in the heat load test suite
for second setup
Looking at the results from the first setup the machine learning model is seen to
outperform the heatload project as all of its quantiles are ahead compared to the heatload
project and the median for the ML-predictions is even seen to be lower than the first
quantile of the heatload project. The significant difference is supported by the t-test
showing that the chance of the two groups of errors being from the same distribution is
1.7e-4% for the hot points and 1.77e-4% for the cold points. For both the hot and the
cold points a single generalization error for the machine learning algorithm is seen to
be the highest achieved error however beyond that the distribution is favorable for the
ML-algorithm.
When it comes to the performance of the second setup the performance of the ML-
algorithm declines. The median of the machine learning algorithm is still lower than for
the heatload project for both the hot points and the cold points, but a higher number of
large errors occur causing the means of the generalization errors for the ML-algorithm
to exceed the one for the heatload project. It is however worth noting that the t-tests
in this case only yields p-values of 27.5% and 18.3%.
Hot points
Heatload
ML setup 1
ML setup 2
Mean
174.72
112.29
191.46
Median
133.86
65.97
125.63
p-value
-
1.70e-6
0.275
Table 5.1: Results of t-test for hot points
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Heatload comparison
43
Cold points
Heatload
ML setup 1
ML setup 2
Mean
164.56
104.81
189.87
Median
114.44
49.36
108.59
p-value
-
1.77e-6
0.183
Table 5.2: Results of t-test for cold points
To investigate what causes this decrease in performance for the ML-algorithm when
changing setup the change in error for the prediction on each engine was plotted. The
results of this is shown in figure 5.7a and 5.7b.
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.7: Change in test error for each test
From these figures it can be seen that for most engines the change in setup only causes
an increase in maximum generalization error of around 200 however for two engines the
error is seen to exceed by significantly more. The engine that has the biggest change
in error is the MAN test-engine(4T50ME-X). This engine is not a standard production
engine as it is constantly being developed to test new concepts. It could therefore be
possible that the unique nature of the engine makes it hard to predict the behaviour of
the engine without having tests from it included in the data-set.
The engine with the second biggest change in generalization error is a 7G50ME-C9.5
engine. Worth noting for the included tests for this engine is that 12 out of the 16
tests are run with methane or ethane. As only a very little part of the training data-set
covers these fuels it could be that the exclusion of these tests has a big impact on the
ML-algorithms ability to predict temperatures for processes using it.
Something seen for both the engines is also that they have a high number of tests relative
to the other engines. It is therefore possible that the performance drop seen is due to
the high number of tests being excluded from the training data when predicting on tests
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Results
from it. To give an idea of the change in performance seen from the number of tests for
an engine the mean of the generalization error for each engine were plotted against the
number of tests. The results can be seen in figure 5.8a and 5.8b.
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.8: Change in test error vs. number of tests for each engine
From the figures it seems that there might be some correlation between the number
of tests and the drop in predictive performance for the second setup however due to the
limited number of engines with higher numbers of tests it is diﬀicult to say for certain.
To give an idea of the performance without the two hard-to-predict engines, it was
attempted to exclude them from the review process with the following boxplots and
t-tests being seen in figure 5.9a and 5.9b and table 5.3 and 5.4.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Heatload comparison
45
(a) Hot points
(b) Cold points
Figure 5.9: Boxplot of the generalization errors for each test in the heat load test suite
for second setup without 4T50ME-X and 7G50ME-C9.5
Hot points
Heatload
ML setup 2(without hard-to-predict engines)
Mean
191.76
154.71
Median
151.20
103.5
p-value
-
0.014
Table 5.3: Results of t-test for hot points without tests from the hard-to-predict engines
Cold points
Heatload
ML setup 2(without hard-to-predict engines)
Mean
181.75
155.06
Median
132.11
91.11
p-value
-
0.189
Table 5.4:
Results of t-test for cold points without tests from the hard-to-predict
engines
It can be seen that the exclusion of these two engines reduces the mean generalization
error of the machine learning algorithm significantly to the point where the t-test for
the hot points show a p-value of 1.4%. For the cold points a big decrease is also seen in
the mean error however the t-test gives a significantly higher p-value of 18.9% making
the difference in performance between the heatload project and the ML-algorithm less
significant.
To further understand the trends in the decrease in performance seen from setup 1
to setup 2 some of the tests seen to give the biggest errors were investigated further.
This was done by plotting the predictions for the liner of the different models versus the
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Results
measured values. The first test result to be investigated is for the hot point measurements
from a test from the test-engine 4T50ME-X. The comparison from the first setup can
be seen in figure 5.10a and for the second setup in figure 5.10b.
(a) Setup 1
(b) Setup 2
Figure 5.10: Comparison of performance on the hot points for the two setups on a test
from the test-engine
The results from the first setup can be seen to be extremely close to the real mea-
surements almost following the curve completely. For the second setup the performance
at the higher temperatures is a bit of compared to the real measurements but especially
at the low temperatures the prediction moves far from the real values. This trend is
seen to be present on all predictions for the tests of the test engine both for hot and
cold points.
The second test to investigate is for the hot points on a test from the 7G50ME-C9.5
engine. The results from the two setups can be seen in figure 5.11a and 5.11b.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Heatload comparison
47
(a) Setup 1
(b) Setup 2
Figure 5.11: Comparison of performance on the hot points for the two setups on a test
from the 7G50ME-C9.5 engine
Comparable to what was seen for the test from the test engine the performance of
the prediction from the first setup is very high as the predicted curve follows the real
curve almost completely. For the second setup a small deviation is seen for the points
close to the cover but as the distance to the cover increases so does the error.
As a final test comparison the results from the cold points from a test on a 6S80ME-
C9 engine were investigated. The results can be seen in figure 5.12a and 5.12b.
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Results
(a) Setup 1
(b) Setup 2
Figure 5.12: Comparison of performance on the cold points for the two setups on test
from a 6S80ME-C9 engine
Contrary to the two other hot point comparisons the performance seen for the ML-
algorithm is less optimal for the first setup. At the low temperatures the fit is quite
good though at the higher temperatures closer to the cover the ML-prediction begins
to predict a to high temperature. For the second setup this trend is exaggerated with
the prediction starting to deviate much more and at a much earlier point. This test is
known to be from a special case where a waste heat recovery(WHR) bypass1 was turned
off resulting in an unusually high scavenge pressure leading to extreme cooling of the
liner. The bad prediction in the first case is most likely due to the low number of tests
for this engine meaning the ML-algorithm had very small amounts of data to learn this
extreme trend from. As the other tests from the engine were removed in the second
setup the model was unable to predict the trend at all.
Looking at the results seen in the studies for the tests from the test-engine, the 7G50ME-
C9.5 engine and the 6S80ME-C9 engine a possible reason for the big change in gener-
alization error is seen. For the first two engines extremely good predictions are seen
in the first setup with the second setup showing less optimal results. A reason for the
big change might therefore be that given the high number of tests for each engines in
the first setup the ML-algorithm is able to make an extremely precise prediction of the
temperature. Then in the second setup where these many tests are not included the
prediction error increases substantially. For the third engine however the uniqueness of
the case and the small number of tests make for a less good prediction in the first case
while the second setup leads to the model being unable to predict the engines behaviour.
1In a WHR system the hot exhaust gas is used to generate power instead of powering the compressor.
Bypassing the WHR means more energy goes to the compressor
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Heatload comparison
49
To investigate this the errors for the different tests for the two setups were plotted against
the error of the heatload project. The results for the hot points can be seen in figure
5.13a and 5.13b and for the cold points in figure 5.14a and 5.14b.
(a) Setup 1
(b) Setup 2
Figure 5.13: Test error for each test for the hot points
(a) Setup 1
(b) Setup 2
Figure 5.14: Test error for each test for the cold points
The results seen seem to somewhat support the earlier described hypothesis as for
the 4T50ME-X engine and the 7G50ME-C9.5 engine extremely low test errors are seen
for the first setup. However for the second setup the error for both engines still seem
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Results
generally higher than for the other engines which supports the hypothesis that the
engines are diﬀicult to predict.
5.4
Results analysis
The results shown in the review of the performance on the different components showed
a very low error for most temperatures. It is however possible that the use of random
sample cross validation for the performance review might have shown a higher perfor-
mance than what can usually be realized. As the random samples were picked with no
bias, points from the same engine could have been a part of the training set and therefore
have led to the algorithm getting informantion to close to the points to predict. However
the fact that the KNN-algorithm didn’t perform better than it did in the model selection
might suggest otherwise as the KNN-algorithm relies solely on making predictions based
on the closest points and therefore would be assumed to perform better if the values of
the adjacent points were of such high value for the prediction. In any case for the future
studies a biased cross validation might be prefered more in line with what was done for
the heatload comparison to rule out any possible advantage.
From the results shown here it seems that generally the machine learning algorithms
have good potential for predicting the temperatures within the engine. Having enough
data from a previous run available allows the algorithm to predict the temperatures with
a precision that outperforms the heatload project even for highly specialized cases. If
no data is available for the specific engine the performance is reduced but depending
on uniqueness of the engine and/or the test the performance of the ML-algorithms may
still exceed that of the heatload project.
These results all seem to indicate that increasing the size and width of the data-set is
something that can increase the performance of the algorithm, but even at the current
level of data machine learning shows good qualities. Though the machine learning algo-
rithms show good qualities it seems from the data that the physical model still posses
an extra advantage when it comes to predicting the behaviour of very extreme cases.
This makes good sense thinking of the way the random forest algorithm is not able to
predict trends beyond the data it is trained on.
5.5
Summary
In this section the performance of the best algorithm(the random forest regressor) has
been reviewed. As a first part of the review the performance was estimated on the hot
and cold points of the four components, generally showing errors significantly bellow
5% for the best described temperature ranges. Following this the performance of the
algorithm was compared to the heatload project. Here it was seen that the machine
learning algorithm performs well on normal engines where for more unique cases a good
performance can be reached if enough data from similar cases is present.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Future work
In this section the future work of the project is discussed.
6.1
Further results analysis
The large increase in errors seen for fx. the test engine with the second setup of the
heatload comparison shows that there is room for improvement in the ML-algorithms
ability to predict on unknown engines. A further study of the results may be able to
reveal more about what causes some of these significant decreases in performance and
how much data is necessary to ensure an acceptable prediction.
6.2
Improving the data-set
For the data-set there is a number of things that could be optimized. The most straight
forward optimization is increasing the size of the data-set. As the power of the machine
learning algorithms increase with the amount of available data and the width/spread of
the data. Currently efforts are made to build an improved temperature database that
might help this.
A more in depth analysis of the parameters is something that might be worth pursuing
as well. For the current data-set some parameters were chosen due to their influence
on a process parameter that is known to have high influence on the temperature. An
example is the compression volume that together with pcpsc and pscav should give an
idea of the amount of air captured as more air captured increases the lambda-value
of the combustible mixture lowering the combustion temperature. In this example it
might be more beneficial to include the lambda value directly though this would require
additional computations as more information about the fuel would be necessary.
Additional parameters could also be worth including in the data-set. For the current
data-set there is no parameters describing the physical attributes of the components or
the component design as such parameters are not described well in the EPOS-database.
No data describing the fuel injection were given either though this is something that is
known to have an impact on the temperatures of the components.
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Future work
6.3
Work on the algorithms and the workflow
For the algorithms used in this project there is a number of features that could increase
the predictive performance. One of the first suggestions would be to try implementing
bagging for some of the other algorithms than the regression tree(random forest). Fur-
ther than bagging it could be of interest to implement boosting[Wik22e] to try increasing
the algorithms precision.
The algorithms used have some possible improvements that could be done.
As the
algorithms are mostly written in C++ with a Cython wrapper to python the training
and test data has to be sent from python to C++. Currently the data is copied from a
numpy array to a C++ array but better utilization of the numpy C-API[Num22b] might
be able to increase the speed and reduce the memory usage of the algorithms as copies
of the same values could be avoided.
Beyond improving the current algorithms it might be worth introducing new ones. A
possible algorithm to try and introduce is the neural network[Wik22a] that is signifi-
cantly different from the ones having been tested in this project. This is however an
algorithm that is very computationally expensive.
For the workflow an optimization that would be beneficial would be to change the
format of the CV-files and result-files from json to HDF5. The large size of the json-files
generated showed to have an influence on the performance and furthermore a change to
a binary format would reduce the required storage space.
6.4
Implementation in the R&D workflow
Before the algorithms made here can be used for R&D in the same way as the heatload
project some extra work is required. Foremost methods for saving the state of a trained
algorithm needs to be implemented for the algorithms. After this the algorithms need to
be changed from predicting the temperatures to predicting the heat-flux as this is what
is required as boundary condition for the FE-models. Furthermore a simple method for
using the algorithms need to be determined.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this project it has been attempted to use machine learning to predict temperatures
within a combustion engine. The reason for doing this study was to determine whether
it could be used in the R&D process to determine the boundary conditions of FE-Models
in addition or as a replacement of currently used physical models.
As the first step in the development of the machine learning workflow a data-set was con-
structed of data from a internal SQL-database at MAN Energy Solutions. The data-set
consisted mainly of physical parameters known to have an influence on the temperatures
of the process and the components. The distribution of the different parameters in the
data-set was investigated to understand the possible obstacles for making good predic-
tions using machine learning. The data-set showed to generally have a good distribution
for most parameters though with some lacking data when it comes to the use of EGR.
A PCA-analysis was conducted on the data-set to investigate the correlations of the pa-
rameters and which seems to have the highest influence on the measured temperatures.
From this it could be seen that the parameters that scale with the load of the engine
seemed to be the main influence on the temperature.
The machine learning algorithms constructed in this project were ridge regression, K-
nearest neighbours, regression tree and random forest. The models were contructed with
high performance in mind by writing them in a low-level language(C++) and enabling
multi-threading as much as possible. Furthermore a setup for runing both regular and
nested cross validation was build with the ability to run reviews of different folds as
array jobs. To determine the performance of these different models and which model
were to be used for prediction, parameter studies were conducted where the models were
evaluated using nested cross validation. The results of this showed the random forest
algorithm to be the model able to reach the best predictive performance.
The predictive performance of the random forest algorithm was then tested with a 10
fold cross validation on the 4 components. These tests generally showed a relative error
bellow 5% for most points though often with less precision at the highest and lowest
temperatures. To further evaluate the performance of the algorithm two test setups
were constructed where the performance of the machine learning algorithm was tested
against the currently used physical model, the heatload project, on the test-suite used
to validate it. The first setup used a simple leave-one-out cross validation where every
==PAGE:62==
54
7 Conclusion
test was picked out to be used for testing with the remaining tests being used as training
data. The second setup used a modified version where tests from the same engine as the
one to be tested against were left out of the training set.
For the first setup the performance of the machine learning algorithm was seen to be
better than the one for the heatload project as the mean generalization error was lower
and a t-test showed a p-value of lower than 1%. For the second setup the mean general-
ization error for the heatload project exceeded the one for the heatload project, however
with a lower median and a p-value above 18%. From a deeper investigation of the errors
it was seen that a small number of engines contributed heavily to the drop in perfor-
mance. The few engines were shown to both go from having very low errors in the first
setup to having errors higher than the mean for the second setup. Common for these
engines/tests were their unique nature. Further studies showed that the step increase
in error was most likely due to the high number of tests present for the engines making
the ML-algorithm able to understand the unique trends. Removal of these tests in the
second setup therefore resulted in a steep increase in the error of the prediction.
Based on the results of the different performance tests it seems machine learning has
the potential to make good predictions of the temperatures. At the current level it
seems good predictions can be made for the more regular engines while the more unique
ones require some prior knowledge of the engines behaviour. In the future this issue
can possibly be alleviated by increasing and improving the used data-set and by further
improving the used algorithms.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[22]
Cross validation. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-validation_
(statistics). 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[C22]
C++. C++. https://isocpp.org/. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Fou22a]
Free Software Foundation. GSL - GNU Scientific Library. https://www.
gnu.org/software/gsl/. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Fou22b]
Free Software Foundation. Vectors and matrices. https://www.gnu.org/
software/gsl/doc/html/vectors.html. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[fou22]
Python Software foundation. Python. https://www.python.org/. 2022
(accessed march 19, 2022).
[HDF22]
HDF5. HDF5. https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/. 2022 (ac-
cessed march 19, 2022).
[jso22]
json. Introducing JSON. https://www.json.org/json-en.html. 2022
(accessed march 19, 2022).
[Mic22]
Microsoft. microsoft SQL server. https://www.microsoft.com/da-dk/
sql-server/sql-server-2019. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Num22a]
NumPy. NumPy. https://numpy.org/. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Num22b]
NumPy. NumPy C-API. https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/c-
api/index.html. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[SBe22]
L.Dalcín S.Behnel R.Bradshaw. Cython. https://cython.org/. 2022 (ac-
cessed march 19, 2022).
[Sol18]
MAN Energy Solutions. Basic principles of ship propulsion. 2018.
[Sol22]
MAN Energy Solutions. Posters. https://www.man- es.com/marine/
products/planning-tools-and-downloads/posters#two-stroke. 2022
(accessed march 18, 2022).
[THe21]
M.Mørup T.Herlau M.N.Schmidt. Introduction to Machine Learning and
Data Mining(Lecture notes, Spring 2020, version 1.0). 2021.
[Wan22]
A. Wankhede. Understanding Hot And Cold Corrosion In Marine Engines.
https://www.marineinsight.com/tech/understanding- hot- cold-
corrosion-marine-engines/. 2021 (accessed march 19, 2022).
==PAGE:64==
56
Bibliography
[Wik22a]
Wikipedia. Artificial neural network. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Artificial_neural_network. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Wik22b]
Wikipedia. Bootstrap aggregating. https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki /
Bootstrap_aggregating. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Wik22c]
Wikipedia. Euclidean distance. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_
distance. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Wik22d]
Wikipedia. Global interpreter lock. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Global_interpreter_lock. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Wik22e]
Wikipedia. Gradient boosting. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradient_
boosting. 2022 (accessed march 18, 2022).
[Wik22f]
Wikipedia. k-nearest neighbors algorithm. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/K-nearest_neighbors_algorithm. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Wik22g]
Wikipedia. Ridge regression. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ridge_
regression. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
[Wik22h]
Wikipedia. Students t-test. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Student%
27s_t-test. 2022 (accessed march 19, 2022).
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:66==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
