==PAGE:1==
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­
based Rehabilitation
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
Master Thesis
1. April, 2022
By
Martin F. Gylstorff and Stefan Vucurevic
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Martin F. Gylstorff and Stefan Vucurevic, 2022
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
Martin F. Gylstorff ­ s165422
Signature
Date
Stefan Vucurevic ­ s163897
Signature
Date
Martin F. Gylstorff
Stefan Vucurevic
1. April 2022
1. April 2022
==PAGE:4==
Reading Guide
Attached to the following thesis is a collection of worksheets that supports and adds ad­
ditional information to different areas. These worksheets are referred to as ”worksheet
No.” throughout the paper and are referred to in chronological order. It is recommended
that the worksheets accompany the report. A collection of appendixes are also attached
to the thesis and are referred to as ”appendix No.”.
As the process was more iterative than linear, some decisions that were made at one
point in the process may be taken up at another point in the paper to ease the reading.
ii
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The following thesis examines a challenge defined in collaboration with The Technical
University of Denmark as part of the ReHyb project. The challenge revolves around the
development of an upper limp exoskeleton for at­home rehabilitation purposes of stroke
patients.
In this regard the overall research question were defined as follows:
How can we design a non­stigma solution that assists in neuro­rehabilitation of upper
limb functionality and is customizable to fit a spectrum of patients without compromising
the usability of the solution and promotes independent use?
This is further broken down into 4 research questions that investigates the preferences of
relevant stakeholders within the stroke field and the opportunities for a final concept that
promotes self use, can fit a spectrum of patients and has an appealing look and feeling.
To lay the foundation of knowledge that would be required for this design process, the top­
ics of stroke, basic upper limb anatomy, traditional as well as at­home rehabilitation and
recent research within the area of exoskeletons were covered through literature studies.
This gave the necessary insights in the requirements for a solution in scope for the project.
To build upon this knowledge, the system around the stroke survivor was firstly mapped
and thereafter demarcated in order to identify the different actors of interest. The area
of investigation was covered through four surveys, several interviews with professionals
and a field study at The Health & Rehab Scandinavia fair 2022.
Based on this data, the preferences of the users and professionals could be uncovered.
Through an iterative user centered conceptualization and based on the previous research,
combined with creative methods and design thinking it was possible to generate 7 con­
cepts. After evaluating these concepts, they were narrowed down to three where a ses­
sion of user testing and pretotyping further narrowed the concepts down to a final one.
The final solution was then refined on certain areas where the forearm actuation was pre­
totyped and it was observed that the actuation mechanism was effective in most of the
defined range of motion. Similar to some deducted research on the area, the forearm
actuation was lacking precision towards the far positions of the range of motion.
After three phases of respectively researching, conceptualizing and refining, the result be­
came a sleeve­based solution that shows promising elements and sets itself apart from
the conventional solutions on the market. Still, several areas require further investigation
before the concept can be deemed feasible and are thus subject of further work which
ultimately can contribute to the improvement of at­home rehabilitation and the quality of
life of stroke survivors.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First of all a big thanks to our project supervisor, John Paulin Hansen, who has shown
excellent support and guidance, both in the field research, the concept evaluation and in
general the scoping of the project and the creation of this report.
Thanks to DTU Management for providing facilities from which we could conveniently
work and use as it suited our process.
Thanks to DTU Skylab for providing a highly inspiring work environment and prototyping
workshops in which we could bring our concepts to life. In this regard we would also like
to thank the workshop staff who has been great sparring partners in the creation of ideas,
concepts and prototypes.
A special thanks to the rehab department at Roskilde Golf Club that gave is us a great
environment for the facilitation of our user test. And especially thanks to Hans Møllegaard
who gave us his opinions and preferences in the context of rehabilitation, being a stroke
survivor himself. Furthermore we would like to thank Mr. Møllegaard for inviting all of
the attendees to the user test which made it possible to have a wide spectrum of stroke
survivors present at the test ­ this provided great value to our project. Also a thanks to the
attendees at the workshop, the user test and the people who participated in our interviews
along the process
Last but not least a thanks to Jeremy Liely, Rikke Steen Krawcyk and Paulette Larsen for
their professional insights.
iv
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Added Value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
The Thesis Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Overview of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Background and Related Work
8
2.1
What is a Stroke?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Stroke Rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Motivation and Barriers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Anatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Exoskeletons and exosuits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
At­Home Rehabilitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.7
Soft Robotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.8
Summary of Background & Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Field Research
17
3.1
User Oriented Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Demarcating the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5
Function Prioritization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.6
Product specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.7
Functions tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.8
Summary of Field Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Conceptualization
30
4.1
Generating Ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3
Concept Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4
3 Concepts for Further Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.5
Pretotyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.6
User Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.7
User Segment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.8
The Final Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5
Refinement
57
5.1
Elbow Actuation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.2
Forearm Actuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.3
EMG integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.4
Data Gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
v
==PAGE:8==
5.5
Summary of Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6
Discussion
63
6.1
The Concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7
Conclusion
68
Bibliography
69
vi
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Stroke incidents have been at an increase globally ever since 1990 with studies showing
increases of first time stroke patients by 68% between 1990 and 2010 [1]. In Denmark
alone 12.000 individuals are suffering a stroke annually which corresponds to 33 people
every single day. This makes stroke the fourth most common cause of death in Denmark
and it is expected that every seventh Dane will experience one during a lifetime [2]. The
same picture is seen in the rest of Europe. In 2017, there were 1.12 million stroke incidents
in the European Union alone, 9.53 million stroke survivors, 0.46 million deaths, and 7.06
million disability­adjusted life years lost due to stroke [3]. Similarly, across the Atlantic, in
the United States during 2018 one in six deaths from cardiovascular disease was due to
stroke and more than 795.000 stroke cases are registered in the States annually, where
610.000 of these are first or new strokes. To put these numbers in perspective, every 40
seconds in the US, someone has a stroke and every 4 minutes, someone dies of one [4].
This thesis is carried out in collaboration with ReHyb, which is a programme within the
European Union that aims to develop an upper­limp exoskeleton for at­home rehabilitation
assistance, worksheet A1.
Studies show that people who survive a stroke almost always have less physical disability
by the end of the first three months post stroke. Furthermore, only 25 percent of patients
return to a level comparable to individuals who have not suffered a stroke [5]. Other re­
search points out that the stroke patient – regardless of age – rehabilitate and regain
abilities not only in the first three months after the stroke, but also through long­term reha­
bilitation [6]. Even then, 36 percent of stroke patients are disabled 5 years post stroke [7]
and when focusing on upper limbs, 65 percent of stroke patients are unable to incorporate
the affected hand into their everyday lives even after therapy is over [8].
This fact unveils a potential in later rehabilitation for patients that have suffered a stroke
­ so why not simply rehabilitate? After patients leave the hospital and have gone through
both an inpatient and outpatient phase of their rehabilitation processes, they start relying
on their own motivation, effort and environment. This phase is not as planned as the
early ones, and therefore also doesn’t have a specified time frame. This can result in long
processes where they require help to perform activities of daily living, which in most cases
are their close relatives.
Recent years have offered new possibilities regarding rehabilitation through the help of
technology and more specifically robotics. Currently, there are multiple solutions ranging
over the following general categories [9]:
• Exoskeletons, robotized prostheses that align their mechanical joints with human
limb ones for rehabilitation purposes. These usually operate in all three spacial
dimensions.
• End­effectors, robots that restrict the patient/machine interaction at the end­effector
level. This means that they are connected to the patient at a single point, usually
the forearm or the hand.
• Cable­driven, parallel manipulators that support and manipulate the patient’s arm
by different operating wires with independent motors.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
1
==PAGE:10==
According to Hjerneskadeforeningen the process of rehabilitation after a brain damage
can be divided into four sections where rehabilitation itself covers the middle two [10].
Here it is important for the survivor that enough information is provided and that they
have a sense of security when it comes to knowledge about their situation. According
to an English study on how much time is spent on different tasks with stroke survivors
from 2018, a team of researchers found that the exchanging of information is taking up
a significant amount of time and thereby directly affecting their receival of active therapy
[11].
An increasing focus to provide mobile and user friendly devices to support the rehabilita­
tion of stroke patients has been emerging [12]. This combined with the ever­increasing
growth and improvements in the different fields of medical technology, a promising area
of at­home rehabilitation through various exoskeletons and similar systems has been on
the rise. Still, studies show that not even half of these systems have been tested in real
at­home environments, which indicates a potentially great area of research to uncover
[13]. On the basis of this, the following thesis will dig deeper into the realm of at­home re­
habilitation and exoskeletons with the aim of designing a solution that can give a glimpse
of the future within at­home rehabilitation assistance and the challenges therein.
1.2
Background
In the following are basic concepts that will become relevant throughout the thesis pre­
sented. Some of the presented concepts will be explained in greater detail in a later
chapter, but it will be beneficial to have a basic understanding already early in the report.
1.2.1
At­home Rehabilitation
After suffering a stroke and in the case of physical impairments to follow, once they sta­
bilised from the incident, a stroke patient finds themselves in a rehabilitation clinic where
the focus is to re­establish core functionalities. As every stroke is unique, and one’s mo­
tivation may not align with the scheduled times, the beneficial outcome of these sessions
may vary. In recent years, research has tried to open the way of having the rehabilitation
done at­home, which would allow the stroke survivor to make their rehabilitation exercises
line up in a more effective manner in regards to their motivation, brain fatigue, time etc.
To keep the user motivated, the topic of virtual reality has been taken up as well as ex­
oskeletons for rehabilitational purposes. This would instead of taking rehabilitation back
home, allow the user to be the facilitator themselves.
1.2.2
Exoskeletons
In a traditional sense, an exoskeleton is an externally applicable structure with the pur­
pose of assisting or completely replacing the movement of a biological joint.
In this area of technology there are two main categories, namely the area of rigid ex­
oskeletons and the area of soft ones.
Rigid exoskeletons are as the name implies a structure external of the body that consists
of harder elements and mechanical actuation. Soft exoskeletons is an overarching term
that ranges a large span of robotics, including entirely soft, monolithic, garment­like wear­
ables made from soft actuators, fabric and other compliant materials. Some also include
minimal or reduced amount of rigid components as mounting points for the soft actuators
[14]. According to the Wearable Robotics Association [15] and Exoskeleton Report (ExR)
[16] soft robotics can be simplified and categorised into four main sections: military, in­
dustrial, consumer and medical. In this paper the focus will be on a mixture of medical
and consumer with the aim of restoring a more ”natural” movement of the bio­mechanical
behavior.
2
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:11==
1.2.3
Usability
Usability in its essence is a quality attribute that assesses how simple and easy a user
interface is to use and is defined by five quality components [17]. Throughout the thesis,
this term will be a defining parameter for the solutions to come, and whenever used it
refers to the definition below.
• Learnability: how easy is it for the user to accomplish a simple task first time they
encounter the design?
• Efficiency: once familiar with the design, how quickly can the tasks be performed?
• Memorability: given a user returns to the design after a period of not using it, how
easy is it to reestablish proficiency?
• Errors: how often does the user make errors, how severe are they and how easy is
it to recover from these?
• Satisfaction: how pleasant is the use of the design?
There are different quality attributes that can be linked to usability as well with the most
important being utility. This refers to the functionality of the design and asks whether the
design does what the user needs it to do. A design is first deemed useful when it both
has the aspect of usability and the aspect of utility [17].
1.3
Added Value
By exploring the needs and wishes from the potential users of an exoskeleton in a future
rehabilitation environment, we can design a concept for an exoskeleton that can enhance
the quality of at­home rehabilitation by giving the patient the freedom to exercise whenever
it suits them, by being able to put on and operate the solution independently.This thesis
focuses on the section from the shoulder to the wrist, meaning that motorically it includes
the flexion and extension of the elbow and the supination and pronation of the forearm.
This can ultimately open a new world of possibilities in stroke rehabilitation and improve
the recovery of stroke patients by making rehabilitation more accessible.
While the exoskeleton designed in this thesis project is not a finished product ready to
be brought to the market, but rather a tangible concept, it can act as a foundation for the
investigations of other researchers within the stroke rehabilitation field as well as for the
design of user friendly and more at­home exoskeletons in the future.
1.4
The Thesis Project
The thesis in its core is a design project and is therefore centered around the double
diamond, made by the British Design Council in 2005 [18] and based on the work of Bela
H. Banathy about divergent and convergent thinking in 1996 [19]. The double diamond
visualises the different divergent and convergent thinking modes of a designer and further
describes them as the 4 phases: Discover, Define, Develop and Deliver.
1.4.1
The Triple Diamond
To create a model that visualises the process of this specific design project, as the process
is composed of 3 overall phases; Research, Conceptualization and Refinement, we re­
vised the double diamond to reflect this particular project. This reflects the process in more
detail, shown in figure 1.1, where the model has been extended ­ or rather zoomed into the
second diamond. In practice the research phase focuses on exploring the problem space
and the user needs. The conceptualization phase focuses on generating ideas, creating
concepts and choosing the most promising one. And the refinement phase, shown as
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
3
==PAGE:12==
a third diamond, focuses on the further development of some of the crucial elements of
the final concept. The following sections are an overview of the design process for this
specific project, in the context of the double diamond.
Figure 1.1: A visualisation of the design process and its 3 phases along with activities
Research
The first half of the first diamond is the divergent discovery phase, where the problem
space is explored to gain knowledge on sub problems to the overall problem at hand, as
well as specific user needs and pains. This exploration was done by conducting a series
of interviews with three different stroke survivors, two physiotherapists and a material
scientist. Additionally 2 online surveys were made, one for stroke survivors and one for
next of kin, and finally to create a foundation for functionality prioritisation interviews where
conducted based on the Kano­model, on the Scandinavian Health and Rehab Fare 2021.
To converge the process and thereby define a more narrow focus for the project, the take­
aways from the above mentioned actions where compiled in a product specification that
4
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:13==
defines the scope and qualification of the future concepts and thus made it possible to
create a function tree to establish an tangible understanding of the desired features.
Conceptualization
The conceptualization phase is about generating ideas, synthesising concepts, testing
and finally choosing the most promising concept. The divergent exploration of the so­
lution space was done by generating ideas through 4 different sources being creative
ideation within the design team, desktop research, reverse engineering and a workshop
involving different types of engineering students. The ideas from these sources where
then gathered in a morphology in different categories corresponding to the central func­
tionalities for the solution, namely donning and doffing, fastening, elbow actuation and
wrist actuation. 8 different concepts where then synthesised from the morphology and
where then evaluated in a PUGH matrix, based on the design team’s academic knowl­
edge, and 3 top concepts where chosen, one being rigid mechanical concept, one being
soft pneumatic concept and one being a hybrid. The 3 concepts where then pretotyped
and visualised through CAD modelling and brought to a user test with a group of stroke
patients that has organized a rehab club for golf players at Roskilde Golf Club [20], where
the pneumatic concept was chosen as the most promising one by the attendees.
Refinement
The last part of the process focused on the refinement of the chosen concept. The most
crucial elements of the concept were identified and refined through research and rapid
prototyping using CAD, 3D­printing and laser cutting. Furthermore, tests had to be con­
ducted to answer more specific specifications of the concept and thus make it more tan­
gible. The areas for refinement where the following: forearm actuation, elbow actuation
and compressor size along with the integration of EMG sensors.
1.4.2
Designing During a Pandemic
Special for this thesis and most others that have been written throughout the years of
2020 to 2022, is that they have been massively impacted by the at that time spreading
COVID­19 pandemic. This meant that parts of the project had to be done online, and
even though this was sub optimal, a series of initiatives were introduced to accommodate
this challenge.. By introducing newer theory on online work, it was possible to effectivize
the process.
According to C. Gibson and S. Cohen there are three enabling conditions when talking on­
line work. These are shared understanding, integration and mutual trust [21]. From these
three, having to work online would affect the shared understanding and integration. This
is due to the fact that working physically and having to interact with each other creates
a shared common knowledge and thereby understanding. Furthermore, the integration
comes naturally as everybody usually is involved when working on something physically
together.
So in order to effectivize our work from home, it was necessary to guarantee the shared
understanding and the integration of both. M. Gonçalves et al. argue that tangible work
and structure are powerful tools to activate engineers as this makes them more productive
[22]. This also means that the lack of physical stimuli can affect not only the productivity
but also the shared understanding of what we are and should be working on, which easily
becomes the case when working from home. Yoshinaka refers to these type of physi­
cal stimuli as boundary objects [23]. He argues that in any given conversation having a
physical stimuli that is relevant to the conversation can drive it forward and improve the
common understanding. In everyday work as a design engineer, post it notes, mock­ups
and prototypes take on this role as the conversational bridge between people.
We were able to create a shared understanding by creating online workshops that were
planned to the minute. By doing this, there was at no point any confusion as to what we
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
5
==PAGE:14==
were doing and thereby had a common understanding of where we were heading. By
using online tools where you can draw on a shared canvas like Miro, it was possible to
share ideas and edit each others as well and have therefore introduced boundary objects
in our work.
1.5
Research Questions
This thesis addresses the development of an upper­limb exoskeleton that focuses on
solving several of the challenges regarding at­home rehabilitation by using its own novel
mounting and actuation capabilities, with the purpose of assisting the users motions in
the rehabilitation of neuromechanical functions. More specifically, this project will explore
the different aspects of designing the physical exoskeleton from a design engineering
perspective and go in depth with aspects that are deemed to have the strongest potential
in the given time frame. Furthermore, through iterative prototyping and user involvement
the findings will be integrated into a more tangible concept that can be subject for further
development.
This leads to 3 areas of interest in the early stages of the project:
• User wishes and preferences.
• Aesthetics and non­stigma design.
• Usability in the process of mounting and dismounting the device.
Therefore, the overall scope for the project may be defined as:
“How can we design a non­stigma solution that assists in neuro rehabilitation of upper
limb functionality and is customizable to fit a spectrum of patients without compromising
the usability of the solution and promotes independent use?”
This is further split into a series of research questions presented in the following.
To develop a great solution it is important to know what matters to the user, and other
relevant stakeholders, in the context of rehabilitation and in general recovering from a
stroke. Thereby we formulate research question 1 as:
“What preferences do stroke patients and other relevant stakeholders have in relation to
a solution that assists in neuro rehabilitation of upper limb functionality?”
To really open up for new opportunities in at­home rehabilitation it is crucial that the patient
can put on and operate the solution independently. If assistance from others is needed the
possibilities for doing rehabilitation exercises whenever the patient wishes to is still limited.
This gets further complicated by the fact that a significant number of stroke survivors suffer
from hemiplegia and therefore are paralyzed or have impaired mobility in the arm that the
solution is supposed to be worn on. Thereby we formulate research question 2 as:
“How can we design an exoskeleton that promotes self use, even in cases of
hemiplegia?”
Everyone is different. Both in regards to height and width but also in regards to the severity
and how the sequalaes from the stroke are expressed. Therefore the solution needs some
level of adaptability to fit a spectrum of different users. Thereby we formulate research
question 3 as:
“How can we design an adaptable solution that can fit a spectrum of stroke patients?”
6
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:15==
The look and feeling of a solution greatly impacts the users motivation to use it according
to the aesthetic usability effect [24]. Therefore it is important that the solution appeals to
the user, or at least that the user does not have a negative perception of the solutions
appearance. It is therefore important to research how we can accommodate the wishes
of the users regarding appearance. Thereby we formulate research question 4:
“How can we promote an appealing look and feeling of the solution?”
1.6
Overview of the Thesis
Below is an overview of the different chapters that this thesis consists of.
Chapter 2 ­ Background and Related Work: This chapter introduces the background con­
cepts of the thesis starting from what a stroke is and how patients recover from it through
rehabilitation. It further examines the anatomy of the human upper body to establish an
understanding of the optimal placements of EMG sensors. Lastly, the chapter digs into
the recent requirements and challenges of exoskeletons and takes a look at the research
that has been done in the area of soft robotics.
Chapter 3 ­ Field Research: This chapter is a documentation of the field research where
knowledge is sought out from stroke patients and various professionals within the field,
through interviews and questionnaires. Furthermore, desktop research is utilized to gain
a fundamental understanding within the relevant fields of knowledge.
Chapter 4 ­ Conceptualization:This chapter documents the different initiatives for gener­
ating ideas, as well as the concept synthesis, preliminary concept evaluation, user tests
and finally the choice of a final concept for further work.
Chapter 5 ­ Refinement: This chapter dives into the refinement of the final concept, fo­
cusing on various areas that needs to be investigated to asses the viability of the concept.
Chapter 6 ­ Discussion: This chapter reflects upon the feasibility of the proposed concept,
the boundaries of the obtained knowledge and proposes a series of next steps if the
concept was to be developed further. Additionally, potential pitfalls in the process and
methodology are discussed.
This chapter interprets the results of the design process and the tests within, considers
the research questions and reflects upon various challenges within the process.
Chapter 7 ­ Conclusion: This chapter is a conclusion upon the findings of the project.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
7
==PAGE:16==
2
Background and Related Work
The following section will dig into the background material and related work in regards to
this project. The section will start off by giving a brief introduction to what stroke is and
how it can affect the human body both physically and mentally. Thereafter, an introduction
to the modern rehabilitation system will be given followed by what research says about
motivational factors and barriers in said rehabilitation. Furthermore, parts of the human
anatomy will be examined in relation to sensor placement before taking a look at the
solutions within the last decade and what challenges and requirements there has been.
Lastly, the chapter will introduce the phenomenon of at­home rehabilitation with focus on
the elements that research deems most relevant, before finishing off with a insight into
soft robotics and its appliance within the field of rehabilitation.
2.1
What is a Stroke?
There are mainly two different types of stroke: blockage and bleed (worksheet A2) [25]. All
depending on the type of stroke, the placement and the size the effects and their severity
may differ, ranging from mild cognitive impairments to half­sided paralysis (worksheet A3)
[26]. Common for all is some variation of movement and/or coordination disability which
is mainly the scope of this project. Still, it is possible to imagine that side effects such as
tiredness, memory problems and general cognitive impairments are of relevance when
designing a tangible solution, This will therefore also be explored through interviews later
in the report.
2.2
Stroke Rehabilitation
No stroke is the same and therefore the rehabilitation process also varies from each in­
dividual patient. Nevertheless, each patient goes through roughly the same steps in the
rehabilitation but at different pace and focus in the exercises depending on how fast the
specific patient recovers and what consequences they are struggling with. A sequential
analysis is illustrated on fig. 2.1 of a rehabilitation process described by Johns Hopkins
Medicine (worksheet A4) [27].
In case of a stroke, the emergency department is contacted who then try to identify the
situation and transports the patient to the hospital for urgent treatment. Here the type
of stroke is determined and in case of a blood clot, the patient will receive clot bursting
medicine. 24 hours after the stroke the rehabilitation process starts and the patient will
receive therapy 6 times a day for 5­7 days staying at the hospital, depending on the sever­
ity of the stroke. At this point the patient will start doing ”activities of daily living”­related
exercises and the health care team around the hospital will prepare a discharge plan for
the patient to return to his/her home. At this point in the process, the rehabilitation is
usually split between at home exercises and more extensive exercises at a dedicated
clinic. Along this process, measures are taken to avoid a fall back, as 23 % of people
who suffered from a stroke, experiences another one [28]. If the patient still experiences
sequelaes after 3 months, which is the period in which the patient usually experiences the
most significant rate of improvement [27],
alternative treatments will be sought out. From 3­6 months after the stroke incident, the
patient will transfer to a maintenance phase, where the aim is to maintain regained func­
tionalities with less focus on actual improvement.
8
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: Example of a rehabilitation process from stroke incident to full or partly recov­
ery [27]
2.3
Motivation and Barriers
Within rehabilitation it is important to distinguish between the different factors that are into
play and can either make or break ones progress. On one hand ­ as described in the intro­
duction ­ the time is already limited which adds a factor of pressure onto the individual to
get as much as possible out of a rehabilitation session. Still, it is not a given that a patient
has the necessary motivation on that particular day, which can cause a serious misalign­
ment in the patients motivation and the available time slot. In 2000 a qualitative study on
22 patients who had suffered a stroke was made[29]; Fourteen with high motivation and
eight with low motivation to establish which factors played an important role in setting up a
motivational mindset. The study showed that all patients generally thought rehabilitation
is an important part of their recovery with the high motivation individuals placing it as the
most important factor in ones process.
A few high motivated patients had an emphasis on the importance of knowing how to
correctly perform the different rehabilitation exercises. In contrast, only low motivation
patients expressed that they did not understand the nature of the rehabilitation exercises
and how certain exercises would relate to their personal goals.
Another important factor of motivation was the ability to regain independence. Many high
motivation individuals were worried that they would be dependent on others once they left
the hospital and therefore focused on performing the rehabilitation exercises. Some low
motivation patients also expressed the importance of independence but only few linked
this goal to progress in rehabilitation itself.
Another more recent study from 2021 also emphasised on the independent training as be­
ing a significant motivation [30]. This was specially true for patients of age while factors
related to physical function and its disability was affecting middle­aged patients. Common
for both was the motivation gained through tailored rehabilitation.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
9
==PAGE:18==
2.4
Anatomy
As an exoskeleton practically is an extension of the body, it is important to gain a basic
understanding of how the human body actually works.
The elbow flexion and extension is achieved respectively through the biceps and the tri­
ceps. The normal range of the elbow joint from full extension to full flexion is 0 degrees to
about 140 degrees but for most activities you need a range of 30 degrees to 130 degrees
[31].
As for the forearm, having the hand at an neutral position with the thumb pointing upwards,
the natural movement is about 85­90 degrees clockwise and counter clockwise using the
muscles in the forearm and biceps [32]. This is important to note, as it determines which
muscles activate the desired movement and thus which placements would be relevant for
potential electromyography (EMG). On figure 2.2 are the different optimal placements for
EMG electrodes shown. 1­2­3 for the anterior, lateral and posterior deltoids, 4­5 for the
long and lateral triceps brachii, 6 for the biceps, 7­8­9 for the brachioradialis, flexor capri
radialis and ulnaris respectively and 10 for the extensor digitorum [33]
Figure 2.2: Surface EMG electrodes placement [33]
2.5
Exoskeletons and exosuits
Out of the previously mentioned possibilities in the field of rehabilitation ­ being exoskele­
tons, end­effectors and cable­driven manipulators ­ most potential is seen in the field of
exoskeletons and exosuits, where exosuits refers to the field of skin­close soft exoskele­
tons.
This is due to their natural benefit of mobility which enables the user to use the product
independent of any fixed setting. This also makes sense in relation to the expressed de­
sire for independence as briefly touched upon in the section on motivation and barriers.
A recent study published in July 2021 [34] investigated the challenges of different types
of exoskeletons during the last decade. Based on an investigation that covered the ex­
oskeletons for both upper and lower body and more specifically the shoulder, elbow, wrist,
hand, hip, knee and ankle, they were able to list several challenges and requirements that
were relevant during the last decade ­ this list consists of the following:
10
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:19==
• Power to weight ratio
• Safety
• Control
• Portability
• Softness
• Comfort
• Durability
• Accessibility
• Bidirectionality
• Transmission
• Stability
• Maneuverability
• Adaptability
• Modularity
• Actuators
• Fixation
• Alignment
• Costs
Not all factors will be in scope for this project as it would not only require a broader knowl­
edge but also a substantial amount of time, and are therefore not explored in detail. This
doesn’t mean they won’t be included or at least considered at later stages, but only that
they are not in focus. These include factors as safety, bidirectionality, transmission, sta­
bility, modularity.
Below are several factors detailed which are of relevance for this project and that may
require a brief explanation for the given context. These will all be taken into consideration
throughout the thesis.
2.5.1
Power to weight ratio
The necessary energy required to assist a join in the human body is usually very high.
This together with the desire to create low weight solutions creates a demand for a high
power to weight ratio. In recent years there has been a surge in pneumatic solutions that
have the disadvantage of needing a compressor to actuate the pneumatics, but also the
advantage of being able to put the compressor externally and place on ground or table.
This would in turn reduce the amount of weight that the user himself has to carry.
An example of this is a soft robotic orthosis for wrist rehabilitation that was made in 2015
by a group of researchers. The complete weight of this solution is 2.26kg but only 0.22kg
of that weight actually has to be worn [35]. In comparison, another group of researchers
designed an electric robotic glove in 2020 that had a portable weight of 0.45kg which
is approximately double the pneumatic [36] ­ given that the pneumatic solution isn’t as
portable.
2.5.2
Control
To assist the movements of the user, the solution must be able to know when to help
and when not to. In recent years many different methods have been applied such as
hydraulic pressure sensors, resistive flexors, position sensors, EMG etc. [34] This part of
the project will be black­boxed [37] as most work up until this point in the ReHyb project
has been based on EMG and the project scope does not include the method of monitoring
but rather the dynamics that are happening after the solution has detected an input.
2.5.3
Portability
For a user to use the solution in an at­home environment, the solution will have to be
portable enough for the user to have it at home. Portability will also set other demands
to the solution such as ease of equipping and removing and the overall maneuverability
and compatibility of said solution.
2.5.4
Softness
Over the last 10 years, research within the field of robots has gravitated towards soft
robotics. To understand this, one must look at the degrees of freedom in human joints.
Each joint is flexible in one rotary or translational direction which a robot ­ or in this case
exoskeleton ­ must accommodate. When the number of joints becomes large, the rigid
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
11
==PAGE:20==
exoskeletons become hyper redundant [38]. This is in direct contrast to the soft robotics
that have the potential of infinite degrees of freedom and thus a more natural pattern of
movement.
2.5.5
Comfort
In order for at user to even have the desire to use a solution, they must feel comfortable
using it. In this context, the word comfort refers to the overall fit and feel of the solution
once it is on a user. This is therefore also connected to the maneuverability of the solution.
2.6
At­Home Rehabilitation
The subject of at­home rehabilitation is not a new area of research and has been under
the scope for several years now. Back in 2018 Tamayo­Serrano et al. made an overview
of the gamified stroke rehabilitation systems that were published between 2009 and 2017
[13]. To limit the otherwise overly extensive research, they set up eight criteria for the
study to be relevant ­ all of which are also relevant for this project.
• The work must focus on stroke rehabilitation
• It has to include a gamified solution
• It should present the important features implemented in the gamified solution
• The developed system must be intended for in­home use
• The developed solution must have been tested
• The use of the developed system must be done without assistance
• The work must specify the hardware used
• The work must have been cited at least once on the used database
In a total of 1090 articles that were identified, 28 unique works matched the criteria and
were analyzed. Throughout the research 20 features were identified as presented in figure
2.3.
Figure 2.3: Identified features in research [13]
Most of these features are out of scope as they are directly connected to the software of
the solution. The features that are deemed relevant to take a closer look at for this project
are At­Home Use, Cost, Type of Rehabilitation, Data Analysis and Simple interaction
devices/quality of interaction.
12
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:21==
2.6.1
At­Home Use
Originally the question about at­home use has been a question about whether or not
the rehabilitation can be taken home ­ meaning it has been a simple yes/no question.
And even though one of the criteria for the articles was at­home rehabilitation, only 43%
of the works were actually tested in an at­home environment, while the rest have been
tested only in a laboratory or at the hospital. This is crucial as the environment itself
may introduce some challenges that otherwise would have gone undetected. Something
that was not covered by this work was the question of whether the at­home rehabilitation
was independent or not as there is a great difference between rehabilitating at home by
yourself and taking your clinique back home.
2.6.2
Cost
An obstacle to overcome in regards to at­home rehabilitation is the economical viability
compared to traditional at­hospital therapy. It is simply a question of difference in wal­
let sizes and therefore possibilities when it comes to equipment. Therefore, the overall
consensus is that such a solution would need to be at a low cost. Hung et al. state that
therapists report gamified solutions at hospitals normally are in the range of $10,000 USD
to $20,000 USD [Hung]. Same study shows that patients are willing to pay from $300
USD to $1,500 USD. It would therefore be of interest to explore the preferences of the
end users in regards to pricing as the price of the solution reflects the possibilities within
material choice, features etc.
2.6.3
Type of rehabilitation
A typical distinction of the upper body movement is the distinction between gross move­
ments and fine motor ones. The overall goal of the ReHyb project is to cover both at some
point but the focus of this project are the gross ones only for the elbow and forearm as
explained in the anatomy section earlier.
2.6.4
Data analysis
In order to ensure that the user performs their rehabilitation exercises correctly, data will
have to be collected on their movements. Traditionally, it is the therapist who monitors
the patient’s performance using some of the standard indices like the Barthel scale and
Frenchay (worksheet A5 and A6)[39][40]. This implies that during at­home rehabilitation
there is no one to observe the user in their exercises. This would create a safety con­
cern as the solution suddenly has to take on some of the responsibilities of a therapist.
Physically this would manifest itself as sensors that would have to be placed strategically
around the solution to allow for data collection.
This particular project will not investigate different means to achieve this, but rather ex­
amine how the concept can allow for data collection through EMG sensors.
2.6.5
Simple interaction devices/quality of interaction
The human body is used to certain movements more than others which is something that
designers have been incorporating in their products during the last decade. This is what
we call Natural User Interfaces (NUI)[41]. A well known example of this is how you rotate
images on an iPad by placing two fingers and rotating them. A worse example is the
modern keyboard as you are “clawing” your wrists which is not a natural position ­ which
is also why you can have wrist rests now. As it can be easy for people to get tired after
a stroke and become overwhelmed, it can become particularly important to have such
things in mind.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
13
==PAGE:22==
2.7
Soft Robotics
With the desire to create safe solutions to assist the daily living of elderly and disabled
people, several areas of innovations have been utilized. One of these recent areas is
the area of soft robotics or more specifically for this section ­ artificial muscles through
pneumatics.
Pneumatic artificial muscles go back as early as the 1950s where they were developed
under the name of McKibben muscles [42]. McKibben muscles are artificial muscles that
are either contractile or extensional in nature. By filling a pneumatic bladder, surrounded
by a woven shell, the devices are operated by pressurized air ­ see figure 2.4. The re­
traction strength of the muscle is limited to the sum of the individuals fibers strength in the
woven shell. The exertion distance depends on the tightness of the weave itself meaning
that a loose weave allows for a greater bulge.
Figure 2.4: Illustration of how McKibben muscles work [43]
What differentiates this pneumatic motion from a conventional actuator is the build com­
position. A conventional actuator is made of a rigid material and has no flexibility in any
other direction than the axis of the actuator itself. In contrast to this, a soft actuator has
a passive compliance in all direction, as the medium itself is not rigid. N. W Bartlett et
al. show how a setup made with pneumatic artificial muscles (PAM) can allow for wrist
supination and pronation by contracting the muscles pairwise and thereby achieving the
desired motion [35].
In their work from 2005 T. Noritsugu shows that by introducing a rigid element into a PAM,
the muscle can be manipulated to bend in different directions due to the sudden rigidity
[44]. This allows for solutions like the one presented by B. W. K. Ang and C. H. Yeow in
their 2020 paper on the design and modeling of a high force actuator for assisted elbow
flexion [45]. Here they utilize such a mechanism to bend the elbow and thereby assist the
user in doing their elbow motions. P. H. Nguyen and W. Zhang looked into the possibilities
of PAM and developed a list of all the different motions you can achieve with alternative
modifications and setups which are shown on figure 2.6 [46].
14
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Different Modifications and Setups Using Pneumatics [46]
G. Alici looked into existing solutions regarding both pneumatics and electronics in the
field of exoskeletons and listed pros and cons for the different solutions. An overview of
the pros and cons can be found in worksheet A7 [47]. A different way of approaching
pneumatic was done by a team of researchers back in 2019 as they braided the PAM
into a mesh which would allow for higher contraction, lower profile and a wider range of
bending mechanisms as seen on figure [48] .
Figure 2.6: Different configurations of active textile [48]
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
15
==PAGE:24==
2.8
Summary of Background & Related Work
Based on the research above, several take­aways that will be important throughout the
project can be summarized.
The research showed that while physical impairment as a result of a stroke is the essence
of this project, the cognitive consequences are not to be neglected. As a stroke survivor,
it may be difficult to maintain focus for an extended period of time and doing so may lead
to mental fatigue. This is something which has to be accommodated for in later surveys
and interviews in order to get most value.
In regard to stroke rehabilitation, it was found that you could put most stroke survivors into
two categories ­ high and low motivation individuals. Studies showed that both groups
were motivated by the thought of independence in the long run, but only low motivation
individuals had trouble seeing how some of the rehabilitational exercises would lead to
their personal goals of independence. It is therefore of interest to see if the rehabilitation
process can be made more independent as this is both the driving motivation but also the
end goal, meaning it should be easier to visualize if you are already doing it.
On the solution side of things, the desired ranges of motion for the future concept were
defined as the range of 30 to 130 degrees for elbow extension and flexion, as well as
85­90 degrees in both supination and pronation of the forearm. Also, proposed EMG
placements were covered.
Furthermore, based on the literature, an overview of the most important features within
the field of exoskeletons has been made. As the scope and time frame of this project
won’t allow for the inclusion of all these features, only the most crucial ones will be taken
into account going forward ­ being power to weight ratio, control, portability, softness and
comfort. Some of the same aspects were discovered when looking into the research on
rehabilitation at­home with the addition of cost.
Lastly, research shows that the field of exoskeletons is moving towards soft robotics as
they contribute to a flexible solution due to their passive compliance. Given the features
that were covered as well, it will be of special interest to uncover the area of soft robotics
going forward.
16
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:25==
3
Field Research
The following section of this thesis will look into the field research that has been done
uniquely for this project. Firstly, this chapter will introduce the concept of user oriented
design and how it applies to a project like this. After that, it will place the project into
an actor and investigate which actors are relevant for the project scope, to thereafter
demarcate the system and gather a deeper insight in the different areas of the project.
This will create the base for the surveys that will be introduced and the interviews that
will be conducted and gone through. Lastly, this chapter will take a look at the Health
Rehab Scandinavia fair 2021 where the project was represented and useful user data
was gathered. The chapter finishes off by collecting the data and translating the answers
and preferences of users into requirements and criteria in a product specification and
establish the desired functions to an eligible solution in a function tree.
3.1
User Oriented Design
A product needs a user but a user does not necessarily need a product. It is therefore the
design engineers job to ensure that the user feels the need for the product as the value it
brings it too great to decline.
A designers perception of a product may be completely different than the user’s and thus
result in a misalignment in both interest and end result. Additionally, the consumer’s per­
ception of a product is often unknown and often can’t be described precisely. To meet
the consumer’s needs from a design perspective, the designer has to link the physical
elements of the product to the consumer’s preferences in order to help them design the
desired solution [49]. A design tool that will be used later in this section in order to create a
metaphorical bridge between the perceptions of the designer and the users are boundary
objects. Boundary objects are physical objects that can both spark and add to a conver­
sation about a given topic by introducing a tangible object from which the conversation
can take form [23]. In the world of design engineering mock­ups and prototypes often take
up the role of boundary objects as the user doesn’t have to imagine the whole product
anew but instead has something to go from. This will bring the perceptions closer to each
other and thereby increase the chances of developing the right product for the right user.
As mentioned, often the user themselves don’t know how to express their needs, which
is why it is crucial to take in the user’s environment in consideration as well and is why
the thesis will focus on involving the user and their environment as much as possible
throughout the process.
3.2
Demarcating the System
To include the environment in the product considerations, firstly it has to be very specific
whose environment you are investigating at all. This thesis focuses on adult stroke sur­
vivors who have lost a significant part of their motor skills in their upper body and might
suffer from hemiplegia. Having defined this as our target user, it is important to investigate
and gain an overview of the system that the development is taking place in. Knirknel, Viss­
ing and Langvad investigates the actor network and interactions around a stroke patient
and this thesis builds on these insights in the system demarcation presented on figure 3.1,
see also worksheet A8.1 and A8.2 [6][50]. Figure 3.1 illustrates the interactions between
stakeholders and further scopes the project by dividing the system into several areas.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.1: Proposed demarcation of the system around a stroke patient
18
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:27==
The system is demarcated into the following areas:
• Surrounding system
• Area of intervention, where actors will experience a change if the solution is intro­
duced
• Area of effect, which is the actors that are affected by the introduction of the solution
• Area of investigation, which is the actors that are considered relevant in the devel­
opment of the solution
• Area of solution, which is the area where the solution applies directly to.
The area of investigation covers the actors that would be relevant to gather knowledge
from. Therefore, this area will work as a guide line for the scope of our field research
going forward and includes hospitals, rehabilitation centres, general practices, support
systems, at home help, main caregivers, artifacts help aids, and the actual patients.
3.3
Survey
3.3.1
Survey Design
To get a holistic view of the experiences, wishes and preferences of the patients and
main caregivers, as scoped in the area of investigation in the demarcated system, both
quantitative and qualitative studies were conducted. The quantitative study was done
through online surveys across various Facebook groups of relevance (worksheet XX). 4
surveys were made in total to accommodate both caretakers and stroke survivors both
internationally and domestically (appendices A1.1­A1.4).
As mentioned in the chapter ”What is a stroke?”, stroke survivors often not only suffer from
physical impairment but also cognitive limitations. These limitations manifest themselves
as increased tiredness and difficulty in maintaining focus, which may affect the results of
a survey if these factors are not taken into account. This is especially important as the
survey is online and thus leaves the user alone in their interpretation of the questions.
Therefore, a lot of focus went into generating a survey that would be easy and quick to
get through and didn’t require the user to formulate long answers.
To make the survey comprehensible in a way that the common stroke survivor would be
able to complete in a meaningful manner, the design of the survey was split into 2 parts,
namely ”first draft” and ”Pilot Interview and Survey”.
First Draft
The goal of this survey was to establish an overview of the preferences that users would
have to an exoskeleton. This naturally creates challenges as the solution itself has not
been developed yet and therefore isn’t a tangible object they can see and evaluate. Thus,
the first two questions of the survey were designed to establish a certain mindset of having
the product at hand. This would be achieved by showing different scenarios where the
solution can be utilized and asking whether or not the user can imagine this. Denisova
and Cairns did research on which view gave the most immersive experience in games,
and based on their study of randomly allocated groups of 20 people, they concluded the
first person view to have the most immersive experience [51].
P. M. Pedersen et al. combined the Barthel and Frenchay index as seen on worksheet A10
[52]. The relevant ADL’s from this study were picked out and used as images for the sur­
vey where they were shown from a first person view ­ along with a few other ADL’s as well.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
19
==PAGE:28==
To gain an understanding of which physical look was preferred, several mood boards were
created to guide the user into different lanes of thinking ­ see worksheet A11.1­A11.7. The
questions themselves were chosen to be multiple choice questions to reduce complexity
and thereby keep motivation throughout the survey. This means that the user would not
have to formulate their own sentences and therefore get tired. One may argue that this
also limits the user in giving input that is not already given in the survey. Thus, it was
chosen to pilot the survey both in an interview setting and traditional online setting.
Pilot Interview and Survey
Having designed a draft for the survey, the next step was to validate that the different
parts of the survey would be understood by the surveyees. To do this, we conducted a
face­to­face interview with the founder of the rehab department at Roskilde Golf Club,
Hans Møllegaard.
To the test survey, it was printed out and the questions were handed out to Hans one at a
time. We, as the interviewers, would be silent to simulate the circumstances any surveyee
would have while answering the survey on a computer. Hans was asked to speak up if
there were any questions or any confusion in regards to the survey.
In general, the survey seemed understandable to him and he was very open minded about
the solution that could help him ­ especially in the first months after the stroke incident
when he was playing golf as his supplement to his rehab program.
The main take away from the interview with Hans was that he got motivated by being
around other people ­ see notes for interview on worksheet A12.1­A12.4.
When asked about the financial aspect in question 5, he pointed out that this question
could be misinterpreted as how much we can charge (”how greedy can we be”) for the
product instead of what retail price the product should aim for to be economically available
to the consumer. This was corrected in the formulation of the question.
Furthermore, Hans was kind enough to let us include the rehab golf club in the survey.
3.3.2
Survey Results
There were a total of 30 responses to the survey from stroke survivors directly and 8
from the caretakers. Originally, the purpose of the split was to identify any differences
in answers between the stroke survivors and their caretakers to see if any interesting
differences would occur. As there were only 8 responses from caretakers, these were not
deemed to be representative and thus not conclusive. They were instead put together
with the answers from the stroke survivors where they were counted equally.
The 38 answers are divided between 22 females and 16 males where the most prevalent
age group is 51­60 and over half the responses lie in the age range of 41­70.
Interesting to note are the answers to the question of which factors would make the users
not use such a device, question 7, to which the responses were as follows ­ be aware
that the respondents were able to pick three options, and that the percentage indicates
the amount of surveyees that picked that particular answer.
• Too complicated/technical to use (55%)
• Too big/too heavy (52.6%)
• Tricky to put on (47%)
• Uncomfortable to wear (44.7%)
• Difficult to maintain/clean (39.5%)
• Noise from the device (21%)
• Too low battery life (21%)
20
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:29==
• Stigma/non­appealing aesthetics (10.5%)
• Fragile in appearance use (7.8%)
These result emphasize that the potential users have a clear voice in regards to several
aspects of the solution. Just more than half would not use a solution that is too complicated
to grasp, which also makes sense given the cognitive consequences a stroke can have as
discussed earlier in the report. About half would also have less intentions of using such
a solution if it was too tricky to put on and too big and heavy to wear. Last two aspects
that are heavily voted for are the aspect of maintenance and the solution generally being
uncomfortable which both can not be ignored going forward.
When asked about the preferences in regard to their rehabilitation and how they feel in
relation to independence, the answers are distributed as follows:
• If possible, I would prefer to do my exercises by myself (21%)
• I prefer to do my rehab exercises by myself, but appreciate some company/assis­
tance once in a while (47%)
• Neutral (10.5%)
• I prefer to do my rehab exercises in company with others, but like to do them myself
once in a while (13%)
• Even if I could do my rehab exercises by myself, I like to do the exercises in company
with others (8%)
As seen above, just about half the respondents prefer to do their exercises on their own
with assistance every now and then, while 21% prefer to be completely on their own.
This aligns well with with answers from earlier, having 55% on the solution being too
complicated and 47% on the solution being tricky to put on. This highlights the wish of
independence during rehabilitation. Individual results for the surveys can be found on
appendices 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4.
3.4
Interviews
The following chapter will introduce the different individuals that have been interviewed
at different occasions throughout the research phase. The area of investigation in our
demarcated system, figure 3.1, was used as a guideline for which areas we wanted to
investigate throughout our interviews.
Each subsection will introduce the relevance of that person and the desired outcome
before guiding through the actual interview. By the end of each subsection, there will be
a reference to the specific worksheet where more details can be found on the precise
questions and answers for each individual.
3.4.1
Interview with Material Scientist
To uncover the areas of artifacts and help aids in the system demarcation, an interview
was set up with Jeremy Liely. Mr. Liely is a Product Quality Manager at Demant A/S and
has an educational background in material science.
Given the medical nature of the project, and the fact that we are dealing with a product in
skin contact, it is of utmost importance to establish an understanding of the requirements
set for those kind of products. Since Mr. Liely has experience in managing the quality of
a skin contact medical product, in this case hearing aids, we found it relevant to interview
him.
When talking about which materials that were deemed most useful for the purpose of this
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
21
==PAGE:30==
particular project, Mr. Liely pointed out how medical products have to follow certain regu­
lations but that all the normally blacklisted materials could be found on the ROHS list [53].
Furthermore, he pointed out how important not only the choice of material but also struc­
ture of the solution is due to the harsh environment skin contact products have to undergo,
material wise. From his experience with hearing aids, everything from sweat, sebum and
temperature are important factors as they wear the materials out. The structure of the so­
lution is important because cracks and similar smaller spaces that are hard to keep clean
can host all sorts of bacteria that also wear down the materials. Generally speaking, Mr.
Liely thought plastics would be the way to go as they easily molded into different shapes
and create a great protection for the electronics inside (worksheets A13.1­A13.3).
3.4.2
Interview with Physiotherapist
To uncover the areas of hospital, rehabilitation center and at­home help in the system
demarcation, an interview was set up with Rikke Steen Krawcyk.
Mrs. Krawcyk is a research and developmental physiotherapist and Ph.D. at Herlev Hos­
pital in Denmark and has lot of experience within the different motivations and barriers
a patient may have during rehabilitation. Specifically she mentioned how on one hand it
is important that the user gets to stimulate both mind and body but on the other hand a
very common side effect of stroke is a lack of energy and ease of tiring ­ which approves
the points made about the cognitive consequences of stroke in section 2.1. This is an
interesting paradox which will have to be kept in mind when realizing the solution ­ es­
pecially in regards to amount of features and the working of these, as the complexity of
the product was one of the most important factors according to the survey on what could
make the user not want to use the solution.
She also put emphasis on the fact that it is important for the user to be able to handle the
solution independently as this gives a feeling of control back to the user. This point was
also covered in the survey where most surveyees emphasised that they would prefer to
rehabilitate mostly independently of others. The interview is documented on worksheet
A14.
3.4.3
Interview with Physiotherapist 2
In continuation of uncovering the areas of hospital, rehabilitation center and at­home help
in the system demarcation, an interview was set up with Paulette Larsen.
Mrs. Larsen is head of the rehabilitation department of Sahva A/S and works close with
bandagists in the development of orthoses and prosthesis. Given the fact that orthoses
function wise are similar to what we expect the exoskeleton to be by the end, it was
of special interest to talk about the common challenges. Mrs. Larsen focused on how
important it is to create the right product for the right individual, meaning that there was
a high emphasis on the individualization of the solution. This also included the aspect of
being able to continuously monitor the patient through data gathering. Furthermore, she
pointed out that the overall hygiene of such a product also is of importance, as the user
might be less encouraged to use a solution they find hard to clean and maintain. Lastly,
she talked about the process of how an orthosis is made ­ more on worksheet A15.
3.4.4
Interview With Stroke Survivors
To uncover the areas of the patient and social circle in the system demarcation, an inter­
view was set up with two stroke survivors that will remain anonymous in the report.
Stroke survivor 2 and 3 live 100 meters apart, but had never met each other until 5 years
ago where they both experienced a stroke. They met in their local rehabilitation center
and have been close friends ever since, supporting each other in their rehabilitation and
their struggles related to the late sequelaes. Their motor skills are almost not affected to­
day and they mainly struggle with cognitive skills arising from brain fatigue after extended
22
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:31==
periods of concentration.
Some of the key takeaways from the interview with them was their belief that the most
important factor to success in their rehabilitation was the fact that they did it together to
support and motivate each other, to find out what works for them and how to get through
tough times. This is also why they are part of a network of other stroke survivors. An­
other motivational factor was in their opinion the ability to track their own rehabilitation
progress. Interestingly, when talking about the exoskeleton solution, they would visualize
putting it on similar to the way that you put your arm through a sleeve or a jacket­sleeve.
This shows indications of a natural user interface which will be dug deeper into through­
out the conceptualization starting in chapter 4. The interview notes are documented on
worksheet A16.1 and A16.2.
Lastly, an interesting point they brought up was the desire for not only a simple solution,
but also a solution that could be integrated in their everyday lives. More precisely, one
of the interviewees expressed this desire as the following: ”It would be amazing if I could
wear the solution together with my party dress”.
3.4.5
Summary of Interviews
Throughout both the interviews and the survey certain topics of the project became ap­
parent. Firstly, the focus of independence was prevalent and it is our understanding that
it is maybe not only a preference but also an expectation to such a system. This was
verified by both our talk with Rikke Krawcyk (worksheet A14) who explained how impor­
tant this was to the overall motivation but also through our talks with the stroke survivors
themselves who also further agreed on its importance. Furthermore, our interview with
Paulette Larsen (worksheet A15) put emphasis on the importance of creating the right
solution to the right user ­ meaning that it would have to be customizable to a certain de­
gree. Another interesting point brought up by Paulette Larsen was the fact that hygiene
also played a major part in the motivation of using such a device, meaning that if it wasn’t
easy to maintain the solution and thus keep it clean, it would be enough to demotivate the
user and stop them entirely from using said solution.
With factors such as these highlighted through the surveys and interview it is an important
task as a design engineer to understand the prioritization of these functions that the solu­
tion could consist of and determine how crucial they are for a successful design ­ naturally
within the scope of the project.
3.5
Function Prioritization
When designing a product it is important to establish an understanding of the features that
are being requested by both users and professionals in relation to each other. A unique
opportunity to do this was The Health and Rehab Scandinavia Fair, where thousands of
professionals and patients where gathered ­ see worksheet A17 for more information on
the fair. Having this wide spectrum of relevant actors all grouped in a single place also
has the benefit of uncovering the area of investigation even further.
To utilize this opportunity, we wanted to create a boundary object that would attract at­
tention, act as a foundation for a good qualitative conversation, and allow us to make a
quantitative evaluation of the inputs from the participants and ultimately identify what ar­
eas of the solution they found most important.
It was decided to base this boundary object on the Kano­model [54], which is a tool that
helps categorize the different functionalities of a product into the categories: Desired,
Exciter/Delighter, Required, Questionable, Neutral, Anti­feature and Dissatisfied.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.2: Kano model categorization [54]
As illustrated on figure 3.2, the categorization is achieved by asking stakeholders if they
would feel satisfied, neutral or dissatisfied about the presence and the absence of a cer­
tain feature. Taking a Tesla as a reference, an example of a feature that has become
required in recent years might be the autopilot as the user would probably feel dissat­
isfied about its absence, but neutral about its presence. On the other hand, the ability
to play Mario Cart on the center screen, using the steering wheel is something that the
user would not be dissatisfied about being absent, but is something that really excites and
makes the user satisfied about the product if it is present, which is therefore an example
of a exciter/delighter.
To be able to ask these questions, it is important to identify a series of relevant features
first. The chosen features were based on the points from both the previously conducted
interviews as well as the surveys.
• The users ability to put on and operate the solution independently
• Solution made of environmentally sustainable materials
• Sensoric Feedback to guide the user in the excersises
• Ease of maintenance and cleaning
• Aesthetic customisability
To communicate these features effectively, two following concepts for boundary objects
were designed.
Figure 3.3: Kano voting concept one
24
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.4: Kano board concept two
Concept number one, as seen on figure 3.3 was inspired by the election going on in USA
and the idea was that the participants would receive a note with a question on. They
would then put it into the box with the label that corresponded to how they felt about the
question, either satisfied, neutral or dissatisfied. The pros of this concept was the fact
that by putting a strap on the box, we would be able to walk around the fair and seek out
answers from different people. The con was that it would be hard to connect different
answers from the same participant to each other.
The thought of the second concept, seen on figure 3.4, was to gain attention to our stand
at the fair and to create something that the participants could interact with while talking to
us about the answers. The idea was to make a board with 10 questions, 2 for each feature,
with a knob underneath each question that could be adjusted to reflect the participants
answer with either satisfied, neutral or dissatisfied. After answering the questions, the
participant would fill out a post­it note with their name and occupation and put it in the
top corner of the board and we would then take a picture of the board to document their
answers. The pros of this concept was that it was more interactive, attracts more attention
and makes it easier to engage in a conversation with the participants as well as more
practical to document their answer set. The con was that the board is not convenient to
move around the fair, but we decided that it would make most sense to have the interviews
at our stand anyway, as prototypes and other project related things would be close by.
Therefore we chose to build concept number 2 for the interviews at the Health and Rehab
Scandinavia fair.
The building of the kano board was done mainly by laser cutting and engraving plywood
and by building a stand and ended up as on figure 3.5.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.5: The Kano board at our stand at the Health and Rehab Scandinavia Fair
The table below is a readable representation of the questions on the board.
How would you feel if...
...The user is able to put on
the solution independently?
...The solution is made of
sustainable materials?
...The solution can give sensoric
feedback to guide exercises?
...The solution is not easy
to clean and maintain?
...The user needs assistance to
put on and operate the solution?
...The solution can’t be customized to
fit the preferences of the user?
...The solution can be customized
to fit the preferences of the user?
...The solution does not give the user
sensoric feedback in exercises?
...The solution is easy to
clean and maintain?
...Sustainability is not
considered in the solution?
Table 3.1: Clear representation of the content on the Kano board
The way we interviewed came fairly naturally, as our stand would attract plenty of curious
people and we would then ask them to answer our questions on the way out, as they
would then have a basic understanding of the whole concept of the exoskeleton and the
world around it.
26
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:35==
3.5.1
Function Prioritization Results
The KANO board ended up attracting a total of 26 unique individuals to both fill out the
board and have a small discussion on their choices. The results can be seen on figure
3.6 (next page) and were accumulated into worksheet A18. Here it is apparent that some
features were more desired than others. For example, 88% of participants deemed inde­
pendent use as either an exciter/delighter or a desired feature. The remaining 12% saw
the potential and would prefer it, but did not see the need for help as a necessarily bad
feature, thus putting them somewhere in between.
Sensory feedback was the only feature where there was a general agreement across all
participants that the feature was either desired or an exciter/delighter. Several profes­
sionals also pointed out the importance of such a feature as it would also help them in
their practice and also motivate the user – which we have already observed and covered
earlier. Only one feature out of the five that were presented had participants categorize
it as an anti­feature – namely customizable appearance. This is where context matters,
and it is therefore important not only to look at the table alone. When talking about cus­
tomizable appearance with the clinicians, they pointed out that from their perspective it
would not be a good idea to have a device that was customizable. From a clinics point of
view, they would rather have a single neutral­looking solution that is acceptable by most
patients instead of having several options as this would take additional time and costs to
accommodate for. This means that their answer was purely from the clinician’s point of
view which interestingly comes into a conflict with the expressed desire for this feature
from users and other professionals.
The feature that was deemed the most irrelevant was the sustainable build of the solution.
This was generally due to the assumption – which might as well be true – that given the
solution was sustainably built, the price of the solution would be higher and thus more
unobtainable. Here the benefit simply did not outweigh the costs both figuratively and
literally. Lastly, the maintenance of the solution was overall deemed desired and also
pointed out by a doctor to be crucial as the user would be demotivated to use a device
they think is dirty which is a point that was also covered in our interview with Paulette
Larsen.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.6: KANO Board Results
3.6
Product specification
The main purpose of the field research is to understand the problem and gain knowledge,
for the designer to be able to come up with solutions that are good and relevant. To define
what qualifies as a solution to the problem, all insights from the field research has been
gathered in a product specification and has been described as either as a requirement
(specifications that a given solution has to fulfill to qualify as a solution) or criteria (measur­
able specifications that differentiates the quality of different solutions). The requirements
and criteria have been divided into the categories: Anatomy, Technology, Usability, Aes­
28
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:37==
thetics, Safety and Cost. The product specification is found in appendix 3.
3.7
Functions tree
Naturally the ideas and later on concepts that will be covered in the conceptualization
phase will all have one thing in common ­ they will oblige to the same rules. These rules
are set by the product specification as presented above. In relation to the deducted re­
search and the resulting product specification, the project has been scoped to include the
following functions:
• Donning and doffing of the solution
• Fastening of the solution
• Sensory feedback
• Size adaptation
• Elbow actuation
• Forearm actuation
These functions were identified through a function tree [55] and can be seen on worksheet
A19. From here on out, a concept can be considered a solution if it has the functions
given in the function tree and if those functions also oblige to the product specification.
The following chapters will explore which combinations of ideas can create solutions that
follow these requirements.
Please note that the sensory feedback functionality was removed from the scope in the
later stages of the project, in order to focus more on the other functionalities, considering
the limited time frame. The feature is still apparent in the worksheets to give an idea of
what areas that have been touched upon within this field, though it will not be part of the
final solution and in the rest of the written report.
3.8
Summary of Field Research
Through a demarcation of the system around the stroke patient, it was possible to estab­
lish an overview of the relevant actors in relation to knowledge gathering. This knowledge
was utilized to create a 4­split survey and to conduct several interviews with professionals
to further expand on the knowledge of user preferences. The survey verified the impor­
tance of independent use as well as highlighting a desire for a simple, comfortable and
slim solution. The interviews also verified the need for independent use, but further added
the aspects of hygiene and data gathering as important areas as well. A kano analysis
was conducted at the Health & Rehab Scandinavia fair, where 26 individuals were inter­
ested in talking to us and giving their data points. Here the most desired features were
the independent use again, sensory feedback and maintenance. Based on the findings
from the desktop research and now field research, a product specification was created to
lay the foundation for the concepts to come, as well as a function tree that specified what
such a solution should be able to do.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
29
==PAGE:38==
4
Conceptualization
Having ended the exploration of the problem space, it was time to engage in an exploration
of the solution space to identify various ideas that can create a foundation for a good
solution. By combining different sources of knowledge it is possible to explore the solution
space more in depth and thus generate more unique ideas and later on concepts.
The exploration was composed of 4 different initiatives:
• Creative Ideation within the team, where different creative method were utilized
• Desktop Research, where relevant functionalities were sought out online
• Reverse Engineering, where inspiration was drawn from mechanism in the environ­
ment around us
• Co­creation workshop, with other engineering students
Below on figure 4.1 is a hypothetical visualization of the solution space we are about to
explore through the four different initiatives. Note that there are overlaps between the
different sources of ideas. This is due to the fact that some ideas will be similar across
the sources.
Figure 4.1: Theoretical Visualization of Solution Space
In the following sections each source of ideas will be introduced and the outcome will be
presented. The features of investigation were taken directly from the function tree and
thus cover the basic functionalities of the desired solution (worksheet A19). Important to
note is that the features were handled independently, so that one feature idea wouldn’t
rely on the other and vice versa. This means that not all ideas make intuitive sense to
combine as they can rely on completely different mechanisms and functions.
30
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:39==
4.1
Generating Ideas
4.1.1
Creative Ideation
To avoid bias and self­priming in the ideation process, it was decided to initiate the concep­
tualization phase with a series of creative methods within our own team to get our ideas
down on paper. In this way it would be easier to go through the other ideation initiatives
without having to remember the ideas we have gotten along the research phase.
A rapid ideation session was initiated. All the ideas that were piling up in our minds
throughout the research phase finally saw the light of day. Still, it didn’t take long to
notice that our thinking was apprehended by our own assumptions to the project. Before
going any further with the ideation, a session of assumption dumption was initiated [56].
This was with the purpose of getting all the thoughts that may have been apprehending
the creative ideas down on paper and removed ­ see worksheet B1.1 and B1.2.
Having mapped the assumptions, another round of rapid ideation was initiated ­ this time
with slightly more radical ideas. It is arguable that this way of ideating only reveals the
most obvious features and it is therefore also important to move out to the edges of the
solution space to find the most radical of ideas.
One way of doing so ­ and also the chosen method in this project ­ was to do both a
session of wishful thinking [57] but also one of negative brainstorm [58].
Both methods take an extreme to begin with and attempt to turn those into useful ideas.
Often the ideas are still not feasible, but more often than not, a few radical ideas may
appear from doing so. See worksheets B2 and B3 for the results of these processes ­
figure 4.2 shows a few of the ideas.
Figure 4.2: Snippet of Ideas That Came From Creative Ideation
4.1.2
Desktop Research
It is rarely necessary to re­invent the wheel and therefore of great importance to utilize
some of the knowledge and experiences that have already been made throughout the
years. Desktop Research as an idea source has mainly consisted of the existing research
which was also highlighted in Chapter 2. It is worth to note that different to our own
ideation, most of the ideas within this source are validated features that have been tested
which naturally presents some advantages in form of feasibility. On worksheet B4 an
overview of the ideas that have originated from researching literature can be seen and
figure 4.3 shows a few of the ideas.
Figure 4.3: Snippet of Ideas That Came From Desktop Research
4.1.3
Reverse Engineering
This source of ideas came from the surroundings themselves. By looking at existing
products, features, and systems it was possible to reverse engineer them into their basic
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
31
==PAGE:40==
principal structures [59].
A brief example of this are the Reebok Pump shoes [60]. These are equipped with ­
what Reebok themselves call ­ a bladder. The user can pump this bladder up manually
by pressing on a button on the shoe that pushes air in but doesn’t let it out again. This
feature can be reduced down to the bladder itself and the button functionality. By doing
that, it is possible to re­use the feature in another context and hereby create a new use
case. In this particular case it would be to instead of replacing the shoe lace, it would be
a feature that can adapt the exoskeleton to a users arm in a comfortable and controlled
manner.
On worksheet B5 there is an overview of all the features that originate from the reverse
engineering method and figure 4.4 shows the principle of reverse engineering. The fea­
tures that are being reverse engineered are common products from the household and
your commonly thrived environments.
Figure 4.4: Reverse Engineering Principle Exemplified
4.1.4
Co­creation Workshop
An important contributor to the ideation process was the co­creation workshop. The ideal
way to do this would be to bring together a series of stroke­related stakeholders ­ both
patients, health care professionals, bandagists, physiotherapists etc. This mix of people
would have a great potential for generating some interesting ideas as the room would con­
tain experience in living with stroke sequelaes, treatment, coping­methods, development
of assistive solutions, rehabilitation etc. Nevertheless, it was decided not to bring in these
kinds of stakeholders due to two reasons. First of all, the combination of Covid­19 and
the fact that we work with a group of “high risk” patients. At the time of the workshop the
infection rate in Denmark was at a peak and it was decided that it would be irresponsible
to have this kind of workshop at the time. Secondly, it was a huge barrier in the planning of
the workshop that stroke survivors often suffer from brain fatigue after extended periods
of concentration, which is not practical in the context of a 2­3 hour workshop. Therefore
it was decided that this was not the time to have a workshop with these stakeholders, but
the potential of such a work and the ideas and discussions it could bring, should not be
underestimated and should be a part of future development.
Instead we chose to invite a handful of our fellow engineering students from the Technical
University of Denmark, with experience within the fields of Design Innovation, Production
Construction and Software Technology. The downside of this was that there would not be
the same amount of knowledge on the stroke­field present in the workshop. However the
participants would have a lot more technical knowledge and we would not be limited by
brain­fatigue in the same way.
As preparation for the workshop, a 2 hour session was planned (appendix 4). All in all, the
workshop consisted of 4 phases, namely Introduction, Create Comfort, Stage Discussion
and Develop Together, that were accompanied by a series of slides (appendix 5).
The first phase was an introduction from us, the facilitators, to give the participants an
32
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:41==
understanding of the field of stroke and what factors to be aware of.
The second phase consisted of a LEGO collaboration game where the purpose of this
exercise was to make the participants start thinking along alternative lines and to create
comfort and make the participants relaxed and open minded.
The third phase, Stage Discussion, was divided into 4 brainstorms each focusing on one
of the functionalities that was in focus in our development, namely ON/OFF, Fastening,
Actuation in Elbow, and Actuation in Forearm. The participants were only asked to brain­
storm on four out of six features in order to effectivize the workshop and reduce the time
required. Each brainstorm lasted around 5 minutes followed by 5 minutes where the par­
ticipants presented their ideas individually and they had the opportunity to ask elaborating
questions to the ideas. This discussion would in turn give rise to even more ideas.
This kind of brainstorming was repeated 4 times, to finally create a morphology [61] that
would create a foundation for the participants to rapidly prototype a concept in pairs, see
figure 4.5. See worksheet B6 for the full morphology.
Figure 4.5: The ideas that came from the co­creation workshop, gathered in a morphology.
This initiated the fourth phase, Develop Together, where the participants were divided in
groups of 2 to make 3 paths through the morphology. Finally they prototyped the one that
seemed most promising to each group in 15 minutes. The 2 groups went in very different
directions, one focusing on a electrically driven and string based solution, and the other
focusing on a pneumatic soft solution. The 2 concepts are further described below. The
primary aim of this was not to make a functional prototype, but rather to make boundary
objects that could visualise the different functionalities, to open up for discussion.
4.1.5
Workshop Concept 1
As mentioned, concept 1 was based on electric motors that pulls strings to simulate the
same way that our muscles would contract. The concept was based on the ideas from
the morphology shown in figure 4.6 and the actual mock­up on figure 4.7. The idea was
to actuate the strings from one central place ­ the actual motorization was black boxed.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.6: The ideas that went into concept 1 in the workshop
Figure 4.7: Workshop Brainstorm
4.1.6
Workshop Concept 2
Concept 2 was a pneumatic based solution. The concept could be put on by placing it
in a stand and then dropping the hand down through the solution. Afterwards pressure
would be applied to an inflatable structure around the arm to fasten it. The elbow would be
actuated using an asymmetric inflatable structure in the back of the elbow and the forearm
actuation would be driven by strings pulling on each side of the wrist by an electric motor
on the back of the upper arm. The ideas from the morphology used in this concept are
comprised in figure 4.8 and the actual mock­up on figure 4.9.
Figure 4.8: The ideas that went into concept 1 in the workshop
34
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.9: The ideas that went into concept 2 in the workshop
Thereby the outcome of the workshop has been plenty of ideas for each functionality in
the morphology as well as 2 proposed concepts.
4.2
Morphology
An essential part of design is naturally the generation of solutions. Whether these are a
result of creativity, a logical process or a mix of both, the purpose of creating a proposal
for something new does not change. In the following section the combined morphology
will be presented which consists of a logical utilization and execution of the ideas on fea­
tures that previously were established based on the four different sources for ideas.
Usually creativity is associated with novel ideas which often appear to have risen from
nothing else but the mind of the inventor/engineer, but this also often overlooks the fact
that novel ideas on most occasions are variations or modifications of existing solutions.
Nigel Cross (2008) argues that even with a relatively small amount of elements or com­
ponents, you can combine a large amount of different configurations, as the number of
configurations rises exponentially with the number of components [61].
By using the features from the function tree it is possible to establish a morphology chart
to generate the alternatives to a design and thus explore the solution space further. A
morphology chart itself consists of the required features that the design should consist of
and the different ways these features can be accomplished. figure 4.10 gathers all ideas
from the ideation phase into a single morphology (see next page).
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.10: Final Morphology Without Concept Tracks ­ also found in worksheet B7
36
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:45==
4.2.1
Concept Synthesis
To establish concepts that are of relevance to the project scope, it is crucial to set up
criteria that will limit the amount of concepts that either aren’t feasible to begin with or
are completely unrelated to the scope. Earlier in the research phase of this project inde­
pendent use was highlighted as the most important aspect of the project when speaking
to both professionals and potential users. On worksheet B8 a complete overview of the
established concepts is visible as lines through the morphology. When a morphology ta­
ble is established there are ­ as seen earlier ­ nearly countless options as to how many
concepts you can create. This is where you need to limit yourself in the sense of look­
ing at the concepts that make sense given the context and scope. To do this, we looked
back at the stakeholder priorities from the research phase. Areas that were highlighted
included the likes of independent us, cost and adaptability. Therefore, an approach that
was taken was to ask questions like: ”which solution would be the easiest to take on and
off?”. Limiting ourselves to a question like this means that we would create a solution with
a given strength. Having more of these you can potentially combine elements that are
proven to work well and see if you can create a concept that has several strengths.
Overall, the concept synthesis focused on three different categories: soft concepts, rigid
concepts and hybrid concepts. 2 soft concepts were made that primarily focused on the
simplicity of pulling on a sleeve and the principles of pneumatics ­ these are described
more in depth in worksheet B9 and B10. The 2 rigid concepts are the more traditional
ones that provide great stability and accuracy in the movements, but with a twist of novel
mounting and actuation methods ­ these are shown and described further in worksheet
B11 and B12. Lastly, the hybrid concepts are less explored mix of soft and rigid principles
­ these are described further in worksheets B13, B14, and B15.
In total, the concept synthesis resulted in 7 different concepts within the categories of
rigid, soft and hybrid exoskeletons. Only the most promising concept within each of the
three areas will be described further in the report and thus the reader should turn towards
the worksheets for more information on all 7 concepts.
4.3
Concept Evaluation
With the concepts being established, the next step for a design engineer is ­ as objectively
as possible ­ to distinguish the good solutions from the less good ones. This is especially
important as concepts in the early stages have a tendency of sounding promising on paper
but turning out to be either non­feasible or simply not as fulfilling in practice. To narrow
down the currently seven concepts to a amount that can be detailed further, they will have
to be compared to each other. The tool that was chosen for this is known as the PUGH
matrix (Cross, 2008, p. 169). Cross argues that to benefit as much as possible from this
method, the concepts will have to be weighed against an existing product that is similar
to the concepts. The reason for this is, if you are comparing the solutions solely to each
other, you might get a skewed perception of their performances as they might all be too
bad for the real world and compared to existing products.
It is therefore of utmost importance to add the real world into the mix, which was done by
using the MyoPro by Myomo, figure 4.11, as a reference product [62]. One challenge in
this is the fact that no products on the market cover the exact same same use case as
the end product will do, but the MyoPro gets rather close as it is designed for assisting
at­home rehabilitation and activities of daily living. The main difference is the fact that
MyoPro does not provide actuation for pronation and supination of the forearm.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.11: The MyoPro ­ an assisting solution for at­home rehabilitation purposes, avail­
able on the US market [62].
The areas that were chosen for the PUGH are related to the topics that have been touched
upon throughout the thesis. Firstly there are the areas that are related to the use of the
product. This covers the areas such as usability, comfort, and maintenance. Then there
are the technical aspects of the products which covers areas such as fixation, alignment,
adaptability, control, maneuverability, aesthetic adaptability and safety. Lastly there is an
aspect of cost which also has to be considered in this regard.
It was apparent both through our interviews and survey that these areas are not weighted
equally important, which also has to be reflected in the PUGH. The weightings of the areas
are ranging from 1­10, 10 being the best score, and are distributed as seen below:
• Usability ­ 10
• Cost ­ 8
• Comfort ­ 8
• Fixation/alignment ­ 7
• Adaptability ­ 6
• Control ­ 6
• Durability ­ 5
• Maintenance ­ 5
• Maneuverability ­ 4
• Power/Weight ­ 3
• Safety ­ 2
• Aesthetic adaptability ­ 2
On worksheet B16.1 and B16.2 is an overview of the PUGH results. Worth to note is
that due to the COVID­19 situation at that point in time, it was not possible to test the
concept’s early stages with users as COVID­19 was at its highest. As an alternative, the
evaluation of the products was based on our own engineering intuition to drive the project
forward, till the preferred option became viable. It was decided that the winner from each
category would be taken into further detailing, which in this case became the following
concepts: The Sleeve, The Bear Trap and Best­of­Both. The next step would be to detail
the concepts to a level that is both presentable and to a degree possible to pretotype to
get direct input from potential end­users.
38
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:47==
4.4
3 Concepts for Further Work
In the following section, each of the three final concepts will be explained in further detail.
A brief description of expected benefits and challenges will also be presented which later
will be tested through pretotyping and user testing.
4.4.1
The Sleeve
This concept is expected to be comprised of a sleeve that will be made of a stretchable
fabric and a inflatable structure around it. Being comprised of a sleeve will allow the
solution to be stretched but still have a preferred form and thereby tighten up around the
arm of the user. This tightening sensation will contribute to increased blood flow and
faster recovery due to both the muscles as well as the blood vessels being stimulated
[63]. It is expected that the solution will be adaptable to the specific user by having several
sizes of sleeves similar to any other piece of clothing you might own. The structure of the
McKibben muscles will either be woven into the fabric of the sleeve to make it inaccessible
to external factors, but the possibility of having it as a removable outer layer is also an
option ­ based on what will be revealed during testing. The muscles themselves are
expected to be small enough that the solution is desirable, but more testing on the forces
required will be explored in a later chapter.
As seen on worksheet B17, the user scenario of equipping the solution consists of very
few steps as the sleeve solution allows the user to take the solution on all at once.
An expected challenge to this solution, and something that will have to be tested is the
validity of the use of a sleeve as a stroke survivor, as proper user testing had not been
conducted thus far in the project. Figure 4.12 is a visualization of the concept.
Figure 4.12: First Rendering of The Sleeve
On figure 4.13 is a visualization of the intended mounting process. In this case the user
is supposed to pull the sleeve onto their arm and inflate the structure to ensure a tight fit.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.13: Intended mounting process of The Sleeve
4.4.2
The Bear Trap
The Bear Trap is thought to be the fully rigid of the solutions. It consists of two parts that
are connected through the elbow joint motor. The two halves are similar in form as they
both utilize the bear trap mechanism. They consists of several tilting components that are
based on a simple lever­principle, which makes the construction close around the arm as
it is placed in the mechanism. These components will also have to snap shut, as they
otherwise would open again upon lifting the arm. It is expected that the user will be able
to lay down their forearm into the solution and afterwards use the other hand to drive the
upper part onto the upper arm as seen on figure 4.15. The solution has a battery that is
attached to the back part of the upper arm, and will be rechargeable in order to provide
enough power for a training session and potentially a whole day ­ this would have to be
explored further should the solution be the final concept.
The forearm actuation method is based on the research done by M. Dežman et. al, where
a novel double rod system is utilized for forearm supination and pronation. Their research
showed that the solution had great potential through their testing [64].
The rigid parts of the solution itself would be made of a polymer as this would be the
obvious choice given their materialistic properties as we came to know early in the project
through our interview with Mr. Liely ­ see worksheet B18.
An obvious question to ask in regard to the Bear Trap is whether the actual mechanism
works in practice and if so, how well it performs. On figure 4.14 a visualization of The
Bear Trap is seen.
40
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.14: First Rendering of The Bear Trap
On the figure 4.15 below is a visualization of the intended mounting process. In this case
the user is supposed to lay their forearm into the solution and then raise the second half
of the solution with the other hand.
Figure 4.15: Intended mounting process of The Bear Trap
4.4.3
Best­of­Both
The Best­of­Both concept ­ also internally referred to as BoB ­ is intended to consist of a
sleeve made up of a stretchable fabric for the flexibility and tightening sensation ­ much
alike The Sleeve concept. This sleeve will be enveloped in a structural polymer mesh
that will be removable for maintenance purposes. The structural mesh itself consists of
mainly two bodies that are connected through the motor in the elbow joint. Furthermore,
the solution consists of two rotational locks to tighten the solution to the body for the sake
of securing its position. These rotational locks are expected to be easily operable with a
single hand, thus requiring further testing for verification. Given the design of the solution
as seen on worksheet B19, the elbow extension and flexion will be achieved through what
we call the tilter underneath the forearm. This sets up requirements to the strength of the
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
41
==PAGE:50==
motors as the torque requirements will be relatively large if the tilter should take all the
weight. The supination and pronation of the forearm will be achieved through pulling of
wires that are controlled by the motor on the backside of the upper arm. Technically the
solution checks a lot of the criteria a good solution should have, but since it has a rigid
element to it, it is of interest to investigate whether the rigid structure will affect the user
experience of a sleeve­based solution. On figure 4.16 a visualization of The Bear Trap is
seen.
Figure 4.16: First Rendering of BoB
On figure 4.17 below is a visualization of the intended mounting process. In this case the
user is supposed to pull the sleeve onto their arm and tighten the rotating lock mechanism
to ensure a tight fit.
Figure 4.17: Intended mounting process of BoB
4.5
Pretotyping
To get a realistic perception of a given concept it is important to create a tangible mani­
festation of it and thereby build on the previous knowledge with new findings. To visualize
the concepts in greater detail, they have been put in a CAD modelled. Taking a concept
like these and creating them in a CAD program is in many ways challenging as not every­
thing is set in stone and decided on, but that is also where the strength lies. It allows the
design engineer to realize exactly which parts of the solution you have subconsciously
black­boxed and therefore have to uncover in order to make it a feasible solution. Still,
a limitation of CAD is that it can only show you things in an ideal world where the laws
42
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:51==
of physics and the interaction of the user has not been accounted for yet. To introduce
these factors in an effective manner, an engineer must initially utilize what we call preto­
typing. In comparison to prototyping, pretotyping is a simpler approach which generally
takes less time. These often only need to highlight a single core functionality of the envi­
sioned product, whereas prototypes usually cover several if not all [65]. These pretotypes
are also great boundary objects that can be utilized in conversations to create a shared
knowledge and common ground on an otherwise complex subject ­ this will be further
explored in chapter 4.7.
4.5.1
Pretotyping of The Sleeve
Throughout the design of The Sleeve, much attention went into the promising usability of
such a solution. Thus far this has been based on assumptions and therefore will have to
be validated through user testing. It is therefore important to establish an overview of the
assumptions that are relevant for the concept. The assumptions to The Sleeve were the
following:
1. A broad range of stroke patients will be able to put on the concept
2. It is possible to deliver enough pressure and still keep the solution mobile
3. It is possible to deliver a sufficient amount of pressure in a relevant time frame
4. The sleeve should be looser than the pretotype sleeve
5. It is possible to align the solution reliably
6. The noise from the compressor is a disturbing element
7. A grip on the sleeve would help people to pull it on
The first assumption related to The Sleeve is that the process of mounting the solution
can be executed by a broad spectrum of stroke patients. To test this, we bought a regular
compression sleeve that is usually used in sports. The sleeve consists of 82% polyamide
and 18% spandex and is seen on worksheet B20. This gives it a tightening sensation as
was desired but is also flexible enough to fit your arm. Important to note is that the sleeve
used during testing is of the size XL due to its looser fit. It is therefore arguable that the
final solution should have a different material composition to achieve the right fit.
Furthermore, a grip was modelled, 3D printed and attached to the upper end of the sleeve ­
see worksheet B21. The grip was designed so that it wasn’t a permanent part of the sleeve
but rather an interchangeable part, as it required several iterations of the 3D model to get
it right. The grip would allow users to grab the solution and pull it up the arm as initially
intended ­ see figure 4.13. During initial testing, this seemed like a promising solution as
it made the mounting of the solution not only more efficient, but also gave a reference
to directionality of the solution that seemed to help with alignment. In chapter 4.7, user
testing will be utilized to validate the assumptions 1, 4, 5, 6 and 7. Assumptions 2 and 3
are within the technological area and thus not relevant for the pretotyping of the mounting
process.
On basis of this, the CAD model of the solution was updated as seen on figure 4.18
(worksheet B22).
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.18: Refined CAD model of The Sleeve
4.5.2
Pretotyping of The Bear Trap
The strength of the Bear Trap has been in the potential of high usability for a rigid solution,
which is why this was the focus of the pretotyping as well. Below are the assumptions:
1. A broad range of stroke patients will be able to put on the concept
2. There is no difference, difficulty­wise, taking the solution on and off
3. The appearance of the solution is not too overwhelming
4. The solution is not too bulky
To test the first assumption it was necessary to create a model that would simulate the
use of the final product. By laser cutting several profiles it was possible to assemble the
forearm portion of the Bear Trap as seen on worksheet B23. During initial testing of this
mechanism, it was apparent that curvature of the forearm resulted in a misaligned closing
and therefore sometimes a not completely closed solution. Several other iterations were
therefore created to see whether a different configuration of the setup would result in a
better closing of the mechanism. It showed that configuration A, as seen on worksheet
B23, was most promising in how reliably it would enclose around the forearm. On figure
4.19 the pretotyping iterations of the Bear Trap mechanism are shown.
Figure 4.19: Bear Trap pretotyping iterations
The upper part of the solution was made in similar fashion and the two were combined
with a strap of Velcro to imitate the rotating feature and provide the necessary mobility.
Another benefit of configuration A in comparison to the originally thought design was that
it wouldn’t collide with the upper body as it was pushed on the upper arm. On figure 4.20
the Bear Trap pretotype is shown during its intended mounting process.
44
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.20: Bear Trap pretotyping including both upper­ and fore­arm
On basis of this, the CAD model of the solution was updated as seen on figure 4.21
(worksheet B24)
Figure 4.21: Bear Trap prototyping including both upper­ and fore­arm
4.5.3
Pretotyping of BoB
The combination of both the soft elements of the sleeve and structural aspects of the rigid
mesh has also set up some assumptions for the performance of such a solution:
1. A broad range of stroke patients will be able to put on the concept
2. The rigid structure won’t get in the way when taking solution on and off
3. The solution is not too bulky
4. It is possible to align the solution reliably
5. The sleeve should be looser than the pretotype sleeve
6. It is possible to align the solution reliably
7. A grip on the sleeve would help people to pull it on
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
45
==PAGE:54==
To verify these assumptions, another sleeve of the same kind as earlier was used. This
time, it was of interest to see whether the rotating lock mechanism would be as good as
previously assumed. For this, a rigid mesh was modelled and 3D printed for the sleeve.
To attach the mesh, Velcro was used to keep it in place. During the search for a proficient
way of creating the rotating lock mechanism, BOA was discovered. BOA is a company
that specializes in these lock mechanisms and are being widely used for bicycle shoes
and helmets (worksheet B25). The next challenge was to attach this lock onto the actual
sleeve. For this, the mesh was customized to fit the lock inside as seen on worksheets
B26.1 and B26.2 and figure 4.22.
Figure 4.22: Sleeve with Boa­lock at the forearm
On basis of this, the CAD model of the solution was updated as seen on figure 4.23
(worksheet B27)
Figure 4.23: Refined CAD model of BOB
46
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:55==
4.6
User Testing
Having boiled the conceptualization phase down to 3 concepts that focus on a rigid, a soft
and a hybrid approach, it was time to test these concepts in collaboration with potential
users. The purpose of this is to get opinions directly from those who can benefit and are
supposed to use a solution like this. To get the best possible insights it was desired to test
in collaboration with a spectrum of users with different post stroke complications, different
severity and different experience in rehabilitation. The user test was accompanied by a
slideshow which can be found on appendix 6.
To find a suitable user group we contacted Hans Møllegaard who is founder of the Rehab
department in Roskilde Golfclub. Mr. Møllegaard offered to invite some of the stroke
survivors from the golf team and to provide the facilities for facilitating the user testing
within the golf club. The number of attendees amounted to 6, ranging from stroke survivors
who experienced their stroke 23 years ago and had regained a significant part of the
mobility in the affected site, to stroke survivors who experienced their stroke only a few
years ago. The setting of the user testing was as shown on figure 4.24.
Figure 4.24: User testing at Roskilde Golf Club
To achieve the best output, the user test was divided into 4 distinct phases. Firstly an
introduction to the project and its context as well as an explanation of “why we are here”.
Secondly a presentation of each of the 3 concepts, though to avoid name bias and/or
confusion, the concepts were named respectively Concept 1, Concept 2 and Concept
3. Each concept was presented individually focusing on the physical appearance, the
mounting process, and an explanation of how the elbow and the forearm are actuated.
Though, this would only be touched upon briefly as a technical explanation would result
in more confusion than understanding. Figure 4.25 shows an example of how BoB was
presented.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.25: Example slide from user testing
Thirdly, the presentation of the concepts was followed by the chance for the attendees to
try the different pretotypes as well as asking elaborating questions and for all to have a
discussion about pros and cons of each concept.
The goal of each pretotype was to show the main functionalities in the process of mounting
and taking off the solution. For BoB, the objective was to test the process of putting on the
sleeve, tightening the BOA­locks and afterwards loosening the BOA­locks and pulling of
the sleeve. On figure 4.26 below, one of the attendees is seen trying the BoB pretotype.
Figure 4.26: Stroke survivor trying the boa­lock
For the sleeve concept the objective was solely to test the process of putting on and taking
off the sleeve, as most of the structure around the sleeve is intended to be flexible anyway.
Therefore this pretotype was based solely on a sports sleeve.
Figure 4.27: Stroke survivor trying The Sleeve pretotype
48
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:57==
Interestingly, and to complete surprise, one of the users took on the pretotype of The
Sleeve by firstly pulling all of it over the hand before pulling over the arm. This is a use
that has not been covered before this point. This, along with other pictures from the
workshop, can be found on worksheet B28.
For the Bear Trap concept, the main objective was to test the process of first attaching the
solution to the forearm and afterwards to the upper arm. The test of the Bear Trap was
unsuccessful as the attendees felt that the concept was too bulky and intimidating. Also
the mounting that was the basis of this concept didn’t work well considering post stroke
spasticity which was also revealed in the test of The Sleeve concept.
Lastly, the attendees were asked to rank the 3 concepts. Before this point the attendees
was asked not to share any opinions in regards to which concept they preferred. The
participants were asked to individually rank the concepts from 1 to 3 on a piece of paper.
Notice that a score of 1 corresponds to a person favorite concept and 3 to a persons least
favorite. The result of this voting was as shown in table 4.1 and the sum in the bottom
indicates the mean rank.
BoB
BEARTRAP
SLEEVE
Person 1
1
2
3
Person 2
2
3
1
Person 3
2
3
1
Person 4
2
3
1
Person 5
2
3
1
Person 6
2
3
1
MEAN
1,83
2,83
1,33
Table 4.1: The voting results from the user test shows a 1st place for The Sleeve, a 2nd
place for BoB and a 3rd place for The Bear Trap
As the table shows, the clear winner was The Sleeve, with only one person having it
as a second place. Here it is important to emphasise that the most crucial element of
The Sleeve concept is the size and practical mobility of the compressor, according to the
attendees. If the compressor is small enough to for instance hang in the belt (or some
similar place) the concept is a clear winner. But if it is not possible to an acceptable size,
it is least preferred. Additionally the attendees didn’t find sound from a compressor a
problem as long as the solution provides assistance.
To sum up, the user test showed that all 3 concepts had interesting functionalities. In
general it was clear that the most important factors to the attendees were compactness
and discreteness which is also the main reason why Sleeve was the winner. BoB was
easy to put on and the fact that the BOA­locks made it possible to adapt to different arm
sizes was positive, but there was a concern among the attendees that the rigid parts, and
especially the motors, would take up to much space and for instance not make it possible
to wear a the solution underneath a shirt. An important factor that is relevant to both BoB
and sleeve was the fact that they included a compression sleeve that increases blood
flow and has a heating effect on the joints. This was a big advantage in the eyes of the
attendees, as most of them were familiar with stiff joints and freezing in the affected arm.
The main principle of the Bear Trap, being that the solution can enclose itself around the
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
49
==PAGE:58==
arm, was also appealing to the attendees as it seemed rather easy and very possible to
do with one arm. Unfortunately this was not possible to do in practice for patients with
post stroke spasticity. Also, this concept had the same problems as BoB, as it seemed too
bulky. Additionally the CAD model arguably had a more “hostile” appearance which can
part of the reason for the low score. Lastly, the addition of the grip to the sleeve­based
concepts showed to be insignificant, as none of the participants used it by themselves.
Furthermore, it does not align well with the use of a patient with spasticity, as they are not
able to pull the solution all the way at once, which was the idea.
4.7
User Segment
Thanks to the wide range of users in regards to spasticity severity at Roskilde Golf Club,
the concepts were also put to the test as to how large a user segment they may be able
to cover. It is no secret that a product like this would benefit from covering a larger user
segment, and it is therefore also a determining factor when comparing the solutions. A
thing that became clear when testing the different solutions was that not all of the partici­
pants would be able to equip all solutions. One thing that became interesting in particular
in this case was the unforeseen use case of the sleeve concepts. Having users pull the
sleeve solutions over the hand before pulling it over the upper arm is interesting as it cre­
ates some challenges for the concepts. Firstly, BoB is intended to have a rigid structure
around the sleeve. So even though you are able to pull the sleeve part with a single rigid
structure as the pretotype had, it will arguably become a challenge as soon as there is
more attached. This would come in conflict with each other in such a close space and
thus hinder the user in equipping the solution in a way they find most intuitive.
The Sleeve concept on the other hand will here benefit from its softer actuation mecha­
nisms. The muscles themselves are flexible and have a passive compliance in all direc­
tions, which allows the user to do as they in this case find intuitive.
The Bear Trap showed to be a complex solution to grasp, which usually also translates
into use. Furthermore, the concept would not be applicable to individuals with a more
severe case of post stroke spasticity. Therefore this solution is deemed to have the most
narrow user segment.
4.8
The Final Concept
Based on the take­aways from the user testing, our internal testing and conversations with
our project supervisor, it was agreed that the concept that is most radical and thereby also
the one with highest potential, is The Sleeve. It has therefore been chosen as the final
concept and is subject for further refinement.
4.8.1
Concept Recap
As the name indicates, The Sleeve consists of a sleeve with an inflatable structure around
it. This makes it flexible while the solution is being put on, and semi­rigid when the solution
has been placed correctly on the arm, as it will be inflated to provide support. The forearm
and the elbow are actuated using the principles of McKibben muscles that contracts when
pressure is applied. More specifically, the forearm is actuated with two linear muscles
that stretch from the wrist and around each side of the arm attaching at the top of the
forearm. The Elbow actuation is based on a long McKibben muscles which is braided
into a specific textile mesh. By applying pressure, the combination of the textile and the
McKibben muscle will change its shape from a flat overall structure into a saddle shape,
that mimics the inner shape of the elbow.
In the sections below, the 4 main elements of the sleeve are described and visualized
in further detail. These elements are the sleeve, the elbow actuation method, the wrist
50
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:59==
actuation method and the inflatable structure. Additionally, the boundaries of our current
knowledge about the working principles will be elaborated, which will then be subject for
further work.
4.8.2
Sleeve
The sleeve should be similar to a compression/sport sleeve with a few modifications, e.g.
a looser fit than the one that has been used in earlier tests.
Areas that needs to be investigated in regards to the sleeve are the following:
• Material composition ­ which materials are optimal for providing the right fit
• Aesthetics ­ which colors and patterns should be available to the users and what do
they prefer
• The sizes ­ how many sizes should be available and how big of a spectrum of users
should each size seek to cover
• Fabric thickness ­ how thick should the fabric be in order to heat up joints and mus­
cles without getting to hot
An overview and elaboration of what areas are still unknown in regards to the sleeve can
be found on worksheet B29.
4.8.3
Inflatable Structures
On the sleeve there will be several inflatable areas. The purpose of this is twofold. firstly,
As the inflatable structure is flexible the solution will be able to pass over the hand more
easily. Secondly, when the solution has been mounted, the structure can be inflated to
provide a good fit and some rigidity when forces are applied during actuation.
During initial testing, this seemed promising on the upper arm, but the precise placements
of the structure will have to be defined more precisely to determine the actual feasibility.
The inflatable structure is thought to be made of a flexible rubber­like material. This is
so it doesn’t keep expanding, but has a soft limit as to how much the structure itself can
expand before it becomes a semi­rigid structure. Figure 4.28 shows the current placement
of inflatable structures and channels for air distribution.
Figure 4.28: The placement of inflatable structures (shown in red), as well as air passages
(shown in blue) that distributes the air for the inflatable structures throughout the solution
4.8.4
Forearm Actuation
As mentioned, the forearm rotation happens by using two linear McKibben muscles that
span from the wrist, around the arm, till the upper part of the forearm, just below the elbow
as illustrated on figure 4.29.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.29: The placement of the McKibben muscles around the forearm (highlighted in
red)
The actuation is in principle similar to what happens when we twist our forearm using our
muscles. When pressurised, the McKibben muscle contracts, which creates a pull that
twists the forearm. The contraction principle is shown on figure 4.30.
Figure 4.30: Testing showed that the contraction of a McKibben muscle is around 20­25%.
In this test, the muscle were pressurized using a syringe and ”hand­power”
We made a McKibben muscle that were activated with a syringe that was pressurized
by hand. The contraction was between 20­25% which was in accordance to the desired
contraction that was introduced on figure 2.4 back in chapter 2.7.
The actuation works as illustrated on figure 4.31. When the McKibben muscles highlighted
in red are pressurized, the arm will rotate in the direction shown by the red arrow. When the
McKibben muscles highlighted in blue are pressurized, the arm will rotate in the direction
shown by the blue arrow.
52
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.31: Rotation of the forearm using McKibben muscles
The areas that are subject for further research to ensure the viability of the concept in
regards to the forearm actuation is the placement and fixed points of the McKibben mus­
cles ­ this will be further investigated in the refinement. Additionally, the force needed to
twist the forearm is relatively small and it is therefore relevant to look into how small the
McKibben muscles can be in this context, to minimize the size of the solution,However
this is not investigated further in this report.
4.8.5
Elbow Actuation
The actuation of the elbow is, just like actuation of the forearm, based on the use of
McKibben muscles. In this context though, the muscle is not used linearly, but is woven
into a mesh of strings to create a so called active textile, which reshapes itself into a
saddle when pressurized. The actuation is based on the principle seen on figure 4.32.
Figure 4.32: The active textile transforming from a flat structure to a saddle shaped struc­
ture when pressure is applied [48]
The reshaping of the active textile is achieved by pressurizing the McKibben muscle to
make it expand and thereby contract the mesh as a whole, as illustrated on figure 4.33.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.33: Active Textile Contraction Principle [48]
This contraction can be manipulated to transform the shape into a saddle by weaving the
McKibben muscle into a 5­string­cycled pattern as shown on figure 4.34, where the red
dots indicate the string going below the McKibben muscle.
Figure 4.34: The saddle shape weaving pattern consist of a 5­string repeating cycle with
a McKibben muscle woven into the structure
The idea is to place the active textile on the inside of the elbow joint. By pressurizing the
McKibben muscle the relative angle of the forearm to the upper arm will be lowered. In
other words, the arm will bend. The integration is shown on figure 4.35
54
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.35: The active textile is placed on the inside of the elbow to actuate when pres­
sure is applied.
The potential of this actuation principle is interesting as it can be close to the skin. Still
there is a series of unknowns needed to be investigated to determine the feasibility of the
concept. This concerns the actual torque output of the mechanism, the range of motion
and the possibility of bi­directionality.
Regarding the torque, it needs to be tested if it is possible to achieve a significant assis­
tance in the elbow joint by using a compressor of realistic size, considering that it needs
to be carried around by the user ­ this will be explored and refined in chapter 5.
The range of motion ,and the torque behavior, of this mechanism needs to be investigated
in regards to how far it can bend compared to the range of motion of the elbow joint. This
would require a dedicated test and the building of such a mechanism, which will not be
conducted in this project.
Lastly, it is important to consider bi­directionality as many stroke patients with more severe
sequelaes experience that their affected arm is bend when relaxing ­ the question is how
this can be implemented into the solution using this principle. This won’t be addressed
either in this project.
4.8.6
Mounting Process
The intended use of the product has not been changed even though a unforeseen case
scenario was highlighted through testing. The user is still expected to grip the sleeve in
the upper opening, pulling it over the hand and applying enough force upwards for the
sleeve to glide along the arm till it is in place. Instead, the introduced use has been set
as a criteria for how well the solutions can adapt to such a case, whereas The Sleeve
would do the best. The alternative mounting process for individuals with high spasticity is
illustrated on figure 4.36 and can be found on worksheet B30.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.36: The active textile is placed on the inside of the elbow to actuate when pres­
sure is applied.
4.8.7
Summary of Conceptualisation
The conceptualization phase was initiated with ideation from 4 different sources, namely
creative ideation in the team, desktop research, reverse engineering and an engineering
workshop. The ideas were then gathered in a morphology from which 7 concepts were
synthesised. From these 7, 3 were pretotyped and brought to a user test at Roskilde Golf
Club where ”The Sleeve” was chosen by the attendees as the most promising concept.
Thereby, the final concept was a slim, pneumatic and sleeve­based solution that includes
actuation methods in elbow and forearm, based on McKibben muscles and active textile.
Several areas still need further refinement. These are the torque capabilities and range
of motion of the elbow actuation method as well as the compressor specifications needed
in this context. Further, the placement and size of the McKibben muscles for forearm
actuation need to be investigated. And lastly the shape, materials and pressure needed
in the inflatable structure and the material composition and fit of the sleeve needs to be
investigated. Even though all of these areas needs to be refined, only a few are further
addressed in the refinement in this report. This includes the torque capabilities of the the
elbow joint, the forearm actuation method and the compressor specifications.
56
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:65==
5
Refinement
Looking back at the function tree that was defined earlier in the project (worksheet A19),
it is clear that the conceptualization phase has been defining alternative options for an
additional row ­ meaning extending the function tree with another step. Given that the
final concept is The Sleeve, this additional row can be added with the concept as basis
­ see worksheet C1. The next step is then to gain insights in the further branching of
the function tree, detailing the concept and coming closer to a realization of it. Naturally,
this process can be continued until the product is so defined that it can be produced, but
given the scope and time frame of this project, only some of the features will be detailed
further. These features cover the elbow actuation and the forearm actuation. Addtionally,
a proposal is made for the integration of EMG and data gathering.
5.1
Elbow Actuation
A crucial unknown in the concept is the actual torque output that is realistic from the active
textile to assist the elbow in raising the forearm and hand. Additionally, the torque output is
directly coupled to the pressure applied to the artificial muscle [48], which is again coupled
to the size of the pump that should be small enough to be carried around on the user. The
following section investigates these aspect more in depth and finally proposes a test setup
that can provide even more knowledge on the specific capabilities of the elbow actuation
method.
According to a study, the weight of the forearm makes up 2,52% of the total weight of the
average adult male body, which is 82.4 kg for the average adult German male [66] [67].
This means that the average forearm weight of a German adult male is approximately
2076 grams.
Roy et al. investigate the correlation between forearm mass and required torque to lift the
forearm, which in the case of 2076 grams (or approximately 2.1 kg) relates to a required
torque of 2.5 Nm [68] centered around the elbow. Whether or not this is achievable using
the active textile principle is currently unknown but T. Hiramitsu et al. investigated the
linear contraction force of the active textile to be around 32 N at a pressure of 0.2 MPa
[48]. Even though this linear contraction force can’t be directly coupled to the torque
capabilities of the active textile, it isn’t negligible and might indicate that the forces in play
can make a difference in assisting the stroke rehabilitation.
A pressure of 0.2 MPa is highly achievable in a portable pump size with today’s technology.
An example of a small discount pump that can be aquired for a retail price of DKK 139
and has that can provide the needed pressure has the following specifications:
• Voltage: 12 volt
• Current: 1 Amp
• Pressure Range: 0 ­ 220 KPa
To gain more knowledge on the actual torque capabilities of the active textile, we suggest
to make a prototype based on the weaving pattern in figure 4.34. One end of the active
textile should be fixed and the other should be free to move with a newton meter below it
to measure the vertical force when pressure is applied, which can then be translated into
the provided torque. A suggestion for the test setup is provided in figure 5.1
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.1: Proposed test setup for investigating torque capabilities of the active textile
actuation method
Finally, the solution is not of much use, if it can not be powered. For the compressor that
was given as an example to deliver the desired pressure, it requires 1 ampere worth of
current. Given it also requires 12 volts to operate, and we are looking at a battery life time
between 1 and 2 hours before needing a recharge, we would be looking at a 12V battery
with a capacity of approximately 1500mAh.
A battery that lies in a similar range being 12V and having a capacity of 1300mAh is a
simple off shelf battery at a retail price of DKK 89,00 [69]. The dimensions of this battery
are 97x43x52 mm, which would be on the larger side given that the compressor has to
be placed with it. Still, the future of batteries is looking promising with articles showing a
tripling in battery­cell energy densities since 2010 [70].
5.2
Forearm Actuation
To put more detail on the forearm actuation, a pretotype of the mechanism was built as
seen on worksheet C2.1. The purpose of this prototype was twofold: on one hand it was
of interest to see whether or not the mechanism was able to rotate the forearm, but also
how natural the movement would be. A simple test was conducted where the pretotype
was put onto the arm of one of the team members and the other would pressurize the
solution using manual force, inducing a movement.
During initial testing, it was discovered that the angle at which the muscles were attached
to the wrist and forearm had a significant effect on both the things we wanted to test,
meaning the ease of movement, but also the actual pattern as well. Furthermore, we
realized that it was enough to only have a single muscle for pronation and one for supina­
tion. As the concept originally had two muscles for each, this was a promising finding as
it would allow us to create a smaller solution which originally was the main selling point of
The Sleeve for the users as experienced during the visit at Roskilde Golfklub.
As a result of these two findings, another test was conducted where the interest was
how the single muscle configuration should be aligned on the wrist in order to provide a
natural movement. To begin with, the muscles were attached with tape on either end and
the results were looking promising. Removing the tape, and modelling an attachment
58
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:67==
for the sleeve showed, that the sleeve then became prone to slipping and thereby not
induce any movement in the forearm ­ as explained on worksheet C2.2. The reason lied
within the structure of the taped solution. Because the tape wrapped around the wrist,
the muscle didn’t pull a single point, but the force was distributed around the whole wrist.
Testing this as seen on worksheet C2.2, the natural range of motion of the forearm of
one of our team members lied between the angles of ­75 and 70. Using the pretotype to
induce a movement and trying as much as possible not to induce any motion themselves,
the range lied between ­60 and 50 degrees. This is illustrated on figure 5.2
Figure 5.2: Result of closed­loop angle control of the arm model with the wearable device
[71]
Looking back, during research, we also found the work of Se­Hun Park et. al [71] that were
developing a lightweight, soft wearable sleeve for forearm rehabilitation. They were look­
ing at how you would be able to create the supination and pronation movements through
artificial muscles that were embedded as arm bands that were wrapped around the arm ­
much like we did with the muscles during testing. The benefit of this configuration is the
naturally more slim fit and the spread of pull. This configuration can be seen on figure 5.3
below.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.3: Proposed supination/pronation mechanism as researched by Se­Hun Park et
al. [71]
Another promising aspect of this configuration is the precision that the same team proved
through testing of their solution. Figure 5.4 shows the target angle of the forearm along­
side the produced angle through the solution. Interesting to note is that the only area in
which the solution becomes slightly more unreliable is in the far ends of the movement,
which was also hinted in our own test as the solution struggled to reach the far ends of
the range of motion.
Figure 5.4: Result of closed­loop angle control of the arm model with the wearable device
[71]
It is apparent that the solution, even in that early state, is able to deliver promising precision
of movement over time. This configuration would have to be thoroughly tested before any
conclusions regarding its feasibility in the solution context can be made. Especial focus
would have to be put in the far ends of the movements as it is here that the principle may
have some challenges.
5.3
EMG integration
For an exoskeleton to work, it is crucial to know what movements the user are trying to
do. One way to do this is by using electromyography (EMG) sensors that measures small
60
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:69==
electrical signals upon muscle movements. The design team has made a proposal of how
such sensors can be integrated in the proposed concept to accommodate the fact that this
is a fundamental aspect in any exoskeleton. Figure 5.5 illustrates the proposed design.
Figure 5.5: Illustration of EMG sensors that are integrated into the sleeve part of the
solution
By integrating the EMG sensors into the sleeve, it is possible to accomplish 2 things.
Firstly the concept will have the hardware needed to pick up data on the users intentions.
Secondly the integration also acts as the coupling between the sleeve and the outer struc­
ture, which will have the opposite part of the buttons. The sleeve can then be detached if
the user wishes to use another or to wash it.
5.4
Data Gathering
The last area of refinement is not directly tied to the project scope, but may add an op­
portunity for the concept to play a role in a larger context within stroke rehabilitation. To
counteract the natural lack of precision compared to existing motorized solutions, W. Felt
and C. David Remy introduce a novel method for data gathering in the braid of the mus­
cles that allows for flexible, precise and robust self­sensing actuators [72]. By introducing
a more precise way of monitoring the position of the muscles and thereby the solution and
hand of the user, it is possible to collect direct data on the stroke patient’s rehabilitation
patterns. This includes data on progress, correctness of movements and potentially the
integration of the solution into gamified systems that require more precision.
5.5
Summary of Refinement
The combination of different research made it possible to gain insight in the forces required
to raise the forearm and hand through an induced torque around the elbow. As the initial
research of the applied actuation in the elbow showed a linear pull of 32 N at a pressure
of 0.2 MPa, it was deemed that the method isn’t negligible and might be able to make a
difference in assisting the stroke rehabilitation. Still, it is recommended to do a validation
test of the actual actuation method in order to verify its feasibility. Through tests it was
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
61
==PAGE:70==
seen that the forearm actuation method was able to rely on only a single muscle for each
movement, meaning that the solution could be made even slimmer which according to
the user preferences would be a desired outcome. Lastly, a method for applying EMG
sensing capabilities as well as data gathering on the position of the solution are proposed
for any further work on this subject.
The final design of the solution can be seen on figure 5.6 and worksheet C3.
Figure 5.6: The final concept equipped
62
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:71==
6
Discussion
As presented in chapter 1.5, the overall problem statement for this thesis has been the
following:
“How can we design a non­stigma solution that assists in neuro rehabilitation of upper
limb functionality and is customizable to fit a spectrum of patients without compromising
the usability of the solution and promotes independent use”
The work throughout the field research in chapter 3, the conceptualization as depicted in
chapter 4, and the refinement described in chapter 5 provided valuable insights in the po­
tentials of a sleeve­like exoskeleton solution for stroke rehabilitation assistance in relation
to the overall goal. Still, several areas remain uncovered and thus also raise questions to
the feasibility of the concept in regards to its at­home rehabilitation context.
6.1
The Concept
One of the biggest areas in relation to the concept validation is the actuation method in
the elbow joint of the solution. Chapter 5.1 attempts to utilize the knowledge from the
research on active textile of Hiramitsu et. al [48]. But still, the elbow actuation mecha­
nism is based on the fact that the conducted research shows that a contraction force of
34N at 200kPa can be produced. However, it is neither clear or a given that this linear pull
means that a reasonable torque can be generated through another weaving configuration.
To validate this, it will be necessary to test the actual setup and gather concrete results
such as the strength of the configuration and required pressure to achieve a reasonable
force. Chapter 5.1 proposes a setup that is thought to be a good foundation for the start
of this work.
Another unclear factor that is linked to the elbow actuation is the lack of bidirectionality
in the current configuration. While it is imaginable that the same actuation method could
be applied on the other side of the elbow, but in an inverted version to help with the ex­
tension of the elbow, this does in fact conflict with the points made in the research phase
throughout chapter 2.5 where the bidirectionality is set to be an important feature. And
while the solution may still set up some ground work for future research within the area,
this is from a purely design perspective a flaw in the design process.
Moving down the solution, chapter 5.2 examines the area of the forearm actuation method
and points out that, based on the conducted test, the angles of the muscles play a sig­
nificant role in relation to the movement pattern of the actuation. This is something that
would have to be explored in further detail in any further work, as it is defining to both
the performance but possibly also to R6 and R7, regarding the solution’s ability to actuate
elbow and forearm, in the product specification ­ appendix 3. Chapter 5.2 also proposes
another working mechanism that is based on the research of S. Park et. al. [71]. This
configuration has the benefit of only having a single actuator for respectively supination
and pronation, which was seen could be done through the testing presented in chapter 5.2.
Chapter 5.1 ties the investigated requirements to both the elbow and forearm actuation
and proposes which specifications that would be sufficient from a compressor that should
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
63
==PAGE:72==
be able to cover the desired movements. Still, these calculations are relatively simple and
though they are based on other research, they do not look into what is required from the
solution, should the user want to flex the elbow and supinate the wrist at the same time.
This is due to the chapter looking into the requirements isolated from each other. This
would be subject for further work.
Furthermore, another crucial factor in the feasibility of the final concept is the actual mount­
ing process. Due to various circumstances it was not possible to get early user involve­
ment incorporated in the early stages of the conceptualization phase. This meant that
when we conducted our user test as described in chapter 4.8, an alternative way of mount­
ing the sleeve solutions, where the sleeve was first pulled over the hand and then up along
the rest of the affected arm, was introduced to us. While the final solution was deemed
the best at handling this use context, it does not necessarily mean that it is handling it
optimally, as usually best in class does not translate to best in school. Still, the user test
did provide insights in how the end user might use the concept, which in a design context
is a valuable input for further improvement of a design.
The user test also showed that the alignment of the sleeve concepts could be an issue
when considering the alternative way of mounting the sleeve. It is important both in a
functionality and safety context that the sleeve can be consistently aligned correctly. If
the sleeve is twisted around the arm it wont actuate in the right direction and can potentially
harm the user. This project does not cover how consistent alignment can be achieved,
but considering how crucial an element it is for the overall feasibility of the solution, one
may argue that alignment should have been prioritized more than other elements in the
solution. For the concept to be feasible in a real world context, it is crucial to enhance the
usability. More specifically the memorability of the design and the severity and frequency
of errors (In relation to chapter 1.2.3 about usability), should be improved in regards to
the process of aligning the sleeve correctly. This is also an important step to ultimately
answer research question 2.
Additionally, the proposed solution consists of an inflatable structure which purpose it is
to tighten the solution around the arm of the user and thereby secure the solution and
to make it adaptable to a spectrum of users. As the thesis did not look into this part of
the concept with particular focus, many of its areas remain unclear and would have to
be investigated. This covers the shape of the structure that would envelop the arm, the
necessary pressures for a comfortable fit and how this would relate to the requirements of
the compressor, as well as the material composition of the structure. These areas would
need to be investigated further to determine if the solution can truly adapt to a spectrum
of patients and thereby answer research question 3 thoroughly.
Finally, the actual aesthetics of the solution are defined by the solution itself. An additional
benefit of having a sleeve­based solution is that the sleeve and the inflatable structure can
be separated and thereby the appearance of the actual sleeve can be an optional factor.
In relation to the user’s aesthetic preference, the mood boards in our survey as described
in chapter 3.3.2 showed that most users would prefer a clean look. This is something that
has not been included in the current design as the project did not proceed far enough to
establish detailed design aesthetics. Chapter 4.3 shows that aesthetic adaptability had
the lowest score which contributed to the feature falling out of the focus throughout the
64
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:73==
project. This is further supported by the kano investigation in chapter 3.5.1, where the
same feature also did not get that much attention.
Still, the interviews and mood boards have laid a solid foundation for the expectations and
wishes in relation to the appearance of such a solution being a clean look with the pos­
sibility to change a little if the solution would we worn in another occasion. Thereby the
creation of mood boards and the use of these as boundary objects in user interviews to­
gether with the communication through surveys become a foundation to answer research
question 4, as it allowed us to gather insights to the appearance preferences of the poten­
tial end users, but the concept as it is does not provide an answer to research question 4
in its current state but rather insights into it.
6.1.1
The Validity of Data
In fact, many of the unclear aspects of the solution may be traced back as early as the
demarcation of our system in chapter 3.2. By this we do not mean that the demarcation
itself was flawed but rather the execution of the utilization. The system demarcation was
used as a guideline for which actors were relevant to gather knowledge from as described
in chapter 3.2. Still, in a design project of this size, there will be a blurry line that defines
when you included enough individuals within the system ­ which we do not think we have
crossed in all the investigation areas. This lack of system covering manifested itself in the
lack of insights within the field of the rehabilitation process itself which should have been
part of the investigation of the general practices. An example of how this is apparent in
the final solution is the lack of clarity in relation to how to ensure that the solution would
be aligned properly on the user.
A particular activity that could have provided valuable insights is for instance a contextual
interview taking place in a rehabilitation session with a patient and a health care profes­
sional present. This could have given us a more in depth understanding of the motor
challenges that a stroke patient experiences as well as a better understanding of the en­
vironment that the solution is supposed to be a part of. Additionally, it would potentially
have been possible to gain insights on how a rehabilitating stroke patient has adapted
to their everyday lives and thus the alternative mounting process of the sleeve that was
introduced in the user test might not have come as a surprise. Still, the demarcation of
the system allowed us to gain great insights in the preferences across the fields we did
investigate through targeted interviews.
Another source of information in this regard was the deducted survey that was shared
across several platforms and groups. Considering the fact that the total reach of the
Facebook groups where the surveys were shared was more than 54.000 people, the sur­
vey resulted in a surprisingly low participation being 30 answers from stroke patients and
8 from caretakers. The low number of responses could have arguably skewed the pref­
erences and thereby the focus of the project. But since the same preferences in form of
e.g independent use was seen across both the survey, interviews and later on the kano
board, it greatly reduces the probability of the survey misleading the project. Still, the sur­
vey may not have contributed to its highest potential, as we decided to base the survey
around questions with multiple predefined answers. While this was thought through in
relation to the cognitive challenges that a surveyee in this case might have as described
in chapter 3.3.1, this could also have eliminated responses that would have been insight­
ful, as the only options that were given were based on our own research and assumptions.
Lastly, looking back on the interviews at the Scandinavian Health & Rehab Fair the num­
ber of individuals that were interviewed was 26. This was acceptable considering the fact
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
65
==PAGE:74==
that we only had one day at the fair, but in the context of a data­foundation the number of
interviewees has to be considered fairly low and hard to draw any clear conclusions from
on its own. Therefore we must admit that also here, the data foundation must be consid­
ered quite thin. Furthermore, the kano method is usually used for more specific features
such as whether or not a phone should have GPS tracking. By presenting more general
features as we did, you allow room for interpretation and thereby also misunderstandings
which might have led to skewed responses. Furthermore, it is arguable that since none of
the features were directly disliked or seen as an anti­feature, the proposed features may
have been too obvious and not controversial enough.
Furthermore, In hindsight we could have benefited from gathering a few additional data­
points. Examples of additional data points of relevance could be age, years of experience
within their field and the municipality they work in. Especially their years of experience
within their field could give us a way to prioritize the answers of different interviewees
differently. For instance the opinions of a physiotherapist with 33 years of experience
within the field of stroke rehabilitation might weigh more than the person who is studying
to become a physiotherapist.
6.1.2
User oriented vs participatory design
During the early stages of the conceptualization phase it was originally planned to conduct
a co­creation workshop with a gathering of potential end­users and relevant profession­
als. Due to certain circumstances as described in chapter 4.2.5 this was not possible and
a workshop with engineering students was conducted as an alternative. The stroke sur­
vivor was thereby no longer a participatory element in the workshop and rather than being
a participatory co­creation, the workshop became a user centered one. This would also
turn the user, that initially should have been a direct influence in the design process, to a
subject of interest. Still, the result of the workshop was an impressive amount of ideas of
which The Bear Trap later was created.
In chapter 4.8, our user test with the final three concepts is described. Here the alternative
mounting process of rolling the sleeve over the affected hand before pulling up the arm
was presented to us through the participation of stroke survivors. It is arguable that this
finding should have been found earlier in the process, as touched upon earlier in the dis­
cussion, due to its crucial role in the independence of use. This could also have allowed
us to design around the use case and thereby create a potentially better solution for the
end user.
Comparing the takeaways from the workshop and the user test furthermore highlights the
importance of a balance between a user oriented design approach and a participatory
one. On one hand the workshop resulted in technical ideas, and on the other hand the
result was an eye opening use case. We would argue, that optimally both approaches
should have been present throughout the early stages of the conceptualization and in
reverse order. Thereby we could have gained insights in the users and their circumstances
first and thereafter generate ideas that are relevant for these. Instead the ideas were
generated first and then it was more a question of luck, whether they would be applicable
to the use case.
Thereby the answer to research question 2 becomes a slightly complicated one. In order
to create a solution that promotes independent use, you first have to gain the insights on
which barriers there are to the independent use. This insight is best gathered through
66
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:75==
participatory design where the potential end user can help uncover the use context and
its environment. Thereafter it is important to also establish the necessary framework for
a creative ideation where the good ideas can come from, which can be a workshop with
different engineering disciplines represented. This would in turn be a more user centered
process, where the potential end user is not present but rather a subject of interest.
Important to note is that it is not enough to have both approaches present as the actual
benefit lies in the order of which you utilize the approaches. Having uncovered the barriers
and laid the scope first and thereafter having a solid source of ideas will establish the most
optimal framework for ultimately designing an exoskeleton that promotes self use.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
67
==PAGE:76==
7
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to design a concept for an exoskeleton that can enhance the quality
of at­home rehabilitation by giving the patient the freedom to exercise whenever it suits
them, by being able to put on and operate the solution independently.
The result of this was a slim, pneumatic and sleeve­based concept that includes novel
actuation methods in elbow and forearm, in the sense of active textile based on the prin­
ciples of McKibben muscles. Additionally the concept provides a user friendly mounting
process, inspired by a simple sports sleeve, that allows the user to put on the solution
independently and provides a series of health benefits when worn.
The concept is the product of a 3­phased design process that involved a research phase,
where an investigation of preferences and needs from users and other relevant stakehold­
ers was conducted. This was followed by a conceptualization phase where ideas were
generated through creative ideation, desktop research, reverse engineering, and an en­
gineering workshop. From this, 7 concepts were synthesized and the 3 most promising
ones were evaluated at a user test with 6 stroke survivors at Roskilde Golf Club, where
The Sleeve was chosen as having the highest potential of them all. Lastly the concept
was refined in various areas in a refinement phase.
To ultimately determine the feasibility of the concept, a number of crucial areas still need
to be investigated further. The torque capabilities of the elbow joint and the overall pres­
sure requirements of the system needs to be determined to know if it is achievable using
a portable compressor. The usability of the concept in regards to consistent alignment in
the mounting of the solution also needs to be improved to avoid safety hazards and and
ensure a high usability. Finally, pressure, shape and material that goes into the inflatable
structure should be determined and the pneumatic and electrical systems should be re­
fined.
All in all, the proposed final concept shows promising elements that sets itself apart from
conventional exoskeletons and can contribute to the improvement of at­home rehabilita­
tion and ultimately the quality of life of stroke survivors.
68
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
Valery L Feigin et al. “Global and regional burden of stroke during 1990­2010: find­
ings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010”. In: The Lancet 383.9913
(2014), pp. 245, 255.
[2]
First­8. Hvad er et STROKE? 2009. URL: https://first-8.dk/stroke/?gclid=Cj0KCQiA
qbyNBhC2ARIsALDwAsDlPR1Latytg1tk3QxgB7KZycjBggCgtmWw29wjoVRyoF4niCEQ
FswaAlmjEALw_wcB.
[3]
Hatem A. Wafa et al. Burden of Stroke in Europe: Thirty­Year Projections of Inci­
dence, Prevalence, Deaths, and Disability­Adjusted Life Years. 2020. URL: https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32646325/.
[4]
Centers For Disease Control and Prevention. Stroke Facts. 2021. URL: https://ww
w.cdc.gov/stroke/facts.htm.
[5]
Bruce H. Dobkin. “Rehabilitation after Stroke”. In: (2014).
[6]
Sara K. Langvad, Liv A. Kirknel, and Mikkel V. Reimann. “A case study of stroke
rehabilitation with the ReHyb exoskeleton”. In: (2021).
[7]
Robert Teasell et al. “Time to Rethink Long­Term Rehabilitaion Management of
Stroke Patients”. In: (2014).
[8]
G. Kwakkel, B. J. Kollen, and et al. “Probability of regaining dexterity in the flaccid
upper limb: Impact of severity of paresis and time since onset in acute stroke”. In:
(2003).
[9]
C. Sicuri, G. Porcellini, and G. Merolla. “Robotics in shoulder rehabilitation”. In: Mus­
cles, ligaments and tendons journal 4 (2014).
[10]
Hjerneskadeforening. Behandling og rehabilitering. 2022. URL: https://hjerneskade
t.dk/raadgivning/behandling-og-rehabilitering/.
[11]
David J. Clarke, Louisa­Jane Burton, and Sarah F. Tyson. “Why do stroke survivors
not receive recommended amounts of active therapy? Findings from the ReAcT
study, a mixed­methods case­study evaluation in eight stroke units”. In: (2018).
[12]
J.­H. Park, K.­S. Lee, and et al. “Low cost and light­weight multi­dof exoskeleton for
comprehensive upper limp rehabilitation”. In: (2014).
[13]
Paul Tamayo­Serrano, Samir Garbaya, and Pierre Blazevic. “Gamified In­Home Re­
habilitation for Stroke Survivors: Analytical Review”. In: (2018).
[14]
Carly Thalman and Panagiotis Artemiadis. “A review of soft wearable robots that
provide active assistance: Trends, common actuation methods, fabrication, and ap­
plications”. In: (2020).
[15]
WRA. Wearable Robots. 2015. URL: http://www.wearablerobotics.com/wearable-ro
bots/.
[16]
ExR. Exoskeleton Companies and Organizations Directory. 2020. URL: https://ex
oskeletonreport.com/exoskeleton-companies-and-organizations-directory/.
[17]
Jakob Nielsen. Usability 101: Introduction to Usability. 2012. URL: https://www.nn
group.com/articles/usability-101-introduction-to-usability/.
[18]
Design Council. What is the framework for innovation? Design Council’s evolved
Double Diamond. 2005. URL: https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/what-
framework-innovation-design-councils-evolved-double-diamond.
[19]
Bela H. Banathy. “Designing Social Systems in a Changing World”. In: Springer,
Boston, MA, 1996.
[20]
TV2. Rehabgolf i tv2nyhederne 18­9­2020. 2020. URL: https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=wevFhrv7g4Y.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
69
==PAGE:78==
[21]
Cristina B. Gibson and Susan G. Cohen. “Virtual Teams that Work ­ Creating Con­
ditions for Virtual Team Effectiveness”. In: Jossey Bass, 2003, pp. 8–10.
[22]
Milene Gonçalves, Carlos Cardoso, and Petra Badke­Schaub. “What inspires de­
signers? Preferences on inspirational approaches during idea generation”. In: (2014).
[23]
Yutaka Yoshinaka. “Teknologianalyse ­ bind 1”. In: Kgs. Lyngby: Polyteknisk Forlag,
2015, 5 (DTU–Man).
[24]
W. Lidwell, K. Holden, and J. Butler. “Universal Principles of Design”. In: Rockport,
2010, pp. 20–21.
[25]
Stroke Association. Types of stroke. 2021. URL: https://www.stroke.org.uk/what-is
-stroke/types-of-stroke.
[26]
John Hopkins Medicine. Effects of Stroke. 2021. URL: https://www.hopkinsmedicin
e.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/stroke/effects-of-stroke.
[27]
April Puski. Stroke Recovery Timeline. 2021. URL: https://www.hopkinsmedicine.o
rg/health/conditions-and-diseases/stroke/stroke-recovery-timeline?fbclid=IwAR3-6
RLRUTV5vMIRabvylCys-dsLWhKP92qXmrMNLN2UK-bZgQeSuCnHvCw.
[28]
Johns Hopkins Medicine. 3 ways to avoid stroke. 2021. URL: https://www.hopkins
medicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/stroke/3-ways-to-avoid-a-second-stroke.
[29]
ExR. Qualitative analysis of stroke patients’ motivation for rehabilitation. 2000. URL:
https://www.bmj.com/content/321/7268/1051.short?casa_token=0lyd6p1frUEAAA
AA:412Nq_gwysHjasKl3uDJfeT8L8Fs1FlaZP1yjRVmNVRu0O1hw0xYgPZTQIGhmYu
PKHZ5aXyhW-P9.
[30]
Taiki Yoshida et al. “Motivation for Rehabilitation in Patients With Subacute Stroke:
A Qualitative Study”. In: (2021).
[31]
Healthline. “Elbow Flexion: WHat it is and what to do when it hurts”. In: (2019).
[32]
Maria Guadalupe Contreras­Calderón and Eduardo Castillo­Castañeda. “PRSX:
An End­Effector for Pronation and Supination Adaptable to Arm Rehabilitation De­
vices”. In: (2020).
[33]
Jacopo Buzzi et al. “On the Value of Estimating Human Arm Stiffness during Virtual
Teleoperation with Robotic Manipulators”. In: (2017).
[34]
A. F. P. Vidal et al. “Soft exoskeletons: Development, Requirements, and challenges
of the last decade”. In: (2021).
[35]
N. W. Bartlett et al. “A Soft Robotic Orthosis for Wrist Rehabilitation”. In: 9 (2015).
[36]
Sangheui Cheon et al. “Single EMG Sensor­Driven Robotic Glove Control for Reli­
able Augmentation of Power Grasping”. In: (2021).
[37]
Yutaka Yoshinaka. “Teknologianalyse ­ bind 1”. In: Kgs. Lyngby: Polyteknisk Forlag,
2015, 314 (begrebsliste).
[38]
Deepak Trivedi et al. “Soft robotics: Biological inspiration, state of the art, and future
research”. In: (2008).
[39]
Thomas Maribo et al. “Barthel indeks til vurdering af funktionsevne: Forslag til dansk
konsensus om anvendelse”. In: (2006).
[40]
Lisa Zeltzer. “Frenchay Activities Index (FAI)”. In: (2008).
[41]
Weiyuan Liu. “Natural user interface­ next mainstream product user interface”. In:
(2010).
[42]
Jakub Emanuel Takosoglu et al. “Determining the Static Characteristics of Pneu­
matic Muscles”. In: (2016).
[43]
Soft Robotics Toolkit. Pneumatic Artificial Muscles. 2022. URL: https://softrobotics
toolkit.com/.
[44]
M. Takaiwa and T. Noritsugu. “Development of Wrist Rehabilitation Equipment Using
Pneumatic Parallel Manipulator”. In: (2005).
70
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:79==
[45]
Benjamin W. K. Ang and Chen­Hua Yeow. “Design and modeling of a High Force
Soft ACtuator for Assisted Elbow Flexion”. In: (2020).
[46]
Pham Huy Nguyen and Wenlong Zhang. “Design and Computational Modeling of
Fabric Soft Pneumatic Actuators for Wearable Assistive Devices”. In: (2020).
[47]
Gursel Alici. “Softer is Harder: What Differentiates Soft Robotics from Hard Robotics?”
In: MRS Advances 3 (Feb. 2018), pp. 1–12. DOI: 10.1557/adv.2018.159.
[48]
Tatsuhiro Hiramitsu et al. “Experimental Evaluation of Textile Mechanisms Made of
Artificial Muscles”. In: (2019).
[49]
Hsin­Hsi Lai et al. “User­oriented design for the optimal combination on product
design”. In: (2006).
[50]
Rainer Züst and Peter Troxler. “No More Muddling Through Mastering Complex
Projects in Engineering and Management”. In: Springer, 2006, p. 51.
[51]
Alena Denisova and Paul Cairns. “First Person vs. Third Person Perspective in
Digital Games: Do Player Preferences Affect Immersion?” In: (2015).
[52]
Palle M. Pedersen et al. “Comprehensive Assessment of Activities of Daily Living
in Stroke. The Copenhagen Stroke Study”. In: (1987).
[53]
European Union. “DIRECTIVE 2011/65/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
AND OF THE COUNCIL of 8 June 2011 on the restriction of the use of certain
hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment”. In: (2011).
[54]
Noriaki Kano, Nobuhiku Seraku, and F. Takahashi. “Universal Principles of Design”.
In: Japanese Society for Quality Control 14, no. 2, 1984, pp. 39–48.
[55]
Eskild Tjalve. “Systematic Design og Industrial Products”. In: IPU, 2015, pp. 38, 39.
[56]
Moura Quayle. The Strategic Design Method: Ask.Try.Do. University Lecture. 2017.
[57]
Robert Curedale. “Service Design: 250 Essential Methods”. In: Design Community
College Inc., 2013.
[58]
Dagny Valgeirsdottir, Astrid Kofod Trudslev, and Maria Væver Olsen. Negative brain­
storming. 2022. URL: https://universaldesignguide.com/method/negative-brainstormi
ng/.
[59]
Eksild Tjalve. “Systematic Design of Industrial Products”. In: Lyngby: IPU, 2003,
pp. 38–39.
[60]
Danielle Rines. How the Reebok Pump Became an Icon in the Sneaker World. 2019.
URL: https://www.reebok.com/us/blog/319118-how-the-reebok-pump-became-an-ico
n-in-the-sneaker-world.
[61]
Nigel Cross. “Engineering Design Methods”. In: John Wiley, 2008, pp. XX, XX.
[62]
Myomo. Myopro User Manual ­ Sections for all Myopro 2 Devices. 2022. URL: http
s://myomo.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/26036-Rev-6-User-Manual-All-MyoPr
o-2-Devices-English.pdf.
[63]
Ying Xiong and Xiaoming Tao. “Compression Garments for Medical Therapy and
Sports”. In: Polymers 10 (June 2018), p. 663. DOI: 10.3390/polym10060663.
[64]
Miha Dežman et al. “Exoskeleton Arm Pronation/Supination Assistance Mechanism
With A Guided Double Rod System”. In: (2019).
[65]
Alberto Savoia. “Pretotype It: Make sure you are building the right It before you build
it right”. In: (2011).
[66]
ExRx.net. Body Segment Data­ Mean Segment Weights. 2022. URL: https://exrx.n
et/Kinesiology/Segments?fbclid=IwAR04dY9j6amTFZgLrYcToE8tqFctZme9Opr-9Pje
r6PiH9swVsMePkZHw_Y.
[67]
WikiPedia. Human body weight. 2022. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human
_body_weight?fbclid=IwAR074gRf6RnFm12T6HmpTJf3sXG47HlRv1lD-OthkyNczUl
JH7u0fX6Lwaw#cite_note-39.
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
71
==PAGE:80==
[68]
Rupal Roy et al. “The development of a portable elbow exoskeleton with a Twisted
Strings Actuator to assist patients with upper limb inhabitation”. In: (Jan. 2022).
[69]
AV­cables. 12v batteri ­ 1,3Ah. 2022. URL: https://www.av-cables.dk/12v-blybatte
ri/12v-batteri-1-3ah.html?utm_source=google&utm_medium=organicshopping&ut
m_campaign=googleshoppingorganic&gclid=CjwKCAjwrfCRBhAXEiwAnkmKmUllQ4
LwjplcNLtXs5OEHGJOit-o3abjMVPrZc_Vh9dl39HqjtAC_RoC_-MQAvD_BwE.
[70]
Kyle Field. BloombergNEF: Lithium­Ion Battery Cell Densities Have Almost Tripled
Since 2010. 2020. URL: https://cleantechnica.com/2020/02/19/bloombergnef-lithiu
m-ion-battery-cell-densities-have-almost-tripled-since-2010/.
[71]
Se­Hun Park et al. “A Lightweight, Soft Wearable Sleeve for Rehabilitation of Fore­
arm Pronation and Supination”. In: (2019).
[72]
Wyatt Felt and C. David Remy. “Smart braid: Air muscles that measure force and
displacement”. In: 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems. 2014, pp. 2821–2826. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2014.6942949.
72
Design of User­centered Exoskeleton for AR­based Rehabilitation
==PAGE:81==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
