==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Impact of atmosphere-wave interactions on 
wind resources
Anomitro Datta
DTU Wind Energy-M-0490 
February 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0490 
February 2022
Project period: 
August 2021 - February 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Jana Fischereit
Xiaoli Guo Larsén
DTU Wind Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: 
Anomitro Datta
Title:
Impact of atmosphere-wave 
interactions on wind resources
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Offshore wind energy continues to grow multi-folds into a cost effective and reliable alter-
native to the current fossil fuel driven energy mix. However, there are potential challenges
to further expansion of these resources offshore, due to complex interactions involving
winds, waves and wakes propagating from surrounding wind farms. The current project
is dedicated to achieving a better understanding of the impact of waves on the wind re-
sources.
This thesis work involves the analysis of a set of climatologically representative mesoscale
simulations of a 30-year wind and wave climate over wind farm clusters in the German
Bight area in order to quantify the long-term impact of oceanic surface waves on the exist-
ing offshore wind resources. The simulation set consists of simulations of the atmosphere
in the Weather Research and Forecasting model coupled and uncoupled to a Simulating
Waves Nearshore wave model, both without wind farms as well as including the presence
of wind farms on parameterizing the wind farms built prior to July 2020 using the Fitch
parameterisation scheme.
The simulated wind speeds, wind direction, significant wave height and wave direction
from the simulation sets are compared with long term European Centre for Medium-Range
Weather Forecasts Reanalysis 5th Generation ERA5 reanalysis data and post processed
measurements from the Forschungsplattformen In Nord and Ostsee 1 and 3 (FINO1 and
FINO3) offshore research platforms in the North Sea. Wind and wave climate is examined
during different atmospheric conditions and the wind speed deficits accounting for wake
and wave impact on hub height wind resources are quantified from the simulation results.
The results show that including the wave effect for long term offshore wind resource
assessment leads to an average reduction in wind speeds at near hub-height of 100 m
by 1% as compared to standalone atmospheric simulations. The maximum wind speed
deficits increase by 0.5% including the wave impact on wind speeds at 100 m. The wave
influence on wind speed reduction are found to be higher in wind speed ranges greater
than 10 m/s. Wake characteristics depend on the existing atmospheric stability conditions.
Under stable conditions, maximum wind speed deficits due to wakes are found to be 10%
higher than in unstable conditions. The turbulence kinetic energy on average is higher in
case of the coupled simulations leading to an enhanced mixing reflected in smaller wake
affected areas calculated from the coupled simulations. Comparing the effect of waves
and wakes on wind resources in the German Bight, even though the waves induce smaller
wind speed deficits than wakes, the order of magnitude can be comparable depending on
the location of the site and the long term directionality of winds.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jana Fischereit and Xiaoli Guo Larsén for their
constant help and support during the course of this thesis project. Their help in solving
the many technical problems I encountered throughout the entire period of my thesis was
invaluable and continuously providing me support. I also thank them for their simulations
on which this thesis is based.
Anomitro Datta
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Overview
3
2.1
Atmospheric Boundary Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Atmospheric Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Wind driven waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Wind Turbine flows and Wakes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Wind Farm Parameterisations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Selection of representative days
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Modeling system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Measurement and Reanalysis data
17
4.1
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
ECMWF Reanalysis 5th Generation (ERA5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Climatic Validation
19
5.1
Statistical Error Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Wind Speeds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Significant Wave Height
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Wind Direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.5
Wave Direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Point Analysis
37
6.1
Wind Speed Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Stability Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Spatial Analysis
57
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
7.1
Wake Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Turbulence Kinetic Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8
Conclusions
67
Bibliography
68
A Appendix : Point Analysis
73
B Appendix : Wake Analysis
78
B.1 Wind Speed deficits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Wind energy has played an important role towards energy transition and will be key to
achieving the European Union’s renewable energy targets in becoming carbon-neutral by
2050 EuropeanCommission. With increasing installed capacities of wind energy, avail-
ability of new sites with good wind conditions becomes even more limited. The main
incentive for the development of wind energy offshore, is the limited land availability for
onshore sites and the abundance of shallow waters with high wind resources.
Offshore wind turbine installations has steadily increased over the past decade across Eu-
rope due to increasing project scales and decreasing levelized cost of energy (LCOE). As
of June 2021, offshore wind energy accounted for a cumulative installed capacity of 26
GW in Europe. In the first half of 2021, new offshore wind energy installations in Europe
amounted to a net capacity of 1.3 GW, that was connected to the grid despite disruptions
faced in the global wind energy market due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Almost all of
these new offshore installations were in the North Sea and is projected to rise further
Ramírez and Brindley [2021].
The wind farm planning and development process is heavily reliant on accurate wind
resource assessment of proposed sites. Wind resources are affected by the existing atmo-
spheric flow conditions. In offshore conditions, wind is dependent on the sea state. The
atmosphere and sea interact, wherein winds generate waves and waves in turn imply a
feedback to the winds. The flow is further influenced by turbulent streams propagating
downstream from surrounding wind farms. This gives rise to complex flow field featuring
wind, waves and wakes. Therefore, quantifying these effects is relevant and crucial for a
better estimation of wind resources.
1.2
Research Questions
This thesis aims to support the research on atmosphere-wave coupled models by providing
insights into how the waves impact the long term wind climate. The following research
questions have been formulated:
1. What are the atmospheric conditions impacting the interactions between atmo-
sphere and waves ?
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
2. What is the long term impact of oceanic surface waves on wind resources and tur-
bulence ?
1.3
Thesis Structure
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical Overview
This chapter will provide an overview of the relevant theory and concepts described in
literature, justifying the relevance of the research objective and providing a basis for the
rest of the thesis.
2.1
Atmospheric Boundary Layer
A boundary layer exists whenever a fluid flows over a surface. If a solid object is immersed
inside the volume of a fluid flow, a boundary layer is developed over the surface of the
object. The fluid is bound by adhesive forces which makes it to have the same velocity
as the object at the surface while diffusive forces lead to the smoothening of the velocity
profile, thus leading to the fluid attaining free stream velocity outside the boundary layer.
The bottom of the troposphere, that is the part of the atmosphere directly affected by
the presence of earth’s surface is known as the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL). This
layer acts as an intermediate between the Earth’s surface and the free atmosphere. In
this boundary layer, the flow velocity is assumed to be zero at the surface and equal to
the free-stream velocity outside the boundary layer. Air masses in the ABL experience a
resistive drag force due to surface roughness, leading to a slowing down of the flow near
the Earth’s surface. In addition, there are thermal effects like the heating of air during
the day, cooling of air in the night, evaporation and condensation processes, and pollutant
concentration. These external forcings determine the thickness of the ABL Stull [1988].
The turbulence in the ABL is mainly generated by wind shear due to the friction with
the surface, and buoyancy, due to the heating of the ground.
The ABL can be further classified into several layers as shown in Figure 2.1, that are
distinguished by the force balances within them. The two main layers significant to wind
resource assessment are firstly, the constant flux layer or surface layer which is at the
bottom part of ABL and the Ekman layer. The surface layer extends roughly upto a
height of 100 m. In the surface layer, the variation of vertical fluxes of momentum and
heat are considered to be almost constant (less than 10%) Berg et al. [2020]. The wind
structure is primarily affected by the surface friction and surface heat flux (or the vertical
temperature gradient) in this layer. In the Ekman layer (from roughly 100 m up to the
free troposphere above ∼1 km), in addition to above forces, the Coriolis force due to the
Earth’s rotation has an important effect that leads to a turning of wind direction with
increasing height commonly referred to as the Ekman-spiral Emeis [2018].
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Theoretical Overview
Figure 2.1: Vertical layers of the ABL over a flat terrain. Figure taken from Emeis
[2018].
2.2
Atmospheric Stability
Atmospheric stability in the ABL describes the potential of the vertical motion of air
due to the temperature distribution with height. This has an important effect on the
turbulence in the atmosphere due to buoyancy effects. Depending on the state of stability
in the ABL, there is an amplification or reduction of turbulent fluctuations in the flow
field. A layer is considered to be stable when as a result of buoyancy forces, the vertical
motion is suppressed and as unstable or convective when vertical motion is increased.
Using Archimedes’ physical law of buoyancy, the buoyancy force (Fb) acting on a parcel
of air in the ABL can be written as follows Stull [2015],
Fb
m = ρa −ρe
ρa
· g
(2.1)
where ρa and m are the density and mass respectively of the air parcel, ρe is the density
of the environment (atmosphere) and g is the acceleration due to gravity.
Buoyant forces in the ABL form due to convection of air in the presence of vertical tem-
perature gradients or temperature differences across heights. This vertical temperature
gradient is referred to as the atmospheric lapse rate (γ). If a parcel of air is hypothetically
displaced away from the Earth’s surface, it expands at higher heights due to a lower pres-
sure. The work done during this expansion process is considered to be adiabatic (without
any heat transfer) and at a rate referred to as the dry adiabatic lapse rate (γd). If the
temperature of a vertically displaced air parcel is warmer than its surrounding environ-
ment, it has lower density than the environment (ρa < ρe), therefore it will experience
a negative buoyancy force (Fb) pushing it upwards. Therefore, the lapse rate of this air
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Atmospheric Stability
5
parcel in the ABL is larger than the dry adiabatic lapse rate. In this case, the ABL is
unstable or convective.
On the contrary, if the temperature of the air parcel is cooler than the surrounding envi-
ronment, it has a higher density than the environment (ρa > ρe). This results in a positive
buoyancy force acting downward. This is the case of a stable ABL wherein the lapse rate
of the air parcel is lower than the dry adiabatic lapse rate. Figure 2.2 shows a compari-
son between the parcel temperature and the environment temperature. It describes the
motion of an air parcel in an unstable ABL demonstrating the concept wherein if the
temperature of the air parcel is warmer than the environment, an upward buoyancy force
acts on it.
Figure 2.2: Thermodynamic diagram of an air parcel in an unstable atmosphere wherein
the darker line shows the temperature profile in the ABL environment.
Comparison
of (left) temperature T and (right) potential temperature θ of the air parcel with its
surrounding environment. Figure taken from Stull [2015].
An unstable ABL, is characterised by a higher degree of turbulence. Higher turbulence
leads to increased momentum transfer towards the surface leading to wind profiles with
low shear in the surface layer. Whereas, in a stable ABL the negative buoyancy suppresses
the atmospheric turbulence leading to a higher wind shear as shown in Figure 2.3 Stull
[1988].
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Theoretical Overview
Figure 2.3: Stability dependent velocity profiles illustrating differences in wind shear
where zSL is the height of the surface layer and M is the mean wind speed. Figure taken
from Stull [2015].
The potential temperature θ of an air parcel can be defined using the relation as Stull
[2015],
θ = T
(p0
p
)R/cp
(2.2)
where T is the absolute temperature (in K), p0 is the standard reference pressure (1000
hpa), p is the pressure at the reference height, R is the dry air gas constant and cp is the
specific heat capacity of air at constant pressure.
The ratio of R/cp is used as a constant ≡0.286 for air. The advantage of using potential
temperature is that the air parcel maintains a constant θ as it moves dry adiabatically as
shown in Figure 2.2. The lapse rate γ, defined as the gradient of potential temperature θ
with the height z is expressed as Stull [2015],
γ = dθ
dz ≈∆θ
∆z
(2.3)
Platis et al. [2021] conducted a study to characterize stability using airborne measurements
as well as long term measurement data from the offshore masts at FINO1 and FINO3.
On evaluating different stability classification criteria including gradient based parameters
such as lapse rate (γ) and bulk Richardson number (RiB), a large number of outliers
were found in the RiB data leading to unreliable results. They thereby concluded that
FINO measurements can be used as a reliable data source for calculating the gradient of
potential temperature. This is taken into consideration and the stability classifications
in this project are based on the calculation of lapse rate from the measurements and
simulation data.
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Wind driven waves
7
2.3
Wind driven waves
Oceanic waves develop due to frictional forces acting on the sea surface. These forces are
mainly transferred in the form of pressure or stress perturbations from the winds leading
to the development of wind-driven waves. In the sea, the wind-driven waves are either
generated locally by the local wind field referred to as wind sea, or generated far-away
referred to as swell. The area over which the wind blows over the water is called fetch.
The magnitude of the resulting waves can determined by the wind speed, duration, water
depth and fetch length Holthuijsen [2007].
When the wind blows over a flat water surface, the two fluids get coupled by a thin vis-
cous layer leading to a creation of irregularities on the water surface. These irregularities
grow and steer the wind over the waves, thus creating a differential surface pressure. This
pressure difference increases the transfer of energy and momentum from wind to waves.
As a result, the waves grow and evolve in height and length. As the waves grow, the
harmonic nature of the generated waves causes a disturbance of the air flow along the
surface. This enhances the number of interactions with the wind and induces an even
faster wave growth. This is regarded as a positive feedback mechanism Miles [1957].
The energy from wind-driven waves is distributed across a range of frequencies and di-
rections or wave spectrum. From in field measurements, it is diﬀicult to measure the
wave spectrum for waves of smaller wavelengths whereas laboratory experiments cannot
replicate the same characteristics as the actual sea. Therefore, in order to combine the
available in situ and laboratory measurements of spectra across various wavelength ranges,
spectral wave models are developed to numerically model the sea surface.
2.4
Wind Turbine flows and Wakes
Wind turbines are machines that extract mechanical energy in the form of momentum
from the air and convert it into electrical energy. This energy conversion process is highly
dependent on the flow mechanisms taking place both in front and behind the wind turbine
rotor.
The region in front of the turbine rotor is called the induction zone wherein there is a de-
acceleration of air and downstream of the turbine is called the wake region characterised
by a velocity deficit due to increased turbulence and loss in momentum. The waked region
can be further classified into near-wake and far-wake which have distinctive differences
in the velocity profiles as shown in Figure 2.4. The near wake region is affected by the
immediate response to the rotation of the turbine blade and extends upto around 3-4
rotor diameters downstream of the turbine Sanderse [2009]. The flow in this region is
dictated mainly by the geometry of the blade and nacelle as well as the incoming wind
speeds. This region is characterised by the largest wind speed deficit arising due to the
formation of helical vortices originating from the tips of the wind turbine blade and nacelle.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Theoretical Overview
Figure 2.4: Velocity profiles in the wake of a wind turbine. Figure taken from Sanderse
[2009].
In contrast to the flow in the near wake, flowfield in the far wake affects the performance of
other turbines located downstream in a wind farm cluster. From wind tunnel experiments
of a wind turbine, the stream-wise velocity deficit in the far wake is found to correspond
to an approximately self similar Gaussian profile as seen in Figure 2.4. This means that
the normalised velocity deficit profile is independent of the stream-wise position in the
far wake.
In field experiments Smedman and Magnusson, Machefaux and Larsen [2016], Hansen
et al. [2012], showed the stability dependence on wake deficits and rate of recovery. Faster
wake recovery during unstable conditions is associated with wake meandering caused by
large convective motions.
Further, atmospheric stability also has a strong impact on
spread of wind speed deficit in the wake. The centerline of the wake is uplifted from the
hub height and the maxima of the turbulence is noted at the tip of the blades.
2.5
Wind Farm Parameterisations
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) is too coarse in order to resolve individual wind
turbines, therefore Wind Farm Parameterization (WFP) schemes are used to simulate the
impact of wind turbines on the kinetic energy and momentum balance. In this way, only
far wakes can be captured by the mesoscale models. The power and thrust curves, turbine
dimensions and the positions of each turbine are taken as input. The WFP schemes make
the assumption that all turbines are perpendicular to the flow direction. The two most
common WFP schemes used in the scientific research community are the Fitch Fitch et al.
[2012] (FIT) scheme and the Explicit Wake Parameterisation Volker et al. [2015] (EWP)
as reviewed in Fischereit et al. [2022]. The working principle of the FIT parameterisation
scheme is described briefly.
==PAGE:17==
2.5 Wind Farm Parameterisations
9
2.5.1
Fitch scheme
The Fitch Scheme has been integrated into to the WRF software since first released in
version 3.3. This scheme models the wind turbine drag as a function of the extracted
kinetic energy (KE) by the turbines.
The FIT scheme models the turbines as a mo-
mementum sink, transferring some of the KE to useful electricity and the rest in the
form of Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE). The TKE is a drag force produced by turbine
rotor. The drag force induced on the flow by a wind turbine is given by Fitch et al. [2012],
Fdrag = 1
2CTAρ|V |2V
(2.4)
where CT is the turbine thrust coeﬀicient which is obtained from the turbine thrust curve,
V = (u, v) is the horizontal velocity, and ρ is the air density and A is the rotor area.
TKE is the non-productive drag produced by the rotor. The loss of kinetic energy from
the flow is converted to power and TKE source term as shown in Equation (2.5) and
Equation (2.6) respectively as Fitch et al. [2012],
∂Pijk
∂t
=
1
2N ij
t CP |Vjik|3 VijkAijk
(zk+1 −zk)
(2.5)
∂TKEijk
∂t
=
1
2N ij
t CTKE |Vjik|3 VijkAijk
(zk+1 −zk)
(2.6)
TKE comprises of the mechanical and electric turbine losses, and a source term. The
power calculation uses the turbine power curve to determine the power coeﬀicient based
on incoming wind speed. As the grid spacing may be larger than the spacing between
two turbines, that leads to more than one wind turbine being located in a single grid cell.
The density of turbines is described by N ij
t , where i and j are the model grid cell indices
in the x (zonal) and y (meridional) directions.
The coeﬀicient of TKE, CTKE is therefore the remaining fraction of the momentum sink
which remains after the power is produced which is expressed here as the difference be-
tween the thrust and power coeﬀicients 11.
CTKE = CT −CP
(2.7)
==PAGE:18==
10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
The analysis performed in this thesis work was based on previously existing simulations.
The simulation methodology is briefly described in this chapter for the sake of complete-
ness. Fischereit [2022] Fischereit and Larsén [2021]
3.1
Selection of representative days
In order to simulate long-term climate over an area, simulating for the entire duration
is computationally expensive. Therefore, downscaling methods are used to simulate the
long term climate using a shorter duration. A measurement driven statistical dynamical
downscaling process was adopted in order to select a limited number of days that represent
the climatic frequency distribution of the wind and wave climate in the German Bight for
a 30 year period [1989-2018]. Measurements of wind and wave parameters were collected
from different sites in the restricted area of focus. The measured variables considered
were the wind speeds (WS) and wind direction (WDIR) at 10 m and close to hub height
(91.5 - 100 m), significant wave height (Hm0), peak wave direction (pdir) or mean wave
direction (mdir) and sea surface temperature (SST) or water temperature (tw). As the
datasets differed in the covered periods as well as their temporal resolution and averaging
times, they were first filtered to remove irregular values and then hourly averages were
taken in order to align the temporal frequency of the different datasets.
A base sample was created using the measurements data so that suﬀicient observations
are available for the entire period in order to validate the simulations. An availability
requirement of more than 98% was set during the entire 30 year period for creating the
base sample. This criteria was fulfilled only by wind measurements taken at 10 m across
12 sites across the German Bight. From the available measurements, days with an avail-
ability of at least 22 hours each on two consecutive days were selected from all the 12 sites.
A sampling technique was used to choose 10-190 random pairs of consecutive days with
intervals of 10 days from the base sample so that no day was selected twice. This sampling
was repeated 1000 times in order to capture the scatter of each individual sample. In order
to obtain how representative the selected days are of the long-term climate, probability
density functions for the entire available measurement period and randomly sampled days
were computed and compared for each wind and wave variable using the Perkins Skill Score
(PSS) Perkins [2007]. A sensitivity analysis was performed to compare the skill scores
over intervals of days sampled. From the sensitivity analysis, it was concluded that 180
sampled days were representative of the 30 year wind and wave climate. The final sample
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Methodology
days were selected based on the best overall agreement for the distributions of long-term
observations and the sampled days of wind and wave variables. The representativity of
the best combination was checked for joint probability distributions between different
variables and for the spatial representativity by comparing it against reanalysis data.
3.2
Modeling system
The simulations were performed using the Coupled-Ocean-Atmosphere-Wave-Sediment
Transport Modeling System (COAWST) Warner et al. [2008] Warner et al. [2010] for the
selected days. For the coupled simulations, a reduced coupling configuration was used
wherein the exchange of data takes place between the mesoscale atmospheric model WRF
and the spectral wave model Simulating Waves Nearshore (SWAN) Booij et al. [1999].
WRF and SWAN are coupled in a two-way online coupling using the Wave Boundary
Layer Model (WBLM) that has been implemented in SWAN Du et al. [2017] Du et al.
[2019]. The two components of wind speed, u10 and v10 at a height of 10 m above ground
level are determined from the WRF model and transferred to SWAN. The SWAN-WBLM
system uses this input wind speed to determine the roughness length z0 using an iterative
process and transfers it back to the WRF as presented in Du et al. [2017]. This transfer
follows the conservation principle of kinetic energy with height such that the momentum
transfer between wind and waves is both flux and energy consistent. The exchange fre-
quency is set to 6 min for the coupled simulations.
In order to include the effects of wind farms in the atmospheric model, the Fitch (FIT)
parameterisation scheme was used. A database of offshore wind turbines present as of July
2020 was created for their location, hub height, rotor diameter and power characteristics
in the form of thrust and power curves using multiple data sources. The locations of the
wind farms is illustrated in Figure 3.1. For some of the turbines, due to the unavailability
of the actual power characteristics, the thrust and power curves were scaled to other
reference turbines corresponding to equivalent power capacities.
The horizontal resolution of the innermost domain was set to 2 km and a vertical resolution
of about 10 m upto a vertical height of 250 m and a total of 62 sigma levels. WRF and
SWAN use the same model grid with 3 nests having a horizontal resolution of 2 km, 6
km and 18 km for the inner, middle and outer domain a shown in Figure 3.2. Similar to
the settings in WRF, the SWAN model was setup with a spacial directional resolution of
36 directions equidistantly distributed over the full circle and a total of 62 frequency bins
with a minimum frequency resolution of 0.03 Hz.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Modeling system
13
Figure 3.1: Wind farm locations in the German Bight as of July 2020 (marked in red),
included in the simulations.
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Methodology
Figure 3.2: Domain map of the WRF simulations. Outer, middle and inner domains
with grid resolution of 18 km, 6 km and 2 km respectively. Figure courtesy of Fishereit.
Used with permission.
The coupled modelling system was run for a 60 hr period, which included 12 hr of spin-up
time and 48 hr of actual simulation time covering the 86 pairs of selected sample days
as identified in Section 3.1. Spin-up time was used to prevent the development of model
instabilities. The initial and boundary conditions for WRF were set using ERA5 ECMWF
reanalysis data and OSTIA sea surface temperature data. SWAN was initialised using the
output spectrum of a previous 24 hr long uncoupled SWAN simulation prior to spin-up of
the coupled simulations. The forcing used in the SWAN model was the 10 m wind speeds
obtained from the ERA5 reanalysis data.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Modeling system
15
The different simulation cases are abbreviated and used as follows in the further part of
this thesis.
• WRF - standalone atmospheric simulation
• WRF+FIT - standalone atmospheric simulation with FIT parameterisation
• WRF+SWAN - coupled simulation
• WRF+SWAN+FIT - coupled simulation with FIT parameterisation
==PAGE:24==
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Measurement and
Reanalysis data
4.1
Measurements
In order to evaluate the results from the different simulation cases, measurements from
the meteorological masts and sea buoys are used for a validation study in Chapter 5 and
Chapter 6. The measurement locations considered are the FINO1 and FINO3 offshore
research platforms in the North Sea that are managed by the R&D centre of Kiel Uni-
versity of Applied Sciences and the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Climate Action (BMWK). These sites provide long term measurements of a large number
of meteorological and hydrological parameters which are relevant for this thesis. The
measurement locations are depicted in Figure 4.1 and the summary of the variables used
are tabulated in Table 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Location of the measurement sites.
The measured variables used in this thesis are the wind speeds and wind direction (WS100
and WDIR100) at a height of 100 m, significant wave height (Hm0), peak wave direction
==PAGE:26==
18
4 Measurement and Reanalysis data
(pdir), pressure (p) and temperature (T) that are recorded at a 10 min resolution. Post
processed time series of wind speed and wind direction WS100 and WDIR100 at FINO1
and FINO3 are used which include corrections for met mast tower distortion effects and
are interpolated to a height of 100 m.
Table 4.1: Measurement variables used in the thesis.
Location
Mast Location
Period
Variables
FINO1
54.01◦N , 6.59◦E
[2004 - 2018]
WS100, WDIR100, Hm0, pdir, p, T
FINO3
55.19◦N , 7.15◦E
[2009 - 2018]
WS100, WDIR100, Hm0, pdir, p, T
4.2
ECMWF Reanalysis 5th Generation (ERA5)
The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) Reanalysis 5th
Generation (ERA5)ECMWF dataset is developed by the ECMWF and is a multi decadal
dataset produced by the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) at ECMWF, covering
the period from January 1950 to present. It provides hourly estimates of a large number
of atmospheric, land and oceanic climate variables. The dataset has a global resolution
of 30 km and 137 vertical pressure levels and is available for hourly values. This dataset
is used as an input boundary condition for the WRF model. Further, this data is also
used for a validation study in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 5
Climatic Validation
A long term climatic validation study is performed for the simulated wind and wave
climate at FINO1 and FINO3 offshore sites located in the North Sea. The long term
datasets used are simulation data from the different simulation cases1, ERA5 reanalysis
data, available wind measurements from the meteorological mast and wave measurements
from the sea buoy obtained for the sites. The wind climate is examined using wind speeds
(WS) [Section 5.2] and wind direction (WDIR) [Section 5.4] at near hub height of 100 m
whereas the wave climate is examined using significant wave height (Hm0) [Section 5.3]
and peak wave direction (pdir) or mean wave direction (mdir) [Section 5.5].
The statistical error metrics used in this validation study are briefly explained in Section
5.1.
5.1
Statistical Error Metrics
5.1.1
Correlation Coeﬀicient
A linear correlation provides a measure of the strength of relationship between two pa-
rameters. In statistical terms, the correlation coeﬀicient is used to quantify a monotonic
dependence between two variables and lies in the range -1 to 1. A complete correlation
between two variables is expressed by either +1 or -1 whereas a complete absence of
correlation is represented by 0. In this thesis project, the Pearson’s product-moment cor-
relation coeﬀicient (rX,Y ) is computed as the ratio between the covariance of two variables
(X and Y) and the product of their standard deviation (σ) using the relation Freedman
et al. [2007],
rX,Y = cov(X, Y )
σXσY
(5.1)
where X is the simulated variable and Y is the variable used as reference from reanalysis
data or measurements.
1The simulation results from the EWP parameterisation scheme is used only for this validation study
and has not been used in the further analysis in this thesis.
==PAGE:28==
20
5 Climatic Validation
5.1.2
Bias
The bias gives a statistical estimate of the consistency of the predictions. The higher
the magnitude of bias, the farther the predictions are from the reference value. In this
project, the mean bias is computed as the mean of the difference between the datasets of
simulated variable and the reference variable (from reanalysis data or measurements).
5.1.3
Root Mean Square Error
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) gives a comparison of the actual difference between the
predicted and the reference value. RMSE is a measure of how far are the predictions from
the regression line. It is represented as the square root of the average of the differences
between the predictions and the reference value as,
RMSE =
√∑N
i=1 (X −Y )2
N
(5.2)
where X is the simulated variable and Y is the reference variable (from reanalysis data
or measurements). N is the number of datapoints considered.
==PAGE:29==
5.2 Wind Speeds
21
5.2
Wind Speeds
Figure 5.1 shows a simultaneous comparison of the wind speed distributions at a height
of 100 m at sites (a) FINO1 and (b) FINO3 in the form of a color coded box-plot rep-
resentation. The datasets comprise of hourly recorded values of reanalysis data (ERA5)
for the entire 30 year representative period of simulations [1989-2018], reanalysis data
corresponding to the selected days used for simulations, available measurement data from
meteorological masts and the simulated wind speeds from the different cases.
Figure 5.1: Box plots illustrating wind speed distributions at 100 m obtained from the
different datasets at (a) FINO1 and (b) FINO3. The green line inside the boxes signifies
the median and the dot refers to the mean value of the dataset.
From Figure 5.1, it can be observed that the simulated wind speeds at both the sites are
well representative of the average wind climate reflected in close location of the boxes
indicating the interquartile range (25th-75th percentile) of the datasets.
However, at
FINO1, there is a higher variation in the wind speeds among datasets reflected in the
lower shift of the boxes in the simulation cases with WFP (WRF+FIT, WRF+EWP,
WRF+SWAN+FIT) as compared to FINO3. Therefore, the reduction of wind speeds
due to wind farm wakes is higher at FINO1. The simulated wind speeds at both the sites
were in the range of [0-25] ms-1 with a few outliers. It can be noted that extreme values of
wind speeds are not captured in the simulations as the goal of the statistical downscaling
used for selecting the days for the long term simulations was to represent the average
climate in the area.
For the validation study, wind speeds from each simulation case are compared first with
reanalysis values and then with observed data from measurements. This two step valida-
tion approach is aimed at fulfilling two objectives: (a) validation using reanalysis data is
used to make a comparison of the simulated time series of wind speed at discrete times
for the entire simulation period (since reanalysis data is available for the entire 30 year
representative period), (b) validation with the available measurement data is used to
==PAGE:30==
22
5 Climatic Validation
make a more realistic comparison with the simulations.
5.2.1
Validation using reanalysis data
Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3, show scatter plots of the simulated wind speeds at FINO1 and
FINO3 respectively at 100 m from the different simulation cases against reanalysis data.
A statistical comparison for wind speeds at FINO1 is presented in Table 5.1.
Figure 5.2: (a-e) Scatter plot comparisons of the simulated wind speeds at 100 m from
(a) WRF, (b) WRF+FIT,(c) WRF+EWP,(d) WRF+SWAN,(e) WRF+SWAN+FIT,
with reanalysis data for the entire simulation period at FINO1. The identity line (shown
in red) is used as reference.
Table 5.1:
Statistical comparison of simulated wind speeds with reanalysis data at
FINO1.
WRF
WRF+FIT
WRF+EWP
WRF+SWAN
WRF+SWAN+FIT
ERA5
[entire 30 yr. period]
Mean wind speed µWS [ms-1]
9.48
7.70
8.34
9.35
7.56
9.62
Correlation Coeff. (r)
0.875
0.858
0.866
0.874
0.853
-
BIAS [ms-1]
0.388
-1.390
-0.754
0.254
-1.530
-
RMSE
2.075
2.474
2.178
2.033
2.569
-
It can be noted from Table 5.1, that the simulated wind speeds are well correlated with
the reanalysis data with high correlation coeﬀicients although the mean wind speeds are
a bit lower in simulations as compared to the reanalysis data. Lower values of the mean
wind speed for the cases with WFP (WRF+FIT,WRF+EWP,WRF+SWAN+FIT) is due
to effect of the surrounding wind farms at FINO1 which induce a deficit in the wind speed
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Wind Speeds
23
at FINO1. The positive bias in these cases is attributed to the fact that the parameteri-
sation scheme was implemented for the entire 30 year period which included simulation
dates when there was no physical wind farms present in its current position.
On comparing the mean wind speeds from the coupled and the uncoupled simulations, it
is observed that the values in the coupled simulations are lower than the uncoupled sim-
ulations. The wind speeds are further reduced when both the effect of waves and wakes
are included in the simulations as observed from the lower values of mean wind speeds
for the WRF+SWAN+FIT case.
Figure 5.3: Same as Figure 5.2 but at FINO3.
From Figure 5.3, it is observed that the simulated wind speeds at FINO3 are higher than
at FINO1. The effect of the nearby wind farms on the simulated wind speed values is
found to be lower at FINO3 than at FINO1. This can be observed from the low magnitude
of bias and lower RMSE in wind speeds for the cases with WFP in Table 5.2 as compared
to FINO1. This is caused due to the lower frequency of winds coming from the direction
where flow is affected by the nearby wind farms. FINO3 is positioned in between two
wind farms located to the east (E) and west (W) of the site. As seen from the wind rose
in Figure 5.12, majority of the winds come from the south-west (SW) while there is a
low frequency of winds from the east (E). Whereas at FINO1, the closest wind farms are
positioned SW of the site, and with a high frequency of winds coming from the SW, the
wake induced wind speed deficits are found to be higher than at FINO3. As observed at
FINO1, mean wind speeds are lower in the coupled simulations at FINO3.
==PAGE:32==
24
5 Climatic Validation
Table 5.2: Same as Table 5.1 but at FINO3.
WRF
WRF+FIT
WRF+EWP
WRF+SWAN
WRF+SWAN+FIT
ERA5
[entire 30 yr. period]
Mean wind speed µWS [ms-1]
9.77
9.51
9.59
9.63
9.36
9.93
Correlation Coeff. (r)
0.876
0.879
0.875
0.874
0.879
-
BIAS [ms-1]
0.325
0.062
0.149
0.188
-0.081
-
RMSE
2.087
2.023
2.064
2.065
2.002
-
5.2.2
Validation using measurements
In this section, simulated wind speeds are compared with the observed data from mea-
surements for days when the simulation period coincides with available measurements.
The measurement dataset at FINO1 comprises of a 15 year period [2004-2018], while the
dataset at FINO3 is for a 9 year long period [2010-2018]. This leads to a non-uniform
number of cases when comparing the sites due to the difference in their respective mea-
surement periods.
This validation study aims to evaluate how representative are the
simulations of the observed wind speeds at the respective sites, for the available measure-
ment period therefore this approach is deemed suitable. The scatter plot comparisons
of the wind speeds at FINO1 and FINO3 are illustrated in Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.5
respectively.
Figure 5.4: Same as Figure 5.2 but with measurements for the available measurement
period at FINO1.
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Wind Speeds
25
Table 5.3: Same as Table 5.1, but with measurements at FINO1.
WRF
WRF+FIT
WRF+EWP
WRF+SWAN
WRF+SWAN+FIT
Measurement data
entire period [2004-2018]
Mean wind speed µWS [ms-1]
8.77
7.08
7.67
8.66
6.97
9.34
Correlation Coeff. (r)
0.800
0.774
0.785
0.797
0.765
-
BIAS [ms-1]
-0.493
1.191
0.606
-0.386
1.306
-
RMSE
2.433
2.685
2.458
2.412
2.771
-
It is observed that the simulated wind speeds in Figure 5.4, are well correlated with the
measurements as seen from the calculated correlation coeﬀicients tabulated in Table 5.3.
The correlation coeﬀicients are found to be lower in this case when compared to values
calculated from the validations using reanalysis data in Section 5.2.1. But, it must be
noted that the ERA5 reanalysis data was used as an input boundary condition for the
simulations, so a higher correlation is expected. The simulated wind speeds are consistent
with the observed values as noted from the statistical metrics in Table 5.3. Identical
observations are made as the validations using reanalysis data regarding the effect of
reduced wind speeds on including wind farms and waves respectively in the simulations.
Figure 5.5: Same as Figure 5.4 but for the available measurement period at FINO3.
Table 5.4: Same as Table 5.3, but at FINO3.
WRF
WRF+FIT
WRF+EWP
WRF+SWAN
WRF+SWAN+FIT
Measurement data
entire period[2010-2018]
Mean wind speed µWS [ms-1]
9.53
9.25
9.36
9.42
9.11
10.12
Correlation Coeff. (r)
0.810
0.816
0.806
0.799
0.809
-
BIAS [ms-1]
-0.135
0.143
0.028
-0.028
0.280
-
RMSE
2.455
2.383
2.459
2.500
2.431
-
At FINO3 from Table 5.4, it is observed that simulated wind speeds have lower bias across
all cases than in comparison with FINO1 in Table 5.3. However, the measurement period
==PAGE:34==
26
5 Climatic Validation
at FINO3 is also shorter and fewer cases are compared in contrast to FINO1.
It can be concluded that the simulated wind speeds are well representative of the long
term wind speeds at both the sites as referenced from both reanalysis and measurements
data in this study. Comparing the wind speeds simulated in a no-wind-farm scenario, it
is observed that coupled models have a consistently lower bias as compared to standalone
WRF simulations giving a better predictions of wind speeds.
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Significant Wave Height
27
5.3
Significant Wave Height
In Figure 5.6, the comparison of the distribution of simulated significant wave height Hm0
at sites FINO1 and FINO3 is made with renalysis data and measurements in the form
of a box-plot representation. The datasets comprise of hourly recorded values of reanal-
ysis data (ERA5) for the entire 30 year representative period of simulations [1989-2018],
reanalysis data corresponding to the downscaled dates used for simulations, available mea-
surement data from sea buoys and the simulated significant wave height (Hm0) for the
coupled simulation cases.
Figure 5.6: Same as Figure 5.1, but for simulated significant wave heights (Hm0 from
coupled simulations at (a) FINO1, (b) FINO3.
The simulated Hm0 at both FINO1 and FINO3 are well representative of the long term
average significant wave heights at the sites as compared with the reanalysis data and
measurement data in Figure 5.6 by comparing the respective median values of the datasets.
The inner 50 percentile of the simulated Hm0 depicted in the boxes lie close to [1-2] m at
both the sites. Wave heights are found to be slightly higher at FINO3 reflected in higher
values of the mean and median across the datasets as compared to FINO1. It can also
be observed that the extreme wave heights [> 5 m] reflected in the measurements and
reanalysis data are not captured in the simulations.
==PAGE:36==
28
5 Climatic Validation
5.3.1
Validation using reanalysis data
The comparison of the significant wave heights at FINO1 and FINO3 from the coupled
simulations with the reanalysis data is shown in Figure 5.7 and Figure 5.8 respectively.
Figure 5.7: Scatter plot comparisons of the simulated significant wave height Hm0 from
(a) WRF+SWAN, (b) WRF+SWAN+FIT with reanalysis data at FINO1.
Figure 5.8: Same as Figure 5.7 but at FINO3.
In comparison to the simulated wind speeds, wave heights have a higher correlation with
the reanalysis data. On comparing the plots in Figure 5.7 and Figure 5.8, it can be ob-
served that the simulated Hm0 demonstrate a low degree of scatter with most values close
to the regression line. Although, the wave heights are found to be slightly underpredicted
in the simulations as observed in a negative bias in Table 5.5 and Table 5.6 respectively.
The wave heights simulated in the WRF+SWAN+FIT case, including the effect of the
wind farm wake leads to slightly lower wave heights in the mean values as compared to
==PAGE:37==
5.3 Significant Wave Height
29
the WRF+SWAN case at both the sites.
Table 5.5: Statistical metrics for validation of Hm0 with reanalysis data at FINO1 .
WRF+SWAN
WRF+SWAN+FIT
ERA5
[entire 30 yr. period]
Mean Hm0 µHm0 [m]
1.17
1.13
1.44
Correlation Coeff. (r)
0.944
0.943
-
BIAS [m]
-0.116
-0.130
-
RMSE
0.289
0.296
-
Table 5.6: Same as Table 5.5 but at FINO3.
WRF+SWAN
WRF+SWAN+FIT
ERA5
[entire 30 yr. period]
Mean Hm0 µHm0 [m]
1.33
1.31
1.57
Correlation Coeff. (r)
0.928
0.928
-
BIAS [m]
-0.118
-0.160
-
RMSE
0.300
0.317
-
5.3.2
Validation using measurements
As in Section 5.3.1, the significant wave heights are compared with the measurements
taking in the respective measurement periods of the wave heights at FINO1 and FINO3
as shown in Figure 5.9 and Figure 5.10 respectively.
The statistical comparisons are
tabulated in Table 5.7 and Table 5.8.
Figure 5.9: Same as Figure 5.7 but with measurements.
Table 5.7: Same as Table 5.5 but with measurements at FINO1.
WRF+SWAN
WRF+SWAN+FIT
Measurement data
entire period[2004-2018]
Mean Hm0 µHm0 [m]
1.17
1.13
1.45
Correlation Coeff. (r)
0.934
0.933
-
BIAS [m]
-0.191
-0.233
-
RMSE
0.317
0.345
-
==PAGE:38==
30
5 Climatic Validation
Figure 5.10: Same as Figure 5.9 but at FINO3.
Table 5.8: Same as Table 5.7 but at FINO3.
WRF+SWAN
WRF+SWAN+FIT
Measurement data
entire period[2010-2018]
Mean Hm0 µHm0 [m]
1.21
1.15
1.61
Correlation Coeff. (r)
0.927
0.926
-
BIAS [m]
-0.230
-0.246
-
RMSE
0.344
0.356
-
On comparing the wave heights with measurements, identical observations are made as
in the comparison with reanalysis data. The effective biases are a bit higher in the com-
parison with measurements, however a good agreement is found between the simulations
and the reference datasets from the error metrics.
==PAGE:39==
5.4 Wind Direction
31
5.4
Wind Direction
A comparison of the long term distribution of wind directions is made using a wind rose
with 24 directional bins for all the datasets. The wind roses at FINO1 and FINO3 are
shown in Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12 respectively on the next page.
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Climatic Validation
Figure 5.11: Wind direction expressed as wind roses depicting their frequency of occur-
rence (in %) for (a) long term reanalysis data, (b) reanalysis data from downscaled dates
used for simulations, (c) available measurements and simulations (d-h) for (d) WRF,
(e) WRF+FIT, (f) WRF+EWP, (g) WRF+SWAN, (h) WRF+SWAN+FIT at FINO1.
Figure 5.12: Same as Figure 5.11 but at FINO3.
==PAGE:41==
5.4 Wind Direction
33
It can be observed from from Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12, that the predominant wind
direction is from the south west (SW) sector at both FINO1 and FINO3. At FINO1, on
comparing the cases with WFP, it can be observed that the wind speeds are lower than
the cases in a no-wind farm scenario due to the wake effect of the surrounding wind farms.
However, at FINO3 the wake effect on wind speeds is found to be considerably smaller.
This is because, FINO1 is surrounded by wind farms in the south-west (SW) sector which
has a high frequency of incoming winds whereas FINO3 is located in between two wind
farms in the east (E) and west (W) sector which has a relatively lower winds. Overall,
a good agreement can be found from the the directional distribution of the wind across
datasets at both the sites.
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Climatic Validation
5.5
Wave Direction
A comparison of the long term distribution of wave directions at FINO1 and FINO3 is
shown in Figure 5.13 and Figure 5.14 respectively. The datasets include long term mean
wave directions from the ERA5 reanalysis data and peak wave directions from available
sea buoys and simulations at FINO1 and FINO3.
Figure 5.13: Wave direction expressed as roses depicting their frequency of occurrence
(in %) for (a) long term reanalysis data, (b) reanalysis data from downscaled dates
used for simulations, (c) available measurements and simulation results (d-e) for (d)
WRF+SWAN, (e) WRF+SWAN+FIT at FINO1.
Figure 5.14: Same as Figure 5.13 but at FINO3.
==PAGE:43==
5.5 Wave Direction
35
It can be observed from Figure 5.13 that the main component of waves at FINO1 are
from the north west (NW) and west (W) sectors which are associated with longer fetch
length into the open sea whereas there is also a weaker component coming from the east
(E). On comparing the distributions across datasets, it can be noted that the directional
distribution of waves is much better captured in the simulations Figure 5.13(d,e) than the
ERA5 dataset Figure 5.13(a,b) referencing from the measurements in Figure 5.13(c).
At FINO3, the dominant waves with higher Hm0 are found to be coming from the north
west (NW) direction, while there is also a component of waves from the south-west (SW)
which are a result of long fetch length and prevailing winds from the SW sector. The
simulations are found to represent the directionality of waves better than the reanalysis
data.
==PAGE:44==
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Point Analysis
6.1
Wind Speed Classification
6.1.1
Methodology
In this section, a classification is performed on the basis of observed values of wind speeds
at 100 m obtained from the measurement masts at the offshore sites FINO1 and FINO3.
The observed wind speeds (WSobs) are binned into intervals of [0 −5, 5 −10, 10 −15
and > 15] ms-1 and the corresponding wind and wave parameters from the simulations
for those observed times are analysed at the respective sites. Due to the difference in the
measurement periods at the sites, the temporal variability of wind and wave conditions
between the sites is not investigated. The wind climate is represented by the simulated
wind speeds (WSsim) and wind direction at 100 m, whereas the wave climate is repre-
sented by the simulated significant wave height (Hm0sim) and peak wave direction (pdir).
In each of the wind speed categories, the simulated wind speeds (WSsim) and significant
wave height (Hm0sim) from the different simulation scenarios are compared against the
observed values (WSobs) and (Hm0obs).
Further, in each wind speed category, the wind speed deficits due to the contribution of
atmospheric wakes and oceanic waves are calculated and compared at 100 m at FINO1
and FINO3 considering the following simulation scenarios :
• Wake induced deficit :
– WSWRF+FIT - WSWRF
– WSWRF+SWAN+FIT - WSWRF+SWAN
• Wave induced deficit :
– WSWRF+SWAN - WSWRF
– WSWRF+SWAN+FIT - WSWRF+FIT
==PAGE:46==
38
6 Point Analysis
6.1.2
Wind Speeds [0 - 5] ms-1
The simulated wind and wave parameters in the observed wind speed (WSobs) range [0−5]
ms-1 at FINO1 is illustrated in Figure 6.1. The plots for FINO3 in the same wind speed
category is enclosed in the Appendix in Figure A.1.
Figure 6.1: Simulated (a-d) wind speeds (WSsim) at 100 m height from (a) WRF,
(b) WRF+FIT, (c) WRF+SWAN, (d) WRF+SWAN+FIT, (e-f) significant wave height
(Hm0sim) from coupled simulations (e) WRF+SWAN, (f) WRF+SWAN+FIT, compared
with observations. (g-h) wind rose from (g) WRF, (h) WRF+SWAN, (i) wave rose of
peak wave direction from WRF+SWAN, at FINO1 during the observed wind speed in
range [0 −5] ms-1.
The simulated wind speeds in this wind speed category are found to be overpredicted
at both FINO1 and FINO3 with notable outliers. This is reflected by a positive bias
which can be seen in Figure 6.1(a-d). The cases representing no-wind-farm scenarios i.e.
WRF and WRF+SWAN show a similar distribution of wind speeds with a comparatively
higher bias than the cases including wind farms i.e. WRF+FIT and WRF+SWAN+FIT.
The significant wave heights are well represented in the simulations as observed from
Figure 6.1 (e) and (f) in both the coupled simulations and the coupled simulations with
FIT parameterisation showing a high correlation with the observed values. The simulated
waves in this category are associated with low wave heights with the majority of wave
==PAGE:47==
6.1 Wind Speed Classification
39
heights (<1 m) at both FINO1 and FINO3.
At FINO1, the wind directions are scattered however a higher frequency of winds are
from the north-west (NW) sector which stretches out into the open sea which can be seen
from the wind rose of both the uncoupled and coupled simulations in Figure 6.1(c) and
(d) respectively. In comparison, at FINO3 winds are predominantly from the south-west
(SW) with also a component from over the land in the north-east (NE). A high frequency
of waves are from the the north-west (NW) at both FINO1 and FINO3 which is influenced
by the longer fetch length in that sector. In addition, at FINO3 a large component of
waves are also found to be coming from the south-west (SW) as the winds.
In order to quantify the impact of wakes and waves on hub height wind speeds, wind
speed deficits at FINO1 and FINO3 due to wake and wave contribution are shown below
in Figure 6.2 in the form of a color coded boxplot representation. The wake contribution is
marked in Figure 6.2(a,b) by the dark and light blue boxes whereas the wave contribution
is shown in pink and yellow boxes Figure 6.2(c,d).
Figure 6.2: Wind speed deficits in [ms-1] due to (a,b) wakes at (a) FINO1, (b) FINO3,
and (c,d) waves at (c) FINO1, (d) FINO3 for observed wind speeds in range [0−5] ms-1.
The mean deficits are represented by the dots inside the boxes while the green horizontal
line represents the median deficits.
On comparing the mean of wind speed deficits at FINO1, it can be observed that the
mean wake induced deficit is -0.65 ms-1 whereas the mean deficit due to waves is close
to 0 ms-1. The negative wind speed deficit indicates the reduction in wind speeds down-
stream caused by the presence of wind farms. At FINO3, the wake effect is found to be
much lower as compared to FINO1 with a mean wind speed deficit of -0.05 ms-1. The
mean wave induced wind speed deficit is found to be close to 0 ms-1 as at FINO1. The
wake effects at both the sites are quite low as it is expected to have negligible effects
of wind farm wakes at low wind speeds below cut-in wind speeds of wind turbines. It
can also be noted that even though the mean deficits due to waves are quite low at both
FINO1 and FINO3, the range of the deficits are higher at FINO3 as compared to FINO1.
==PAGE:48==
40
6 Point Analysis
In general, for wind speeds in the range [0 - 5] ms-1, the wind speed deficits due to both
the wake and wave effects are found to be quite low.
6.1.3
Wind Speeds [5 - 10] ms-1
The simulated wind and wave parameters in the observed wind speed (WSobs) range [5−10]
ms-1 at FINO1 is illustrated in Figure 6.3 and for FINO3 in in Appendix:Figure A.2.
Figure 6.3: Same as Figure 6.1 for observed wind speeds in range [5−10] ms-1 at FINO1.
The simulated wind speeds from the WRF and WRF+SWAN simulations at FINO1 shows
a general overprediction of wind speeds whereas the simulations with WFP show an un-
derprediction of wind speeds as compared to the measurements as seen in Figure 6.3(a-d).
At FINO3, the wind speeds are also slightly overpredicted throughout all the simulation
cases. The wave heights are found to be higher in this wind speed category with the mean
≈1 m, at both FINO1 and FINO3.
At FINO1, a weaker component of winds are found to be from the eastern sector while the
majority of the winds are from the north-west (NW) sector Figure 6.3(g,h) as observed
in the [0 −5] ms-1 category. The waves continue to come predominantly from the NW
sector in Figure 6.3(i) as observed in the [0 −5] ms-1 category. The NW sector is the
==PAGE:49==
6.1 Wind Speed Classification
41
dominant wave direction at FINO1 as observed from the long term wave roses as observed
from Figure 5.13.
The wind direction at FINO3 are scattered with a majority of winds from the western
sector while there is also a component of wind associated with higher wind speeds coming
from the eastern sector. The waves are found to be typically coming from the north-west
(NW) and south-west (SW) as observed in the [0 −5] ms-1 category.
The wind speed deficits due to the wakes and waves respectively at FINO1 and FINO3
for this wind speed category are plotted in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Same as Figure 6.2 for observed wind speeds in range [5 −10] ms-1.
On comparing the wind speed deficits from Figure 6.4, the deficits are found to be higher
than in the [0 −5] ms-1 category. The mean wake induced deficit at FINO1 is found to
be higher than at FINO3. The mean wake induced deficit at FINO1 is -1.6 ms-1 while at
FINO3 is -0.3 ms-1. The mean wave induced deficits are found to be comparable at both
the sites and are -0.09 ms-1 at FINO1 and -0.08 ms-1 at FINO3.
==PAGE:50==
42
6 Point Analysis
6.1.4
Wind Speeds [10 - 15] ms-1
The simulated wind and wave parameters in the observed wind speed (WSobs) range [10−
15] ms-1 at FINO1 and FINO3 are illustrated in Figure 6.5 and in Appendix: Figure A.3
respectively.
Figure 6.5: Same as Figure 6.3 for observed wind speed in range [10−15] ms-1 at FINO1.
In this wind speed category, the simulated wind speeds are found to be underpredicted
across all simulation cases at both FINO1 and FINO3 as seen in the case of FINO1 in
Figure 6.5(a-d). At FINO1, a high frequency of winds are found to be from the west and
(W) and south-west (SW) sector from Figure 6.5(g,h). In comparison, at FINO3 the wind
direction is scattered although a high frequency of winds are found to be from the west
(W) and south (S) sectors.
Higher waves are noted in this wind speed category as compared to the low wind speed
categories with the mean simulated Hm0 found to be ≈1.5 m at both FINO1 and FINO3.
The waves at FINO1 are predominantly coming from the north-west (NW) and west (W)
sector as seen in Figure 6.5(i). At FINO3, wave direction is found to scattered while there
is a component of waves associated with higher wave heights that are found to be from
the north-west (NW) sector.
==PAGE:51==
6.1 Wind Speed Classification
43
The wind speed deficits found due to the wakes and waves respectively at FINO1 and
FINO3 for this wind speed category are plotted in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Same as Figure 6.4 for observed wind speeds in range [10 −15] ms-1.
From Figure 6.6, the mean wind speed deficits induced by wakes at FINO1 is found to
be -2.5 ms-1 while the mean wind speed deficit due to waves is -0.2 ms-1. In comparison,
at FINO3, the wake effect is found to be lesser as compared to FINO1 noted in a mean
deficit of -0.26 ms-1 whereas the wind speed deficit due to waves at FINO3 is found to
-0.2 ms-1. The wave induced wind speed deficits is found to be identical at both the sites
and higher than the observations from the [5-10] ms-1 Figure 6.4, pointing to the greater
influence of high wind speeds on the wave induced deficits.
==PAGE:52==
44
6 Point Analysis
6.1.5
Wind Speeds [> 15] ms-1
The simulated wind and wave parameters in the observed wind speed (WSobs) range [ >
15] ms-1 at FINO1 and FINO3 are illustrated in Figure 6.7 and in Appendix: Figure A.4
respectively.
Figure 6.7: Same as Figure 6.5 for observed wind speeds > 15 ms-1 at FINO1.
There were notable outliers found in the simulated wind speeds in this wind speed category
at both FINO1 and FINO3 showing an underprediction compared to the measurements as
seen at FINO1 in Figure 6.7(a-d). The associated biases were found to be higher at FINO1
especially in the cases with WFP. From the distribution of wind and wave directions, a
high scatter can be observed at both the sites, as seen for FINO1 in Figure 6.7(g,h) and
Figure 6.7(i) respectively. However, wind and wave directions were noted to be highly
aligned at FINO3 in this wind speed category.
The wind speed deficits found due to the wakes and waves respectively at FINO1 and
FINO3 for this wind speed category are plotted in Figure 6.8.
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Wind Speed Classification
45
Figure 6.8: Same as Figure 6.6 for observed wind speeds > 15 ms-1.
From Figure 6.8, the mean wind speed deficit induced by wakes at FINO1 is found to be
-2 ms-1 while the mean wind speed deficit due to waves is -0.3 ms-1. At FINO3, the wake
effect is found to be lesser as compared to FINO1 as observed from previous cases, noted
in a mean deficit of -0.28 ms-1 while the wind speed deficit due to waves at FINO3 is -0.3
ms-1. The mean wave induced deficits at FINO1 and FINO3 were found to be identical
in this wind speed category and higher than the previous categories. However, the mean
wake induced wind speed deficits were found to be lower as compared to the [10-15] ms-1
wind speed category.
==PAGE:54==
46
6 Point Analysis
6.1.6
Summary
In order to summarise the findings of this study, the wind speed deficits at FINO1 and
FINO3 at 100 m height are binned over the range of the observed wind speeds with
intervals of 1 ms-1 as shown in Figure 6.9 and Figure 6.10 respectively. The mean wind
speed deficits for each 1 ms-1 bin are represented as dots and vertical lines indicate the
standard deviation around the mean.
Figure 6.9: Mean wind speed deficits [in ms-1] at 100 m height obtained by binning the
scatter over the range of observed wind speeds into observed wind speed bins of 1 ms-1 to
due to (a,b) wakes (c,d) waves at FINO1.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Wind Speed Classification
47
Figure 6.10: Same as Figure 6.9 for FINO3.
On comparing the wake induced wind speed deficits at FINO1 and FINO3 from Fig-
ure 6.9(a,b) and Figure 6.10(a,b) respectively, it can be noted that the mean wind speed
deficit due to the wake contribution varies with the wind speed. The wake effect is found
to be negligible for the lower wind speed category [0-5] ms-1 as observed in Figure 6.2, as
most wind turbines operate above this wind speed range. The mean wake induced deficits
increase with increasing wind speeds as observed in this analysis, attaining a maximum
at an observed wind speed of 11 ms-1 which is close to the rated wind speed of wind
turbines corresponding to the highest thrust coeﬀicient CT. The maximum values of the
mean wake induced deficits, is found to be -2.4 ms-1 and -0.38 ms-1 at FINO1 and FINO3
respectively. The lower wake deficits found at FINO3 is due to the lower frequency of
winds observed from the sectors with wind farms (E and W) from the long term direc-
tional distribution of the wind speeds at FINO3 in Figure 5.12.
The wave induced wind speed deficits are compared from Figure 6.9(c,d) and Figure 6.10(c,d)
respectively. It can be observed from the plots that the mean wave induced deficits in-
crease with increasing wind speeds due to increased roughness. This increased roughness
is due to larger number of cases of higher waves found at higher wind speed categories as
observed in Section (6.1.2-6.1.5) reflected in higher mean Hm0. The wave induced deficits
were found to increase progressively in the wind speeds > 10 ms-1 at both FINO1 and
==PAGE:56==
48
6 Point Analysis
FINO3. The absolute maximum values of the mean deficits due to waves at FINO1 were
found to -0.4 ms-1 at an observed wind speed of 15 ms-1 whereas at FINO3, it was -0.6
ms-1 at an observed wind speed of 18 ms-1.
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Stability Analysis
49
6.2
Stability Analysis
Atmospheric stability in offshore conditions is influenced by the difference in temperature
between the air and the water surface. This temperature difference has a direct impact
on the turbulence in the ABL which in turn affects the momentum flux generated at
the air-sea interface. Surface waves are formed as a result of a downward momentum
transfer from the winds to the ocean surface. The surface roughness of the sea, increases
with increasing wind speeds leading to higher wave heights. The stability dependence
on wave heights with the wind speeds during different stability conditions is looked at in
this analysis. In addition, the influence of stability on turbulence kinetic energy (TKE)
by means of surface-generated turbulence induced by waves in the coupled simulations is
also evaluated.
6.2.1
Methodology
6.2.1.1
Data Used
This study is based on two datasets. Firstly, 4 year long meteorological data [2016−2019]
from the measurement masts at FINO1 and FINO3 is used. Evaluating the long-term
time series of measurements at the sites, there were notable gaps found in the time series.
In order to remove the bias due to seasonal or diurnal cycles on stability conditions, it
was required to choose a section of data which had a good availability. Therefore, this
time period was chosen wherein the data availability of the measurements was found to
be 80% and 94% at FINO1 and FINO3 respectively. The measured values of the pressure
(p) and temperature (T) recorded at a 10 minute resolution for different heights are used
in this study. Secondly, the hourly simulated values of potential temperature (θ) from the
simulations are extracted at heights 10, 30, 50, 75 and 100 m. The summary of the data
variables used are listed in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Data availability of parameters from observations and simulations in terms
of their height
Data variables
Heights [m]
FINO1
Observations
p
21
92
T
34
42
52
72
101
Simulations
θ
10
30
50
75
100
FINO3
Observations
p
23
95
T
29
55
95
Simulations
θ
10
30
50
75
100
6.2.1.2
Computation of θ and γ
At FINO1, due to the absence of measurements of pressure and temperature at the same
height for the computation of the θ, the pressure values are linearly interpolated to heights
72 and 101 m respectively. The same procedure is followed at FINO3, to obtain the values
==PAGE:58==
50
6 Point Analysis
of θ at 55 and 95 m by interpolating the pressure value at 23 m to a height of 55 m. The
values of θ, calculated at the respective heights are then used to calculate the adiabatic
lapse rate (γ) measured by the gradient of θ with the height z. For the simulations, the
gradient of θ between 75 and 100 m is calculated.
6.2.2
Results and Discussion
6.2.2.1
Distribution of γ
The distribution of the adiabatic lapse rates (γ) based on observations and simulations at
FINO1 and FINO3 for the 4 year long time period [2016−2019] is illustrated in Figure 6.11
and Figure 6.12 respectively. It can be noted that the results from simulations are from
the simulation times when the measurements are available at the respective sites, thus
reflected in the unequal number of datacounts at the sites. However, the datacounts are
equal for all the simulation cases at a particular site.
Figure 6.11: Probability histograms of the γ distribution at FINO1 from (left) observa-
tions, (right) simulations. (Note: The respective vertical scales for the plots are different
in order to accommodate the respective distributions)
It can be observed from the distributions of γ that the histograms peak near zero but is
slightly shifted to the left indicating a high occurrence of near-neutral unstable conditions.
There is an agreement of this leftward shift of the γ distribution in both observations and
simulations. It is noted that the stability distributions across the simulation cases are
quite similar which is seen from the overlapping histogram bars as seen in Figure 6.11
and Figure 6.12. On evaluating the respective probability categorisation across simulation
sets into stable and unstable conditions, it is observed that the values differ by less than
± 0.3%. Hence it has been listed as an equivalent figure representing the mean of all the
simulation cases when tabulated in Table 6.2.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Stability Analysis
51
Figure 6.12: Same as Figure 6.11 at FINO3.
Table 6.2: Stability classification at FINO1 and FINO3.
Stable [%]
Unstable [%]
Data Availability [%]
FINO1 [observations]
13
87
80
FINO1 [simulations]
6
94
100
FINO3 [observations]
15
85
94
FINO3 [simulations]
6
94
100
In the further analysis, the results are presented for the times when the stability condition
is the same in observations and simulations. This will lead to a better generalisation of
the results and the stability dependence on the parameters can be determined.
6.2.2.2
Wind Direction
The directional dependence of stability on wind direction can be seen from Figure 6.13
and Figure 6.14. The distribution of wind directions during the different stability condi-
tions are found to be analogous from the observations, uncoupled WRF simulations and
coupled WRF+SWAN simulations at both FINO1 and FINO3. The directional distri-
bution from the other simulation cases with WFP (WRF+FIT and WRF+SWAN+FIT)
were also found to be similar.
From this analysis, it is observed that stability in the German Bight depends on wind
direction, with the most stable conditions noted for flow from the south-west (SW) and
south-east (SE). This is due to the impact of the land mass in the south and south-east
on the stability conditions because warm air masses over the land are advected across the
sea. This pattern is common over the ocean in the westerly wind belts in the northern
hemisphere where winds from warm sectors come from the south-west (SW) and are thus
followed by relatively stable conditions. The cold sector winds tend to come from longer
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Point Analysis
fetch conditions in the north-west and are likely to result in unstable conditions as noted
in a similar analysis in Platis et al. [2021].
Figure 6.13: Wind roses during stable conditions from (a,d) observations, (b,e) WRF,
(c,f) WRF+SWAN at sites FINO1 and FINO3 respectively.
Figure 6.14: Same as Figure 6.13 for unstable conditions.
6.2.2.3
Wave heights
The influence of stability on wave heights can be observed from Figure 6.15. It is observed
that unstable conditions due to enhanced mixing, results in higher waves which are distinc-
tively higher than the waves prevailing during stable conditions due to increased surface
roughness.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Stability Analysis
53
Figure 6.15: Variation of wave heights over wind speeds during different stability con-
ditions at (a) FINO1 and (b) FINO3.
Further, the variation of wave heights with respect to the friction velocity (u∗) at the
surface is evaluated as shown in Figure 6.16. Friction velocity is defined as a velocity
scale which denotes the strength of turbulence and rate of momentum loss at the air-sea
interface Berg et al. [2020]. The magnitude of u∗, increases with the amount of downward
momentum flux generated. It can be seen in Figure 6.16, that the amount of momentum
exchange taking place at the air-sea interface increases during unstable condition leading
to higher waves than in stable conditions.
Figure 6.16: Variation of wave heights with friction velocity u∗during stability condi-
tions at (a) FINO1 and (b) FINO3.
==PAGE:62==
54
6 Point Analysis
6.2.2.4
Turbulence Kinetic Energy
The turbulence kinetic energy (TKE) parameter can be used to quantify turbulence. It
can expressed in a simplistic manner in the following Equation 6.1 below where the TKE
(e) per unit mass can be equated as the mean variance of the components of wind speed
u, v and w Stull [2015].
e = 1
2
(
u′2 + v′2 + w′2
)
(6.1)
The variation of TKE with wind speeds at the offshore sites in this validation study is
shown below in Figure 6.17 from the coupled simulations (WRF+SWAN) in a no-wind-
farm scenario.
Figure 6.17: TKE variation over wind speeds in different stability conditions at (a)
FINO1 and (b) FINO3.
It can be observed from Figure 6.17, that TKE is highly dependent on the atmospheric
stability conditions. Stable stratification leads to a subdued mixing in the atmospheric
boundary layer which is reflected in the low values of TKE even at higher wind speeds.
In contrast, unstable conditions aids turbulent mixing and leads to higher values of TKE.
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Stability Analysis
55
6.2.3
Summary
In order to summarise the study and quantify the impact of stability on hub height wind
speeds affected by atmospheric wakes and waves, the wind speed deficits are calculated
during stable and unstable conditions as shown in Figure 6.18 and Figure 6.19 respectively.
Figure 6.18: Wind speed deficits in [ms-1] due to (a,b) wakes at (a) FINO1, (b) FINO3,
and (c,d) waves at (c) FINO1, (d) FINO3 during stable conditions.
Figure 6.19: Same as Figure 6.18 during unstable conditions.
It can be noted from the plots above that during stable conditions, there is a higher wind
speed deficit due to wakes at both FINO1 and FINO3 as compared to during unstable
conditions. This supports the argument that stable conditions result in higher wind speed
deficits due to longer propagation of wakes whereas during unstable conditions, wakes are
shorter as noted in Smedman and Magnusson,Hansen et al. [2012]. The mean wind speed
deficit during stable conditions at FINO1 is found to be -2.8 ms-1 whereas during unstable
conditions, it is -1.2 ms-1. At FINO3, a similar observation is made wherein the mean
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Point Analysis
deficits in stable conditions is -1.2 ms-1 while during unstable conditions, it is -0.17 ms-1.
In comparison, the wave induced wind speed deficits are slightly higher during unstable
conditions. Although the order of magnitude of the median deficits are similar during
both stable and unstable conditions and is found to be roughly -0.2 ms-1 at both FINO1
and FINO3. Therefore, the effect on wind speed deficits at hub height caused by waves
during different stability conditions is found to be negligible. However, this study included
a restricted number of cases based on the agreement of stability conditions noted from
measurements and simulations which is a potential limitation to the findings.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7
Spatial Analysis
7.1
Wake Analysis
In this analysis, a section of the inner simulated domain with a resolution of 2 km spanning
504 x 454 km over the German Bight is used.
The spatial distribution of the mean
wind speeds simulated at 100 m height from the uncoupled and coupled simulations are
illustrated in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Spatial distribution of mean simulated wind speeds at 100 m height from (a)
WRF, (b) WRF+FIT, (c) WRF+SWAN, (d) WRF+SWAN+FIT across the considered
domain.
The simulations accurately capture the effect of larger roughness over land, resulting in
lower wind speeds onshore as compared to over the sea across all simulation sets. The
wind speed reduction in the scenarios including wind-farms in Figure 7.1(b) WRF+FIT
and Figure 7.1(d) WRF+SWAN+FIT (marked in lighter hues) in the sea is consistent
with the notion that the presence of wind turbines lead to decrease in wind speeds in the
==PAGE:66==
58
7 Spatial Analysis
surrounding area. The results also show that including the wave effect for a long term
offshore wind resource assessment leads to an average reduction at near hub-height wind
speeds by 1% as compared to standalone atmospheric simulations.
The wake induced wind speed deficits are calculated by taking the relative differences in
the mean wind speeds from the uncoupled and coupled simulation sets by subtracting the
no wind farm scenario from the respective wind farm scenario as shown in Figure 7.2 in
terms of absolute values (in ms-1) in Figure 7.2(a,b) and in percentage deficits by normal-
izing the absolute difference with the respective no wind farm scenarios in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2:
Mean wind speed deficits from the uncoupled and coupled simulations
setups represented in (a,b) absolute values [ms-1] and (c,d) in percentages % for the
entire simulation period.
It can be observed from the above plots that the regions marked in blue (Figure 7.2) rep-
resent areas with maximum wind speed reduction at the grid cells. The extended areas
of velocity deficit as observed in the southern area of the German Bight in Figure 7.2
signifies there is a steady wind speed reduction due to the presence of a cluster of wind
turbines wherein the wind speed potential of one wind farm is affected by the surrounding
farms. The wind speed deficits from the uncoupled and coupled simulations setups are
observed to be quite similar. The maximum wind speed deficit from the uncoupled simu-
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Wake Analysis
59
lations setup (WRF+FIT)-(WRF), is found to be -2.06 ms-1 which equates to a -21.7%
deficit while the maximum deficit from the coupled simulations (WRF+SWAN+FIT)-
(WRF+SWAN), is -2.08 ms-1 which is a -22.15% deficit. Therefore, the wave impact
incorporated in the coupled simulation setup leads to an increased maximum wind speed
deficit by ≈0.5% which highlights the long-term wave impact on the maximum wind
speeds deficits near hub-height.
In order to further investigate the wake impact on hub-height wind speeds, the simulated
data (from all simulation sets) is filtered into categories in terms of wind speed classes,
stability conditions and wind directions. The basis of this data selection is from the data
of the interpolated time series from the surrounding grid points for FINO1 and FINO3
from the uncoupled simulation set (WRF) in a no-wind-farm scenario. Choosing to filter
on the basis of the wind speeds from the WRF simulations, the effect of reduced wind
speeds at the points in the simulation domain due to the surrounding wind farms doesn’t
affect the filtering process and would lead to a better estimation of wind speed deficits
from the uncoupled and coupled simulations setups.
The wind speeds are split into categories with interval of 5 ms-1 based on the the data of
the interpolated time series from the surrounding grid points for FINO1. Wind direction
sectors are also classified based on the data at FINO1 into [45◦- 135◦], [135◦- 225◦],
[225◦- 315◦] and [315◦- 45◦] sectors, which represent considerable differences in the wind
and wave conditions due to varying fetch lengths influenced by the presence of the land
masses in the east [45◦- 135◦] and south [135◦- 225◦] sector as noted in Emeis [2018] and
the location of the wind farms in the German Bight area. From Section 6.2.2.1, it was
observed that there is a prevalence of near-neutral stable or unstable conditions in this
area while using gradient based stability characterisation methods. The stability criteria
for this data selection includes the intersection of the stability conditions as observed
from interpolated time series from the surrounding grid points for FINO1 and FINO3
respectively. This would lead to an improved stability representation over a larger area
in the German Bight. It is noted that there is a very low datacount of neutral conditions
upon filtering, so it is chosen to limit the analysis to stable and unstable conditions.
Table 7.1: Criteria for data filtering
Variable
Categories
Point
Wind Speed [ms-1]
[0-5], [5-10], [10-15], [>15]
FINO1
Wind Direction [◦]
[45 - 135], [135 - 225], [225 - 315], [315 - 45]
FINO1
Stability classes
Unstable, Stable
FINO1 and FINO3
7.1.1
Wake deficits
The time averaged wake induced wind speed deficits at 100 m, from the uncoupled simu-
lations and coupled simulations as in Figure 7.2, is now plotted for the filtered scenarios
and the maximum deficits are tabulated in Table 7.2, Table 7.3, and Table 7.4 respec-
==PAGE:68==
60
7 Spatial Analysis
tively. Wind speeds in the range [0-5] ms-1 are excluded from the analysis due to their
negligible climatological impact on wind farm wakes as the cut-in wind speeds for most
modern wind turbines are found to be just equal or higher than the maximum values in the
lowest bin [0-5] ms-1. The plots for all the scenarios are enclosed in entirety in Appendix B.
It is observed that the highest number of data points fall in the wind speed category of
[5-10] and [10-15] ms-1 across wind directions and stability classes. There is a prevalance
of unstable conditions as noted from the stability analysis in Section 6.2.2.1. On analysing
the maximum wind speed deficits due to wakes for the different scenarios, it was observed
that the deficits from the uncoupled and coupled simulations are quite similar with small
differences. The maximum wake induced wind speed deficits were found to be for the
wind speed class [10-15] ms-1, which is consistent with the findings from the analysis of
wind speed deficits at FINO1 and FINO3 using point extracted simulation data in Section
6.1 wherein deficits were found to peak at around 11 ms-1. In the lower wind speed class
[5-10] ms-1, the deficits are higher from the uncoupled simulations while in higher wind
speed classes [10-15] ms-1 and [>15] ms-1 the deficits are higher in the coupled simulations.
At higher wind speeds, the wave contribution to wake deficits is higher due to increased
roughness. On an average, the maximum deficits in the coupled simulations were found
to be higher by 0.5% in the [10-15] ms-1 range and by 0.2% in the [>15] ms-1 wind speed
categories.
There are higher wind speed deficits during stable conditions as compared to unstable
conditions as noted from the results from both the uncoupled and coupled simulations
due to stronger wakes formed as a result of less turbulent mixing. It is observed that un-
der stable conditions, on an average, the maximum deficits were ≈10% (roughly 1 ms-1)
higher than under unstable conditions in both the uncoupled and coupled simulations.
The wind speed deficits due to wakes are direction dependent. The highest deficits are
found from the [45◦- 135◦] sector followed by the [135◦- 225◦] sector. It can be observed
from Figure 7.3, that stable conditions in the [10-15] ms-1 wind speed range in those
scenarios the wakes are found to be longer. The maximum deficits were found to be higher
in the uncoupled simulations in this scenario which corresponds to a higher roughness
induced by the waves.
==PAGE:69==
7.1 Wake Analysis
61
Figure 7.3: Wake induced wind speed deficit at 100 m for the different wind direction
sectors for wind speeds in the range [10-15] ms-1 under stable conditions from (a) Uncou-
pled simulations (b) Coupled simulations. The points marked in black crosses represent
FINO1 (south), FINO3 (north).
==PAGE:70==
62
7 Spatial Analysis
Table 7.2: Maximum wake induced wind speed deficits (%) for wind speed category
[5-10] ms-1.
Wind Direction [◦]
[45-135]
[135-225]
[225-315]
[315-45]
Max. WS deficit [%]
Stable
Uncoupled simulations
[WRF+FIT] - [WRF]
-35.7
-34.7
-33.5
-34.9
Coupled simulations
[WRF+SWAN+FIT] - [WRF+SWAN]
-35.0
-34.0
-33.1
-34.1
Unstable
Uncoupled simulations
[WRF+FIT] - [WRF]
-21.6
-23.9
-25.2
-23.3
Coupled simulations
[WRF+SWAN+FIT] - [WRF+SWAN]
-21.4
-23.4
-25.0
-22.8
Table 7.3: Same as Table 7.2 for wind speed category [10-15] ms-1.
Wind Direction [◦]
[45-135]
[135-225]
[225-315]
[315-45]
Max. WS deficit [%]
Stable
Uncoupled simulations
[WRF+FIT] - [WRF]
-40.1
-35.1
-29.9
-35.8
Coupled simulations
[WRF+SWAN+FIT] - [WRF+SWAN]
-40.9
-35.8
-30.7
-36.2
Unstable
Uncoupled simulations
[WRF+FIT] - [WRF]
-23.7
-27.4
-25.1
-25.8
Coupled simulations
[WRF+SWAN+FIT] - [WRF+SWAN]
-24.1
-27.5
-25.9
-25.8
Table 7.4: Same as Table 7.2 for wind speed category [>15] ms-1.
Wind Direction [◦]
[45-135]
[135-225]
[225-315]
[315-45]
Max. WS deficit [%]
Stable
Uncoupled simulations
[WRF+FIT] - [WRF]
-39.8
-10.5
-16.1
-28.4
Coupled simulations
[WRF+SWAN+FIT] - [WRF+SWAN]
-42.1
-11.1
-16.9
-31.5
Unstable
Uncoupled simulations
[WRF+FIT] - [WRF]
-17.2
-12.6
-12.5
-13.8
Coupled simulations
[WRF+SWAN+FIT] - [WRF+SWAN]
-19.8
-12.9
-13.5
-15.9
==PAGE:71==
7.1 Wake Analysis
63
7.1.2
Wake affected area
The wake effect in a domain including a cluster of wind farms can be broadly quantified on
the basis of wake affected area. This parameter is useful to analyse the potential impact
of a wind farm on its surrounding wind farms. Previous researches have used different
thresholds in terms of % velocity deficits to quantify the number of grid cells in the sim-
ulated domain to be wake affected. Pryor et al. [2020] performed an analysis on a cluster
of offshore wind farms in Iowa, United States by including 3 different wake thresholds
in terms of 2%, 5% and 10% velocity deficits using the FIT and EWP parameterisation
schemes. Following a similar approach in this study, the wake affected area is calculated
for the simulation domain, based on the wind speed deficits shown in Figure 7.2(c,d).
Using the 2% deficit threshold, the wake affected area WAA2% can be defined as the area
in the simulation domain where the wind speed deficits are greater than 2%. On compar-
ing the respective areas from the uncoupled and coupled simulations setups for the entire
simulation period, the calculated areas were found to be quite similar and quantified as
WAA2%,(uncoupled) = 9052 km2 and WAA2%,(coupled) = 9024 km2 respectively. It can be
noted that the wake affected area from the coupled simulations were a bit lower than
the uncoupled simulations. Further, investigating for higher thresholds of 5% and 10%
deficits, the areas could be quantified as WAA5%,(uncoupled) = 3028 km2, WAA5%,(coupled) =
3036 km2 and WAA10%,(uncoupled) = 1092 km2, WAA10%,(coupled) = 1112 km2. This reveals
that the wake affected area in coupled simulations is larger for higher deficit thresholds
and there is a sustained wind speed deficit as noted in the coupled simulations in the form
of higher maximum wind speed deficits on average as noted in Section 7.1.1.
Figure 7.4: Comparison of wake affected area calculated for 2%, 5%, 10% wind speed
deficit thresholds from the uncoupled and coupled simulations.
==PAGE:72==
64
7 Spatial Analysis
7.2
Turbulence Kinetic Energy
The main difference of the turbulence kinetic energy (TKE) values in the cases including
wind farms with FIT parameterisation is that the FIT parameterisation scheme Fitch
et al. [2012] treats the wind turbines as a source of TKE. Therefore the TKE term in the
presence of wind turbines comprises of an ambient TKE and an additional TKE source
term due to wind turbine induced TKE. The climatologically averaged TKE values from
a section of the inner simulated domain is used, as in Section 7.1. The relative differences
calculated from the different simulation scenarios at a height of 100 m accounting for the
influence of (a,b) wakes and (c,d) waves on TKE is plotted in Figure 7.5.
Figure 7.5: TKE differences at 100 m height due to the effect of (a,b) wakes, (c,d)
waves.
From Figure 7.5(a,b), it can be observed that the TKE calculated in the cases with WFP
accounting for wakes from the uncoupled and coupled simulations are higher around the
locations of the wind turbines and smaller in the surrounding areas. This is caused due
to the additional source term added in the FIT parameterisation scheme due to wind
turbines accounting for wind shear. The effect of increased TKE due to the wind turbines
is found to be upto 10% higher in the waked area.
The TKE calculated in the coupled simulations accounting for the effect of waves is
found to higher than the uncoupled simulations as seen in Figure 7.5(c,d). This is due
==PAGE:73==
7.2 Turbulence Kinetic Energy
65
to the higher roughness lengths calculated in the coupled simulations as compared to
the uncoupled simulations. This is reflected in the lower wake affected areas calculated
from the coupled simulations using the 2% wind speed deficit threshold in Section 7.1.2.
Increased roughness creates more mixing leading to an eﬀicient wake dissipation.
==PAGE:74==
66
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusions
Answering the research questions formulated in the beginning of the thesis period, the
following answers are provided.
• In order to answer the first research question, the wind and wave climate was anal-
ysed for different wind speed ranges and atmospheric stability conditions.
– The mean wave induced deficits increase with increasing wind speeds due to
increased roughness. The wave induced deficits were found to increase progres-
sively in the wind speeds > 10 ms-1.
– Higher friction velocities u∗were observed during unstable conditions from
the coupled simulations, therefore higher momentum exchange at the air-sea
interface.
– The wind speed deficits due to waves are found to be similar at both FINO1
and FINO3.
• In order to answer the second research question,
– On a climatological average, the wind speeds from the coupled simulations
were 1% found to be lower than the wind speeds from the uncoupled simula-
tions. This was due to the higher roughness length calculated in the coupled
simulations.
– Maximum wind speed deficits due to wave impact on wakes were found to be
≈0.5% higher in the coupled simulations.
– The maximum wake induced wind speed deficits from the coupled simulations
were found to be higher for the wind speed classes [10-15] and [>15] ms-1. On
an average, the maximum deficits in the coupled simulations were found to be
higher by 0.5% in the [10-15] ms-1 and by 0.2% in the [>15] ms-1 wind speed
category.
– The wake affected area was calculated to be lower in the coupled simulations
as compared to uncoupled simulations.
– The TKE was found to be higher in the coupled simulations as compared to
the uncoupled simulations.
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
Jacob Berg, Mark Kelly, Jakob Mann, and Morten Nielsen. Course notes for 46100 :
Micrometeorology for wind energy dtu autumn, 2020.
N. Booij, R. C. Ris, and L. H. Holthuijsen. A third-generation wave model for coastal
regions: 1. model description and validation. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans,
104, 4 1999. ISSN 01480227. doi: 10.1029/98JC02622.
Jianting Du, Rodolfo Bolaños, and Xiaoli Guo Larsén. The use of a wave boundary layer
model in swan. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 122:42–62, 1 2017. ISSN
21699291. doi: 10.1002/2016JC012104.
Jianting Du, Rodolfo Bolanõs, Xiaoli Guo Larsén, and Mark Kelly. Wave boundary layer
model in swan revisited. Ocean Science, 15:361–377, 4 2019. ISSN 18120792. doi:
10.5194/os-15-361-2019.
ECMWF. ECMWF Reanalysis 5th Generation data (ERA5). https://www.ecmwf.int/
en/forecasts/datasets.
Stefan Emeis.
Green Energy and Technology Wind Energy Meteorology Atmospheric
Physics for Wind Power Generation Second Edition. Springer International Publishing
AG, 2018. ISBN 978-3-319-72858-2.
EuropeanCommission.
European Green Deal.
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-
action/climate-strategies-targets/2050-long-term-strategy_en.
Jana Fischereit and Xiaoli Guo Larsén.
Interaktion zwischen wind und wasserwellen
in offshore-windparks. Deutsche Meteorologische Gesellschaft DMG; KlimaCampus
Hamburg, 2021. https://doi.org/10.5446/52003 Lastaccessed : 17Jan2022.
Jana Fischereit, Roy Brown, Xiaoli Guo Larsén, Jake Badger, and Graham Hawkes. Re-
view of mesoscale wind-farm parametrizations and their applications. Boundary-Layer
Meteorology, 182, 2 2022. ISSN 0006-8314. doi: 10.1007/s10546-021-00652-y.
Xiaoli Guo; Hahmann N. Andrea (2022): Fischereit, Jana; Larsén. Climatic impacts of
wind-wave-wake interactions in offshore wind farms. Frontiers, page to be submitted,
2022.
Anna C. Fitch, Joseph B. Olson, Julie K. Lundquist, Jimy Dudhia, Alok K. Gupta,
John Michalakes, and Idar Barstad. Local and mesoscale impacts of wind farms as
parameterized in a mesoscale nwp model. Monthly Weather Review, 140, 9 2012. ISSN
0027-0644. doi: 10.1175/MWR-D-11-00352.1.
==PAGE:78==
70
Bibliography
David Freedman, Robert Pisani, and Roger Purves.
Statistics (International Student
Edition) 4th edn. WW Norton & Company, New York, 2007. ISBN 978-0-393-93043-6.
Kurt Schaldemose Hansen, Rebecca J. Barthelmie, Leo E. Jensen, and Anders Sommer.
The impact of turbulence intensity and atmospheric stability on power deficits due to
wind turbine wakes at horns rev wind farm. Wind Energy, 15(1):183–196, 2012. ISSN
1095-4244. doi: 10.1002/we.512.
Leo H. Holthuijsen. Waves in Oceanic and Coastal Waters. Cambridge University Press,
2007. ISBN 13:978-0-521-86028-4.
Ewan Machefaux and Gunner C. et. al. Larsen. An experimental and numerical study
of the atmospheric stability impact on wind turbine wakes. Wind Energy, 19, 10 2016.
ISSN 10954244. doi: 10.1002/we.1950.
John W. Miles. On the generation of surface waves by shear flows. Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, 3, 11 1957. ISSN 0022-1120. doi: 10.1017/S0022112057000567.
S. E. Perkins.
Evaluation of the ar4 climate models’ simulated daily maximum tem-
perature, minimum temperature, and precipitation over australia using probability
density functions. Journal of Climate, 20:4356–4376, 9 2007. ISSN 1520-0442. doi:
doi:10.1175/JCLI4253.1.
Andreas Platis, Marie Hundhausen, Astrid Lampert, Stefan Emeis, and Jens Bange. The
role of atmospheric stability and turbulence in offshore wind-farm wakes in the german
bight. Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 2021. ISSN 15731472. doi: 10.1007/s10546-021-
00668-4.
Sara C. Pryor, Tristan J. Shepherd, Patrick J.H. Volker, Andrea N. Hahmann, and Re-
becca J. Barthelmie. ”wind theft” from onshore wind turbine arrays: Sensitivity to wind
farm parameterization and resolution. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology,
59:153–174, 1 2020. ISSN 15588432. doi: 10.1175/JAMC-D-19-0235.1.
Lizet Ramírez and Guy Brindley. Offshore wind energy: 2021 mid year statistics. Tech-
nical report, WindEurope, 2021.
URL "https://windeurope.org/intelligence-
platform/product/offshore-wind-energy-2021-mid-year-statistics/".
Benjamin Sanderse. Aerodynamics of wind turbine wakes literature review. 01 2009.
A.S. Smedman and M. Magnusson.
Roland. Stull. Meteorology for Scientists and Engineers, Third Edition. The University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, 2015. ISBN 978-0-888-65178-5.
Roland B. Stull. An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology, 1st edition. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1988. ISBN 13:978-90-277-2769-5.
P. J. H. Volker, J. Badger, A. N. Hahmann, and S. Ott. The explicit wake parametrisation
v1.0: a wind farm parametrisation in the mesoscale model wrf. Geoscientific Model
Development, 8, 11 2015. ISSN 1991-9603. doi: 10.5194/gmd-8-3715-2015.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
71
John C. Warner, Natalie Perlin, and Eric D. Skyllingstad. Using the model coupling
toolkit to couple earth system models. Environmental Modelling Software, 23, 10 2008.
ISSN 13648152. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2008.03.002.
John C. Warner, Brandy Armstrong, Ruoying He, and Joseph B. Zambon. Development
of a coupled ocean–atmosphere–wave–sediment transport (coawst) modeling system.
Ocean Modelling, 35, 1 2010. ISSN 14635003. doi: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2010.07.010.
==PAGE:80==
72
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Appendix : Point Analysis
Figure A.1: Same as Figure 6.1 for FINO3
==PAGE:82==
74
A Appendix : Point Analysis
Figure A.2: Same as Figure 6.3 at FINO3.
==PAGE:83==
A Appendix : Point Analysis
75
Figure A.3: Same as Figure 6.5 at FINO3.
==PAGE:84==
76
A Appendix : Point Analysis
Figure A.4: Same as Figure 6.7 at FINO3.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Appendix : Wake Analysis
==PAGE:86==
78
B Appendix : Wake Analysis
==PAGE:87==
B.1 Wind Speed deficits
79
B.1
Wind Speed deficits
B.1.1
WS [0-5] ms-1
(a)
(b)
Figure B.1: Wind speed deficit at hub height for the different wind direction sectors
for wind speeds [0-5] ms-1 under stable conditions for (a) Uncoupled model (b) Coupled
model.
==PAGE:88==
80
B Appendix : Wake Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure B.2: Wind speed deficit at hub height for the different wind direction sectors for
wind speeds [0-5] ms-1 under unstable conditions for (a) Uncoupled model (b) Coupled
model.
==PAGE:89==
B.1 Wind Speed deficits
81
B.1.2
WS [5-10] ms-1
(a)
(b)
Figure B.3: Wind speed deficit at hub height for the different wind direction sectors
for wind speeds [5-10] ms-1 under stable conditions for (a) Uncoupled model (b) Coupled
model.
==PAGE:90==
82
B Appendix : Wake Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure B.4: Wind speed deficit at hub height for the different wind direction sectors for
wind speeds [5-10] ms-1 under unstable conditions for (a) Uncoupled model (b) Coupled
model.
==PAGE:91==
B.1 Wind Speed deficits
83
B.1.3
WS [10-15] ms-1
(a)
(b)
Figure B.5: Wind speed deficit at hub height for the different wind direction sectors for
wind speeds [10-15] ms-1 under stable conditions for (a) Uncoupled model (b) Coupled
model.
==PAGE:92==
84
B Appendix : Wake Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure B.6: Wind speed deficit at hub height for the different wind direction sectors for
wind speeds [10-15] ms-1 under unstable conditions for (a) Uncoupled model (b) Coupled
model.
==PAGE:93==
B.1 Wind Speed deficits
85
B.1.4
WS [> 15] ms-1
(a)
(b)
Figure B.7: Wind speed deficit at hub height for the different wind direction sectors for
wind speeds [> 15] ms-1 under stable conditions for (a) Uncoupled model (b) Coupled
model.
==PAGE:94==
86
B Appendix : Wake Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure B.8: Wind speed deficit at hub height for the different wind direction sectors for
wind speeds [> 15] ms-1 under unstable conditions for (a) Uncoupled model (b) Coupled
model.
==PAGE:95==
==PAGE:96==
