==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Secure Logistics Systems
A Core Framework
Patrick Serena Kruse (s164166) &
Christian Herreborg (s160902)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With the introduction of blockchain and its related family of technology, it has be-
come possible to create software systems, wherein it is possible to trust that others
can not violate the data that you upload to a share database, even without trusting
them. This thesis explores the possibility of utilizing blockchain technology to create
an extensible software package to facilitate a logistic system in a secure way. It does so
based on four different logistical scenarios; ride sharing, package delivery, secure trans-
portation and international shipping. The thesis first defines a set of requirements
for such a package, followed by going through a design of both blockchain infrastruc-
ture and the required data-structures and related considerations. Then, it describes
the implementation of the software package using Hyperledger Sawtooth Software
Development Kit. An evaluation of the resulting package is then made based on its
security, eﬀiciency and how practical the blockchain based solution is. The result
is an extensible software package that requires a consortium style blockchain infras-
tructure to function, which might not be practical in a range of logistics scenarios,
especially those that need to follow regional data restrictions such as GDPR.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master in Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, March 6, 2022
Patrick Serena Kruse (s164166) & Christian Herreborg (s160902)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Christian D. Jensen, our supervisor, as without him this
project would not have been started.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Big Picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scenarios Covered
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Our Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Domain & Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Structure of paper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
State of the Art
5
2.1
Information Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
C# . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Business Process Modelling Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
GDPR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
HTTPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
JavaScript Objection Notation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7
Asymmetric cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.8
RSA Encryption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.9
Docker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.10 Base64 encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.11 JSON Web Token . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.12 AES Encryption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.13 SHA Hashing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.14 Digital Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.15 Single point of failure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.16 Database Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.17 Global Universal Identifier - GUID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.18 Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.19 Consensus Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
2.20 Hyperledger Sawtooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.21 TradeLens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Requirements Analysis
21
3.1
Problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Design
27
4.1
Overall Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
The Scenarios Revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Data Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Implementation
47
5.1
The Ride Sharing process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Technologies utilized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Consensus Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.5
The Transaction Processor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
The Client . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.7
Addressing Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.8
Digital Signature & Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Evaluation & Discussion
59
6.1
Working with Hyperledger Sawtooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.3
Eﬀiciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.4
Data Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.5
Practicality of Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.6
Trust & Accountability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7
Conclusion
69
7.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Future Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A
Github
71
B
Project Plan
73
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
The Big Picture
In our modern lives, transport and logistics is utilized everywhere constantly. Whether
that be in the form of shipping a package from Copenhagen to New York or traveling
with a group of people from Copenhagen to Aarhus. However, an issue is the actual
tracking, given that, if you use a traditional database, the data on the database can be
manipulated quite easily, and therefore cannot be inherently trusted. This is where
the blockchain comes in. Given the fact; that the blockchain is an immutable data
storage solution, that we can trust, this means we can trust that the data on the chain
has not been edited. This gives us the ability to trust the data. This can then be
further combined with other identification processes, granting people and companies
a digital signature, allowing them to work together on key processes with confidence,
but without trusting each other.
1.2
Scenarios Covered
To support a wide range of transport-related solutions, the solution being explored
in this paper is being designed from the perspective of the following four scenarios:
• Ride sharing
• Package delivery
• Secure Transportation
• International shipping
The scenarios vary in scale, from local to international, and each comes with their
own set of problems. Designing a solution that can encompass these scenarios creates
a solid foundation which can fit into a wider variety of logistic scenarios.
1.2.1
Ride sharing
Ride sharing is about moving people to- and from- locations, which requires sharing
of private user data. It is relevant, as a growing interest in environmentalism and
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
concerns of air quality in cities, means that municipals are becoming interested in
initiatives that may reduce traﬀic.
In the US for instance, during rush hour one
lane is always restricted to service vehicles or people doing ride sharing.
This is
called a High-occupancy vehicle lane[Gov]. It currently makes use of, among other
mechanisms, cameras to track whether the car has a single or multiple occupants in
it. This is very challenging, as noted by Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos[Minb], due to a
variety of challenges, including people trying to cheat the system through mannequins
or by various other means.
1.2.2
Package delivery
Package delivery is about confirmation that an item (package) has been properly
received. It is relevant, as issues in package deliveries, such as missing package claims
and theft still remain an issue[Ava].
This is a reoccurring issue every Christmas,
for instance, where people get a lot more boxes compared to the rest of the year,
thieves, or often referred to as ”porch pirates” are more likely to strike at such times.
These people sit and wait till people are at work during daylight hours, and then flee
afterwards.
1.2.3
Secure Transportation
Secure transportation is about ensuring that a delivery is kept within certain condi-
tions during transport. It has been very relevant in the times of Covid-19, as the
vaccines must be kept at a low temperature during transportation. Another example
is in regard to animals. European regulations[Coma] require that animals have to be
let out of their transportation vehicle every so often.
1.2.4
International Shipping
International Shipping is about being able to keep a record of important documents,
such as bill of lading, that can be shown as required. It is relevant, as the shipping
industry, which transports around 80%[TD] of the world’s goods for trade, is still
reliant on non-digital paperwork. With the sheer size of this industry, it provides a
challenge in terms of scale and therefore also in terms of security.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Our Solution
3
1.3
Our Solution
1.3.1
A System of Trust
The solution proposed in this project is an extensible software package that makes
use of a blockchain infrastructure to keep a distributed log of logistical events. It
sets up a general logistics-related data-structure, which can be extended to fit data
of a specific scenario, such as the ride sharing scenario. Through the use of smart
contracts, it is able to ensure that a specific process is kept to and restrict who/what
is able to update specific data, such as a bill of lading, through the use of digital
signatures. It makes for a rather dynamic and scalable solution, where participation
is made as easy as adding another blockchain node to the network.
1.3.2
How it is Evaluated
The solution is evaluated overall on a few different things:
• How well does the solution work
• Is it pragmatic solution versus other options
These two measures act as the main benchmarks in regards to whether the solution
proposed is a good solution or not.
1.4
Domain & Related Works
The domain for this paper is an exploration into how and whether it is possible to
create a core framework for a subset of different types of logistic networks.
At DTU, Kasper Lindegaard Stilling, and Sebastian Lindhard Budsted, looked into
how you could make a logistic validation framework and proposed a solution to it.
TradeLens, is a joint venture between IBM and Maersk, with the goal of provid-
ing an electronic set of documentation for shipping, something that has been seen as
the ”philosophers stone” for the industry.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.5
Structure of paper
The aim of this project is to create a core-package that can be extended to cover a
wide array of logistical scenarios. The solution proposed by this paper is based on
a blockchain infrastructure, which is used as both a trusted process facilitator and a
distributed record-keeper.
Chapter 1 provides an introduction to a series of issues, which this paper revolves
around.
Chapter 2 discusses the theory utilized in the paper, alongside the technology uti-
lized for the implementation.
Chapter 3 goes over a set of issues in regards to designing and implementing a
framework for handling a logistic network both in the form of GDPR and other
requirements
Chapter 4 goes over a set of designs for the four issues described; and considers how
to solve the issues and proposes a design for each of them.
Chapter 5 discusses the implementation of a blockchain-based backing for the Ride
Share Scenario and the general data structure.
Chapter 6 evaluates the paper in terms of what was good, and the options whilst
weighing up the benefits of utilizing blockchain-based technology.
Chapter 7 is a short conclusion rounding up the paper and looks at further improve-
ments that can be made.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
State of the Art
2.1
Information Security
Security Triad: Within information security the CIA, Confidentiality, Integrity and
Availability, is considered to be the some of the three most important security
principles of any system. [Mar15]
Availability: Availability refers to whether information is accessible to the autho-
rized users, whenever it is needed or not.
Availability can be improved by
adding and creating more infrastructure, which allows systems to handle larger
loads or manage the case that either the hardware or the software fails at certain
locations.[Mar15]
Integrity: Integrity refers to the accuracy and the completeness of the data. In-
tegrity is improved upon by ensuring that data is not edited maliciously or mis-
used by unauthorized parties. Integrity involves maintaining the consistency of
the data, by ensuring it is not modified during its transit. [Mar15]
Confidentiality: Confidentiality refers to the data being unavailable for unautho-
rized parties, whether that be in the form of a data breach or an insider threat.
[Mar15]
Authentication: Authentication refers to users proving their identity to show that
they are credible. [Mar15]
Nonrepudiation/Accountability: Accountability refers to the actions taken by
each of the users being logged, so that in case a user is compromised or goes
rogue, actions can be taken to manage it. [Mar15]
2.2
C#
C# is a modern, object-oriented and type-safe programming language. [Mic] It is built
upon the ideas of Java, JavaScript, C and C. C# runs on multiple different operation
systems through the C# execution environment. It is developed and maintained by
Microsoft, who offer .NET as the primary software kit for the C# language.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 State of the Art
2.3
Business Process Modelling Notation
Business Process Modelling Notation (BPMN) [OMG] is a graphical representation of
the business processes that goes on for a group of entities performing a formalized pro-
cess. Its job is to properly reflect what goes on and codify the elements alongside the
executions of such processes and grant an overview for groups that wish to monitor it.
A BPMN Diagram consists of the following graphical representations: events, ac-
tivities, gateways and swim lanes. Each of these different diagram objects have a
different use case. Events for instance are represented by a circle and represent a
start, intermediate or end event. Start events are signified by only a single thin out-
line, whereas an intermediate event has two thin circles and an end event consists of a
single thick line. Intermediate events are utilized to showcase events that are created
during the process. These intermediate events are often handled by other entities
whether those be software systems or human people.
Activities are represented by rounded-corner rectangles and represent some sort of
task that an entity is performing. These tasks are generally simplified views of what
goes on inside a system, and do not match one to one with reality, but bear a close
enough resemblance to the actual task. An activity can hide sub-processes within it,
indicated by a plus sign at the bottom of it. Sub-processes are generally used to show
cases wherein further small steps are located, but which are not important overall to
the overview that the person who made the diagram wishes to showcase.
Logical conditions can also be displayed in a BPMN in the form of gateways. Gate-
ways have strict restrictions on what can go through them and under what conditions.
The gateway types that exist are exclusive, event based, parallel, inclusive, exclusive
event, complex and parallel event based. Most of them only allow for one path to be
taken, but in some cases, multiple paths through the system can be taken increasing
the complexity of the BPMN diagram.
In order to showcase communication across multiple entities in the same diagram
in system messages can be utilized in the system.
These messages can either be
message flows, which are dashed lines with an open arrow connection. Or one may
create events that throw messages, indicated by a letter icon that is black or closed
if it is throwing the letter, or if it is a white or open letter which indicates that it is
currently waiting for a message. Usually when working with messages there is some
sort of indication to what message they are waiting for or throwing out.
Artifacts are another important aspect to BPMN modelling as they allow the mod-
ellers to showcase different sources of information. For instance, if an activity requires
reading a dial on some machine, they might indicate it with an image of it attached
and a line going to it. But more commonly it is used to showcase links to either
data objects defined by some process or by showcasing a connection to a database
==PAGE:17==
2.4 GDPR
7
whenever a process requires it.
2.4
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [Par] is a set of regulations about how
to handle Europeans’ personal data, as the European Union, sees the protection of
such data as a fundamental right. Personal data is defined as any data, which is
related to an identified or identifiable natural person. In order to process the data,
you also need one or more of the following ticked off:
• Ensure the subject has given consent to the processing of their personal data.
• Have a contractual obligation with the data subject, either in general or for the
task specifically.
• Comply with the data controller’s legal obligations.
• Protect the vital interests of the data subject or other individuals.
• The process must be done in public interest or done by an oﬀicial authority.
The data must also be stored inside of Europe with very few exceptions, such as data
on passengers on airlines traveling from Europe to a country outside or the other way
around.
2.5
HTTPS
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS)[Comb] is a secure form of Hypertext
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) which is commonly referred to as the standard protocol
for transmitting hypermedia documents. Websites are a form of hypermedia text
document. It is utilized in common web interfaces, which allows servers to communi-
cate with people’s personal devices. Modern HTTPS utilizes TLS (Transport Layer
Security) which is a security protocol that provides communication security between
two or more parties.
2.6
JavaScript Objection Notation
JavaScript Objection Notation (JSON) is an open-standard file format written in
a human-readable format[Cro]. It is used to transmit programming objects, in the
form of attribute and value pairs through the internet. It is commonly associated
with web clients and web APIs. It was originally used solely by JavaScript, but due
to its human readable format it has gained traction in other languages, and is the
modern gold standard for APIs.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 State of the Art
2.7
Asymmetric cryptography
Asymmetric cryptography commonly referred to as public-key cryptography, is a form
of cryptography, wherein each participant has a set of keys, referred to as key pairs.
One of these keys is known as the public key, with the other key being referred to
as the private key. In order to protect their communication people can utilize other
people’s public keys to transform their message into an encrypted message. Once this
is done, the message can only be read by utilizing the other parties private key, which
only they should know, to decrypt and read the messages that are transmitted. It
is important to note, that only the public key should be shared with other entities
in order to protect the assurance to others that only one other entity can read the
message content that is sent to them.
2.8
RSA Encryption
RSA encryption is an encryption scheme utilizing public and private keys created
by Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard Adleman, thereby the name RSA. It is an
asymmetric cryptography algorithm, given that it utilizes both a public and a private
key for each side. The public key can be given out to anyone, and allows them to
encrypt their messages, so that they can only be read by the holders of the private
key. RSA key pairs can be any size, however typical sizes utilized today are either
1024 or 2048 bits[IBMa]. IBM currently designates an RSA key with a length of 2048
bits as a high strength key [IBMb].
2.8.1
Optimal Asymmetric Encryption Padding
Optimal Asymmetric Encryption Padding (OAEP) is a padding scheme that makes
use of Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) hashing (see section 2.13) and often used to-
gether with RSA encryption. The RSA encryption algorithm is deterministic, which,
even with simple random padding, makes it susceptible to various attacks, such as
Coppersmith’s short-pad attack[Bon].
2.9
Docker
Docker is a software tool made for packaging software and applications and their de-
pendencies within a virtual container that can run on any popular platform, whether
that is Linux, Windows or macOS. Docker containers are an alternative to traditional
virtualization systems such as virtual machines, which allow for emulating a full ma-
chine. Where virtual machines are heavy, Docker provides only just enough for the
application to run, making it a lightweight alternative. Docker themselves describe
their software, the Docker container, as the following ”A container is a standard unit
of software that packages up code and all its dependencies so the application runs
==PAGE:19==
2.10 Base64 encoding
9
quickly and reliably from one computing environment to another. A Docker container
image is a lightweight, standalone, executable package of software that includes ev-
erything needed to run an application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries
and settings.”[Doc].
2.10
Base64 encoding
Base64 encoding is a common binary to text encoding scheme, wherein sequences of
24 bits can be recorded as four encoded characters[Jos]. Each of these characters are
from the base 64 alphabet, which is what gives Base64 its name.
2.11
JSON Web Token
The JSON Web Token (JWT) is a security token made for compact and URL/safe
means of representing data claims which can be sent to other parties in the form of a
JSON object[NRI]. JWTs utilize JSON in a structured way referred to as the JWT
Claims Set, which is the key-value pair for the claim. JWTs can be utilized in order
to provide secrecy between two parties, and they are generally used as signed tokens
according to auth0[Aut].
The data format of the token in its compact form, is a series of three JSON objects -
the header, payload and the signature each separated by a single dot, an example of
this format would be XXXX.YYYY.ZZZZ with X, Y and Z representing the different
JSON objects. The header consists of the algorithm used for the signing and the type
of the token, which in this case is JWT. This is then Base64Url encoded into a proper
data format, which can be read by the other participant. The next part of the string,
which is also Base64Url encoded into the system, is the payload. This part consists
of the claims made by the token owner. The claims consist of either registered claims,
public claims or private claims.
Registered claims are a set of predefined claims,
which, whilst not mandatory, define the baseline and are considered interchangeable
between different systems.
The last part of the claim is the signature of the person signing it. This part consists
of taking the algorithm from the header and then applying the algorithm to the
base64urlencoded header and payload separated by single dot and the secret.
2.12
AES Encryption
Advances Encryption Standard (AES) Encryption is an encryption scheme utilizing a
block cipher used to protect electronic data. [NISa] AES is a symmetric block cipher
algorithm that can both encrypt and decrypt information. AES is capable of using
keys with a size of 128, 192 or 256 bits to encrypt and decrypt data found in blocks of
size 128 bits. Whoever holding the keys can encrypt and decrypt the electronic data
==PAGE:20==
10
2 State of the Art
allowing for two-way communication that cannot be read by others, without them
holding the right key.
2.13
SHA Hashing
Secure Hash Algorithms (SHA) refers to a family of related cryptographic hash func-
tions verified and published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), who is in charge of the processing standards utilized in the United States of
America. The family consists of the following algorithms:
• SHA-0
• SHA-1
• SHA-2
• SHA-3
The goal of each of these hashing is to take a set of arbitrary data and then ”hash”
it into a human unreadable string, that cannot be transformed back into its original
string, as the transformation is one-way only transformation. An example of SHA-2
hashing can be seen in the string ”Alice gave her key to Bob” which through SHA-256
(Part of SHA-2) can be converted to the hash ”633adf641592ffc6edbdb7b427bbcea5e31
8ab54f14a25546d9de0e16fdc64a4”. If one letter is changed in the original string, for
instance the o in Bob to an i, the hash value changes in such a way, that they generate
an unpredictable, to the outside viewer, hash value. The resulting hash can be seen
here ”e8b7dc0faf7252dc9af1f17c21d4fed207b26657afeb3552eb7eabdf758e3841” which
has only four overlapping characters between the two hashed values, even thought
only one character of the original string was changed.
Amongst these algorithms SHA1 and SHA-0 are no longer in use for most cryptogra-
phy, as flaws in them exists, which allow modern computers to break them and bypass
them. The extent of some of its flaws can be seen in the paper ”SHA-1 is a Sham-
bles*” by Gaëtan Leurent and Thomas Peyrin[LP], wherein the authors discuss why
SHA-1 should not be used where collision resistance is required for any safety feature.
All of the SHA algorithms generate a set of fixed length hashes, with the longer
ones being more secure. For SHA-2 the length options are either 224, 256, 284 or 512
bits whereas SHA-3 offers arbitrary digest size, but generally the bigger the better
when it comes to size. However, that comes with a tradeoff against time, and gener-
ally 256 or 512 is good enough for all purposes, with 512 being faster on certain 64-bit
processors. SHA-3 is also considered more safe than SHA-2, but generally takes a
longer time to compute, unless you use specialized hardware. NIST also notes, that
whilst it is usable, that ”Currently there is no need to transition applications from
SHA-2 to SHA-3.”[NISb] as the current solution is good enough.
==PAGE:21==
2.14 Digital Signature
11
2.14
Digital Signature
A digital signature is a signature made online through a cryptographic protocol. A
valid digital signature gives a recipient a very good reason to believe the sender’s
identity whilst providing proof that the message was not altered during transit, as the
authors in chapter two of Security in Computing notes ”The most powerful technique
to demonstrate authenticity is a digital signature. Like its counterpart on paper, a
digital signature is a way by which a person or organization can aﬀix a bit pattern
to a file such that it implies confirmation, pertains to that file only, cannot be forged,
and demonstrates authenticity.”[Mar15]. In order to sign a message, a few different
schemes can be utilized, but most modern solutions utilize asymmetric cryptography.
In Denmark, a common two-factor authorization system that is utilized is ”NemID”.
NemID gives each Danish citizen a unique digital signature, which they can utilize to
verify their identity. They do this by providing a public key to an identification server
either through a one-time-pad that they physically own, or through a smartphone
application, after it has been verified through the one-time-pad, which can generate
the keys as needed in order to verify their identity.
2.15
Single point of failure
A single point of failure is a part of a system, wherein if that part fails, the entire
system stops working. Single points of failure can be made more robust through the
use of redundancy in potential points of failure.
2.16
Database Systems
Database systems are used to record data in a quick and easy way, by identifying key
data or through the use of keys, which allows for easy identification of specific data.
Database systems can be build to allow different things from fast lookups, massive
data amounts or through sharding the data across different platforms.
2.17
Global Universal Identifier - GUID
A Global Universal Identifier (GUID) is a 16-byte structure of hexadecimal characters,
which is used as a unique identifier for an object. In the documents associated with it
made by Microsoft, the term is interchangeably used with the term Universally Unique
Identifier (UUID)[Mic21]. A GUID is created through an algorithm with the goal of
combining a set of data, such as time and location data, to create a unique identifier for
some data collection[Ray08]. However, since the data is not always unique, it therefore
requires a few additional methods in order to make it truly unique. The additional
methods used can be hashing or by generating random numbers. These methods
==PAGE:22==
12
2 State of the Art
and the algorithms utilized are described in RFC 4122[Soc05]. The probability of
duplicate GUIDs is extremely unlikely, given the chaotic modifications done to the
data, though it is not impossible.
2.18
Blockchain
The blockchain is a distributed decentralized ledger utilizing a series of ”blocks” that
are chained together. Each block consists of some transaction data and a crypto-
graphic hash of the previous block. Since each block contains a cryptographic hash of
the previous block, their links come together to form a ”chain”, with each additional
block further reinforcing the chain, ensuring that they cannot be easily retroactively
altered. The blockchain is usually not operated by a single entity, but rather by a
group of entities. Each entity can either freely join the blockchain or has to be invited
depending on the type of blockchain. An example of the data structure can be seen
in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Blockchain data structure example. Each hash is based on the previous
block with a set of data, transactions, built into it. It is important to
note that this structure has a Merkle-tree associated with it, which is
used for identifying indexes in the list based on the hash values gener-
ated.
The blockchain’s data is largely considered immutable[IET], due to the chain, which
ensures, that the people operating on the chain, can trust that the data has not been
altered since it was uploaded.
Blockchains have three main types, with each of them being based on the type of
==PAGE:23==
2.18 Blockchain
13
membership related to it. These types are public, private or consortium[Foug]. The
key differences between each of them are as follows:
Public blockchains: Public blockchains allow anyone to participate in the network
and upload to the blockchain.
Private blockchains: Private blockchains are hosted by private entities usually in
the form of a single entity. It is still possible to access the blockchain, but the
hosting entity acts as a trusted intermediary.
Consortium blockchains: Consortium blockchains are blockchains with permis-
sions wherein multiple organizations govern the platform.
To get access to
a consortium blockchain, you will need an invitation.
When working with the blockchain an important thing to note is a fork. A fork refers
to a split in the blockchain and it can occur in three distinct ways:
• An accidental split, which occurs when two miners on the blockchain mine a
block at almost the exact same time.
• A change in the protocol defining the blockchain.
• A cryptocurrency split, wherein a developer creates an alternate blockchain
based on the history and source code of an already existing blockchain solution.
Among these forks and splits, a fork can also either be denoted soft or hard, which
indicates the level of restrictions on the chain further on. In the case of a hard fork,
the old way of performing transactions is no longer valid, and all of the user base
needs to upgrade their software to properly utilize the blockchain. Whereas, in the
case of a soft fork, the old way of doing transactions are still valid, and can be further
performed on the chain. Hard forks are often utilized when there is a schism in the
community amongst the different users[Binb].
The reasoning for these schisms differs, but can result in a new currency such as
in the case of Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash, where some users argued, that the purpose
of the Bitcoin was to enable anonymous transactions, where others saw it as a store of
value. This was particularly an issue, when some bitcoin enthusiasts decided to reeval-
uate the scaling mechanism used by the blockchain[Bit]. Since both parties could not
come to an agreement, it resulted in a fork. Forks can also occur in case of an attack,
such as what happened with Ethereum classic and Ethereum[Pop]. In this case, every
user had to be moved to a new chain, and the old chain, whilst it cannot be stopped,
is no longer the oﬀicial chain due to the existence of the hack, resulting in a hard fork.
Whenever a fork occurs, the old users are often given the same amount of new coin-
s/items on the new chain through their private keys, which are forked to the new
system. The Ethereum blockchain is currently planning[Wac] on forking their chain
onto a new one, once they manage to finalize and implement their new consensus
==PAGE:24==
14
2 State of the Art
algorithm proof-of-stake, which is meant to be a solution to some of the underlying
problems in proof-of-work consensus-based systems, especially in regards to energy
consumption
Generally, on the blockchain a transaction is referred to as a change of the state
of the chain, however, this is not always the case. Sometimes, individuals who utilize
the blockchain perform transactions regarding a chain, without modifying the state.
This is done by performing an off-chain transaction.
Off-chain can refer to two things, one being an off-chain transaction.
Whenever
an off-chain transactions is performed, instead of generating a new block and logging
the transaction on the blockchain, a trusted third party intermediary allows for users
to swap a private key in-exchange for either another private key or another currency.
What is important to note about off-chaining, is that since it occurs off the chain, it is
anonymous for the rest of the chain, since the state of the blockchain is not changed,
which means that it can be a more secure form of transaction.
Off-chain, and not an off-chain transaction, can also refer to a data storage method,
wherein part of the data is kept off the chain, in a literal sense. Off-chain data storage
makes a lot of sense as it allows for users to partially edit the data related to the
chain. This edited data, as it is not the data on the blockchain, but rather data the
blockchain references, can be argued to not violate the fundamental trust brought by
the blockchain. Off-chain data storage is utilized by Non Fungible Tokens (NFTs).
Wherein the reference to an image and the data related to that image might be stored
on the blockchain, but the image itself might be hosted on off-chain storage network.
This allows the host take down stolen images, which the uploader originally had no
right to publicize which has been an issue plaguing the NFT community and which
has reflected badly on them[Pur].
A side-chain is a separate blockchain network[Smib] tied to the main chain via a
two-way peg. A two-way peg allows for transference of a currency/assets related to
a chain from another blockchain, whilst allowing for the transference of information.
This can then be further utilized in order to allow for multiple blockchains either for
storing the information or managing different type of information systems through
the blockchain, where you want them distinctly but not completely linked to each
other.
Smart contracts [Mina] are a computer program that is stored and executes on the
blockchains whenever a predetermined condition is met. They allow for the execu-
tion of automated agreements, so that whenever all the participants have agreed to
something, they can be immediately certain of the outcome without anyone’s outside
involvement. This allows for remote execution and atomic swaps, wherein bitcoins
or other kinds of transactions are performed. The blockchains that support smart
contracts are rather limited in their fullness, but two of the main chains, the Bitcoin
==PAGE:25==
2.18 Blockchain
15
blockchain and Ethereum Blockchain both have Turing complete languages, which
allows for developers to create everything they want on the blockchain. Non-fungible
tokens (NFT) for instance were initially made to be run on the Ethereum blockchain
through the use of smart contracts[Ent+21].
The blockchain is built upon a data structure called a Merkle tree or a Hash tree[Fouc],
see figure 2.2 for an example, wherein every leaf of the tree is marked by a crypto-
graphic hash of a data block. The idea behind a Merkle tree, is that every node, that
is a leaf, is marked with a cryptographic hash of one of the data blocks, whereas any
that is not a leaf, is labelled by a hash of its descendants’ cryptographic hashes. In
order to prove that a leaf node is inside a part of a given Merkle tree. The computer
needs to compute a number of hashes proportional to the logarithm of the number
of leaf nodes contained within the tree. In figure 2.2, the 0-0, 0-1 marks a concate-
nation of the hashes in order This is used in blockchain operations because it lets
you verify whether the transaction L1, L2 or L3 are part of the tree. If you query
for L2 for instance, given the Merkle root (Top hash), it would give you the hashes
hash(L1) and hash(L3), meaning that the hash has to be present in the data. If the
root hashes are returned, it can be assumed that no hash contained the answer, and
the transaction is not inside of the Merkle tree. A merkle tree is a form of balanced
tree, which means that queries within the tree will at most have a running time of
O(log(n)).
Figure 2.2: A Merkle tree structure wherein a set of leafs, nodes and branches on
a Merkle tree can be seen. In this example L1, L2 and L3 is the data.
hash0-0, hash0-1 and hash1 are leaf nodes, with hash0 and hash1 being
branches, at the top is the tophash, which is also known as the Merkle
Root.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 State of the Art
2.19
Consensus Algorithms
Consensus algorithms are utilized to decide which entity is right and reach agreement,
based on the consensus of the entire group.
2.19.1
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (pBFT) is a consensus algorithm, that can be
utilized when members of the network are expected to be at least somewhat trusted.
This means, it is better utilized in either a private or a consortium blockchain and
not a public one, as partial trust is not possible in a public blockchain.
To do this, pBFT works on a principle called byzantine fault tolerance. The goal
of Byzantine fault tolerance is to define a protocol for allowing untrusted messages in
a communication network. Binance defines Byzantine fault tolerance as ”This means
that a Byzantine fault tolerance system is able to continue operating even if some of
the nodes fail or act maliciously.”[Bina] Byzantine failures can come in the following
forms:
• Failure to return a result
• Return a wrong result
• Deliberately return a wrong result
• Return a result from the wrong source
When utilizing the pBFT consensus algorithm, each of the nodes are ordered sequen-
tially with one node being promoted to the leader node, with the other nodes acting
as backup nodes. Any node can transition from a backup node to the leader node. A
leader swap can also happen in case of a failure, if a node has been a leader for too
long, without sending any messages and after every consensus round. The job of each
of the backup nodes is to help the system reach a consensus through majority rule.
In pBFT at most less than one third of the nodes may be malicious, for the majority
rule to properly work, this means that, whenever the network grows, it becomes safer,
as more nodes have to be compromised to hurt the system.
The pBFT consensus algorithm works through the following steps:
1. A client sends a request leader node.
2. The leader node sends a broadcast messages containing the request to all backup
nodes.
3. The leader and backup nodes then perform the service requested and then send
a reply back to the client.
==PAGE:27==
2.20 Hyperledger Sawtooth
17
4. The request is considered a success, whenever the client receives replies from an
amount of nodes equal to one third of the total nodes plus one.
pBFT issues lies primarily in the fact that, for every node added to the network, the
communication overhead increases quadratically by a factor of O(nk) where n is the
messages and the k is the amount of nodes.
2.19.2
Proof of Elapsed Time
Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET) is a consensus algorithm developed by Intel. It pre-
vents high resource utilization, high energy consumption and keeps the system eﬀi-
cient through the use of a lottery system. Poet is a Byzantine fault tolerant consensus
algorithm according to the Sawtooth Foundation [Kan].
Each peer sample an exponentially distributed random variable and wait for the
amount of time dictated by that sample. The peer with the smallest sample is then
deemed the winner. The election is kept fair by having a monitoring entity, which
runs in a trusted execution environment using identity verification and blacklisting
based on asymmetric key cryptography. Entities can also verify the fairness of the
election algorithm, as it is kept in a log and available at their request.
The trusted execution environment runs through the use of the Intel Software Guard
Extensions (SGX), which is built into the Intel CPU, which is therefor a necessity for
all of the different nodes that perform the consensus.
2.19.3
Proof of Work
Proof of work (PoW) is the consensus algorithm, that is used for the majority of
public blockchains currently. It is a consensus algorithm utilized wherein all nodes,
can be brought to trust each other, by solving a computationally hard puzzle, which
generates a new block, commonly referred to as ”mining”. Whenever a node discovers
the solution it is broadcast to everyone else. For each block, the miners group of
a set of transaction and try to calculate a mathematical hard problem. The main
issues with Proof of work is the fact that, the problems are time consuming, and
that if an entity ever has 51% or more of the nodes in the network, they can control
the blockchain. Likewise, since each entity has to continuously mine, they end up
consuming a lot of energy.
2.20
Hyperledger Sawtooth
The Hyperledger Sawtooth[Foud] is an open source enterprise blockchain-as-a-service
platform allowing developers to create customizable smart contracts that can be exe-
cuted on their platform. It is maintained and developed primarily by the Hyperledger
==PAGE:28==
18
2 State of the Art
Foundation. It comes with a set of different consensus algorithms including pBFT
and PoET. The Sawtooth Hyperledger also offers a set of predefined software develop-
ment kits (SDKs) to interact with their blockchain implementation and perform basic
operations on the network. The Hyperledger Sawtooth software is licensed under the
Apache License 2.0.
2.20.1
Smart Contracts using Transaction Processors
Sawtooth separates the core system (blockchain nodes) from the application do-
main through the use of smart contracts. A smart contract is code running on the
blockchain, which can act as a trusted intermediary that enforces a process. It can,
for example facilitate the game of tic-tac-toe step-by-step, ensuring that no partici-
pant cheats. In Sawtooth, the smart contract comes in the form of the transaction
processor. When a processor is deployed, it attaches itself to a node, which then
forwards requests to it. Which requests gets forwarded depends on which transaction
family the processor belongs to. Each processor makes use of a family name and
version number to identify what specific process they are facilitating, same as with
every transaction request being sent into the network. This framework simplifies ap-
plication development, as the duties of software developer and network administrator
are clearly separated.
There are several SDKs available in multiple languages to make a basis for new trans-
action families. To achieve this variety, they all make use of Google Protobuf[Goo],
which is a free open-source cross-platform data format, which is a useful tool for de-
veloping cross-platform network communication. The SDKs are in various stages of
stability/completion[Foui]:
Complete?
Stable Application Programming Interface?
Python
Yes
Yes
Go
Yes
Yes
JavaScript
Yes
Yes
Rust
Yes
No
Java
No
No
C++
No
No
Not mentioned here is Swift and .NET Core, as a transaction processor SDK is not
available for these languages according to the Sawtooth documentation. Swift has an
ongoing project for client signing, and an unoﬀicial implementation of an unoﬀicial
transaction processor SDK for .NET Core[tma] exist. However, development on it has
slowed down and there has been talks about handing it over to the oﬀicial Sawtooth
development team and archiving it.
==PAGE:29==
2.21 TradeLens
19
2.20.2
Consensus Algorithms
Four consensus algorithms are available in Hyperledger Sawtooth:
Sawtooth pBFT (see section 2.19.1): Short for Practical Byzantine Fault Toler-
ance, this algorithm is an extended version of the original voting-based consen-
sus pBFT algorithm. It includes features such as dynamic network membership,
regular view changes, and a block catch-up procedure. It has a requirement of
at least four nodes in the network.
Sawtooth PoET (see section 2.19.2): Short for Proof of Elapsed Time, the Nakamoto-
style consensus algorithm is designed to support large network populations, but
without the power consumption drawbacks of the similar Nakamoto-style Proof
of Work algorithm (section 2.19.3). It comes in two versions; PoET-SGX that
relies on Intel Software Guard Extensions (SGX) to implement a leader-election
lottery system, while PoET-CFT is a crash fault tolerant consensus algorithm
that works on any hardware, but runs inside a simulated enclave.
Sawtooth RAFT: A leadership-based algorithm with crash fault tolerance, designed
for small, restricted networks.
Dev mode: Short for developer mode, the simple random-leader algorithm is for
testing a transaction processor on a single node.
2.21
TradeLens
TradeLens is a tracking platform for shipping and transport of goods, created through
a joint partnership between IBM and Mearsk[Traa].
They utilize a consortium
blockchain to manage the documentation part of shipping and for cross-organizational
automation by creating a set of paid APIs to track cargo along its travel, auto generate
documents for inland carriers, freight forwarders and logistics providers. Their goal is
to connect the different shipping systems, making it beneficial for both cargo owners,
freight forwarders and many more, whilst fostering collaboration and trust through
their use of immutable blockchain ecosystem. They offer their users what they refer
to as a ”three component” solution[Trab], which constitutes of the following:
• The Marketplace
• The Platform
• The Ecosystem
The Marketplace is an ecosystem, wherein users and TradeLens can offer application
and services that utilizes the data provided by the ecosystem.
The Platform refers to their core package of tools, which is their transport insight,
==PAGE:30==
20
2 State of the Art
continuous data improvement, shipment manager, document sharing tool, visualiza-
tion dashboards, API integration and notification system alongside the permission
blockchain, that works through open APIs and modern standards in terms of both
development and security.
The Ecosystem refers to the fact that it is made up of shippers, freight forwarders, ter-
minal operators, government authorities, custom brokers, financial services and many
more. The advantage of the ecosystem is that it already encompasses ports, ocean
carriers, intermodal operators, government authorities, freight forwarders, financial
services and many more.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Requirements Analysis
3.1
Problems
The four scenarios mentioned in section 1.2, those being ride sharing, package delivery,
secure transportation and international shipping, each come with their own set of
problems. This chapter is meant to be an exploration into these problems and the
requirements that are needed in order to properly facilitate a system which falls within
those parameters.
3.1.1
Multiple Actors/Entities
When imagining a logistic system a common theme in them is that they typically in-
volve multiple different entities interacting with each other. Just like when someone
is producing a car, the engine might have been made in Germany, seats with leather
from Italy and wheels procured from China. The vehicle itself, however, is assembled
in Japan, before being transported to Canada to be sold. The company making the
car may or may not even be related to the companies making the components that
make up the vehicle. The car might also take on step further, and go through an
unrelated car dealer before finally being sold to an end user.
A issue with such a system, is that it requires trust. Trust that the leather from
Italy is in fact not procured in China, that the wheels are not from the Philippines
and that the engine is not Russian. This trust can come from many different sources,
but one of the primary sources is through accountability being able to hold entities
accountable for the actions and the claims that they make.
Another example of this could be a package that has been delivered. However, the
recipient claims they never received the package. It might be true, that they never
received the package, as it could easily have been delivered to the wrong address,
or it may be false and the recipient is attempting to defraud the system. The so-
lution needs to be able to act as a source of truth whilst interacting with multiple
actors/entities and hold them accountable, in order for all of the users to trust the
system.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Requirements Analysis
3.1.2
Security
When designing a secure digital logistic system, a very important aspect is the secu-
rity itself. Generally, when making baseline assumptions, one refers to the terms from
the security triad, as described in section 2.1, as the baseline. The concepts required
are pretty straight forward; ensure that the users are each authenticated and that
they are authorized to use the services they are requesting. Keep the communica-
tion secure, and always ensure that the services are available, whilst ensuring that
all users and other entities can be held accountable for the actions/changes they make.
As for most digital systems, the solution must communicate through the use of inter-
net in order to communicate with each point of the logistic system. It is important
to note, that this communication should not be able to be read, manipulated or
otherwise misused by anyone other than the intended recipient. In regards to this,
there are plenty of industry standards to choose from, such as HTTPS, see section 2.5.
There are also multiple ways to set up an authentication and authorization manage-
ment infrastructure, and all modern companies with any kind of digital infrastructure
already have one. As such, while the solution must be designed with authentication
in mind, it should not attempt to design or implement it in a specific way, but rather
should it be able to utilize whichever authentication infrastructure already exists.
An unavailable service can cause major issues. Imagine a container port (shipping)
where the contents, whereabouts and goings of its containers are only accessible
through a digital service. If that service were to go down, such as in case of a lo-
cal power outage, then the work suddenly becomes a lot more challenging. A tried
and proven way of ensuring that a service is always available, is by introducing addi-
tional redundancies to a system. An easy way to do this, is by duplicating the data
onto multiple sites. It will still be somewhat vulnerable to outside threats, such as a
distributed denial of service attack, but there already exist tools and techniques to
handle such things. For this solution, the main concern in this aspect should be allow
for redundancy and having the system shared across multiple sites, so that it does
not become overly dependent on a single point of service or data storage, in order to
ensure that there is no single point of failure.
3.1.3
Scaling
A very common problem in software solutions, is their ability, or rather their lack
thereof, to scale as their user-base grows. This can often be seen in application in
terms of the performance as something scales.
Whist various software techniques
such as parallel programming, can help alleviate that, ultimately, the performance of
the software system is limited by the code and the hardware the code runs on. Quite
often, this problem is handled today by moving the solution to the cloud, where the
hardware and performance can be scaled both vertically, by increasing its allocated
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Problems
23
ram and CPU, or horizontally, by distributing workloads across multiple servers. Like-
wise, scaling allows the system, to combat the issue of having a single point of failure,
as often when systems scale, they are spread across multiple instances to properly
handle the workload.
Another aspect to this problem lies in availability.
With availability the concern
is whether the required services are available to perform their services when needed.
The primary way to avoid issues here, is to avoid having a single point of failure,
like only having a single server providing a needed service. It can come with some
downsides, like replicating databases to ensure data is available when needed. This
is more important in a solution that aims to have international reach, which for a
logistic system almost certainly should be the case. In an international context, it is
good to distribute the system into interconnected regions, so that any issue(s) that
may arise in one region does not affect the availability of another.
Last but not least is maintenance and expenditure, which in part overlap. When
it comes to maintenance, the concerns are related to ease of monitoring, updating
and fixing the system when required. With expenditure, the focus however is on the
cost of development, maintenance and operation of the system. In itself, the cost
and long term maintenance is not a big priority, when it comes to the design of this
solution, but there is one good point to derive from it. Old and centralized systems,
such as the core software infrastructure of an old bank, are diﬀicult to maintain,
as they are often tightly coupled systems, that were not made to scale, making the
maintenance cost high and scalability low. Software infrastructure that can be dis-
tributed, can often lower costs overall on the system. They are however, overall more
costly in terms of development and tend to be more complex than monolithic software.
To conclude, to ensure future scaling in terms of performance, availability, main-
tenance and expenditure, the solution should focus on being distributed.
3.1.4
Bad Actors
Another important thing to consider is bad actors. These bad actors can exist in
many different ways, but when discussing a data driven platform such a logistic sys-
tem, the main ways that bad actors can harm the system is to insert bad data, lie
about their identity or try to take down the network. To combat these issues, the net-
work needs to be resilient against take down, which can be done setting up a proper
walled garden to shield the network or by utilizing a widely distributed network.
In regards to bad data, there are primarily two different ways that they can harm
the system by inserting bad data. To begin with, if they keep inserting bad data,
it might become hard to make an overview of the data, likewise, the more data is
inserted, the more memory and time it will take to properly perform queries on the
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Requirements Analysis
data. Similary, they could keep hogging the network with their own data, which can
result in a denial of service attack. Another issue could be that potentially a user
could lie about their identity or otherwise get access to data that is not meant for
them, such as addresses or packages.
To conclude, to ensure that the system remains safe, it should not be easy to be
a bad actor on the network.
3.1.5
General Data Protection Regulation
For the solution to be utilized worldwide, it must conform to legal data requirements
wherever it is used. One of these standards, is the European General Data Protection
Regulation, GDPR. To be GDPR compliant, the solution must not store personal in-
formation in a way where it cannot be edited or deleted as required. If the solution is
not GDPR compliant, you are not allowed to operate in Europe, which would restrict
the usefulness of the solution.
For instance, when imagining the design for a co-driving app within this context -
quite a lot of contextual problems come to mind. An app like that would likely in-
volve personal information regarding many different private citizens in the form of
their names, and perhaps even their personal address. Then, as part of registering a
trip, a series of GPS coordinates would be registered to ensure, that the trip was real,
that it was not faked and other such things. Within this context, both the names,
addresses and GPS coordinates would likely fall under the umbrella that is personal
information, as it is likely data about them could be extrapolated easily.
Other restrictions similar to the GDPR likely exist in other regions of the world
such as China and the United States of America, and in order to be able to operate
within those regions, the solution needs to be modifiable in such a way, that it can
comply to all of these requirements.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Requirements
25
3.2
Requirements
Given these problems and the fact, that the one of the goals of this thesis is to create
a foundation for secure logistics through an SDK, a list of requirements has been
to be made. This list of requirements, is mainly based on the problems described
previously, but also on concepts such as scalability for the database, overall ease-of-
use, and similar concepts.
• Accountability of involved entities
• Industry standard secure communication
• Should be able to integrate with pre-existing authentication schemes
• Availability through redundancy
• Scalability
• Combat bad actors
• Compliance with local legal requirements
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Design
Figure 4.1: Blockchain network with a ride share service and parking service. Alice
and Bob are sending data into the network, through an authentication
proxy server, using their ride-share app. Transaction id and personal
information is sent directly to the parking service, which signs-off on the
transaction and shares the parking details with their parking enforcers.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Design
4.1
Overall Design
The four scenarios described in the introductory chapter (chapter 1), and the require-
ments as described in the previous chapter (chapter 3) come together to form the
baseline for the design found in this chapter. Please note that the design takes a
European outlook on the problem, in order to follow the data legislation that the
authors interact with.
The scenarios for this implementation are as follows:
• Ride sharing.
• Package delivery.
• Secure Transportation.
• International shipping.
4.2
Blockchain
The solution proposed by this paper is built around utilizing the blockchain and its
associated data structure as described in section 2.18. The reasoning for utilizing
and exploring a secure logistic systems through the blockchain is because of the
blockchains following characteristics:
• Scalable.
• Promotes working together.
• Immutability.
• Inherent trust.
• Consensus Algorithm.
• Accountability.
Each of these factors makes a blockchain-based system a good choice for software
that needs to be used to store data between many different entities, across borders
and with little to no trust between each of its members. One of the reasons for this, is
that since each of them hold a complete copy of the data wherein the data uploaded
cannot be altered without alerting everyone else on the network. Each of them having
control over the data, also gives them the option of forking the blockchain or porting
it to another media, if some schism were to occur between the different entities. Ul-
timately, these two factors are what heavily enables the entities to trust the product.
This trust is also what allows for the solution to be used across multiple borders.
Likewise, the blockchain is a form of distributed ledger, which means that it is built
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Blockchain
29
around being distributed. In other words, once a blockchain-based system is in use,
the system by default increases the levels of redundancy as entities are added to the
network due to its distributed nature. This means, that the solution should in theory
always be available, unless someone were to attack all of the entities at the same time.
Likewise, given that each of the data transactions on the blockchain, can be signed
by the uploading entity, the system inherently can be designed, such that the core
operations require strict degrees of accountability, to help promote safety in the net-
work. This specifically, will allow the different entities to identify each other, and
help combat bad actors. For instance, by stamping each data entering the system,
with a stamp pertaining to the uploading entity, the point of origination can easily
be tracked and seen by others using the system.
This allows for identification of
the entities, and the other entities can then take actionable steps, such as choosing
whether to exclude them from the network or not. Due to this, it fits well within the
requirements described previously in section 3.2.
4.2.1
Blockchain Type
For the blockchain type, as discussed in section 2.18, a few different options exist over-
all. These types are public blockchain, private blockchain and consortium blockchain.
Each of them has a set of advantages and disadvantages, which have to be compared
to each other when designing a blockchain system. However, as the project utilizes
Sawtooth, for the choice of consensus algorithm, they either have to utilize Practical
Byzantine Fault Tolerance (pBFT) or Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET), which is an
important consideration, when picking what type of blockchain to use.
Generally, it can be assumed that public blockchains get a lot more members and
therefore more layers of redundancy, which can lead to a healthier system. Using
PoET as the consensus algorithm is not a bad, given that PoET (section 2.19.2) as
an algorithm scales linearly based on the amount of nodes in the network, which is
an acceptable amount. However, it does require specific hardware, in this case an
Intel CPU with Intel Software Guard Extensions (SGX), which is somewhat restric-
tive, but given that most participants in a secure logistic system, should in theory be
companies, this should not provide much of an issue.
However, the other option - pBFT (see section 2.19.1) is less suited towards a public
blockchain and PoET. Unlike PoET, pBFT does not require a specific brand of CPU.
It does however transmit a quadratic amount of messages for every node added to
the network, which is very much an issue. This makes pBFT a somewhat bad option
overall for public blockchains, as the amount of messages scales quadratically based
on the number of nodes, making it ill-suited in networks that are likely to scale a lot.
For the private blockchain however, instead of multiple different entities hosting the
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Design
blockchain, only a single private entity has access to it. They act as a private interme-
diary and maintain the blockchain, allowing them to scale it as necessary. However,
given that a single entity controls the blockchain, the issue becomes, can you truly
trust them?
Whilst the blockchain is said to be immutable, if enough of the consensus nodes
bands together, they can force a fork in the chain resulting in the history of the
chain being edited. This will cause transactions to become lost or irreversibly edited.
Given that a single entity would control the chain, the result should be the loss in
the trust of the immutability of the blockchain, negating most of the usefulness in a
blockchain-based on these principles.
The last type of blockchain is the consortium blockchain. The consortium is a mixture
between a private and a public blockchain, in that it is a group of entities, just like
the public blockchain. However, to join the group you will require an invitation. Gen-
erally consortium blockchains are started by a set of private entities banding together
to create some sort of blockchain-based solution for a problem. They chose who to
invite into their group, which can allow for both public and private entities to par-
ticipate in it. Since more than one party is hosting it, unlike the private blockchain,
the inherent trust can still exist on the chain, as long as enough entities are part of
the group, and whilst you might not be able to trust every participant, you can likely
still trust some. Because of this feature, the trust can be preserved in the blockchain.
Likewise, the honest organization can and should act as a canary in the coal mine,
and blow the whistle in case someone in the consortium group ever tries to manipu-
late the blockchain data for their own or another entity’s gain. Likewise, redundancy
is further enhanced by having multiple entities host it at their own sites, alongside
multiple organization structures, with their own defenses against an attack.
For this project, the consortium blockchain type was ultimately picked as the choice.
The primary reasoning for this, is that both of the Sawtooth consensus algorithms fit
well within this category of blockchain, where for the public blockchain - only PoET
(see section 2.19.2) is the reasonable choice. Likewise, unlike a private blockchain,
the trust can still be maintained, even if the group is small compared to a normal
blockchain. Another factor is that since they can decide who participates in the net-
work, they can invite a lot or few companies depending on what is needed, allowing
the network to eﬀiciently grow as needed and swap the consensus algorithm as needed.
4.2.2
Consensus Algorithm
As described in section 2.20.2, there are four consensus algorithms available for Hyper-
ledger Sawtooth. Though, in the context of designing with a consortium blockchain
in mind, there are only two options worth discussion, as RAFT was not an option
when we initially begun this project with the C# software package, and the dev mode
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Blockchain
31
consensus[Fouh] (the fourth option) is not meant to be used outside of development
purposes.
1. Proof of Elapsed Time
2. Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
Both Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET) and Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (pBFT)
come with their own advantages and disadvantages as discussed previously. Each of
these differences have to be weighed against each other in terms of both their use-
fulness and such. Likewise, the choice of consensus algorithm has to fit within the
framework of a consortium blockchain, which was the one that was decided on in
section 4.2.1. Given that a consortium blockchain is not public, and therefore should
in theory not include as many nodes as a public blockchain would.
The opposite would also hold true for a consortium blockchain versus a private
blockchain. In this case, there would be more nodes, given that more than one entity
come together to form the blockchain network in a consortium blockchain versus a
private one.
Both of these things have to be taken into consideration, and if you consider only
the size, PoET, see section 2.19.2, comes out as a clear winner compared to pBFT.
This is because it linearly scales with the number of nodes, rather than the quadratic
scaling of pBFT. Another advantage is that it executes in a software guarded safe
environment, which ensures that the software integrity is protected, and ensures that
it will execute safely whilst protecting the integrity of the blockchain. However, an
issue with it, is that it forces the host to utilize Intel Hardware. Modern Intel chipsets
are not always available to all people, however for a company that should not be an
issue. Another, bigger issue, is that the Intel Software Guard Extensions have been
breached in the past with attacks akin to Spectre[Gro][Teca][Tecb] alongside other
attacks, meaning, that the defense mechanism, might not be good enough to properly
defend the blockchain against all types of hostile actors, especially as it is assumed,
that under PoET there should not be any malicious nodes, as long as the Intel Soft-
ware Guard holds.
Another option is the use of pBFT, see section 2.19.1, which is an algorithm that
works with a number of trusted nodes, rather than generating a random number for
each node like PoET does. It works by electing leader nodes, which are then put
in charge of communicating requests and messages across the network to the other
nodes. Occasionally, there is a vote, wherein the nodes decide on a new leader to
elect. This ensures that the network should be safe, as long as a little more than
the majority are non-malicious the network can be trusted. As long as the number
of malicious nodes is less than one third, the system can continue operating without
any issue[Fouf].
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Design
The issue however primarily lies in the fact, that the increase of messages send to
nodes is quadratic, meaning that whenever a node is added, regardless of type, the
number of messages increases by a large factor, which is not good for blockchain-
based systems, as they are distributed software, that is meant to be shared in as
many places as possible. However, it does come with a bonus, being able to run on
non-Intel hardware.
Ultimately, the best option for a consortium blockchain solution is PoET. For a mod-
ern company that wants to utilize blockchain technology, the fact that they might
have to go buy Intel hardware, should not be a problem for them, given that buying
new is overall a non-issue for them, even if the prices were to go up.
4.2.3
Management/Structure of Nodes
The network consists of a series of blockchain nodes, each of these nodes are managed
by a legal entity, which together forms the consortium blockchain. A few things that
are important to note for the node management.
The first thing to ensure, is that only somewhat trusted entities should be invited to
the consortium, even if they might prove malicious later. This is primarily for safety,
as untrusted individuals might misuse the data and/or continuously try to abuse the
system. Likewise, no member should ever be able to hold majority control, because if
so, they might be able to edit the blockchain to their own needs or force forks through
the network, in pBFT, you would only require one third of the nodes to be malicious
in order to stop commits from being added to the blockchain.
It is also important to insure that for the access control of the network, each en-
tity that hosts the network is responsible for the data, that they upload, and the
sanitation of their data. This means that the hosts should always put the access
behind a proxy, so that they can sanitize and edit what comes into the network,
rather than giving direct access to outsiders of the consortium, and the proxy has to
be incorporated into the implementation to properly protect the network. Likewise,
if personal information were to be added to the network, it could have devastating
effects for the consortium members, as they now have to properly manage that, which
will likely require a hard fork to fix the network.
4.2.4
Smart Contracts
A smart contract (section 2.20) is a program, that executes under certain conditions
to make changes on the blockchain. While these contracts are not legally binding, the
contract acts as a trusted intermediary, as it enforces the process and conditions in
a chain of transactions on the blockchain as described in the code. A smart contract
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Blockchain
33
can be compared to stored procedures on a traditional database, which are set of
code instructions, which is stored on the database, that can modify and access the
data of said database. These smart contracts also exist in Hyperledger Sawtooth,
wherein the equivalent to a smart contract in Hyperledger Sawtooth is referred to as
the Transaction Processor (section 2.20). Each Transaction processor attaches itself
to a validator node and processes any incoming requests that matches its transaction
family and executes it on the blockchain network.
In this solution, a transaction processor will enforce a business process, ensuring
no parties cut corners. It will make use of digital signatures to verify identities and
as tools to sign-off/accept a transaction.
4.2.5
Transaction Ownership/Authorization
While the transaction data in the blockchain might be open to all parties involved,
not all participants should be allowed to update the state of a transaction. As men-
tioned in section 2.20, a transaction can go through multiple states, and anyone who
has access to the blockchain may create a new transaction, referring to the address
of the old one, thereby making a newer state. Anyone polling for the newest state of
a series of transactions will simply get the newest one, and while each transaction is
signed by the node that made it, such a free-for-all is simply not practical.
A typical way of proving ownership in cryptocurrency blockchain schemes[Fra21] is
through the use of private-public key encryption (section 2.7). A public key acts as
an identifier, while the private key acts as a proof of identity. As mentioned in section
4.2.4, the transaction processor is able to enforce a process and its conditions, includ-
ing this method of showing the ownership. This method is done by adding the public
key into the data-structure for every transaction, and then sending a fresh signature
along with every transaction request on the network. The transaction processor can
then authorize updates to the transaction state based on the validity of the signature
that it receives. To enable others to sign-off/accept a transaction, the owner can
authorize or ”invite” them to sign by adding their public keys to a list that gives
them limited access to making updates to the transaction state.
4.2.6
Blockchain & GDPR
While the open and immutable nature of blockchain is good for establishing account-
ability and trust, it also presents a major challenge. Any information that is stored in
the blockchain is considered to be permanent and immutable, and even though this
solution is designed as a consortium blockchain, and not as a public blockchain, the
information in it will still be shared by a set of different entities, as it is available to
any participant in the network.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Design
This is a problem when working with private information, as it not only conflicts
with the rule set that is GDPR (see section 2.4). Likewise, it might also be con-
cerning to the user in that their personal information is permanently shared between
multiple corporate entities, which increases the chances of it leaking. The design of
this solution therefore has to deal with those restrictions. Another important thing
to note, is that pseudonymisation of the data is not enough, and whilst it helps with
the data protection aspects, requirements such as people asking for their data to be
deleted, conflict with the core thesis of a blockchain. In order to still be able to use
the blockchain, the personal data has to be stored in a database hosted by whichever
entity uploaded the data, and not on the blockchain itself. This personal data is then
linked with some form of identification such as a UUID. This UUID would then allow
for whomever uploaded the data to link it together, such that others can use the data
through them as needed.
4.3
The Scenarios Revisited
This part of the design goes over the scenarios and how they can be contextualized
within the blockchain design space. The scenarios it goes over are the ride sharing,
package delivery, secure transportation and international shipping scenarios from
earlier.
4.3.1
Ride sharing
In the Ride sharing scenario, as described in section 1.2, two or more people want to
share a ride to a new location. The town, in order to cut down on the number of cars
on their roads, decide to provide incentives in the form of prolonged or free parking,
as long as they bring along one or more passengers with them. The passengers, mean-
while, get the ability to enjoy a nice and stress free ride to their destination. To the
town and/or municipal, it is a tool that helps reduce the level of traﬀic, which helps
reduce the overall noise and pollution, whilst enabling more people to quickly get to
and from locations.
The service is imagined as a smartphone app, wherein users register events from
the beginning of the journey and till the end of it. This data is then passed to a com-
pany before it is ultimately stored in the blockchain. Once the journey is over, the
data regarding the trip can be shared with a parking company or another entity as
proof of it having occurred, enabling the company to reward the driver. The journey
data is easily shared by sending an identification number relating to the blockchain,
which allows the parking company to verify this information. The parking company
then signs off on the journey by creating another transaction on the chain, containing
with their own signature. This transaction would be linked to the other transaction
and state how much parking time is granted alongside an expiration date, before
which the parking must take place.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 The Scenarios Revisited
35
Figure 4.2: Typical Ride sharing trip. A driver begins their journey outside of town
and drives out to pick up a passenger. Together they drive to town and
the passenger is then dropped off, before the driver finds a parking spot,
managed by one of the local parking-companies.
In this scenario, some additional data, such as license registration plates, would have
to be shared together with the transaction identification as well - however this is not
GDPR friendly (section 2.4). Any direct coordinates or addresses are also considered
private information and cannot be included on the blockchain either. To circumvent
this, a generalization of the location can instead be used. This generalization can
either take the form of an entire municipal or individual sections of the general areas,
such as outer Copenhagen, inner Copenhagen, northern Copenhagen and so on. This
way, location data may still be included on the blockchain without it breaking GDPR.
4.3.2
Package delivery
The Package delivery scenario, as described in section 1.2, consists of one person
making a package delivery to another individual or company. Each party does not
want to be tricked by the other. The delivery person, in that they do not want their
client to claim that they have not delivered the package, or that they have delivered
the package to the wrong person. Likewise, for the client, they want to be able to
prove, whenever they did or did not receive their package.
This service is imagined as a service with two component - a real life component,
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Design
in the form of a QR code and a camera/smartphone/scanner application. Whenever
the package is received by a new entity, either in the form of a package facility or
someone at their house, they scan the QR code. Whenever this occurs, the scanning
device should utilize the data provided by the QR code, to identify the package and
then inform the blockchain, that a swap of ownership has occurred alongside who the
current owner of the package is. However, just like in the Ride Sharing scenario, there
is an issue in the identification, wherein another identification store has to be used to
identify people as described in section 4.2.6, by storing the data off the blockchain.
4.3.3
Secure Transportation
To put it simply, the goal of the secure transportation scenario is to follow a set of
regulations during the transportation of goods, whilst they are being delivery. These
goods can take many different forms, whether that be money, animals, or other goods,
what is important is that each of them have strict regulation on what can occur dur-
ing the drive, whether that be letting out animals, crossing areas they are not meant
to enter or have strict regulation on how much they can disturbed during the trans-
portation of the goods. This service can be imagined as a series of sensors attached
to a transmitting device.
therefore, it needs to be able to work by transmitting a value every so often linked
to the transport, these values can take a lot of different forms. For animals for in-
stance, it could be whenever they leave the transport vehicle, in order to follow the
EU regulation on animal transportation. For money transportation, it could be in
the form of a door sensor, that triggered whenever the door was opened. Whilst for
other goods a temperature sensor, an accelerator or similar type of sensor could be
utilized to ensure that the goods, never have their transport requirements violated.
Likewise, this scenario could be utilized as a sub-process within the package delivery
process to provide additional meta data as needed for certain sorts of packages.
Alongside this, a way to track the vehicles is needed, however, the issue is that
they cannot utilize the license plates in most circumstances due to GDPR, however,
by creating a different identification number and linking it to the vehicle, the issue
can be bypassed and the vehicles can get linked to each device.
4.3.4
International shipping
This scenario had to be refined the most, as it takes inspiration from TradeLens and
the technology they utilize as part of that. TradeLens by itself is a massive project
made as a joint venture between IBM and Maersk, and covering all of what they do
to enable this technology, would be another project in and off itself. Especially in re-
gards to the rules and documents required for each different country, including things
such as custom declarations, import tariffs calculations and many more services they
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Data Structure
37
provide.
Therefore, as part of the project, the scope for international shipping was reduced
down to a single important document called a ”Bill of Lading”. A bill of lading func-
tions as a document, that declares what is inside a container and how it should be
transported. Not only that, but it has to be stored for a different amount of time
based on the country, and in some countries, it is meant to be stored indefinitely,
making the blockchain uniquely suited for this.
The service is imagined as someone either sending the data to a harbor, wherein
the harbor then transmit the data to the blockchain properly formatted, whilst keep-
ing all personal data in their own servers. Based on this data on the blockchain, all
the needed documents and track information can then be stored, whilst the personal
data can be kept off-chain till it is needed. An important index to tracking the data
is the use of container identification numbers and such, as a container will likely go
from harbor to ship to harbor to another vessel or another similar route, till it finally
reaches its destination
4.4
Data Structure
The data uploaded to the blockchain is designed in a semi-dynamic way. It is defined
by a general structure which defines the ownership/identification, event history and a
framework for inviting others to sign-off on the data, while the events themselves and
the sign-off structure leaves room for it to incorporate a variety of logistic scenarios.
4.4.1
Base Data Structure
The idea behind it, is that the logistical data, which is shared on the blockchain is
contained with a holding Entity object, which is used as a baseline for each logistical
system. The Entity object contains the definition of a series of event objects, which
are objects that represent events that occur during the Entity objects lifetime, along-
side a SignOff object which is used to represent other entities verifying and signing
the original entity. In order to identify which type of logistical scenario the Entity
object represents, whether that be ride sharing or secure transportation, each Entity
object should store their type for easy identification. Another important set of core
data it should store is the pubic key and identification of the legal entity that created
it. The creator id being the identifier for the legal entity, should be either a string or a
unique user identification depending on whether the identifier is personal information
or not. The public key is used for the same purposes as the identifier - identification.
The public key, when used by the identifying entity, can be used to create digital
signature (see section 2.14), which the owner can use to identify themselves in a ver-
ifiable way. Likewise, two timestamps which can be used to track when the entity
was created and when it was last modified on the blockchain, in order to be able to
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Design
Figure 4.3: General Data-structure class diagram as it is defined and designed,
please note that Guid in this case refers to a UUID.
perform temporal logic on the blockchain data.
The Event object is rather simple in its execution. Within it is a JSON object repre-
sented in its string (see section 2.6), which contains the data for an event pertaining
to one of the event types. Whilst the entity type in the Entity object is used to
identify which type of scenario the object is being used for, the event type is used to
represent what kind of modification was performed the last time on the Event object.
This way, the event object can contain any data structure as needed, whilst holding
information on hand on how to unpack the data. Likewise, this should also keep a
timestamp of when the event was performed, in order to be able to perform temporal
logic and to enable a temporal overview of the event history if needed.
The SignOff object contains very little information, in fact, it should only contain a
list of the invitations and a list of the signatories. The idea is that whenever an entity
needs to signoff for some action performed on the object, they need to be invited in
order to do so. Otherwise the blockchain implementation should ensure that they are
blocked from doing anything to the Entity object.
In order to do this, objects in the list of invitations need to track the invitees pub-
lic keys, the status of the invitation and the temporal information of when it was
last updated. The status should either be of the form pending, cancelled, rejected
or signed, and if the status is not pending, it should not be possible to alter the
invitation further. When the invitation is signed, a new item should be added to the
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Data Structure
39
list of signatories. These items should contain a timestamp, a human readable id,
their public key and JSON object containing something based on the type of entity
they are, which is not defined. For the ride share scenario, this could for instance
be additional parking time, whereas in the package delivery, it could be a note, that
they have now taken ownership over the package, and are now the ones in charge.
4.4.2
Ride Sharing
The base structure from section 4.4.1 needs to be expanded in order to accommodate
the requirements for the ride sharing scenario, with the scenario specific data struc-
tures for the Event and Signatory as follows.
In order to make a simple and practical structure, the event structure for the ride
sharing scenario needs to be one with space for it all within the scope of the ride
share. And whilst not all information should be filled out every time, it does need to
be able to support the following events to facilitate a ride share properly this:
StartRide: The StartRide event should be utilized to create the initial object on
the blockchain when the ride is started.
UpdateRide: The UpdateRide event update the current location of the ride.
StopRide: The StopRide event should be used to stop the ride, in order to facilitate
that every passenger has been dropped off, every passenger should be removed
before this event can be used. After it has been used, the ride should be marked
final, in order to ensure it cannot be edited further.
CancelRide: The CancelRide event should be used to stop an ongoing trip, without
requiring passengers to be removed, in case a ride was started by a mistake.
After it has been used, the ride should be marked final, in order to ensure it
cannot be edited further.
AddPassenger: The AddPassenger event should be used to add a passenger, who
is not currently a passenger, to the list of passengers.
RemovePassenger: The RemovePassenger event should be used to remove a pas-
senger, who is currently a passenger, from the list of passengers.
In order to facilitate all of these events, a base object will need to be developed.
This data structure should be able to maintain a list of all passengers, keep track of
whoever the driver is, the current location from where the ride is updating and the
current status of the ride. A visualization of this can be seen in figure 4.4.
The driver id should only be necessary when starting a ride, as in all other cases,
it can be assumed the driver stays the same and that in the other cases, they have
some data pertaining to the object on the blockchain, that represents the ride, and
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Design
should therefore not need the driver id. The driver id should refer to an object kept
in a database by a ride sharing application or a governmental unit, to keep personal
data off the blockchain and allow for identification. Likewise, for every update, a
location variable location should be used, in order to keep track of where the riders
currently are located, but it should only point to the general area, in order to be
GDPR compliant. The status of the ride should only be used when either cancelling
or stopping the ride to signify this change in events. The list should be a set of user
identification values, similar to the driver id, which represents a person stored in a
solution that is more GDPR friendly than the blockchain.
Figure 4.4: Designs for the Event object utilized by the Car Sharing scenario.
For the signatories, the main ways that people would be rewarded would be through
additional parking time and reduced ferry or bridge crossing prices. In order to fa-
cilitate this, the design space is a lot simpler, as no new events or such are utilized
by the signatory design. Rather, it just needs a timestamp, in order enable temporal
reasoning, a location to signify where they are allowed to park or cross and a Granted-
Time to be able to reason about how much time users have to park, this is visualized
and can be seen in figure 4.5. The location utilized needs to be generalized in order
to ensure people cannot track down the location where people use this application.
Figure 4.5: Designs for the Signatory Reward Object utilized by the Car Sharing
scenario.
4.4.3
Package Delivery
Just like with the Ride Sharing scenario, the package delivery scenario should utilize
the event and signatory parts differently. For package delivery, what is important
is the hand-off part and the ownership part, alongside the GDPR requirements. As
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Data Structure
41
generally storing people’s addresses on the blockchain, where they cannot be altered,
is a really bad idea. As such the event space is unlike the Ride sharing scenario, a lot
simpler and just requires a start, end and exchange package method.
StartDelivery: The StartDelivery event should be utilized to create the initial ob-
ject on the blockchain when the delivery is started.
EndDelivery: The EndDelivery event should be utilized to mark the delivery as
final, once it has reached its final destination, this field requires the public key
of the customer in order to mark it as recieved through the use of a digital
signature.
CancelDelivery: The CancelDelivery event should be utilized, if the person who
bought the item(s) decides to not receive it anyway, as long as it is used before
the package has exchanged hands at least once.
ExchangePackage: The ExchangePackage event should update the current holder
of the package and its position before it is exchanged.
In order to properly facilitate these events the following fields are necessary on the
event object.
General Location of the package, identification of who the current
package holder is and space for their public keys in order to ensure their identity,
identification of the new holder and space for their public key and a field to denote
whether the package has reached its final destination or not. This has been visualized
and can be seen in figure 4.6. The identification would only be readable through
a trusted third party, what would keep both of the IDs and such secret, alongside
knowing where packages need to be delivered, which should be kept off the blockchain.
Figure 4.6: Designs for the Event object utilized by Package Delivery Scenario.
For the package delivery scenario, the idea behind the signatory could differ a little
from the one in the ride sharing scenario. The uploading entity could create an API,
which could potentially allow the most recently added invited and accepted signatory
entity to upload commands regarding the object. That way, when a package is handed
off to another company, by asking them to become a signatory, they would show
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Design
ownership of the package and then be denoted as being in charge of the package, till
either the customer receives it or they hand it off to another delivery company. In
order to facilitate this, the signatory object needs to keep track of identification, a
timestamp and the public key of the company receiving the package, this has been
visualized and can be seen in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Designs for the Signatory object utilized by the Package Delivery Sce-
nario.
4.4.4
Secure Transportation
The secure transportation scenario entails much of the same as the package delivery
scenario, in that, the goal is to have one or more items delivered from one point to
another. However, it does feature an additional requirement, in that meta data needs
to be provided ever so often. In order to make it so that it can be seen as an extension
of the package delivery design (see section 4.4.3). The new events that are required
as follows:
AddMetadata: The AddMetadata event should be utilized when adding metadata.
The timing of when metadata differs based on delivery type.
Metadata can often change and be different from case to case, as such, it needs to be
dynamic in terms of the changes added to the system. Metadata could come in the
form of tracking when animals were let out on a pasture whilst being transported,
which would require a string for location and a string for identifying which animal.
For other types of goods, which requires that certain thresholds values are maintained,
such as temperature during vaccine transportation, or other such things, a real could
be used to identify it. A status field can also be used for updates to the status of
the item during delivery, if for instance something became wet or if the package was
received in a bad state by someone. This event structure has been visualized and can
be seen in figure 4.8.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Data Structure
43
Figure 4.8: Design for the additional fields added to the Event object utilized in the
Secure Transportation scenario.
The signatory object should not differ, as that should work the same, given that this
is only an extension. The only extension that could possibly be added here, would
be an additional field in the form of a ”item status when received” field in the form
of a string. However, that can also be performed through the Event Object through
the Status field.
4.4.5
International shipping
For the international shipping scenario, in order to fit within the scope of this project,
it has to be cut down quite a bit, such that it only facilitates the bill of lading. The
bill of lading is a document, which acts as an acknowledgement receipt of the cargo of
goods being loaded onto a ship or another transport vessel. The document is primar-
ily utilized when shipping goods across the ocean, but it is a transferable document
and proof of the goods being loaded on the ship. Not only that, but the document is
also a contract, which states the terms of the agreement, works as a title of the goods
and who the goods are being delivered to.
A bill of lading has no legal requirements anywhere, and as such there is no oﬀi-
cial bill of lading used universally and one can easily be drafted up by anyone, in any
sort of way, but a few general points are often included in these contracts. Those
points are as follows:
• Vessel Name
• Port of loading
• Port of destination
• Freight payment status
• Demurrage
• Special Instructions
• Owner identification
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Design
• Consignee
• Item information
The special fields to make note of here is the item information, which is a series of
fields relating to what is being transported, usually in the form of the following:
• Universal Product Code
• Reference number
• Quantity of Items
• Number of pallets
• Total weight
• Required storage conditions
• National Motor Freight Code (NMFC) if applicable
• Less-than Truckload (LTL) if applicable.
The UPC, Universal Product Code, is an identifier for the item utilized in tracking
trade items for stores. The reference number usually refers to some internal docu-
mentation for the freight company with the goods loaded during transportation. The
NMFC, National Motor Freight, Classification or the LTL, Less-than Truckload ship-
ping, is information in regards to the size and number of the pallets, liabilities, how
much is being shipped and so on.
Unlike the other designs, the bill of lading does not require a lot of events to fa-
cilitate, the only events that would be necessary, would be the following:
CreateBillOfLading: The CreateBillOfLading event should be utilized to create
the initial object on the blockchain.
Unlike the other scenarios, once the bill of lading has been created, it should not be
changed afterwards, and as such it is very restrictive. The only thing that should be
changed as such, should be the payment, however, that should not be an event, rather
it should be done through a signatory object, that would maintain the payment sta-
tus when it is paid, if it was NOT prepaid. Note that the information regarding the
owner and the consignee should be properly protected as discussed before in regards
to GDPR and kept off the blockchain most likely.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Data Structure
45
Figure 4.9: Designs for the Signatory object utilized by the International Shipping
Scenario.
All of this information can then be transformed into an Event object. The structure
of the event object can be seen in figure 4.10. The Signatory Object should only be
used to track payment. This could be done by adding an empty object to the list of
signatory, or an object containing a string or boolean informing, that they have paid
and that the payment has been logged.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Design
Figure 4.10: Designs for the Event object utilized by the International Shipping
Scenario.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter covers the details of the implementation of the software. Please note,
that only one of the four scenarios that were discussed previously are implemented -
specifically the ride share scenario. This is because, whilst the other scenarios could
be implemented, little value is gained from implementing the other scenarios for this
project. Do note also however, that the ride scenario only implements the parts that
are centered around the blockchain, as such, things like the database to properly
facilitate personal information is not implemented as part of this project.
5.1
The Ride Sharing process
The process of the ride sharing scenario can be seen in figure 5.1 in the form of a
BPMN diagram, see section 2.3. This diagram gives a quick overview of the ride
sharing process that was developed as part of this project in the form of a simplified
overview. In this diagram the process of ride sharing application can be seen, with
each of the steps and the messages that are transmitted around the system in order
to properly facilitate the ride sharing.
5.2
System Architecture
Overall, the system can be said to consist of the following sub-systems:
• One or more clients
• One or more validator nodes
• A transaction processor
The transaction processor and client are built around implementing the ride sharing
data structure discussed in section 4.4.2 whilst utilizing the process from 5.1.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Implementation
Figure 5.1: Business Process Modelling notation diagram of the Ride Share giving
an overview of what occurs in the process from the point of view of the
driver and the signatories that partake in it.
5.3
Technologies utilized
In order for this project not to have to reinvent the wheel, several existing compo-
nents and tools have been utilized as part of the project.
The validator node for instance is provided through an open source project called
called Hyperledger Sawtooth, as mentioned in section 2.20, which is part of an um-
brella project initiated by the Linux Foundation, which has now been spun off into
its own entity called the Hyperledger Foundation who maintain it to this day.
Hyperledger Sawtooth comes out of the box with all the required scripts to setup
and start running a simple blockchain without much logic. The Sawtooth toolkit
is uniquely suited to this project, because it allows for a variety of different SDKs
(Software Development Kits), which have been provided by a series of open source
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Consensus Algorithm
49
enthusiasts and maintainers. Because of this, a series of different SDKs are available,
with each of them having their own classification such as mature or experimental.
However, some of the SDKs remain unclassified due to their adoption rate being very
low compared to their counterparts. The list of languages that are classified as mature
are the following:
• Python
• Go
• JavaScript
• Rust
The list of experimental languages are:
• Java
• C++
• Swift
Several languages are not listed amongst those, with one of those languages being C#.
Yet, despite not being listed as either a mature or experimental language, C# was
still the language chosen for this project, as we, the authors, work primarily with C#.
Whilst not listed on the list of either experimental languages or mature languages, it
was however still listed on the oﬀicial Hyperledger Sawtooth Github. Still, in later
states of the development, we discovered that it had issues with the current versions
of the Hyperledger Sawtooth chain.
The SDK is primarily the basics for a message exchange service between the nodes
for validation and defines the fundamentals for the communication between the nodes
through Google Protobuffers (protocol buffers), which is a data format made for seri-
alizing structured data made to easily allow different platforms running on different
systems to communicate with each other across different networks and different soft-
ware systems.
In terms of encryption and the validation of the messages exchanged through this
platform is done by utilizing Microsoft’s RSA Cryptography tools, which are part of
the .NET core Framework, which is utilized by their C# tool suite.
5.4
Consensus Algorithm
For this implementation, the consortium algorithm chosen was neither PBFT nor
PoET, which can be read about in section 2.19.2 and section 2.19.1, but rather a
third option - Dev Mode Consensus. Dev Mode consensus is a spinoff of PoET, and
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Implementation
works almost exactly the same way.
The main difference is that Dev Mode operates without the Intel Software Guard
Extensions (SGX) provided by the Intel CPU. This means that by itself, the network
is unsecured, and it should only be used for development purposes, like we have done
for this project. It should not be used for an actual implementation that is designed
to be used in a commercial and/or public environment, given that users can easily
modify the system by letting them post to the blockchain whenever they need and/or
want to. This would allow malicious actors to wreak havoc on the network making it
unsuited for a public/commercial solution, but great for testing the implementation.
Not only that, it is easy to switch between different consensus engines till you deploy
your actual network, meaning it has no actual development costs to do so.
5.5
The Transaction Processor
As previously discussed, the job of the transaction processor is to take incoming
requests and handle them based on the type of command they represent, before then
submitting that to all of the nodes maintaining the blockchain data. In order to do
this, the transaction processor utilizes three different subsystems that composes it
alongside a decryption service - the Logistic Processor, the Logistic Handler and the
Business Processor.
==PAGE:61==
5.5 The Transaction Processor
51
Figure 5.2: Class Diagram for the implementation of the Transaction Processor.
A class diagram for the transaction processor can be see in in the figure 5.2, with the
different subsystems that are part of the overall Transaction Processor.
5.5.1
The Logistic Handler
The logistic handler’s job is to intercept all the data that comes into the system and
properly handle it. It does so by looking at the enumerator that defines the type of
invoking that the caller desires and invokes it appropriately.
The data that comes into the system however is in the form of a byte array, which it
needs to convert to a structured data format that the system understands, which is
done by then converting it to a token object. This token object consists of a command
and a certificate used to verify the identity of the sender. After this action is com-
pleted, the data is then passed onto the logistic processor, which handles the request
and passes it further onto the other systems in order to handle the finer details of the
request.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Implementation
5.5.2
The Logistic Processor
The logistic processor could be said to be the most important subsystem of the trans-
action processor. Its job is to properly maintain and handle the calls that need to
be made to the blockchain ultimately. That is to say, whenever any of the other
subsystems need to create a new entity, finalize one, add events to modify the state
of one on the blockchain, change access control to the individual blocks or other such
similar actions, the logistic processor is the one part that ultimately commits it to
the network. Whilst ensuring that each of the calls and rules of the calls are prop-
erly enforced in the system, while it shapes the data structures that are about to be
committed to the blockchain in a strict and rigorous manner based on the rules as
described by the event type.
Input to the logistic processor comes from the logistic handler, after it has been
converted to a structured data format, it can then process. Given a command com-
ing in, the handler has previously informed it what type of command it is, whether
that be in the form of either a NewEntity, AddEvent, MakeFinal, NewInvite, Can-
celInvite, RejectInvite or AcceptInvite. It then verifies the information related to
that, verifying the addressing space on the blockchain whilst ensuring that the rules
of the blockchain are enforced on the chain.
For instance, for the command type - NewEntity, it needs to ensure that the ad-
dressing space is not already in use, that the type of entity is one of the predefined
types used on the blockchain, and then commit it to the blockchain. For command-
types MakeFinal and AddEvent, which modify an existing entity on the blockchain
by invoking the Business Processor and getting it to invoke the business rules tied
into that command type.
5.5.3
The Business Processor & Handler
The business processor and handler are closely tied together, in the regard that the
processor takes the incoming command and hands it off to the handler by invoking
the proper command. The data is then taken and checked for consistencies, before
being returned in a format meant for the blockchain, which the logistic processor can
then take, and transmit to the blockchain as needed.
The handler primarily works by looking through the command and the entity which
it relates to. The entity’s history is checked and verified, to ensure that the command
fits within the parameters of that dataset when applying the appropriate business
logic to the set of data.
==PAGE:63==
5.5 The Transaction Processor
53
5.5.4
Enumerators
The commands and their structure are broken into different groupings based on the
enumerator and their associate changes to the blockchain. Their main grouping is
based on the type of event they precede.
NewEntity: When this is invoked, the Logistic Processor evaluates whether or
whether not the addressing space is currently in use and that the entity type
is one that exists. Which, in the case of the implementation, is the RideShare
entity type only and then returns the entity to be uploaded by the Logistic
Handler to the Blockchain.
AddEvent: When AddEvent is invoked, the logistic processor quickly checks the
type and verifies that the type is one used, before it is passed onto the business
processor to be properly enforced by the rules, in regards to the event type.
MakeFinal: MakeFinal works through business logic. It evaluates whether or not
the event has already been finalized, and if the object has not yet been made
final passes it on the business processor in order to evaluate, whether or not,
the object is mature enough for it to be finalized, so that it can no longer be
edited further.
NewInvite: NewInvite is made for adding new signatories, that the object owners
wish to allow adding a signatory object to its state. They send one of these
requests in, with the public key of that entity.
Afterwards, that entity can
make an AcceptInvite or RejectInvite call to state their intention and provide
a signatory object with.
AcceptInvite: If previously NewInvite has been invoked, this will allow the party
to become a signatory and therefore modify the entity as needed.
CancelInvite: This command CancelInvite requires that a previous NewInvite has
been invoked, and the inviting party has decided, that the invited party should
not become a signatory. As such, they can then send a CancelInvite out, which
deletes the public key from the list of possible candidates.
RejectInvite: RejectInvite requires that a previous NewInvite has been invoked,
and the invitee has decided to not become a signatory in regards to this entity.
They then respond by sending a RejectInvite to the network. This removes
them from the list of possible future signatories.
Each of these commands are implemented as different enumerators, and they each ex-
ecute a different part of the system with some of them executing down in the business
processor as well. The ones that execute inside the business processor are AddEvent,
MakeFinal and AcceptInvite, since each of them changes the state of existing entities
on the blockchain, which means that the business rules of that entity type need to
apply to it as such.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Implementation
All of the previously mentioned enumerators require a command object, which con-
sists of the following data:
CommandType: Defines what type of command is being issued to the system. The
type is utilized by the Logistic Handler to appropriately invoke the Logistic
Processor.
TransactionId: The transactionId is utilized to identify which transaction is being
modified on the blockchain. It is an inherent value to the Sawtooth blockchain.
CompanyId: The CompanyId is used to identify the company performing the trans-
action. In the case of the implementation, it is not the identification of the
company transmitting the data, but rather, the identification of the node up-
loading the data. This identification can be further used to identify nodes that
are acting maliciously.
Info: The info object contains information used by the business handler. It contains
the entity type, event type, JSON type and information regarding a public key,
if some entity wishes to allow another entity to write about anything on the
blockchain.
PublicKey: This is the public key of the company issuing the company, which the
RSA service utilizes to verify the identity.
TimeStamp: A timestamp to ensure that the command was issued recently in an
attempt to prevent replay attacks and allows for temporal reasoning.
The Info object as described above is utilized by the Business Processor and Handler
and when it is made into a readable format, since this is an implementation of the
Ride Share design, it may contain the following fields:
DriverId: This value is used to identify who initiated the ride, they are known as
the driver and are the ones that can claim certain signatory rewards.
Location: This value is a general location utilized for tracking where the person
currently is.
PassengerIdList: The Passenger identification list is used to keep track of who is
currently riding with the driver on their trip. It is updated as people leave or
enter the ride on the trip in the business processor.
PassengerId: This information is used whenever a passenger wishes to update the
current list of passengers in terms of leaving the ride, joining it or other such
behavior.
Status: This value is a small enumerator used to denote whether the ride is currently
ongoing, has been cancelled, or is finished.
==PAGE:65==
5.6 The Client
55
5.6
The Client
The client in this context communicates with a Sawtooth node through its REST
API[Foue], which then forwards requests to a transaction processor matching the re-
quested transaction family. Though it is supposed to be a part of a server with a
REST API that can manage authentication and authorization, the client code im-
plemented in this case is simply meant to provide the necessary methods for making
communication with the transaction processor possible through the Sawtooth node.
It is designed in three layers, the first being the Sawtooth client, which contains
the methods necessary for communication with the Sawtooth Node API. This is done
using http which notably is not secure, but as discussed in section 4.2, this commu-
nication is supposed to isolated, with the server this client is running on acting as a
proxy server. The second layer is the logistic client, which packages command pack-
ages of their basic types (events, invites, etc.) and signs them, before sending them
off using the Sawtooth client. The final layer is the ride share client, which contains
functions for packaging the ride sharing related objects.
5.7
Addressing Scheme
Hyperledger Sawtooth stores data in a Merkle tree (see section 2.2).
To look up
data in the tree, an address consisting of 70 hex characters (35 bytes) is used. In
this scheme, as long as the 70 hex characters are unique, anything works. However,
the Sawtooth documentation[Foud] has a series of guidelines that they recommend
following such as utilizing hashing in order to ensure determinism[Foub].
They recommend making use of hashing, as it is a deterministic way of generating
byte arrays of a fixed length, wherein the generated values are very likely to not be
colliding. Using a hash, one or more identifiers, such as a GUID (see section 2.17),
can be hashed in a deterministic fashion into the required length of 70 hexadecimal
characters.
Each transaction family must define their own way of constructing addresses. The
simplest way of separating each family into their own address space, is by splitting
up the address space into sections, wherein the family’s name is used as a prefix. The
recommended length for this prefix is six characters, which can be done by hashing
the family name to the correct size. The rest of the 64 characters of space can then be
split up as needed, or it can just be used for a single identifier besides the transaction
family.
In this project, the transaction family name is based on the type of entity type
that they process. therefore, the first six hexadecimal characters will be the entity
type. The next six hexadecimal characters would be a hash of a company identifier,
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Implementation
such as R̈ide Share Inc.,̈ while the remaining 58 character space should be used for
a hashed transaction GUID. This creates a very clear and distinct separation of ad-
dresses based on the type, company and entity, which follows the guidelines proposed
by the Hyperledger foundation. An example of the discussed addressing space can be
seen in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Addressing space based on hashed values of entity type, company id
and transaction GUID.
5.8
Digital Signature & Verification
In the blockchain, a public key (see section 2.7 is used to identify who exactly the
actors in the system are. However, a public key is exactly like the name suggests,
public, so to ensure that the blockchain remains free of any impersonators, the trans-
action processor needs to verify their identities through the use of a digital signature
(see section 2.14).
In order to do this, the implementation makes use of RSA encryption (see section 2.8)
with OAEP (see section 2.8.1) to sign data. In context of encryption, the key that
encrypts it is called the ”public key” and the key that decrypts it is the ”private key”.
As mentioned earlier (see section 4.2.5), when discussing digital signatures, the ter-
minology gets turned on its head. This is because, in the context of digital signature,
the key that encrypts is kept private, so that it can be used as a proof of identity,
while the key that decrypts is the one made public. It is and important distinction
to keep in mind while working with any such encryption package.
The signature is made by signing the commands transaction id, type and timestamp,
using a private key. Both command and signature is then packaged together into a
token. This token format is heavily inspired by the signed JSON Web Tokens format
(section 2.11), an open standard for sharing verifiable information used for authenti-
cation.
While more information could be signed, the amount of data that can be encrypted
==PAGE:67==
5.8 Digital Signature & Verification
57
is ultimately limited by the size of the RSA keys. The maximum length of a message
in bytes can be calculated by this formula[Cry]:
mLen <= k −2 ∗hLen −2
Where mLen is the message length, k the size of the key and hLen is the length of
the hash. The hash length is dependent on the type of hash used (see section 2.13),
which for this project utilizes SHA-2 with which uses a SHA-256 bit hashing function.
Whilst more secure hashing algorithms exists, since this is just being used within
the context of signing data, it is more than plenty. As according to have a high-
strength key according to IBM[IBMc] requires it to have a length of at least 2048
bits, which gives a maximum message length in bytes:
mLen = 2048/8 −(2 ∗256)/8 −2 = 190bytes
A signature with a timestamp, enumerator and 16 byte GUID, makes for a signature
of 120 bytes, which is comfortably below the 190 byte limit. The cryptography pack-
age used does allow for any key-size that is a multiple of 8 though, so any key-size
above will also work.
To verify the signature, it is decrypted using the public key from the command,
before being compared with the corresponding information in the command. If the
information matches, then the signature is considered valid.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation &
Discussion
Is it possible for the blockchain to be the sole software solution underpinning for a
secure logistic systems? And is the blockchain as a technology good enough for such
a system? In order to properly answer these questions, the following points will be
looked at and discussed, alongside the results that have been gathered as part of this
process in the following section:
• 6.1 Working with Hyperledger Sawtooth
• 6.2 Security
• 6.3 Eﬀiciency
• 6.4 Data Access
• 6.5 Practicality of Blockchain
• 6.6 Trust & Accountability
6.1
Working with Hyperledger Sawtooth
The experience we had working with the Hyperledger Sawtooth and the unoﬀicial
.NET Core SDK was initially good. While we were in our first attempt to set up our
own Sawtooth node, we got caught up in a rather long and complicated walk-through
of setting up Ubuntu on a virtual machine to run it, we did find an easy method of
setting up a node for testing using the Dev Mode consensus algorithm, which is made
for testing. All it took was deploying it in Docker using a yaml file provided with the
Sawtooth documentation.
Creating a basic Transaction Processor also went well when utilizing the .NET Core
SDK, which allowed for a very streamlined and smooth development process. All
that we really had to figure out, was how exactly to handle the incoming requests,
how to validate them and then how to commit them to the blockchain, and besides
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Evaluation & Discussion
the usual issues with documentation, such as scratching our heads on how exactly we
were supposed to unpack the API response, as they were according to the documen-
tation written in JSON, but in fact required some transliteration in order to properly
unpack it.
And this was when issues started springing up all around us in terms of the soft-
ware, and solutions were very hard to find. For when you are working with a tool
that relatively few people are working with, then there simply will not be many so-
lutions online to look up. This obviously makes things quite a bit more complicated.
An instance of one such occurrence was when the transaction processor started paus-
ing whenever it was supposed to process and create new transactions. This issue was
really hard for us to understand, especially because, as far as we could see the code
worked fine. When we ran it through a debugger, the code worked just fine and all
lines of code were executed. So the fact that there never was a proper response, was
quite the tough nut to crack.
However, after further analyzing, where we started looking into the functionality
provided by looking into the code of the SDK, we discovered that the ”GetState”
functionality, which was provided by the .NET SDK package, did not exactly work
like intended. Rather, whenever the transaction processor was finished, rather than
getting the state of an entity it had just worked on, and it was for some reason return-
ing nothing, after what must have been an unnecessarily long timeout timer, it simply
stopped working. In the end, we managed to make a workaround by creating an http
request function, which just as the documentation described, was able to retrieve the
latest entity through the node’s REST API. This shows that Hyperledger Foundation
is right by stating that the functionality of the package is not totally stable.
Another issue, we were facing for quite a while, was that after we committed our
blocks to the blockchain, they would instantly be rejected. After this had occurred
once, the blockchain would then proceed to refuse all of the transaction requests sent
afterwards. To get the node back up and running, we had to pull down the node and
delete it, before deploying a new one with the exact same settings as the old one.
After a bit of head scratching, we discovered out that the Dev Mode consensus al-
gorithm made not just one, but rather two requests to the transaction processor,
whenever it was uploading the data to the blockchain.
This data then had their
hashes compared with each other, and if they did not match, then the block valida-
tion would fail. But also due to this, not only would it not be committed, the node
would also stop forwarding future transactions to the transaction processor. With
that in mind we went through our code once more in search of the cause of the mis-
match.
We discovered that this was caused by utilizing the system time in the transaction
processor to determine when the Entity was last updated. Our reasoning at the time
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Security
61
for this, was originally that it would be more accurate than the timestamp from the
request, but in the context of blockchain, any source of non-determinism in the trans-
action processor will cause the block validation to fail, and since the timestamps did
not match exactly, it resulted in two different hashes from the original source.
In regards to the four scenarios and their designs, see chapter 4, whilst only one
of them has been implemented as part of this thesis, as previously mentioned in chap-
ter 5, each of them and their designs can easily be implemented without much issue,
given the flexibility of the SDK that was developed as part of this project.
Overall, despite being unoﬀicial and unsupported, the .NET Core SDK did function
for the most part, and Hyperledger Sawtooth has indeed made it a quite streamlined
process for learning and implementing blockchain infrastructure. What issues we had
were mostly the type of issue most people would have with any not-commonly-used
software tool, wherein documentation cannot always answer all of the questions one
might have, and other sources of information beyond your own exploration are not
always available.
6.2
Security
As mentioned previously, the implementation does not contain the entire infrastruc-
ture that is required to support it in a professional environment. However, we can
still go through the security considerations behind the design and implementation in
its entirety theoretically
In the proposed design (see chapter 4), each participant in the network has their
own node and are in charge of their own authentication and authorization.
The
software package made as part of this project is imagined as a standard REST API
with the participants preferred authentication scheme, which for example could be
Microsoft’s Active Directory Federation Services (ADFS) or Azure Active Directory
(AD).
This would provide solid industry standard security to the client. The package does
not make use of https, but the insecure http to make calls to the node, due to the
node REST API not supporting it. This can be made secure by either enforcing a
strict network policy, allowing only the client to communicate with the node API, or
simply running the client on the same machine as the node, allowing only for API
calls to the node through local host. Transaction Processors would follow the same
model as the client, connecting to the node from either their own server with a strict
network policy, or running on the same machine as the node.
A consortium network has restricted node access using a list of public keys. This
means that only validator nodes that can prove their identity by ownership of a cor-
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Evaluation & Discussion
responding private-key may join the network. Network traﬀic between the nodes are
secured using ZeroMQ encryption[Foua] using a 256-bit Elliptic-curve cryptography
(ECC) key with elliptical curve; ”Curve25519”. The data inside the data-structure
can also contain a layer of authentication by only allowing requests, which can prove
ownership through the use of a valid digital signature (see section 5.8) to update the
transaction state.
In order to secure the infrastructure surrounding the system, one has to utilize proper
encryption, authentication and network permission management. This is not a sim-
ple task to do properly, and requires quite some work to implement and manage
for each participant. However, should unauthorized people gain access to the client,
they can lookup data present in the network and push unwanted transaction onto
the network, though by design they are limited to only pushing transaction onto the
network on behalf of the owner of the node they have accessed. Private information,
such as private keys, also need to be strictly managed through the use of key vaults or
through certificates made through a trusted certificate authority. If the private keys
were to leak, they can be used to send unwanted messages to the blockchain, decrypt
node-to-node communication or even add their own nodes to the network. Adding a
malicious node to the network however, is not likely to have much consequence, as
though it may act as a legitimate node and allow its owners to read data from the
network, it cannot modify the data that other nodes have committed nor can it make
changes to the history, unless they force a fork.
Other types of security breaches in blockchain are not exactly unheard of.
Cryp-
tocurrencies which all are based on blockchain technology has been subject to hack-
ers finding exploits to take advantage of at the cost of the network. This happened
recently with Ethereum[Pop], wherein a hacker was able to create fake IOU tokens,
which he could then utilize whilst keeping his old tokens. He could then go and spend
the amount of the IOU and inform the blockchain, that he no longer wished to have
the IOU exist, by informing the smart contract that it had to self-destruct, which
returned his original investment.
This essentially gave him access to a Ethereum
printer, which could print an infinite amount of Ethereum tokens. These tokens and
IOUs could be spent however he wanted to, allowing him to destabilize the entirety
of the Ethereum and other blockchains. Other hacks have occurred in the past, and
people’s keys have been leaked on the large cryptocurrency exchanges[Sel].
As mentioned before, security is never easy, but the foundation laid by utilizing
the modern standard for protecting users in the design and implementing limiting
features on the blockchain, makes our solution a good basis to start with for creating
a secure logistic system, if you want to utilize the blockchain.
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Eﬀiciency
63
6.3
Eﬀiciency
When fetching data from any of the blockchain nodes, the access speed of each call is
not slow compared to a traditional database. This is because it utilizes a Merkle-tree
(see section 2.18), which allows for quick lookups based on the transaction hash to
identify and locate a particular leaf. It can be indexed to some extent as seen with
Sawtooth’s addressing scheme (see section 5.7), but the first transaction state will
still define the address used by all its future states, which makes it a little harder to
index the data. Likewise, the blockchain does not enable as it cannot perform tradi-
tional data lookups, as the key for each entry is based on their hash. For instance,
if you wanted to search for red cars made by Mercedes, you would have to iterate
through the entire dataset and then look at each item and then do the comparison
there. That is a bleak task to perform for a computer, compared to a traditional
database, wherein certain setups allow for the searches and their terms to be indexed,
making such operations take a split second of the time it would take in one of these
blockchain databases. The lookup time for identifying the individual items related
to a transaction however only takes Log(n) time, if you have the key to the Merkle
tree. This is because a Merkle tree is a balanced tree, and that is an inherent trait
for balanced trees.
The data usage for communicating the data in a blockchain is not bad at all. Given
that generally not a lot of data is stored on the blockchain and the messages that can
be sent on the blockchain, are generally small as the cost of a block scales up to a cap
with the cost of the transaction on traditional networks such as can be seen on the
Ethereum blockchain[Smia]. Blockchain also do not follow the general trend of data
normalization, which is used in traditional relational databases, and should therefore
in theory be smaller than their traditional relational database equivalence. The Bit-
coin blockchain for instance, currently has a size of of 324 gigabytes[Mit], which in
the scheme of things is quite small compared to traditional database with its over 700
million transactions in total[Blo], especially given that this is for the entirety of the
Bitcoin blockchain.
Whilst the blockchain is not good for lookups, it can be combined with a traditional
database to improve it. Hyperledger Sawtooth does allow for entities to subscribe to
events, such as new blocks being added. This could make it easier to perform these
operations and allow for traditional database lookups. It does however come at the
price of the same data being duplicated, and the blockchain-related data in the data-
base may not be updated through regular means, but only through the blockchain, or
it goes out of sync. In terms of eﬀicient data-distribution, there are better solutions,
such as a distributed NoSQL database solution, but if you are married to the idea of
utilizing a blockchain, it will do the job just fine.
==PAGE:74==
64
6 Evaluation & Discussion
6.4
Data Access
When considering data access, a few different things might pop up inside someone’s
head as different factors. These things are:
• Ping
• Regional Restrictions
• Availability
• Request Processing time
Generally, distance related ping is a non-factor in most types of systems, whether
that be banking or other such related systems. For instance, accessing tesla.com takes
about 80 milliseconds and pinging filtrine.com, which is owned by a small American
producer of water related products, takes about 150 milliseconds, which indicates
that for distance, ping should be considered as a non-factor. Likewise, given that
the blockchain should utilize a lot of different nodes, when implemented in a proper
environment, it should have a lot of different access points, mitigating availability
issues based on this. This of course is based on the type of blockchain utilized, as a
private blockchain would likely not have this capability.
Regional restrictions however have caused an overall issue with the designs, as dis-
cussed previously, General Data Protection Regulation, see section 2.4, which requires,
that all personal identifiable information regarding Europeans individuals needs to
follow the European Union’s very strict regulations on data. This is especially true
in regards to storage, as this data pertaining Europeans can only be stored and pro-
cessed within Europe. As mentioned in the design however, see section 4.2.6, there is
a way to mitigate this. This can be done by adding a traditional database, which is
managed and kept by some entity uploading entity. These databases would require
some sort of API to access, but since traditional databases cannot as easily be spread
across multiple sites like the blockchain, nor is it capable of utilizing the same avail-
ability mechanisms as the Blockchain, access to these might be slower.
This is very much an issue with the Blockchain based solution, given that, when-
ever additional APIs and databases need to be added, you introduce more security
risks into the system that have to be managed. Likewise, if the database is only main-
tained by a single company, you will need to trust them in regards to the data. Also
the company hosting the traditional database needs to be wary of who they allow to
query their database for personal identifiable information, and be very restrictive of
this, because otherwise they will fall foul of GDPR. If they were to share the data
with an entity that is located outside of Europe for instance, they could be fined by
the EU for not following GDPR. A solution to that, though far from ideal, would be
to only utilize this solution outside of Europe, and not allow Europeans to utilize it,
==PAGE:75==
6.4 Data Access
65
neither good options.
Another thing to consider is that request processing time can vary a lot depending on
what is being accessed. Generally, actions like getting information about the state of
an entity or pulling several of them will take almost no time, however, uploading data
can take quite a while, especially depending on which type of consensus mechanism
is utilized whether that be PoET (see section 2.19.2) or pBFT (see section 2.19.1).
This is generally what will take the longest time, given that the consensus has to be
agreed upon between the different systems, which can take quite a while.
Given that PoET is ultimately a lottery style algorithm, wherein every participant is
given a lottery ticket to be the next one to upload their transaction and is therefore
dependent on the number of total transaction, it is good. pBFT however has a slight
issue in regards to the time it will take for commits to be completed. For pBFT how-
ever, it takes a lot more, since it scales by a quadratic factor rather than a linear one
like in the case of PoET. Therefor extra considerations have to be taken into account
for when utilizing this consensus algorithm in regards to the network size. However,
if we assume that the network has 10 nodes, and we get that the amount of messages
that need to be sent is 1 to the leader node in the form of the request, the leader
node then has to send a ”pre-prepare” message to each of the nodes. This is followed
up by the backup nodes informing every other node but them, what is going on in
a ”prepare” statement. Every node in the network then informs ever other node of
the commit that occurred, and afterwards every node informs the client of whether
it succeeded or not. This is quite a lot of messages, which can be seen graphically in
the figure 6.1, and it can be formalized as such:
MessageAmmount = 1 + (numberofnodes −1) + (numberofnodes −1)2 +
(numberofnodes −1)2 + numberofnodes
Given that each of these messages have to sent across the network to facilitate this,
quite a lot need to be sent out across the network, which has obvious implications for
the speed of the consensus algorithm. Especially compared to PoET, which takes a
more linear amount of messages compared to pBFT. However, in a small network, the
number of messages that have to be sent out across the network falls within a few hun-
dreds, which should allow for the solution to execute within an acceptable time frame.
Both of these consensus algorithms are good choices as long as considerations are
made to what is being implemented and the constraints around the network. For
a public blockchain for instance, we would not recommend using pBFT, but in a
consortium environment it might be acceptable.
==PAGE:76==
66
6 Evaluation & Discussion
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
NumberofNodes
NumberofMessages
Figure 6.1: The quadratic formula which defines the amount of messages needed for
pBFT to work.
6.5
Practicality of Blockchain
In regards to how practical the Blockchain is, it is hard to gauge exactly how practical
the solution is. As previously discussed the blockchain grants inherent trust to the
users, in the form that they know, that the data has not been modified. However,
statements such as ”Patrick uploaded this data at 3 am, saying he picked up Christian
in the vicinity of Kongens Lyngby”, with the names replaced with unique user ids,
can be used for scenarios such as the one discussed in the Ride Share logistic Scenario,
however due to GDPR, the blockchain might not be the most practical solution to this.
Supply chains in general might be suited towards this type of solution, allowing
containers of rubber and other types of good to be tracked, wherein a customer can
then track it further down the line, however even that has issues. Imagine for in-
stance, a supply chain for gloves for instance, where someone produces some sort of
resource and then creates a barcode or similar reference and apply it to the items
produced. Afterwards, they take another set of almost identical items and apply the
same reference, to trick people into believing that the fake items, really are the real
ones. For such a scenario wherein a good is produced, the blockchain might not be
super practical. Likewise, if one were to consider a transport scenario, wherein special
conditions were required such as vaccines, which require a very specific temperature,
malicious actors could wrap a cold material around the thermometer used to track the
temperature in order to trick it, which would be very problematic. Likewise, there is
no easy way to see exactly who is trying to cheat the system, beyond enough people
==PAGE:77==
6.6 Trust & Accountability
67
complaining about them.
We also have some thoughts on how exactly TradeLens and their solution works prac-
tically, given that, with our understanding of blockchain technology, their solution
cannot, with our understanding, be solely underpinned by the blockchain. This is due
to the existence of GDPR regulation, as that rules and regulations requires that data
needs to be deleted if requested and such. However just like the solution that we have
implemented, they might use a series of off-chain databases, which maintains the data
for them. Likewise, they can also whenever data needs to be removed, recalculate
the entire blockchain, which takes up a lot of resources and might be a slight problem.
Overall, the blockchain is not a very practical solution, but it is however still a
solution. However, it is important to note that security has never made anything
more practical, but it has often made solutions more secure, allowing them to be
used in real life cases.
6.6
Trust & Accountability
Every transaction made in the blockchain has a digital signature of the node that
initiated it, while the implemented transaction processor also requires a digital signa-
ture to both identify and authorize updates to the transaction state. In this way, it
creates trust through accountability, as when someone has added something to the
blockchain, they cannot take it back or deny it. To add to it, one can also trust that a
certain process has been followed, namely the one in the Smart Contract (see section
2.18. Yet the added trust that a blockchain implementation grants might not always
be needed.
Trust is typically based on our relations and perceptions of each other, on top of
how much is at stake. looking at companies like Swift[Swi], who manages and per-
forms most of the world’s cross country and border money transfers, it would be clear
that companies exist where a large degree of trust is required. However, their solution
is not based on the blockchain, and their current trust is not based on technology.
Rather, it is based on a history of good practice< if Swift were ever caught in a lie
or in editing their data history, then the trust in their institution would be broken,
and that would be very likely to cost them their entire business.
Another way of having a trusted business relationship, is simply not having much
at stake.
Like in the case of the ride sharing scenario.
It is diﬀicult to imagine
what kind of partnership has been established where a parking company wants an im-
mutable record. The parking company would have to be giving out the extra parking
time for free for it to be detrimental for them, a rather poor agreement to sign onto.
==PAGE:78==
68
6 Evaluation & Discussion
Not every company is this trusted by default, especially if they are trying to break
into a new or different market segment than their usual one. However, to this there
is also an already existing solution - joint ventures such as TradeLens, see section
2.21. This partnership between IBM & Maersk is a good example of that. They
are both some of the biggest companies within their spheres of expertise. Smaller
companies are also likely to believe and trust them, as long as they can be provided
the same amount of benefits from utilizing the data as the companies that created the
solution. Because their initial partnership was seemingly a private blockchain, due to
the amount, which faced criticism from different blockchain enthusiasts[Tin], as not
a lot of invites were issued in a large industry, made it feel like a private blockchain,
which lead to early adoption issues for TradeLens according to a series of blockchain
enthusiast.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
7.1
Conclusions
This project set out to create an extensible software package for secure logistic sys-
tems. In order to build a foundation of trust and accountability, the solution is based
on a blockchain framework. This blockchain framework was designed to be used as
a consortium, meaning as a restricted network consisting of selected companies and
other legal entities. The design featured a general logistic-related data-structure, with
a set of extending data-structures for specific logistic scenarios. On the basis of this
design, a software solution was implemented with a client, a transaction processor
and various other objects required to implement all the functionalities required for a
ride sharing platform, at the same time leaving it open to be extended with additional
software as needed. The smart contracts were made to ensure that the processes for
ride sharing were followed and in order to verify the digital signature of any entity
committing transactions to the chain. This was done using Hyperledger Sawtooth,
which provides a clear separation between the blockchain node and its own definition
of smart contracts, the transaction processor. An unoﬀicial .NET Core SDK pack-
age was used as a basis for the implementation. Using an unoﬀicial SDK did come
at a cost; some of its functionalities were not functional which required them to be
re-implemented, alongside having less supporting documentation than, and finding
solutions to common problems was made more challenging.
The evaluation found that the immutable nature of a blockchain might be good for
trust, but makes for a very restrictive design, when one attempts to keep it inside
the rules of GDPR and other regional data restriction. Though alternatives do not
bring the same level of trust, they can provide a more eﬀicient framework in a GDPR
friendly manner. So the question becomes whether the trust and accountability of
blockchain is required. In a low-stakes scenario like ride sharing, the involved parties
might be more inclined to trust each other, while when it comes to the bill-of-lading
scenario, others might be less so.
In conclusion, the package provides a functional and extensible framework with
blockchain at its core, but the kind of logistical scenario it should be extended to
cover, should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, based on the level of trust of
the involved parties and whether it is subject to restrictive data regulation such as
GDPR.
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Conclusion
7.2
Future Improvements
• Extended Scenarios: Add an analyze of the scenarios and other related sce-
narios on whether they are suited towards using a blockchain solution.
• Alternative SDKs: The SDKs for more supported languages may be explored.
• Network Demo: Setup a blockchain network environment with multiple nodes
and dive deeper into the specific node and network settings it requires and the
consequences on performance.
• Expanded Ride Sharing Demo: Expand the demo of one or more scenarios
by including the required infrastructure necessary for authentication, a database
to store personal information and a mobile application for the ride sharing
scenario.
• Look into Publish/Subscribe system: Instead of exchanging transaction
ids through other means, the publish-subscribe system in Hyperledger Sawtooth
could be used instead. Whenever a participant is invited to sign-off, they can
be notified directly through the blockchain and make an automated response.
• Incorporate a Synchronized Database: The blockchain does not perform
well when querying data, as such. In order to improve it, a database can be
set up to fetch data from the blockchain and make use of the built-in publish-
subscribe system, to keep a database in sync.
It does add some amount of
duplicated data, but provides better options for querying data and may cut
down the need for communication through APIs, depending on the use-case.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Github
The code for the logistics framework package can be found at; https://github.com/
Castleburg/BlockchainLogisticsFramework.
The solution contains three projects; a client, a transaction processor and their shared
objects. A yaml file is included in the transaction processor which is used to deploy
a DevMode Sawtooth node in docker.
The specific guide used for this project to setup the DevMode node can be found at;
https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/app_developers_guide/installing_
sawtooth.html#docker.
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
Project Plan
Project Plan
13 October 2021
1. Formal Details
Student:
Patrick Kruse (s164166)
Student’s Institution:
DTU
Thesis Topic:
Core Framework for Secure Logistics Systems
Conducted at:
DTU
Start Date:
13-09-2021
Due Date:
06-02-2022
Defense date:
Approx 18-02-2022 (early estimate)
Supervisor:
Christian D. Jensen
2. Project Description
The goal of this project is to analyze the requirements for such secure logistics systems,
and develop a core software package that can be configured and extended to support
many different types of transportation systems, from car pooling to global logistics
chains.
This implementation of a core secure logistics system can be build upon
in the future either as a open source project or as a commercially viable project.
The project is expected to present an analysis, a design and an implementation of a
software package for transport integrity. The software package must be flexible and
extensible.
==PAGE:84==
74
B Project Plan
3. Tentative project schedule
Task Name
Week start
week end
Completion Rate
Thesis Writing
1
15
5%
Theory
1
13
30%
Design
1
8
30%
Implementation
2
12
0%
Testing and Evaluation
10
14
0%
Formalities
15
15
-
Hand-in
16
16
-
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[Aut]
Auth0. “Introduction to JSON Web Tokens.” In: (). url: https://jwt.
io/introduction.
[Ava]
Jennifer J Taylor; AvailableLight. “210 million packages were stolen from
Americans this year: survey.” In: (). url: https://nypost.com/2021/11/
29/210-million-packages-were-stolen-this-year-survey/.
[Bina]
Binance. “Byzantine Fault Tolerance Explained.” In: (). url: https://
academy.binance.com/en/articles/byzantine- fault- tolerance-
explained.
[Binb]
Binance. “Hards Forks and Soft Forks Explained.” In: (). url: https:
//academy.binance.com/en/articles/hard-forks-and-soft-forks.
[Bit]
Bitcoin.com. “What is Bitcoin Cash?” In: (). url: https://www.bitcoin.
com/get-started/what-is-bitcoin-cash/.
[Blo]
Blockchain.com. “Total Number of Transactions.” In: (). url: https://
www.blockchain.com/charts/n-transactions-total.
[Bon]
Dan Boneh. “Twenty Years of Attacks on the RSA Cryptosystem.” In:
(). url: https://crypto.stanford.edu/~dabo/pubs/papers/RSA-
survey.pdf.
[Coma]
European Commision. “Animal welfare during transport.” In: (). url:
https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/animal- welfare/animal-
welfare-practice/animal-welfare-during-transport_en.
[Comb]
Comodo. “What is HTTPS?” In: (). url: https://web.archive.org/
web/20150212105201/https://www.instantssl.com/ssl-certificate-
products/https.html.
[Cro]
Douglas Crockford. The JSON Saga. url: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=-C-JoyNuQJs.
[Cry]
Cryptsoft. “PKCS #1 RSA OAEP.” In: (). url: https://www.cryptsoft.
com/pkcs11doc/v220/group__SEC__12__1__8__PKCS____1__RSA_
_OAEP.html.
[Doc]
Docker. “Use containers to Build, Share and Run your applications.” In:
(). url: https://www.docker.com/resources/what-container.
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[Ent+21]
William Entriken et al. “Non-Fungible Token Standard.” In: (2021). url:
https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721.
[Foua]
Hyperledger Foundation. “45 Blockchain Statistics & Facts That Will
Make You Think: The Dawn of Hypercapitalism.” In: (). url: https :
//www.hyperledger.org/blog/2018/11/23/hyperledger-sawtooth-
blockchain-security-part-two.
[Foub]
Hyperledger Foundation. “Address and Namespace Design.” In: (). url:
https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/app_developers_
guide/address_and_namespace.html.
[Fouc]
Hyperledger Foundation. “Glossary.” In: (). url: https : / / sawtooth .
hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/glossary.html.
[Foud]
Hyperledger Foundation. “Hyperledger Sawtooth 1.2 Documentation.” In:
(). url: https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/.
[Foue]
Hyperledger Foundation. “Hyperledger Sawtooth REST API Reference.”
In: (). url: https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/rest_
api/.
[Fouf]
Hyperledger Foundation. “PBFT Architecture.” In: (). url: https://
sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/pbft/architecture.html/.
[Foug]
Hyperledger Foundation. “Permissioning Design.” In: (). url: https://
sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/architecture/permissioning_
requirement.html.
[Fouh]
Hyperledger Foundation. “sawtooth-devmode.” In: (). url: https : / /
github.com/hyperledger/sawtooth- devmode#:~:text=Sawtooth%
20dev % 20mode % 20is % 20a , of % 20the % 20Hyperledger % 20Sawtooth %
20platform..
[Foui]
Hyperledger Foundation. “Summery of Available SDKs.” In: (). url: https:
//sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/app_developers_guide/
using_the_sdks.html.
[Fra21]
Jake Frankenfield. “Crypto currency private key.” In: (2021). url: https:
//www.investopedia.com/terms/p/private-key.asp#:~:text=In%
5C%20cryptocurrency%5C%2C%5C%20private%5C%20keys%5C%20are,
and%5C%20unauthorized%5C%20access%5C%20to%5C%20funds..
[Goo]
Google. “Protocol Buffers.” In: (). url: https://developers.google.
com/protocol-buffers.
[Gov]
Canadian Government. “High Occupancy Vehicle Lanes in Canada.” In: ().
url: https://web.archive.org/web/20120419031447/http://www.tc.
gc.ca/eng/programs/environment-utsp-hovlanescanada-886.htm.
[Gro]
Large-Scale Data & Systems Group. “spectre-attack-sgx.” In: (). url:
https://github.com/lsds/spectre-attack-sgx.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
77
[IBMa]
IBM. “Public key cryptography).” In: (). url: https://www.ibm.com/
docs/en/ztpf/1.1.0.14?topic=concepts-public-key-cryptography.
[IBMb]
IBM. “Size considerations for public and private keys.” In: (). url: https:
//www.ibm.com/docs/en/zos/2.4.0?topic=certificates- size-
considerations-public-private-key.
[IBMc]
IBM. “Size considerations for public and private keys.” In: (). url: https:
//www.ibm.com/docs/en/zos/2.4.0?topic=certificates- size-
considerations-public-private-keys.
[IET]
IETF. “Blockchain.” In: (). url: https://www.internetsociety.org/
issues/past-categories/blockchain/.
[Inv]
Investopedia. “Hard Fork (Blockchain).” In: (). url: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/h/hard-fork.asp#:~:text=With%20a%20soft%20fork%2C%
20only,work%20by%20the%20new%20rules.
[Jos]
S. Josefsson. “The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data Encodings.” In: ().
url: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#section-4.
[Kan]
Teemu Kanstrén. “Merkle Trees: Concepts and Use Cases.” In: (). url:
https://medium.com/coinmonks/merkle-trees-concepts-and-use-
cases-5da873702318.
[LP]
Gaëtan Leurent and Thomas Peyrin. “SHA-1 is a Shambles*.” In: (). url:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/014.pdf.
[Mar15]
Charles P Pfleeger & Shari Lawrence Pfleeger & Jonathan Margulies. Se-
curity in Computing, Fifth Edition. 2015.
[Mic]
Microsoft. “A tour of the C language.” In: (). url: https : / / docs .
microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/tour-of-csharp/.
[Mic21]
Microsoft. “GUID and UUID.” In: (2021). url: https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/openspecs/windows_protocols/ms-dtyp/4926e530-816e-
41c2-b251-ec5c7aca018a.
[Mina]
Minimalsm. “INTRODUCTION TO SMART CONTRACTS.” In: (). url:
https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/smart-contracts/.
[Minb]
Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos & University of Minnesota. “Sensing for HOV-
/HOT Lanes Enforcement.” In: (). url: https://web.archive.org/web/
20171215141918/http://www.dot.state.mn.us/research/reports/
2017/201705.pdf/.
[Mit]
I. Mitic. “45 Blockchain Statistics & Facts That Will Make You Think:
The Dawn of Hypercapitalism.” In: (). url: https://fortunly.com/
statistics/blockchain-statistics/#:~:text=The%5C%20current%
5C%20size%5C%20of%5C%20Bitcoin%5C%20blockchain%5C%20is%5C%
20324%5C%20gigabytes.&text=The%5C%20Bitcoin%5C%20blockchain%
5C%20expands%5C%20to,February%5C%202021%5C%20was%5C%20343%
5C%20bytes..
==PAGE:88==
78
Bibliography
[NISa]
NIST. “Announcing the ADVANCED ENCRYPTION STANDARD (AES).”
In: (). url: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.
197.pdf.
[NISb]
NIST. “NIST Policy on Hash Functions.” In: (). url: https://csrc.nist.
gov/Projects/Hash-Functions/NIST-Policy-on-Hash-Functions.
[NRI]
M. Jones & Microsoft & J. Bradley & Ping Identity & N. Sakimura &
NRI. “JSON Web Token (JWT).” In: (). url: https://datatracker.
ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519.
[OMG]
OMG. “Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN).” In: (). url: https:
//www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/PDF.
[Par]
European Parliment. “REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF THE EURO-
PEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 27 April 2016 on
the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of per-
sonal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Direc-
tive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).” In: (). url: https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj.
[Pop]
Nathaniel Popper. “A Hacking of More Than $50 Million Dashes Hopes in
the World of Virtual Currency.” In: (). url: https://www.nytimes.com/
2016/06/18/business/dealbook/hacker-may-have-removed-more-
than - 50 - million - from - experimental - cybercurrency - project .
html.
[Pur]
James Purtill. “Artists report discovering their work is being stolen and
sold as NFTs.” In: (). url: https://www.abc.net.au/news/science/
2021-03-16/nfts-artists-report-their-work-is-being-stolen-
and-sold/13249408.
[Ray08]
Raymond. “GUIDs are globally unique, but substrings of GUIDs aren’t.”
In: (2008). url: https : / / devblogs . microsoft . com / oldnewthing /
20080627-00/?p=21823.
[Sel]
SelfKey. “A Comprehensive List of Cryptocurrency Exchange Hacks.” In:
(). url: https://selfkey.org/list-of-cryptocurrency-exchange-
hacks/.
[Smia]
Corwin Smith. “BLOCKS.” In: (). url: https://ethereum.org/en/
developers/docs/blocks/.
[Smib]
Corwin Smith. “Sidechains.” In: (). url: https://ethereum.org/en/
developers/docs/scaling/sidechains/.
[Soc05]
The Internet Society. “GUID Algorithm - RFC 4122.” In: (2005). url:
httpshttps://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122.
[Swi]
Swift. “About Us.” In: (). url: https://www.swift.com/about-us.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
79
[TD]
United Nations Conference On Trade and Development. “Review of mar-
itime transport.” In: (). url: https://web.archive.org/web/20220207145438/
https : / / unctad . org / topic / transport - and - trade - logistics /
review-of-maritime-transport.
[Teca]
Ars Technica. “New Spectre-like attack uses speculative execution to over-
flow buffers.” In: (). url: https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2018/
07/new- spectre- like- attack- uses- speculative- execution- to-
overflow-buffers/.
[Tecb]
Ars Technica. “Researchers use Intel SGX to put malware beyond the
reach of antivirus software.” In: (). url: https://arstechnica.com/
gadgets/2019/02/researchers- use- intel- sgx- to- put- malware-
beyond-the-reach-of-antivirus-software/.
[Tin]
Andrea Tinianow. “About Us.” In: (). url: How%20Maersk' s%20Bad%
20Business%20Model%20Is%20Breaking%20Its%20Blockchain.
[tma]
tmarkovski. “Hyperledger Sawtooth .Net Core SDK.” In: (). url: https:
//github.com/tmarkovski/sawtooth-sdk-net/.
[Traa]
TradeLens. “DIGITIZING THE GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN.” In: (). url:
https://www.tradelens.com/about.
[Trab]
TradeLens. “SOLUTION BRIEF.” In: (). url: https://s3.us.cloud-
object-storage.appdomain.cloud/tradelens-web-assets/Tradelens_
Solution_Brief_v3.pdf.
[Wac]
Paul Wackerow. “PROOF-OF-STAKE (POS).” In: (). url: https : / /
ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
==PAGE:92==
