==PAGE:1==
nmnddd
MASTER’S THESIS
Data-based investigation of the influence of public transport
on free-floating carsharing usage
Maresa Lisa Weisshaar, s200150
Supervisors: Jesper Bláfoss Ingvardson, Jeppe Rich
May 15, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Free-floating carsharing (FFCS) is an emerging mode of transport that enhances the mobility of
individuals. However, literature on the substitution effects of carsharing services and conventional
transport modes, such as bus, rail, or bike, is scarce. As to contribute to this gap in literature,
this thesis studies the influence of public transport on carsharing usage in Copenhagen, Denmark.
Specifically, it will be the scope of this project to analyse the effect of the extension of Copen-
hagen’s Metro network by a new Cityring line on FFCS usage patterns. Therefore, this project
comparatively analyses changes in the temporal and spacial usage of FFCS from the before to the
after period of the Cityring Metro opening. Results reveal that while generally increasing over
time, the carsharing usage decreased in areas where Cityring Metro stations are located in the af-
ter period. Thus, this thesis proposes the assumption of free-floating carsharing being substituted
with the Cityring Metro.
Further investigating factors influencing FFCS demand, a direct demand model is adapted
to reveal associations between the chosen independent variables and zone-to-zone carsharing de-
mand. Applying a multiple regression model thereby reveals that the inclusion of a specific cat-
egorical Cityring Metro variable is statistically significant in explaining FFCS usage along with
socio-economic and demographic, built-environment, transit-supply and travel-impedance vari-
ables. Thus, the modeling results support the assumption obtained on basis of the explorative
analysis stating that FFCS is being substituted with the Cityring Metro. Nonetheless, findings
also reveal that FFCS demand can be associated with a smaller household size, a higher percentage
of young adults, or a lower bus and rail density in city areas, among other statistically significant
factors.
==PAGE:3==
Master’s Thesis
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Related work
3
2.1
FFCS transaction data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Direct demand models in transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Methodology
6
3.1
Temporal, spatial and temporal-spacial network analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
The direct demand model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2.1
OLS multiple regression model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.2
Ordinary Least Square assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.3
Variable selection and model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.4
Cross-validation and evaluation of model accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.5
Interpretation of estimated coefficients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Data description and pre-processing
13
4.1
Data sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.1
Drive Now Copenhagen FFCS trips
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.2
Drive Now Copenhagen Customer data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.3
Zone system and area of operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.4
Cityring Metro stop locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.5
Built-environment and transit-supply data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.6
Socio-economic and demographic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Data pre-processing and filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Results
17
5.1
Descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Temporal and spatial analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2.1
Temporal changes on FFCS usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2.2
Spatial changes on FFCS usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.3
Spatio-temoral changes on FFCS usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Direct demand model for FFCS trips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.1
Model variables and posterior summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.2
Model estimates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.3
Model accuracy metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Discussion of results and limitations
45
7
Conclusion
48
References
52
A Appendix
iv
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master’s Thesis
List of Tables
1
Significance of coefficients (t-test statistics)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Summary of data filtering statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Data characteristics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Customer gender and age derived from Drive Now Customer Data (01.01.2016-31.12.2018) 18
5
Descriptive statistics: measure of central tendency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Ratio of trip origins/destinations in level 2 metro zones over the total trip count of the
respective year(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7
Change in ratio of trip origins and destinations in metro zones from 2018 to 2019 . . . .
26
8
Descriptives for the metrics trip duration and trip distance for different zone categories
and aggregated years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
9
Variable descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
10
Pearson’s correlation matrix for numerical variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
11
Summary of aggregated variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
12
Marginal changes in parameter estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
13
Parameter Estimates for the Scenario Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
14
Model accuracy metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
15
Parameter Estimates for the Random Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Figures
1
Drive Now operating area and zone details: location of Cityring Metro stations . . . . .
6
2
Density distribution of the metrics trip duration and trip distance
. . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Density distribution and histogram of the metric idle time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Ratio of monthly FFCS trips to total yearly FFCS trips over the years . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Daily Drive Now usage of each month in each year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Drive Now usage of the weekdays of each year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7
Total number of hourly FFCS origins and destinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
8
Total number of hourly FFCS trips on the different weekdays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
9
Distribution of trip duration and trip distance across different temporal categories
. . .
25
10
Absolute number of trip origins and destinations of level 2 zones representative for the
years 2017 to 2019 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
11
Trip net flows of the 92 level 2 zones representative for the years 2017 to 2019 . . . . . .
28
12
Difference in the number of trip origins and destinations over the years . . . . . . . . . .
29
13
Rental net flow for different time intervals in 2018
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
14
Rental net flow for different time intervals in 2019
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
15
Map of the marginal change of estimated metro zone coefficients from the before to the
after period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
16
Estimated effect of metro stations on FFCS demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master’s Thesis
1
Introduction
Free-floating carsharing (FFCS) has been one of the latest innovations in the car-sharing market
becoming increasingly adopted in urban areas (Becker et al., 2017b). With the continuous development
of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), GPS technology and digital platforms, FFCS
services have been enhanced. Evolving from station-based carsharing services which limit the usage to
complete round trips while vehicles are picked up at and returned to the same rental station, commercial
FFCS offers flexibility with regard to the origin and destination of trips within a predefined service
area. When using the service outside of this area, the vehicles need to be returned to an arbitrary
official parking place within the dedicated area while the usage is charged on an hourly (or distance-
based) tariff (Jochem et al., 2020). Vehicles can be booked dynamically in a self-service manner via
a smartphone application displaying the real-time location of available vehicles. These can also be
reserved for a short time period prior to their rental. While different business models exist which,
for instance, specify the refueling or relocating strategies of vehicles, users can enjoy the privacy and
flexibility of the car without bearing fixed costs of purchase or recurrent costs of insurance, maintenance
and fuel (Ceccato & Diana, 2021). Hence, "free- floating car-sharing is not only an alternative to private
car [ownership], but also to public transportation" (Becker et al., 2017b) providing increased mobility,
especially to those without access to private cars.
However, as a rather recent addition to the overall transportation system, the empirical research
on FFCS is still very limited (Khan & Machemehl, 2017; Papu Carrone et al., 2020). Especially the
utilization of FFCS transaction data for the investigation of impacts on user behavior and on the
public transport system is scarce (Guirao et al., 2021). Due to car utilization patterns and demand
characteristics being variable across cities and operators (Giordano et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021),
this thesis will focus on the public transport network of the city of Copenhagen, Denmark. It will
be this projects’ objective to investigate the influence of public transport on free-floating car-sharing
usage based on transaction data provided by Drive Now Copenhagen. Specifically, the main goal of
this project is to analyse the impact of the implementation of the Copenhagen Cityring Metro on
FFCS usage.
The Cityring Metro is a 15.5 km underground railway circle connecting 17 underground stations
in the city center of Copenhagen connecting different neighbourhoods. Its construction has been the
largest public transport infrastructure upgrade in Copenhagen in 400 years (Cowi, 2022). As a fully
automated driverless system the Cityring Metro requires 28 minutes to drive a full circle while trains
depart very frequently (Online travel information, 2022) with a 100 second headway in rush hour
(Ramboll Group A/S, 2022). Being designed to support the Danish capital’s vision to "uphold and
further develop a livable city with green and vibrant public spaces" (Cowi, 2022), the Cityring Metro
enhances the connectivity and access to the public transport system. It provides fast and frequent
connections between the Copenhagen districts, which before were connected with bus services, and
offers multiple stations of transfer to other public transport means. In detail, "85 % of all homes,
work places and educational facilities in Copenhagen’s inner city area, as well as the surrounding
neighborhoods, are less than a ten-minute walk from either a metro or train station" (Cowi, 2022).
1
==PAGE:6==
Master’s Thesis
Due to the large scale of the Cityring Metro project it has had great consequences on the existing
network. However, there is limited research devoted to understanding the evolving travel patterns of
passengers and connected changing FFCS demand in response to the opening of the Cityring Metro
in September of 2019. To fill this gap, this thesis will analyze the changes in FFCS usage before and
after the Cityring Metro started operating. In other words, FFCS transaction data will be utilized to
study the impacts on FFCS usage resulting from the public transport infrastructure upgrade. As to
disregard impacts caused by the COVID-19 pandemic on the public transport system, this thesis will
not analyse the year 2020 and later, as the pandemic had begun to spread in Europe. Thus, the years
2016 to 2019 serve as a basis for this project’s exploration.
To further explore associations between FFCS usage and influential factors, a direct demand model
will be developed for the FFCS transactions of Drive Now in Copenhagen. As one of the best known
travel-demand modeling approach, the four-step model, a sequence of trip generation, trip distribution,
mode choice, and route assignment, has conventionally been applied to derive aggregated estimates of
demand shares for different modes (Kepaptsoglou et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2014). However, due to its
various limitations, such as model inaccuracy, sensitivity to land-use variables, travel input data and
more (Choi et al., 2012; Talvitie, 1973; Zhao et al., 2014), direct demand models have been increasingly
adopted by researchers as an alternative approach. In attempting to overcome the limitations of the
four-step model, direct demand models estimate zone-level travel-demand as a function of travel-
impedance variables, socio-economic and demographic characteristics, built-environment and transit-
supply variables (Yan et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2014). Thereby, the direct demand model integrates the
conventional generation, distribution, mode choice and attraction steps overcoming weaknesses of the
sequential approach (Choi et al., 2012; Kepaptsoglou et al., 2017; Yan et al., 2020). As summarized by
Cardozo et al. (2012), the advantages of direct demand models hence include "simplicity of use, easy
interpretation of results, immediate response and low cost".
The objectives of this project can be summarized as follows:
• explore if free-floating car sharing is being complemented by or substituted with public transport,
specifically with the M3 Cityring Metro
• investigate the role of travel-impedance, socio-economic and demographic, built-environment and
transit-supply factors to cast light on the underlying determinants of in FFCS usage
The proceeding thesis is organized as follows.
In Section 2, relevant literature in the field of
FFCS demand analysis and direct demand modeling will be reviewed. Section 3 describes the here
applied methodology elaborating the dimensions of the conducted explorative analysis as well as the
fundamentals of the here applied direct demand model. Section 4 introduces the data sources which
have been used to carry out this project’s study for the use case of Copenhagen, Denmark. After
briefly describing the data sources, the steps of the preliminary data pre-processing and filtering will
be explained. Section 5 presents a descriptive analysis of this project’s main datasource, the FFCS
transaction data, before presenting the results from the explorative analysis. Furthermore, the results
from the applied direct demand model will be elaborated. Section 6 discusses the results obtained
from the explorative analysis and the direct demand model while critically reflecting on this thesis’
limitations.
Lastly, Section 7 concludes this thesis by summarizing the findings and providing an
outlook to future research.
2
==PAGE:7==
Master’s Thesis
2
Related work
2.1
FFCS transaction data analysis
With the increased availability of FFCS transaction data, the investigation of car sharing usage and
the identification of factors influencing car sharing demand has become a growing study field within
the transport literature. In this sense, Ciociola et al. (2017) exploratively analyse temporal and spa-
cial characteristics of FFCS bookings in the city of Turin, Italy, to identify and understand travelers
usage patterns. Schmöller and Bogenberger (2014) and Schmöller et al. (2015) further include socio-
demographic information and weather data to gain deeper insights into the purpose of trips aiming
at determining factors influencing car sharing usage. Similarly, Müller et al. (2017) apply a negative
binomial statistic model to predict and explain the demand of FFCS systems for the case study of
Berlin, Germany. Utilizing transaction data among land-use and socio-demographic data describing
the cities’ neighborhoods and residents, their results indicate that the average income of a neighbor-
hood, the centrality of an area and the availability of parking are significant drivers of FFCS usage.
Applying their model to data from Munich and Cologne however shows, that demand is locally biased
as varying local conditions have great influence on the spatial demand for bookings. This conclusion is
also reached by Giordano et al. (2021) who provide an extensive characterization of the FFCS service
usage in 23 cities in Europe and North America over a 14-month period. Analysing the temporal
dimension of car sharing services revealed that Thursdays and Fridays are the days of the week with
the highest number of rentals for all cities. Nevertheless, the daily usage differs among North American
and European cities. Italian and Spanish cities, for example, have relatively higher utilization rates
in the evenings, but show seasonal patterns as the number of rentals decreases in the summertime.
Regarding the spatial dimension, "rentals were homogeneously spread [in cities like New York City and
Amsterdam], whereas in cities like Milan and Vancouver rentals were concentrated in only a few zones"
(Giordano et al., 2021).
However, investigating the substitution patterns between FFCS and traditional public transport
modes has only been approached by a few researchers. Due to free-floating car sharing being available
for point-to-point trips, the service is "not only an alternative to private cars, but also to public trans-
portation", as argued by Becker et al. (2017b). Utilizing FFCS transaction data for the city of Basel
in Switzerland, Becker et al. (2017b) apply a spacial regression model to study the effect of spacial
characteristics (e.g. population density, number of work places) on FFCS demand as well as a mode
choice model to analyse the influence of trip attributes on travelers choice of mode. The researchers
find that free-floating car sharing usage is higher in areas with a high population density as well as a
lower public transport accessibility. Becker et al. (2017b) thus conclude that FFCS "bridges gaps in
the existing public transportation network" being mainly used for trips "for which only substantially
inferior public transportation alternatives are available". A rather similar conclusion is reached by
Guirao et al. (2021) conducting a transaction data analysis in the city of Madrid, Spain, to measure
the FFCS service demand around rail stations. Finding that the demand is high despite a limited
availability of vehicle parking space as well as alternative public transport options, the researchers
argue that FFCS is complementing public transport as opposed to replacing it.
3
==PAGE:8==
Master’s Thesis
Drawing a closer look at the FFCS development in Copenhagen, Denmark, Papu Carrone et al.
(2020) present the results from a stated preference mode choice experiment analysing substitution
patterns between free-floating car sharing, private cars, bikes and public transport applying a mixed
logit model. While the data sample mostly represents "young and educated individuals, who are more
likely to consider car sharing as a mode of transport", results indicate free-floating car sharing to be a
strong competitor of public transport and bike trips, however not of private car trips. Papu Carrone
et al. (2020) further simulate elasticities for travel cost and travel time. While the sensitivity for the
cost and time of the car sharing service is generally much larger than for the alternative modes, car
sharing reveals to be mainly a substitute for public transport, as an increase in the car sharing price
or time would imply a relatively larger increase in the probability of choosing public transport than in
choosing the other modes. However, Papu Carrone et al. (2020) conclude that while mainly being a
substitute of public transport, the impact of the FFCS service on the total share of public transport
trips is still limited, as only 0.01 % of trips per year would shift from public transport to car sharing
for the respective case study considering a relatively small and specific data sample. Nevertheless, the
results indicate that the "availability of car sharing vehicles, convenient access and the availability to
parking are very valuable characteristics for the users and could play an important role in car sharing
adaption".
2.2
Direct demand models in transport
Reviewing the application and development of direct demand models in the rail transit research sector,
different modeling techniques as well as sets of variables have been exploited. As a distinctive differ-
entiation, ridership either refers to (1) the number of boardings at stations ("station-level ridership"),
or to (2) passenger flows between pairs of stations ("station-to-station ridership") (Kepaptsoglou et
al., 2017). While both approaches model ridership as a function of socio-economic and demographic
variables, built-environment characteristics and transit-supply variables, the latter approach differenti-
ates between origin and destination attributes while additionally including travel-impedance variables
characterizing the trips from station to station. With regard to the Drive Now transaction data being
analysed in this project, research studies adopting the latter approach have principally been reviewed
as to explore techniques for modeling the zone-to-zone trips of FFCS vehicles in the course of this
thesis.
As one of the first researchers introducing econometric models as direct demand models in the
transport sector, Talvitie (1973) draws the parallel of "travel demand elasticities behav[ing] according
to the economic theory of consumer behavior". Studying the effects on zone-to-zone traffic volumes
by mode of travel in Chicago, USA, the predictive performance of the econometric direct demand
models revealed to be less error-prone than the traditional four-step transit model. Thus, Talvitie
(1973) apply mixed linear-logarithmic form models to estimate the predictive relationship between the
dependent and independent variables where the estimates represent the demand elasticity. As such,
the models have been designed to directly forecast aggregated zone-to-zone travel movements, and to
provide estimates on the elasticity of travel demand with respect to socio-economic and demographic
variable, land-use variables and transportation system characteristics.
4
==PAGE:9==
Master’s Thesis
Applying two types of direct demand models, namely the multiplicative and the Poisson regression
model, Choi et al. (2012) study factors affecting metro ridership in the Seoul metropolitan area at
the station-to-station level. Including independent attributes separately for the origin and destination
stations allows the researchers to distinguish the respective effects on ridership. While the multiplica-
tive model outperforms the Poisson regression model, Choi et al. (2012) further differentiate ridership
by the time of day, finding that socio-demographic variables of the origin stations are most influential
on metro ridership in morning peak hours while employment-related variables dominate in destination
stations. Both, built-environment variables and socio-demographic variables reveal to be significant
in accounting for the metro ridership at the destination station in evening peak hours. They conclude
that the measured effect is consistent with a previously conducted direct household study revealing
that citizens take various non-home-based trips after work. Inspired by Choi et al. (2012), Zhao et al.
(2014) compare a multiple regression model at station level, as well as a multiplicative model at station-
to-station level to investigate the factors affecting Metro station ridership of a recently implemented
Metro system in Nanjing, China. The estimated coefficients of the multiplicative direct demand model
indicate varying impacts of the explanatory variables on station-to-station ridership for different time
periods. With regard to their findings, Zhao et al. (2014) finally highlight the importance of inter-
modal connectivity suggesting "a need to establish an efficient multimodal transit system, in particular
coordinating bus and Metro", particularly as transfer times were found to be negatively associated with
metro ridership.
As opposed to most studies applying direct demand models to existing infrastructure data, Kepapt-
soglou et al. (2017) attempt to model the expected ridership of a planned LRT system in Cyprus. For
this purpose, Kepaptsoglou et al. (2017) develop a partial direct demand model based on a combina-
tion of existing traffic demand data and limited stated-preference information obtained from a survey.
Describing Cyprus as an automobile-dominated culture the study aims at "justifying the potential of
introducing a new mode in Cyprus’s transportation system" while determining potential mode shifts
to the planned transport option. Hence, Kepaptsoglou et al. (2017) propose a practical method to
forecast LRT ridership as to critically assess the potential of a new transport system.
Lastly, Cocca et al. (2020) and Yan et al. (2020) apply and compare advanced machine-learning
algorithms to estimate zone-to-zone direct demand models for free-floating carsharing demand in Van-
couver, Canada, and for ridesourcing services in Chicago, USA, respectively. Both studies principally
apply modeling approaches for empirical prediction rather than for causal explanation of estimates.
Cocca et al. (2020) apply univariate models along with multivariate models finding that the latter
reach the highest performance with Random Forest Regression. This is in alignment with Yan et al.
(2020)’s comparison of the classic multiplicative model with the random forest model achieving higher
predictive accuracy and model fit. The researchers’ findings thus reveal the potential of leveraging ma-
chine learning techniques to improve travel demand modeling, however suggesting to further explore
factors shaping the demand.
5
==PAGE:10==
Master’s Thesis
3
Methodology
The here applied methodology is twofold. At first, FFCS transaction data will be analysed to explore
the changes in free-floating car sharing usage due to the influence of the Cityring Metro operating in
2019. After the presentation of the descriptive statistic, the explorative analysis will be conducted with
regard to temporal, spacial and temporal-spacial dimensions. Secondly, a direct demand model will
be applied to model the demand of free-floating car-sharing in Copenhagen as to study the association
between the service usage and the model’s chosen explanatory variables. The two parts will following
be elaborated.
3.1
Temporal, spatial and temporal-spacial network analysis
The temporal, spacial and temporal-spacial analysis of FFCS transaction data focuses on the overall
usage patterns in time and space. The recorded timestamps of each rental will thereby be utilized to
explore FFCS trips under different time scales as to uncover recurrent, or changing travel patterns.
The Drive Now operation area is divided into 92 level 2 zones defined in the Danish National Transport
Model (Papu Carrone & Rich, 2022; Rich & Hansen, 2016), as will be described in section 4.1.3. The
borders of the Drive Now operating area can be seen on the map in figure 1. The metro zones are
colored in darker grey with the 17 Cityring Metro stations being labeled. On level 2, the metro stations
can be assigned to 14 zones while the stations Gammel Strand and Kongens Nytorv, Trianglen Station
and Vibenshus Runddel as well as Norrebro Station and Norrebros Runddel are located within the
same zone. Zones in which universities, big parks, hospitals or the airport are located are differently
colored, as can be seen on the map below (figure 1).
Figure 1: Drive Now operating area and zone details: location of Cityring Metro stations
The here conducted analysis will firstly explore the transaction data with regard to the temporal
dimension, secondly investigate the spacial dimension and thirdly consider the combined temporal-
6
==PAGE:11==
Master’s Thesis
spacial approach.
By addressing the following questions, this thesis’ objective of investigating, if
free-floating car sharing is being influenced by public transport, specifically the M3 Cityring Metro,
will be approached.
• How have "metro zones" evolved over time? Have more or less vehicles been starting or ending
their trips in metro zones after the Cityring Metro started operating at the end of September of
2019?
• How many trips have both, started and ended in a "metro zone" and could thus have been
substituted with the Cityring Metro?
• Has the driving distance and rental time of trips starting and ending in "metro zones" changed?
• Which level 2 zones generate and attract the most FFCS trips (in general and for different time
intervals)?
Thereby, the three variables trip duration, trip distance and idle time have been defined as the key
metrics being of central interest as they provide valuable details about trip characteristics and the FFCS
activity in the operation zones. For the numerical and graphical analysis of FFCS transaction data in
time and space, the programming language Python has been used as its standard library and modules
provide powerful tools to manipulate and investigate data. Specifically, the library Geopandas has been
applied to create maps of the Drive Now operation area as to graphically examine zone characteristics.
While the metrics trip duration and trip distance represent trip specific characteristics, the idle time
variable is defined as the time during which a vehicle is parked and not being utilized between two
consecutive bookings. As such, the variable is connected to the zone in which the vehicle is parked
when becoming idle, thus not only representing a determinant for the utilization of the vehicle, but
for the FFCS activity of the respective zone.
3.2
The direct demand model
In general, direct demand models serve a two-fold purpose: Firstly, the models are applied to generate
forecasts for traffic volumes by developing a functional relationship between the dependent variable
and the specified independent variables. Secondly, direct demand models are adopted to address the
association between the output variable and the chosen input variables. The latter will be of primary
interest in this thesis’ case study. Specifically, the direct demand model approach based on Ordinary
Least Squares (OLS) multiple regression analysis is here applied to evaluate the impact of the selected
variables on FFCS usage at zone-to-zone level while differentiating between influences of origin and
destination zones. Thereby, the influence of the Cityring Metro on the Drive Now car sharing usage
will be investigated by introducing a categorical metro variable indicating if a Cityring Metro station
is located within the origin or destination zone of each FFCS trip. Creating a scenario representing
the launch and operation of the new metro line, the categories are further distinguished temporarily
such that the impact of the zones with ("future-") Cityring Metro stations on FFCS trips in the pre-
operation period (Jan 2017 to Sep 2019) can be differentiated from the operation period (Oct-Dec
2019), as further elaborated in section 5.3.1. As OLS regression incorporates both, numerical and
dummy variables, it will be of primary interest to measure the effect of the Cityring Metro stations on
FFCS usage intended to be captured in the introduced dummy variables.
7
==PAGE:12==
Master’s Thesis
The python libraries scikitlearn (Scikit-learn webpage, 2022) and statsmodels (Statsmodel webpage,
2022) have been used to implement and develop the direct demand model. Formulated by Yan et al.
(2020) and Zhao et al. (2014) and adapted from Talvitie (1973), the here applied direct demand model
of FFCS trips can be defined to have the following functional form:
CSij = F(Tij, Lij, SEDi, SEDj, BEi, BEj, TSi, TSj),
(1)
where the dependent variable CSij is the number of free-floating carsharing trips from origin zone
i to destination zone j, and four sets of independent variable vectors are included: (1) Tij is the set
of temporal details on the trip from i to j (e.g. weekday, quarter, year etc.) (2) Lij is the set of
travel-impedance variables characterizing the trips from i to j (e.g. trip distance, trip duration). (3)
SEDi and SEDj are the sets of socio-economic and demographic variables for the origin zone i and the
destination zone j characterizing the individuals whose demand is being analysed within the respective
zones (e.g. average household size, average number of children per household). (4) BEi and BEj are
the sets of built-environment variables characterizing the origin zone i and destination zone j (e.g.
university location, airport area). Lastly, (5) TSi and TSj are the sets of transit-supply variables for
the origin zone i and destination zone j, such as bus departure density, metro station zone for zones i
and j. All these variables are commonly used in travel demand modeling in which the demand for the
subject variable - the number of trips between origin zone i and destination zone j - is being derived
(Talvitie, 1973; Yan et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2014). In other words, these variables are expected to
affect the zone-to-zone FFCS usage.
3.2.1
OLS multiple regression model
The classic direct demand model takes a multiplicative form as specified in equation 2 (Talvitie,
1973; Yan et al., 2020).
"Multiplicative models assume that ridership is related to the product of
different explanatory factors; these are estimated as linear models following an appropriate logarithmic
transformation" Kepaptsoglou et al. (2017). As it separately integrates origin and destination variables,
their independent impact on the dependent variable can be measured and compared. As noted by Choi
et al. (2012) the multiplicative model outperforms the Poisson regression model in explaining station-
to-station ridership. Yan et al. (2020) further states that "compared to the Poisson regression model,
the multiplicative model is easier to interpret and to draw inferences". The multiplicative model takes
the following form:
CSij = ln(ϕ)
P
Y
p=1
Xαp
ip
P
Y
p=1
Xβp
jp
Q
Y
q=1
Zγq
ijq
(2)
where CSij are the counted car sharing trips from zone i to zone j, Xip ∈SEDi ∪BEi ∪TSi
represents the pth independent variable regarding the origin zone i, Xjp ∈SEDj ∪BEj ∪TSj represent
the pth independent variable regarding the destination zone j, Zijq ∈Tij ∪Lij represent the qth
independent variable regarding the temporal details and travel impedance of the FFCS trips from i to
j, ϕ is the scale parameter, αp, βp, γq are the model parameters to be estimated, P is the total number
of independent variables that include socio-economic and demographic, built-environment, and transit-
supply variables, and Q is the total number of independent temporal and travel-impedance variables
(Yan et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2014).
8
==PAGE:13==
Master’s Thesis
By taking the natural logarithm, Eq. 2 can be transformed into a linear form:
ln(CSij) = ln(ϕ) +
P
X
p=1
αpln(Xip) +
P
X
p=1
βpln(Xjp) +
Q
X
q=1
γqln(Zijq)
(3)
As proceeded by Talvitie (1973) and Yan et al. (2020), this thesis uses numerical log-transformed
variables and a log-transformed target variable to conduct OLS multiple linear regression with a
partly multiplicative form. However, adding categorical variables, a mixed logarithmic-linear model
specification will here be applied. Including both, numerical and dummy variables, the "advantage of
the OLS regression is its simplicity for use" (Talvitie, 1973) among its flexibility, widespread use and
easy comprehensibility (Zhao et al., 2014). By adapting equation 4, the model takes the following
form:
ln(CSij) = ϕ +
P
X
p=1
αpln(Xip) +
P
X
p=1
βpln(Xjp) +
Q
X
q=1
γqln(Zijq)+
P
X
p=1
Xdumδp
ip +
P
X
p=1
Xdumϵp
jp +
Q
X
q=1
Zdumζq
ijq + ε
(4)
where Xdumip ∈SEDi ∪BEi ∪TSi,
Xdumjp ∈SEDj ∪BEj ∪TSj and
Zdumijq ∈Tij ∪Lij
represent the corresponding dummy variables of the trips from i to j, ϕ is the intercept, δp, ϵp, ζq are
the additional model parameters to be estimated and ε is the error term.
Each estimated coefficient of log-transformed numerical variables represents the constant elasticity
of FFCS demand with respect to the change of the corresponding variable. Exponentiated coefficients
of dummy variables are, on the other hand, interpreted as the ratio of the geometric mean for the
respective exponentiated estimate to the geometric mean for the variable’s reference group which is
further elaborated in section 3.2.4. Thus, the magnitude of the coefficients is directly comparable
implying that inferences can be drawn (Choi et al., 2012). As such, the estimation of direct demand
models has two objectives: to predict zone-to-zone travel demand as accurately as possible; and to
"provide plausible estimates [...] with respect to various transportation system characteristics" (Talvitie,
1973). However, the latter will essentially be focused on in this project when evaluating the final model
in section 5.
3.2.2
Ordinary Least Square assumptions
OLS estimators minimize the sum of the squared errors in which errors represent the difference between
the observed values and the predicted values. Mathematically, the least squares method minimizes S:
S = (y −Xβ)T (y −Xβ).
(5)
In order to develop an accurate and reliable linear regression model, the following assumptions must
be satisfied:
1. OLS assumption: Linearity in parameters.
The dependent variable y is a linear function of independent variables X and the error term ε.
9
==PAGE:14==
Master’s Thesis
2. OLS assumption: No perfect multicollinearity.
In multiple linear regression models with multiple explanatory variables, there should be no exact
linear dependence between the independent variables. Hence, there should be sufficient variation
in the explanatory variables as to achieve reliable OLS estimates which determine the impact of
the independent variables on the dependent variable.
3. OLS assumption: Strict Exogeneity.
The expected value of the mean of the error terms should be zero given the values of the in-
dependent variables. Thus, the mathematical condition E(ε|X) = 0) must hold implying that
there must be no relationship between the independent variables X and the error term.
4. OLS assumption: Spherical error variance.
The error terms in the regression should all have the same variance (homoscedasticity), such that
mathematically, V ar(ε|X) = σ2 (const.) holds. If the variance is not constant, thus, dependent
on X, then the linear regression model has heteroscedastic errors.
Error terms of different observations should further not be correlated with one another (no
autocorrelation). Mathematically, Cov(εiεj|X) = 0 for i ̸= j must hold.
5. OLS assumption: Normality.
Error terms should be normally distributed. This OLS assumption is not required for the validity
of OLS method, however, if error terms are not normal, then the standard errors will not be
reliable implying too wide, or too narrow confidence intervals.
3.2.3
Variable selection and model development
Initially, variables from available data sources have been selected due to their expected influence on
FFCS usage. Then, the following steps have been conducted to arrive at the variable set to be included
in the direct demand model:
1. A correlation matrix has been applied to all numeric variables to measure the interdependence
between the explanatory variables as to avoid multicollinearity within the model. While the
Pearson’s correlation coefficient’s value ranges between -1 and +1, a coefficient value above |0.7|
has here been defined as "strongly correlated". Thus, only one of the two strongly correlated
variables will be used in the modelling process.
2. The dependent variable and all numeric explanatory variables have been log-transformed. Cat-
egorical variables have been transformed into dummies.
3. The data to be used for modelling has been split into a training and a testing dataset as to
develop models on the training set to be cross-validated on the test set.
4. An initial multiplicative direct demand model has been developed based on the numeric variables.
5. The model specification was gradually extended by including explanatory variables, or the least
significant variable has been removed (one at a time) to better understand their impact with
respect to model fit, until attaining a stable set of variables. The significance of coefficients has
been evaluated based on the t-test statistics (table 1).
6. The size and sign of the coefficients has further been observed for reasonability.
10
==PAGE:15==
Master’s Thesis
7. During the stepwise selection, the models have been compared based on statistics for prediction
errors and goodness-of-fit measures described in the following (section 3.2.4).
Table 1: Significance of coefficients (t-test statistics)
alpha
confidence level
tcritical
p-value
α = 0.1
10 %
1.65
0.1
α = 0.05
5 %
1.96
0.05
α = 0.01
1 %
2.57
0.01
3.2.4
Cross-validation and evaluation of model accuracy
The dataset used for modeling is randomly split into a training set (80 % of the data) and a test set
(20 % of the data). The previously described process of variable selection is applied based on the
training set whereas the test set is used to cross-validate the prediction performance of the trained
model (Bronshtein, 2017). However, in a subsequent step, the final model is applied to the dataset
under a different test-train-split specification. As opposed to a random split, the training set includes
datapoints from the pre-operation period in 2017 and 2018 while the test set includes the datapoints
from the operation period in 2019. Thus, the test set will be utilized to evaluate how the trained model
reflects the upgrade of public transport infrastructure.
The developed model is evaluated with regard to four metrics belonging to the most common
metrics used to measure the accuracy of model predictions: the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), the
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) and the coefficient
of determination (R-squared value, R2). The MAE is measured in the same unit as the data. It is
the average vertical distance between the predicted values and the regression’s actual observed values.
The RMSE is the square root of the mean squared error. Its value is minimized during the parameter
estimation process and it is the statistic that determines the width of the confidence intervals for
predictions. The MAPE is expressed in generic percentage terms and can only be computed if data
is strictly positive, implying that it cannot be used for data including zero values as there would be
a division by zero. It is commonly used as measure of relative error. The R2 value is the percent of
variance explained by the model (Antoniou et al., 2019).
The MAE is defined as
1
N
N
X
n=1
|yn −ˆyn|
(6)
the RMSE is defined as
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
n=1
(yn −ˆyn)2
(7)
the MAPE is defined as
100
N
N
X
n=1
|yn −ˆyn|
yn
(8)
and the coefficient of determination R2 is defined as
1 −
PN
n=1(yn −ˆyn)2
PN
n=1(yn −¯y)2
(9)
11
==PAGE:16==
Master’s Thesis
where y1, ..., yN are N observations, ˆy1, ..., ˆ
yN are the corresponding predictions, and ¯y = (y1, ..., yN)/N
is the mean of the observation (Antoniou et al., 2019).
While lower values are preferred for the MAE, RMSE and MAPE (0 is a perfect fit), high R2 values
indicate a better model in predicting the dependent variable (Antoniou et al., 2019). Thus, models
are improved in the development process such that the set of coefficient estimates producing the least
costly combination of forecasting errors for the data sample available is chosen (Talvitie, 1973). At the
same time, a high R2 value is aimed for and the coefficient estimates are intended to be of structural
validity by carrying the correct sign as assumed beforehand based on common knowledge and empirical
evidence of FFCS travel demand.
3.2.5
Interpretation of estimated coefficients
Due to the natural logarithmic transformation of the numerical variables, coefficients are interpreted
as the percentage change in the dependent variable for a given percentage change in the independent
variable. The percentage change in the outcome variable is here calculated using an approximation
method explained by UCLA (2021) where, e.g. for any 1 % change in the independent variable, the
expected ratio of the outcome variable is approximately (1.01β) with β being the estimated coefficient
of the independent variable. The percentage change in the dependent variable can directly be calcu-
lated by (100 · (1.01β −1)).
At the same time, the non-transformed categorical dummy variables are interpreted with regard
to the reference group. Thereby, the exponentiated coefficient (eβ) is the ratio of the geometric mean
for the estimated group to the geometric mean for the reference group. Thus, the expected percentage
increase in the outcome’s geometric mean from the estimated group to the reference group is calculated
by (100 · (eβ −1)).
12
==PAGE:17==
Master’s Thesis
4
Data description and pre-processing
This section describes the data sources used in this thesis’ study as well as the pre-processing of the
main data source.
4.1
Data sources
The main data source for this study is a large transactions database of electric FFCS vehicle trips
containing information on the exact starting and ending time and location of each trip. The FFCS
data is supplemented with socio-economic and demographic data, built-environment attributes and
transport-related variables providing a basis to study the impact of public transport on FFCS usage.
The data sources will following be elaborated.
4.1.1
Drive Now Copenhagen FFCS trips
Provided by the FFCS operator Drive Now Copenhagen the data source contains over 2.5 million data
points (trips) which have been registered during the period of January of 2016 to December of 2019.
The predefined area of operation in which the trips start and end is considered to remain unchanged
over the analysis period. The data contains timestamps, geographical coordinates for the respective
origin and destination of the trip, as well as information about the driven distance, prior reservation
minutes of the vehicle, vehicle ID, customer ID and user identifier. The user identifier specifies if the
trip has been a private or business trip performed by a Drive Now user, or a relocation or maintenance
trip by the service operator. Due to the detailed and continuous tracking of each vehicle in space and
time, patterns can comprehensively be modelled within the two dimensions.
4.1.2
Drive Now Copenhagen Customer data
Along with the FFCS trips data, data including details about Drive Now’s customers has been provided
by the service operator. Registered between January of 2016 and December of 2018, the gender and
age of all active customers is displayed.
4.1.3
Zone system and area of operation
In order to analyse the dataset with regard to temporal and spacial dimensions, the geographical start
and end coordinates have been geo-coded and matched to traffic analysis zones defined in the Danish
National Transport Model (Papu Carrone & Rich, 2022; Rich & Hansen, 2016). Thereby, the Drive
Now operation area is divided into 92 zones on level 2, and into 259 zones on level 1. Hence, the
operation area is divided into smaller areas for level 1 while level 2 zones are composed of a subset of
level 1 zones. The explorative analysis as well as the modeling of direct demand will here be based on
the level 2 zone specification.
4.1.4
Cityring Metro stop locations
The zone system details are supplemented with geo-coordinates of the 17 Cityring Metro stations
extracted from Googlemaps (Googlemaps.com, 2022). As the Cityring Metro area represents a focus
13
==PAGE:18==
Master’s Thesis
area of this thesis’ analysis, the metro’s coordinates have been assigned to the level 2 zones system as
to be compatible with the dataset. As such, the 17 metro stations have been allocated to 14 level 2
zones which will further be elaborated in section 5.2.
4.1.5
Built-environment and transit-supply data
Extracted from Papu Carrone and Rich (2022) and for their part collected from the Danish National
Transport Model (Rich & Hansen, 2016), transit-supply variables specifying stops and frequencies of
bus and rail services operating within the Drive Now operation area are included in this study. Further-
more, information about the level 2 zone-to-zone travel time of public transport has been extracted.
In this regard, five variables have been taken over to be used in this thesis: (1) the average waiting
time at the first stop before boarding, (2) the average total waiting time along the travelled route,
(3) the average waiting time in the start zone before the journey begins, (4) the average walking time
in minutes associated with shifts made, and (5) the average time spent on board of collective lines
(in-vehicle time). These travel times are added up as to represent the average public transport travel
time from zone-to-zone being included in the direct demand model.
With regard to built-environment data, variables identifying if the Copenhagen airport, the two large
parks Valbyparken and Amagerfaellen, a university campus, or a hospital with more than 3000 em-
ployees are located within the respective zone of the operation area are included. A variable indicating
if a zone belongs to the main area (city center and surrounding neighborhoods), as opposed to satellite
areas or zones at the border of the main area, has further been extracted from Papu Carrone and Rich
(2022).
4.1.6
Socio-economic and demographic data
Population and employment data is excerpted from Papu Carrone and Rich (2022), for their part
collected from the Danish National Transport Model (Rich & Hansen, 2016). Likewise, additional
socio-economic and demographic information is extracted from Papu Carrone and Rich (2022), as
for their part collected from the Danish National Travel Survey (TU, Transportvaneundersøgelsen)
(Christiansen, 2018). "TU is a large scale trip diary conducted continuously since 2006 for all Danish
residents between the age of 6 and 84 years. This data in combination with the zone system of the
Danish National Transport Model is used to calculate aggregated variables for each zone" (Papu Carrone
& Rich, 2022). The variables taken over for this thesis are: average number of cars per household, share
of single households, share of households with children, share of young adults (18 to 37 years), share of
inhabitants with a high level of education and the number of people employed in shopping activities per
square kilometre of the level 2 zones. Complementing the Socio-economic and demographic variables,
the average household size and the average household income of each level 2 zone has been derived
from the COMPASS dataset (MOE A/S, 2022).
4.2
Data pre-processing and filtering
The pre-processing of the raw Drive Now dataset has been conducted in three steps. In the first step,
datapoints with missing timestamps, an unavailable user identifier, lacking origin and destination de-
14
==PAGE:19==
Master’s Thesis
tails or invalid geo-coordinates have been disregarded. Before further cleaning the data, idle times
between consecutive trips have been identified by subtracting each unique vehicle’s start-timestamp
from the previous trip’s end-timestamp. Thereby, idle times have been disregarded if the previous trip
has been a "non-customer"-trip, e.g. for maintenance or relocation purposes. This prevents idle times
to be influenced by trips made by the operator with possibly longer maintenance periods.
Further on, trips with a recorded driven distance of zero kilometers have been disregarded. Matching
the zones from the dataset to the FFCS operation area, trips which started or ended outside of this
area have been removed as the recorded geo-coordinates are invalid. Likewise, maintenance or reloca-
tion trips made by the service provider have been dismissed.
For the remaining datapoints, calculations have been made to derive the trip duration (min) and
average speed (km/h) of each trip in the second step. The trip duration has been calculated by sub-
tracting the trip start timestamp from the trip end timestamp. The average speed has been derived
by dividing each trip’s distance (km) by the duration of the rental (min), divided by the factor 60
to receive the unit km/h. Based on these calculations, invalid or unreasonable datapoints have been
removed (Antoniou et al., 2019). Trip duration values which were negative or below one minute have
been disregarded due to a presumably false record of timestamps. Furthermore, outlier datapoints
with a recorded trip duration, or a reservation time above 120 minutes were dropped as it is the objec-
tive of this thesis to analyse short-term rentals which may have been substituted by means of public
transportation. Long-term trips and rentals, e.g. for a weekend, are hence considered out of scope.
Lastly, trips with an unreasonable average speed above 130 km/h have been dismissed.
In the third step, the remaining datapoints have been reduced to the months October, November
and December in the years from 2016 to 2019 due to this thesis’ objective of investigating the influence
of the Cityring Metro on the FFCS usage. In this sense, the three months October to December of
2019 reveal the development of the FFCS usage after the Cityring Metro opened. Thus, the years 2016
to 2018 represent the period before the Cityring Metro operated. The months January to September
have been disregarded as to exclude possible seasonality effects in the data. Furthermore, data from
the year 2020 onward will not be considered to disregard influences of the Covid-19 pandemic on the
public transport network.
The final dataset has been reduced from over 2.5 million datapoints to a subset of 614,986 data-
points. The data filtering steps and the corresponding dataset sizes for each year are displayed in
table 2. For the simplification of wording and expression, the years 2016 to 2019 will only refer to
the months October, November and December in the proceeding sections of this thesis. Hence, when
comparing the year 2018 with the year 2019, only the respective three months of each year will be
objectified.
15
==PAGE:20==
Master’s Thesis
Table 2: Summary of data filtering statistics
Dataset filtering
N
%
2016
2017
2018
2019
Initial trips in dataset
2,555,402
100.0
Missing or disregarded datapoints
526,912
20.6
Final trips in dataset (Jan-Dec)
2,028,490
79.4
204,977
336,005
628,696
858,812
Trip no. increase over previous year (%)
-
63.9
87.1
36.6
Final trips in dataset (Oct-Dec)
579,032
22.7
58,917
102,439
200,572
217,104
Trip no. increase over previous year (%)
-
73.9
95.8
8.2
16
==PAGE:21==
Master’s Thesis
5
Results
This section provides the results obtained from the explorative analysis as well as the application
of the direct demand model. Initially, measures of central tendency and variability are applied to
describe and summarize the FFCS transaction data in the subsequent section 5.1. Afterwards, in the
first analysis part, the pre-processed Drive Now dataset is explored to illustrate underlying trends
and patterns under the objective of studying the influence of the Cityring Metro on FFCS usage.
Thereby, temporal and spacial dimensions are investigated, especially with regard to the here defined
key metrics trip duration, trip distance and idle time between trips. The second part will present and
contextualize the direct demand model estimates while providing a more holistic view of carsharing
demand in Copenhagen.
5.1
Descriptive statistics
In Descriptive Statistics, measures of central tendency include the mean, median and mode while
measures of variability refer to standard deviation, variance and skewness of data (Donges, 2018).
Thus, descriptive statistics reveal information required for further analysis and interpretation.
As
outlined before, the years 2016 to 2018 represent the period before the Cityring Metro opened, here
referred to as before period, whereas the year 2019 represents the time period in which the Cityring
Metro has been operating, or after period. Gaining insights into each year’s characteristics, table 2
shows the number of FFCS trips made each year. As each datapoint represents a recorded booking, it
can be observed that the total number of trips has greatly increased over the years. While the total
number of trips per year has more than tripled from 2016 to 2018, it only increased by 36.6 % in 2019
(full dataset), and only by 8.2 % if considering the reduced final data set including the months October,
November and December (table 2). While a fraction of roughly 1
3 of trips per year can be allocated to
the months October to December in 2017 and 2018, only a fraction of roughly 1
4 of the total number
of trips has been performed in the considered time period in 2019. At the same time, Drive Now’s
customer base as well as fleet size has greatly increased over the years as depicted in table 3.
Table 3: Data characteristics.
Variable counts
2016
2017
2018
2019
Unique customers
N
17467
24522
37694
49332
Increase customers
%
-
40.39
53.72
30.88
Fleet size*
N
400
410
546
877
Increase fleet size
%
-
2.5
33.17
60.63
Private trips (wrt. Business trips)
%
98
97
97
96
*number derived from FFCS data: unique vehicle IDs in recorded rentals.
Note that the fleet size and number of "active" customers have been calculated based on the unique
number of vehicle and customer IDs extracted from the FFCS transaction data as opposed to being
provided by the operator. Vehicles which have not been booked were not registered in the data, thus
not being considered in the calculation. Likewise, "passive" customers who are registered but have
17
==PAGE:22==
Master’s Thesis
never taken a trip have not been included. Table 3 further reveals that between 2 % and 4 % of trips
are made on a business purpose each year. As this is an insignificantly small share, trips will further
not be differentiated with regard to their trip purpose.
Complementary to the information derived from the FFCS transaction data, customer data pro-
vided by Drive Now has been used to identify details about the gender and age group of users. Available
for the years 2016 to 2018, table 4 reveals that a share of 28 % of the service users is female, with 72 %
being male, respectively. For both genders the majority of users is aged between 35 and 44, in fact
representing above 65 % of the total users.
Table 4: Customer gender and age derived from Drive Now Customer Data (01.01.2016-31.12.2018)
Gender
N
%
Age group
N
%
Female
26043
28.22
18-24
3761
1.46
25-44
18414
19.96
45-54
3761
4.08
>55
2519
2.73
Male
66239
71.78
18-24
3385
3.37
25-44
2519
46.03
45-54
11483
12.44
>55
8894
9.64
Observing the central tendencies of trip FFCS characteristics, table 5 provides an overview of
variables measuring the FFCS usage for the final dataset, as well as the final reduced dataset only
including data for the "winter months" October, November and December (labeled with the prefix
R_ in the table). It can firstly be noted that no significant difference between the full and reduced
dataset can be recognized. Thus, an increasing average daily trip count per vehicle can be observed
over the years, however, slightly decreasing in R_19 even though the usage in the winter months of
previous years showed to be slightly higher in relation to the full year. With an average trip duration
under 30 minutes for all years, the average trip distance has increased from 6.5 km to 8.2 km with a
slightly increased standard deviation. This implies an increased number of longer trips which can
also be observed in figure 2, visualising the density distribution of the metrics trip duration and trip
distance. Note that the maximum of both variables has been set in the data pre-processing step to
remove outliers.
Figure 2: Density distribution of the metrics trip duration and trip distance
18
==PAGE:23==
Master’s Thesis
Table 5: Descriptive statistics: measure of central tendency
2016
R_16
2017
R_17
2018
R_18
2019
R_19
Daily trips per vehicle
mean
2.35
2.52
3.33
3.97
4.66
5.12
5.17
4.91
std
1.42
1.50
2.03
2.29
2.63
2.83
2.76
2.63
median
2
2
3
4
4
5
5
5
max
12
12
16
16
21
21
21
21
Trip duration (min)
mean
20.81
24.96
25.70
26.50
28.26
28.93
28.64
28.60
std
15.71
16.02
15.74
15.69
16.32
16.51
16.57
16.75
median
17
21
22
23
25
26
25
25
max*
120
120
120
120
120
120
120
120
Reservation time (min)
mean
6.03
6.72
6.70
7.24
8.83
9.23
9.09
8.96
std
5.18
5.41
5.44
5.96
7.04
7.26
7.43
7.62
median
5
6
6
6
8
8
8
7
max*
116
116
119
116
118
116
115
108
Trip distance (km)
mean
6.53
6.68
7.16
7.27
7.93
8.00
8.24
8.22
std
5.43
5.39
5.97
5.95
6.96
7.08
7.35
7.30
median
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
max*
115
81
200
102
171
167
190
190
Idle time (hours)
mean
11.13
9.67
6.63
5.20
4.57
4.15
4.21
4.50
std
14.56
12.70
8.84
6.77
5.91
5.30
5.08
5.38
median
5.33
4.65
3.27
2.69
2.40
2.20
2.28
2.42
max*
119.99
119.75
119.96
119.08
119.87
109.55
114.84
109.60
Column labels R_[year] refer to the reduced dataset only including the months October to December.
* the maximum of this variable has been set in the data pre-processing step.
Likewise, the tendency of reserving vehicles prior to their usage has increased, however ranging
between 6 and 10 minutes with maximum reservation periods approaching 2 hours. The metric idle
time is highly right-skewed with vehicles not being utilized for up to 120 hours which is equal to 5 days.
Again, note that this value has been set as a maximum in the pre-processing step removing outliers.
For a better visualisation of the distribution, a probability density curve and a histogram are plotted
in figure 3 with outliers being disregarded. While the average idle time of vehicles has decreased from
11 to 5 hours over the years, idle times between trips are, again, relatively elevated in R_19 compared
to 2019 which is in correspondence with the decreased number of daily trips per vehicles in this time
period.
19
==PAGE:24==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 3: Density distribution and histogram of the metric idle time
Further insights derived from the Drive Now booking data will be provided in the following section
5.2. Thereby, FFCS trips will be explored with regard to the dimensions time and space. In this sense,
the coherence of FFCS trips and the operation of the Cityring Metro will further be investigated.
5.2
Temporal and spatial analysis
This section will investigate temporal and spacial characteristics of the FFCS trips, primarily in the
months October, November and December of the years 2016 to 2019. It will be this sections’ goal
to uncover changes in free-floating carsharing demand with regard to the Cityring Metro line which
began to operate at the end of September of 2019.
5.2.1
Temporal changes on FFCS usage
As to study the FFCS service usage over time, different timescales have been applied to compare the
absolute number of bookings and characteristics of the FFCS trips from a month granularity, to days of
the month, weekdays, up to hours of the day. The temporal analysis thus intends to uncover recurrent
patterns, potential outlying events or peaks of demand for varying time intervals. Thus, an overview
of the usage over the full year will following be provided before continuing to only focus on the reduced
dataset.
Graphically observing the yearly FFCS usage, figure 4 shows the ratio of trips for each month of
each considered year. Thereby, the total quantity of trips of each year corresponds to 100 % based
on which each months’ share is calculated. Note that this graph is based on the full dataset. While
generally increasing from January to June, then dropping in July and rising again from August, the
ratio of booked trips is the highest during the last four months of the years, except for 2019. Hence,
as also mentioned in section 5.1, the share of FFCS trips within the last three months of 2019 has
decreased compared to the years before.
20
==PAGE:25==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 4: Ratio of monthly FFCS trips to total yearly FFCS trips over the years
Taking a closer look at the months October, November and December, the subsequent temporal
analysis will investigate the reduced dataset. Figure 5 thus depicts the absolute daily FFCS usage
for each of the considered months and years. In correspondence with section 5.1 and the previous
remarks, a greatly increasing trend for the Drive Now service demand can be denoted over the years
with an exception to 2019 in which the absolute number of FFCS trips only slightly increased. Further
inspecting figure 5, the curves of all years reveal a "regular, periodic" fluctuating FFCS usage over the
months with a few low points and peaks. Each year, the demand drops to a minimum in December
around the Christmas days, then rises again after Christmas reaching a peak on New Years Eve.
The overall number of yearly bookings however remains on a reasonably constant level. The "regular,
periodic" fluctuations may indicate a varying FFCS usage on different weekdays implying working days
and weekends. To gain insights into the FFCS usage on the different weekdays, the ratio of trips for
each weekday has been calculated for the reduced dataset, thus aggregating the months October to
December. As such, the total quantity of trips of each year (Oct-Dec) corresponds to 100 % while each
weekday is assigned its share. The results are shown in figure 6.
21
==PAGE:26==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 5: Daily Drive Now usage of each month in each year
Figure 6: Drive Now usage of the weekdays of each year
Figure 6 clearly indicates that the service usage is the highest on Fridays and Saturdays with a
share above 15.8 % for all years. In contrast, the usage is lowest on Mondays (except for 2018), then
following an upward trend until reaching a peak on Friday and Saturday before dropping again. In
2019, the FFCS usage has been slightly higher on Tuesdays than in the years before. This may however
be due to New Year’s Eve (the 31st of December) falling on a Tuesday in 2019 which influences the
quantity of bookings as months have been aggregated. The same effect is true for the 31st of December
of 2016 which has been a Saturday, as revealed by the peak in figure 6. In 2017, New Year’s Eve has
been on a Sunday while it was on a Monday in 2018 which can both be seen by a slightly higher trip
ratio, however not as extensive.
Studying the FFCS usage on an hourly scale, figure 7 depicts the quantity of origins and destinations
during each respective time interval. Again, the figure is based on the reduced dataset aggregating the
months October to December. It can be seen that, in general, the number of origins and destinations
22
==PAGE:27==
Master’s Thesis
within each hourly time interval is relatively equal. This indicates trip’s duration to be mostly below
one hour, as the begin time and end time of trips is within the same, or the adjacent time interval.
Figure 7 further reveals a synchronous trend of the year’s trip curves meaning that the frequency of
bookings at the specified day times has been similar for all years. It reveals that the FFCS usage
reaches a local peak between 08:00 and 09:00 am. Afterwards, the number of rentals decreases slightly
before rising again until reaching the global maximum between 17:00 and 18:00 pm. Both peaks can be
related to the rush hour intervals when customers are commuting to work or returning home after work.
Between 03:00 and 05:00 am the quantity of FFCS bookings is at its minimum. Further unraveling the
usage of shared vehicles on different weekdays, figure 8 compares the usage of the Drive Now service
on working days to the usage on weekends.
Figure 7: Total number of hourly FFCS origins and destinations
Figure 8: Total number of hourly FFCS trips on the different weekdays
The working day curves (Monday to Friday) follow the previously described patterns indicating a
23
==PAGE:28==
Master’s Thesis
high demand in the mornings during rush hour as well as a maximum demand during evening rush
hour. Thereby, figure 8 shows that, generally, the absolute FFCS usage on Fridays significantly exceeds
the four other working days. However, on weekends the demand is at a minimum between 04:00 am
and 06:00 am before slowly beginning to rise. On Saturdays the demand for vehicles climbs up to a
global maximum between 17:00 pm and 18:00 pm, as on Fridays. In contrast, on Sundays the FFCS
usage saturates between 14:00 pm and 18:00 pm before flattening again. As expected, the demand on
weekends exceeds the demand on working days during the main working hours (11:00 am to 16:00 pm)
which can be related to the usage of the Drive Now service for social activities and weekend trips.
Likewise, the relatively higher frequency of bookings on weekends during the night hours (00:00 to
05:00 am) may be due to social evening events.
As to the varying demand at different hours of the day, the time series will be aggregated into 6
time bins for each day. These bins are represented by the intervals 22 pm to 7 am (night period), and
3 hour intervals for the remaining time series, namely 7 am to 10 am, 10 am to 13 pm, 13 pm to 16 pm,
16 pm to 19 pm and 19 pm to 22 pm. The weekdays of each month will be aggregated according to
working days, Saturdays and Sundays. This temporal categorization of FFCS data will be used in the
proceeding sections of this project.
Casting light on the difference in trip characteristics between metro zones and zones without a
metro station, boxplot diagrams have been utilized to show the distribution of the metrics across
different temporal categories. Accordingly, the data is split into the established time intervals, weekday
categories as well as into trips which begin and/or end in a level 2 metro zone and trips made outside
of metro zones. In boxplot diagrams, the boxes reveal the quartiles of the dataset with a line indicating
the median. The whiskers extend to show the rest of the distribution, while outliers are depicted as
points. Note that the metrics trip duration and trip distance have been restricted with regard to their
maximum values during the data pre-processing steps.
It can be observed from the boxplot diagrams in figure 9 that the visualized data groups are
not significantly different from each other as boxes overlap. However, as indicated by the median,
trip’s duration is slightly higher between 10 am to 16 pm on both, working days and weekends while
no significant difference between trips from/to metro zones and trips outside of metro zones can be
recognized.
At the same time, the median driven distance reveals to be below 10 km for all time
intervals on the respective weekdays and across all level 2 zones. However, the boxes for trips made
outside of metro zones are slightly taller, thus indicating a higher variability of trip lengths. In general,
trips reveal to be similar among all categories. A longer trip duration but equal distance may point
to FFCS trips being influenced by congestion or a longer duration to find a parking space, as the time
to search for parking is included in the trip duration variable.
24
==PAGE:29==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 9: Distribution of trip duration and trip distance across different temporal categories
5.2.2
Spatial changes on FFCS usage
To gain a deeper understanding of the influence of the Cityring Metro on the FFCS service usage, this
section examines the spacial changes on FFCS usage from a zone-based point of view. Hence, FFCS
usage within and outside of metro zones will be analysed to investigate the coherence between the
Cityring Metro and Drive Now service. It will be of central interest to observe, if the FFCS vehicles
are substituted with the metro line as opposed to being complementary. The metrics will further be
observed to compare changes in the characteristics of trips within and outside of metro zones. Note
that the following steps have also been conducted based on the reduced dataset.
Initially, the ratio of trip origins and destinations in metro zones have been calculated being dis-
played in table 6. It reveals that, in total, less than half of FFCS trips generated from 2016 to 2019
have both started and ended (Category 1), solely started (Category 2) or solely ended (Category 3)
in a level 2 metro zone. Thereby, a downtrend can be recognized over the years implying that in 2019
relatively less trips originated in or led to a metro zone than in 2016. This is especially the case for
trips which both start and end in a metro zone (Category 1) - 6,9 % of total trips in 2019, and 9,2
% of total trips in 2018 - which may thus have been substituted with the Cityring Metro in 2019. It
is further noticed, that the share of metro zone trip origins and destinations (Categories 2 and 3) is
rather equal for all years. This means that, overall, the same amount of vehicles entering these zones
are also leaving them.
Table 6: Ratio of trip origins/destinations in level 2 metro zones over the total trip count of the respective year(s)
Level 2 zone categories
2016-2019
2016
2017
2018
2019
Category 1: origin and destination in metro zone (%)
8.8
11.5
10.7
9.2
6.9
Category 2: only origin in metro zone (%)
17.5
20.1
18.9
17.4
16.3
Category 3: only destination in metro zone (%)
17.3
19.2
18.3
17.4
16.1
Category 4: others (outside of metro zones) (%)
56.3
49.2
52.2
56.0
60.7
Specifically observing the FFCS usage in the 14 Cityring Metro zones, table 7 depicts the calculated
change in ratios of trip origins and trip destinations from 2018 to 2019. The share of trips beginning
and ending in each of the 14 metro zones has been derived based on the absolute counted trip numbers.
As already mentioned, a downtrend can be observed with regard to the FFCS activity in metro zones.
25
==PAGE:30==
Master’s Thesis
Thus, despite the overall increase of trips from 2018 to 2019, each metro zone denotes a decreased
ratio of FFCS origins and destinations whereas the usage in outer zones, here "no metro station
zones", increased in 2019. The spatio-temporal analysis will further explore this manner in section
5.2.3.
Table 7: Change in ratio of trip origins and destinations in metro zones from 2018 to 2019
Ratio of trip origins (%)
Ratio of trip destina-
tions (%)
ID
Station
2018
2019
Change
2018
2019
Change
0
No metro station zone
72.93
76.54
3.61
73.30
76.87
3.56
1
Kobenhavn H
1.92
1.61
-0.32
1.87
1.58
-0.29
2
Radhuspladsen
1.84
1.51
-0.32
1.78
1.49
-0.29
3
Gammel Strand. Kongens Nytorv
1.20
1.12
-0.08
1.16
1.10
-0.06
4
Marmorkirken
2.74
2.43
-0.31
2.68
2.39
-0.29
5
Osterport
1.57
1.55
-0.02
1.56
1.54
-0.02
6
Trianglen St., Vibenshus Runddel
2.60
2.36
-0.24
2.55
2.32
-0.23
7
Poul Henningsens Plads
1.47
1.30
-0.17
1.45
1.30
-0.15
8
Skjolds Plads
2.10
1.62
-0.47
2.08
1.61
-0.47
9
Norrebro St., Norrebros Runddel
2.43
2.14
-0.29
2.44
2.13
-0.30
10
Nuuks Plads
3.40
3.08
-0.33
3.39
3.05
-0.33
11
Aksel Mollers Have
1.79
1.57
-0.22
1.80
1.53
-0.27
12
Frederiksberg St.
0.49
0.46
-0.03
0.50
0.47
-0.03
13
Frederiksberg Allé
1.63
1.38
-0.24
1.59
1.34
-0.25
14
Enghave Plads
1.89
1.32
-0.57
1.85
1.29
-0.56
Complementing the temporal characterization of the metrics, table 8 establishes an overview of the
variables trip duration and trip distance for the coherent zone categories specified in table 6. As no
significant change has been identified between the years 2016 to 2019, figure 8 displays the average
aggregated values of the years. It can be observed that the average trip duration of approximately 28
minutes is similar between all zone categories. However, the average trip distance is the shortest for
Category 1 (trips from a metro zone to a metro zone) with 5.65 km. A shorter average driving distance,
but equal average trip duration between the categories may be caused by higher traffic volumes as well
as a longer duration to find parking in the cityring areas. The relatively higher standard deviation
for the trip duration variable of Category 1 supports this assumption due to the traffic volume varying
between different days of the week and times of the day. Nevertheless, the rather short average trip
distance of Category 1 supports the assumption that vehicles are mainly used for trips which could
have been made with the Cityring Metro in 2019, as opposed to making longer round trips to outer
areas and returning to the metro zones.
26
==PAGE:31==
Master’s Thesis
Table 8: Descriptives for the metrics trip duration and trip distance for different zone categories and aggregated years
Category 1
Category 2
Category 3
Category 4
Trip duration (min)
mean
27.57
27.39
27.73
28.29
std
19.54
14.86
14.86
16.85
median
22
24
25
25
Trip distance (km)
mean
5.65
6.95
7.10
8.65
std
6.38
5.25
5.29
7.60
median
4
6
6
7
Shifting the focus to the 92 zones of the Drive Now operating area, the open source library GeoPan-
das has been applied in Python to graphically explore zone characteristics. As such, the change in the
number of trips has been analysed over time and space which will following be elaborated.
In general, with a share of approx. 40 % of all registered trips beginning and/or ending in one of
the 14 out of 92 level 2 zones (table 6), the density of trip origins and destinations in these central areas
is relatively high. This is highlighted by figure 10 presenting the absolute number of trip origins and
destinations in each zone, representative for the years 2017 to 2019. The figure further reveals that
outlying areas have become increasingly attractive over the years with the absolute trip rate in metro
zones increasing from 2017 to 2018, however, appearing to mostly remain stable in 2019. Specifically,
zones in which DTU and the airport are located, as well as park areas have become more popular for
both, FFCS origins and destinations. The ratio of origins and destinations in metro zones to the total
number of trips per year slightly decreased in 2019 as already identified in the previous section.
Figure 10: Absolute number of trip origins and destinations of level 2 zones representative for the years 2017 to 2019
27
==PAGE:32==
Master’s Thesis
As to compare the difference in the number of vehicles being rented in and being returned to the
level 2 zones, figure 11 depicts OD trip net flow maps. Thereby, net flows are defined as the difference
between origins and destinations and have been derived by subtracting the absolute number of trip
origins from destination in each level 2 zone (Cocca et al., 2020). Positive values indicate that, in
total, rather more vehicles arrive in a zone than leave a zone. It firstly needs to be noted that the
scale ranges from -400 to 400, thus representing a relatively small discrepancy if considering that the
absolute number of trip counts exceeds 7000 in some zones and the here considered figures summarize
FFCS trips of the three months October, November and December of the respective years. Nonetheless,
figure 11 depicts that the central areas are mostly balanced, however, with slightly negative trip flows in
most metro zones implying more trip origins than destinations. With the discrepancy varying between
zones it can be noted, that the most significant mismatch is detected in outlying areas, such as the
very southern zones. Most remarkable is hereby the zone in which the airport is located. As can be
seen, more car sharing vehicles are being returned to than begin their trip in the airport zone in all
respective years, revealed by the dark blue color on the map. In opposition, the Amager park area as
well as the DTU zone mark more trip origins than destinations, as the zones are colored orange on the
map.
Figure 11: Trip net flows of the 92 level 2 zones representative for the years 2017 to 2019
The change in FFCS usage within the metro zones remains to be further explored. As mentioned
before, a general downtrend in the relative number of trips in metro zones has been recognized in 2019,
possibly influenced by the Cityring Metro being in operation. This trend, as well as the development of
FFCS demand in outlying zones will further be investigated by observing the change in the number of
trips per zone from one year to the next, thus, subtracting the trip count of a year from the trip count
of the next year for each level 2 zone (figure 12). While it has been discovered in section 5.1, that the
overall number of FFCS rentals has increased over the years, figure 12 depicts that from 2016 to 2017
and from 2017 to 2018 FFCS usage in and around the metro zones greatly increased while outlying
zones, especially in the south, became more attractive. It can further be noted, that the number of
trips has generally increased in each zone from 2016 to 2018. However, from 2018 to 2019 FFCS usage
reveals to have slightly decreased in most of the metro zones which is indicated by orange-colored areas
in the map (figure 12). This is true for both, trip origins and destinations, and may again be related
to the Cityring Metro operating in 2019. It may thus be assumed, that the Drive Now service has
been substituted with the Cityring Metro.
28
==PAGE:33==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 12: Difference in the number of trip origins and destinations over the years
After having analysed the yearly development of travel patterns in the level 2 zones, the focus will
be shifted to a spacio-temporal perspective in the following section. Rather than providing a complete
characterization of the origin-destination (OD) matrix, OD trip net flows will be graphically observed
on different daytime intervals.
5.2.3
Spatio-temoral changes on FFCS usage
Finalizing the explorative analysis on FFCS trips, this section combines the temporal and spatial
dimensions as to gain insights into the spatio-temporal changes on FFCS usage in Copenhagen. As
such, OD trip net flow maps have been created for different time intervals and weekday categories as
to reconstruct FFCS trips on working days, weekends, or during rush hour. Again, net flows have
been derived by subtracting the absolute number of trip origins from destinations in each zone and for
each respective temporal interval. Figures 13 and 14 show the OD trip net flows for the years 2018
and 2019. Note that scales vary across the different temporal categories of each figure. Key findings
are listed below:
• the discrepancy between origins and destinations is higher on working days compared to weekends
as indicated by the scale range for both years
• During morning rush hour on working days (2018 and 2019), in approximately half of the Cityring
Metro zones (Station IDs 6 to 10) more vehicles are leaving than arriving (orange); the Radhus-
pladsen and Marmorkirken station zones denote a slightly higher arrival of vehicles (light blue)
and the other zones are balanced (yellow)
• Over the day on working days (10am-16pm, 2018 and 2019), more vehicles are arriving in than
leaving metro zones as well as very southern zones (light blue)
29
==PAGE:34==
Master’s Thesis
• During evening rush hour on working days (2018 and 2019), net flows are rather balanced (yellow)
for all city zones with a few metro zones having slightly more trip arrivals (light blue) and airport
and DTU zones denoting more trip origins
• The highest discrepancy of origins and destinations on working days is in DTU zones (more
vehicle arrivals between 7am-10am, more vehicles leaving between 10am-19pm)
• On weekends, no clear net flow pattern can be recognized. However, some metro zones with more
vehicle arrivals in mornings seem to have more departures in evenings and vise versa
• Drive Now customers use vehicles to get to the airport in the morning before 10am (dark blue)
and to leave the airport in the time span from 10am - 19pm (dark red)
• in general, rental net flows between 2018 and 2019 are rather similar among the observed temporal
categories
Figure 13: Rental net flow for different time intervals in 2018
30
==PAGE:35==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 14: Rental net flow for different time intervals in 2019
5.3
Direct demand model for FFCS trips
As already mentioned, the estimation of the direct demand models has two main objectives: to accu-
rately predict zone-to-zone travel demand; and to provide plausible estimates on the elasticity of the
travel demand with respect to the specified system characteristics. While the latter has been of prior
interest in this thesis, this section presents the results obtained in the modeling phase. Hence, the
variables used in the models as well as the estimates of the final models are provided in the following
sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2. With it, a summary of the metrics used to measure the accuracy of the model
predictions is given along with a brief description of the results.
5.3.1
Model variables and posterior summary
The dependent variable is specified as the counted FFCS trips from zone-to-zone (92 × 92) as an
aggregation of trips per weekday category (working day, Saturday, Sunday), of every year (2017, 2018,
2019). Applying different aggregation granularities during the modeling process, such as a daily trip
count from zone-to-zone, a weekly trip count from zone-to-zone, or a monthly trip count from zone-
to-zone, the aggregation specification of the final model yielded the relatively best model performance
with regard to the applied accuracy measures. Note again, that the reduced dataset only including
the months October, November and December of the years 2017, 2018 and 2019 has been used to
model the FFCS demand. The year 2016 has been disregarded as the Drive Now service had just been
introduced, thus slowly leveling off.
Independent variables used in the modeling process have been categorized among the set of tempo-
ral variables, travel-impedance variables, socio-economic and demographic variables, built-environment
31
==PAGE:36==
Master’s Thesis
variables as well as transit-supply variables, as elaborated in section 3.2. A list of the variable de-
scriptions is depicted in table 9.
As a preparation for applying the direct demand model, FFCS
travel-impedance variables derived from the transaction data have been aggregated to reflect the av-
erage trip duration and distance from zone-to-zone, on every weekday category of every year. At the
same time, the ratio between public transport travel time and FFCS travel time has been calculated
as to include a relative measure between the two transport modes. Thereby, public transport time is
composed of the sum of five variables, namely: (1) the average waiting time at the first stop before
boarding, (2) the average total waiting time along the travelled route, (3) the average waiting time
in the start zone before the journey begins, (4) the average walking time in minutes associated with
shifts made, and (5) the average time spent on board of collective lines (in-vehicle time). The average
zone-to-zone public transport travel time has then been calculated for the here applied aggregation
granularity. At the same time, the FFCS trip duration of each carsharing trip has been increased by
3 minutes to add an additional walking time. The considered average walking time value of 3 minutes
is based on the accepted average maximum walking distance of 500 m to reach a carsharing vehicle, as
indicated by Guirao et al. (2021). The average ratio between public transport and FFCS travel time
has then been computed to be included in the direct demand model.
With regard to the objective of studying the impact of the Cityring Metro on FFCS usage, two
categorical variables are included among the transit-supply variable set indicating if a Cityring Metro
station is located in the origin zone, or the destination zone of a carsharing trip, thus resulting in
15 dummies (14 metro station zones and one "no metro station" indicator), for both, origin and
destination zones. Each Cityring Metro station zone has been assigned a Station ID ranging from
1 to 14 (Station_1,..., Station_14) while the ID 0 (Station_0) indicates that no M3 line station is
located within the respective level 2 zone of the trip. The categorical variables are further temporarily
differentiated such that the pre-operational time period can be distinguished from the cityring operation
period here defined as October, November and December of 2019. Thus, for the operation period,
each Station ID has been increased by the value 20 (Station_20,..., Station_34) in order to be able
to compare the model estimates for the pre-operational period to the operation period.
Table 9
provides an overview of the categorical Cityring Metro station variable assigning each Station ID
to the corresponding station name. The transit-supply variable set further includes the continuous
variables bus departure density and rail departure density representing the number of bus, and rail
departures per square kilometre of each level 2 zone.
The set of built-environment variables includes dummies specifying if the airport, a hospital, a
park or a university campus are located within the respective origin zone and destination zone of a
carsharing trip. In addition, the dummy variable Zoneloc:main_area is included based on the results by
Papu Carrone and Rich (2022), specifying if a zone belongs the main area (city center and surrounding
neighborhoods), as opposed to satellite areas or zones at the border of the main area.
The set of temporal variables includes a categorical variable representing the year in which FFCS
trips have been made as well as a weekday category variable indicating if the day of the trip is made
on a working day (Monday to Friday), on a Saturday, or on a Sunday. The temporal variables have
been created based on the timestamps included in the FFCS transaction data.
32
==PAGE:37==
Master’s Thesis
A correlation matrix of all numerical variables is depicted below (table 10). Variables which have been
sorted out due to their high correlation with another variable are marked (*) while not being included
in the final model.
Table 9: Variable descriptions
Variable
Type
Description
Travel-impedance
Av. trip duration
continuous
average trip duration in minutes
Av. trip distance
continuous
average trip distance in km
Av. PT_tt/FFCS_tt
continuous
ratio of public transport travel time and free-floating carsharing
travel time
Socioeconomic and demographic
Job density
continuous
jobs/sqkm of the level 2 zone
Population density
continuous
population/sqkm of the level 2 zone
Av. HH size
continuous
average number of residents per household
Av. HH income
continuous
average income per household of the level 2 zone
Av. HH car ownership
continuous
average number of cars owned per household of the level 2 zone
Shopping density
continuous
number of people employed in Shopping activity per sqkm of
the level 2 zone
% HH with children
continuous
ratio of households with children
% Young adults
continuous
ratio of households with young adults
% Single HH
continuous
ratio of single households
% High education
continuous
ratio of households with at least one high educated member
Built-environment
Airport
dummy
dummy variable for the airport zone
Hospital
dummy
dummy variable that identifies zones with hospitals with more
than 3000 employees
Park
dummy
dummy variable that identifies zones that correspond to Valby-
parken and Amagerfaellen
UniversityCampus
categorical
Categorical variable with 3 levels: No University (reference),
CBS & KU, DTU
Zone
location:
main
area
dummy
dummy variable that identifies the central zones to the area of
operation, as defined by Papu Carrone and Rich (2022)
Temporal
Weekday category
categorical
Categorical variable with 3 levels: Working days (reference),
Saturday, Sunday
Year
categorical
Categorical variable with 3 levels: 2017 (reference), 2018, 2019
Transit-supply
Rail departure density
continuous
number of rail (train and metro) departures per sqkm of a given
level 2 zone
Bus departure density
continuous
number of bus departures per sqkm of a given level 2 zone
Station_ID*
categorical
Categorical variable with 30 levels.
* Station ID explanation on following page (table 9 continuation)
33
==PAGE:38==
Master’s Thesis
Table 9 continuation: Variable descriptions
Station_IDs:
• Station_0 (reference) No M3 line station in the level 2 zone for 2017 and 2018 data
• Station_1 to Station_14: level 2 zones with M3 line metro station for 2017 and 2018 data
• Station_20: No M3 line station in the level 2 zone for 2017 and 2018 data
• Station_21 to Station_34: level 2 zones with M3 line metro station for 2019 data
*Explanation of Station_ID
1 & 21: Kobenhavn H; 2 & 22: Radhuspladsen; 3 & 23: Gammel Strand & Kongens Nytorv;
4 & 24: Marmorkirken; 5 & 25: Osterport; 6 & 26: Trianglen St. & Vibenshus Runddel;
7 & 27: Poul Henningsens Plads; 8 & 28: Skjolds Plads; 9 & 29: Norrebro St. & Norrebros Runddel;
10 & 30: Nuuks Plads; 11 & 31: Aksel Mollers Have; 12 & 32: Frederiksberg St.;
13 & 33: Frederiksberg Allé; 14 & 34: Enghave Plads
A summary of the variables included in the final model is further presented in table 11. Showing
the average value, standard deviation, minimum and maximum values, the table further reveals that
all numerical variables have been log-transformed in order to enter the multiple regression model in a
multiplicative form. Irrelevant variables for origin or destination zones are marked (*) in the table.
34
==PAGE:39==
Master’s Thesis
Table 10: Pearson’s correlation matrix for numerical variables
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
Av. trip duration *
1.00
2
Av. trip distance
0.73
1.00
3
PT_tt/FFCS_tt
-0.21
0.24
1.00
4
Job density
-0.10
-0.21
-0.18
1.00
5
Population density
-0.08
-0.23
-0.12
0.31
1.00
6
Av. HH size
0.00
0.00
-0.01
-0.27
-0.26
1.00
7
Av. HH income *
-0.03
-0.14
-0.10
0.15
0.75
-0.24
1.00
8
Av. HH car ownership
0.06
0.09
0.06
-0.32
0.19
0.30
0.46
1.00
9
Shopping density
-0.01
-0.03
-0.07
0.57
-0.02
0.10
-0.12
-0.15
1.00
10
% Young adults
-0.02
-0.06
-0.02
0.30
0.28
-0.54
0.20
-0.44
0.04
1.00
11
% HH with children
0.03
0.01
0.02
-0.38
0.34
0.47
0.41
0.68
-0.20
-0.41
1.00
12
% Single *
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.20
0.30
-0.75
0.11
-0.35
-0.08
0.67
-0.42
1.00
13
% High education
-0.10
-0.26
-0.22
0.39
0.32
0.24
0.38
0.18
0.27
0.16
0.18
-0.18
1.00
14
Rail departure density
-0.05
-0.07
-0.05
0.09
0.15
-0.04
0.00
-0.12
0.09
0.11
0.04
0.04
0.15
1.00
15
Bus departure density
-0.11
-0.26
-0.17
0.62
0.58
-0.31
0.25
-0.32
0.23
0.22
-0.19
0.21
0.23
0.10
1.00
* Variables being excluded from the final model
35
==PAGE:40==
Master’s Thesis
Table 11: Summary of aggregated variables
Not transformed
Log-transformed
Mean
Std
Min
Max
Mean
Std
Min
Max
Dependent variable
FFCS Tripcount
8,58
16,36
1,00
731,00
1,76
1,14
0,69
6,59
Independent variables
Av. Trip duration *
29,27
11,18
2,00
120,00
3,31
0,37
0,69
4,79
Av. Trip distance
9,3
6,35
1,00
110,00
2,03
0,60
0,00
4,70
Av. PT_tt/FFCS_tt
0.59
0.25
0.01
4.71
-0.61
0.45
-3.98
1.55
O_PopDens
7858,99
6649,65
0,02
28292,45
8,33
1,91
-4,04
10,25
D_PopDens
7841,74
6654,03
0,02
28292,45
8,32
1,92
-4,04
10,25
O_AvHHsize *
1,80
0,22
1,00
2,37
0,59
0,12
0,10
1,00
D_AvHHsize
1,79
0,22
1,00
2,37
0,59
0,13
0,10
1,00
O_AvHHCarOwn
0,59
0,21
0,00
1,18
0,45
0,14
0,00
0,78
D_AvHHCarOwn
0,59
0,21
0,00
1,18
0,45
0,14
0,00
0,78
O_ShoppingDens
475,62
785,15
7,99
5691,83
5,29
1,36
2,08
8,65
D_ShoppingDens
475,62
783,41
7,99
5691,83
5,28
1,35
2,08
8,65
O_Perc_Child
0,31
0,11
0,00
0,56
0,27
0,09
0,00
0,44
D_Perc_Child
0,31
0,11
0,00
0,56
0,27
0,09
0,00
0,44
O_Perc_YoungAdults
0,43
0,16
0,00
1,00
0,43
0,16
0,00
1,00
D_Perc_YoungAdults
0,43
0,16
0,00
1,00
0,43
0,16
0,00
1,00
O_Perc_HighEd *
0,22
0,10
0,00
0,65
0,18
0,07
0,00
0,41
D_Perc_HighEd
0,22
0,10
0,00
0,65
0,18
0,07
0,00
0,41
O_Zoneloc:main_area *
0,78
0,42
0
1
D_Zoneloc:main_area
0,77
0,42
0
1
O_University
1,09
0,35
1
3
D_University
1,09
0,35
1
3
O_Hospital
0,06
0,23
0
1
D_Hospital
0,06
0,24
0
1
O_Park
0,06
0,24
0
1
D_Park
0,06
0,24
0
1
O_Airport
0,01
0,12
0
1
D_Airport
0,01
0,12
0
1
Weekday category
1
3
Year
2017
2019
O_BusDepDens
2646,92
2862,35
80,08
17371,09
7,35
1,13
4,38
9,76
D_BusDepDens
2618,75
2823,22
80,08
17371,09
7,34
1,13
4,38
9,76
O_RailDepDens
327,96
618,30
0,00
3645,06
2,93
3,09
0,00
8,20
D_RailDepDens
323,42
612,33
0,00
3645,06
2,92
3,09
0,00
8,20
O_Station_ID
0
34
D_Station_ID
0
34
* Variable not included in the final model | O=Origin zone, D=Destination zone
36
==PAGE:41==
Master’s Thesis
5.3.2
Model estimates
Table 13 depicts the estimation results obtained on the basis of the multiple linear regression direct
demand model approach. Only significant parameters have been included in the final model. Given
the model parametrization, a negative sign of the estimated parameters indicates a reduction in FFCS
trips for an increase in the respective variable; conversely, a positive sign indicates an increase in
FFCS usage. When describing model estimates in the following, the pre-operational time period of
the Cityring Metro will be referred to as the before period. In opposition, the time period in which the
metro line has been in operation is referred to as the after period. As to draw conclusions from the
model estimates, two different train-test-split specifications have been applied based on which model
results have been obtained. As described in section 3.2.4, the first data separation is randomness based.
The corresponding model will here be referred to as the random model and will principally be used
to compare the estimated coefficients for the categorical Cityring Metro variables. The second data
separation intends to simulate the introduction of the public transport infrastructure extension. The
corresponding model will be referred to as the scenario model in which the training set is composed
of the before period data whereas the test set is composed of the after period data. This specification
aims at assessing the performance of the model with regard to the upgrade of the public transport
system.
The reason for using the random model to compare estimates from the metro station variables is
mainly that the parameters are set in relation to one reference variable, namely Station_0 reflecting
zones without a metro station in the before period. In opposition, in the scenario model, training set
parameters are set in relation to zones without a metro station in the before period (O/D_Station_0)
whereas test set parameters are set in relation to zones without a metro station in the after period
(O/D_Station_20), however not capturing the change between "no metro stations" from the before to
the after period. Note however, that estimated coefficients among both models are very similar in sign
in size which is why the results from the scenario model will here be described with an exception for
the metro station variables. The complete list of results obtained from the random model is included
in the Appendix A.
Transit-supply variables
In correspondence with the findings from the explorative analysis, the Cityring Metro reveals to have a
reducing effect on FFCS usage as indicated by the model estimates. Coefficients of the station dummy
variables are seen in relation to the reference dummy reflecting zones without a Cityring Metro station,
here referred to as "no station zones" in the before period. The exponentiated coefficient for each M3
Metro Station dummy variable is the ratio of the expected mean for the trip origin (or destination)
zone to be an M3 metro zone over the expected mean for the origin (or destination) zone not to be
an M3 metro zone in the pre-operational period, when all other variables are held at a fixed value.
In order to compare the magnitudes of the coefficients and explain marginal effects on the dependent
variable, the coefficients have been transformed, as explained in section 3.2.5, into a percentage unit
in table 12. For each station dummy variable it can then be said that the expected percent increase
in FFCS demand from "no station zones" in the before period to each "station zone" is the respec-
37
==PAGE:42==
Master’s Thesis
tive transformed coefficient when holding all other variables constant. For example, FFCS origins are
expected to be 51 % higher in the Radhuspladsen zone (O_Station_2) compared to a zone without
a cityring station in the before period. However, in the after period, FFCS origins are expected to
be only 27 % higher in the Radhuspladsen zone (O_Station_22) than in a zone without a cityring
station in the before period. Thus, the marginal change of the Radhuspladsen zone coefficient indicates
a decreased carsharing demand in the after period. As to simplify the explanation of results, (1) the
marginal change for each station zone from the before to the after period will firstly be elaborated
and graphically visualized. (2) Secondly, the change of marginal effect of the station zones on FFCS
demand will be explained and visualized.
(1) The marginal change for each station zone is calculated by subtracting the before period magni-
tudes from the after period magnitudes as depicted in table 12. Consequently, it can be stated that this
difference is negative for all origin-related and most destination-related station parameters implying
a decreasing demand for FFCS in station zones in the after period. In opposition, the average FFCS
origins demand increases by 2.5 % in zones without a metro station in the after period, compared to
zones without a metro station in the before period. Figure 15 visualizes the marginal change of each
station zone for both, trip origins and destinations. Thereby, greater marginal changes from the before
to the after period and into the direction of decreasing demand are revealed by a darker colored zone.
Changes into the direction of increasing demand are shown by whitish colors. An observation of the
map (figure 15) further reveals that:
• the strongest decrease in average FFCS origins can be expected in zones where Enghave Plads
station and Radhuspladsen station are located. However, the demand in these zones has been
the relatively highest in the before period due to insufficient public transport options at Enghave
Plads, and the centrality of the town square (Radhuspladsen). The metro upgrade is a great
improvement.
• the least decrease in average FFCS origins can be expected in zones in which Norrebro St. and
Norrebros Runddel, Osterport station and Gammel Strand and Kongens Nytorv are located.
These station zones have (mostly) already been well connected by public transport in the before
period.
• the strongest decrease in average FFCS destinations can be expected in zones in which Enghave
Plads, Skjolds Plads and Radhuspladsen are located.
• the two zones in which the average FFCS demand is expected to increase are the Gammel Strand
and Kongens Nytorv station zones and Osterport for trip destinations. At Osterport is is possible
to transfer to the S-tog whereas the M1 and M2 metro lines run across Kongens Nytorv.
• carsharing trips are, on average, 2.5 % more likely to begin in a zone without a Cityring Metro
station in the after period, however, averagely 0.88 % less likely to end in a zone without a
Cityring Metro station in the after period, compared to the before period. Note however, that
this covers all 78 zones without a Cityring Metro station not revealing varying demand of these
zones.
38
==PAGE:43==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 15: Map of the marginal change of estimated metro zone coefficients from the before to the after period
Table 12: Marginal changes in parameter estimates
Ratio of trip origins (%)
Ratio of trip destinations (%)
ID
Station
Before
After
Change
Before
After
Change
0
No metro station
2.52
2.52
-0.88
-0.88
1
Kobenhavn H
-7.15
-16.32
-9.17
-7.75
-13.57
-5.81
2
Radhuspladsen
50.95
27.77
-23.18
50.82
32.30
-18.52
3
Gammel Strand, Kongens
Nytorv
-32.89
-34.41
-1.51
-36.93
-33.08
3.85
4
Marmorkirken
51.69
41.96
-9.73
52.73
36.92
-15.81
5
Osterport
14.96
13.70
-1.26
12.93
19.57
6.64
6
Trianglen St., Vibenshus
Runddel
45.28
31.77
-13.51
38.85
34.08
-4.76
7
Poul Henningsens Plads
20.44
10.11
-10.33
20.60
13.62
-6.98
8
Skjolds Plads
23.99
8.37
-15.61
25.60
5.28
-20.31
9
Norrebro St., Norrebros
Runddel
15.85
15.26
-0.59
24.30
12.54
-11.76
10
Nuuks Plads
48.65
45.79
-2.86
49.86
45.54
-4.31
11
Aksel Mollers Have
-7.78
-13.82
-6.04
-8.04
-13.15
-5.11
12
Frederiksberg St.
-38.03
-44.70
-6.67
-37.17
-45.18
-8.01
13
Frederiksberg Allé
25.51
21.11
-4.40
22.91
15.73
-7.18
14
Enghave Plads
16.14
-9.43
-25.57
12.84
-10.85
-23.69
% before/after calculation: (ecoef −1) × 100 with respective coefs from table 13
(2) Comparing the change of marginal effect on FFCS demand from the before to the after period,
a scenario has been created as to simplify and visually express this change. Thereby, a demand of 10
car sharing vehicles is assumed as a reference in origin and destination zones without a metro station.
Considering that the station dummy estimates are interpreted in relation to the reference variable when
holding all other variables at a constant level, each station zone’s estimated marginal effect is here
39
==PAGE:44==
Master’s Thesis
multiplied by the reference demand such that the expected average carsharing demand is calculated
for the respective zone. Comparing the expected average FFCS demand in the before and after period
for both, the origin and destination of trips, figure 16 displays a bar chart diagram visualizing the
described scenario. Concurrently, the figure reveals that the marginal effect of station zones on FFCS
demand goes into the direction of lower demand in the after period as bars become smaller. The
remarks made based on observing figure 16 are thus correspondingly reflected. The change of marginal
effect on the expected average carsharing demand can directly be compared between the before and
the after period as well as among origins and destinations of trips. It can additionally be observed that
the FFCS demand is generally higher in most metro station zones compared to zones without metro
stations as bars reach above the reference demand of 10. Zones with the highest demand for both,
origins and destinations, are namely the zones in which the stations Radhuspladsen, Marmorkirken,
Trianglen St. and Vibenshus Runddel and Nuuks Plads are located. The metro upgrade can hence be
associated with an increase in public transport availability as well as a higher convenience when going
into the central sqaure area Radhuspladsen, probably with fewer parking options.
Figure 16: Estimated effect of metro stations on FFCS demand
Estimated coefficients for the transport-related variables further reveal that the bus departure
density and rail departure density of both, origin and destination zones, are negatively related to
FFCS demand. Thus, in the before period, FFCS demand decreases by 0.7 %, or 0.05 % when the
bus, or rail departure density of the origin zone of a carsharing trip is increased by 10 %. The effect is
roughly equal when considering an increase in bus, or rail departure density of the destination zone.
Comparing the before to the after period, the effect on FFCS demand is only minimally higher for an
increase in the transit-supply variables.
Travel-impedance variables
As expected, the average trip distance of FFCS trips is negatively related to FFCS demand. Thus, a
10 % increase in the average driving distance yields a 4 % decrease in carsharing demand. With regard
to the average ratio between public transport travel time and FFCS travel time, an increase in FFCS
demand can be expected if public transport travel time increases, or if FFCS travel time decreases.
Precisely, for a 10 % increase in the average travel time ratio of the two modes, a 0.2 % demand increase
can be expected in the before period, and a 0.3 % demand increase in the after period.
40
==PAGE:45==
Master’s Thesis
Socio-economic and demographic variables
Describing the estimates of the socio-economic and demographic parameters, it can firstly be noted
that no significant difference in the expected effect of the respective parameters on FFCS demand
can be recognized between the before and after period. However, while the average household size
and the ratio of households with at least one high educated member is only significant for destination
zones, both variables are not statistically significant on the 95 % confidence interval in the after period.
However, in the before period, an increased household size in destination zones negatively affects FFCS
demand whereas an increased ratio of high educated household members in destination zones yields
an increased expected FFCS demand. An increase in FFCS demand is further expected when the
population density, number of people employed in shopping activity, ratio of households with children,
or ratio of households with young adults increases in the origin, or destination zone of trips.
In
opposition, an increase in car ownership in origin or destination zones leads to a decreased expected
carsharing demand.
Built-environment variables
Estimated coefficients reveal that the FFCS origins and destinations will averagely be nearly 4 times
higher in zones with an airport, compared to zones without an airport. If a hospital, or park is located
in an origin, or destination zone of a trip, demand is expected to be 9-10 %, or 15-16 % higher than in
zones with no hospital, or park, respectively. In the after period, FFCS demand is even expected to be
around 30 % higher in zones with a park compared to zones without a park. Observing the effect of a
university campus being located in a zone on FFCS demand, the findings from the explorative analysis
are confirmed. Thus, FFCS trips are expected to be higher (109 % for origins, 128 % for destinations)
in DTU zones, compared to zones without a university campus. In contrast, carsharing demand is
estimated to be 22-27 % lower for origin and destination zones in which the universities CBS and KU
are located.
Temporal variables
Finally, the temporal parameters indicate an increased FFCS demand for 2018, compared to 2017.
Drawing on the results obtained from the random model, FFCS demand is also estimated to be higher
for the year 2019 compared to 2017. The weekday parameters imply a higher demand on working days
than on Saturdays, or Sundays.
41
==PAGE:46==
Master’s Thesis
Table 13: Parameter Estimates for the Scenario Model
Training set
Test set
Parameter
coef
std err
t-stats
coef
std err
t-stats
Const
1.3666
0.083
16.379
2.4618
0.120
20.547
Av_trip distance
-0.4224
0.007
-60.488
-0.4705
0.010
-44.979
Av_PT_tt/FFCS_tt
0.0240
0.009
2.809
0.0396
0.013
3.104
O_PopDens
0.0965
0.005
18.472
0.0797
0.007
10.671
D_PopDens
0.0962
0.005
18.126
0.0762
0.008
10.028
D AvHHsize
-0.1723
0.055
-3.128
0.0237
0.080
0.294
O_AvHHCarOwn
-0.2531
0.010
-25.018
-0.2487
0.015
-16.856
D_AvHHCarOwn
-0.2503
0.011
-23.193
-0.2524
0.016
-16.130
O_Shopping
0.1388
0.003
41.023
0.1562
0.005
32.317
D_Shopping
0.1354
0.003
39.542
0.1471
0.005
30.130
O_Perc_YoungAdults
0.2217
0.008
26.636
0.2422
0.012
19.833
D_Perc_YoungAdults
0.2000
0.011
18.835
0.2340
0.015
15.414
O_Perc_Child
0.0747
0.006
12.056
0.0781
0.009
8.993
D_Perc_Child
0.0752
0.006
11.746
0.0697
0.009
7.836
D_Perc_HighEd
0.0378
0.008
4.573
0.0225
0.012
1.944
O_Airport
1.6405
0.062
26.634
1.6622
0.090
18.374
D_Airport
1.8312
0.069
26.439
1.6845
0.100
16.779
O_Hospital
0.0903
0.016
5.680
0.1153
0.022
5.150
D_Hospital
0.1001
0.016
6.140
0.1152
0.023
5.030
O_Park
0.1539
0.017
9.049
0.2675
0.025
10.707
D_Park
0.1400
0.017
8.124
0.2753
0.026
10.736
D_zone_mainarea
-0.0103
0.010
-0.985
-0.0408
0.015
-2.704
O_University_CBS/KU
-0.2583
0.021
-12.281
-0.3480
0.031
-11.286
O_University_DTU
0.7496
0.041
18.311
0.7468
0.058
12.981
D_University_CBS/KU
-0.3202
0.022
-14.681
-0.3615
0.032
-11.338
D_University_DTU
0.8244
0.049
16.970
0.7931
0.070
11.333
Weekday_Saturday
-0.8582
0.008
-102.997
-0.9819
0.012
-81.065
Weekday_Sunday
-0.9331
0.008
-110.289
-11.020
0.012
-89.212
Year_2018
0.3964
0.007
56.561
O_RailDepDens
-0.0048
0.001
-7.276
-0.0065
0.001
-6.803
D_RailDepDens
-0.0050
0.001
-7.497
-0.0056
0.001
-5.824
O_BusDepDens
-0.0740
0.006
-12.251
-0.1069
0.009
-12.190
D_BusDepDens
-0.0886
0.006
-13.973
-0.1034
0.009
-11.261
The table continues on the following page.
42
==PAGE:47==
Master’s Thesis
Table 13 continuation: Parameter Estimates for the Scenario Model
Training set
Test set
Parameter
coef
std err
t-stats
coef
std err
t-stats
O_Station_1
-0.0840
0.033
-2.538
-0.1354
0.049
-2.745
O_Station_2
0.3733
0.039
9.567
0.3446
0.058
5.975
O_Station_3
-0.3888
0.033
-11.630
-0.4031
0.049
-8.247
O_Station_4
0.4231
0.032
13.399
0.3398
0.047
7.179
O_Station_5
0.1466
0.031
4.700
0.1569
0.047
3.366
O_Station_6
0.3547
0.031
11.483
0.2756
0.046
5.937
O_Station_7
0.1600
0.032
5.038
0.1389
0.046
2.987
O_Station_8
0.2074
0.031
6.628
0.1018
0.047
2.144
O_Station_9
0.1386
0.031
4.435
0.1531
0.048
3.207
O_Station_10
0.3702
0.031
11.795
0.3771
0.047
7.968
O_Station_11
-0.0562
0.032
-1.775
-0.1448
0.047
-3.061
O_Station_12
-0.4963
0.035
-14.294
-0.5722
0.052
-11.027
O_Station_13
0.2057
0.032
6.492
0.1997
0.048
4.168
O_Station_14
0.1309
0.031
4.222
-0.0798
0.047
-1.701
D_Station_1
-0.0752
0.035
-2.144
-0.1538
0.052
-2.971
D_Station_2
0.3912
0.039
9.911
0.3248
0.059
5.519
D_Station_3
-0.4666
0.034
-13.690
-0.3869
0.050
-7.777
D_Station_4
0.4012
0.032
12.501
0.3321
0.048
6.854
D_Station_5
0.1077
0.032
3.357
0.1536
0.047
3.248
D_Station_6
0.3197
0.031
10.442
0.3223
0.047
6.905
D_Station_7
0.1636
0.032
5.137
0.1703
0.046
3.669
D_Station_8
0.2082
0.032
6.550
0.0665
0.048
1.392
D_Station_9
0.1653
0.031
5.254
0.1825
0.048
3.827
D_Station_10
0.3892
0.031
12.360
0.4017
0.047
8.462
D_Station_11
-0.0966
0.032
-3.037
-0.1165
0.047
-2.458
D_Station_12
-0.4829
0.035
-13.853
-0.5326
0.052
-10.191
D_Station_13
0.2041
0.032
6.433
0.1785
0.049
3.673
D_Station_14
0.1123
0.031
3.602
-0.0657
0.047
-1.402
5.3.3
Model accuracy metrics
Model accuracy metrics have been applied to measure the error of the developed models. With error
range between 36 % and 41 %, as well as an R2 being below 0.5, the model is not very strong in its
predictive power. Hence, only about 50 % of the variance in the dependent variable is collectively
explained by the independent variables. Model limitations will further be discussed in the following
section.
43
==PAGE:48==
Master’s Thesis
Table 14: Model accuracy metrics
Random Model
Scenario Model
Dataset
Training
Testing
Training
Testing
Dataset size N
44653
11164
35996
19821
MAE
0.53
0.53
0.51
0.58
RMSE
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.76
MAPE [%]
39.76
40.05
41.13
36.02
R2
0.48
0.49
0.49
0.47
44
==PAGE:49==
Master’s Thesis
6
Discussion of results and limitations
The here conducted explorative analysis aims at fostering the understanding of the influence of the
launch of the Cityring Metro line on the free-floating car sharing usage in the city of Copenhagen. In
this sense, the Drive Now service usage data has been investigated with regard to the dimensions time
and space in the fist part while the second part examines underlying determinants of the observed
changes in FFCS usage. Thereby, the metro system’s operation period in the winter months October,
November and December of the year 2019 is the main focus of this study being compared to the years
2016 to 2018 within the same months ruling out seasonality effects. This section will highlight and
discuss the key findings and results of the conducted analysis parts. Limitations and possible short-
comings will thereby be reflected on.
The Cityring Metro has revealed to be a competitor of the free-floating carsharing service as trips
have presumably been substituded. Despite a yearly growing customer base and an increasing fleet
size, the ratio of trips in the winter months has stagnated in 2019, contrary to the previous years
showing an uptrend in FFCS demand. In absolute numbers, trips increased by 36 % from 2018 to 2019
(January to December) of which 8 % is connected to the winter months (October to December). At
the same time, the absolute number of trip origins and destinations in metro zones (figure 12), as well
as the ratio of trips with both, origin and destination within the 14 level 2 metro zones has slightly
decreased in 2019, compared to previous years. With an average above 9 % of FFCS trips beginning
and ending in a metro zone in the winter of 2016 to 2018, 2019 marks 6.9 % (table 6) which has led to
the assumption that FFCS vehicles have been substituted with the new metro line.
Drawing attention to previous research studying mode choice and substitution patterns, free-
floating carsharing has shown to reduce the use of public transportation, or active modes such as biking,
thus substituting them (Becker et al., 2017a). Hence, when considering the broader transportation net-
work, public transport options and free-floating car sharing reveal to be competing alternatives while
"free-floating car-sharing members are particularly frequent users of public transportation" (Becker et
al., 2017a). In fact, when studying general mode substitution patterns in Copenhagen, free-floating
car sharing is found to be the main substitute of public transport (Papu Carrone et al., 2020). Hence,
it can be argued that a decrease in FFCS trips is reasonable when a public transport system extension
is introduced, denoting a substitution effect as observed in this thesis’ analysis.
Another aspect supporting the hypothesis of free-floating car sharing vehicles being likely to be
substituted by the new metro line is the fact that both transportation options can be categorized
among "high level" public transport options. "High level" thereby points to systems operating in the
higher price range, being easily accessible, fast, reliable, and attractive. Designed to provide rapid and
safe transportation for passengers with an alignment ensuring that more than 80 % of Copenhagen’s
population "will be within 600 m of the nearest metro station" (Rabensteiner & Notarianni, 2013), the
Cityring Metro is likely to present a strong competitor to the FFCS service. However, the specific
features of the two systems will here not be further compared, as this would go beyond the scope of
this study. Instead, it must be highlighted that "while free-floating car sharing is a main substitute
45
==PAGE:50==
Master’s Thesis
of public transport, its impact on the total share of public transport trips is limited", as concluded by
Papu Carrone et al. (2020). They observed a number of 1,300,000 public transport trips starting, or
ending at the DTU campus per year while only 54,060 FFCS trips, which is a share of 4.16 %, have
been counted in 2019. Thus, here observed decrease in FFCS trip activity in metro zones, which has
been assumed to reflect a change in mode choice from FFCS to metro, represents an extremely small
impact on the traditional public transport network. With an observed decrease in FFCS trip origins
and destinations of below 1 % in each of the 14 metro zones over the studied three months period (table
7) it can be stated that the impact on FFCS usage is noticeable but may, however, also be related to
other external influences which have not been included in this thesis’ analysis.
Nonetheless, the here conducted explorative analysis based on FFCS transaction data comple-
ments existing research studies in finding a presumed substitution effect between FFCS vehicles and
the Cityring Metro as FFCS demand decreased after the implementation of the metro extension. How-
ever, it needs to be stressed that "the number of bookings is a censored representation of the FFCS
carsharing demand which is conditioned by the supply" (Papu Carrone & Rich, 2022), thus only resem-
bling a lower bound for the FFCS demand. In this sense, the analysis of transaction data does not allow
to observe latent demand which is not served due to the unavailability of vehicles in time and space. Is
the decreased carsharing demand in metro zones an effect of the transport network upgrade, or a result
from outer zones becoming more popular for FFCS trips, hence reducing vehicle availability in metro
zones? This question can be raised based on the findings obtained within the here conducted explo-
rative analysis. Future research could be guided to investigate this assumed coherence more profoundly.
Performing further analysis on part of the travel demand rather than the entire urban travel
demand, the second part of this thesis examines the role of travel-impedance, socio-economic and
demographic, built-environment and transit-supply factors to cast light on the underlying determinants
of the observed changes in FFCS usage and the coherent demand over time and space. Enriching the
initially analysed FFCS transaction data with zone-based information thus aimed at drawing a more
holistic picture on FFCS demand in Copenhagen. Hence, the second part of this thesis’ analysis intends
to explain the assumed substitution of the carsharing service with the Cityring Metro. Thereby, the
direct demand model approach has provided useful estimates on travel demand elasticities "which can
be taken as suggestive evidence of the responses the traveling public are likely to exhibit with regard to
propspective transportation system changes" (Talvitie, 1973), or as here simulated, with regard to the
metro system extension.
As mentioned before, all included variables have been statistically significant in predicting FFCS
demand in the level 2 zones. Separately including variables for origins and destinations of trips, the
direct demand model approach allows to estimate their individual impact. However, zone details here
revealed to be mostly equally important with respect to origins and destinations with an exception to
the ratio of households with at least one high educated member as well as the differentiation between
zones in the main and in satellite which have only been statistically significant for trip destinations.
Further elaborating the model results it can be stated that estimated coefficients seem reasonable,
and mostly as observed in the explorative analysis. For instance, zones in which parks are located
46
==PAGE:51==
Master’s Thesis
are expected to have a 16 % higher trip count than zones without parks in the before period which
even increased to 30 % in the after period reflecting the observed findings. Airport zones are expected
to have averagely four times as many FFCS trips than zones without an airport which reflects the
tendency of high demand in Copenhagen’s airport zone.
Comparing the coefficients of the metro
station parameters it can be stressed that the marginal change from the before to the after period
is negative for most station zones implying a decreasing demand in FFCS usage, as observed in the
explorative analysis.
Nevertheless, the elasticities of the bus and rail departure density variables revealed to have a
generally negative, however inelastic impact on FFCS demand.
The density of traditional public
transport departures in zones is thus a significant determinant of FFCS demand. An increase in rail
density caused by the metro system extension can thus explain the slightly decreased FFCS demand
in Cityring Metro zones, as also observed in the explorative analysis. The assumption of free-floating
carsharing being substituted with the new metro line is hence supported.
However, as indicated by the obtained 36-41 % error range as well as the R2 value, the model
is restricted in its accuracy and predictive power.
Thus, reflecting the model limitations it needs
to be stressed that the choice of applying the OLS algorithm has been based on the relatively simple
implication and interpretability of results, also with regard to the restricted scope of this study. As such,
the multiple linear regression model performance may not be accurate enough for precise planning,
but may still be useful to support operators decision making when exploiting new service areas of the
city (Cocca et al., 2020). Nonetheless, future research may apply more complex algorithms such as
the Random Forests Regression (RFR), Support Vector Regression (SVR) which have proven to be
less error prone, thus stronger in their predictive power (Cocca et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020). The
direct demand model is further limited with regard to its supplemented variables. These variables have
been extracted from external data sources, however remaining constant over the studied time period
as opposed to reflecting changes over the years. For example, socio-economic and demographic zone
details have been extracted from the Danish National Transport Model based on the year 2016. The
utilized numbers are, however, not updated for the here considered years. For this reason, the here
developed model does not take account for the specifics of urban development. To arrive at a more
accurate model, explanatory variables should hence be updated as to precisely reflect the underlying
determinants of FFCS demand.
47
==PAGE:52==
Master’s Thesis
7
Conclusion
In this thesis, the usage of the free-floating carsharing service in Copenhagen has been analysed with
regard to temporal and spacial dimensions. As to explore the influence of public transport on FFCS
usage the extension of the metro system has provided the scope for this thesis’ project. Carsharing
transaction data has thereby been utilized to compare temporal and spacial usage patterns in the pre-
operational and the operation period. Thus, insights into the observed changes in carsharing usage
have been gained while arriving at the assumption of FFCS trips being substituted with the new
Cityring Metro line, once in operation. The explorative temporal and spacial analysis has provided
interesting insights:
(1) Compared to the years 2016 to 2018, the ratio of FFCS trips performed during October,
November and December of 2019 has decreased. The service usage is generally the highest on Fridays
and Saturdays while the demand reaches a global maximum at the rush-hour between 17:00 and
18:00 pm.
(2) The average distance of 5,65 km for trips starting and ending in metro zones allows to assume
that these trips may have been substituted with the new Cityring Metro. The slightly decreased number
of trips performed in metro zones in 2019 also leads to the assumption that the Drive Now service
has been substituted with the Cityring Metro. Thereby, FFCS bookings in outer areas increased, on
average.
(3) Dynamic rental net flow patterns have been observed in the temporal-spacial analysis with
metro zones denoting rather more trip origins than destinations on working days during morning rush
hour; in contrast, more trip departures can generally be observed in metro zones on weekends in the
afternoon.
Beyond this, the application of the direct demand model aimed at providing knowledge about the
underlying determinants of the carsharing system. With regard to this thesis’ objective of analysing
the influence of public transport on free-floating carsharing, the augmentation of transaction data
with socio-economic, demographic, built-environment and transit-supply data being assigned to the
respective geographical zones thereby extended the first part analysis capturing the complex interre-
lationships among variables. Thus, the observed change in FFCS usage presumably resulting from the
opening of the Cityring Metro has been put into context.
Captured by the rail departure density estimate, the inelastic negative impact of the rail departure
density of zones partly explains the observed decrease in FFCS usage with respect to the Cityring Metro
implementation. Additionally, the decrease in FFCS usage of the individual Cityring Metro zones has
been captured and estimated by the station variables introduced as dummy variables, separately
for the before and after period. Thereby, the marginal change of estimates from the before to the
after period reflected the demand reduction in metro zones. At this point it can be stressed that
demand modelling is generally useful when planning system extensions, or changes in existing transport
infrastructure. Despite the fact that the here developed direct demand model has a limited predictive
power, influencing factors and their effect on carsharing demand have been identified. Thus, this thesis
arrives at the conclusion that carsharing is substituted with the Cityring Metro in 2019, as revealed by
48
==PAGE:53==
Master’s Thesis
the data-based analysis and modelling. However, it also needs to be highlighted that socio-economic
and demographic and built-environment variables, among others, are estimated to contribute to FFCS
demand and may have been influential on the observed decreased FFCS usage in the metro operation
period. Among the inclusion of a more extensive set of explanatory variables, the development of a
more complex and precise model is here suggested for future research projects.
49
==PAGE:54==
Master’s Thesis
References
Antoniou, C., Pereira, F., & Dimitriou, L. (2019). Mobility Patterns, Big Data and Transport Analytics.
Elsevier.
Becker, H., Ciari, F., & Axhausen, K. W. (2017a). Comparing car-sharing schemes in Switzerland: User
groups and usage patterns. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 97, 17–29.
Becker, H., Ciari, F., & Axhausen, K. W. (2017b). Modeling free-floating car-sharing use in Switzerland:
A spatial regression and conditional logit approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 81, 286–299.
Bronshtein, A. (2017). Train/Test Split and Cross Validation in Python. https://towardsdatascience.
com/train-test-split-and-cross-validation-in-python-80b61beca4b6
Cardozo, O. D., García-Palomares, J. C., & Gutiérrez, J. (2012). Application of geographically weighted
regression to the direct forecasting of transit ridership at station-level. Applied Geography, 34,
548–558.
Ceccato, R., & Diana, M. (2021). Substitution and complementarity patterns between traditional
transport means and car sharing: a person and trip level analysis. Transportation, 48(4),
1523–1540.
Choi, J., Lee, Y. J., Kim, T., & Sohn, K. (2012). An analysis of Metro ridership at the station-to-station
level in Seoul. Transportation, 39(3), 705–722.
Christiansen, H. (2018). Beregning af usikkerhed og varians for Transportvaneundersøgelsen. Proceed-
ings from the Annual Transport Conference at Aalborg University.
Ciociola, A., Cocca, M., Giordano, D., Mellia, M., Morichetta, A., Putina, A., & Salutari, F. (2017).
UMAP: Urban mobility analysis platform to harvest car sharing data. 2017 IEEE SmartWorld,
Ubiquitous Intelligence & Computing, Advanced & Trusted Computed, Scalable Computing &
Communications, Cloud & Big Data Computing, Internet of People and Smart City Innovation
(SmartWorld/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI), 1–8.
Cocca, M., Teixeira, D., Vassio, L., Mellia, M., Almeida, J. M., & da Silva, A. P. C. (2020). On car-
sharing usage prediction with open socio-demographic data. Electronics (switzerland), 9(1).
Cowi. (2022). Copenhagen Metro. https://www.cowi.com/solutions/infrastructure/copenhagen-
metro#
Donges, N. (2018). Intro to Descriptive Statistics. https://towardsdatascience.com/intro-to-descrip-
tive-statistics-252e9c464ac9
Giordano, D., Vassio, L., & Cagliero, L. (2021). A multi-faceted characterization of free-floating car
sharing service usage. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 125.
Googlemaps.com. (2022). Kopenhagen - Google Maps. https : / / www . google . com / maps / place /
Kopenhagen, +D%C3%A4nemark/@55.6713442, 12.5237842, 12z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m5!
3m4!1s0x4652533c5c803d23:0x4dd7edde69467b8!8m2!3d55.6760968!4d12.5683372
Guirao, B., Molina-Sánchez, R., Ortuño, A., & Gálvez-Pérez, D. (2021). Integration of Free Floating
Car Sharing Systems in Rail Stations: A Web Based Data Analysis. Future Transportation,
1(1), 38–53.
50
==PAGE:55==
Master’s Thesis
Jochem, P., Frankenhauser, D., Ewald, L., Ensslen, A., & Fromm, H. (2020). Does free-floating carshar-
ing reduce private vehicle ownership? The case of SHARE NOW in European cities. Trans-
portation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 141, 373–395.
Kepaptsoglou, K., Stathopoulos, A., & Karlaftis, M. G. (2017). Ridership estimation of a new LRT
system: Direct demand model approach. Journal of Transport Geography, 58, 146–156.
Khan, M., & Machemehl, R. (2017). The impact of land-use variables on free-floating carsharing vehicle
rental choice and parking duration. Springer Geography, 331–347.
MOE A/S. (2022). COMPASS Data Source. https://www.moe.global/services/compass-new-traffic-
model-for-the-capital-areal-of-denmark/
Müller, J., Correia, G. H. d. A., & Bogenberger, K. (2017). An explanatory model approach for the
spatial distribution of free-floating carsharing bookings: A case-study of German cities. Sus-
tainability (switzerland), 9(7).
Online travel information. (2022). M3 Cityringen - The Copenhagen Metro. https://intl.m.dk/travel-
information/m3-cityringen/
Papu Carrone, A., Hoening, V. M., Jensen, A. F., Mabit, S. E., & Rich, J. (2020). Understanding car
sharing preferences and mode substitution patterns: A stated preference experiment. Transport
Policy, 98, 139–147.
Papu Carrone, A., & Rich, J. (2022). Free-floating carsharing operation area performance: a Bayesian
idle time prediction approach.
Rabensteiner, K., & Notarianni, S. (2013). Cityringen - Extension of the Copenhagen Metro / Cityrin-
gen - Ausbau der Metro Kopenhagen. Geomechanics and Tunnelling, 6(5), 542–550.
Ramboll Group A/S. (2022). The Copenhagen Metro. https://ramboll.com/projects/rdk/copenhagen/
%20metro
Rich, J., & Hansen, C. O. (2016). The Danish national passenger model – Model specification and
results. European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research, 16(4), 573–599.
Schmöller, S., & Bogenberger, K. (2014). Analyzing External Factors on the Spatial and Temporal
Demand of Car Sharing Systems. Transportation: Can We Do More With Less Resources? -
16th Meeting of the Euro Working Group on Transportation - Porto 2013, 111, 8–17.
Schmöller, S., Weikl, S., Müller, J., & Bogenberger, K. (2015). Empirical analysis of free-floating
carsharing usage: The Munich and Berlin case. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 56, 34–51.
Scikit-learn webpage. (2022). scikit-learn: machine learning in Python — scikit-learn 1.0.2 documen-
tation. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html
Statsmodel webpage. (2022). Statsmodels. https://www.statsmodels.org/stable/index.html
Talvitie, A. (1973). A direct demand model for downtown work trips. Transportation, 2(2), I–I.
UCLA. (2021). How do I interpret a regression model when some variables are log transformed? https:
//stats.oarc.ucla.edu/other/mult-pkg/faq/general/faqhow-do-i-interpret-a-regression-model-
when-some-variables-are-log-transformed/
Wang, C., Bi, J., Sai, Q., & Yuan, Z. (2021). Analysis and prediction of carsharing demand based on
data mining methods. Algorithms, 14(6).
51
==PAGE:56==
Master’s Thesis
Yan, X., Liu, X., & Zhao, X. (2020). Using machine learning for direct demand modeling of ridesourcing
services in Chicago. Journal of Transport Geography, 83, 102661.
Zhao, J., Deng, W., Song, Y., & Zhu, Y. (2014). Analysis of Metro ridership at station level and station-
to-station level in Nanjing: An approach based on direct demand models. Transportation,
41(1), 133–155.
52
==PAGE:57==
Master’s Thesis
A
Appendix
Table 15: Parameter Estimates for the Random Model
Training set
Test set
Parameter
coef
std err
t-stats
coef
std err
t-stats
Const
1.5486
0.077
20.142
1.7416
0.156
11.158
Av_trip distance
-0.4368
0.007
-67.020
-0.4386
0.013
-33.086
Av_PT_tt/FFCS_tt
0.0249
0.008
3.130
0.0513
0.016
3.167
O_PopDens
0.0936
0.005
19.379
0.0786
0.009
8.287
D_PopDens
0.0878
0.005
17.994
0.0943
0.010
9.535
D AvHHsize
-0.1030
0.051
-2.018
-0.1531
0.103
-1.487
O_AvHHCarOwn
-0.2546
0.009
-27.128
-0.2444
0.019
-13.063
D_AvHHCarOwn
-0.2448
0.010
-24.550
-0.2797
0.020
-13.902
O_Shopping
0.1471
0.003
47.153
0.1388
0.006
22.339
D_Shopping
0.1385
0.003
44.086
0.1456
0.006
22.792
O_Perc_YoungAdults
0.2286
0.008
29.515
0.2344
0.015
15.235
D_Perc_YoungAdults
0.2152
0.010
22.011
0.2124
0.020
10.830
O_Perc_Child
0.0756
0.006
13.369
0.0757
0.011
6.611
D_Perc_Child
0.0718
0.006
12.338
0.0795
0.012
6.722
D_Perc_HighEd
0.0303
0.008
4.007
0.0413
0.015
2.719
O_RailDepDens
-0.0052
0.001
-8.595
-0.0060
0.001
-4.897
D_RailDepDens
-0.0050
0.001
-8.140
-0.0062
0.001
-4.916
O_BusDepDens
-0.0874
0.006
-15.605
-0.0802
0.011
-7.192
D_BusDepDens
-0.0925
0.006
-15.819
-0.1014
0.012
-8.479
O_Airport
1.6506
0.058
28.679
1.5939
0.112
14.202
D_Airport
1.8285
0.065
28.237
1.6383
0.123
13.269
O_Hospital
0.0978
0.015
6.697
0.1041
0.029
3.607
D_Hospital
0.1000
0.015
6.702
0.1208
0.030
4.041
O_Park
0.1962
0.016
12.437
0.1637
0.032
5.134
D_Park
0.1917
0.016
11.955
0.1415
0.033
4.355
D_zone_mainarea
-0.0163
0.010
-1.696
-0.0489
0.019
-2.522
O_University_CBS/KU
-0.2871
0.020
-14.597
-0.2929
0.038
-7.665
O_University_DTU
0.7490
0.037
20.066
0.7158
0.076
9.391
D_University_CBS/KU
-0.3305
0.020
-16.374
-0.3425
0.041
-8.323
D_University_DTU
0.7965
0.045
17.709
0.8222
0.089
9.250
Weekday_Saturday
-0.8978
0.008
-116.467
-0.9111
0.016
-58.408
Weekday_Sunday
-0.9867
0.008
-125.533
-10.130
0.016
-64.637
Year_2018
0.3957
0.008
49.065
0.4066
0.016
25.037
Year_2019
0.4717
0.017
27.387
0.5048
0.035
14.597
O_Station_1
-0.0742
0.037
-2.029
-0.0813
0.076
-1.073
O_Station_2
0.4118
0.042
9.901
0.4263
0.084
5.095
O_Station_3
-0.3989
0.038
-10.601
-0.3802
0.074
-5.133
O_Station_4
0.4167
0.036
11.675
0.4475
0.071
6.327
O_Station_5
0.1394
0.035
3.982
0.2268
0.079
2.862
iv
==PAGE:58==
Master’s Thesis
Table 15 continuation (1): Parameter Estimates for the Random Model
Training set
Test set
Parameter
coef
std err
t-stats
coef
std err
t-stats
O_Station_6
0.3735
0.036
10.420
0.3463
0.065
5.313
O_Station_7
0.1860
0.037
5.024
0.1720
0.069
2.491
O_Station_8
0.2150
0.035
6.120
0.2812
0.074
3.787
O_Station_9
0.1471
0.034
4.265
0.1911
0.079
2.431
O_Station_10
0.3964
0.035
11.202
0.3060
0.071
4.325
O_Station_11
-0.0810
0.036
-2.231
0.0672
0.068
0.982
O_Station_12
-0.4785
0.039
-12.172
-0.4851
0.082
-5.903
O_Station_13
0.2272
0.035
6.408
0.1919
0.076
2.530
O_Station_14
0.1496
0.034
4.342
0.1662
0.079
2.107
O_Station_20
0.0249
0.014
1.795
-0.0607
0.028
-2.155
O_Station_21
-0.1782
0.046
-3.841
-0.0371
0.096
-0.387
O_Station_22
0.2451
0.051
4.824
0.3371
0.096
3.504
O_Station_23
-0.4217
0.046
-9.096
-0.2500
0.098
-2.546
O_Station_24
0.3504
0.046
7.675
0.3198
0.095
3.371
O_Station_25
0.1284
0.049
2.643
0.2044
0.086
2.368
O_Station_26
0.2759
0.045
6.089
0.1854
0.097
1.920
O_Station_27
0.0963
0.047
2.067
0.1335
0.099
1.342
O_Station_28
0.0804
0.047
1.696
0.0407
0.091
0.446
O_Station_29
0.1420
0.047
3.024
0.0668
0.089
0.752
O_Station_30
0.3770
0.046
8.169
0.3261
0.088
3.717
O_Station_31
-0.1487
0.047
-3.194
-0.1571
0.090
-1.747
O_Station_32
-0.5924
0.051
-11.713
-0.5792
0.114
-5.083
O_Station_33
0.1915
0.046
4.149
0.1471
0.106
1.392
O_Station_34
-0.0991
0.046
-2.173
-0.1721
0.101
-1.712
D_Station_1
-0.0807
0.039
-2.075
-0.0801
0.074
-1.082
D_Station_2
0.4109
0.042
9.785
0.4260
0.084
5.101
D_Station_3
-0.4609
0.038
-12.079
-0.4616
0.076
-6.080
D_Station_4
0.4235
0.036
11.741
0.3750
0.072
5.218
D_Station_5
0.1216
0.036
3.372
0.1131
0.080
1.407
D_Station_6
0.3282
0.036
9.242
0.3562
0.064
5.531
D_Station_7
0.1873
0.036
5.151
0.1931
0.075
2.583
D_Station_8
0.2279
0.036
6.323
0.2081
0.072
2.910
D_Station_9
0.2175
0.035
6.132
0.0389
0.071
0.546
D_Station_10
0.4045
0.036
11.357
0.3846
0.070
5.497
D_Station_11
-0.0838
0.036
-2.353
-0.0808
0.075
-1.072
D_Station_12
-0.4648
0.040
-11.742
-0.4595
0.081
-5.653
D_Station_13
0.2063
0.036
5.712
0.2944
0.069
4.238
D_Station_14
0.1208
0.035
3.431
0.1866
0.072
2.575
D_Station_20
-0.0088
0.014
-0.633
0.0380
0.028
1.355
D_Station_21
-0.1458
0.048
-3.059
-0.1707
0.095
-1.792
D_Station_22
0.2799
0.052
5.392
0.2771
0.096
2.886
v
==PAGE:59==
Master’s Thesis
Table 15 continuation (2): Parameter Estimates for the Random Model
Training set
Test set
Parameter
coef
std err
t-stats
coef
std err
t-stats
D_Station_23
-0.4016
0.047
-8.546
-0.4182
0.100
-4.192
D_Station_24
0.3142
0.048
6.598
0.2926
0.088
3.307
D_Station_25
0.1787
0.049
3.644
-0.0057
0.088
-0.064
D_Station_26
0.2933
0.046
6.399
0.2800
0.095
2.960
D_Station_27
0.1277
0.046
2.749
0.0771
0.099
0.776
D_Station_28
0.0515
0.047
1.084
-0.0066
0.092
-0.072
D_Station_29
0.1181
0.046
2.565
0.2685
0.094
2.851
D_Station_30
0.3753
0.045
8.392
0.3717
0.102
3.653
D_Station_31
-0.1410
0.046
-3.046
-0.1508
0.093
-1.618
D_Station_32
-0.6012
0.052
-11.568
-0.4213
0.104
-4.047
D_Station_33
0.1461
0.048
3.071
0.1496
0.097
1.539
D_Station_34
-0.1149
0.047
-2.451
-0.0766
0.088
-0.869
vi
