==PAGE:1==
Optimization of maintenance schedules for off­
shore wind turbines
Master’s Thesis
Vibeke Hvidegaard Petersen
Supervisors:
Daniela Guericke, DTU Compute
Magnus Stålhane, IØT NTNU
Peder Bacher, DTU Compute
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
NTNU
Department of Industrial Economics and Technology Management
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
Master’s Thesis
March, 2022
By
Vibeke Hvidegaard Petersen- s143881
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Colourbox.com
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute at the Technical university of Denmark (DTU)
as the final part of Master of Science in Engineering with specialization in Mathematical
modeling and computation.
It has been prepared in close collaboration with the De-
partment of Industrial Economics and Technology Management (IØT) at the Norwegian
university of science and technology (NTNU).
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
A warm thank you to both of my daily supervisors, assistant professor Daniela Guericke
at DTU Compute and professor Magnus Stålhane at NTNU IØT for their supportive
supervision. Our many conversations have inspired my continuous curiosity in the field of
operations research greatly. I would also like to thank my third supervisor professor Peder
Bacher at DTU Compute for playing the role of sorting practical details out.
Thank you to all my new colleagues at IØT for welcoming me to the department (where
I will continue in a PhD position) and for creating a stimulating academic environment.
In particular I would like to thank PhD student Šárka Štádlerová for her competent and
eﬀicient guidance in the use of Solstorm, IØTs clustering computer, and to PhD student
Gaute Nafstad who I am lucky to share oﬀice with for fruitful discussions on the details
implementation of the dynamic labeling algorithm.
I would also like to thank professor Jørn Vatn and PhD student Wanwan Zhang at the
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, NTNU, for their valuable inputs
regarding the modeling of degration of sub-assemblies.
Lastly, I would like to thank my father, Erling Petersen, for helping me proofread the
thesis in the crucial final time.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
In this thesis the jack-up vessel chartering problem with sub-assembly ordering is con-
sidered. The problem is formulated as a two-stage stochastic programming model with
uncertainties associated with the weather conditions and the failures of sub-assemblies.
The first stage decisions entail when and for how long to charter in the jack-up vessel
as well as how many of each type of sub-assembly to order to support the execution of
maintenance task in wind turbines. The second stage decisions are when to schedule the
maintenance tasks. An integer L-shaped solution method is developed with two different
solution approaches for the subproblem. The first solution approach uses a MIP solver.
For the second solution approach, the subproblem is restated as a shortest path resource
constrained problem (SPRRC) which is solved using a labeling algorithm. A study of the
performance of the integer L-shaped method with either of the two solution approaches for
the subproblem against solving the deterministic equivalent model with a commercial MIP
solver is conducted. It reveals that neither of the two L-shaped based solution methods
can compete with the MIP solver.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
5
3
Problem description
9
4
Mathematical model
11
4.1
The first stage model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
The second stage model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Solution method
17
5.1
Deterministic equivalent formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
L-shaped solution approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Computational study
25
6.1
Static data for instance generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Scenario generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Stability testing for scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Performance testing of the solution techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Concluding remarks and future research
45
A Complete model formulation
47
A.1 Deterministic equivalent model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Bibliography
50
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
The world saw its first offshore wind farm, Vindeby, being installed in Denmark in 1991.
With a total capacity of 5MW it supplied power to 2200 Danish homes (Oersted, 2019). A
lot has happened since then. Today the most powerful offshore wind turbines in operation
can deliver as much as 13 MW each (Dogger Bank Wind Farm, 2020). These improved
capacities are in line with the current development within wind technology where focus
is on scaling up offshore wind (WindEurope, 2021). Figure 1.1 shows how the installed
capacity of offshore wind has increased globally during the past 10 years.
Figure 1.1: Development in the global accumulated installed capacity of offshore wind energy
during the past 10 years. China is responsible for a large part of the increase in capacity from 2020
to 2021.
In July 2021 the European Union launched The European Green Deal in which all member
states commit to turning Europe into the first climate neutral continent by 2050. Work-
ing toward this target, the goal is to reduce emissions by at least 55% in 2030 (European
Commission, 2021a).
Among other initiatives within renewable energy, the ambitions
are to achieve this partly by installing more offshore wind turbines. (European Commis-
sion, 2021b) It is estimated that 16-24 % of the costs related to offshore wind turbines stem
from operations and maintenance. The harsh conditions at sea effects that this is higher
than for onshore wind turbines (IRENA, 2012). Therefore to ensure that the ambitions
of offshore wind are viable it is crucial to minimize the cost of maintenance.
A wind turbine consist of up to 8000 components (IRENA, 2012). These require main-
tenance as they are worn down in order for the wind turbine to keep harvesting energy
from the wind. In this thesis we are only concerned with components that require heavy
maintenance operations. These are typically the larger components of the wind turbine
that are known as sub-assemblies. The sub-assemblies we consider in this thesis are blades,
pitch, generator, gearbox, transformer and hub.
Figure 1.2 shows an illustration of where the different sub-assemblies are placed in the
wind turbine. Constituting a major part of the wind turbines iconic silhouette, the three
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
1
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.2: Sub-assemblies’ placement in the wind turbine. Original drawing is from Colour-
box.com.
blades are probably the most recognizable. Each blade consist of composite material and
can be more than 60 meters. When the wind is blowing on the blades, the wind turbine
spins. The hub consists of cast iron and is protected behind a layer of composite material.
It ensures that the blades are kept in position as they turn. The pitch is a part of the
connection between each blade and the hub. It adjusts the angle of the blades depending on
the wind in order to maximize the energy output. A shaft connects the hub to the gearbox
inside the nacelle housing. The nacelle housing is the box on top of the tower. The blades
of the wind turbine rotates at a slower pace than the generator requires, therefore the
gearbox increases the rotational speed. The generator is behind the gearbox and converts
the mechanical energy to electricity. Before the electricity can be sent out into the power
grid, the transformer ensures that it is transformed to higher voltage (IRENA, 2012).
For heavy maintenance operations it is necessary to use special equipment in form of jack-
up vessels. A jack-up vessel has the special ability of ’jacking-up’, that is, lowering a set
of legs into the seabed. This stabilizes the vessel such that the onboard crane is able to
lift heavy sub-assemblies. Thereby technicians can replace these in the wind turbines.
2
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:15==
Different strategies can be employed in the maintenance of wind turbines. In a corrective
maintenance strategy, the maintenance of a wind turbine is planned after it has failed.
In a preventive maintenance strategy, a wind turbine is maintained before it fails.
In
condition-based maintenance strategy, the condition of the wind turbines is monitored
and maintenance is scheduled when the condition of the components of the turbine reach
a certain threshold. A lot of efforts are put into the research supporting predictive main-
tenance strategies. That is, given the condition of a wind turbine, we try to predict when
it fails and ideally plan the maintenance such that the wind turbine is maintained just
before it fails.
In this thesis the problem of optimizing the chartering strategy of a jack-up vessel and
ordering of sub-assemblies to support heavy maintenance operations in offshore wind tur-
bines is considered. It contributes with a two-stage stochastic model formulation of the
problem where the incorporation of ordering of sub-assemblies is new. The thesis also
focuses on the development of exact solution methods to solve the model.
The remaining part of the thesis is structured as follows:
In chapter 2 literature related to maintenance of offshore wind turbines and solution
methods for stochastic programming problems are reviewed.
The problem of optimiz-
ing jack-up vessel chartering strategies for heavy maintenance of offshore wind turbines
with ordering of sub-assemblies is described along with its requirements in chapter 3. A
two stage stochastic programming model capturing this problem is formulated in chapter
4. In chapter 5 a solution approach based upon the integer L-shaped method is devel-
oped. A computational study is carried out in chapter 6. This comprises analysis and
preparation of data used for instance generation of instances consisting of static param-
eters as well as stochastic parameters. These are obtained through the discretization of
stochastic processes using scenario generation. It also comprises a sensitivity analysis of
the stability of the scenarios in terms of in-sample and out-of-sample stability testings.
The chapter is concluded with a study of the performance of the implemented integer
L-shaped method algorithm against an implementation of the deterministic equivalent of
the two-stage stochastic programming problem. At last we give some concluding remarks
in chapter 7 together with thoughts on further research.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
3
==PAGE:16==
4
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:17==
2
Literature review
In this section we look into the literature relevant to the problem of optimizing the jack up
vessel chartering strategies with ordering of sub-assemblies and the solution methodologies
related to stochastic programming problems.
A variety of optimization problems related to offshore wind turbines have previously been
studied. Barlow et al. (2017) have developed a mixed decision support framework combin-
ing discrete-event simulation and robust optimization to support the installation phase of
wind farms. Fischetti and Pisinger (2017) consider how the cable routing of wind farms
can be optimized taking the power losses into account. They present a mixed integer
linear programming model and solve it using a solution approach that mixes exact com-
mercial solvers and a matheuristic. The optimization of the layout for an installation port
of an offshore wind farm is studied by Irawan et al. (2017). The objective is to mini-
mize the transportation cost of main components for offshore wind turbines within the
installation port. The authors solve the problem using a matheuristic based upon variable
neighborhood search.
Ursavas (2016) investigates a problem that shares similarities with the problem we consider
in this thesis. The author considers the offshore wind farm installation planning problem
which entails decisions regarding the renting period of offshore installation vessels and
the scheduling of the operations that are required to build the wind farm. The author
proposes a two-stage stochastic programming model that takes the uncertainty of the
weather into account. The first stage decisions are related to the chartering period of the
vessels while the second stage decisions are related to scheduling of installation operations.
The problem is solved using Benders decomposition. The integrality requirements in the
problem are handled by relaxing the integrality conditions in the subproblem and solve
the problem using Benders decomposition. The solution from Benders decomposition is
then embedded in a branch and bound framework to restore the integrality requirements.
Problems related to maintenance and operations have also been researched.
In a re-
view Shafiee (2015) considers maintenance logistics of offshore wind energy by dividing
the maintenance logistics according to three echelons depending on their time horizon:
Strategic (long-term), tactical (medium-term) and operational (short-term). For instance
a strategic decision could be selecting a maintenance strategy for the wind farm, a tac-
tical could be to decide on purchasing or leasing of equipment such as vessels while an
operational could be to do maintenance scheduling. The author concludes that although
the area have received reasonable attention in the literature there is still a large research
gap for future developments within maintenance, repair and operation issues which has
received far less attention than areas of design, installation and production.
While Shafiee (2015) reviews the literature within maintenance of offshore wind turbines in
a broad setting, Seyr and Muskulus (2019) review decision support models for operations
and maintenance for offshore wind farms. They discuss a number of different types of
decision support models such as discrete event simulation, Markov models and differential
equations. Further, they consider different optimization methods here amongst stochastic
programming which they suggest for future modeling. Seyr and Muskulus (2019) are not
alone in suggesting stochastic programming. In their review of research within operations
and maintenance of offshore wind turbines Ren et al. (2021) also point out the need for
more studies of stochastic modelling of the uncertainties.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
5
==PAGE:18==
Quite a few articles are concerned with optimizing the strategy of the vessel fleet size
and mix to support maintenance operations at offshore wind farms. These are in some
ways related to the jack-up chartering problem we consider. It is often formulated as a
stochastic programming problem where uncertainties in the weather conditions and the
demand in terms of failures in the wind turbines are handled.
In a study by Stålhane, Halvorsen-Weare, et al. (2019) a two-stage stochastic programming
model for the vessel fleet size and mix problem is formulated. To support the first stage
decisions the routing of the vessels are considered. The authors deduce a solution approach
based upon Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition. The subproblems consist in the routing of the
vessels which can be considered a shortest path resource constrained problem. Taking
advantage of this formulation, a subset of feasible maintenance patterns are generated by
a heuristic version of the labeling algorithm as described in Irnich and Desaulniers (2005).
Halvorsen-Weare, Norstad, et al. (2017) also consider a heuristic solution approach for fleet
size and mix problem. They develop a decision support tool for the problem that is driven
by a metaheuristic solution method. This method is based upon a greedy randomized
adaptive search procedure (GRASP).
Stålhane, Bolstad, et al. (2021) formulate a dual-level stochastic fleet size and mix problem.
They are the first to consider the problem on a strategic level where decisions regarding
the vessel fleet are taken to support the maintenance of a wind farm as it develops stepwise
and during its entire lifetime. To guide these strategic decisions, operational decisions of
how to utilize the fleet are taken into account. Based upon this a stochastic programming
model is formulated and the authors develop an integer L-shaped solution approach which
we use as inspiration for the solution method for the stochastic model we formulate in this
thesis.
Stålhane, Vefsnmo, et al. (2016) also consider the entire lifespan of the wind farm in their
two stage stochastic programming formulation. It is not all articles concerned with vessel
fleet size and mix problems, that considers jack-up vessels as one of the vessels types avail-
able to charter, but in this article they are included. Halvorsen-Weare, Gundegjerde, et
al. (2013) also include jack up vessels in their fleet size and mix problem which also entails
helicopters. Jack-up vessels are also considered an opportunity to charter in the three-
stage stochastic programming model for the vessel fleet size and mix problem proposed by
Gundegjerde et al. (2015).
Only few studies focus in detail on chartering strategies of jack-up vessels for maintenance
of offshore wind turbine farms. Broek et al. (2019) consider the problem of how resources
can be shared among wind farm service providers. These resources entail maintenance
vessels, port facilities, etc. In the article the authors use jack-up vessels as an example
of such a resource. Through a simulation model that takes uncertainty of weather and
failures of components in the wind turbines into account, they evaluate two cases of this
sharing strategy: a) multiple service providers purchase and share jack-up vessels and b)
multiple service providers share both jack-up vessels and harbour facilities. Although the
simulation model can be employed to thoroughly investigate the sensitivity of the sharing
strategies it is also limited to only consider predetermined strategies.
Dalgic et al. (2014) investigate the problem by comparing different jack-up vessel charter-
ing strategies through a simulation model. As in the previous article, the simulation model
is restricted to evaluating chartering strategies that are selected beforehand by exploring
the sensitivity of each strategy. This means that the study is limited to consider only
a subset of the possible vessel chartering strategies. These encompass different length of
vessel chartering periods for three wind farms of different sizes in terms of the number
6
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:19==
of wind turbines. They do not consider when during the year, the vessel is chartered
in. Neither do consider the option of multiple chartering periods during the maintenance
season.
Stålhane, Christiansen, et al. (2017) propose a a two-stage stochastic programming model
for optimization of jack-up vessel chartering strategies. The main decisions are when and
for how to charter a set of jack-up vessels to support maintenance of failed components
in a wind farm. The model is very similar the one we consider in this thesis, but it differs
in three ways: a) it considers the possibility of chartering in more than one vessel, b)
it includes a minimum time period for each vessel to be chartered, c) it does not take
ordering of components into account. The main contribution of Stålhane, Christiansen,
et al. (2017) is the model formulation, but the authors do sketch out a possible solution
approach employing the sample average approximation algorithm. We shall however look
into how our problem can be solved, by applying the L-shaped method and solve the
decomposed problem.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
7
==PAGE:20==
8
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:21==
3
Problem description
In this thesis the problem of scheduling maintenance of wind turbines in an offshore wind
farm is considered. Offshore the maritime conditions are harsh taking its wear on the
wind turbines. Therefore the wind turbines require continuous maintenance in order to
keep harvesting energy from the wind. The condition of each wind turbine is monitored
through the level of energy output along with the measurements of instruments attached
to different sub-assemblies. Together these data give an immediate picture of the state of
the wind turbine and disclose whether there is an urgent need for maintenance. However,
they can also be used to predict the development of the turbine’s condition and hence
the failure of each sub-assembly. Using the prediction as input it is possible to schedule
maintenance ahead of failure.
Depending on the type of maintenance operation, different equipment is required. In this
thesis only heavy maintenance operations comprising the replacement of rotor and nacelle
sub-assemblies are considered. That is, the maintenance operations involving heavy lifts
of 5-150 tons in the height of the wind turbine of 100-150 meters, e.g. the maintenance
of blades, generator, gearbox, etc. These sub-assemblies play a substantial part in the
wind turbine’s ability to harvest energy from the wind. Further, letting a wind turbine
keep running after one of the sub-assemblies have broken down can tear on the other
sub-assemblies causing them to break down as well. Therefore the wind turbine is shut
down if any of the sub-assemblies fail. It takes time to produce new sub-assemblies for
the replacements. Therefore they need to be ordered in advance of the planning horizon
for maintenance such that they are ready when the maintenance begins.
Technicians performing the heavy maintenance tasks are highly specialized and are to be
contracted ahead of the planning horizon. Often they are contracted along with the vessel.
In order to execute maintenance tasks of the sub-assemblies, highly specialized vessels such
as jack-up vessels are needed. Such vessels may have a long lead time. They are therefore
to be contracted well in advance of the planning horizon where the maintenance is to be
executed.
When a wind turbine requires heavy maintenance, a crew consisting of a number of techni-
cians use a vessel to bring the sub-assemblies needed for the specific maintenance operation
out to the wind turbine where they first position and jack-up the vessel and then perform
the replacement. During the maintenance the wind turbine is shut down and therefore
not producing any energy. The accessibility of offshore wind turbines is highly influenced
by the weather, especially in terms of wind speed and wave height. These two parame-
ters govern when jacking-up the vessel is possible as well as when the onboard crane can
operate. Weather predictions are more accurate, the shorter the time horizon is. This
means that whether a maintenance operation can actually be carried out in the week it
is scheduled, is highly influenced by weather conditions that week. It is however evident
that there is seasonal variation in the whether which limits the heavy lifting maintenance
to take place during the summer season. This means that the planning horizon for main-
tenance span 3-6 months. Besides the uncertainty related to the weather predictions, the
estimates of the condition of each sub-assembly of the wind turbines are also associated
with uncertainty. This means that they sometimes break down suddenly and urgent cor-
rective maintenance is needed to bring the wind turbine back to normal performance. If
it is not possible to maintain the wind turbine immediately, the lost power output due to
the downtime might be high leading to high cost.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
9
==PAGE:22==
By using the predictions of the condition of each sub-assembly as input the idea is to
decide upon when to charter in a jack-up vessel and how many sub-assemblies to order
such that it is possible to create a maintenance schedule where the sub-assemblies in the
wind turbines ideally are maintained just before they fail. At the same time costs related
to vessel chartering and ordering of sub-assemblies together with the down time cost of
the wind turbines in the wind farm are to be minimized. For the maintenance schedule
decisions need to be taken about which sub-assemblies in which wind turbines to maintain
in each week of the planning horizon. When a predictive or corrective task is performed
it might be advantageous to perform opportunistic tasks. That is, while the costs of the
vessel and the technicians are already payed, we might as well perform maintenance on
sub-assemblies which state of condition are near the threshold of maintenance. This also
need to be taken into consideration when deciding upon the maintenance schedule.
Due to the long lead time of sub-assemblies and jack-up vessels, the decisions regarding
these are to be taken before the maintenance period begins while the weather conditions
and the failures in the wind turbines are still uncertain. When the maintenance season
begins decisions regarding which maintenance task in the wind turbines to execute using
the chartered jack-up vessel and the ordered sub-assemblies are taken. At this point the
information about weather and failures are certain. However, it is not possible to change
the period the vessel is chartered nor order more sub-assemblies. The main decisions in
the problem are therefore how to charter the jack-up vessel and how many sub-assemblies
to order such that it is possible to create a good maintenance schedule. A start-up cost
and a day rate cost is related to the chartering of the vessel, while each sub-assembly is
ordered at a cost. The maintenance schedule is evaluated in terms of two costs: The first
is the electricity price of the lost power production while the wind turbine is shut down
for maintenance. The second is the electricity price of the lost power production if a sub-
assembly fails without being scheduled for maintenance and the wind turbine therefore
has to be shut down until it has been maintained.
10
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:23==
4
Mathematical model
In this section we show how the described maintenance problem of finding an optimal
chartering strategy for a jack up vessel with ordering of sub-assemblies such that costs
related to chartering, ordering of sub-assemblies and downtime of the wind turbines are
minimized, can be formulated as a two-stage stochastic programming model.
The model considers the maintenance of a set of sub-assemblies, S, in a wind farm con-
sisting of a set of wind turbines, O, during a planning horizon discretized into a set of
time periods, T .
To each wind turbine o ∈O belongs a set of heavy sub-assemblies,
So which require a jack-up vessel to replace if they have failed. Let K be the different
types of sub-assemblies. E.g. a blade is a type of sub-assembly k ∈K that each wind
turbine o ∈O has three of, meaning that they contribute with three indices to the set of
sub-assemblies, So. Uncertainty is considered both in the weather conditions and failures
of sub-assemblies. This means that uncertainty is related to when the weather conditions
allow for the vessel to access the wind turbines, and which sub-assemblies that fail during
the planning horizon. In fact we allow the failures to occur on a longer horizon than the
planning horizon, which we will refer to as the failure horizon, H. This is in order to
capture the failures that occur during the winter season where the weather conditions do
not allow for maintenance. For now, let ξ be the set of uncertain parameters which are
formally introduced in 4.2.
The first stage of the model represent a point in time where decisions of when and for how
long to charter in a jack-up vessel as well as how many sub-assemblies to order need to
be taken. Technicians are hired along with the chartering of the vessel and therefore not
considered explicitly in the model. It is assumed that these first stage decisions are taken
so well in advance of the maintenance period that the planner is at liberty to charter in
the vessel at any given point and duration during the planning horizon as well as order any
quantity of sub-assemblies. Neither the weather nor the failures are known at this stage.
In the second stage of the model, decisions regarding the deployment of the chartered
vessel in terms of scheduling which sub-assemblies in the wind turbine to maintain during
the planning horizon. At this stage the uncertainty related to the weather and failures is
assumed realized. Employing the classification scheme proposed by Shafiee (2015), we can
say that the first stage decisions are related to the tactical echelon while the second stage
decisions are related to the operational echelon.
The first stage and the second stage are subject to two different time scales where the
granularity of the second stage is finer than the first stage. E.g. we consider weeks in the
first stage while we in the second stage consider days. This reflects that planning on a
tactical level is often more abstract than planning on an operational level where decisions
are executed in a more near future and thus require a higher level of detail. In order to
distinguish between the two time scales we let T FS be the set of time periods in the first
stage model and T SS be the set of time periods in the second stage. The relation between
the two are described by a granularity factor R such that a time period p ∈T FS in the
first stage correspond to R time periods t ∈T SS in the second stage.
4.1
The first stage model
Now, we go into details with modeling the tactical maintenance decisions entailing when
and for how long the jack-up vessel is chartered as well as how many sub-assemblies that
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
11
==PAGE:24==
is ordered. It is possible to charter the vessel for more than one time period during the
planning horizon. Let zS
p be one if such a chartering period of the vessel begins in time
period p ∈T FS, and zero otherwise. Each chartering period is related to a start-up cost,
CS
p . Let another decision variable yRF
p
be one if the vessel is chartered in time period
p ∈T FS, and zero otherwise. Let CR
p be a day rate cost of each time period p ∈T FS the
vessel is chartered. Define xA
k to be the number of sub-assemblies of type k ∈K that is
ordered. Each type of sub-assembly k ∈K has a unit cost of CA
k . Lastly, let Q(yRF , xA, ξ)
be the recourse function representing the cost of executing maintenance tasks in the wind
turbines for a given set of tactical maintenance decisions and a realization, ξ, of the
uncertain parameters related to weather and failures in the wind turbines. Employing
this notation the first stage model can be formulated as:
min
∑
p∈T F S
(
CS
p zS
p + CR
p yRF
p
)
+
∑
k∈K
CA
k xA
k + Eξ
[
Q(yRF , xA, ξ)
]
(4.1)
st.
yRF
1
≤zS
1
(4.2)
yRF
p
−yRF
p−1 ≤zS
p
p ∈T FS|p > 1
(4.3)
zS
p , yRF
p
∈{0, 1}
p ∈T FS
(4.4)
xA
k ∈Z+
0
k ∈K
(4.5)
The objective function (4.1) minimizes the cost of the tactical maintenance decisions. The
first term is the total cost of chartering the vessel consisting of start up and day rate costs.
The second term is the cost of ordering the sub-assemblies required for the maintenance
tasks. Finally, the third term is the expected cost of executing maintenance tasks in terms
of the price of the lost power production in the downtime period of the wind turbines when
supported by the given chartering period(s) of the vessel and the number of ordered sub-
assemblies. Constraints (4.2) and (4.3) link the variables related to vessel chartering by
setting zS
p equal to one if a chartering period begins in time period p ∈T FS. A chartering
period is defined to begin in time period p ∈T FS if the vessel is chartered in time period
p, but not in time period p −1. The last constraint (4.4) and (4.5) establish the binary
and integral domains of the variables.
4.2
The second stage model
In the second stage the uncertainty related the weather conditions and the which failures
occur during the failure horizon are realized at once. This is clearly a simplification of
reality. However, as it is always beneficial to maintain failed sub-assemblies immediately,
knowing that other failures will appear later should not not affect which maintenance
tasks that are planned to be executed early in the planning horizon. Now, let ξ be the col-
lection of stochastic parameters such that ξ = (Gω, CD
1,1,1, ..., CD
|O|,|Gω|,|T SS|, CP
1,1, ..., CP
|O|,|S|,
E1,1, ..., E|Go|,|T SS|, A1,1,1,1, ..., A|O|,|Go|,|T SS|,|T SS||Eg,t
≤
|T SS|, U1,1, ..., U|K|,|Go|, P1,1, ...,
P|S|,|Go||) It is assumed that the probability distributions of ξ are known. That is, the
probability distribution of the failures of the sub-assemblies in the wind turbines are
known as well as the probability of different kind of weather conditions. Further, the
failures of the sub-assemblies are assumed to be independent of the weather.
We understand a maintenance task, G(ξ), as a combination of sub-assemblies that fails dur-
ing the failure horizon and therefore require maintenance by replacing the sub-assemblies.
It is assumed that the maintenance of the sub-assemblies is ordered in a fixed sequence.
E.g. in order to maintain both the gearbox and one of the blades in a turbine, the vessel
12
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:25==
is first positioned, then the gearbox that is inside the wind turbine is maintained first
as it require the outer sub-assemblies including the blades to be detached. Afterwards
the maintenance blade is maintained when the outer sub-assemblies are reattached. In
order to distinguish between the maintenance tasks in different wind turbines, define a
subset Go(ξ) ⊂G(ξ) to the set of maintenance tasks on wind turbine o ∈O. Let Ps,g(ξ)
be a parameter that takes the value one if sub-assembly s ∈S is a part of maintenance
task g ∈G(ξ) and zero otherwise. Let another parameter Uk,g(ξ) denote how many sub-
assemblies of type k ∈K that is needed for maintenance task g ∈G(ξ).
In order to connect the time periods p ∈T FS in the first stage model with the finer
granulated time periods in the second stage model, we introduce an auxiliary variable yRS
t
which is one if the vessel is chartered in time period t ∈T SS where (p −1)R + 1 ≤t ≤pR
and zero otherwise. E.g. if a vessel is chartered in week p = 1 of the first stage model,
then the vessel is chartered in days t = 1, 2, ..., 7 of the second stage model (and the
granularity factor in this case is R = 7). With the aim of enabling a connection between
the maintenance tasks and the time line, two parameters are defined. Let Lo,g(ξ) be the
latest time a maintenance task g ∈Go(ξ) in wind turbine o ∈O can start such that the
entire task is executed within the maintenance horizon. Let Ag,t,t′(ξ) be one if maintenance
task g ∈Go(ξ) is started in time period t ∈T SS is still ongoing in time period t ∈T SS,
and zero otherwise.
Let the variable βo,g,t be one if an operational decision of assigning maintenance task
g ∈Go(ξ) on wind turbine o ∈O starting in time period t ∈T SS is taken and zero
otherwise. It is assumed that a weather window must be suﬀiciently large for the entire
maintenance task to be executed without any breaks.
t = 1
t = 2
t = 4
t = 6
t = 7
t = 14 t = |T SS|
Failure of first
sub-assembly,
gearbox,
in wind turbine
Vessel is
assigned
to task
Maintenance
finishes
Poor weather Set up
Gearbox
Blade
Maintenance time
Downtime period of wind turbine
Figure 4.1: Illustration of calculation of the downtime cost. The vessel is assigned to a mainte-
nance task in a wind turbine in time period t = 2. The sub-assembly of these two failing first is
the gearbox failing in time period t = 1. The vessel is assigned to a maintenance task comprising
the gearbox and one of the blades in the wind turbine in time period t = 3. Due to poor weather
conditions, the vessel cannot access the wind turbine before time period t = 5 where the vessel
is positioned and jacked-up. The maintenance task is executed in time period t = 6 and it is
finished in time period t = 13, which is where the downtime period of the wind turbine ends. The
downtime cost is calculated as the price of the lost electricity production from time period t = 1
to time period t = 14.
A downtime cost, CD
o,g,t(ξ), is associated with this task assignment since the wind turbine
needs to be shut down during maintenance. Figure 4.1 illustrates how the downtime cost
is calculated. We formalize this calculation in section 6.2.3, but to get a notion of the logic
behind the model, we illustrate the concept here. In the illustration two sub-assemblies
fail during the failure horizon, the gearbox and one of the blades. The first sub-assembly
to fail is the gearbox which fail at time t = 2. This means that the wind turbine is down
from this point in time and until the gearbox has been replaced. If the blade fails before
the gearbox is maintained, both the gearbox and the blade need maintenance before the
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
13
==PAGE:26==
wind turbine can be started again. The vessel is assigned to a maintenance task consisting
of the gearbox and the blade in t = 4, however poor weather conditions means that a
suﬀiciently large weather window to complete the task does not start before t = 6 where
the vessel is positioned and jacked-up. Then the gearbox and blade are maintained and
the task finishes at time t = 14. Therefore the wind turbine has a downtime from t = 2
to t = 14 and the downtime cost is calculated as the accumulated price of the lost power
production in this period.
t = 1
t = 9
t = |T SS|
t = H
Failure of
sub-assembly
Downtime period of wind turbine
(a) Calculation of penalty cost when a sub-assembly fails far from the end of the failure horizon. The
sub-assembly fails after the planning horizon in time period t = 9. The penalty cost is then calculated as
the accumulated lost electricity production from the failure occurs and until the failure horizon is reached
at t = H.
t = 1
t = |T SS|
t = 14 t = H
Failure of
sub-assembly
Downtime period of wind turbine
(b) Calculation of penalty cost when a sub-assembly fails close to the end of the failure horizon. The sub-
assembly fails in time period t = 14 which is so close to the end of the failure horizon, H, that calculating
the penalty cost as the lost electricity production from t = 14 to t = H result in end of time effects.
Instead the penalty cost is calculated as the accumulated lost electricity production from the start of the
planning horizon at t = 1 to the end of the failure horizon in order to mimic a rolling time horizon.
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the penalty cost depending on whether the sub-assembly fails close to
the end of the failure horizon or not.
Define αo,s to be one if sub-assembly s ∈So in wind turbine o ∈O is not maintained
within the planning horizon, and zero otherwise. Related to this variable is a penalty cost
CP
s,o(ξ) corresponding to the price of the lost electricity production in the downtime period
of the wind turbine from the time period where the sub-assembly fails. If a sub-assembly
fails it is assumed that the entire wind turbine is shut down. If a sub-assembly does not
fail within the failure horizon, the penalty cost equals zero. The calculation of the penalty
cost for sub-assemblies that do fail is illustrated in figure 4.2. Figure 4.2(a) shows a sub-
assembly failing in time period t = 8 which is just after the planning horizon has ended.
The resulting downtime period of the wind turbine due to this failure is then from t = 9
and until the end of the failure horizon t = H.
Figure 4.2(b) shows another example where the sub-assembly fails very close to the end
of the failure horizon. In fact the price of the lost electricity production in the downtime
period from the failure occurs in time period t = 14 and until the end of the failure
horizon t = H is so low that the model may not schedule the maintenance task. In this
case the penalty cost is instead calculated as the accumulated price of the lost electricity
14
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:27==
production during the entire failure horizon, that is from time period t = 1 to time period
t = H. This is to avoid this end effect in the model. Although we only consider one
maintenance season in the model, the model can be considered as part of a larger setting
where the process of chartering the vessel and order sub-assemblies is repeated every year
during the entire lifetime of the wind farm. Therefore these failures occurring late can be
interpreted as failures that happened late during the previous failure horizon.
Employing the introduced notation, the second stage model can be formulated as follows:
Q(ˆyFS, ˆxA, ξ) = min
∑
o∈O
∑
g∈Go(ξ)
∑
t∈T SS
CD
o,g,t(ξ)βo,g,t +
∑
o∈O
∑
s∈So
CP
o,s(ξ)αo,s
(4.6)
st.
yRS
t
= ˆyRF
p
p ∈T FS, t ∈T SS|
(p −1)R + 1 ≤t ≤pR
(4.7)
∑
o∈O
∑
g∈Go(ξ)
∑
t∈T SS|
t≤Lo,g(ξ)
Ag,t,t′(ξ)βo,g,t ≤ySS
t′
t′ ∈T SS
(4.8)
∑
o∈O
∑
g∈Go(ξ)
∑
t∈T SS|
t≤Lo,g(ξ)
Uk,g(ξ)βo,g,t ≤ˆxA
k
k ∈K
(4.9)
∑
g∈Go(ξ)
∑
t∈T SS|
t≤Lo,g(ξ)
Ps,g(ξ)βo,g,t + αo,s = 1
o ∈O, s ∈So
(4.10)
ySS
t
∈{0, 1}
t ∈T SS
(4.11)
αo,s ∈{0, 1}
o ∈O, s ∈So
(4.12)
βo,g,t ∈{0, 1}
o ∈O, g ∈Go(ξ), t ∈T SS|t ≤Lo,g(ξ)
(4.13)
The objective function (4.6) minimizes the cost of the operational decisions. The first
term is the downtime cost related to the execution of the maintenance tasks, while the
second term is the penalty cost of not maintaining a sub-assembly that fails during the
time horizon.
The first constraint (4.7) maps the time periods in the first stage with
the granularity of the time periods in the second stage.
The second constraint (4.8)
states that the vessel can only be assigned to a maintenance task in a wind turbine if it is
chartered for the entire maintenance period. Further, it ensures that no maintenance tasks
are overlapping. Next, constraint (4.9) limits the number of sub-assemblies that can be
maintained by the quantity of sub-assemblies ordered in the first stage. Constraint (4.10)
ensures that a penalty is imposed in the objective function if a sub-assembly that fails
during the time horizon is not maintained, while the last three constraints (4.11)-(4.13)
establish the binary domain of the variables.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
15
==PAGE:28==
16
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:29==
5
Solution method
In this section the solution methodology is presented. The uncertainty in the model is
handled by letting a set of scenarios represent the outcome space of the failures and weather
conditions such that the deterministic equivalent model can be solved. We describe the
details of this in section 5.1. As the deterministic equivalent model constitutes a NP-
hard combinatorial problem, we expect it to be diﬀicult to solve for larger instances,
and therefore an exact solution method based upon the L-shaped method is deduced and
presented in section 5.2.
5.1
Deterministic equivalent formulation
In order to solve the stochastic programming model presented in the section 4, we need
to reformulate the uncertainty into a computationally tractable model that is the deter-
ministic equivalent formulation. This is done by introducing a set of scenarios ω ∈Ω.
A realization of ξ, ˆξω = (Gω, CD
1,1,1, ..., CD
|O|,|Gω|,|T SS|, CP
1,1, ..., CP
|O|,|S|, E1,1, ..., E|Go|,|T SS|,
A1,1,1,1, ..., A|O|,|Go|,|T SS|,|T SS||Eg,t ≤|T SS|, U1,1, ..., U|K|,|Go|, P1,1, ..., P|S|,|Go||), and a prob-
ability Πω are related to each scenario ω ∈Ω.
This allows for a replacement of the
expectation of the recourse function Eξ
[
Q(yRF , xA, ξ)
]
in the objective function of the
first stage problem (4.1) by ∑
ω∈ΩΠωQω(yRF , xA). Hence, this corresponds to having a
second stage problem for each scenario. The expectation of the solutions of these second
stage problems are weighed by the probabilities and used as input in the objective function
of the first stage model. Thereby we yield the deterministic equivalent model formulation.
It can be seen in its entirety in Appendix A.1.
5.2
L­shaped solution approach
Slyke and Wets (1969) were the first to propose the L-shaped method as a solution tech-
nique for two-stage stochastic programming problems. It is based upon Benders decompo-
sition (Benders, 1962) where the mixed integer problem is decomposed into two problems:
a master problem (MP) and a set of subproblems (SPs). Here, the L-shaped method ex-
ploits the structure of the two-stage stochastic programming problem such that the first
stage decision variables and constraints belong in the master problem while the second
stage decision variables and constraints belong in the subproblem such that there is one
subproblem per scenario. The solutions obtained from the SPs are used to generate cuts
that are added to the MP. There are two types of cuts: If an SP is infeasible, a feasibility
cut is added. If on the other hand the SP is feasible, an optimality cut is added. The
master problem and the subproblem are then solved iteratively to gradually tighten the
bounds on the solution to the master problem until the optimal solution is found. In the
original form both Benders decomposition and the L-shaped method rely on the variables
in the subproblems to be continuous such that duality theory can be used to create cuts
from the solutions to the subproblems. However, as all variables in the problem we are
considering are integer, we need a different approach to generate the cuts. Based upon
the work of Laporte and Louveaux (1993) we instead derive the cuts by exploiting our
knowledge of the structure of the problem.
5.2.1
Decomposed model
We start by decomposing the problem into the master problem and the subproblem. We
consider two equivalent formulations of the subproblem. The first formulation is similar to
the second stage problem in the deterministic equivalent model. In the second formulation,
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
17
==PAGE:30==
the subproblem is restated as a shortest path problem with resource constraints.
By
restating it, a labeling algorithm as described by Irnich and Desaulniers (2005) can be
used to solve the subproblem. In the computational study we test the L-shaped method
using each of the subproblem formulations.
After the two versions of the subproblem have been formulated, we exploit the structure
of the subproblem to state two propositions that aid the formulation of the cuts in the
master problem. When the master problem has been formulated, we at last consider some
implementation details.
Subproblem stated as original second stage problem
In order to formulate the subproblem in line with the original model (SP-O), all second
stage decisions and requirements are simply put into the subproblem. This means that the
subproblem consist of (4.6)-(4.13) or in the deterministic equivalent form (A.1b), (A.5)-
(A.7) and (A.10)-(A.12) as seen in appendix A.1.
Subproblem restated as a shortest path problem with resource constraints
The subproblem is now reformulated to a shortest path problem with resource constraints
(SP-SPPRC). In order to reformulate it, we first need to introduce some notation: Let
G = (N, A) define an acyclic graph such that N is the set of nodes and A is the set of
arcs. Each node is defined by a set (o, g, t) ∈N consisting of a wind turbine o ∈O, a
task g ∈Go in the wind turbine and a starting time t ∈T SS of the task. There is an
arc between two nodes if it is feasible for the vessel to take on the task defined by the
second node after completing the task defined by the first node. Define a decision variable
γ(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′) which equals one if the vessel traverse the edge from node (o, g, t) to node
(o′, g′, t′), and zero otherwise. That is, after completing task g ∈G in wind turbine o ∈O
starting at time t ∈T SS, the vessel continues to task g′ ∈G in wind turbine o′ ∈O
starting at time t′ ∈T SS.
Let (os, gs, ts) be a source node in the network where the vessel is chartered and therefore
starts while (oe, ge, te) is a sink node where the vessel ends as the chartering period ends.
Here os and oe are artificial wind turbines and correspondingly gs and ge are artificial
maintenance tasks in these wind turbines.
Further, let ts be the starting time of the
particular chartering period of the vessel, while te is the ending time of the particular
chartering period of the vessel. A chartering period begins in time period t ∈T SS if
yRS
t
= 1 while yRS
t−1 = 0 for t > 1 and if yRS
t
= 1 if t = 1. As there might be more than
one chartering period, we define a set of artificial starting nodes N START ⊂N and a set
of artificial ending nodes N END ⊂N. This means that while the original second stage
constraint (4.10) aided by the ySS-variables ensure that no maintenance tasks are taken on
in periods where the vessel is not chartered and prohibit overlapping maintenance tasks,
this is now encoded in the underlying acyclic graph. Let CN
(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′) be the cost of
traversing the arc from node (o, g, t) ∈N to node (o′, g′, t′) ∈N, corresponding to the
cost of the vessel taking on maintenance task (o′, g′, t′). Hence, we have
CN
(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′) = CD
o′,g′,t′
{(o, g, t), (o′, g′, t′)} ∈A
(5.1)
Lastly, define the ending time of a task g ∈G when starting at time t to be Eg,t. As
we are considering one subproblem per scenario, we may the extend the notation with an
index ω ∈Ωto capture this such that we have Nω, Aω, γ(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ω, CN
(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ω,
and Eg,t,ω
Employing this notation, the subproblem for scenario ω ∈Ωcan be formulated as
18
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:31==
min Qω(ˆyRF , ˆxA) =
∑
{(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′)}∈Aω
CN
(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ωγ(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ω +
∑
o∈O
∑
s∈So
CP
o,s,ωαo,s,ω
(5.2)
st.
∑
(o,g,t)∈Nω
γ(os,gs,ts),(o,g,t),ω = 1
{os, gs, ts} ∈N START
(5.3)
∑
(o,g,t)∈Nω
γ(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ω −
∑
(o,g,t)∈Nω
γ(o′,g′,t′),(o,g,t),ω = 0
(o′, g′, t′) ∈Nω
(5.4)
∑
(o,g,t)∈Nω
γ(o,g,t),(oe,ge,te),ω = 1
{oe, ge, te} ∈N END
(5.5)
∑
{(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′)}∈Aω
Qk,g,ωγ(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ω ≤ˆxA
k
k ∈K
(5.6)
∑
g′∈Go,ω
∑
t′∈T SS
∑
(o,g,t)∈Nω
Ps,g,ωγ(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ω + αo,s,ω = 1
o′ ∈O, s ∈So′
(5.7)
αo,s,ω ∈{0, 1}
o ∈O, s ∈So
(5.8)
γ(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ω ∈{0, 1}
{(o, g, t), (o′, g′, t′)}
∈Aω|t′ > Eg,t,ω
(5.9)
The objective function (5.2) minimizes the cost of traversing the arcs and thereby taking
on maintenance tasks together with the penalty cost of neglecting to maintain failing
sub-assemblies, equivalent to the objective function (4.6) in the original second stage
problem. The three first constraints (5.3)-(5.5) are related to the network flow constituting
the creation of the maintenance schedule: Constraint (5.3) ensures that the schedule is
started by forcing the flow to leave the dummy starting node of the first period the vessel
is chartered. Constraint (5.4) is a flow conservation constraint that states that if a task
is started then it must also be completed as the schedule proceeds with another task,
possibly the dummy ending node. At last constraint (5.5) ensures that the schedule of the
vessel ends in the dummy ending node of the last period the vessel is chartered. Next,
constraint (5.6) states that the vessel cannot take on a task if the required sub-assemblies
are not ordered in the first stage. This corresponds to constraint (4.9) in the original
second stage model. Constraint (5.7) imposes a penalty in the objective function if a sub-
assembly is not maintained. This corresponds to constraint (4.10) in the original second
stage problem. Lastly, constraints (5.8) and (5.9) establish the binary domains of the
variables.
Master problem
In accordance with the L-shaped method, the solutions of the subproblems are employed
to create cuts in the master problem thereby narrowing the solution space. Based upon
the subproblem formulations, we formulate two propositions which aid the formulation of
these cuts. The first of these propositions is stated as follows:
Proposition 5.2.1. Both the SP-O given by (4.6)-(4.13) and the SP-SPPRC given by
(5.2)-(5.9) have a feasible solution for a feasible set of first stage decisions.
Proof. The first stage model given by (4.1)-(4.5) establishes the domain on the first stage
decisions in terms of xA and yRF . That is, xA
k ≥0 and yRF
p
∈{0, 1}.
Let ∀k ∈K, ˆxA
k = 0 and ∀p ∈T FS, ˆyRF
p
= 0. Then a feasible solution to the SP-O is
∀t ∈T SS, yRS
t
= 0 and ∀o ∈O, s ∈So, αo,s = 1. A feasible solution to the SP-SPPRC is
∀{(o, g, t), (o′, g′, t′)} ∈A, ω ∈Ω, γ(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′),ω = 0 and ∀o ∈O, s ∈So, αo,s = 1.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
19
==PAGE:32==
Increasing either the value of any ˆxA
k , ˆyRF
p
or both has the effect that the feasible region
in both subproblem formulations increases and therefore the solution to the SP-O and
SP-SPPRC is still feasible. This means that ∀k ∈K, ˆxA
k ≥0 and ∀p ∈T SS, ˆyRF
p
∈{0, 1},
the subproblem has a solution. Thereby we have shown that for all feasible solutions to
the first stage problem, a feasible solution exist to both of the subproblem formulations,
SP-O and SP-SPPRC.
Put in other words the trivial solution of not maintaining any sub-assemblies at all is
always feasible regardless of the first stage decisions. The second proposition we shall use
is formulated as:
Proposition 5.2.2. If ∀p ∈T FS, ˆyRF
p
≤ˆy′RF
p
and ∀k ∈K, ˆxA
k ≤ˆx′A
k then Qω(ˆyRF
p
, ˆxA
k ) ≤
Qω(ˆy′RF
p
, ˆx′A
k )
Proof. For the SP-O we have that when the first stage decisions ˆyRF
p
and ˆxk are used
as input to the subproblem it affects the right hand side of constraint (4.8) and (4.9),
respectively. Flipping any of the yRF
p
from zero to one increases the feasible region in
the SP-O, as the vessel is chartered for more time periods t ∈T SS in the second stage,
thereby having the potential to increase the amount of maintenance tasks the vessel can
execute. Increasing xA
v,k extends the feasible region too as the upper bound on constraint
(4.9) is loosened.
When the first stage decisions ˆyRF
p
and ˆxk are used as input to the SP-SPRRC it affects
the set of nodes N and the right hand side of constraint (5.6).
Flipping any of the
yRF
p
from zero to one have the potential to increase the amount of nodes that can be
reached in the network between a starting node {os, gs, ts} ∈N START and an ending
node {oe, ge, te} ∈N END, thus extending the feasible region. Increasing xA
v,k extends the
feasible region too as the upper bound on constraint (5.6) is loosened. This means that
given that ∀p ∈T FS, ˆyRF
p
≤ˆy′RF
p
and ∀k ∈K, ˆxA
k ≤ˆx′A
k , the right hand side of each
constraint (5.6) and the set of reachable nodes is smaller than or equal for Qω(ˆyRF
p
, ˆxA
k )
compared to Qω(ˆyRF
p
, ˆxA
k ).
Thus, all feasible solutions to Qω(ˆyRF
p
, ˆxA
k ) must also be feasible for Qω(ˆyRF
p
, ˆxA
k ) for both
SP-O and SP-SPRRC while the reverse is not necessarily true.
Hence, the notion is that adding more resources to the second stage model extends the
solution space which means that a new optimal solution will be at least as good as the
optimal solution to a more resource restricted second stage model. The implication of
proposition 5.2.1 is that we have a relative complete recourse such that we do not need any
feasibility cuts but only optimality cuts in the L-shaped method. The property described
by proposition 5.2.2 is used to formulate these optimality cuts.
In order to be able to formulate the cuts, we introduce a bit more notation: The set
of iterations in the L-shaped algorithm is given as B and Qb,ω is the solution to the
subproblem in scenario ω ∈Ωin iteration b ∈B. Define ly
b,p to be a variable that is one if
it holds that yRF
b,p ≤ˆy′RF
b,p
in iteration b ∈B for time period p ∈T FS, and zero otherwise.
Define another variable lx
b,k to be one if it holds that xb,k ≤ˆx′
b,k in iteration b ∈B for
sub-assembly type k ∈K , and zero otherwise. Further, the variable hb is one if either
∀p ∈T FS at least one of ly
b,p takes the value one or ∀k ∈K at least one of lx
b,k takes the
value one in iteration b ∈B, and zero otherwise. Lastly, let θ represent the cost of the
solution to the second stage model.
20
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:33==
min MP
=
∑
p∈T F S
(
CS
p zS
p + CR
p yRF
p
)
+
∑
k∈K
CA
k xA
k + θ
(5.10)
st.
(4.2) −(4.5)
∑
ω∈Ω
ΠωQb,ωhb ≤θ
b ∈B
(5.11)
yFS
p
≥ly
b,p(ˆyb,p + 1)
b ∈B, p ∈T FS
(5.12)
xA
k ≥lx
b,k(ˆxb,k + 1)
b ∈B, k ∈K
(5.13)
∑
p∈T F S
ly
b,p +
∑
k∈K
lx
b,k ≥(1 −hb)
b ∈B
(5.14)
ly
b,p ∈{0, 1}
b ∈B, p ∈T FS
(5.15)
lx
b,k ∈{0, 1}
b ∈B, k ∈K
(5.16)
hb ∈{0, 1}
b ∈B
(5.17)
θ ∈R+
0
(5.18)
The objective function 5.10 minimizes the cost of the first stage decisions of chartering the
vessel and ordering the sub-assemblies as well as the cost of the second stage decisions from
the subproblems. It is subject to constraints (4.2)-(4.5) from the original first stage model
together with a new set of constraints which establish the optimality cuts: Constraint
(5.11) sets the cost of the second stage solution obtained from the subproblems, θ, for all
hb that are equal to one. Then we have that constraint (5.12) sets ly
b,p to be zero unless yp
takes a value that is strictly greater than ˆyb,p. Correspondingly, constraint (5.13) sets lx
b,k
to zero unless xA
k takes a value that is strictly greater than ˆxA
b,k. Constraint (5.14) binds
hb to take the value zero unless at least one of the ly
b,p-variables or the lx
b,k-variables equals
one. Lastly, constraints (5.16)-(5.18) establish the domain of the variables.
5.2.2
Implementation details
This part is dedicated to a closer look into the details of the implementation of the L-shaped
solution method and how we exploit the two different formulations of the subproblem to
obtain a solution which is returned to the master problem.
Valid inequalities
To aid the performance of the L-shaped method two valid inequalities are introduced in the
master problem. A lower bound on the total length of the chartering period of the vessel
can be obtained by considering the scenario where the duration of the set of maintenance
tasks that repair all failures in a situation with perfect weather is lowest. Let this value
be DMAX. Then a valid inequality is
∑
p∈T F S
yFS
p
≥DMAX
(5.19)
Hence, knowing that the model always has the incentive to fix failures no matter how late
they occur in the maintenance period, the chartering period must always be long enough
to accommodate the scenario where the failures takes the shortest time to maintain.
We may also obtain an upper bound on the amount of sub-assemblies that are ordered.
Consider the scenario with the largest number of failure occurrences of sub-assembly of
type k ∈K and let this value be represented by F MAX
k
. Then a valid inequality is
xA
k ≤F MAX
k
∀k ∈K
(5.20)
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
21
==PAGE:34==
That is, there is no need to order more sub-assemblies of each type k ∈K than required
in the worst case scenario for that type of sub-assembly.
Algorithm for the L­shaped method
In algorithm 1 the pseudo code of the implementation of the L-shaped method is shown. In
line 6 to 21 is the main loop of the L-shaped method. It begins with solving the MP in line
7. Then the SPs are solved in line 9 to 13 using the solution from the MP as input. The
corresponding optimality cuts are added to the MP in form of constraints (5.11)-(5.17)
in line 14. The upper bound on the entire problem is obtained as the minimum value
of the current upper bound and the value of the current MP solution plus the current
SPs solutions weighed by their probabilities in line 15. The size of the optimality gap is
checked in line 16. If it is below a threshold of 0.0001 the algorithm terminates, otherwise
it proceeds with a new iteration.
Algorithm 1 Integer L-shaped method to solve the decomposed model
1: continue := true
▷Initialization
2: counter b := 0
3: lower bound LB := −∞
4: upper bound UB := ∞
5: while continue do
6:
increment counter b := b + 1
7:
solve MP to obtain MP ∗, yRF∗and xA∗
▷Solve the master problem
8:
LB := MP ∗
9:
tempUB := MP ∗−θ∗
10:
for ω ∈Ωdo
▷Solve the subproblems
11:
solve SP to obtain Qω(yRF∗, xA∗)
12:
tempUB := tempUB + ΠωQω(yRF∗, xA∗)
13:
end for
14:
add constraints (5.11)-(5.17) to MP for iteration b
15:
UB := min{UB, tempUB}
16:
if UB−LB
LB
≤0.0001 then
▷Check size of optimality gap
17:
continue := false
18:
end if
19: end while
20: return MP and SP solutions
Before main loop of the algorithm starts in line 5, the SPs are solved with an artificial large
input of yRF∗and xA∗. This is in order to create an initial cut from the subproblems that
hopefully gives a reasonable set of optimality cuts such that the algorithms terminates in
fewer iterations.
Using bounds from the solution of SP­O
When solving the SP-O for larger instances, it might be that each subroblem takes long
time to solve to optimality and therefore each iteration of the L-shaped method end up
being so time consuming that only a few iterations can be performed within reasonable
time. To avoid this we can impose a time limit on the computation time when solving
the SP-O. Then let Qω(yRF∗, xA∗) be the lower bound obtained from the SP-O, while
Qω(yRF∗, xA∗) is the upper bound.
Then replace line 11-12 in algorithm 1 with the
following three lines:
22
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:35==
1: solve SP to obtain Qω(yRF∗, xA∗) and Qω(yRF∗, xA∗)
2: Set Qω(yRF∗, xA∗) = Qω(yRF∗, xA∗)
3: tempUB := tempUB + ΠωQω(yRF∗, xA∗)
Labeling algorithm for the SP­SPPRC
The dynamic labeling algorithm is based upon the generic programming algorithm shown
in Irnich and Desaulniers (2005) and with inspiration from Stålhane, Halvorsen-Weare,
et al. (2019). It hinges on the maintenance of two sets of labels: Let U be the set of un-
processed labels and P the set of processed labels. Further, let L0 be the label representing
the initial source node (os, gs, ts).
Each label, L, contains the following information: Let η be the last node in the path, c
be the accumulated cost of the path, let qk be the quantity of each type of sub-assemblies
k ∈K required for the path, let ∆be the set of assigned maintenance tasks, and lastly
let tE be the ending time of the last node in the path. Now, let the notation η(L), c(L),
qk(L), ∆(L) and tE(L) refer to the respective data of label L.
Algorithm 2 Labeling algorithm to solve the SP-SPPRC
Require: Gω = (Nω, Aω)
1: U := {L0}
▷Initialization
2: P := ∅
3: while U ̸= ∅do
4:
let tE−MIN be the minimum ending time of a label in U
▷Dominance step
5:
let U′ = {∀L ∈U|tE(L) = tE−MIN}
6:
remove all dominated labels in U′
7:
while U′ ̸= ∅do
8:
L = removefirst(U′)
▷Extension step
9:
let (o, g, t) be the last node of the path represented by label L
10:
extended = false
11:
for each node (o′, g′, t′) : ((o, g, t), (o′, g′, t′)) do
12:
let L′ be a new label extending L to node (o′, g′, t′)
13:
if L′ is resource feasible then
14:
U = U ∪{L′}
15:
extended = true
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
if extended = false then
19:
P = P ∪{L}
20:
end if
21:
end while
22: end while
23: return Label in P with minimum cost as the SP-SPPRC solution with cost
Qω(yRF ∗, xA∗)
We now go through the pseudo code of the labeling algorithm as shown in algorithm 2.
The two first lines initializes the two sets of labels. Then while there are still unprocessed
labels left, the algorithm proceed as follows: We take advantage of the underlying acyclic
graph by considering only the subset of U′ ⊂U that has the minimum ending time tE−MIN
in each iteration. Because the graph is acyclic, we know that we need only consider each
time period t ∈T SS at most once. All dominated labels are removed from U′ in line 6
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
23
==PAGE:36==
and next we try to extend each of the labels in U′. Let removefirst(U′) be a function
that returns the first label in U′. For all edges going out from the end node η(L), L is
extended to L′ if L′ is resource feasible. If the extension of a label L was not successful,
the path cannot be further extended and is therefore added to the set of processed labels
P. The algorithm terminates when all labels have been processed and the cost, c(L), of
the label L ∈P with minimum c(L) is returned as Qω(y∗, x∗).
Next, we go into details with the dominance criterion and the label extension starting
with the former. Under the assumption that it is always better to maintain as many tasks
as possible, we say that a label L dominates another label L′ if |∆(L)| > |∆(L′)|. In
the dominance step all labels dominated by the label L with the maximum |∆(L)|, are
discarded. Notice that if the dominance step is neglected the algorithm will process all
resource feasible paths through the underlying graph.
When a label L is extended with a new end node η(L) = (o′, g′, t′), we say that it is
resource feasible if the ending time of the vessel chartering period is not exceeded and if
the quantity of each type of sub-assembly does not exceed the ordered quantity. Before we
formalize this consider a set of resource functions extending the resources that are stored
as information in each label L when extending it to a new label L′:
fη
((o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′))(L′) = (o′, g′, t′)
(5.21)
fc
((o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′))(L′) = c(L) + CN
(o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′)
(5.22)
fqk
((o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′))(L′) = qk(L) + Qk,g′
(5.23)
f∆
((o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′))(L′) = ∆(L) ∪g′
(5.24)
ftE
((o,g,t),(o′,g′,t′))(L′) = tE(L) + Eg′,t′
(5.25)
Then we define L to be resource feasible if the two conditions
qk(L)
∀k ∈K
(5.26)
and
tE(L) ≤te|(oe, ge, te) ∈N END
(5.27)
are observed.
24
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:37==
6
Computational study
In this section the computational study is presented. An instance generator is implemented
such that instances for the testing can be generated. The static data for instance gener-
ation is presented in section 6.1. An important part of the instances are the stochastic
parameters based upon the scenarios. The generation of scenarios are considered sepa-
rately in section 6.2 where we also go into details with the calculation of the stochastic
parameters. In section 6.3 the stability of scenario generation technique is considered by
testing the sensitivity of the solutions in terms of in-sample and out-of-sample stability. At
last the performance of the L-shaped method using SP-O and the L-shaped method using
SP-SPPRC are tested against an implementation of the deterministic equivalent model
formulation in a commercial solver in section 6.4. All tests carried out in the computa-
tional study are conducted with an Intel Xeon Gold 6244, CPU 2 × 3.6 GHz processor, 16
cores, and 384 Gb RAM. The commercial optimization solver, Gurobi Version 9.5 using
the standard parameter setting, have been used to solve the instances.
6.1
Static data for instance generation
In order to generate data instances that are as realistic as possible, the data used as input
is stemming from previous research in the offshore wind industry. We will go into details
with the input data and how it is processed by the instance generator here. One of the big
challenges within the research field of maintenance of offshore wind turbines is that data
for wind power equipment is not easy to come by in the wind industry. The wind turbine
manufacturers tend to retain data related to the reliability of the wind turbines (Hameed
et al., 2011). Therefore some of the data dates years back, however, as the data does not
alter the model, the results obtained when solving the models with the tests instances still
holds.
6.1.1
Vessel
Starting with the data for the jack-up vessel, the input data needed is related to the
chartering cost of the vessel and under which weather conditions the vessel can operate.
These data are presented in table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Characteristics of the jack-up vessel
Wave limit [m]
Wind limit [m/s]
Start up cost [€]
Day rate [€]
Set up time [h]
2.5
35
595000
178500
24
The operational data in terms of the significant wave height and wind speed which sets
the limits on when the jack-up vessel can operate, are based upon data from Gundegjerde
et al. (2015). The start up cost and the day rate is based upon Dinwoodie et al. (2015).
The costs have been converted from British pounds to euros using an exchange rate of
1.19. The set up time is an assumption.
6.1.2
Wind turbines
Using the same source for the power curve of the wind turbines as Dinwoodie et al. (2015),
the power curve of Vestas V90 3.0 MW is employed based upon the data collected by
Staffeli (2012) where the power curve is given in discrete values. It is illustrated in figure
6.1. The electricity price is set to 107.1€/MWh in accordance with the test case from
Dinwoodie et al. (2015) and a conversion rate of 1.19 from British pounds to Euros.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
25
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.1: Power curve of a Vestas V90 3.0 MW wind turbine.
6.1.3
Maintenance of sub­assemblies
The data related to the failures include failure rates of the sub-assemblies, maintenance
time and cost of the sub-assemblies. These data are summarized in table 6.2. They all
stem from Carroll et al. (2016).
The failure rates are for major replacements and we
assume that these require a jack-up vessel to be maintained. The rate for a blade are in
Carroll et al. (2016) called ’Blades’, so assuming that this means that one of the blades
will fail with a probability of 0.001, the rate is divided by 3 assuming that failure of each
blade is independent from failures of the other blades.
Table 6.2: Characteristics related to the failures and maintenance of the sub-assemblies
Sub-assembly
Failures [/turbine/year]
Cost [€]
Maintenance time [h]
Pitch
0.0010
14000
25
Generator
0.0950
60000
81
Gearbox
0.1540
230000
231
Blade
0.0003
90000
288
Hub
0.0010
95000
298
Transformer
0.0010
70000
1
6.1.4
Weather
The weather data is obtained from FINO (2012) which is a data bank for meteorological
and oceanographic data collected from three different wind farm locations. In this thesis
the data from Fino1 which has been in operation since 2003 and is sited in the North sea
near the German cost on a water level of 30 m. The data bank for Fino1 has wind speed
and wave height data corresponding to 16 years, where a year begins 1st of April and ends
31st of March the following year. Missing values are handled by employing a cubic spline
as Dinwoodie et al. (2015) suggest in their reference cases where they also use data from
Fino1. The method used in this thesis to obtain the monotonic cubic spline is based on
Fritsch and Carlson (1980), but the details of the method are outside the scope of this
project.
26
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:39==
6.2
Scenario generation
This section is dedicated to the details of how the scenarios are generated and the stochastic
parameters are calculated. The uncertainty in the problem we are considering consists
of which kind of weather it turns out to be during the failure horizon and which sub-
assemblies that fail in the each wind turbine. The weather and the failures are assumed
independent of each other. The weather and the failures are first handled separately by
generating a set of failure scenarios ΩF and a set of weather scenarios ΩW . These two
sets of scenarios are combined into the final set of scenarios Ω.
I.e.
if |ΩF | = 3 and
|ΩW | = 2, then |Ω| = 2 · 3 = 6. This situation is depicted in figure 6.2. The corresponding
probabilities of the scenarios are obtained using the law of total probability.
Figure 6.2: Scenario tree with two weather scenarios and three failure scenarios. The probabilities
of each of the resulting six scenarios are obtained using the law of total probability.
In section 6.2.1 and in section 6.2.2 we take a look at how the failure scenarios and the
weather scenarios are generated, respectively. Finally, the preprocessing of the stochastic
parameters for the mathematical model is considered in section 6.2.3.
6.2.1
Failure scenarios
For the generation of failure scenarios, we start by formulating a simple degradation model
for each sub-assembly which we can sample from using Monte Carlo sampling. As we wish
to simulate the real underlying distribution as precisely as possible, we sample a much
larger set of failure scenarios, ΩF−SAMP , than the set of scenarios, ΩF , we want to end
up with. Then a clustering algorithm is used to reduce the number of scenarios to the
number we initially wanted.
Stochastic process modeling degradation of sub­assemblies
One type of degradation model that has been used to predict the remaining useful life-
time (RUL) of components in wind turbines is a Wiener process with linear drift (Hu
et al., 2018). We will exploit the flexibility of this stochastic process and adapt it to the
failure rates of the sub-assemblies that we have as input with the assumption that all sub-
assemblies of the same type in all wind turbines degrade with the same rate. In the model
we shall interpret the failure rate as a degradation rate of each individual sub-assembly.
A wiener process with drift parameter µ and diffusion parameter σ is given as
Xt = µt + σWt
(6.1)
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
27
==PAGE:40==
where Wt ∼N(0, u) and W0 = 0 such that it follows that Xt ∼N(µu, σ2u) (Pinsky
and Karlin, 2011). Here we shall assume u = 1 such that Wt follows a standard normal
distribution.
Subsequently, the time T to first pass a threshold l follows the inverse
Gaussian distribution
T ∼IG
(
l
µ,
( l
σ
)2)
(6.2)
If we consider a sub-assembly which has just been replaced, T, can be interpreted as the
remaining useful life time of the sub-assembly given that the drift parameter, µF , is the
mean failures per time unit, the diffusion parameter, σF , expresses the uncertainty of the
prediction and the threshold l is 1.0 where a failure has occurred. Further, the remaining
useful lifetime of the sub-assembly when observing the sub-assembly at a point in time
where the degradation level is m is
RULm ∼IG
(
l −m
µF
,
(l −m
σF
)2)
(6.3)
Figure 6.3 shows an example of the failure prediction model for the gearbox. It has a
failure rate of 0.154 per year and in the model we assume a diffusion of 0.05. The gray
graph shows the development of the degradation until a point in time shown by the red
dot where the gearbox is four years old and it has a degradation level of m1 = 0.548. The
coloured graphs shows possible developments of the degradation of the gearbox during the
next years until it passes a threshold of 1.0 where it fails. The expected time until this
threshold is passed is 2.94 years.
The underlying inverse Gaussian distribution for this situation is depicted in figure 6.4(a).
The dashed red line indicate the mean, µR
1 = 2.94, of the distribution. Due to the long
right tale of the distribution, it does not coincide with the mode. If we considering the
forest green realization in figure 6.3, and follow it up to a 6 years, the degradation level
is m2 = 0.845. Then expected time to failure is µR
2 = 1.00 years. The notion is that the
closer we come to the point of failure, the more precise the predictions become.
Scenario generation
The idea of Monte Carlo sampling is to first draw a number u between 0 and 1 uniformly at
random and then evaluate the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the distribution
one wish to simulate. This means that we need to evaluate the CDF of the inverse Gaussian
distribution. It is given as
FIG(u; µR, σR) = Φ
(√
σR
u
( u
µR −1
))
+ exp
(2σR
µR
)
Φ
(
−
√
σR
u
( u
µR + 1
))
(6.4)
Each failure scenario consist of a set of parameters T R
o,s,ω which is the failure time of
sub-assembly s ∈So in wind turbine o ∈O in failure scenario ω ∈ΩF .
28
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.3: Illustration of the degradation model of a gearbox with a failure rate of 0.154 per
year. The gray graph shows how the level of degradation has evolved during a time period of 4
years from when the gearbox was first installed. After four years the degradation level at the red
point is 0.548. The coloured graphs shows possible realizations of the further degradation. The
mean time from the red point until the degradation level passes a level of 1.0 and the gearbox fails
is 2.94 years.
(a) When m1 = 0.548 the expected time until fail-
ure is the mean, µR
1 = 2.94 years, of the inverse
Gaussian distribution.
(b) When m2 = 0.845 the expected time until
failure is the mean, µR
1 = 1.00 years, of the inverse
Gaussian distribution.
Figure 6.4: Illustration of the underlying inverse Gaussian probability distribution of the remain-
ing useful lifetime for the gearbox in the situation depicted in figure 6.3 for two different values
of the degradation level m corresponding to a realization that consist of the gray graph together
with the forest green graph.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
29
==PAGE:42==
Algorithm 3 Scenario generation using Monte Carlo simulation
Require: ΩF−SAMP , µF and σF
1: l := 1
▷Initialization
2: ΠF−SAMP
ω
=
1
|ΩF −SAMP | ∀ω ∈ΩF−SAMP
3: T R
o,s,ω := 0 ∀o ∈O, s ∈So, ω ∈ΩF−SAMP
4: for all ω ∈ΩF−SAMP do
5:
for all o ∈O do
6:
for all s ∈So do
7:
randomly draw m ∼U[0, l]
▷Sample current degradation level
8:
µR = l−m
µF
9:
σR =
( l−m
σF
)
10:
randomly draw u ∼U[0, 1]
▷Sample from inverse Gaussian distribution
11:
T R
o,s,ω = ⌊FIG(u; µR, σR)⌋
12:
end for
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return T R and ΠF−SAMP
To get the best simulation of the underlying distribution, we generate a much higher
number of failure scenarios than what is computationally tractable for the optimization
model to solve. Let this large set of sampled failure scenarios be given as ΩF−SAMPL =
{1, 2, ..., NF−SAMPL} where NF−SAMPL is the size of this sample set. We assume that all
scenarios in ΩF−SAMP are equiprobable. That is, for all ω ∈ΩF−SAMP the probability
of realization is ΠF−SAMP
ω
=
1
|ΩF −SAMP |. Algorithm 3 shows the pseudocode of how the
set of scenarios are generated. It takes the failure rate of each sub-assembly s ∈S, µF
s as
input together with the diffusion parameter σF
s and a large sample set of failure scenarios
ΩF−SAMPL.
In line 1 to 3 the algorithm is initialized. Then the main part of the algorithm are line 4 to
14. For each failure scenario in the sample set ΩF−SAMP , we consider each sub-assembly
s ∈So in each wind turbine o ∈O. As the level of degradation, m, for each sub-assembly
is unknown we will sample this value uniformly at random between 0 and l = 1 in line 7.
The parameters of the corresponding inverse Gaussian distribution are determined in line
8 and 9. Then a random number u is sampled uniformly at random in line 10 and the
CDF of the inverse Gaussian distribution is evaluated in line 11 to achieve the RUL for
the sub-assembly. Notice that we round down the value since the time are discretized in
the mathematical model.
After the algorithm has finished we have achieved the time of failure, T R, for all sub-
assemblies in all wind turbines in all failure scenarios in the sample set, ΩF−SAMP , and
their corresponding equiprobable probabilities, ΠF−SAMP .
Scenario reduction
When a large sample set of failure scenarios, ΩF−SAMP , has been generated we need to
reduce the number of scenarios to an amount that is computationally tractable for the
model to be solved. We define this set of failure scenarios as ΩF−SAMP . Let the size of
it be NF . While we reduce the set of scenarios, we want to preserve the properties of the
real underlying probability distribution such that the reduced set of scenarios hopefully
represents the outcome space in the real world. For this we shall use a partition based
clustering algorithm known as the k-medoid algorithm as it is described in Reynolds et
al. (2006).
The idea behind the algorithm is, given a data set D, to greedily cluster
30
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:43==
data points in D that are similar together in a cluster. The number of clusters is given
beforehand as k. Each cluster of data points is represented by a medoid. This is the
data point in the cluster that minimizes the distance to all other data points within that
cluster. This differs from the well known k-means clustering algorithm where a centroid,
which is the point in the center of each cluster, not necessarily belonging to the data
set D, represents each cluster. I.e. the coordinates of the centroid is the mean of the
coordinates of the data points belonging to the cluster. By using medoids rather than
centroids smoothening of the original data points in the cluster is avoided.
Algorithm 4 k-medoid clustering alghorithm
Require: a set of data points D and the desired number of clusters k
1: assign k data points in D to be the initial medoids
▷Initialization
2: while medoids are not fixed do
3:
assign each data point in D to the closest medoid
4:
update medoid in each cluster to data point that minimizes ∑
j∈Ci dist(i, j)
5: end while
6: return medoids and the assignment of data points
The pseudocode of the k-medoid clustering algorithm is shown in algorithm 4. Let k be
the number of clusters we desire. This corresponds to the number of scenarios, so we may
say that k = NF . Let the distance between two data points i and j in D be given as
dist(i, j). Define Ci to be the cluster data point i ∈D belongs to.
Like other clustering algorithms it is initialized in line 1 by selecting k data points to be
the initial medoids. In line 3 each data point is assigned to the closest medoid and in
line 4 the medoid in each cluster is updated. Line 3 and 4 are repeated until the step of
updating medoids in line 4 does not change the medoids, hence these are fixed.
As the failure times, T R, representing the the failure scenarios are discrete we shall use the
manhattan distance, dist(i, j) = |i −j|, as distance measure in the clustering algorithm
when reducing the sample set of failure scenarios, ΩF−SAMP , to the final set of failure
scenarios, ΩF . The returned medoids are the subset of scenarios that we assign to ΩF .
The probability of each scenario ω in ΩF is set equal to the sum of the probabilities of the
scenarios that belong to the cluster represented by ω.
6.2.2
Weather scenarios
For the weather scenarios we have historical data available which we will use as the sample
set of weather scenarios, ΩW−SAMP . In order to obtain the final set of scenarios, ΩW , we
use the same clustering algorithm as used when reducing the failure scenarios ΩF−SAMP
to ΩF .
Scenario generation
For the weather scenarios time series of wind speed and wave height from FINO 1 is used
(FINO, 2012). Let the 16 years of historical weather data represent the sample set of
weather scenarios, ΩW−SAMP , such that this set consist of 16 different weather scenarios.
The weather scenarios in ΩW−SAMP are equiprobable, such that the probability associated
with each weather sceanrio ω ∈ΩW−SAMP is ΠW−SAMP
ω
=
1
|ΩW −SAMP |.
Scenario reduction
Depending on how many scenarios we want in the data instance, we may want to choose
just a subset of the weather scenarios in ΩW−SAMP and use as ΩW . In order to select the
subset of weather scenarios that best represent the entire sample set of weather scenarios,
we use the same k-medoid clustering algorithm shown in algorithm 4 as when we reduced
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
31
==PAGE:44==
the number of failure scenarios. For the weather scenarios where each point in the time se-
ries are fractional values, we use the euclidean distance, dist(i, j) =
√
(i −j)2, as distance
measure in the clustering algorithm. Just as for the failure scenarios, the probability for
each of the scenarios, ω, in the reduced set of weather scenarios, ΩW , is the sum of the
probabilities of the weather scenarios which were assigned to the cluster that is represented
by ω in the clustering algorithm.
Figure 6.5 and 6.6 illustrate how ΩW−SAMP has been reduced to a set of weather scenarios
ΩW consisting of three scenarios. Both figures contain both the time series in the entire
length as well as a figure of the time series in May in order to give a closer impression
of the time series within one month. Figure 6.5 shows the time series of the significant
wave height, while figure 6.6 shows the wind speed.
The colored time series are the
weather scenarios that has been chosen while the gray graphs in the background represent
weather scenarios that were not selected as medoids in the clustering algorithm.
The
selected weather scenarios correspond to the weather years 2005/2006 in blue (ω = 1),
2007/2008 in orange (ω = 2) and 2017/2018 in green (ω = 3). 13 of the weather scenarios
in ΩW−SAMP belong to the cluster represented by the weather year 2005/2006, so it has
a probability of Π1 = 13
16. Only 1 of the weather scenarios in ΩW−SAMP belong to the
cluster represented by the weather year 2007/2008, so it has a probability of Π2 =
1
16.
Lastly, the probability of the weather scenario represented by weather year 2017/2018 is
Π3 = 2
16 as two scenarios belong to its cluster.
6.2.3
Preprocessing of stochastic parameters
Using the realization of failures that occur in each wind turbine together with the real-
ization of the weather as input, the stochastic parameters can be preprocessed to prepare
the stochastic input set and parameters for the stochastic optimization model.
First let the set of tasks in each wind turbine, Go,ω be empty if no failures are occurring
within the failure horizon, H, and contain one task if any failure is occurring within the
failure horizon, H. Hence, each wind turbine has at most one task. Formally, we define
a failure to occur if T R
o,s,ω ≤H. From this it follows that the entire set of tasks in each
scenario ω ∈Ω, Go,ω, consist of all the tasks in the wind turbines Gω = ∪
o∈O Go,ω.
Define the binary parameter determining whether a sub-assembly s ∈So in wind turbine
o ∈O is a part of a task g ∈Go,ω in scenario ω ∈Ωor not as
Ps,g,ω =
{
1
If
T R
o,s,ω ≤H|o ∈O, s ∈So, g ∈Go,ω
0
Otherwise
(6.5)
I.e. if a sub-assembly in a wind turbine fails within the failure horizon, then there exists
a task for this wind turbine and the sub-assembly is a member of it.
We have another parameter related to the tasks, namely Uk,g,ω. Let KU
s,k be a parameter
that is one if the sub-assembly s ∈S is of type k ∈K. Then we obtain the number of
sub-assemblies of type k ∈K needed in task g ∈Gω in scenario ω ∈Ωas
Uk,g,ω =
∑
s∈S
Ps,g,ωKU
s,k
(6.6)
The ending time of a maintenance task g ∈Go,ω given that it started in time period
t ∈T SS in scenario ω ∈Ω, Eg,t,ω is calculated taking the length of the task together with
the weather in terms of wind speed and significant wave height as input. The length of
each task is the total maintenance time of the sub-assemblies in the task together with a
32
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:45==
(a) Illustration of the time series of the significant wave height during the entire weather
year
(b) Illustration of the time series of the significant wave height in May.
Figure 6.5: Illustration of the time series of the significant wave height that has been chosen
for ΩW using the k-medoid algorithm from the sample set of weather scenarios, ΩW −SAMP . The
colored graphs are the time series of the weather scenarios that were selected while the gray graphs
in the background are the time series of the weather years that were not selected. The blue graph
corresponds to weather year 2005/2006 (ω = 1), the orange is 2007/2008 (ω = 2) and the green is
2017/2018 (ω = 3). The associated probabilities are Π1 = 13
16, Π2 =
1
16 and Π3 =
2
16.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
33
==PAGE:46==
(a) Illustration of the time series of the wind speed during the entire weather year
(b) Illustration of the time series of the wind speed in May.
Figure 6.6: Illustration of the time series of the wind speed that has been chosen for ΩW using the
k-medoid algorithm from the sample set of weather scenarios, ΩW −SAMP . The colored graphs are
the time series of the weather scenarios that were selected while the gray graphs in the background
are the time series of the weather years that were not selected. The blue graph corresponds to
weather year 2005/2006 (ω = 1), the orange is 2007/2008 (ω = 2) and the green is 2017/2018
(ω = 3). The associated probabilities are Π1 = 13
16, Π2 =
1
16 and Π3 =
2
16.
34
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:47==
set up time of the jack-up vessel which is rounded to an integer number of second stage
time periods. I.e. as we shall consider days as the granularity of the time in the second
stage, it is rounded an integer number of days. The time series of the wind speed and
the significant wave height can be transformed into a parameter, BW
t , that is one if the
wind speed and the wave height is below the wind and wave limits of the jack-up vessel
in time period t ∈T SS and zero otherwise. Then a maintenance task can be carried out
when the sum of a series of consecutive BW
t s matches the length of the maintenance task.
If a maintenance task begins at an earlier point in time than a consecutive series of BW
t s
matching the task length, then the vessel will wait for the first coming series of BW
t s and
then execute the maintenance task. E.g. consider a maintenance task g ∈Gω with a
duration of 3 and say that an appropriate series of consecutive BW
t s for the length of this
task starts in time period t = 3. Then both Eg,1,ω = 5 and Eg,3,ω = 5.
The parameter, Ag,t,t′,ω, stating whether a maintenance task g ∈Gω starting in time period
t ∈T SS is still ongoing in time period t′ ∈T SS can be obtained from Eg,t by
Ag,t,t′,ω =
{
1
if
t′ ≤Eg,t,ω
0
otherwise
(6.7)
The latest time t ∈T SS a task g ∈Gω can begin, is defined as
Lg,ω = max
t {t|Eg,t,ω ≤|T SS|}
(6.8)
The two stochastic cost parameters CP
o,s,ω and CD
o,g,t,ω both hinges on the calculation of
the price of the lost power production in downtime periods of the wind turbine.
Let
powerPrice(t, t′, ωW ) be a function that takes the starting time t and the ending time
t′|t ≤t′ ≤H of a downtime period of a wind turbine as input as well as the weather
scenario ωW ∈ΩW .
Then powerPrice(t, t′, ωW ) determines the amount of MWh the
turbine could have produced in scenario ωW ∈ΩW using the power curve shown in figure
6.1 and multiply this with the electricity price of 107.1€/MWh.
Employing the powerPrice() function, the penalty cost, CP
o,s,ω, of not maintaining sub-
assembly s ∈So in turbine o ∈O, can be calculated as
CP
o,s,ω =





powerPrice(T R
o,s,ω, H, ω)
if
T R
o,s,ω ≤T E
powerPrice(1, H, ω)
if
T E ≤T R
o,s,ω ≤H
0
otherwise
(6.9)
where we let T E be the point in time where cost of the lost electricity production is lower
than the cost associated with the maintenance, i.e. the chartering of the vessel and the
sub-assembly.
The downtime cost of maintenance task g ∈Go,ω in wind turbine o ∈O given that the
maintenance started at time t ∈T SS in scenario ω ∈Ω, CD
o,g,t,ω, is determined as
CD
o,g,t,ω =
{
powerPrice(t, Eg,t,ω, ω)
if
Eg,t,ω < T R−MIN
o,s,ω
powerPrice(T R−MIN
o,s,ω
, Eg,t,ω, ω)
if
otherwise
(6.10)
where T R−MIN
o,s,ω
= min{T R
o,s,ω|∀s ∈So}. That is, the downtime cost of the wind turbine
corresponds to the price of the lost power production in the maintenance period where
the wind turbine is shut down unless the sub-assemblies in the wind turbine that has the
earliest failure time failed before the maintenance started. In that case the downtime cost
is calculated as the price of the lost power production from the time of the earliest failure
and until the maintenance task ends.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
35
==PAGE:48==
6.3
Stability testing for scenarios
When the stochasticity of the stochastic model has been approximated by discretizing the
outcome space into scenarios, it is relevant to consider how well the scenario generation
technique simulate the real outcome space. For this we will look at the stability of the
solutions by testing the in-sample and out-of-sample stability as suggested by Kaut and
Wallace (2007).
The in-sample stability test provide an insight on how stable the solutions are when using
different scenario trees generated by the same scenario generation technique. We can for-
malize this by letting NST be the number of scenario trees that are generated using the dis-
cretization, {˘ξt,k}, to simulate the stochastic process, {˜ξt}. Further, let F(yRF∗
k
, xA∗
k ; ˘ξt,k)
be the objective function of the optimal solution yRF∗
k
and xA∗
k
when the optimization prob-
lem is solved with each of the scenario trees k = 1, 2, ..., NST . Then we have in-stability
as the criteria that
F(yRF∗
k
, xA∗
k ; ˘ξt,k) ≈F(yRF∗
l
, xA∗
l ; ˘ξt,l)
k, l ∈{1, 2, ..., NST }
(6.11)
That is, the objective value of the optimal solution should be approximately the same
independent of which scenario tree is used as input for the stochastic parameters.
In the out-of-sample testing, the aim is to test how stable the solution of all scenario trees
generated with the same input is when solving the optimization model using the true
distribution of the uncertainties as input. Let F(yRF∗
k
, xA∗
k ; ˜ξt) be the objective function
when the true distribution of the uncertainties as input. Then out-of-sample is the criteria
that
F(yRF∗
k
, xA∗
k ; ˜ξt) ≈F(yRF∗
l
, xA∗
l ; ˜ξt)
k, l ∈{1, 2, ..., NST }
(6.12)
By testing the in-sample and out-of-sample stability, we can check the stability in the
generation of the scenarios. All test instances have 25 wind turbines and a maintenance
horizon of 26 weeks. The time is discretized into weeks in the first stage and days in the
second stage. An overview of the attributes of the scenario trees used in the test sets can
be seen in table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Attributes of the test sets of scenarios used in the stability testing
Total no. of scenarios
No. of weather scenarios
No. of failure scenarios
4
2
2
9
3
3
16
4
4
25
5
5
36
6
6
49
7
7
64
8
8
81
9
9
100
10
10
121
11
11
We consider the in-sample stability in section 6.3.1 and the out-of-sample stability in
section 6.3.2, before we conclude upon the stability testing in section 6.3.3.
36
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:49==
6.3.1
In­sample stability
For the in-sample stability test 15 instances are generated of each size of the scenario tree
spanning from 4 to 121 scenarios as shown in table 6.3. We use coeﬀicient of variation
(COV) to measure how spread the objective values are between the 15 instances when
they have been solved by the commercial solver using the deterministic equivalent model
formulation.
Figure 6.7: Coeﬀicient of variation (COV) of the objective value for each test case for the in-
sample-testing. It fluctuates without clear tendency with COV between 8.93 % and 9.67 % from
4 to 36 scenarios. Then it decreases for 49 and 64 which gives the lowest COV of 7.86 %. The
COV increases from 81 to 100 where it is 9.04%. Last value is 8.85 % for 121 scenarios. Hence, all
values lie within a range of 2.00 %.
In figure 6.7 the COV is plotted as a function of the number of scenarios. We see how the
value fluctuates between 8.93 % and 9.67 % for instances where the number of scenarios
are between 4 and 36. Then the COV decreases for the next to points corresponding
to instances with 49 scenarios and 64 scenarios. The minimum COV of 7.86 % for the
in-sample stability test is obtained when using 64 scenarios. The COV increases for the
next two instances with scenario set of 81 and 100 where the value is 9.04%. At last a
COV of 8.85 % is obtained when using instances with 121 scenarios. Altogether the COV
lie within a range of 2.00 %, but there is no clear tendency in the plot that imply how
many scenarios we should use when solving the optimization model to get robust first
stage decisions. We would expect to have seen a convergence toward a low COV as the
number of scenarios increases. When we do not see this here it suggests that the scenario
generation technique is not stable for the tested sizes of scenario sets. It could be due to
the double stochasticity that we have in the generation of failures where we both draw m
uniformly at random and then also sample the corresponding failure time randomly. This
could be interesting to investigate further in a future study.
In figure 6.8 the average computational time is plotted together with a 0.95 confidence
band. Here it is seen how the computational time increases with the number of scenarios.
Considering that the complexity of the optimization problem increases with the number
of scenarios, this is expected. The confidence band also widens as the number of scenarios
increases. Hence, we expect that the computational time will fall within a wider interval
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
37
==PAGE:50==
for instances with a larger set of scenarios compared to instances with fewer scenarios.
6.3.2
Out­of­sample stability
Since it is not possible to test the solution of the real distribution of the stochastic pa-
rameters, this real distribution has been approximated by generating a scenario tree with
2000 scenarios. These have been generated using all historical weather data as 16 weather
scenarios and pairing each of these with 125 failure scenarios. We consider the same 15
set of instances as in the in-sample stability testing, where they were solved to optimality.
The first stage solutions from these optimal solutions are now fixed and using the large
scenario tree of 2000 the second stage solutions are obtained for the approximated real
distribution of the stochastic parameters.
Again we use COV as a measure to illustrate the variation between the 15 instances for
each size of the scenario trees. This is plotted in figure 6.9. We see how the COV decreases
from 2.20 % to 0.19 % for when going from 4 to 36 scenarios. The COV for 49 scenarios
is a bit higher with a value of 0.39 %. From 64 to 100 scenarios it decreases to the lowest
value of 0.09 %. Rounding affects the COV to be 0.09 % for 121 scenarios although slightly
higher than for 100 scenarios. Although the COV does not decrease monotonically, we
still see a tendency that more scenarios lead to a lower COV.
6.3.3
Conclusion of stability testing
The in-sample stability test leaves a cluttered picture and based upon the in-sample sta-
bility test alone it is hard to tell which size of the scenario tree would be the best. If we
carry out the test for even larger scenario trees it could be that we would discover a conver-
gence toward lower values of the COV. However, as we see the average computational time
increase dramatically with the number of scenarios, so this is likely not computationally
tractable. Locking the value of m to an observed value could therefore be an option in a
future study. The out-of-sample test on the other hand suggest that a higher number of
scenarios yield a low COV between the objective values. In fact the COV for all instances
with a scenario tree consisting of 25 scenarios or above has a COV below 1.0 %.
In the optimization problem the most important decisions are the first stage decisions
while the second stage decisions are there to provide support for the first stage decisions.
This means that emphasize is on obtaining robust solutions for the real distribution of the
stochastic parameters which is achieved with low values of COV in the out-of-sample test.
The lowest values of the COV in the out-of-sample testing is for the two largest scenario
sets of 100 and 121, respectively. If we look at the COV in the in-sample testing then it
is lower for 121 scenarios than for 100 scenarios. Bearing all of this in mind we choose to
have a scenario tree of 121 in the remaining computational studies in this thesis.
6.4
Performance testing of the solution techniques
We now look into the performance of the three implemented solution methods: The di-
rect deterministic equivalent model formulation (MIP) solved with the commercial solver,
the L-shaped method using SP-O as subproblem with a time limit of 20 seconds on each
subproblem and where the master problem and subproblem are solved with the commer-
cial solver, and the L-shaped method using SP-SPRRC as subproblem where the master
problem is solved with the commercial solver while the subproblems are solved using the
labeling algorithm. The gap limit has been set to 0.0001 for all solution methods and a
maximum computational time of 12 hours (corresponding to 43200 seconds) is imposed.
Table 6.4 shows an overview of the test instances used in the performance testing. Two
different lengths, 13 and 26, of the maintenance season is used.
The number of wind
38
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.8: Average computational time shown with 0.95 confidence band for each test case for
the in-sample-testing. The average computational time increases with the number of scenarios and
the confidence band widens with the number of scenarios. So we expect the computational times
to fall within a wider range as the number of scenarios increase.
Figure 6.9: Coeﬀicient of variation (COV) of the objective value for each test case for the out-
of-sample-testing. The COV decrease from the largest value of 2.20 % to 0.19 % from 4 to 36
scenarios. For 49 scenarios the COV is 0.38 % from which it decreases to a COV of 0.09 %. The
last COV for 121 scenarios is slightly higher although rounding yields 0.09 %.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
39
==PAGE:52==
turbines span from 25 to 150 with increments of 25. The average number of tasks and
failures over the set of 121 scenarios are also shown together with their 0.95 confidence
intervals. The same seed has been used for the random number generator to generate
the sets which is the reason why the average number of tasks is the same independent of
the number of weeks in the maintenance season. We see that the confidence intervals are
rather narrow indicating that we expect that the number of tasks will not vary much from
scenario to scenario. This might seem odd as we have used the clustering algorithm to yield
failure scenarios that are as dissimilar as possible, but here it is important to remember
that the manhattan distance between the scenarios are calculated as the distance between
failure times of the sub-assemblies and not the number of failures or tasks.
Table 6.4: Attributes of the test instances used in the performance testing
Instance name
No. weeks
No. wind turbines
Avg. no. tasks
Avg. no. failures
B3T25W13S121
13
25
15.36 ± 0.48
23.82 ± 1.39
B3T50W13S121
13
50
35.09 ± 0.60
55.73 ± 1.60
B3T75W13S121
13
75
54.09 ± 0.87
84.18 ± 2.77
B3T100W13S121
13
100
74.45 ± 1.30
127.18 ± 3.83
B3T125W13S121
13
125
87.73 ± 1.06
141.55 ± 2.97
B3T150W13S121
13
150
107.91 ± 1.06
178.73 ± 2.76
B3T25W26S121
26
25
15.36 ± 0.48
23.82 ± 1.39
B3T50W26S121
26
50
35.09 ± 0.60
55.73 ± 1.60
B3T75W26S121
26
75
54.09 ± 0.87
84.18 ± 2.77
B3T100W26S121
26
100
74.45 ± 1.30
127.18 ± 3.83
B3T125W26S121
26
125
87.73 ± 1.06
141.55 ± 2.97
B3T150W26S121
26
150
107.91 ± 1.06
178.73 ± 2.76
The overall results of the performance test are summarized in table 6.5. When running
the performance test, the L-shaped method using SP-SPPRC has severe diﬀiculties solving
the subproblems in a short time, so it only manages to go through a few iterations within
12 hours. Therefore it has been left out of the table. We go through the results of the MIP
and the L-shaped using SP-O before we discuss the performance of the L-shaped method
using SP-O and the L-shaped method using SP-SPPRC and what might limit these in
detail.
In the table we see that the MIP manages to solve one instance, the one with 25 turbines
and 26 weeks. When we compare the computational time of this instance with the instances
of the same size in the in-sample stability test it is seen that the computational time falls
outside the confidence band.
Maybe the chosen seed for the random generator yields
a test set of instances that are particularly hard. It could also be that the sample set
in the in-sample stability test is too small to give a general impression of the expected
computational time of the instances.
Neither of the other instances are solved to optimality by the MIP or the L-shaped method
with SP-O, but when considering the size of the gap, the MIP performs better than the
L-shaped method with SP-O. It appears that both methods perform slightly better on the
instances with a large number of turbines and tasks.
40
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:53==
Table 6.5: Summarized solutions from the performance testing
MIP
L-shaped
Instance name
Primal [€]
Gap [%]
Time [s]
Primal [€]
Gap [%]
Time [s]
B3T25W13S121
21,587,137.58
0.0002
43200
23,631,587.27
0.1111
43200
B3T50W13S121
52,561,323.41
0.0033
43200
58,015,977.00
0.1151
43200
B3T75W13S121
78,057,476.20
0.0035
43200
87,059,472.75
0.1182
43200
B3T100W13S121
116,035,120.27
0.0024
43200
127,701,944.87
0.1076
43200
B3T125W13S121
135,105,973.70
0.0024
43200
146,510,425.18
0.0927
43200
B3T150W13S121
170,964,872.13
0.0022
43200
182,844,484.40
0.0788
43200
B3T25W26S121
22,305,927.25
0.0000
2841
25,123,342.31
0.1621
43200
B3T50W26S121
53,221,517.98
0.0038
43200
64,747,648.48
0.2355
43200
B3T75W26S121
81,563,806.19
0.0042
43200
101,526,448.81
0.2517
43200
B3T100W26S121
121,226,986.20
0.0032
43200
148,265,933.72
0.2314
43200
B3T125W26S121
137,862,496.98
0.0034
43200
166,354,430.22
0.2144
43200
B3T150W26S121
180,109,581.66
0.0024
43200
208,229,132.42
0.1692
43200
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
41
==PAGE:54==
To understand more about the behaviour of the L-shaped method with SP-O the bounds
on the objective value have been plotted as a function of computational time in figure 6.10
for the instance of 25 wind turbines and 13 weeks. We see how the lower bound which is
the objective of the master problem changes more slowly than the upper bound consisting
of the cost of the first stage decisions (that is the master problem objective subtracted the
value of the largest active cut, θ) together with the cost of the corresponding second stage
decisions (which is the objective value of the subproblems) weighed by their probabilities.
Figure 6.10: Upper and lower bound on the objective function for the instance with 25 wind
turbines and a time period of 13 weeks.
By inspection of a test run of the solutions in each iteration of the L-shaped method it
appears that it has a ’wiggling’ behaviour where it changes each variable one at a time,
going through all sorts of combinations of the variables that lead to the lowest cost in
the master problem.
This is partly prevented by solving the subproblems first for an
artificially large amount of sub-assemblies and length of vessel chartering period, such
that it has a warm start. With this we hope to bring down the number of iterations before
optimality is reached. Figure 6.11 illustrates why we are interested in bringing the number
of iterations down. It shows the computational time for each iteration for the instance
with 25 wind turbines and a 13 week planning horizon. The blue curve shows the time
spent on each iteration in total, while the red curve shows the time spent on solving the
master problem in each iteration. Although it fluctuates there is a clear tendency that the
computational time increase with the number of iterations. It is also clear that after about
1000 iterations, the time spent on the master problem accounts for approximately 50 %
of the total computational time. The overall picture is that this fraction increase with
each iteration. We know that in each iteration of the L-shaped method |K| + |T FS| + 1
variables and |K| + |T FS| + 2 constraints are added to the master problem. As the size
of the master problem grows be expect to be increasingly diﬀicult to solve. Therefore it
makes sense that the computational time spent on solving the master problem increase
as the size of the problem increase with each iteration. Notice that for this instance the
computational time of the subproblems does not reach the imposed limit of 20 seconds in
any of the iterations as the difference between the total computational time and the time
spent on solving the master problem is never above 20 seconds.
42
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.11: Computational time spent on each iteration for the instance with 25 wind turbines
and a time period of 13 weeks.
The blue graph shows the total time spent in each iteration,
while the red curve shows the time spent on the master problem in each iteration.
Although
the computational time fluctuates there is a clear tendency that it increases with the number of
iterations.
As promised we now consider the L-shaped method with SP-SPPRC as subproblem in
more detail. Recall that the labeling algorithm goes through all resource feasible paths
if the dominance step is neglected in the algorithm. Therefore it is desirable to have a
strong dominance criterion that can remove a lot of the feasible paths such that as few
paths as possible through the underlying acyclic graph are considered and the algorithm
can iterate quickly through the network. When inspecting the behaviour of the labeling
algorithm it appears that a large amount of the paths maintain the same number of tasks.
Therefore the dominance criterion does not bring down the number of paths suﬀiciently
for the labeling algorithm to be eﬀicient to a point where it beats solving the subproblems
using the commercial solver.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
43
==PAGE:56==
44
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:57==
7
Concluding remarks and future research
In this thesis the jack-up vessel chartering problem with sub-assembly ordering is con-
sidered. The problem is formulated as a two-stage stochastic programming model with
uncertainties associated with the weather conditions and the failures of sub-assemblies.
The first stage decisions entail when and for how long to charter in the jack-up vessel as
well as how many of each type of sub-assembly to order in order to support the execution
of maintenance tasks in wind turbines. In the second stage the uncertainty is revealed and
the second stage decisions are when to schedule the maintenance tasks given the weather
conditions and the occurrences of failures.
An integer L-shaped solution method is developed where the problem is decomposed into
two: The master problem consist of the second stage decisions and requirements together
with cuts generated from the solution of the subproblem. Two versions of the subproblem
are considered. The first consist of the second stage decisions and requirements as stated
in the original model. The second also consist of the second stage decisions, but in a
reformulated version where it is stated as a shortest path resource constrained problem
(SPPRC). This is in order to exploit the labeling algorithm for SPPRC problems.
An instance generator has been implemented based on an analysis of relevant data from
previous research related to maintenance of offshore wind turbines.
A crucial part of
each instance is the stochastic parameters. Scenarios are generated for the weather using
historical data. A predictive stochastic process model for the degradation of sub-assemblies
is formulated using a Wiener process with linear drift. By exploiting the properties of this
model, the failure time of each sub-assembly can be sampled to generate the scenarios for
the failures. Both weather scenarios and failure scenarios are reduced from a large sample
set to the final number of scenarios using a clustering algorithm. The final set of scenarios
are the combination of the reduced weather scenarios and the reduced failure scenarios.
A sensitivity analysis of the stability of the scenario generation method by testing in-
sample stability and out-of-sample stability is conducted. For the 15 test instances, the
COV of the objective function as a function of the number of scenarios in the in-sample
test shows no clear tendency. This could be due to the double stochasticity when sampling
the failure times. In the out-of-sample test the COV of objective function indicates that
a higher number of scenarios yield a more stable objective value.
Based upon the stability testing, a large set of 121 scenarios are used when generating the
instances for the performance testing. For the performance testing the direct implemen-
tation of the deterministic equivalent formulation of the stochastic progrmming problem
(MIP), the L-shaped method using bounds from solving SP-O with a commercial solver
and the L-shaped method using SP-SPPRC solved with the labeling algorithm are con-
sidered. The performance of these are tested by solving the test instances. It turns out
that the L-shaped method using SP-SPPRC is so slow that only a few iterations of the
L-shaped method is performed within the time limit. This is due to the labeling algorithm
where the dominance criterion is too weak to cut away enough resource feasible paths for
the algorithm to be eﬀicient. The L-shaped method using SP-SPPRC performs better
but cannot compete with the MIP. The L-shaped method exhibit a ’wiggling’ behaviour
where only only one of a few first stage variables change value in each iteration. With each
iteration of the algorithm, the computational time increases which is probably related to
the increasing size of the master problem.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
45
==PAGE:58==
For future research there is still a large potential in looking into the details of the imple-
mentation of the dynamic labeling algorithm in order to speed it up. Here it is essential
to work on the dominance step and see if the structure of the problem can be exploited
even better in order to cut away more paths that will not lead to optimal solutions. This
will finish the dynamic labeling algorithm in fewer iterations and thus speed it up which
is critical as the size of the subproblem grows with the size of the underlying graph as the
vessel is chartered for more time periods. Even though a more eﬀicient solution method
for the subproblem aids the overall eﬀiciency of the integer L-shaped solution method, it
is still necessary to look into the ’wiggling’ behaviour of the L-shaped solution method.
Maybe it is possible to deduce stronger cuts can such that the algorithm terminates in
fewer iterations before the master problem grows to an extend where each iteration takes
unreasonably long time to solve. As an alternative to the integer L-shaped method, one
could also consider decomposing the problem using Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition. This
could allow for the chartering of more than one jack-up vessel. The subproblems could
still be formulated as a shortest path resource constrained problem which could be advan-
tageous if a more eﬀicient dominance criterion in the labeling algorithm is developed.
Another thing to look into is the m parameter in the failure prediction model. By locking
this value when sampling from the inverse Gaussian distribution, we could simulate that
the current state of each sub-assembly is known when the planner charter in the jack-up
vessel ahead of the maintenance season. This could serve as a basis for a study comparing
condition-based maintenance with predictive maintenance.
While we have focused on the development of exact solution methods to solve the problem
at hand in this thesis, it could also be interesting to work with the same problem from
more of a practitioners point of view and do a specific case study of different kind of wind
farms. This could entail investigating whether the chartering period of the vessel changes
if there are different types of wind turbines in the wind farm. I.a. since the 3 MW Vestas
V90 wind turbine were developed, the capacity of the latest wind turbines has reached
12-15 MW, and although there undoubtedly still are many smaller wind turbines in the
production, it would be interesting to see how a mix between these older wind turbines
with lower capacity and newer wind turbines with higher capacity affects the scheduling
of maintenance.
46
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:59==
A
Complete model formulation
A.1
Deterministic equivalent model
A.1.1
Notation used in the model
Deterministic sets
T FS
Set of time periods in the planning horizon of the first stage where T FS =
{1, 2, 3, ...}
T SS
Set of time periods in the planning horizon of the second stage where
T SS = {1, 2, 3, ..., R|T FS|} and R is a factor defining the relation between
the granularity of the time periods in the first stage and the second stage
O
Set of wind turbines
S
Set of sub-assemblies
So ⊂S
Set of sub-assemblies in wind turbine o ∈O
K
Set of sub-assembly types
Stochastic sets
Ω
Set of second stage scenarios
Gω
Set of maintenance tasks in scenario ω ∈Ω
Go,ω ⊂Gω
Set of possible maintenance tasks for wind turbine o ∈O in scenario ω ∈Ω
Deterministic parameters
CS
p
Start up cost of chartering the vessel for a period starting at time period
p ∈T FS
CR
p
Day rate cost of chartering the vessel for a time period p ∈T FS
CA
k
Cost of ordering a sub-assembly of type k ∈K
Stochastic parameters
CD
o,g,t,ω
Downtime cost of maintenance task g ∈Go,ω in wind turbine o ∈O given
that the maintenance started at time t ∈T SS in scenario ω ∈Ω
CP
o,s,ω
Penalty cost of not maintaining sub-assembly s ∈So in turbine o ∈O in
scenario ω ∈Ω
Uk,g,ω
Number of sub-assemblies of type k ∈K that is required for maintenance
task g ∈Gω in scenario ω ∈Ω
Ps,g,ω
One if sub-assembly s ∈S is a part of maintenance task g ∈Gω in scenario
ω ∈Ω, zero otherwise
Eg,t,ω
Time period in the second stage where maintenance task g ∈Gω ends
given that it started at time t ∈T SS in scenario ω ∈Ω
Ag,t,t′,ω
One if maintenance task g ∈Gω started at time t ∈T SS is still ongoing at
time t′ ∈T SS in scenario ω ∈Ω, zero otherwise
First stage variables
zS
p
One if the chartering period of the vessel starts in time period p ∈T FS,
zero otherwise
yRF
p
One if the vessel is chartered at time p ∈T FS, zero otherwise
xA
k
Quantity of sub-assemblies of type k ∈K that is ordered
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
47
==PAGE:60==
Second stage variables
yRS
t
One if the vessel is chartered in time period t ∈T SS, zero otherwise
βo,g,t,ω
One if the vessel starts maintenance task g ∈Go,ω in wind turbine o ∈O
at time t ∈T SS in scenario ω ∈Ω, zero otherwise
αo,s,ω
One if sub-assembly s ∈So in wind turbine o ∈O is not maintained in
scenario ω ∈Ω, zero otherwise
A.1.2
Complete deterministic equivalent model
min
∑
p∈T F S
(
CS
p zS
p + CR
p yRF
p
)
+
∑
k∈K
CA
k xA
k
(A.1a)
+
∑
ω∈Ω
Πω

∑
o∈O
∑
g∈Go,ω
∑
t∈T SS
CD
o,g,t,ωβo,g,t,ω +
∑
o∈O
∑
s∈So
CP
o,s,ωαo,s,ω


(A.1b)
st.
yRF
1
≤zS
1
(A.2)
yRF
p
−yRF
p−1 ≤zS
p
p ∈T FS|p > 1
(A.3)
yRS
t
= yRF
p
p ∈T FS, t ∈T SS|
(p −1)R + 1 ≤t ≤pR
(A.4)
∑
o∈O
∑
g∈Go,ω
∑
t∈T SS|
t≤Lo,g,ω
Ag,t,t′,ωβo,g,t,ω ≤ySS
t′
t′ ∈T SS, ω ∈Ω
(A.5)
∑
o∈O
∑
g∈Go,ω
∑
t∈T SS|
t≤Lo,g,ω
Uk,g,ωβo,g,t,ω ≤xA
k
k ∈K, ω ∈Ω
(A.6)
∑
g∈Go,ω
∑
t∈T SS|
t≤Lo,g,ω
Ps,g,ωβo,g,t,ω + αo,s,ω = 1
o ∈O, s ∈So, ω ∈Ω
(A.7)
zS
p , yRF
p
∈{0, 1}
p ∈T FS
(A.8)
xA
k ∈Z+
0
k ∈K
(A.9)
ySS
t
∈{0, 1}
t ∈T SS
(A.10)
αo,s,ω ∈{0, 1}
o ∈O, s ∈So, ω ∈Ω
(A.11)
βo,g,t,ω ∈{0, 1}
o ∈O, g ∈Go,ω, ω ∈Ω,
t ∈T SS|t ≤Lo,g,ω
(A.12)
The objective function (A.1) comprise both the tactical decisions of the first stage model
and the operational decisions of the second model. The first part (A.1a) minimizes the
cost of the tactical maintenance decisions. The first term is the total cost of chartering
the vessel consisting in start up and day rate costs.
The second term is the cost of
ordering the sub-assemblies required for the maintenance tasks. Finally, the third term
is the expected cost of executing maintenance tasks supported by the given chartering
period(s) of the vessel and the number of ordered sub-assemblies. The second part (A.1b)
minimizes the cost of the operational decisions. The first term is the downtime cost related
to the execution of the maintenance tasks, while the second term is the penalty cost of
not maintaining a sub-assembly that fails during the time horizon. Constraints (A.2) and
48
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:61==
(A.3) links the variables related to vessel chartering such that a start up cost is imposed
for each period the vessel is chartered. Then constraint (A.4) maps the time periods in the
first stage with the granularity of the time periods in the second stage. Constraint (A.5)
states that the vessel can only be assigned to a maintenance task in a wind turbine if it
is chartered for the entire maintenance period. Further, it ensures that no maintenance
tasks are overlapping. Next, constraint (A.6) limits the number of sub-assemblies that
can be maintained by the quantity of sub-assemblies ordered in the first stage. Constraint
(A.7) ensures that a penalty is imposed in the objective function if a sub-assembly that
fails during the time horizon is not maintained. Lastly, constraints (A.8)-(A.12) establish
the binary and integral domains of the variables.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
49
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
Barlow, Euan et al. (2017). “A mixed-method optimisation and simulation framework
for supporting logistical decisions during offshore wind farm installations”. In: European
Journal of Operational Research 264, pp. 894–906. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2017.05.043.
Benders, J. F. (1962). “Partitioning procedures for solving mixed-variables programming
problems”. In: Numerische Mathematik 4.1, pp. 238–252. issn: 0029599X. doi: 10.1007/
BF01386316.
Broek, Michiel A.J. uit het et al. (July 2019). “Evaluating resource sharing for offshore
wind farm maintenance: The case of jack-up vessels”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 109, pp. 619–632. issn: 1364-0321. doi: 10.1016/J.RSER.2019.03.055.
Carroll, James, Alasdair McDonald, and David McMillan (June 2016). “Failure rate, repair
time and unscheduled O&M cost analysis of offshore wind turbines”. In: Wind Energy
19.6, pp. 1107–1119. issn: 10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.1887.
Dalgic, Yalcin et al. (2014). “Investigation of optimum jack-up vessel chartering strategy
for offshore wind farm O&M activities”. In: doi: 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2014.12.011.
Dinwoodie, Iain et al. (2015). “Reference cases for verification of operation and mainte-
nance simulation models for offshore wind farms”. In: Wind Engineering 39.1, pp. 1–14.
issn: 2048402X. doi: 10.1260/0309-524X.39.1.1.
Dogger Bank Wind Farm (2020). GE’s Haliade-X 14MW turbine to debut at Dogger Bank
C. url: https://doggerbank.com/press-releases/ges-haliade-x-14mw-turbine-
to-debut-at-dogger-bank-c/.
European Commission (2021a). Delivering the European Green Deal. url: https : / /
ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal/
delivering-european-green-deal_en.
– (2021b). Onshore and Offshore Wind. url: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/
renewable-energy/onshore-and-offshore-wind_en.
FINO (2012). FINO: datenbank. url: http://fino.bsh.de.
Fischetti, Martina and David Pisinger (2017). “Optimizing wind farm cable routing con-
sidering power losses”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 270, pp. 917–930.
doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2017.07.061.
Fritsch, F. N. and R. E. Carlson (Apr. 1980). “Monotone piecewise cubic interpolation”.
In: SIAM J. Numer. Anal.; (United States) 17:2.2, pp. 238–246. issn: 0036-1429. doi:
10.1137/0717021.
Gundegjerde, Christian et al. (Mar. 2015). “A stochastic fleet size and mix model for
maintenance operations at offshore wind farms”. In: Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies 52, pp. 74–92. issn: 0968090X. doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2015.01.
005.
Halvorsen-Weare, Elin, Christian Gundegjerde, et al. (Jan. 2013). “Vessel fleet analysis for
maintenance operations at offshore wind farms”. In: Energy Procedia. Vol. 35. Elsevier,
pp. 167–176. doi: 10.1016/j.egypro.2013.07.170.
Halvorsen-Weare, Elin, Inge Norstad, et al. (2017). “A metaheuristic solution method
for optimizing vessel fleet size and mix for maintenance operations at offshore wind
farms under uncertainty”. In: Energy Procedia 137, pp. 531–538. issn: 18766102. doi:
10.1016/j.egypro.2017.10.382.
Hameed, Z., J. Vatn, and J. Heggset (Aug. 2011). “Challenges in the reliability and
maintainability data collection for offshore wind turbines”. In: Renewable Energy 36.8,
pp. 2154–2165. issn: 0960-1481. doi: 10.1016/J.RENENE.2011.01.008.
50
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:63==
Hu, Yaogang et al. (2018). “A prediction method for the real-time remaining useful life of
wind turbine bearings based on the Wiener process”. In: Renewable Energy 127, pp. 452–
460. issn: 18790682. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2018.04.033.
Irawan, Chandra Ade et al. (Jan. 2017). “Optimisation of maintenance routing and schedul-
ing for offshore wind farms”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 256.1, pp. 76–
89. issn: 0377-2217. doi: 10.1016/J.EJOR.2016.05.059.
IRENA (2012). “Renewable Energy Technologies: Cost Analysis Series”. url: www.irena.
org/Publications.
Irnich, Stefan and Guy Desaulniers (2005). “Shortest path problems with resource con-
straints”. In: Column generation. Springer. Chap. 2, pp. 33–65.
Kaut, Michal and Stein W Wallace (2007). “Evaluation of scenario-generation methods
for stochastic programming”. In: Pacific Journal of Optimization 3.2, pp. 257–271. issn:
03787796.
Laporte, Gilbert and François V. Louveaux (Apr. 1993). “The integer L-shaped method
for stochastic integer programs with complete recourse”. In: Operations Research Letters
13.3, pp. 133–142. issn: 01676377. doi: 10.1016/0167-6377(93)90002-X.
Oersted (2019). Making green energy affordable: How the offshore wind energy industry
matured-and what we can learn from it. Tech. rep. url: https://orsted.com/en/
about-us/whitepapers/making-green-energy-affordable/1991-to-2001-the-
first-offshore-wind-farms.
Pinsky, Mark A. and Samuel Karlin (2011). “An Introduction to Stochastic Modelin:
Fourth Edition”. In: An Introduction to Stochastic Modeling: Fourth Edition, pp. 391–
446. doi: 10.1016/C2009-1-61171-0.
Ren, Zhengru et al. (2021). “Offshore wind turbine operations and maintenance: A state-
of-the-art review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 144. issn: 18790690.
doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2021.110886.
Reynolds, A. P. et al. (Dec. 2006). “Clustering rules: A comparison of partitioning and hi-
erarchical clustering algorithms”. In: Journal of Mathematical Modelling and Algorithms
5.4, pp. 475–504. issn: 15701166. doi: 10.1007/S10852-005-9022-1.
Seyr, Helene and Michael Muskulus (2019). “Decision support models for operations and
maintenance for offshore wind farms: A review”. In: Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 9.2.
issn: 20763417. doi: 10.3390/app9020278.
Shafiee, Mahmood (2015). “Maintenance logistics organization for offshore wind energy:
Current progress and future perspectives”. In: Renewable Energy 77.1, pp. 182–193. issn:
18790682. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2014.11.045.
Slyke, R. M. van and R. Wets (1969). “L-Shaped Linear Programs With Applications To
Optimal Control and Stochastic Programming”. In: SIAM Journal on Applied Mathe-
matics 17.4, pp. 638–663. issn: 00361399. doi: 10.1137/0117061.
Staffeli, Iain (2012). “Wind turbine power curves incorporating”. In:
Stålhane, Magnus, Kamilla Hamre Bolstad, et al. (2021). “A dual-level stochastic fleet
size and mix problem for offshore wind farm maintenance operations”. In: INFOR: In-
formation Systems and Operational Research 59.2, pp. 257–289. issn: 0315-5986. doi:
10.1080/03155986.2020.1857629.
Stålhane, Magnus, Marielle Christiansen, et al. (Oct. 2017). “Optimizing Jack-up vessel
strategies for maintaining offshore wind farms”. In: Energy Procedia. Vol. 137. Elsevier,
pp. 291–298. doi: 10.1016/j.egypro.2017.10.353.
Stålhane, Magnus, Elin Halvorsen-Weare, et al. (July 2019). “Optimizing vessel fleet size
and mix to support maintenance operations at offshore wind farms”. In: European Jour-
nal of Operational Research 276.2, pp. 495–509. issn: 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.
2019.01.023.
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
51
==PAGE:64==
Stålhane, Magnus, Hanne Vefsnmo, et al. (2016). “Vessel Fleet Optimization for Main-
tenance Operations at Offshore Wind Farms under Uncertainty”. In: Energy Procedia.
Vol. 94, pp. 357–366. doi: 10.1016/j.egypro.2016.09.195.
Ursavas, Evrim (2016). “A benders decomposition approach for solving the offshore wind
farm installation planning at the North Sea”. In: European Journal of Operational Re-
search 258, pp. 703–714. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2016.08.057.
WindEurope (2021). Mega trends in wind energy technology. url: https://windeurope.
org/intelligence-platform/product/mega-trends-in-wind-energy-technology/.
52
Optimization of maintenance schedules for offshore wind turbines
==PAGE:65==
