==PAGE:1==
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling
in yeast
Master thesis
DTU Health Technology
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
Master thesis
May, 2022
By
Lauge Naur Hansen - s193168
Danish title:
Nukleocytoplasmatisk O-mannose signalering i gГҰr
Project period:
November 10, 2021 - May 10, 2022 (35 ECTS)
Institute:
DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence
Collaborators:
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Lauge Naur Hansen, 2022 (Acrylic on canvas)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Copenhagen Center for Glycomics,
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, at the University of Copenhagen in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng., in Quantitative
Biology and Disease Modelling.
The scope of the project is in the crossfields of molecular biology, bioinformatics and data
science. The reader should have a basic knowledge in the areas of biology and statistics
to understand the topics covered in the report.
Lauge Naur Hansen - s193168
Signature
Date
ii
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Sugar-mediated nucleocytoplasmic signalling is conveyed by O-linked N-acetylglycos-
amine (O-GlcNAc) in most eukaryotes, but bakerвҖҷs yeast and fission yeast lack the O-
GlcNAc system and instead use O-linked mannose. However, the enzyme that catalyse
nucleocytoplasmic O-mannosylation is currently unknown.
Since nucleocytoplasmic O-GlcNAcylation is a master controller for a wide range of cel-
lular processes (e.g. nutrient sensing, metabolism and transcription), pinpointing the cy-
tosolic mannosyltransferase has potential to enhance the efficiency of yeast bioproduc-
tion.
With the aim to answer if the unknown enzyme adapted from enzymes in the secretory
pathway or is solely expressed in the cytosol, I investigate to what extend protein the lan-
guage model ESM-1b can be used to represent glycosylatable protein substrates in the
cytosolic and extracellular compartments. These glycosylation sites are primarily within in-
trinsically disordered regions, and I show that representations computed with the ESM-1b
model does not contain sufficient information on the hypothesised categories of glycosy-
lation substrates. This leads to a strong indication that the language model embeddings
cannot reliably be used directly as representations of substrates in the development of
glycosylation site prediction models.
Under nutrient deprivation, a Golgi resident putative mannosyltransferase, KTR2, has
been reported to use an alternative transcription start site and be expressed in the nucleus
and cytoplasm. Under the hypothesis that the unknown enzyme evolved in yeasts, I
analyse glycosyltransferase sequences for evolutionary cues that Ktr2p or related proteins
could act as nucleocytoplasmic mannosyltransferases. Furthermore, I make structural
alignments of known substrate binding pockets against the AlphaFold database to identity
novel candidates that may be unrelated to known glycosyltransferases.
I end up with a novel candidate, Ids2p, that I analyse for nucleocytoplasmic O-mannosyla-
tion activity with mass spectrometry. Unfortunately, the results are inconclusive because
the abundance levels for most of the cytosolic proteins are too low to detect in the sample,
and the nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling enzyme remains unidentified.
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ole Winther, Professor, Technical University of Denmark, Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science: Cognitive Systems
Main supervisor for masterвҖҷs thesis project
Hiren Jitendra Joshi, Associate professor, University of Copenhagen, Insititute for Cel-
lular and Molecular Medicine: Copenhagen Center for Glycomics
Daily co-supervisor for bioinformatic arm of masterвҖҷs thesis project
Adnan Halim, Associate professor, University of Copenhagen, Institute for Cellular and
Molecular Medicine: Copenhagen Center for Glycomics
Daily co-supervisor for laboratory arm of masterвҖҷs thesis project
Sergey Vakhrushev, Associate professor, University of Copenhagen, Institute for Cellular
and Molecular Medicine: Copenhagen Center for Glycomics
Performed the mass spectrometric analysis of my samples
Ida Signe Bohse Larsen, Postdoc, University of Copenhagen, Institute for Cellular and
Molecular Medicine: Copenhagen Center for Glycomics
Provided assistance during the initial phases of laboratory experiments
Dennis Madsen, Principal scientist, Novo Nordisk
Project mentor through the Novo Scholarship Programme 2022
iv
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Glycan biology background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim to identify the cytosolic O-mannosyltransferase
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Sequence analysis background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Protein sequence representation with language models
. . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Experimental primer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2
Methods and materials
15
2.1
Conservation analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2
Prediction of GDP-Man binding proteins with TMalign
. . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3
O-glycoproteomic and phosphoproteomic datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.4
Calculation of sequence representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.5
Extract chemically biased protein regions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.6
Classification models and estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.7
Yeast cell culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.8
Yeast cell lysis protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.9
SDS-PAGE, Coomassie protein stain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.10 Western blot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.11 Mass spectrometry sample preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.12 Concanavalin-A lectin weak affinity chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.13 Mass spectrometric analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.14 Mass spectrometric data analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3
Results
27
3.1
Loss of OGT enzyme and emergence of cytosolic O-mannosylation
. . . . 27
3.2
Conservation of the Ktr2p stem region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3
Conservation of putative alternative start sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.4
Structural alignment of GDP-Man binding pockets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.5
Classification of glycosites with language models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.6
Yeast cell lysis protocol assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3.7
Western blot for GFP-KTRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.8
O-linked glycoproteome in IDS2 KO strain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4
Discussion
53
4.1
Evolution of cytosolic O-mannosylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
v
==PAGE:8==
4.2
Limitations of using language models for glycosylation . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.3
Are cytosolic protein acceptor substrates distinct?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.4
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4.5
Sustainability of yeast glycosylation research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5
Conclusion
63
References
65
A Supplementary figures
75
vi
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Glycan biology background
Protein post-translational modifications render protein variants that expand the functional
proteome and introduce fast dynamics of protein function which is vital for cellular re-
sponses.
Oligo- and polysaccharides (i.e.
glycans) are found covalently attached to
nearly all (>85 %) secretory proteins [1, 2] and to the majority of proteins in the nucle-
ocytoplasmic compartment [3], which makes glycan modification the largest and most
diverse class of post-translational modifications (PTM). Glycan synthesis (hereafter gly-
cosylation) is initialised on proteins or lipid membrane anchors and elongated through
incremental addition of sugar moieties by enzymes in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
and Golgi apparatus producing diverse proteoforms with extended functionality [4вҖ“6].
In the majority of eukaryotic organisms, modification with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine
(O-GlcNAcylation) is the most prevalent type of glycosylation in the nucleocytoplasmic
compartment where it can act as nutrient sensor and regulate far-ranging cellular pro-
cesses [3, 7]. The OGT gene encodes for the O-GlcNAc transferase that catalyse the
addition of GlcNAc from UDP-GlcNAc to serine or threonine residues on substrate pro-
teins, whereas an O-GlcNAc hydrolase encoded for by OGA removes the sugar making
the modification dynamic. N-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domains on OGT
likely govern binding to OGT substrates [8] even though O-GlcNAcylation sites share no
obvious sequence recognition motifs.
Since the OGT enzyme is conserved in almost every eukaryotic species, nucleocytoplas-
mic O-GlcNAcylation plausibly provide for a vital cellular capacity; and species without
OGT homologous proteins should likely have developed alternative mechanisms with
the same cellular effect (e.g. plants can use O-fucose modifications in parallel to O-
GlcNAc [9]). Curiously, cytosolic O-GlcNAcylation is completely absent in both Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae (bakerвҖҷs yeast) and in Schizosaccharomyces pombe (fission yeast)
which both neither encode for OGT and OGA. Instead, these yeasts are reported to use
cytosolic O-mannosylation catalysed by a currently unknown enzyme [10, 11]. Further-
more, phosphorylation sites and the detected O-mannose sites on yeast proteins and O-
GlcNAcylation sites on human orthologs appear congruent [10] which suggests that the
yeast O-mannose protein regulation system acts similarly as the O-GlcNAcylation system
in other eukaryotes.
Currently, all yeast mannosyltransferases are assumed to be involved in glycosylation
within the secretory pathway, and thus likely act in glycan initiation or elongation de-
pending on their localisation pattern in combination with any substrate specificities. In
the ER lumen, initiation of secretory protein O-glycosylation is governed by a family of
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
1
==PAGE:10==
protein mannosyltransferases (Pmt1-7 protein). Along with other members of the GT-C
superfamily, the PMTs have multiple membrane-spanning domains and likely catalyse the
transfer of a mannosyl residue from a lipid linked donor substrate to Ser or Thr on protein
substrates to which the individual PMTs have separate preferences (cf. Loibl & Strahl [12]
for a review). Moreover, 36 additional mannosyltransferases are currently thought to re-
side in the Golgi apparatus and act in elongation of both N- and O-linked glycans [12вҖ“14].
Specifically, ten of these are multipass membrane proteins that can act in the synthesis of
a lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor used in N-linked protein glycosylation or in manno-
sylation of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor or inositol phosphorylceramides
(IPCs). In addition, 24 of the mannosyltransferases are membrane-tethered proteins in a
type II topology and can act in mannose polysaccharide synthesis and glycan elongation.
The mannosyltransferase Mnn5p is the only known soluble enzyme, and it localises to the
late Golgi apparatus where it elongates both N- and O-linked glycans. The protein Dpm1p
is membrane-tethered in a type IV topology facing the cytosolic compartment where it syn-
thesises the lipid-linked mannose donor substrate, dolichol-phosphate-ОІ-D-mannose.
1.2
Aim to identify the cytosolic O-mannosyltransferase
The primary aim of my masterвҖҷs project is to pinpoint the long sought-after nucleocyto-
plasmic O-mannosyltransferase. The two main hypotheses on how a cytosolic manno-
syltransferase could emerge in yeasts are that either the enzyme is novel and emerged
through horizontal gene transfer from yeast or bacterial sources [15, 16] or through adap-
tation/relocalisation of a mannosyltransferase throughout yeast evolution. For the first
hypothesis, I scan the AlphaFold yeast protein structure database for likely donor sugar
substrate binding pockets to identify novel candidates, and the latter hypothesis is ex-
amined through sequence analyses of known mannosyltransferases that points to a set
of likely candidates. I analyse whether the cytosolic O-mannosylation protein substrates
are distinct from the secretory glycosites with machine learning and ultimately examine a
single candidate in a mass spectrometric experiment.
1.3
Sequence analysis background
If the loss of the OGT enzyme and the emergence of the cytosolic mannosyltransferase
occur together through evolution of Ascomycota (i.e. phyllum of sac fungi) such that cy-
tosolic O-mannosylation replaced the O-GlcNAcylation system, evolutionary signals may
be detectable across species that either use O-GlcNAcylation (e.g. filamentous fungi, sub-
division Pezizomycotina) or O-mannosylation (i.e. yeasts, subdivisions Taphrinomycotina
and Saccharomycotina). For example, this could include detection of common manno-
syltransferase clades unique to yeasts across Ascomycota. However, the phylogenetic
relationship of the three subdivisions strongly indicates that Taphrinomycotina is a mono-
phyletic subdivision of Ascomycota basal to both Pezizomycotina and Saccharomycotina
[17]. This means that even though the fission yeasts Schizosaccharomyces and budding
2
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:11==
yeasts Saccharomyces should use cytosolic O-mannosylation the two genera likely di-
verged very early in evolution based on their distinct genetic architectures, and therefore
the ancestor of filamentous fungi should somehow reintroduce O-GlcNAcylation.
The group of known Golgi-resident, type II membrane-tethered mannosyltransferases in-
clude the CAZy [18] glycosyltransferase 15 (GT15) family. In bakerвҖҷs yeast the nine Kre-
two-related (KTR) proteins comprise the family and act in both non-redundant and over-
lapping glycan extension pathways using GDP-mannose (GDP-Man) as donor substrate
(reviewed in [19]). These either experimentally confirmed or probable mannosyltrans-
ferases all have a short cytoplasmic region, a type II transmembrane helix domain, and a
luminal region with the catalytically active domain [19] (cf. the predicted structure of Ktr2p
in fig. 1.2). A stem segment of the luminal region proximal to the membrane is highly vari-
able across the family with no apparent function other than linking the catalytic domain to
the membrane (cf. the alignment in fig. 1.1).
Figure 1.1: Multiple sequence alignment of the 9 KTR family members in S. cerevisiae.
In the alignment, gaps are marked white; non-conserved residues are marked in grey;
similar residues are marked in orange; вүҘ50 % conserved residues are marked in pale
red; and вүҘ90 % conserved residues are marked in red.
Reportedly, bakerвҖҷs yeast can express a short transcript isoform of the KTR2 gene when
grown in galactose media where the translational start site is located at the stem region
[20, 21], and likely render a stable, cytosolic isoform of Ktr2p (Ktr2pshort) [21]. Protein
stability profiles can be influenced by N-terminal degradation signals that either targets
N-terminal acetylated residues (Ac/N-end rule pathway) [22], N-terminal unacetylated
residues (Arg/N-end rule pathway) [23] or proteins with N-terminal proline (Pro/N-end
rule pathway) [24]. The N-terminal of Ktr2pshort consist of a Met-Asn (MN)-motif that is
likely the substrate for an N-terminal acetyltransferase, NatB, that stabilise Ktr2pshort [21].
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
3
==PAGE:12==
Other known N-terminal substrate motifs for NatB are Met-Asp (MD), Met-Glu (ME), and
Met-Gln (MQ). Another N-terminal acetyltransferase, NatC, acetylates motifs with large,
hydrophobic residues after the initiator Met (e.g. Met-Trp (MW), Met-Leu (ML), Met-Ile
(MI) and Met-Phe (MF)), and a third, NatA, targets small residues (e.g. Ala, Gly, Val, Cys,
Ser and Thr) when the initiator Met is cleaved off [25, 26]. However, the stability of a pro-
tein is difficult to infer from the absence or presence of known acetyltransferase substrate
motifs because either N-end rule pathway could influence the protein halflife. Regardless,
if Ktr2pshort acts as a cytosolic mannosyltransferase and N-terminal acetylation increases
the protein halflife, preservation patterns of N-terminal acetylation substrate motifs could
indicate whether alternative isoforms of KTRs is unique to species that perform cytosolic
O-mannosylation.
Figure 1.2: AlphaFold prediction of the structure of Ktr2p with its catalytic domain (white),
stem region (blue), transmembrane domain (orange) and cytoplasmic region (yellow).
The side chain of the proposed alternative start site 64Met is marked in green sticks.
1.4
Protein sequence representation with language models
In natural language processing (NLP), various constructions can be considered for any
concrete processing task. For example, if entire sentences or documents has to be pro-
cessed, the semantic of text segments is contained within the meaning of the words that
constitute the paragraph; and for this task semantic word embeddings are computed
based on a given vocabulary. The language of proteins only uses 20 amino acids, so
using NLP models to create semantic representations of amino acid sequences corre-
sponds more to letter-based word-representations because of the small vocabulary.
Recently, high dimensional sequence embeddings that encode information on chemical
features and protein structures by the means of context-encoding language models (LMs)
have improved the performance of biological prediction software [27вҖ“29]. Based on the
idea of the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model [30]
4
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Graphical overview of the Transformer model architecture with adaptations to
indicate the generation of protein sequence representations. Adapted from Alammar, J
(2018) [33] under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0; redistributed at https://github.com/laugenaur/public/
that uses the Transformer model architecture [31] to create context-dependent represen-
tations of text elements that allow dependencies across the entire input, the Evolutionary
Scale Modelling 1b (ESM-1b) model [32] was pre-trained to calculate amino acid repre-
sentations dependent on the protein sequence context that they appear in.
Specifically, the ESM-1b representations consist of high dimensional vector representa-
tions for each amino acid in a protein sequence such that the protein representation is a
set of representation vectors that can be put in a matrix format. Therefore, representa-
tions of the patch of amino acids around glycosylated residues or the single representation
vector for the modified residue can be extracted from the protein embedding. The repre-
sentations contain information on single amino acid properties, secondary structure and
protein homology [32], so any difference in glycosite representations from the cytosolic
and secretory compartments could indicate whether a single enzyme is active in both or
not.
What is the Transformer?
The Transformer model architecture is composed of two types of computation blocks: a)
encoder blocks and b) decoder blocks [31, 33]. A specific architecture can stack any
number of encoders and decoders on top of each other where the output of a previous
block is used as input to the next (cf. fig. 1.3). Before the processing layers, each amino
acid in the sequence of length L is embedded as token vectors, xi for i = 1, . . . , L with
dimension m, which could be one-hot-encoding of the amino acids or more sophisticated
methods [33] (e.g. the ESM-1b uses learned tokens [32]).
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
5
==PAGE:14==
Self-attention
Encoders take the input representation (i.e. either (x1, . . . , xL) for the first encoder block
or hidden states (h1, . . . , hL)) and computes a hidden Attention representation of that input
by:
A(h) = softmax
(QhKT
h
вҲҡ
d
)
Vh
(1.1)
where the query, Q, key, K, and value, V , matrices are computed in the attention layer by
projecting the input vectors to learned subspaces, i.e. (Qh, Kh, Vh) = (hW Q, hW K, hW h)
where the corresponding weight matrices, W, have dimension LГ—m. The matrix product
in the numerator of eq. (1.1) holds all the dot products between query and key vectors
each corresponding to a single amino acid input which is then scaled by 1/
вҲҡ
d where d is
the chosen dimension of the vector subspace for the query, key and value vectors for each
amino acid representation. After applying the softmax function row-wise to the scaled dot
products, the value vectors for all input positions are linearly combined where each value
vector is scaled by its relative attention logit (i.e. the output from the softmax function)
[32, 33].
The trained attention weights govern the interdependence of amino acids relative to their
position in the sequence, and can thus render an amino acid representation dependent
on the entire input sequence regardless of distance in the sequence [31]. The output
from the self-attention layers are added to the input which is then normalised before each
amino acid representation is processed in a multi-layer perceptron feed-forward network
(FFN) [31, 33]. The attention representations and the output of the FFNs are added and
normalised which concludes an encoder block. As mentioned, the output of the first en-
coder block can then be input to yet another encoder block or passed on as partial input
to a decoder block (cf. fig. 1.3).
Feed-forward networks
The FFN structures within the blocks process each hidden state representation hi of the
input amino acids separately, such that the computations can run in parallel. An FFN is a
fully connected network where node values are computed from previous node values only,
i.e. there are no loops (cf. fig. 1.4). First, a linear combination of the normalised attention
representation for an amino acid is passed through an activation function and saved in
hidden states in the network (cf. fig. 1.4). The dimension of the hidden state is 4d in both
the Transformer and in ESM-1b [31, 32]. A subsequent linear combination of the hidden
states is then returned as the output. In a general FFN, linear combinations of hidden
states may also be passed through an activation function for example to output class
probabilities, but the Transformer uses the network to compute a non-linear transformation
of an amino acidвҖҷs attention representation that can discard irrelevant attention contacts.
With a single hidden layer, the outputs, hвҖІ
k, are computed as
hвҖІ
k(h, w) =
4d
вҲ‘
j=0
w(2)
kj f
( d
вҲ‘
i=0
w(1)
ji hi
)
(1.2)
6
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:15==
where h0 = 1 is introduced to accommodate the bias terms, w(1)
j0 and w(2)
k0 . Often the
choice of activation function f(В·) is some sigmoidal function or the Rectifier Linear Unit
(ReLU) function. The latter was used in the Transformer whereas ESM-1b uses the Gaus-
sian Error Linear Unit (GELU) which is a smooth approximation to ReLU [31, 32].
The ESM-1b model was trained on the masked language modelling objective (MLM) [30,
32] where a sampled subset of amino acids in a training sequence are replaced with a
mask token. The objective of the model is then to accurately predict the missing amino
acid for each masked site independently, and training is performed by minimising the
negative log likelihood of the actual amino acid at a position given the masked sequence
[32]. That is, for a masked site m in the set M of independently masked positions in the
sequence, S, the probability of an amino acid, a, at site m is p(m = a | S\M). Since
each masked site it treated as independent, the joint probability is the product across
all masked positions. Viewed as a function of the masked sequence given the masked
positions, this is the likelihood function for the masked sequence given the unmasked
sequence. Viewing this further as a function of the input sequences given the masking
is the corresponding likelihood function. By minimising the negative log-likelihood, the
conditional expectation of the likelihood given the input sequences and masks is max-
imised. Note, that the above construction is equivalent to minimising the cross-entropy
loss function.
In back-propagation, the weights of the network are updated with gradient descent by
evaluating the respective gradient of the loss function and updating the parameter ac-
cordingly, i.e.
wi+1 = wi вҲ’ОұОҙL(w, X)
Оҙwi
(1.3)
where w are network weights, X the data, L(w, X) the loss function and Оұ the learning
rate hyperparameter.
Decoder blocks
Decoder blocks also contain a self-attention layer, but the output of this attention layer
is fed into an encoder-decoder-attention layer where the attention weight matrices were
learned in the final attention block of the encoder stack which ensures that the depen-
dence structure used to encode the sequence is constantly used when the decoder stack
generate the output sequence [31, 33]. Similarly, the output of the attention layers are
processed in FFNs and the representations are shifted and normalised between layers as
described (cf. fig. 1.3). The first amino acid is decoded by entering the encoder-decoder-
attention layer of the first decoder and then processed through the decoder stack which
generates predictions after a projection of the decoder outputs (not depicted in fig. 1.3).
This prediction is then tokenised and used as input to the aforementioned self-attention
layer in the first decoder block such that the preceding output influences the hidden at-
tention representations of the next amino acids [31, 33]. Because the self-attention layer
in the decoder blocks treats the output of previously generated predictions, this attention
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.4: Graphical illustration of a feed-forward network as used in the Transformer
model architecture. An attention representation vector for an amino acid is passed to the
network and outputs a focused representation vector. Inspired by Bishop [34].
layer can only attend вҖңto the leftвҖқ, i.e. to positions in the sequence already processed.
1.4.1
Representations of structurally disordered regions
Even though the ESM-1b model representations contain biologically relevant information
on multiple scales, it is not given that the representations of disordered regions contain
local information about that disordered region. Unlike stable secondary structure folds,
disordered regions does not have stabilising hydrogen bonds between amino acid side
chains that favour one specific fold such as Оұ-helix and ОІ-sheet. On the other hand, it
is not likely that the peptide bonds have unrestricted degrees of freedom. The middle
ground is therefore, that disordered regions have multiple stable states or a continuum of
equally favourable conformations that nevertheless have structural constraints dependent
on the amino acid composition of the region and of any stable fold within the protein close
to the disordered region.
Since the ESM-1b is trained using MLM, it is only sequence context that any represen-
tation is based on. We do not know whether the ESM-1b model uses attention contacts
to more defined regions of a protein to determine the missing amino acid in disordered
segments rather than attention contacts that relate to the function of the disordered region.
1.4.2
Classification models
Hence, whether the ESM-1b is able to represent inherent properties of glycosylatable
patches in unknown, as there is a risk that the representation features that are common
to the entire protein substantially influences the representation of unstructured protein
regions instead of having learned an order within the disordered.
To address this question, I will evaluate the performance of linear and non-linear clas-
8
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.5: Graphical illustration of extracting glycosylation sites and non-glycosylated
sites from nucleocytoplasmic proteins and from proteins that pass through the secretory
pathway (i.e. extracellular). Representations of the extracted sites are then used to fit
classification models that predict the localisation label of the parent protein.
sification models fitted directly on the representation vectors. I have illustrated the data
processing steps leading up to the classification models in fig. 1.5, but basically I will
take glycosylation sites and non-glycosylation sites on proteins that either localise to the
nucleocytoplasmic compartment or pass through the secretory pathway (i.e. mostly extra-
cellular). Then I will compute a representation vector for each of the extracted positions,
and see if the representations differ sufficiently so they can be classified as either nucle-
ocytoplasmic or secretory. I will use various ways to present the glycosylation sites to the
ESM-1b model and assess how much information the representations contain about the
glycosylatability of a protein region. Specifically, the representations will be based on the
protein sequences, N-terminally truncated sequence, synthetic sequence constructions
and peptide fragments around the sites (cf. fig. 1.6 for an overview). In addition, I will use
phosphorylation sites as a placeholder for disordered enzyme recognition site on cytoso-
lic proteins to train classification models, and then use these models to predict the type
of substrate motif that nucleocytoplasmic glycosylation site looks most like. In the follow-
ing paragraphs, I introduce the theory underlying the estimation of the three classification
models.
Logistic regression models
I will use logistic regression models to estimate the class probabilities (C1 denotes extra-
cellular and C2 cytosolic) using a linear combination of the representation features, x,
p(C1 | x) = Пғ
(
П•T x
)
=
1
1 + exp (П•T x)
(1.4)
p(C2 | x) = 1 вҲ’p(C1 | x)
(1.5)
where Пғ is the logistic sigmoid function [34].
For target labels ti вҲҲ{0, 1}, and yi = Пғ
(
ОІT xi + Оұ
)
= Пғ(П•T x) the joint distribution function
for N independent data points is thus parameterised as
p(t | ОІ, Оұ) =
N
вҲҸ
i=1
yti
i (1 вҲ’yi)1вҲ’ti
(1.6)
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1.6: Graphical illustration of the various sequence constructions that are presented
to the ESM-1b model to assess the representationsвҖҷ information content on disordered
regions.
Often, logistic regression models are estimated using the negative log likelihood function
(equivalent to cross entropy function) to evaluate the error and update the parameters
with gradient descent. By taking the negative logarithm on eq. (1.6), the negative log
likelihood is
E(ОІ, Оұ) = вҲ’
N
вҲ‘
i=1
ti log yi + (1 вҲ’ti) log (1 вҲ’yi)
(1.7)
and by the chain rule the gradient of the error function with respect to the parameters
(ОІ, Оұ) is
вҲҮE(ОІ, Оұ) =
N
вҲ‘
i=1
ОҙE
Оҙyi
Оҙyi
Оҙ(П•T x)
Оҙ(П•T x)
Оҙx
(1.8)
=
N
вҲ‘
i=1
yi вҲ’ti
yi(1 вҲ’yi)yi(1 вҲ’yi)П•i
(1.9)
=
N
вҲ‘
i=1
(yi вҲ’ti)П•i
(1.10)
where the partial derivative of the sigmoid yi in general is given by ПғвҖІ = Пғ(1 вҲ’Пғ) [34].
In practise a penalisation term is often added to the error function to avoid overfitting in
cases where the data features are linearly separable. I will use the l2 norm of the feature
parameters scaled by 1
2 as penalty, which renders the gradient
вҲҮE(ОІ, Оұ) =
N
вҲ‘
i=1
(yi вҲ’ti)П•i + ОІi
(1.11)
I will estimate the models with the SAGA algorithm [35] which gives an unbiased estimate
of the gradient. Similar to stochastic average gradient descent (SAG), at each iteration,
k, a random feature index, ik вҲҲ{1, . . . , M}, is sampled and the gradient for that feature is
10
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:19==
updated to the most recent gradient estimate for that feature, g(k)
ik
= вҲҮ(Ei(П•(kвҲ’1))), and
all other gradients are kept the same, g(k)
i
= g(kвҲ’1)
i
, i Мё= ik. Then, the SAGA alogorithm
updates the parameters as follows [35]
П•(k) = П•(kвҲ’1) вҲ’qk
(
g(k)
ik вҲ’g(kвҲ’1)
ik
+ 1
M
M
вҲ‘
i=1
g(kвҲ’1)
i
)
(1.12)
where qk is a scheduled learning rate. The algorithm stops when the it has completed a
specified maximum number of iterations or the parameter update is smaller than a spec-
ified threshold.
Random forest models
Random forest models is an ensemble model structure composed of a set decision trees
that are used together to estimate the class probabilities [36]. Decision trees are build
by categorising the data points according to each feature separately. The order in which
the features are used to branch the tree is chosen by computing the purity gain for each
possible branching K that goes from a root node r to the branches vk
вҲҶ= I(r) вҲ’
K
вҲ‘
k=1
N(vk)
N(r) I(vk)
(1.13)
where N(vk) denotes the number of data points in branch vk, and I(vk) is the impurity
function (i.e. evaluate how impure the categorisation is at branch vk according to the class
labels) [37]. There exist many alternative impurity functions, but the most common ones
are the Gini impurity
I(v) = 1 вҲ’
вҲ‘
c
p(c | v)2
(1.14)
entropy
I(v) = вҲ’
вҲ‘
c
p(c | v) log2 p(c | v)
(1.15)
and misclassification
I(v) = 1 вҲ’max
c
p(c | v)
(1.16)
Finally, the decision trees are normally combined by letting each tree make its predic-
tion on the classes and the class with the most вҖңvotesвҖқ decides the class prediction [36].
However, I will compute the average class probability across all trees and then predict
according to those averages.
Support vector machine models
Support vector machine models fit a linear decision boundary in a transformed feature
space
y(x) = ОІT ПҲ(x) + Оұ
(1.17)
where the feature transformation function, ПҲ(x), relates to the chosen kernel function
[34]. The data points have target labels ti вҲҲ{вҲ’1, 1}, and the decision boundary is param-
eterised such that predictions correspond to the sign(y) and that tky(xk) = 1 for the data
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
11
==PAGE:20==
point, xk, that is closest to the boundary. Here, I will fit the decision boundary by max-
imising a soft margin (i.e. minimum distance from data points to the decision boundary)
without regularisation using slack variables,
Оҫi =
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
0
tiy(xi) > 0
|ti вҲ’y(xi)|
tiy(xi) вүӨ0
(1.18)
for misclassified data points, and that the margin maximisation problem can be stated as
a minimisation of ||ОІ||2
2, such that the the soft margin is maximised for each data point in
the formulation while adding a penalty for misclassified data points by:
arg min
ОІ,Оұ,Оҫ
1
2||ОІ||2
2 +
N
вҲ‘
i=1
Оҫi
(1.19)
under the constraint tiy(xi) вүҘ1 вҲ’Оҫi, вҲҖi вҲҲ{1, . . . , N} given by the parameterisation [34].
In practice, the optimisation problem is restated as a minimisation of a Lagrangian function
with Lagrange multipliers, {ai вүҘ0 | i вҲҲ{1, . . . , N}} and {bi вүҘ0 | i вҲҲ{1, . . . , N}} under
the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions [38, 39] that ai(tiy(xi) вҲ’1 + Оҫi) = 0 and biОҫi = 0
for every i вҲҲ{1, . . . , N}, which gives the support vectors {xi | ai > 0}. Evaluation of
the Lagrangian function in its stationary point wrt. ОІ, Оұ, and Оҫ in turn presents the dual
Lagrangian [34] that is sought minimised
L(a) =
N
вҲ‘
i=1
ai вҲ’1
2
N
вҲ‘
i=1
N
вҲ‘
j=1
aiajtitjk(xi, xj)
(1.20)
under the box constraints
0 вүӨai вүӨ1 and
(1.21)
N
вҲ‘
i=1
aiti = 0 , вҲҖi = 1, . . . , N
(1.22)
where the choice of kernel function k(xi, xj) is linked to the feature transformation ПҲ(x).
Here, I will use the scaled radial basis function as kernel, i.e.
k(xi, xj) = exp
(
вҲ’
1
M ЛҶПғ2 ||xi вҲ’xj||2
2
)
= ПҲ(xi)T ПҲ(xj)
(1.23)
where M = 1280 is the number of representation features for each data point, and ЛҶПғ2 is
the estimated variance across all feature values of all data points.
1.5
Experimental primer
Even if Ktr2p truly exist in a shorter isoform, there is no evidence that other known manno-
syltransferases besides the PMTs can act as protein mannosyltransferases. Therefore,
the initial aim of the project included development of an enzyme purification protocol and
a mannosyltransferase activity assay. However, because yeast cells are surrounded by
12
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:21==
Figure 1.7: Graphical illustration of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged KTR proteins
and tandem affinity purification (TAP)-tagged PMT proteins.
a durable cell wall, the cell membrane is not exposed for disruption with detergents which
is an otherwise common cell lysis method. To create whole cell lysates from yeast cells,
the cell wall has to be disrupted too which requires harsher cell lysis protocols. There-
fore, my laboratory work partly consists of testing different methods of preparing whole
cell lysates, and evaluate whether tagged KTR proteins can be detected in the lysates
towards establishing a protocol for purification of tagged KTR proteins.
Specifically, I will use yeast strains with GFP (i.e. green fluorescent protein) tagged KTR
family members to prepare protein extractions, and then use a polyclonal antibody for
GFP in western blots to detect if the KTR proteins are detectable in the extractions. As a
negative control in the western blots, I will use a tandem affinity purification (TAP)-tagged
PMT protein strain. The TAP-tag consist of a two different binding domains separated
by a cleavage site, but has no resemblance to GFP. Both tags are positioned at the C-
terminal end of the proteins, so given that the transgene KTR-GFP is regulated the same
way as the native KTRs, it would also be possible to detect shorter isoforms of the KTRs.
The molecular weight of GFP is approximately 27 kDa so when GFP is conjugated to the
KTRs that I will use, the expected molecular weights are: KTR1-GFP 73 kDa, KTR3-GFP
74.5 kDa, KTR4-GFP 81.5 kDa and KTR6-GFP 79 kDa.
1.5.1
Mass spectrometry
Aside from assaying KTRs, a knockout (KO) strain of a probable cytosolic glycosyltrans-
ferase is ordered to see if removing this enzyme would have an effect on the cytosolic O-
linked glycoproteome. I will use lectin weak affinity chromatography to enrich protein ex-
tractions for mannose modified peptides and analyse whether cytosolic O-mannosylation
is absent in the KO strain with mass spectrometry.
Mass spectrometry is a method used to measure the weight (measured in daltons, Da) of
molecules. The sugar-enriched samples are injected into the mass spectrometer where
the contents are vaporised and ionised by adding a proton or by dissociation of an elec-
tron. Various methods are used to ionise the sample and include laser ablation, electron
ionisation and electrospray. In the machine, charged ions are sorted by their mass to
charge ratio, m/z, such that the electrical current (that is the quantity used to compute
relative abundance of one sample vs. another) can be associated with a given m/z value.
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
13
==PAGE:22==
These coupled values gives the mass spectrum which can be viewed like a histogram with
the m/z ratios on the primary axis and the signal on the secondary axis.
To check if cytosolic O-mannosylation is absent in the KO strain, I will chemically label
the proteome extraction from the KO strain with a light isotope while a positive control
(the PMT-TAP strain) sample is labelled with a heavy isotope, such that the m/z ratios for
otherwise identical molecules (here peptides), will be slightly shifted relative to each other
in the mass spectrum, such that a comparison on relative abundance can be made.
14
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:23==
2
Methods and materials
2.1
Conservation analyses
With the aim to find genomic signatures in the evolution of cytosolic glycosylation protein
sequences were obtained from Swiss-Prot through UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB,
http://www.uniprot.org, Nov 2021-May 2022) [40]. Searches for homologous proteins
were done with NCBI BLASTPВ® [41] using standard settings. Multiple sequence align-
ments (MSA) were performed with Clustal Omega [42] in R using the package msa [43].
Processing of sequence files was done in R with the packages Biostrings and seqinr;
amino acid variation of MSAs were calculated with BALCONY; phylogenetic analyses were
done with ape using neighbor-joining tree construction [44]; and cladograms were ren-
dered with treeio and ggtree. Alignment figures were rendered with TEXshade [45].
To establish a list of known mannosyltransferases, Interpro family and domain acces-
sion codes were retrieved from proteins associated with the keyword вҖңmannosyltrans-
feraseвҖқ in Swiss-Prot across Ascomycota (taxid. 4890). Interpro domains unrelated to
mannosyltransferase activity were removed from the list. The sequences for all proteins
in Ascomycota associated with these Interpro IDs were downloaded, and analysed with
MSA and by generating phylogenetic trees. Members of the glycosyltransferase fam-
ilies 15 (GT15) and 39 (GT39) in the Carbohydrate Active Enzymes database (CAZy,
http://www.cazy.org/) [18] in Ascomycota were downloaded from both Swiss-Prot and
TrEMBL databases through UniProtKB and analysed as described above.
BLASTP searches for OGT homologous proteins in Ascomycota was done based on
the catalytic domain (Val476 to Leu1016) of the human protein OGT1 (UniProtKB ID:
O15294).
Subdivision
Species (strain)
вҖў
Saccharomycotina
S. cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c) (tax.id. 559292)
вҖў
Saccharomycotina
C. albicans (strain SC5314 / ATCC MYA-2876) (tax.id. 237561)
вҖў
Saccharomycotina
Y. lipolytica (strain CLIB 122 / E 150) (tax.id. 284591)
вҖў
Taphrinomycotina
S. pombe (strain 972 / ATCC 24843) (tax.id. 284812)
вҖў
Pezizomycotina
A. niger (strain CBS 513.88 / FGSC A1513) (tax.id. 425011)
вҖў
Pezizomycotina
A. oryzae (strain ATCC 42149 / RIB 40) (tax.id. 510516)
Table 2.1:
Representative species from Ascomytoca used in BLASTP homology
searches. Colored dots denote species with cytosolic O-mannosylation (вҖў) and without
(вҖў). Pale colours indicate lack of experimental evidence.
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.1: Sequence alignment of GDP-mannose binding pockets of Ktr4p and Kre2p.
Amino acids within 5 Г… of the GDP molecule in the respective crystal structures (Ktr4p,
PDB: 5A07; Kre2p, PDB: 1S4P) are marked in green (в– ). Sequence numbering is relative
to the sequence of Ktr4p.
A set of six representative species were used to explore homology relationships across
Ascomycota and include the species with experimentally confirmed cytosolic O-mannosylation
and A. niger which does not use cytosolic O-mannosylation (cf. table 2.1).
2.2
Prediction of GDP-Man binding proteins with TMalign
Predicted protein structures (6040) from S. cerevisiae (reference proteome: UP000002311)
were downloaded from AlphaFold (https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/) [46, 47]. GDP-Man bind-
ing pocket templates were generated from crystal structures of Ktr4p (PDB: 5A07) [48]
and Kre2p (PDB: 1S4P) [49] both with embedded GDP moieties. The 3D coordinates for
amino acids within 5 Г… of the GDP molecules were saved in separate pdb-files. The amino
acids included in the GDP-Man binding pocket were 1) for Ktr4p: L140-R142, D145, L171-
D173, W204, Q228-Y229, S234-Y235, M238, Y242, R260-P263, N350, H411, and 2)
for Kre2p T127-R130, E133, L159-D161, W190, Y214, S219-Y220, M223, Q227, R245-
P248, H388 (cf. fig. 2.1). Structural alignment of the reference GDP-Man binding pockets
were performed with TM-align [50] using standard settings, and TM-scores were nor-
malised to the sequence length of the GDP-Man binding pocket structures. TM-scores
below 0.2 generally corresponds to randomly aligned structures, whereas scores above
0.5 correspond to structures with about the same fold in SCOP/CATH.
2.3
O-glycoproteomic and phosphoproteomic datasets
Mass spectrometric data from 11 glycoproteomics experiments (kindly made available by
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics) contain sequences of mannose modified peptides,
the position of the modification on the peptide and which protein sequence(s) a peptide
was found in along with other experimental information that was not used. Mass spec-
trometric data analysis was done in Proteome Discovererв„ў(Thermo Fisher Scientific)
as described in section 2.14. The phosphoproteomic dataset was downloaded from the
PRIDE database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/), dataset identifier PXD012395)
originally reported by Lanz et al. [51] and was composed from 75 phosphoproteomic ex-
periments and was structured similarly as the O-glycoproteomics dataset.
The unprocessed glycoproteomics dataset contains more than 30 800 mannosylated pro-
16
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:25==
tein fragments with more than 105 800 positions of O-mannose modifications most of
which were redundant. The detected peptides were mapped to 1091 protein sequences.
968 of the protein sequences stem from the canonical bakerвҖҷs yeast strain, S. cerevisiae
(strain ATCC 204508 / S288c), 95 proteins were from the fission yeast S. pombe (strain
972 / ATCC 24843), 28 sequences were from other S. cerevisiae strains and a single
protein from a yeast virus which was removed from the data. The phosphoproteomics
dataset contains close to 31 000 phosphosites in the canonical bakerвҖҷs yeast strain.
The proteomics datasets were processed in Python run in Google Colab. Each peptide
in the unprocessed data was given a unique identifier string, and peptide to protein map-
pings were validated with the UniProtKB version 2022_1 reference proteome by 100 %
sequence match, and the annotated sequence positions were validated by extracting the
sequence position of the peptides and adding the coordinate of the modified residue rel-
ative to the peptide.
Annotation of subcellular localisation
Annotations of subcellular localisation in the SwissProt database were used to label each
protein in the glycoproteomics dataset. In total, 174 different combinations of localisation
labels were associated with the proteins in the dataset. These were manually categorised
as either nucleocytoplasmic, secretory pathway or ambiguous if for instance a protein was
both secreted and expressed in the cytosol. Transmembrane proteins were labelled using
topological annotations in Swiss-Prot, and each modified residue from transmembrane
proteins was labelled according to the compartment that the modified residue faces. If
no localisation annotation exist for a protein, predictions of subcellular localisation using
DeepLoc 1.0 (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk) [28] and whether the protein contains a
signal peptide using SignalP 6.0 (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk) [27] was used to label
that protein only if the two predictions agree. The remaining unlabelled and ambiguous
proteins were manually labelled using UniProtKB. The subcellular location of 16 proteins
were ambiguous and were left out of the dataset.
Homology bias correction
Proteins with more that 80 % sequence identity were clustered using CD-HIT [52, 53]
and a representative protein from each cluster was chosen, leaving 820 representative
proteins in the dataset with 7577 modified residue positions.
O-mannose sites were clustered if a site was closer than 11 residues in the sequence
from another site, and the lower median of a cluster was chosen as the representative
site. Phosphorylation sites were clustered if a site was closer than 51 amino acids in the
sequence to another phosphorylation site. Depending on the allowance of the various
ways to represent sites with the language model, sites that were too close to either ends
of the protein sequence were not considered.
Sequence positions not close to PTM sites were selected such that no selection was
closer than 25 amino acid residues from a glycosylatable site and phosphorylated site
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
17
==PAGE:26==
respectively nor closer than 25 amino acids from the beginning or end of the protein. One
non-modified site was sampled from each protein in the given setup.
After clustering of sites, 1594 representative sites (834, 52.3 % extracellular; 760, 47.7 %
nucleocytoplasmic) on the 820 representative proteins constitute the dataset. When phos-
phorylation site data was used in combination with extracellular glycosylation sites, the
phosphorylation sites were sampled to equal class sizes.
Protein length restriction by ESM-1b
However, the ESM-1b model requires sequences to be shorter than 1022 residues, so
when full length sequences were embedded, 715 sequences were treated with 1359 rep-
resentative sites (724, 53.3 % extracellular and 635, 46.7 % nucleocytoplasmic) out of
6452 sites on these 715 proteins.
2.4
Calculation of sequence representations
High dimensional representations of sequences were extracted from the last represen-
tation layer of the ESM-1b language model [32]. Specifically, the ESM-1b model trained
on UniRef50 representative sequences with 33 layers and approximately 650 million pa-
rameters was installed from the fair-esm repository. The model adds two tokens in the
beginning of representations which were removed such that the protein representations
only contain representation vectors for amino acids in the input sequence. Due to mem-
ory limitations in Google Colab, attention weights for sequence representations could not
be retrieved.
Various sequence constructions were used as input to the model that allow at least all
sites from representative proteins to be treated, and these include: 1) full length protein
sequences from the entire yeast proteome, 2) 15 and 40 amino acid N-terminal deletion
(NTD) sequences of proteins in the glycoproteomics dataset, 3) 25 amino acid sequence
fragments centered on PTM sites, 4) the same 25 amino acid fragments flanked by a
вҖңsequence harnessвҖқ to unify the representation context, and 5) random yeast protein se-
quences and random peptides.
2.4.1
Embedding of sequences with removed N-terminus
The presence of a signal peptide in a sequence could influence a set of features in the
representation such that those could be used to distinguish secretory proteins from cy-
tosolic ones. Therefore, all representative proteins were N-terminally truncated by 15 and
40 amino acids and the truncated sequences were embedded using ESM-1b. When re-
moving 15 and 40 amino acids from the sequences, a few more of the 715 representative
sequences became shorter than the ESM-1b length restriction. Therefore, 1368 repre-
sentative sites were analysed when 15 amino acids were removed (52.9 % extracellular,
47.1 % nucleocytoplasmic) and 1386 representative sites were analysed when 40 amino
acids were removed (53.2 % extracellular, 46.8 % nucleocytoplasmic). Embeddings of
arbitrary positions were determined for 719 proteins when 15 amino acids were removed
18
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:27==
(40.1 % extracellular, 59.9 % nucleocytoplasmic), and when 40 amino acids were removed
from the N-terminus, arbitrary positions on 724 representative proteins were included in
the analysis (40.3 % extracellular, 59.7 % nucleocytoplasmic).
2.4.2
Protein sequence fragments embedded directly
To force the representation to only include local context for a glycosylatable peptides,
sequence fragments of 25 amino acids around O-mannose sites were embedded directly
in the representation space. For this construction, the length restriction of the ESM-1b
model allowed all representative sites to be included in the analysis. Therefore, fragments
around the 1594 representative O-mannose sites were calculated along with fragments
around one arbitrary sequence position (not close to an O-mannose site) from each of the
820 representative proteins (40.6 % extracellular, 59.4 % nucleocytoplasmic).
2.4.3
Harnessed peptides
To isolate the local dependencies in the sequence, 25 amino acid windows centred on
O-mannose sites were flanked by a вҖңharness sequenceвҖқ such that all glycosylatable frag-
ments were embedded with the same global sequence context.
Each fragment was
flanked by four Gly residues (linker) and the sequence of either Phosphoglycerate kinase
(PGK_YEAST, Uniprot accession code: P00560) without the initiator Met or the mem-
ber of the BUR kinase complex BUR2 (BUR2_YEAST, Uniprot accession code: Q05949)
reduced to residues 43 to 352 to not include disordered regions. Sequence fragments
around arbitrary positions were also harnessed. Out of the 820 representative protein
sequences, 692 protein sequences were long enough such that a fragment around an
arbitrary site could be extracted without violating the nearness-to-glycosite rule. One ar-
bitrary site were embedded per protein (39.3 % extracellular, 60.7 % nucleocytoplasmic),
and the average embedding across the 25 amino acid fragments were used as input to
classification models.
2.4.4
Generation of random sequences
The random sequences were generated by first sampling the sequence length between
128 and 928 which covers 80 % of the protein sequence lengths in the yeast proteome.
Then the random protein sequence was generated by sampling from the 20 common
amino acids using amino acid propensity weights based on the propensity of amino acids
across all proteins in the yeast proteome (cf. fig. 2.2). In total, 500 random protein se-
quences were used in the analysis. The random selections were done in Python with the
random package.
All random peptides were 25 amino acids long and were generated by sampling from
the 20 common amino acid with equal weights. In total, 1000 random peptides were
generated and randomly labelled into two groups of 500.
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
19
==PAGE:28==
A
C
D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0
2
4
6
8
Sample weight
Figure 2.2: Sample weights for generating random protein sequences were based on
amino acid propensity across the yeast proteome. The propensity for a sequence is the
proportion of an amino acid in a sequence (number of occurences divided by sequence
length). The values presented are the average propensities across all yeast proteins
relative to the rarest amino acids (Cys and Trp). Sample weights were rounded to nearest
whole number.
2.5
Extract chemically biased protein regions
Protein sequences longer than 100 amino acids from the yeast reference proteome were
encoded using all 566 amino acid indices from the AAindex1 database ver. 9.2 [54] by
replacing each amino acid in the sequence by the corresponding index value. Based on
this encoding, the sum of the index values across all 11 amino acid windows for a protein
were calculated. The 11 amino acid sequence fragments that correspond to the maximum,
minimum and the 0.9, 0.75, 0.6, 0.51, 0.49, 0.4, 0.25 and 0.1 quantiles were extracted for
each protein. Ten Amino Acid Indices (cf. table 2.2) that correlate with structural disorder
[55] were analysed separately.
The ESM-1b representation matrices were determined for the whole protein sequence.
The representation vectors for the 11 amino acid sequence windows at the respective
quantiles were averaged and used as data input for the classification task.
2.6
Classification models and estimation
The input to the classification models were vector representations, xi вҲҲR1280 for i =
1, . . . , N, of an averaged patch or that of a single amino acid along with binary classifica-
tion target labels, ti.
All models were evaluated with 5-fold cross validation with one hold-out set for testing.
The dataset splits were constructed so the class distribution in the original dataset was
the same in each of the splits. For each fold, the confusion matrix was determined to
report the average true positive rate (TPR/recall), false positive rate (FPR), true negative
rate (TNR), false negative rate (FNR), precision (also termed positive predictive power)
20
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:29==
Amino Acid Index
Description
JURD980101
Modified Kyte-Doolittle hydrophobicity scale [56]
ROBB760101
Information measure for alpha-helix [57]
ROBB760108
Information measure for turn [57]
CHOP780202
Normalized frequency of beta-sheet [58]
CHOP780203
Normalized frequency of beta-turn [58]
CHOP780211
Normalized frequency of C-terminal non beta region [58]
OOBM850105
Optimized side chain interaction parameter [59]
VINM940102
Normalized flexibility parameters (B-values) for each residue
surrounded by none rigid neighbours [60]
BULH740101
Transfer free energy to surface [61]
PUNT030102
Knowledge-based membrane-propensity scale from
3D_Helix in MPtopo databases [62]
Table 2.2: List of Amino Acid Indicies that were used to analyse the ability of the sequence
representation to distinguish regions with varying degrees of disorder.
and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC AUC) across folds with
standard deviation. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and precision-recall
curves were computed on 50:50 training-to-test dataset splits with scikit-learn.
The total number of correct classifications across cross validation folds were used to es-
timate the modelsвҖҷ accuracy, Оё, using Jeffreys interval, which uses BayesвҖҷ theorem to
parameterise the probability density function of the true accuracy, p(Оё | m, N), for m cor-
rect classification out of N data points [63]. The parameterisation uses the symmetric,
bimodal beta distribution Beta(1
2, 1
2) as the Jeffreys prior and the binomial distribution for
the number of correct classifications given the modelвҖҷs accuracy to get [63]
p
(
Оё | m, N, 1
2, 1
2
)
= Beta
( 1
2 + m, 1
2 + N вҲ’m
)
(2.1)
and thus the estimated model accuracy was the expected value of the aforementioned
beta distribution
E(Оё) =
1
2 + m
1 + N
(2.2)
and confidence intervals at level Оұ, [ОёL, ОёU]1вҲ’Оұ can be computed from the inverse regu-
larised incomplete beta function, IвҲ’1(l | a, b). The inverse beta cumulative distribution
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
21
==PAGE:30==
function was estimated with SciPy [64]:
ОёL =
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
IвҲ’1 ( Оұ
2 | 1
2 + m, 1
2 + N вҲ’m
)
m > 0
0
m = 0
(2.3)
ОёU =
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
IвҲ’1 (
1 вҲ’Оұ
2 | 1
2 + m, 1
2 + N вҲ’m
)
m < N
1
m = N
(2.4)
For all classification tasks, three model types were selected for fitting to the data to enable
initial estimates of the complexity of the decision boundary. Logistic regression, random
forest and support vector machine models were considered. All models were fitted with
scikit-learn implementations, and data was weighed with class weights inversely propor-
tional to the class frequencies. The models were introduced in section 1.4.2, so here the
implementations of the models are briefly described.
Logistic regression models were fitted by minimising the negative log-likelihood function
with l2 penalisation without regularisation, i.e.
min
ОІ,Оұ
1
2||ОІ||2
2 вҲ’
N
вҲ‘
i=1
ti log yi + (1 вҲ’ti) log(1 вҲ’yi)
(2.5)
The SAGA algorithm [35] was used to compute the parameter updates (cf. section 1.4.2
for details). The algorithm was stopped after 100 iterations or when parameter updates
were smaller than 10вҲ’2.
Random forest models [36] were built from 100 decision trees each fitted using
вҲҡ
1280
random features on the entire training data. The Gini impurity measure was used to
calculate the purity gain for each branching, and trees were expanded until all branches
were pure. The scikit-learn implementation predicted class labels based on the average
probability of a class prediction across the decision trees, and not by voting.
Support vector machine models were fitted with the scaled radial basis function as kernel
(cf. section 1.4.2 for detailed theoretical explanation).
2.7
Yeast cell culture
Yeast clones were ordered expressing GFP tagged KTR1 (YOR099W), KTR3 (YBR205W),
KTR4 (YBR199W) and KTR6 (YPL053C) (cat. no. 95700, Thermo Fischer Scientific),
and TAP tagged PMT1 (YDL095W) (cat. no. YSC1178-202230216, Horizon) and a yeast
IDS2 (YJL146W) KO strain (clone id: 1279, cat. no. YSC6273-201919317, Horizon).
YP media was prepared with 10 g/L yeast extract (cat. no. SLBV7614, Sigma Life Sci-
ence), 20 g/L peptone (cat. no. BCBW3961, Sigma-Aldrich), autoclaved at 121 в—ҰC for
sterilization, and supplemented with either 2 % D-glucose (cat. no. K52585537103, Milli-
pore) or 2 % D-galactose (cat. no. BCBX5029, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 Вөg/mL carbenicillin.
22
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:31==
Yeast strains were kept either on 100 mm culture plates with YPD agar at 4 в—ҰC or as wet
cell pellets in 15 mL Falcon centrifuge tubes at вҲ’20 в—ҰC or вҲ’80 в—ҰC depending on the ex-
perimental time course. Yeast cell cultures were plated by inoculating 10 ВөL well-mixed
culture onto YPD agar plates supplemented with 50 Вөg/mL ampicillin and grown at room
temperature overnight and transferred to 4 в—ҰC. Pre-cultures were prepared from culture
plates by inoculating a single colony into YPD media, such that OD equivalent inoculation
volumes could initiate the final yeast cell cultures.
Yeast cells were cultured in 15 mL loose cap tubes (5 mL cultures), 500 mL Erlenmeyer
culture flasks (50 mL and 100 mL cultures), or 3 L Erlenmeyer culture flasks (1 L cultures)
in either YPD media or YP galactose media. Cultures were grown to logarithmic growth
phase (OD: 0.2 to 0.8) in 30 в—ҰC shaking incubator.
2.8
Yeast cell lysis protocols
2.8.1
Enzymatic cell wall degradation
Zymolase lysis buffer consisted of 60 mM EDTA, 1 M Sorbitol, 5 mM DTT, 2 mg/mL and
100 mM Hepes (pH 7.4). Thawed cell cultures were resuspended in 30 ВөL lysis buffer and
incubated for 1 h at 750 rpm shaking incubator followed by addition of 1.5 ВөL 10 % (w/v)
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and mixed for 2 min on vortex machine. If samples were
viscous due to DNA in solution, samples were diluted and sonicated to break the DNA.
Samples were centrifuged at 10 000 g for 10 min at 4 в—ҰC and supernatant was prepared
for SDS-PAGE.
2.8.2
Boiling SDS and sonication
Yeast cell cultures were collected in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes by consecutive rounds of
culture media centrifugation. Cell pellets were frozen at вҲ’80 в—ҰC for 0.5вҖ“1 h and thawed
by adding 400 ВөL boiling 5 % (w/v) SDS solution with 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and son-
icated five times of 5 s (60 % Amp) with 5 s breaks between. Remaining cell material was
discarded after 1 min 10 000 G centrifugation and samples were prepared for SDS-PAGE.
2.8.3
Breakage with glass beads
Yeast cell extracts were prepared by vortex disruption of packed yeast cell pellets with
glass beads (0.5 mm, cat. no. 11079105, BioSpec Products) in ice-cold 0.1 % Rapigest
(cat. no. 186001861, Waters), with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at pH 7.8.
2.8.4
Rout protocol
Cell pellets from 10 mL logarithmic phase cultures were resuspended in 240 ВөL lysis solu-
tion and left to react on ice for 10 min. The lysis solution consisted of 1.85 N NaOH, 50 mM
DTT, solution P (0.4 mg/mL Pepstatin A, 18 mg/mL PMSF in ethanol) and complete pro-
teinase inhibitor cocktail (cat. no. 05056489001, Roche Diagnostics GmbH) according to
instructions from vendor. Samples were mixed with 240 ВөL 50 % (w/v) trichloroacetic acid
(TCA) and left on ice for additional 10 min. Lysis precipitate was centrifuged (21 000 g,
10 min, 4 в—ҰC); the pellet was resuspended in 500 ВөL acetone (kept at вҲ’20 в—ҰC), and then
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
23
==PAGE:32==
incubated for 20 min at вҲ’20 в—ҰC. The precipitate was centrifuged (21 000 g, 10 min, 4 в—ҰC);
and the pellet was resuspended in 100 ВөL 0.5 M Tris base with 5 % (w/v) SDS followed by
sonication to fully break the pellet.
2.9
SDS-PAGE, Coomassie protein stain
Yields from yeast cell lysis protocols were assessed with polyacrylamide gel electrophore-
sis (SDS-PAGE). Samples were prepared for SDS-PAGE by mixing with Boltв„ўLDS sam-
ple buffer (cat. no. 2272815, Invitrogen) and 125 mM DTT and incubated for 10 min
at 70 в—ҰC. Samples (10 ВөL) and SeeBlueв„ўPlus2 (Invitrogen) ladder (2 ВөL) were loaded
onto NuPAGEв„ў4вҖ“12 % Bis-Tris Gels (cat. no. 21122871 and 22012970, Invitrogen)
and run for 20 min at 50 V followed by 1 h at 150 V. Gels were stained with InstantBlueВ®
Coomassie Protein Stain, ISB1L (cat. no. GR3394500-1, Abcam) and washed in milli-Q
water for higher contrast.
2.10
Western blot
SDS-PAGE gel blotting buffer consisted of 25 mM Tris base (pH 8.3), 192 mM glycine and
10 % (v/v) ethanol. Gels were transferred to PVDF membranes at 60 V for 1 h 15 min,
and the membranes blocked with 5 % (w/v) Milk (cat. no. VM984863124, Sigma-Aldrich)
in Tris buffered saline with 0.01 % Tween-20 (TBS-T) for 1 h. Membranes incubated with
Rabbit anti-GFP polyclonal antibody (cat. no. 632592, Living colors) used in 1:5000 dilu-
tion in 5 % Milk, TBS-T overnight at 4 в—ҰC followed by three washes of 5 min in TBS-T before
1 h incubation with Goat anti-Rabbit Ig/HRP polyclonal antibody (cat. no. P044801-2, Ag-
ilent Dako) used in 1:4000 dilution and another three 5 min washes in TBS-T. Membranes
were developed with SuperSignalв„ўWest Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Substrate (cat.
no. WD322161, Thermo Scientific).
2.11
Mass spectrometry sample preparation
Cell material from 1 L yeast cultures in logarithmic growth phase was thawed at room tem-
perature, resuspended in 1 mL milli-Q water in capped syringes, and centrifuged at 1000 g
for 5 min to have supernatant free cell pellet in the syringe. Cell material was frozen by
dripping it into liquid nitrogen and then milled using a ceramic mortar. Cryomilled ma-
terial was resuspended in milli-Q water and sonicated at 60 % amplitude for 25 s. Son-
icated samples were centrifuged (10 000 g, 5 min, 4 в—ҰC). The supernatant was reduced
with 15 mM dithiotretiol (DTT) for 15 min followed by incubation with 30 mM iodoacetoac-
etate (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature for alkylation of reduced cysteines. N-glycans
were digested from the proteins with 5 U N-glycosidase F (5 ВөL) in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.6, at
37 в—ҰC for 18 h. Samples were buffer exchanged into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate using
Zebaв„ўSpin Desalting Columns, 7K MWCO, 2 mL (cat. no. 89890, Thermo Scientificв„ў)
according to instructions from vendor. The protein samples were mixed with 25 Вөg trypsin
per 2 mL sample and incubated at 37 в—ҰC overnight.
24
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:33==
Peptide samples were mixed with 12.5 ВөL trifluoroacetic acid to approximately pH 1 and
precipitate was spun down at 21 000 g for 2 min. Acidified peptide samples were desalted
on Sep-PakВ® Vac 1cc (100 mg) C18 cartridge columns that were activated with 100 %
acetonitrile followed by 0.1 % formic acid to equilibriate the column before samples were
passed through. Two times 1 mL 0.1 % formic acid washes were performed to exclude
salts and buffer components before a final wash with 1 mL milli-Q water wash to exclude
excess 0.1 % formic acid. Samples were eluded from the columns with 60 % acetonitrile
and placed to dry in SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge. Dried samples were viscous gel-like
(40вҖ“50 ВөL).
Chemical diethyl labelling of trypsin digests were done with light or heavy (12C or 13C
isotopes) acetaldehyde (CH3CHO) as described by [65]. Briefly, samples were buffered
to pH 5.5 with 0.5 M sodium acetate (NaCH3COO) (40 ВөL) and mixed with either light
or heavy acetaldehylde (60 ВөL light isotope, 24 ВөL heavy isotope) and 50 ВөL 1 M sodium
cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) as a reducing agent. Labelling was allowed to proceed for
2вҖ“3 h on shaking incubator in room temperature, and was quenched by adding 10 ВөL 1 M
Tris (pH 8.0) to the samples and left at 4 в—ҰC.
Diethyl labelled samples were acidified with 7 ВөL TFA and diluted by adding 500 ВөL 0.1 %
formic acid solely to increase sample volume. Samples were desalted on C18 columns
as described above and eluded with 60 % acetonitrile before SpeedVac vacuum drying
for 1 h. Samples were passed through a 0.45 Вөm Sterile PES Syringe Filter (cat. no.
15216869, Fisherbrandв„ў) by centrifugation at 2000 g for 1 min to exclude insoluble ma-
terial. The differentially labelled samples were mixed (250 ВөL each) in 1 mL 25 mM Tris,
pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM MnCl2 (Buffer A) + 40 ВөL 1 M Tris to neu-
tralise pH. Before SpeedVac, peptide content in samples were measured with Nano-Drop
(3.6 mg/mL in each sample [light IDS2 3.629 mg/mL, heavy PMT1 3.577 mg/mL]).
2.12
Concanavalin-A lectin weak affinity chromatography
Concanavalin A (Con-A) agarose (Vector Laboratories) slurry was packed into a 3 m col-
umn as described by [65]. The column was connected to a Г„KTA FPLC system (GE
Healthcare) and equilibrated with Buffer A at 4 в—ҰC. Flowrate was set to 0.1 mL/min. The
labelled tryptic digests were injected and the non-bound fraction was collected. The col-
umn was subsequently washed with 5 column volumes (CVs) with buffer A before elution
of glycopeptides by injection of 4 mL 0.5 M Methyl Оұ-D-mannopyranoside in buffer A. The
glycopeptides were collected in 1 mL fractions and desalted by in-house packed stagetip
columns (C18). The desalted glycopeptides were dried to completeness (Speedvac) and
reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid before mass spectrometric analysis.
2.13
Mass spectrometric analyses
The mass spectrometric analyses were performed by ass. prof. Sergey Vakhrushev at the
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics. Desalted elution fractions were individually injected
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
25
==PAGE:34==
using a EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a nanoSpray
Flex ion source to a Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The
EASY-nLC 1000 was operated using a single analytical column setup (PicoFrit Emitters,
75-Ојm inner diameter; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with Reprosil-
Pure-AQ C18 phase (1.9-Ојm particle size; Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated across
120 min at 200 nL/min; gradient elution was achieved by solvent A (0.1 % formic acid)
and solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) which was set for 2вҖ“20 % B for 95 min fol-
lowed by 20вҖ“80 % B for 10 min and finally 80 % B for 15 min. Precursor MS1 scan (m/z
355вҖ“1700) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 120 000, followed by
Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS and ETciD-MS/MS of multiply charged precursors (z = 2вҖ“6) in the
MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 10 000вҖ“50 000 ions was used for trig-
gering data-dependent fragmentation events; MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution
of 60 000 (HCD and ETciD).
2.14
Mass spectrometric data analyses
Data analyses was carried out using Proteome Discovererв„ў1.4 software (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) in a pipeline developed at the Copenhagen Center for Glycomics. Data files
were processed using the Sequest HT node and searched against the canonical yeast
proteome downloaded (September 2013) from the UniProtKB database (http://www.un
iprot.org/). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tol-
erance to 0.02 Da. Up to 2 missed trypsin (full- and semi-specific) cleavages were al-
lowed. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys: 57.021 46 Da) and di-
ethyl at peptide N-termini and Lys residues (light channel: 56.0626 Da; heavy channel:
60.076 02 Da). Variable modifications included oxidation (Met: 15.9949 Da) and hexose
modification (Ser/Thr: 162.0528 Da). Peptide confidence levels were calculated using the
Target Decoy PSM Validator node and results were filtered for high-confidence (p < 0.01)
identifications only.
26
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:35==
3
Results
The main aim my thesis project is to identify the cytosolic mannosyltransferase in yeast,
and as outlined in the introduction, I hypothesise that the enzyme either adapted from
mannosyltransferases within the secretory pathway throughout yeast evolution or that
the enzyme is novel in yeast and unrelated to known mannosyltransferases.
I will start the presentation of my results with multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) and
homology searches within Ascomycota that I made to assess the likelihood of my initial
hypotheses on the emergence of cytosolic O-mannosylation.
3.1
Loss of OGT enzyme and emergence of cytosolic
O-mannosylation
Since I hypothesise that cytosolic O-mannosylation substituted the otherwise conserved
cytosolic O-GlcNAcylation system, the evolutionary trajectory of the OGT enzyme can
give clues to which species might contain the cytosolic mannosyltransferase gene if this
emerged during yeast evolution.
Figure 3.1: The red nodes (вҖў) are proteins from Pezizomycotina, the green nodes (вҖў) are
from Saccharomycotina, and the blue nodes (вҖў) are from Taphrinomycotina. The internal,
orange nodes (вҖў) indicate the clade nodes.
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Glycosyltransferase family 15
(b) Glycosyltransferase family 39
Figure 3.2: The red nodes (вҖў) are proteins from Pezizomycotina, the green nodes (вҖў)
are from Saccharomycotina, and the blue nodes (вҖў) are from Taphrinomycotina. Proteins
annotated in Swiss-Prot are labelled with the species (two-letter, italics) and the protein
name, and proteins annotated in TrEMBL are left unlabelled.
Within Ascomycota, the subdivision Pezizomycotina has proteins homologous to the cat-
alytic domain of OGT (more than 100 BLASTP hits), whereas in the subdivision Saccha-
romycotina (17 BLASTP hits) and Taphrinomycotina (no BLASTP hits) there is little to no
evidence that a conserved OGT enzyme is widely present. Within Saccharomycotina,
most hits are from Y. lipolytica and are putative N-acetylglucosamine transferases indi-
cating that within Saccharomycotina the genus Yarrowia could have preserved cytosolic
O-GlcNacylation through preservation of OGT whereas the genus Saccharomyces lost
OGT.
Moving on to examining the evolutionary relationship between mannosyltransferase re-
lated proteins across Ascomycota, it seems that protein families such as ALG1, ALG2,
ALG3, GPI10, GPI14, GPI18, SMP3/GT22 and GT2/CHS (Chitin synthase) contain ho-
mologs in all three subdivisions of Ascomycota (cf. fig. 3.1). Interestingly, glycosyltrans-
ferases belonging to CAZy families 15 and 34 have no close relatives in Pezizomycotina,
and the MNN1/MNT family have numerous orthologs in Saccharomycotina with no ap-
parent relatives in Pezizomycotina (cf. fig. 3.1). However, the basis of these MSAs are
annotated sequences in Swiss-Prot. Therefore, to look deeper into the families with no
apparent homologs in Pezizomycotina, both experimentally validated proteins from Swiss-
Prot and not validated proteins from TrEMBL are included in the cladograms in fig. 3.2.
In Ascomycota, the glycosyltransferase 15 family contains the KTR family in bakerвҖҷs yeast,
28
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:37==
Ktr4p
Omh4p
Omh5p
Ktr7p
Mnt1p
Ktr1p
Mnt2p
Kre2p
Ktr3p
Ktr5p
Yur1p
Ktr2p
Omh3p
Mnt3p
Omh2p
Omh1p
Omh6p
Ktr6p
Figure 3.3: Cladogram of members glycosyltransferase family 15 in S. cerevisiae (red:
в– ), in C. albicans (green: в– ), and in S. pombe (blue: в– ). The proteins that contain an
MN-amino acid motif in their stem region (only Ktr2p) or in the very begining of the con-
served sequence region mediates catalytic activity are marked with a filled square (в– ),
and proteins that do not have the MN-motif are marked with a crossed box (вҠ ).
the O-mannosyltransferase homolog (OMH) family in fission yeast and MNT proteins from
C. albicans and then a range of not yet experimentally validated proteins. As can be seen
from the cladogram presented in fig. 3.2a, homologous proteins from Pezizomycotina are
related to other members of the family in two major clades 1) with Ktr4p, Ktr5p, Ktr6p,
and Ktr7p and 2) with Ktr1p, Ktr3p and Kre2p from bakerвҖҷs yeast. Of interest, the clade
with Ktr2p and Yur1p from bakerвҖҷs yeast contains no homologs in Pezizomycotina (cf.
fig. 3.2a), although one of the proteins (UniProtKB ID: Q6CG17) in the clade is from Y.
lipolytica which also encodes for OGT as described previously (the Y. lipolytica protein is
not labelled on fig. 3.2a).
In the glycosyltransferase 39 family, there is a similar separation into clades with more or
less resemblance to homologous proteins in Pezizomycotina. Specifically, Pmt1p, Pmt5p
and Pmt7p from bakerвҖҷs yeast are all more distantly related to homologous proteins in
Pezizomycotina than other yeast PMTs (fig. 3.2b).
3.2
Conservation of the Ktr2p stem region
As outlined in the introduction, nutrient stress may induce expression of a stable short
cytoplasmic isoform of the probable mannosyltransferase Ktr2p in bakerвҖҷs yeast [20, 21].
Given this evidence and since Ktr2p does not have any close relatives in Pezizomycotina,
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.4: Multiple sequence alignment of the nine KTR family members in bakerвҖҷs yeast.
The alignment is zoomed in on six section across the KTR stem region that contains in-
frame translational alternative start sites. The confirmed alternative transcriptional start
site motif (Met-Asn) of Ktr2p is marked in red (в– ), whereas Met-Asp motifs in Ktr4p, Ktr5p
and Kre2p are marked in blue (в– ). In frame potential alternative start sites with N-terminal
small residues (i.e. Gly, Ala, Val) are marked green (в– ), and the Met-Pro-mofif in Ktr3p is
marked pink (в– ). The sequences are labelled with Sc (S. cerevisiae) and the KTR family
protein name.
Ktr2pshort is a candidate for a cytosolic protein mannosyltransferase that has been adapted
to perform a new role. However, in order for Ktr2pshort to be a more likely candidate, the
sequence of Ktr2p should have diverged from any possible Pezizomycotina homologues,
and it should be expressed in the cytosol. For this, I hypothesise that the proposed al-
ternative start site of Ktr2p is also found in homologous proteins that use cytosolic O-
mannosylation.
Studying the diversity of sequences of GT15 family members (including Ktr2p) within Sac-
charomycotina, the catalytic domain is more conserved than other regions with a high level
of protein identity. The stem region, transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic domains
are more variable, but there is a tendency for similar residues (cf. fig. 1.1 and fig. 3.6).
This also displays itself by the fact that the family has an average sequence identity of
only 37.4 % (54.2 % similarity). Only Ktr2p orthologs in other bakerвҖҷs yeast strains share
more than 90 % sequence identity with Ktr2p, and (apart from Yur1p) it is only orthologs
in other budding yeasts that share more than 50 % sequence identity with Ktr2p (Yur1p is
the closest paralog to Ktr2p with 65 % sequence identity and 70 % similarity).
3.3
Conservation of putative alternative start sites
The short isoform of Ktr2p is proposed to be the result of an alternative transcriptional
start site that also render a stabilising acetyltransferase recognition motif in the protein
sequence (i.e. an MN-motif). However, if the alternative start site in Ktr2p indeed en-
sure cytosolic expression of Ktr2pshort and if this event confers essential cytosolic O-
mannosylation, the MN-motif should be conserved on the scale of recent evolutionary
events and therefore be present in the orthologous proteins from closely related species.
It turns out that the MN-motif is present in the stem region in 28 % of the sequences that
30
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.5: Multiple sequence alignment of the glycosyltransferase 15 family members
from S. cerevisiae (Sp), S. pombe (Sp) and C. albicans (Ca) that consist of the KTRs,
OMHs and MNTs respectively.
Sugggested alternative start sites of Ktr7p, Omh4p,
Omh5p and Omh3p are marked red (в– ), and amino acids within 5 Г… of the GDP moity in
resolved structures for Ktr4p (PDB: 5A07) [48] and Kre2p (PDB: 1S4P) [49] are marked
green (в– ). A logo plot above the alignment indicates the consensus sequence, and below
the alignment an (вҲ—) marks вүҘ50 % identity and an (!) marks вүҘ85 % identity.
share high sequence identity with Ktr2p, which for the majority part are Ktr2p homologs
in other bakerвҖҷs yeast strains. A single Ktr2p homolog from S. paradoxus contain an MN-
motif it its stem region, but the motif is not present in any other Ktr2p homolog in closely
related yeast species (i.e. S. paradoxus, S. kudriavzevii, S. pastorianus, C. glabrata etc.).
The MN-motif in the Ktr2p stem region (residues 64-65) is not conserved in the stem
regions of any glycosyltransferase 15 family members either (cf. fig. 3.3), but the very be-
ginning of the common conserved region in Ktr7p in bakerвҖҷs yeast and in Omh3p, Omh4p
and Omh5p from S. pombe contains MN-motifs (cf. fig. 3.5). The positions of these MN-
motifs are also peripheral in the AlphaFold structure predictions for the respective proteins
so shorter isoforms could remain properly folded. Even though the catalytic domain for
glycosyltransferase 15 family members is annotated to start two residues N-terminally of
the mentioned MN-motifs, the position of the Asn residue in the MN-motif is the first con-
served position in the alignment ( 10
17, 59 % Asn and
7
17, 41 % Lys), and prior positions are
more variable (cf. fig. 3.5).
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.6: Multiple sequence alignment of the glycosyltransferase 15 family members
from S. cerevisiae (Sp), S. pombe (Sp) and C. albicans (Ca) that consist of the KTRs,
OMHs and MNTs respectively. Aligned residues are marked with vertical bars to visualise
the entire protein sequences. Segments marked with a black horizontal line mark gaps,
non-conserved residues are marked gray, 50 % identity is marked pale black and 90 %
identity is marked black. Sugggested alternative start sites (MN-motifs) of Ktr7p, Omh4p,
Omh5p Ktr2p and Omh3p are marked red (в– ), MD-motifs of Ktr5p, Ktr4p and Kre2p are
marked blue (в– ). The positions of the amino acids within 5 Г… of the GDP moity in resolved
structures for Ktr4p (PDB: 5A07) [48] and Kre2p (PDB: 1S4P) [49] are marked green
(в– ) for all sequences (green arrows indicate regions that act in GDP-Man binding). The
position of the active sites are also marked with an arrow.
32
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:41==
Since the OMH protein family in fission yeast is related to the KTR protein family in bakerвҖҷs
yeast, and the much mentioned alternative start site motif is also present in OMH protein
family members, I also investigated how these proteins are related to the KTRs. The family
contain membrane-tethered proteins much alike the KTRs, but there is also a soluble
family member that consist solely of the catalytic domain. The average sequence identity
of the soluble OMH family member, Omh6p, to the other GT 15 family members is 22.5 %
(47.5 % similarity) compared to an average sequence identity of 38.3 % (54.6 % similarity)
across the other family members, but nevertheless Omh6p share conserved residues at
regions related to GDP-Man binding and the active site (cf. fig. GT15 fingerprint). Indeed,
Omh6p is perhaps merely an adapted GT15 family member that lost its N-terminal region
entirely as the initiator Met of Omh6p aligns to within two residues of the position of the
suggested alternative start sites of Ktr7p, Omh3p, Omh4p and Omh5p (cf. fig. 3.5)
Besides the MN-motif which was reported to confer stability to Ktr2pshort dependent on
the acetyltransferase NatB, there are also other motifs that this enzyme recognise along
with other acetyltransferases with specific recognition motifs as described in the introduc-
tion. Within the KTR family, the Met-Asp (MD) NatC acetyltransferase substrate motif is
present in the stem regions of Kre2p, Ktr4p and Ktr5p, whereas Ktr5p and Ktr6p contain
potential NatA substrate motifs. So in the case that N-terminal acetylation increases the
halflife of these potential shorter isoform, all of these protein products are interesting can-
didates. On the other hand, Ktr3p contains an N-degradation signal for the Pro/N-end rule
pathway in its stem region (cf. fig. 3.4) that could confer degradation of of a short Ktr3p
isoform. However, none of these suggested alternative start sites are present in the stem
regions of the proteins Mnt1p, Mnt2p or Mnt3p in C. albicans which is a budding yeast
related to bakerвҖҷs yeast that do not have homologs to OGT in its genome. So if nucleocy-
toplasmic O-mannosylation is evolutionary conditioned, I would expect that other budding
yeasts have conserved the genomic signatures that introduced the cytosolic mannosyl-
transferase, and there are indications that GT15 family members are candidates in bakerвҖҷs
yeast and fission yeast, but not in C. albicans.
3.4
Structural alignment of GDP-Man binding pockets
As mentioned, I also consider the option that the cytosolic mannosyltransferase is a novel
enzyme that have affinity for protein acceptor substrates and an available sugar donor
substrate. Since GDP-Man is readily found in the cytosol, it could be the donor sugar
substrate for cytosolic O-mannosylation. Based on this hypothesis, I therefore searched
for GDP-Man binding pockets in all AlphaFold structures in an attempt to point to a novel
enzyme that have structural resemblance to a known GDP-Man binding pocket.
The alignment scores (TM-scores) for the structural alignments of the GDP-Man bind-
ing pocket of Kre2 and Ktr4 on predicted structures of all yeast proteins are shown in
fig. 3.7. As expected, the proteins with the greatest structural similarity to both the Kre2p
and Ktr4p GDP-Man binding pocket are the KTR family members, but Ktr6p has a low
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.7: Structural alignment scores (TM score) for the GDP-Man binding pocket of
Kre2p (left) and Ktr4p (right) against AlphaFold predicted structures of the entire yeast
proteome. The KTR family members are marked blue (вҖў), candidates are marked red
(вҖў) and all other proteins are marked gray. The thresholds for candidate selection were
selected a TM score >0.3 in the Kre2p alignment (left) and >0.4 in the Ktr4p alignment
(right).
score towards the Kre2p GDP-Man binding pocket (cf. fig. 3.7 (left)). The potential GDP-
Man binding proteins includes known mannosyltransferases from the ANP1/MMN9/VAN1
family, MNN1/MNT family and glycosyltransferase 32 family (e.g. Och1p and Hoc1p), but
also members of the chitin synthase family (UDP-GlcNAc binding), glucogenin and glu-
can synthase components (UDP-alpha-D-glucose binding) and the GNT family (GlcNAc
transferases) among others.
The most interesting result is that the IME2-dependent signalling protein IDS2 was part
of the candidates with a TMscore of 0.43. However, the sequence alignment of Ids2p,
Ktr4p and Kre2p do not indicate sequence conservation for the proteins, but nevertheless
the aligned sequence of Ids2p do have some similar residues at the same aligned posi-
tions that are related to GDP-Man binding in the templates (cf. fig. 3.8). IDS2 is part of
the Interpro family of nucleotide-diphospho-sugar transferases (IPR029044) by predicted
functional annotations [66] and is expressed in the cytosol and nucleus [67]. Of interest,
Ids2p only has homologs among budding yeasts (family Saccharomycetaceae), and it is
only reported to indirectly modify the activity of a protein kinase, Ime2p, during meiosis,
which makes it an interesting candidate.
Figure 3.8: Sequence alignment of Ids2p, Ktr4p and Kre2p zoomed in on residue positions
that act in GDP-Man binding in Ktr4p and Kre2p (marked green, в– )
34
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:43==
3.5
Classification of glycosites with language models
With candidate enzymes that either relocate from the secretory compartment or are only
expressed in the cytosol, my first objective with the language model was to develop a
classifier that based upon local sequence context around a single amino acid, could pre-
dict whether that local context was characteristic of a nucleocytoplasmic or extracellular
site using the ESM-1b embeddings. I firstly assumed that ESM-1b can encode informa-
tion on the local context of a protein patch, and that a small sequence segment around a
glycosylation site covers a sufficient part of the protein surface to correspond to a protein
region recognised by glycosyltransferases as an acceptor substrate. The representation
vectors of five neighbouring amino acids to either site of a glycosylation site were used to
calculate an average representation vector that would contain not only information on the
glycosylated serine or threonine, but also information on the surrounding patch.
I considered three model types based on their respective decision boundary complexity
to be able to detect if useful representation features were linearly separable or if more
complicated models were advantageous. There was no significant increase in model
performance when using non-linear classifiers, so for the most part I only present the
performance of one model type. Based on the O-glycoproteome dataset and a phos-
phoproteome dataset, I investigate different ways to represent the modified sites with the
ESM-1b model to be confident that the models are using representation features that are
relevant for the modified patches and not globally available features.
3.5.1
ESM-1b encodes biologically relevant information
It is paramount that information on the local context on a protein can be extracted from the
ESM-1b embeddings for it to be a useful method to represent local binding sites. To check
this, I extracted chemically biased sequence stretches from yeast proteins and assessed
how well logistic regression classifiers could distinguish the amino acid segments and
how biased segments had to be for the models to be successful (cf. section 2.5 for a
description on how this was done). When segments were maximally biased most models
were perfectly able to distinguish the sequence fragments regardless of the amino acid
composition, and when the 90 % quantiles and 10 % quantiles were classified the models
had a median accuracy of 90 % across the AA-indices (cf. fig. A.1). When the sequence
fragments were less biased the estimated accuracy fell, and when the models were tasked
to distinguish the 25 % and 75 % quantiles from yeast proteins, the median accuracy was
just below 70 %, but some AA-indices rendered indistinguishable fragments and yet other
indices gave a high degree of separation in the logistic regression model (cf. fig. 3.9a).
When the degree of separation between the sets of sequence fragments was reduced
to the quantiles 45 % and 55 %, the median accuracy was below 50 %, and generally
the logistic regression models were unable to distinguish these sequence fragments (cf.
fig. 3.9b). Because glycosylation primarily takes place on intrinsically disordered regions
of a protein, I wanted to know to what extent the ESM-1b representations could represent
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Classification of 25 % and 75 % quantiles
(b) Classification of 45 % and 55 % quantiles
Figure 3.9: Histograms of estimated accuracy for logistic regression models trained to
classify representations of biologically biased sequence fragments across all 566 sets of
AA-indices.
biological information about these segments beyond merely amino acid composition. I
found ten AA-index sets that correlate with disorder and trained a logistic regression model
and a support vector machine model to separate more or less biased sequence segments
based on these AA-indices. As a baseline, the models were also trained on sequence
fragments from generated random yeast protein sequences biased by ten sets of random
amino acid index values because these fragments should contain no biologically relevant
information beyond amino acid composition frequency in the respective quantiles. When
the fragments are dominated by a high degree of amino acid composition bias, both the
random and the real fragments are equally easy to separate from the representations (cf.
fig. 3.10). However, when the bias becomes less prominent, sequence fragments biased
using the AA-indices are easier to separate than sequence fragments biased by amino
acid composition (cf. fig. 3.10). In fact, models trained on sequence fragments from the
25 % and 75 % quantiles have an estimated accuracy of about 80 % which is in the higher
end of the histogram of the accuracies across all AA-indices at that level of bias (compare
fig. 3.10 (left) at вҖңQ25-Q75вҖқ with fig. 3.9a).
3.5.2
Information leakage in protein embeddings
To start things off, I classified average representations of glycosylation patches with a
decision tree model and estimated the test set error over 10-fold cross validation where
the number of allowed used features in the classifier were increased. The results show
that the test error levels out when around 6 representation features are used by the clas-
sifier (cf. fig. A.2) indicating that only a small number of features in the high dimensional
representations contain information about the location of glycosylated patches. The dis-
tributions of the seven features that separates the two location classes can be seen in
fig. A.5.
I then asked how well these classifiers can classifiers predict the location label of repre-
36
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.10: Average prediction accuracy for logistic regression models (left) and support
vector machine models (right) trained to classify representations of sequence fragments
that were biased at various degrees (primary axis) based on either 10 AA-indices corre-
lated with disorder (blue curves) or 10 sets of random amino acid index values (orange).
Shaded area is a 95 % confidence interval for the accuracy estimates across the 10 AA-
indices and the 5 folds (cf. fig. A.3 for trajectories for each AA-index).
sentations of glycosylated patches, because if the glycosylation substrates are different
it could indicate that the nucleocytoplasmic signalling enzyme is distinct from the known
mannosyltransferases. It turns out that the logistic regression model trained on average
representations of O-mannose site data has an estimated probability of correctly predict-
ing the site localisation of 0.87 (95 % CI 0.86вҖ“0.89) (cf. fig. 3.11) and the average ROC
AUC metric across cross validation folds is 0.95 Вұ 0.02 (std. dev.) for that same classi-
fier (cf. fig. 3.11). However, I suspected that the model was detecting other information
unrelated to the specific glycosylation sites, as when I trained the models on average rep-
resentations of sites outside glycosylated regions (i.e randomly sampled non-glycosylated
sites), the classifiers are also able to decipher information in the data to distinguish the
site localisation label with an accuracy estimate of 0.83 (95 % CI 0.80вҖ“0.86) and average
ROC AUC is 0.87 Вұ 0.05.
Furthermore, when the model that was trained on average representations of glycosy-
lation sites was used to predict the localisation of randomly sampled non-glycosylated
sites, it was able to predict the correct label of 82 % of the non-glycosylated sites. And
the other way around, the model that was trained on data the from randomly sampled
non-glycosylated sites can correctly predict the localisation label of the glycosylation sites
in 86 % of the cases.
Whether the model trained on glycosylated sites and the model trained on non-glycosylat-
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
37
==PAGE:46==
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
Full length sequences
SVM
LogReg
RF
15 AA NTD
SVM
LogReg
RF
40 AA NTD
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ROC AUC
Full length sequences
SVM
LogReg
RF
15 AA NTD
SVM
LogReg
RF
40 AA NTD
Figure 3.11: Accuracy estimates (top row) and average ROC AUC (bottom row) for mod-
els trained on representations calculated on full length protein sequences (left column),
protein sequences with 15 amino acid N-terminally deleted (middle column), and protein
sequences with 40 amino acid N-terminally deleted (right column). The three clusters of
bars in each plot correspond to the evaluated model type: Support vector machine (SVM),
logistic regression (LogReg) and random forest (RF). The colors indicate which sites were
used as data: bars colored red (в– ) are trained on average representations of O-mannose
modified regions, and bars colored green (в– ) are trained on average representations of
sequence streches further than 25 amino acids away from any glycosylation site.
38
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:47==
ed sites emphasise the same representation features is, however, not as clear because
the coefficients of the logistic regression models are correlated with a Pearson correla-
tion coefficient of 0.43 when the representations are computed from full length protein
sequences.
The model trained on glycosylated sites maintain higher positive predictive power for
thresholds that give higher true positive rate than the model that was trained on non-
glycosylated sites (cf. fig. 3.12 , left pane). So when the threshold in the model trained on
non-glycosylated sites is moved so fewer false positive predictions are made (i.e. cytoso-
lic site predicted secretory), it inaccurately predicts the class for more secretory proteins.
Is the information leakage due to signal peptides?
I hypothesised that since the encoded information that these models are detecting is not
specific to glycosylated regions, I considered that ESM-1b may bias the amino acid repre-
sentations based on the presence of a signal peptide (i.e., information leakage of cellular
compartment based on the presence of the signal peptide in the full protein sequence).
To investigate this, I transformed the protein sequences by N-terminally truncating the se-
quences by 15 and 40 amino acids to remove any dependency of signal peptides in the
amino acid representations. (These truncated sequence foundations are abbreviated 15
AA NTD and 40 AA NTD respectively).
With representations calculated on 15 AA NTD sequences, the logistic regression model
trained on glycosylation sites have an estimated accuracy of 0.87 (95 % CI 0.86вҖ“0.89) and
the average ROC AUC is 0.95 Вұ 0.01; and when trained on representation of randomly
sampled non-glycosylated sites, the estimated accuracy is 0.84 (95 % CI 0.81вҖ“0.86) and
the average ROC AUC is 0.89 Вұ 0.02 (cf. fig. 3.11).
When 40 amino acids are removed from the N-terminal, the logistic regression models
trained on either glycosylation or non-glycosylation sites have estimated accuracies of
0.86 (95 % CI 0.84вҖ“0.88) respectively 0.80 (95 % CI 0.77вҖ“0.83), and the average ROC
AUC metrics are 0.93 Вұ 0.01 respectively 0.87 Вұ 0.02 (cf. fig. 3.11).
So when 15 and 40 amino acids are removed, the models trained on glycosylation site
data and non-glycosylated site data performs equally well as the models trained on full
length protein embeddings. And similar to when full length protein sequences were used
to compute representations, the logistic regression coefficients for the models trained on
glycosylated and non-glycosylated sites have Pearson correlation coefficients of 0.49 for
15 AA NTD and 0.47 for 40 AA NTD.
However, in a similar manner as when the full length protein sequences were used to
compute representations, the ROC curves show that it seems there exists an optimal
threshold to balance the true positive rate and the false positive rate for both data sets,
but the precision-recall curves indicate again that the model trained on non-glycosylated
data loose positive predictive power at lower recall values than the models trained on
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
39
==PAGE:48==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True positive rate
Full length protein sequences
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False positive rate
15 AA NTD
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False positive rate
40 AA NTD
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Precision
Full length protein sequences
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
15 AA NTD
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
40 AA NTD
Figure 3.12: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves (top row) and precision-recall
curves (bottom row) for one fold of a logistic regression model trained on representations
calculated on full length protein sequences (left column), protein sequences with 15 amino
acid N-terminally deleted (middle column), and protein sequences with 40 amino acid N-
terminally deleted (right column). The colors indicate which sites were used as data: bars
colored red (в– ) are trained on average representations of O-mannose modified regions,
and bars colored green (в– ) are trained on average representations of sequence streches
further than 25 amino acids away from any glycosylation site.
40
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:49==
glycosylation data (cf. fig. 3.12).
3.5.3
Amino acid representations contain context information
Since the ESM-1b uses attention to create context dependent representations of each
amino acid in the sequence, it is expected that relevant information on what makes a site
glycosylatable is encoded in the representation of the glycosylated serine or threonine.
In that way, it is not needed to compute the average representation across amino acids
that form a glycosylatable patch because the information can be retrieved from the glyco-
sylated residue itself. Indeed, when the classifier models are trained on the representa-
tion vectors for the glycosylated Ser/Thr or for the non-glycosylated amino acids they are
comparably able to distinguish the proteins in terms of location. The logistic regression
models trained on representation vectors of O-mannosylation sites or non-glycosylated
sites have an estimated accuracy of 0.85 (95 % CI 0.83вҖ“0.86) respectively 0.79 (95 %
CI 0.76вҖ“0.82) and an average ROC AUC metric of 0.93 Вұ 0.02 respectively 0.85 Вұ 0.02
(cf. fig. 3.13). The trajectory of the precision-recall curves for the two models are similar
as what was described previously. The model trained on glycosylated sites maintains a
positive predictive power of approximately 0.9 when the recall value is 0.8, whereas the
positive predictive power is only about 0.65 for the model trained on non-glycosylated
sites.
The two models do not use the same set of features to distinguish the class labels, as the
Pearson correlation coefficient for the logistic regression parameters is 0.39. But indeed
when the glycosylated sites are represented through averages over amino acid patches
compared to the single amino acid representation, parameters in the two logistic regres-
sion models are correlated with a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.86 (cf. fig. 3.14a for
the scatter plot).
3.5.4
Unifying the glycopeptide context reduces information content
It is now clear that the initial idea that one could access local context information by sub-
setting the representation matrix as derived from the full protein sequence may not be
viable because all amino acid representation vectors seem to contain information that
can be used to classify sites according to protein-wide labels such as localisation even
though the separation is more clear for the glycosylation site data.
To remove the influence of the surrounding sequence when calculating representations,
but still have the ESM-1b model do calculations on something that looks like a protein, I
chose to flank each glycosylated amino acid patch with a common protein sequence to
reduce the variation in the feature values most related to protein-wide attention contacts
because then the protein sequence context would be identical.
As a random control, random sequence fragments were flanked by the same protein and
the classification models attempt to predict random labels of the random fragments. On
this construction, all classifiers fail as expected with accuracy estimates around 50 %,
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
41
==PAGE:50==
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ROC AUC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Precision
Figure 3.13: Accuracy estimates (top, left) and average area under the receiver operator
characteristic curves (ROC AUC) (top, right) based on five cross validation folds for three
model types (SVM: support vector machine, LogReg: logistic regression, RF: random
forest) trained on representation vectors for amino acids (i.e. without averaging) that are
either O-mannosylated (в– ) or at least 25 amino acids away from O-mannosylated residues
(в– ) show high accuracy and ROC AUC for both glycosylation sites and non-glycosylation
sites. Representative ROC curve (bottom, left) and precision-recall curve (bottom, right)
for the logistic regression model.
42
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:51==
(a) Pearson correlation coefficient: 0.86
(b) Pearson correlation coefficient: 0.37
Figure 3.14: Scatter plots of logistic regression coefficients for the model trained on full
length sequence representations of glycosylation patches (primary axis) against model
coefficients for the model trained on representations of modified residues (left) and model
coefficients for the model trained on representations of 25 amino acid fragments centred
on glycosylation sites (right).
ROC AUC around 0.5 for all three classifier models and the precision-recall curve at the
level of the baseline majority vote classifier (cf. fig. 3.15, orange). As a positive control
that would indicate the presence of context features outside the scope of the flanked
fragment, random sequence fragments were flanked by one of two protein sequences
and classification models were trained to classify which protein that flanked the random
peptide based on the representations of the random amino acid stretches. On this task,
all three classification models accurately predict which context protein was used when
calculating the representation for all fragments. This indicates that when there is no local
information present in a representation vector, the context remains 100 % accessible (cf.
fig. 3.15 blue).
Together, this suggests that if all glycosylated peptide fragments were derived from the
same protein sequence, then the global context information dominates the embedding
for the glycopeptides, which would be shared amongst all glycopeptides, and could not
be used by classifiers to discriminate between each glycopeptide. Using the synthetic
harness to unify the protein context for all glycopeptides, all three model types perform
equally well, but the random forest model has the highest estimated accuracy of 0.67
(95 % CI 0.64вҖ“0.69) and average ROC AUC metric 0.72 Вұ 0.03 (cf. fig. 3.15, red), but
the performance metrics are not significantly higher compared to the models trained on
harnessed non-glycosylated peptides. The models trained on that dataset perform similar
to the harness random sequence fragments (cf. fig. 3.15, green), but the logistic regres-
sion model does not emphasise the same features as the harnessed random fragments
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
43
==PAGE:52==
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ROC AUC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Precision
Figure 3.15: Classification performance of four sequence foundations for calculating patch
representations where 25 amino acid fragments are flanked by a common protein to unify
the fragment context. The red (в– ) color corresponds to glycosylated sequence fragments,
and the green (в– ) color corresponds to sequence fragments at least 25 amino acids from
a glycosylated residue all flanked by the same protein and classsified as either extracel-
lular or cytosolic patches. The blue (в– ) correspond to random 25 amino acid segments
flanked by one of two proteins and classified according to the context protein, and the
orange (в– ) color corresponds to random 25 amino acid segments flanked by the same
protein and classified according to random labels. Estimated model accuracies (top, left)
and average area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC AUC) (top, right)
are based on five cross validation folds for three model types (SVM: support vector ma-
chine, LogReg: logistic regression, RF: random forest) trained on average representation
vectors taken over 11 vectors that correspond to the vector for the site and five vectors to
either side of the site in the amino acid sequence along with representative ROC curves
(bottom, left) and precision-recall curves (bottom, right).
44
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:53==
summarised by a Pearson correlation coefficient of the modelsвҖҷ parameters close to zero.
For the model trained on harnessed glycopeptides, the trade-off between true positive
rate and false positive rate follows a trajectory closer to that of a baseline classifier than
to that of the models trained on full length protein sequences (cf. fig. 3.12 and fig. 3.15),
and the positive predictive power drops to about 0.8 for a true positive rate at only 0.2 (cf.
fig. 3.15).
3.5.5
Embedding glycopeptide fragments directly
Instead of calculating representations of synthetic sequences as above with the har-
nessed glycopeptides to unify the context, it is also an option to simply remove the context
by subsetting the sequences to the sites of interest and then compute representations of
these protein fragments. When embeddings of 25 amino acid fragments that are centred
on either glycosylation sites or randomly sampled non-glycosylated sites on the same
proteins are classified in terms of location, the performance is comparable to when the
context in unified by calculating representations of harnessed peptides. The logistic re-
gression model trained on glycosylated fragments has an estimated accuracy of 0.67
(95 % CI 0.65вҖ“0.70) and average ROC AUC of 0.74 Вұ 0.03; whereas the model trained
on fragments of arbitrary sites has an estimated accuracy of 0.45 (95 % CI 0.42вҖ“0.49) and
average ROC AUC of 0.43 Вұ 0.04 (cf. fig. 3.16, top). When classifying the glycosylated
fragments, the precision-recall curve is even slightly improved compared to the harness
construction as the positive predictive power is 0.8 for a true positive rate at 0.4, which
still has a low false positive rate at about 0.2 (cf. fig. 3.16, bottom).
3.5.6
Phosphorylation sites as a placeholder for cytosolic glycosylation
Because the cytosolic glycoproteome consist of fewer proteins than the secreted glyco-
proteome, one way to augment the dataset with cytosolic proteins is to consider phospho-
rylated sites as phosphorylation only takes place in the cytosol. In that regard, I wanted
to assess the separation between cytosolic phosphorylation sites and extracellular gly-
cosylation sites, and then use a classification model trained on this combined dataset to
evaluate the class distribution of cytosolic glycosylation sites in that model. As described
in the introduction, phosphorylation sites overlap with O-glycosylation sites on cytosolic
proteins, and in general PTM sites correlate with disordered regions of a protein [68], so
even though the classification task simultaneously separates cytosolic from extracellu-
lar and phosphorylation from glycosylation the predictions on cytosolic glycosylation sites
indicate whether the location signals are stronger than the PTM type.
When the classification models are trained on representations of extracellular glycosyla-
tion sites and intracellular phosphorylation sites, and the sequence representations are
calculated based on the full length protein sequence, the classification performance is
comparable to when the classifiers were trained on representations of glycosylated sites
in the two compartments with estimated accuracy 0.92 (95 % CI 0.90вҖ“0.93) and average
ROC AUC metric 0.97 Вұ 0.02. The ROC curve and precision-recall curve show almost
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
45
==PAGE:54==
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ROC AUC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Precision
Figure 3.16: Estimated classification accuracies (top, right) and average area under the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (top, left) across 5-fold cross validation of
support vector machine (SVM), logistic regression (LogReg) and random forest (RF) mod-
els trained on average representations of embeddings of 25 amino acid sequence frag-
ments centred on O-mannose sites (in red, в– ) or on sites at least 25 amino acids away
from O-glycosylation sites in the protein sequence (in green, в– ). For both datasets the
models classify the site-based fragments as either cytosolic or extracellular. ROC curves
(bottom, left) and precision-recall curves (bottom, right) were based on a 50:50 data split.
46
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:55==
optimal tradeoffs between the positive predictive power, true positive rate and false pos-
itive rate (cf. fig. 3.17).
However, because of the information leakage, 25 amino acid
fragments centred on either the phosphorylation sites or on the extracellular glycosylation
sites were also used to train the classifiers. When trained on fragments with phospho-
rylation sites and extracellular glycosylation sites, the logistic regression model has an
estimated accuracy of 0.73 (95 % CI 0.71вҖ“0.75) and an average ROC AUC metric of
0.80 Вұ 0.02 (cf. fig. 3.17). This is better classification performance than for the mod-
els trained on 25 amino acid fragment representations and on the fragments with unified
context which could indicate that phosphorylated patches have a slightly more uniform
sequence or that phosphorylated sites are distinct from extracellular glycosylation sites to
greater extent than intracellular glycosylation sites.
When the classification models are trained on randomly sampled non-modified sites, the
performance of the three model types are not comparable. The support vector machine
model has an estimated accuracy of 0.80 (95 % CI 0.78вҖ“0.83) and average ROC AUC
of 0.90 Вұ 0.02; the logistic regression model has an estimated accuracy of 0.88 (95 %
CI 0.86вҖ“0.90) and ROC AUC of 0.960 Вұ 0.003; and the random forest model has an
estimated accuracy of 0.93 (95 % CI 0.91вҖ“0.95) and ROC AUC of 0.98 Вұ 0.01 (cf. fig. 3.17
blue).
The ROC curve for the logistic regression model trained on the fragments of non-modified
sites (blue) show a similar trade-off between true positive rate and false positive rate com-
pared to the model trained on full length representations of PTM sites (red) (cf. fig. 3.17).
However, the positive predictive power declines more when the decision boundary is
shifted to favour a higher true positive rate (cf. fig. 3.17).
So after having trained these model types on the three different datasets, the label of the
cytosolic glycosylation sites were predicted. When the models were trained on PTM sites
from full length protein sequence representations, the majority of the glycosylation sites
have most in common with cytosolic phosphorylation sites in the models (cf. fig. 3.18, left).
This biased class distribution is reduced to almost 50:50 when the models are trained on
fragments of PTM sites (cf. fig. 3.18, middle). And lastly, when the models are trained
on fragments around non-modified residues the cytosolic glycosylation sites have most in
common with the extracellular glycosylation sites in the models (cf. fig. 3.18, right).
These results indicate that fragments around glycosylation sites and phosphorylation
sites are similar which confirms my expectation that since these patches likely are dis-
ordered, they may share a similar local sequence context. However, the classification
model trained to separate the fragments into cytosolic and extracellular compartments
were somewhat skilful (cf. presentation above and fig. 3.17). Since the model trained on
full length representations group the cytosolic glycosylation sites with cytosolic phosphory-
lation sites, it could again indicate that protein-wide attention contacts that learn sequence
features related to localisation (e.g. bias in amino acid frequency) dominate the modelвҖҷs
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
47
==PAGE:56==
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
SVM
LogReg
RF
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ROC AUC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
False positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
True positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Precision
Figure 3.17: Estimated classification accuracies (top, right) and average area under the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (top, left) across 5-fold cross validation of
support vector machine (SVM), logistic regression (LogReg) and random forest (RF) mod-
els trained on average patch representations of sites on extracellular (C1) or intracellular
proteins (C2). In red (в– ), representations of extracellular O-glycosylation sites and phos-
phorylation sites were subsetted from full length protein sequence representations (full
length, PTM-sites); in green (в– ), 25 amino acid sequence representations were used to
classify the same two types of post-translational modification (PTM) (25-fragment, PTM-
sites); and in blue (в– ), 25 amino acid sequence representations were used to classify
representations of sites at least 25 amino acids from a PTM site (25-fragment, not-PTM-
site). ROC curves (bottom, left) and precision-recall curves (bottom, right) for the three
classification tasks were based on a 50:50 data split.
48
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.18: Class distributions of predictions of cytosolic glycosylation sites as either
intracellular phosphorylation sites (marked red, в– ) or extracellular glycosylation sites
(marked green, в– ). The class distributions were evaluated on models tasked to clas-
sify phosphorylation sites from extracellular glycosylation sites that were trained on PTM
site patches based on a) full length protein sequence embeddings (left) or b) embeddings
of 25 amino acid fragments (middle). Models were also tasked to classify arbitrary sites
not close to either phosphorylation sites on intracellular proteins or glycosylation sites on
extracellular proteins trained on embeddings of 25 amino acid fragments centred on these
positions (right). Each bar is the average class distribution for 3 model types: logistic re-
gression, support vector machine, and random forest. The error bars indicate standard
deviation (i.e. left: Вұ0.08, middle: Вұ0.04, right: Вұ0.04)
decision boundary. I hypothesise that the fragments around non-modified residues are
more likely to be from disordered regions when sampled from an extracellular protein than
when sampled from a cytosolic protein, and this would explain why the cytosolic glycosy-
lation sites are more similar to fragments without modifications on extracellular proteins
than they are similar to non-modified residues on cytosolic proteins.
3.6
Yeast cell lysis protocol assessment
Now, I have covered the bioinformatic analyses and turn towards my laboratory work. As
I outlined in the introduction, the initial aim was to assay Ktr2p for protein mannosyltrans-
ferase activity. Working towards assembling a protocol to purify Ktr2p from yeast cultures,
I assessed four yeast cell lysis protocols for their yields: 1) zymolase mediated cell wall
degradation and lysis with detergent, 2) alkaline lysis and acid precipitation of proteins
(Rout laboratory), 3) cell lysis by disruption using glass beads, and 4) cell lysis by boiling
in 5 % SDS and sonication.
Degrading the yeast cell wall with zymolase and lysing cells with detergent rendered pro-
teome extractions with a large degree of protein degradation (cf. fig. 3.19 (left, Zymolase))
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.19: Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE of whole cell lysates with the Rout protocol
(left) and enzymatic cell wall degradation (right)
which was not observed with alkaline lysis and acid precipitation of proteins (cf. fig. 3.19
(both subfigs., Rout protocol)). However, because the proteins are precipitated in the
Rout protocol, this extraction method cannot be used to purify native Ktr2p. Instead, it
can be used as a go-to extraction protocol for validation of plasmid expression in later
stages of the protocol assembly.
Cell lysis by centrifugation with glass beads yields comparably well preserved proteomes
as with the Rout protocol, however, the KTR1-GFP strain sample had extensive degrada-
tion (cf. fig. 3.19). Using boiling SDS and sonication for cell lysis had low yields compared
to using the Rout lab protocol and glass beads (cf. fig. A.4a)
3.7
Western blot for GFP-KTRs
I prepared western blots of the whole cell lysates to validate that GFP-tagged KTR family
proteins were extracted in the cell lysis protocols without degradation. For both acid pre-
cipitation and glass bead lysis protocols, whole cell lysate preparations from the PMT1
TAP strain (negative GFP control, NC) yield visible bands at the weight expected for GFP-
tagged KTRs (arrow in fig. 3.20), which are also visible in all four KTR strains prepared
with the Rout protocol and in two out of three samples prepared with glass bead lysis.
However, in addition to the expected bands, there are multiple other visible bands in the
western blot (cf. fig. 3.20; also cf. fig. A.4b for western blot with higher contrast, but without
a negative control). This strongly suggest that the antibodies bind to other epitopes than
the GFP-tag.
50
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.20: Anti-GFP western blot from whole protein lysates of GFP-tagged KTR strains
(i.e. KTR1, KTR3, KTR4 and KTR6) prepared either with alkaline lysis and acid precip-
itation (Rout lysis protocol) or cell disruption using glass beads (glass bead lysis). The
arrow indicates the expected weight for GFP-tagged KTRs.
3.8
O-linked glycoproteome in IDS2 KO strain
I identified Ids2p as a candidate to act in cytosolic O-mannosylation by searching for GDP-
Man binding motifs in the AlphaFold structure database, and then moved to test whether
cytosolic O-mannosylation was absent or affected in an IDS2 KO yeast strain. I prepared
whole cell lysates from an IDS2 KO yeast strain and a PMT1 TAP yeast strain that I expect
to have unaffected cytosolic O-mannosylation. The trypsin digested proteomes from the
two yeast cultures were chemically labelled with a light or a heavy isotope respectively so
I could couple peptides together and compare the masses of otherwise identical peptides
in the mass spectrum.
In total, 806 coupled peptides from 106 secretory proteins, 29 cytosolic proteins and 9
ambiguously localised proteins were identified in the mass spectrometry samples. I cal-
culated the mass ratios of all coupled peptides, and to remove outlier measurements, I
only considered the median mass ratio for each unique peptide. Median mass ratios of
isotope-labelled peptides are centred around unity, and peptide mass ratios not close to
unity are either low at approximately 10вҲ’3 or high at approximately 103 (cf. fig. 3.21a
for median mass ratios for each identified protein). To assess the variation in the mea-
surements, I analysed the mass ratios of all non-modified peptides identified in the mass
spectrometer (i.e. 4111 peptides). The distribution of mass ratios for these peptides with-
out hexose modifications are also centred on unity with tails to approximately 10вҲ’1 and
101, but also with peaks between 10вҲ’4вҖ“10вҲ’3 and 103вҖ“104 (cf. fig. 3.21b). Overall, there is
no significant increase in the mass ratios of peptides from cytosolic proteins compared to
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
51
==PAGE:60==
Secretory
Cytosol
Unknown
10вҲ’3
10вҲ’1
101
103
Heavy/Light
(a) O-hexose modified peptides
-4
-2
0
2
4
log10(H/L)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Peptides
(b) Not glycosylated peptides
Figure 3.21: Median log10 transformed mass ratios of peptides from the heavy isotope
labelled PMT-TAP proteome to the light isotope labelled IDS2 KO proteome (left) where
the peptides are labelled as either secretory, cytosolic or unknown based on the location
of their parent protein or the compartment the peptide faces for transmembrane proteins.
Distribution of transformed mass ratios for peptides in the samples that did not contain
O-Hexose modifications (right) show the error distribution.
those from secretory proteins. However, because only 29 cytosolic proteins were detected
in the samples, the experiment does not cover enough of the cytosolic glycoproteome to
rule out Ids2p as a candidate.
52
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:61==
4
Discussion
4.1
Evolution of cytosolic O-mannosylation
The research group at the Copenhagen Center for Glycomics has confirmed experimen-
tally that both S. cerevisiae and S. pombe perform O-mannosylation in the cytosol, and
interrogation of the genome confirms that both these organisms lack homologues to OGT,
while in the fungi A. niger (Pezizomycotina) that encode for homologs of OGT in its
genome, cytosolic O-mannosylation could not be detected, indicating that usage of O-
mannosylation corresponds with a genomic signature of the loss of OGT. My interpreta-
tion of this signature compared against the phylogenetic relationships between the three
major subdivisions of Ascomycota [17] is that OGT was lost independently in both bud-
ding yeasts (Saccharomycotina) and fission yeasts (Taphrinomycotina), as the OGT ho-
molog is present within members of the filamentous fungi (Pezizomycotina) subdivision
(cf. fig. 4.1).
This seems critical to the hypothesis that cytosolic O-mannosylation was favourable in
some environmental setting of an ancient fungi such that disruption and ultimately loss of
OGT had no effect on cellular fitness, because switching from using O-GlcNAcylation to O-
mannosylation was two independent events in evolution. If such two events occurred, why
was it O-mannosylation that came to act in nucleocytoplasmic signalling in both cases?
My hypothesis is that the shortest possible path (i.e. also the most likely) between using
O-GlcNAcylation and an alternative sugar that either maintains or improves cellular fitness
fall on introducing a protein mannosyltransferase in the cytosolic compartment. Because
these yeasts are related, it is still possible that whatever enzyme that requires the fewest
and most likely adaptations is within the same family of proteins, even though the adap-
tive mutations occurred at unrelated events. In other words, the events may have been
separate, but conditioned on the same heritage, so the most likely outcomes could likely
be correlated.
4.1.1
Cytoplasmic isoforms of GT15 family members
In bakerвҖҷs yeast, Ktr2pshort was reported in the cytosol and these type II membrane-
tethered proteins with stem regions can relatively easy gain an alternative start site and
relocalise to the cytosol. However, protein binding domains should also be present so the
enzyme can bring both protein and sugar substrates close to each other. In that regard,
the extended loops in Ktr5p and Ktr7p could be interesting to compare to other extended
loops that bind protein. However, Ktr5p and Ktr7p are closer related to GT15 proteins in
Pezizomycotina than Ktr2p is (cf. fig. 3.2a). In fission yeast, three OMH proteins contain
an MN-motif and Omh6p only consist of the catalytic domain and is expressed in the cy-
tosol. Therefore, it would also be interesting to functionally characterise Omh6p in terms
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.1: Phylogenetic tree of Ascomycota divided into the three subdivisions: Taphri-
nomycotina, Saccharomycotina and Pezizomycotina. The red color indicates that OGT
homologs are found in Pezizomycotina and in the families Dipodascaceae/Trichomona-
scaceae and Lipomycetaceae, whereas the orange color indicates families without OGT
homologs. Adapted from figure 2 in Li et al. [17].
of substrate binding.
If the alternative start sites are functional in the GT15 family, then I would expect them
to be conserved within the family. But between pairs of KTR paralogs (i.e. Ktr2p-Yur1p,
Kre2p-Ktr6p and Ktr5p-Ktr7p) alternative start sites either disappears or changes. That
is, Kre2p contains an MD-motif, but Ktr6p does not have any; Ktr2p has an MN-motif, but
Yur1p does not; and Ktr7p has an MN-motif, but Ktr5p has an MD-motif within in its stem
region that appear unrelated to the MN-motif of Ktr7p (cf. fig. 3.6). On the other hand,
if there exist a mechanism where yeast can selectively use the alternative transcriptional
start sites, the absence of such sites in some of the KTRs could maintain transcription of
secretory KTRs while producing cytosolic isoforms.
4.1.2
GDP-Man binding proteins
I based the structural search for novel candidates on the hypothesis that GDP-Man is the
donor sugar substrate in the cytosolic compartment, but dolichol-phosphate-ОІ-D-mannose
(Dol-P-Man) is synthesised on the cytosolic phase of the ER membrane and could also be
the sugar donor substrate. Low quality crystal structures of Pmt1p in complex with Dol-
P-Man (PDB: 6P25 and 6P2R) is available which could be used to scan the AlphaFold
database for other potential donor sugar binding proteins. However, since extended loops
in PMTs govern enzyme activity, the Dol-P-Man binding proteins may not have predicted
loop structures in the same conformation as the solved structure for Pmt1 in complex with
the ligand. In relation to my previous point on the likelihood of adaptive mutations, it also
appears more unlikely that multi-pass transmembrane proteins change their topology, but
yet again if there exist a cytosolic protein with affinity for lipid-linked mannose it could be
interesting too.
With regards to the structural alignments of GDP-Man binding pockets, the aligned residue
54
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:63==
pairs for the candidates were not further analysed nor structurally compared. This would
of course be an important validation step to ensure that the aligned residues are oriented
similarly in the template and the predicted structure such that GDP-Man binding is prob-
able for that candidate. I did not pursue to describe Ids2p extensively before testing it in
the laboratory, but since the protein appears to be unique to budding yeasts, expressed in
the cytosol and have homology to nucleotide-diphosphate glycosyltransferases it would
be of interest to further investigate genomic signatures of IDS2 and the structural folds in
its AlphaFold structure prediction.
4.2
Limitations of using language models for glycosylation
My analysis shows that there is a risk that representations of glycosylation sites are pre-
dominantly biased by the protein context and less by local features that could indicate
glycosylatability, and maybe this is because the ESM-1b model might not represent dis-
ordered regions with meaning.
Specifically, when ESM-1b representations of full length proteins were subsetted to repre-
sentations of glycosylatable fragments, the glycosites from the cytosolic and the extracel-
lular compartments were linearly separable in the embedded space, but so were randomly
chosen non-glycosylated sites (cf. fig. 3.11). However, the two linear separation bound-
aries likely focused on different features in the respective representations as the logistic
regression coefficients were only vaguely correlated.
Truncating the sequences slightly be removing N-terminal regions that could contain sig-
nal peptides did not influence the separability of either glycosylation sites or non-glycosy-
lated sites according to location (cf. fig. 3.11), but again the models seem to emphasise
different features when classifying glycosylation sites and non-glycosylation sites.
When I classified random sequence fragments, information on even moderate biases in
amino acid composition was encoded in the representations (cf. fig. 3.10), and the perfor-
mance of the classifiers trained on вҖңharnessedвҖқ and fragmented sequences is so low that
just a slight imbalance in amino acid composition between the cytosolic and extracellular
glycosites can explain the separability (cf. fig. 3.15).
Because the extracellular space is oxidative and the intracellular space is reducing, this
gives an observable bias in amino acid frequency on the surface of proteins in the ex-
tracellular and cytosolic compartments [69]. For example, there are significantly more
Arg, but also Ser and Thr on extracellular protein surfaces than on cytosolic ones which
also relates to the extent of glycosylation on extracellular proteins, and there are signif-
icantly more charged amino acids (Asp, Glu, Lys, Arg, His) on protein surfaces in the
nucleocytoplasmic compartment [69]. Given the results and the nature of Attention, it is
safe to assume that these obvious frequency biases in protein sequences are learned
by language models, because a baseline prediction performance in the masked learning
objective could be to assess the surrounding sequence, compute the distribution of amino
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
55
==PAGE:64==
acids and predict according to this estimated distribution based on amino acid frequency.
Since linear projections of ESM-1b representations can be used to classify sequence el-
ements according to secondary structure with an accuracy of approximately 70 % [32], I
initially hypothesised that also disordered regions have some tendency towards a given
fold represented in the embedded space. If that is the case (in opposition to the case
where disordered regions are represented without any focused local attention contacts)
then it may be possible to structurally categorise disordered regions and maybe even
observe distinct substrate specificities for e.g. kinases and glycosyltransferases. But as
I already discussed, the representations of glycosylated sites does not seem to include
features useful to distinguish cytosolic and extracellular glycosites. Because if there were
any such features that contain information beyond amino acid composition between the
compartments, those features on structural propensity of disordered regions should still
be accessible when the true protein context is absent. This either indicate that the gly-
cosites in the two compartments are similar or that the ESM-1b model does not represent
disordered regions as anything but low signals towards any of the structural folds that the
models does encode.
A representation vector for an amino acid can be used to predict amino acids more than
24 residues away in sequence with an average positive predictive value of about 40вҖ“50 %
[32] which indicate that the extent of context-dependency in the encoding is substantial
along with the representation of folds and structural homology. This aligns with my in-
terpretation that the attention contacts are distributed across the entire sequence, but I
do speculate that some feature values are predominantly governed by local context be-
cause information on secondary structure is present in linear projections. Since the per-
formance of ESM-1b on representing truncated sequences have not been documented,
I do assume that the ability of ESM-1b to represent folds and secondary structure of a
stretch of amino acids is to a large extent independent of the context in order to make the
argument. However, intuitively this should also be the case for secondary structural folds
that are governed by residue side chain interactions within the fold. However, a point of
critique in the argument is that spatial restraints on conformations of disordered regions
that depend on the conformation of other folds have no chance of being appropriately
embedded when the true protein context is removed, and since I expect that the stability
of various conformations of disordered regions are influenced by within-protein interac-
tions, this is an issue when interpreting the results from the вҖңharnessвҖқ-construction and
the fragmented sequences.
4.2.1
Comparability of glycosylated and non-glycosylated sites
The non-glycosylated dataset was constructed by sampling only one non-modified residue
from each representative protein which resulted in a greater class imbalance for the non-
modified training data than for the modified residues. I fitted the models with class weights
to make up for class imbalance, but I could have sampled the sites such that the non-
56
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:65==
modified data had an equal class balance.
In addition, I did not check for amino acid composition biases between sites in the cytoso-
lic and extracellular compartment, which in hindsight is an important parameter to control
when constructing the dataset. When I sampled non-glycosylated sites, the only restric-
tion was that they had to be distant from glycosylated residues, so I speculate that most of
the non-glycosylated sites were sampled from the protein core where the variety of amino
acids are likely not that different between the compartments. However, if there were differ-
ences in the amino acid composition in non-modified regions between the compartments,
then the embeddings of вҖңharnessedвҖқ and fragments of non-glycosylated sites would also
have been separable. But in both constructions, the non-glycosylated regions could not
be classified according to the two location classes (cf. fig. 3.15 and fig. 3.16). Therefore,
even though I did not document if there are clusters of different amino acid distributions
within the sampled non-sites, the results indicate that there are no such groupings. For the
glycosylated sites, I assumed that there were no obvious differences in site composition
because there is no knowledge on which amino acid motifs that govern glycosylatability.
In general, the data of non-modified residues should have been controlled for similarities,
and I should have ensured that factors that could influence the comparability of the two
datasets were minimised.
4.3
Are cytosolic protein acceptor substrates distinct?
With the language model, I aimed to learn if glycosylation substrates in the cytosolic com-
partments were different from the glycosylated regions on secreted proteins. If the anal-
ysis was credible it could indicate whether the cytosolic mannosyltransferase in yeast is
a novel enzyme or is related to mannosyltransferases within the secretory pathway. To
summarise, I did not find credible evidence for any differences between cytosolic and
extracellular glycosylation sites which I argue for below.
Based on classification models trained on protein embeddings of phosphorylation sites
and extracellular glycosylation sites, representations of cytosolic glycosites fall to the
same category as the intracellular phosphorylation sites which is expected given the result
that the representations contain information on protein localisation. Furthermore, when
the classification is based on representations of fragmented sequences around the PTM
sites, the fragments of cytosolic glycosylation sites does not cluster with any particular
compartment/modification type. But lastly, when the models are trained to classify non-
modified fragments, the cytosolic glycosylation fragments cluster with the extracellular
fragments (cf. fig. 3.18).
To me, the latter result indicates that when I sample non-modified residues there is a
greater proportion of disordered regions within the samples from extracellular proteins
than from cytosolic proteins. Note however, that this suggest that there are disordered
regions on extracellular proteins without glycosylation. I do not know whether this could be
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
57
==PAGE:66==
because these sites are not glycosylatable at all of if it may be an artefact in the dataset due
to low site occupancy. However, it would then potentially be the presence of information
on structural folds in the non-modified cytosolic fragments that govern the separation of
the structured fragments from the disordered fragments.
4.3.1
Improvements of classification models
Below I suggest various actions that could improve the classification models that I used
in my project.
In hindsight, the protein representations should have been extracted along with the at-
tention contacts as the attention contacts for each protein representation could have in-
dicated which residues the representation of glycosylation sites were dependent on, and
this could have guided the subsequent sequence truncation experiments.
A way to get at measure for the information content in the glycosite representations could
be to force the logistic regression coefficients to zero for those that matter most to classify
non-glycosylated sites, since the logistic regression model trained on non-glycosylated
sites appear to emphasise different representation features than the model trained on
glycosylated sites. This way, a restricted classification model trained on glycosylated
sites would only be able to use local features that maybe would specify any difference in
local context.
Whereas I took the representation vectors of the five neighbouring amino acids to either
side of a glycosylation site to extract information on the local context, another method to
subset the protein embedding matrix is to use AlphaFold structure predictions and extract
representation vectors for amino acids that are within a certain distance from the site.
This method could perhaps give less variable representations of glycosylated regions
because I expect the attention algorithm to emphasise structural dependencies in amino
acid sequences.
Data on O-mannosylation is sparse compared to other types of sugar modifications, so
in order to use more of the available data the homology threshold could be increased
for the training data sets, but kept lower in the test set partition used to evaluate model
performance. In addition, if one were to train neural networks, the protein-level and site-
level clusters could be sampled in each epoch to use every data point, but always basing
the loss function evaluation on data from each data group.
4.4
Further work
4.4.1
Bioinformatic investigations on KTRs
As I mentioned, the insertion in the catalytic domains of Ktr5p and Ktr7p (cf. fig. 1.1) could
be an extended loop in the structures of these two proteins. And since Ktr7p contains the
MN-motif before the catalytic domain and Ktr5p an MD-motif, it would be interesting to
check if the inserted region has any sequence or fold similarity to other extended loops
58
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:67==
involved in protein binding. For instance, this could be checked using templated loop
modelling software such as FREAD that returns a likely model for the loops in the query
protein.
In addition, I suggest to analyse the KTRs with protein-protein docking models either
based on solved structures or AlphaFold predictions and obtain quality measures on
protein-protein interaction models. These scores could serve as a scale to assess the
likelihood of protein-protein interactions. Overall evaluation could be based on ligand-
RMSD values and categorised according to CAPRI standards, but continuous scales such
as DockQ would also be beneficial to incorporate into an analysis pipeline for fine-scale
comparisons. This pipeline could also be applied to other glycosyltransferases to identify
candidate enzymes with probable protein binding affinity.
Eventually, by categorising glycosylation substrates for example with language models,
protein-protein interactions between representative substrates and candidate enzymes
could be modelled to assess differences in enzyme substrate specificity.
4.4.2
Representation of disordered regions
Another computational experiment that I could have done is to evaluate the difference in
representations of various regions in a single protein. By controlling the selection of non-
glycosylated sites to be in either certain secondary structures, protein folds, non-modified
disordered regions, and even controlling the amino acids at the selected positions, I could
have studied how correlated representations are within the same protein and which rep-
resentation features are most correlated. This could be extended to compare how repre-
sentations of similar folds, amino acids etc. between proteins are correlated.
Since there is a risk that ESM-1b does not represent disordered regions with as much
local information as other parts of a protein, it could be worth investigating whether the
model could be tuned or retrained to represent disordered regions better. Alternatively,
transfer learning models could be trained using the ESM-1b representations as targets,
but manually emphasise retraining of disordered regions. Here, the pLDDT values on
AlphaFold structure predictions could be used as a proxy for disordered regions [70],
and the model could be tasked to predict masked amino acids only in disordered regions
conditioned on the proteinвҖҷs embedding from ESM-1b.
I would also suggest to study the trajectories of protein representations between structure
and disorder. Current structural prediction software are inaccurate even on disordered
regions with multiple known stable conformations, but it may be that language model
representations are able to encode conformation restraints.
I am interested in whether amino acids in disordered regions have the same local atten-
tion contacts or if the representation vector for these amino acids are most similar to the
protein-wide average representation.
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
59
==PAGE:68==
4.4.3
Prospect of O-Man site predictor for yeast
Part of the long-term goals of using language model representations for glycosylation
sites is to train a site prediction model that improve on existing software. The most likely
explanation on how glycosyltransferases bind to protein substrates guided by intrinsically
disordered regions is that an induced fold in the disordered region is stable enough to
mediate affinity between enzyme and substrate. In the secretory pathway, the enzymes
are compartmentalised which hinder competitive binding of substrates, but if there exist
substrate specificities for glycosyltransferases I speculate that they are mediated by the
relative stability of conformations in disordered regions between substrates.
Given that there exist non-overlapping substrate specificities for a given modification type,
development of detailed representations of disordered substrates will benefit training of
such prediction models. However, it appears that based on differences in amino acid fre-
quency of protein surfaces in the extracellular and cytosolic compartment, the ESM-1b
can be used to predict the protein surface, but characterisation of the glycosyltransferase
recognition folds of glycosites may not be accurate with ESM-1b due to lack of repre-
sentation features for disordered regions. Therefore, my work indicates the necessity to
address how rich protein representations of disordered regions are before these can be
used as the sole training data to predict glycosylation sites.
4.4.4
Further experimental work
Mass spectrometry analysis of IDS2 KO
There were only glycosylated peptides from 29 cytosolic proteins in the mass spectrometry
(MS) results from the IDS2 KO strain which were too few to conclude whether Ids2p acts
in cytosolic O-mannosylation. To get more data from cytosolic proteins, the MS samples
could be analysed on a mass spectrometer that can detect peptides at lower abundance
levels.
Mannosyltransferase activity assay
In this project, I tested a single candidate in the laboratory and let the bioinformatic anal-
yses guide the selection of the most likely candidate to test. In general, the balance of
the interplay between bioinformatic analyses and experimental work to solve a problem
is important. One can get fast and cheap results from informatics, but only experimen-
tal evidence can describe the nature of things. Therefore, I will suggest an experimental
approach below that can narrow down potential candidates that then can be examined
using informatics to highlight the enzyme.
To examine whether there exist soluble protein mannosyltransferases, yeast cells could be
broken with glass beads and by omitting any detergent in the lysis solution the enzymatic
activity of the extracted proteins could be preserved. Membrane proteins could then be
spun down in these mild lysis preparations using ultra-centrifugation (i.e. centrifugation
at 15 000вҖ“100 000 g in multiple hours), but leave soluble proteins in solution. The soluble
fraction could then be separated using strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography
60
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:69==
that separates proteins according to negatively charged amino acid side chains on their
surfaces. Fractions could then be analysed for mannosyltransferase activity separately,
and the proteins in each fraction with activity could be identified using mass spectrometry.
With this method, one is able to assess mannosyltransferase activity on a small subset
of proteins separately, and if a fraction turns out to have mannosyltransferase activity,
then bioinformatic examination of the proteins in that sample could maybe identify the
glycosyltransferase. As a side note, the SCX chromatography could be coupled with
weak anion exchange chromatography on the fractions with mannosyltransferase activity
to further separate the cytosolic proteins and assay them separately for activity.
The mannosyltransferase activity assay could consist of a mix of the purified candidate en-
zymes, a sugar donor substrate (e.g. GDP-Man) and a peptide cocktail of known manno-
syltransferase substrates; and whether the sample proteins can catalyse O-mannosylation
could then be evaluated with mass spectrometry on the peptides or by using radioactive
donor sugar substrates. An important positive control for the peptide cocktail assay is to
validate that the peptides in fact can act as acceptor substrates in vitro, and that false pos-
itive results are not obtained through unnatural enzyme-to-substrate concentration ratios
that shift the binding equilibrium. This would require rigorous testing as the association
affinity may not be the same for all substrates.
Regulation of cytosolic O-mannosylation
In continuation of the bioinformatic discussions about the suggested alternative start sites
in the KTRs in bakerвҖҷs yeast and OMHs in fission yeast, it would be interesting to assess
whether any of the acetyltransferases are nutrient sensitive and if they are required in
cytosolic O-mannosylation.
Regulation of cytosolic O-mannosylation activity could act both on the transcriptional level
and on the protein level. To my knowledge, activation and inactivation of glycosyltrans-
ferases have not been described, so it may be that yeasts can only regulate cytosolic O-
mannosylation through protein degradation pathways and transcription. In general these
regulation schemes have slower dynamics, and are therefore unsuitable in regulation of
signalling, but since nutrient availability often may decline gradually this type of regulation
may be probable for signalling in yeast metabolism.
4.5
Sustainability of yeast glycosylation research
The biotechnological application of yeast are immense, and these eukaryotic organisms
are widely used in the food industry and as microbial cell factories, being tasked to produce
many products, including recombinant protein products and defined chemical compounds
[71]. Understanding which factors that convey nutrient sensing in general and regulate
yeast metabolism will boost the suitability of yeast for both these applications.
On a broader scale, glycosylation is still an uncontrolled parameter in eukaryotic cell pro-
duction systems, sometimes resulting in aberrant glycosylation that could affect antigenic-
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
61
==PAGE:70==
ity, or activity of produced products. Therefore, further research into the factors that gov-
ern glycosylatability and glycosyltransferases have prospects in more efficient bioproduc-
tion, expanding the use of biocatalysts, and development of better pharmaceuticals.
62
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:71==
5
Conclusion
In my masterвҖҷs project, I aimed to pinpoint the nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling
enzyme in yeast, but in the end it is still not identified. I hypothesised that the nucleo-
cytoplasmic O-mannosyltransferase either adapted from known enzymes or that a novel
enzyme emerged in yeasts.
Since language models have improved biological prediction models by computing seman-
tic representations of protein sequences that can be harvested for biologically relevant
information, I hypothesised that these protein representations could also be used to ex-
amine glycosylation substrate sites even though these sites often are within disordered
regions. I attempted to describe any differences between glycosylation substrates in the
nucleocytoplasmic and extracellular compartments to learn whether the unknown enzyme
was an adapted mannosyltransferase or a novel enzyme. However, instead I learned that
the ESM-1b model likely cannot be used to accurately represent the versatile behaviour
of disordered protein regions.
In addition, I have searched for evolutionary cues in fungi and highlighted certain glyco-
syltransferases that likely adapted in yeasts to perform cytosolic O-mannosylation, and I
searched the AlphaFold database for GDP-Man binding motifs to locate novel glycosyl-
transferases. I found a cytosolic probable glycosyltransferase that I tested for cytosolic
O-mannosylation activity with mass spectrometry, but the proportion of cytosolic proteins
in the sample was too low to draw a conclusion.
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:73==
References
1.
Steentoft, C. et al. Precision mapping of the human O-GalNAc glycoproteome through
SimpleCell technology. EMBO Journal 32, 1478вҖ“1488. issn: 02614189 (2013).
2.
Zielinska, D. F., Gnad, F., WiЕӣniewski, J. R. & Mann, M. Precision mapping of an in
vivo N-glycoproteome reveals rigid topological and sequence constraints. Cell 141,
897вҖ“907. issn: 00928674. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.012 (2010).
3.
Hart, G. W. Nutrient regulation of signaling and transcription. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 294, 2211вҖ“2231. issn: 1083351X. http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.AW119.
003226 (2019).
4.
Spiro, R. G. Protein glycosylation: Nature, distribution, enzymatic formation, and dis-
ease implications of glycopeptide bonds. Glycobiology 12. issn: 09596658 (2002).
5.
Varki, A. Biological roles of glycans. Glycobiology 27, 3вҖ“49. issn: 14602423 (2017).
6.
Aebersold, R. et al. How many human proteoforms are there? Nature Chemical Bi-
ology 14, 206вҖ“214. issn: 15524469. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2576
(2018).
7.
Slawson, C. & Hart, G. W. O-GlcNAc signaling: implications for cancer cell biology.
Nat Rev Cancer 11, 678вҖ“684 (2012).
8.
Lazarus, M. B., Nam, Y., Jiang, J., Sliz, P. & Walker, S. Structure of human O-GlcNAc
transferase and its complex with a peptide substrate. Nature 469, 564вҖ“567 (2011).
9.
Joshi, H. J. et al. SnapShot: O-Glycosylation Pathways across Kingdoms. Cell 172,
632вҖ“632.e2. issn: 10974172. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.01.016 (2018).
10.
Halim, A. et al. Discovery of a nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose glycoproteome in
yeast. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 112, 15648вҖ“15653. issn: 10916490 (2015).
11.
Neubert, P. et al. Mapping the O-Mannose glycoproteome in saccharomyces cere-
visiae. Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 15, 1323вҖ“1337. issn: 15359484 (2016).
12.
Loibl, M. & Strahl, S. Protein O-mannosylation: What we have learned from bakerвҖҷs
yeast. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - Molecular Cell Research 1833, 2438вҖ“2446.
issn: 01674889. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.02.008 (2013).
13.
Aebi, M. N-linked protein glycosylation in the ER. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta -
Molecular Cell Research 1833, 2430вҖ“2437. issn: 01674889. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.bbamcr.2013.04.001 (2013).
14.
Dean, N. Asparagine-linked glycosylation in the yeast Golgi. Biochimica et Biophys-
ica Acta - General Subjects 1426, 309вҖ“322. issn: 03044165 (1999).
15.
Marinoni, G. et al. Horizontal Transfer of Genetic Material among Saccharomyces
Yeasts. Journal of Bacteriology 181, 6488вҖ“6496. eprint: https://journals.asm.org/
doi/pdf/10.1128/JB.181.20.6488-6496.1999. https://journals.asm.org/doi/abs/10.
1128/JB.181.20.6488-6496.1999 (1999).
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
65
==PAGE:74==
16.
Hall, C., Brachat, S. & Dietrich, F. S. Contribution of horizontal gene transfer to the
evolution of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Eukaryotic Cell 4, 1102вҖ“1115. issn: 15359778
(2005).
17.
Li, Y. et al. A genome-scale phylogeny of the kingdom Fungi. Current Biology 31,
1653вҖ“1665.e5. issn: 0960-9822. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0960982221001391 (2021).
18.
Drula, E. et al. The carbohydrate-active enzyme database: functions and literature.
Nucleic Acids Research 50, D571вҖ“D577. issn: 0305-1048. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/nar/article-pdf/50/D1/D571/42057806/gkab1045.pdf. https://doi.org/10.
1093/nar/gkab1045 (Nov. 2021).
19.
Lussier, M., Sdicu, A. M. & Bussey, H. The KTR and MNN1 mannosyltransferase
families of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - General Sub-
jects 1426, 323вҖ“334. issn: 03044165 (1999).
20.
Pelechano, V., Wei, W. & Steinmetz, L. M. Extensive transcriptional heterogeneity
revealed by isoform profiling. Nature 497, 127вҖ“131. issn: 00280836 (2013).
21.
Kats, I. et al. Mapping Degradation Signals and Pathways in a Eukaryotic N-termi-
nome. Molecular Cell 70, 488вҖ“501.e5. issn: 10974164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molcel.2018.03.033 (2018).
22.
Hwang, C.-S., Shemorry, A. & Varshavsky, A. N-Terminal Acetylation of Cellular Pro-
teins Creates Specific Degradation Signals. Science 327, 973вҖ“977. eprint: https:
//www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1183147. https://www.science.org/doi/
abs/10.1126/science.1183147 (2010).
23.
Kim, H.-K. et al. The N-Terminal Methionine of Cellular Proteins as a Degradation
Signal. Cell 156, 158вҖ“169. issn: 0092-8674. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0092867413014827 (2014).
24.
Chen, S.-J., Wu, X., Wadas, B., Oh, J.-H. & Varshavsky, A. An N-end rule pathway
that recognizes proline and destroys gluconeogenic enzymes. English. Science 355.
All Open Access, Green Open Access. issn: 00368075. https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85017885362&doi=10.1126%2fSCIENCE.AAL3655&
partnerID=40&md5=626a70e6bf56206afe6d41e25d59ebd2 (2017).
25.
Aksnes, H., Drazic, A., Marie, M. & Arnesen, T. First Things First: Vital Protein Marks
by N-Terminal Acetyltransferases. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 41, 746вҖ“760.
issn: 0968-0004. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968000416300779
(2016).
26.
Starheim, K. K., Gevaert, K. & Arnesen, T. Protein N-terminal acetyltransferases:
when the start matters. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 37, 152вҖ“161. issn: 0968-
0004. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968000412000187 (2012).
27.
Teufel, F. et al. SignalP 6.0 achieves signal peptide prediction across all types using
protein language models. bioRxiv, 2021.06.09.447770. http://biorxiv.org/content/
early/2021/06/10/2021.06.09.447770.abstract (2021).
66
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:75==
28.
Almagro Armenteros, J. J., SГёnderby, C. K., SГёnderby, S. K., Nielsen, H. & Winther,
O. DeepLoc: prediction of protein subcellular localization using deep learning. Bioin-
formatics 33, 3387вҖ“3395. issn: 1367-4803. eprint: https : / / academic . oup . com /
bioinformatics/article-pdf/33/21/3387/25166063/btx431.pdf. https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btx431 (July 2017).
29.
Armenteros, J. J. A. et al. Detecting sequence signals in targeting peptides using
deep learning. Life Science Alliance 2. issn: 25751077 (2019).
30.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidi-
rectional Transformers for Language Understanding 2018. https://arxiv.org/abs/
1810.04805.
31.
Vaswani, A. et al. Attention is All you Need in Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (eds Guyon, I. et al.) 30 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2017). https:
//proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.
pdf.
32.
Rives, A. et al. Biological structure and function emerge from scaling unsupervised
learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 118, e2016239118. https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
2016239118 (2021).
33.
Alammar, J. The Illustrated Transformer [Blog post] 2018. https://jalammar.github.
io/illustrated-transformer/.
34.
Bishop, C. M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics) isbn: 0387310738 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006).
35.
Defazio, A., Bach, F. & Lacoste-Julien, S. SAGA: A Fast Incremental Gradient Method
With Support for Non-Strongly Convex Composite Objectives 2014. https://arxiv.
org/abs/1407.0202.
36.
Breiman, L. Random Forests. Machine Learning 45, 5вҖ“32. issn: 1573-0565. https:
//doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324 (Oct. 1, 2001).
37.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. & Friedman, J. The Elements of Statistical Learning (Springer
New York Inc., New York, NY, USA, 2001).
38.
Karush, W. Minima of Functions of Several Variables with Inequalities as Side Con-
ditions MA thesis (Department of Mathematics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA, 1939).
39.
Kuhn, H. W. & Tucker, A. W. Nonlinear programming in Proceedings of the Second
Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 1950 (University of
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1951), 481вҖ“492.
40.
The UniProt Consortium. UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase in 2021. Nu-
cleic Acids Research 49, D480вҖ“D489. issn: 0305-1048. https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gkaa1100 (2020).
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
67
==PAGE:76==
41.
Sayers, E. W. et al. Database resources of the national center for biotechnology
information. Nucleic Acids Research 50, D20вҖ“D26. issn: 0305-1048. https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gkab1112 (2021).
42.
Madeira, F. et al. The EMBL-EBI search and sequence analysis tools APIs in 2019.
Nucleic acids research 47, W636вҖ“W641. issn: 0305-1048. https://europepmc.org/
articles/PMC6602479 (2019).
43.
Bodenhofer, U., Bonatesta, E., HorejЕЎ-Kainrath, C. & Hochreiter, S. msa: an R pack-
age for multiple sequence alignment. Bioinformatics 31, 3997вҖ“3999. issn: 1367-
4803. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article- pdf/31/24/3997/
498788/btv494.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv494 (Aug. 2015).
44.
Saitou, N. & Nei, M. The neighbor-joining method: a new method for reconstructing
phylogenetic trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution 4, 406вҖ“425. issn: 0737-4038.
eprint: https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article-pdf/4/4/406/11167444/7sait.pdf.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a040454 (July 1987).
45.
Beitz, E. TeXshade: shading and labeling of multiple sequence alignments using
LaTeX2e. Bioinformatics 16, 135вҖ“139. issn: 1367-4803. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/16.2.135 (2000).
46.
Varadi, M. et al. AlphaFold Protein Structure Database: massively expanding the
structural coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy models. Nucleic
Acids Research 50, D439вҖ“D444. issn: 0305-1048. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkab1061 (Jan. 2022).
47.
Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature
596, 583вҖ“589. issn: 1476-4687. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2 (2021).
48.
Possner, D. D., Claesson, M. & Guy, J. E. Structure of the glycosyltransferase Ktr4p
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS ONE 10, 1вҖ“16. issn: 19326203 (2015).
49.
Lobsanov, Y. D. et al. Structure of Kre2p/Mnt1p: A yeast Оұ1,2-mannosyltransferase
involved in mannoprotein biosynthesis. Journal of Biological Chemistry 279, 17921вҖ“
17931. issn: 00219258. http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312720200 (2004).
50.
Zhang, Y. & Skolnick, J. TM-align: a protein structure alignment algorithm based
on the TM-score. Nucleic Acids Research 33, 2302вҖ“2309. issn: 0305-1048. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-pdf/33/7/2302/7127128/gki524.pdf. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/nar/gki524 (Jan. 2005).
51.
Lanz, M. C. et al. In-depth and 3-dimensional exploration of the budding yeast phos-
phoproteome. EMBO reports 22, e51121. issn: 1469-221X. https://doi.org/10.
15252/embr.202051121 (Feb. 2021).
52.
Fu, L., Niu, B., Zhu, Z., Wu, S. & Li, W. CD-HIT: accelerated for clustering the next-
generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics 28, 3150вҖ“3152. issn: 1367-4803. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/28/23/3150/18529929/bts565.
pdf. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts565 (Oct. 2012).
68
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:77==
53.
Li, W. & Godzik, A. Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and comparing large sets
of protein or nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics 22, 1658вҖ“1659. issn: 1367-4803.
eprint: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/22/13/1658/484588/
btl158.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btl158 (May 2006).
54.
Kawashima, S. et al. AAindex: amino acid index database, progress report 2008.
Nucleic Acids Research 36, D202вҖ“D205. issn: 0305-1048. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/nar/article-pdf/36/suppl\_1/D202/7637341/gkm998.pdf. https://doi.org/
10.1093/nar/gkm998 (Nov. 2007).
55.
Han, P., Zhang, X. & Feng, Z. P. Predicting disordered regions in proteins using the
profiles of amino acid indices. eng. Bmc Bioinformatics 10, S42. issn: 14712105
(2009).
56.
JuretiДҮ, D. & LuДҚin, A. The preference functions method for predicting protein helical
turns with membrane propensity. eng. Journal of Chemical Information and Com-
puter Sciences 38, 575вҖ“585. issn: 15205142, 00952338 (1998).
57.
Suzuki, E. & Robson, B. Relationship between helix-coil transition parameters for
synthetic polypeptides and helix conformation parameters for globular proteins -
simple model. eng. Journal of Molecular Biology 107, 357вҖ“367. issn: 10898638,
00222836 (1976).
58.
Chou, P. Y. & Fasman, G. D. Empirical predictions of protein conformation. eng.
Annual Review of Biochemistry 47, 251вҖ“276. issn: 15454509, 00664154 (1978).
59.
Kubota, M., Ooi, Y., Obatake, M., Kubota, Y. & Om, T. Optimization of amino acid
parameters for correspondence of sequence to tertiary structures of proteins. Bull.
Inst. Chem. Res. Kyoto Univ, 82вҖ“94 (1985).
60.
Vihinen, M., Torkkila, E. & Riikonen, P. Accuracy of protein flexibility predictions.
eng. Proteins-structure Function and Bioinformatics 19, 141вҖ“149. issn: 10970134,
08873585 (1994).
61.
Bull, H. & Breese, K. Surface-tension of amino-acid solutions - Hydrophobicity scale
of amino-acid residues. eng. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 161, 665вҖ“
670. issn: 10960384, 00039861 (1974).
62.
Punta, M. & Maritan, A. A knowledge-based scale for amino acid membrane propen-
sity. eng. Proteins: Structure, Function and Genetics 50, 114вҖ“121. issn: 10970134,
08873585 (2003).
63.
Jeffreys, H. An Invariant Form for the Prior Probability in Estimation Problems. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sci-
ences 186, 453вҖ“461. issn: 00804630. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/97883 (1946).
64.
Virtanen, P. et al. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in
Python. Nature Methods 17, 261вҖ“272 (2020).
65.
Larsen, I. S. B. et al. Mammalian O-mannosylation of cadherins and plexins is inde-
pendent of protein O-mannosyltransferases 1 and 2. Journal of Biological Chemistry
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
69
==PAGE:78==
292, 11586вҖ“11598. issn: 0021-9258. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0021925820370241 (2017).
66.
Gaudet, P., Livstone, M. S., Lewis, S. E. & Thomas, P. D. Phylogenetic-based prop-
agation of functional annotations within the Gene Ontology consortium. Briefings in
Bioinformatics 12, 449вҖ“462. issn: 1467-5463. https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbr042
(2011).
67.
Huh, W.-K. et al. Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast. Nature 425,
686вҖ“691. issn: 1476-4687. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02026 (2003).
68.
Gao, J. & Xu, D. Correlation between posttranslational modification and intrinsic dis-
order in protein. Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing. Pacific Symposium on Bio-
computing, 94вҖ“103. issn: 2335-6936. PMID: 22174266. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/22174266 (2012).
69.
Andrade, M. A., OвҖҷDonoghue, S. I. & Rost, B. Adaptation of protein surfaces to sub-
cellular location (Edited by F. E. Cohen). Journal of Molecular Biology 276, 517вҖ“525.
issn: 0022-2836. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283697914984
(1998).
70.
Tunyasuvunakool, K. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction for the human
proteome. Nature 596, 590вҖ“596. issn: 1476-4687. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
021-03828-1 (Aug. 1, 2021).
71.
Pscheidt, B. & Glieder, A. Yeast cell factories for fine chemical and API production.
Microbial Cell Factories 7, 25. issn: 1475-2859. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2859-
7-25 (Aug. 7, 2008).
70
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:79==
List of Figures
1.1
MSA of KTR family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Predicted structure of Ktr2p . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Graphical overview of the Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Illustration of feed-forward network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Graphical illustration of site extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6
Graphical overview of sequences presented to ESM-1b . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.7
Illustration of KTR-GFP and PMT-TAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.1
Alignment of GDP-Man binding pocket in Ktr4p and Kre2p . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2
Sample weights for generating random protein sequences . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1
Cladogram of mannosyltransferases in Ascomycota
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2
Cladograms of GT15 and GT39 protein families in Ascomycota . . . . . . . 28
3.3
Cladogram of GT15 annotated with alt. start site in stem region . . . . . . . 29
3.4
MSA of KTR family zoomed in to proposed alt. start sites
. . . . . . . . . . 30
3.5
MSA of GT15 with logo plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.6
Fingerprint MSA of GT15 with annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.7
TM scores for GDP-Man binding pocket alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.8
Alignment of Ids2p, Ktr4p and Kre2p zoomed to GDP-Man binding pocket . 34
3.9
Classification accuracies for biologically biased sequence fragments . . . . 36
3.10 Classification accuracy of disordered sequence fragments . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.11 Classification performance based on protein embeddings . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.12 Diagnostic curves for site repr. from protein embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.13 Classifier evaluation for single amino acid repr. vectors
. . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.14 Correlation of logistic regression coefficients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.15 Performance of вҖңharnessedвҖқ fragment representations . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
3.16 Performance of embedded sequence fragments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.17 Classification of phosphorylation vs. extracellular glycosylation . . . . . . . 48
3.18 Predictions of cytosolic glycosylation sites on phosphorylation vs. secr.
glycosylation models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3.19 Coomassie SDS-PAGE of whole cell lysates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.20 Western blot for GFP-tagged KTRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.21 Mass spectrometry results of IDS2 KO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.1
Phylogenetic tree of Ascomycota . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A.1 Classification accuracies for biologically biased sequence fragments . . . . 75
A.2 Decision tree complexity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
71
==PAGE:80==
A.3 Classification accuracy of disordered sequence fragments . . . . . . . . . . 76
A.4 Coomassie SDS-PAGE and western blot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.5 ESM-1b features with most information on localisation . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
72
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:81==
List of Tables
2.1
Representative species from Ascomycota . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2
AA-indices correlated with disorder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:83==
A
Supplementary figures
(a) Classification of max. and min. quantiles
(b) Classification of 10 % and 90 % quantiles
Figure A.1: Histograms of estimated accuracy for logistic regression models trained to
classify representations of biologically biased sequence fragments across all 566 sets of
AA-indices.
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
75
==PAGE:84==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.2: Boxplot of test errors (a) and average test and training errors (b) for decision
tree classifiers with increasing number of branch nodes across 10 CV folds.
Figure A.3: Prediction accuracy for logistic regression models (left) and support vector
machine models (right) trained to classify representations of sequence fragments that
were biased at various degrees (primary axis) based on 10 AA-indices correlated with
disorder or 10 sets of random amino acid index values (orange). Shaded area is a 95 %
confidence interval for the accuracy estimates across 5 fold cross validation.
76
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:85==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.4: Image of Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE of boiling SDS and sonication lysates
(a), and western blot without negative control of GFP-tagged KTRs (b).
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.5: The seven ESM-1b features with greatest localisation class separation (nu-
cleocytoplasmic, blue; extracellular, orange) based on protein representations of glyco-
sylation site patches. The features with most extreme ВөвҲ’ОҪ
Пғ
were selected, where Вө and
ОҪ are average feature value for cytosolic and extracellular proteins respectively, and Пғ is
standard deviation of feature value computed both for cytosolic and extracellular class.
78
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
==PAGE:87==
Nucleocytoplasmic O-mannose signalling in yeast
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
