==PAGE:1==
DTU Bioinformatics
Department of Health Technology
Tor Krøjer Toudahl
April 2022
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Comparative metagenomic analysis of
antibiotic resistance genes in different
poultry farm environments
MASTER THESIS
==PAGE:2==
Comparative metagenomic analysis of antibiotic resistance genes in different poul-
try farm environments
Master Thesis
April, 2022
By
Tor Krøjer Toudahl
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Bioinformatics.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Kemitorvet, Building 204, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark.
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis comprises 35 ECTS points and has been prepared over the course of seven
months at the Section for Bioinformatics, Department of Health Technology, at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree MSc Eng in Bioin-
formatics and Systems Biology.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Tor Krøjer Toudahl - s163688
Signature
Date
ii
12/4 - 2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) continues to pose an increasing threat to public health.
Excessive use of antibiotics in poultry livestock is believed to be an important source
of the emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). This study exam-
ined a total of 56 chicken gut metagenomes from Chinese and European free range and
conventional poultry farms. The metagenomes were examined to identify the effect of ge-
ographic location and sampling environment on ARGs. Assembled contigs harboring co-
occurrence of ARGs, metal/biocide resistance genes (MRGs/BRGs), and mobile genetic
elements (MGEs) were observed in both geographic locations and farming environments.
The proportion of contigs carrying different combinations of ARG, MRGs/BRGs and
MGEs was significantly different between locations and farming environments (Fisher’s
p<0.05). Using Bray-Curtis dissimilarities of ARG abundances the samples clustered
significantly based on geographic location (PermANOVA p=0.001) with a corresponding
R2-value of 0.212. Clustering of sample environment grouping showed a lower R2-value
of 0.042 (PermANOVA p=0.036). The samples also differed significantly in α-diversity
based on geographic location but not according to sampling environment (TukeyHSD
p<0.05). 103 predicted ARGs were identified as differentially abundant between ge-
ographic locations. No differentially abundant genes were identified between free-range
and conventional sample environments. Six of the 103 differentially abundant ARGs were
harbored by assembled conjugative plasmids. The study illustrated geographic location
as a main contributing factor to the abundance of ARGs and composition of resistomes
while also providing evidence of plasmid mediated dissemination of abundant ARGs.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract - Danish
Antimikrobiel resistens (AMR) udgør en fortsat stigende trussel mod folkesundheden.
Overdreven brug af antibiotika hos fjerkræ menes, at være en vigtig kilde til udviklin-
gen og spredningen af antibiotikaresistensgener (ARG’er). Dette projekt undersøgte i alt
56 kyllingetarm-metagenomer fra kinesiske og europæiske fritg˚aende og konventionelle
fjerkræfarme. Metagenomerne blev undersøgt for at identificere effekten af geografisk
placering og landbrugstype p˚a ARG’er. Assemblede contigs, med samtidig forekomst af
ARG’er, metal-/biocid-resistensgener (MRG’er/BRG’er) og mobile genetiske elementer
(MGE’er) blev observeret i begge geografiske omr˚ader og landbrugstyper. Andelen af
contigs med forskellige kombinationer af ARG’er, MRG’er/BRG’er og MGE’er var sig-
nifikant forskellige mellem de to geografiske omr˚ader og landbrugstyper (Fishers p <
0.05). Ved at bruge Bray-Curtis-uligheder i ARG-abundance clusterede prøverne sig sig-
nifikant baseret p˚a den geografiske placering (PermANOVA p = 0.001) med en tilsvarende
R2 værdi p˚a 0.212. Clustering baseret p˚a landbrugstype viste en lavere R2 værdi p˚a 0.042
(PermANOVA p = 0.036). Prøverne afveg ogs˚a signifikant i alpha-diversitet baseret p˚a
det geografisk omr˚ade, men ikke i henhold til landbrugstype (TukeyHSD p < 0.05). 103
ARG’er blev identificeret som differentially abundant mellem de geografiske omr˚ader.
Ingen differentially abundant ARG’er blev identificeret mellem fritg˚aende og konven-
tionelle langbrugstyper. Seks af de 103 differentially abundant ARG’er blev ogs˚a fundet
p˚a assemblede konjugative plasmider. Dette studie illustrerede, at det geografisk omr˚ade
var en væsentlig medvirkende faktor til sammensætningen ARG-resistome samt forekom-
sten af ARG’er. Samtidigt gav studiet evidens for plasmid-medieret spredning af abundant
ARG’er.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Gisle Alberg Vestergaard, Senior Microbiome Scientist at Christian Hansen and Former
Associate Professor at DTU, Supervisor.
Thank you to Gisle for being a great supervisor in the initial phase of this project and
providing vital guidance for the planning and development of this project. His help in
shaping the scope of this thesis has been much appreciated.
Asger Brejnrod, Postdoc at DTU, Supervisor.
I would like to sincerely thank Asger Brejnrod for overtaking the supervising of this
project on short notice due to unforeseen circumstances. His expert knowledge of bioin-
formatics and metagenomic analysis has been much appreciated and essential for the de-
velopment of this thesis.
Anders Gorm Pedersen, Professor at DTU, Supervisor.
Likewise, I would also like to thank Professor Anders Gorm Pedersen for overtaking the
main supervisor role on short notice. This has of course also been vital to this project.
Metagenomics Group
Finally, I would like to thank all the members of the metagenomics group at the DTU
Bioinformatics section, for daily technical discussions and useful feedback at each of our
weekly meetings. A special thanks to Maja Jager for an excellent collaboration during the
initial phases of this project.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract - English . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract - Danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Metagenomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
In silico prediction of antibiotic resistance genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Differential gene abundance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Plasmid assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methods
11
3.1
Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Metagenomic data pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Metagenomic assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Gene prediction and clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
ARG, BRG, MRG and MGE prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.7
Contig co-occurence analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
Read mapping and abundance estimation of resistance genes . . . . . . .
15
3.9
Diversity estimation of resistance genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.10 Resistome clustering and PCoA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.11 Differential abundance analysis of resistance genes . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.12 Plasmid assembly and typing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.13 Horizontal gene transfer prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
18
4.1
Data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Metagenomic data pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Contig co-occurence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:8==
4.5
ARG read mapping and abundance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6
Resistome clustering and PCoA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.7
Differential abundance analysis of ARG’s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.8
ARG harboring plasmids and horizontal gene transfer of ARG’s
. . . . .
38
5
Discussion
41
5.1
Geographical location showed highest influence on resistance gene abun-
dance and composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Differentially abundant ARGs are associated with conjugative plasmids
.
43
5.3
Limitations of the data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Conclusion
45
Appendix
46
A
Supplementary files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
B
Full metadata table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a cause of increasing concern to global health. As
pathogens continue to acquire antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) the selection of
effective antimicrobial treatment protocols for patients with common diseases becomes
increasingly challenging. This affects national socioeconomic costs significantly as hos-
pitalization and treatment of patients becomes more onerous and simple infections can
potentially become life threatening. The WHO has declared AMR to be one of the top ten
global public health threats facing humanity, and research within this field is imperative
[1].
Chicken meat and eggs is globally among the most widely consumed animal products and
chicken livestock is a well known and important reservoir of AMR [2] [3] [4] [5]. Antibi-
otics are often excessively used as growth promoters in poultry farming which has been
highly controversial and implies high selective pressures facilitating the emergence and
spread of AMR bacteria. However, antibiotics are not believed to be solely responsible
for the development and dissemination of antibiotic resistance in these environments [6].
Metals are also used in high quantities as fed-additives to improve growth and prevent
disease while biocides are used as disinfectants with little restriction in poultry farming.
Previous studies have demonstrated success of a metagenomic approach in examining the
role of co-selection and mobile genetic elements (MGEs) in ARG profiles of different
livestock microbiomes [7], [8], [9]. These metagenomic studies have also examined the
differences in AMR resistances between countries in livestock animals such as pigs and
chickens. However, none of these studies were comparative metagenomic studies of the
effect of both different farming practices and geographic location on livestock mediated
AMR.
This study addresses this by examining ARGs in chicken microbiomes of different farm-
ing environments from geographic locations. The chicken microbiome samples examined
in this study were grouped as either free range or conventional to represent two common
poultry farm types. Furthermore, the samples originated from two distinct geographic
location namely Europe and China.
This study aims to use a quantitative metagenomic approach to examine AMR in chicken
1
==PAGE:10==
gut microbiomes from different geographical locations and farming environments. This
was done to evaluate whether ARG abundances and resistomes were more associated with
either geographical location or farming environments. Furthermore, the genetic context
of identified ARGs was examined to identify potential for co-selection between ARGs
and MRGs/BRGs in the samples. Finally, the role of conjugative plasmids and MGEs in
dissemination of the ARGs was examined by attempting to link differentially abundant
ARGs to assembled conjugative plasmid sequences and predicted HGT events.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Metagenomics
Metagenomics is a field of genomic technologies and bioinformatic tools that directly
access the genetic content of entire communities of microorganisms. An essential key
to the success of the metagenomic approach in microbial research is attributed to the
approach being culture-independent [10]. Initially, metagenomic studies were limited to
amplicon sequencing of conserved regions of the small ribosomal subunits, specifically
16S rRNA for bacteria and 18S rRNA for archea. This type of amplicon sequencing
continues to be a widely used approach but is limited to describing microbial composition
and phylogenetic profiling of the examined microbial communities [11]. To enable a
more thorough description of metagenomic profiles and functionality of genes shotgun
metagenomic sequencing provides a more comprehensive strategy.
2.1.1
Sequencing
Different high-throughput sequencing platforms that facilitate the production of metage-
nomic sequencing data are available with Illumina being the most widely used. Illumina
high-throughput sequencing platforms utilize sequencing by synthesis. Here input DNA
is broken down into small fragments which are ligated with adapter sequences. This al-
lows a massive parallel sequencing of these fragments through a process known as bridge
amplification. The high-throughput of this method is further reinforced through multi-
plexing, which allows multiple samples to be sequenced in the same run. The essential
output of this process is millions of short read sequences comprised into fastQ files, one
file for each sample. The number of reads produced is referred to as the library size and
can vary between sequencing runs [12]. Depending on the environmental sample type se-
quenced the library size can have a profound effect on downstream bioinformatic analysis
and constitutes an important parameter in metagenomic studies [13].
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
In silico prediction of antibiotic resistance genes
Metagenomic sequencing produces high amounts of sequenced DNA and provides a valu-
able approach to examine ARGs in a given microbial community. There are a range of dif-
ferent bioinformatic tools available which use different strategies for in silico predictions
of ARGs in DNA sequences. When working with metagenomic sequencing data most
methods either use predicted open reading frames(ORFs) in metagenomic assemblies to
align with a reference database of ARG sequences or map reads directly to the ARG
reference database [14], [15]. Thus, the essential requirements for both approaches is a
reference ARG data base and an algorithm/model to search the query sequences against
the database.
The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database, CARD[16] is a popular manually cu-
rated ARG database that uses Resistance Gene Identifier[16] (RGI) as its aligner. CARD
and RGI have been used in different metagenomic studies of AMR [7], [17], [18]. CARD
is manually curated and continuously updated to ensure a confident set of reference ARGs
which have documented evidence of conferring AMR. CARD’s curation paradigm en-
sures that ARG entries must have a peer-review publication showing AMR, experimental
evidence of conferring elevated minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), and a sequence
available in GenBank[19].
CARD’s associated alignment tool, RGI, uses four different bioinformatic model types to
predict ARGs in a given query sequence:
1. Protein homology: Use of BLASTP[20] or DIAMOND[21] bitscore cut-offs to
detect functional homologs of ARGs in the query sequence.
2. Protein variant: Similar to the protein homology model but secondarily searches
query sequences for a curated set of mutations shown to clinically to confer resis-
tance relative to wild-type.
3. Protein over-expression : Detects efflux subunits associated with AMR and regula-
tory mutations conferring over-expression of ARGs.
4. rRNA variant : Detection of drug resistant rRNA target sequences.
RGI categorizes identified ARGs into three categories: Perfect, Strict , and Loose. These
categories are based on the curated BLAST bit-score cutoff of the model used as illus-
4
==PAGE:13==
trated in Figure 1.
CARD/RGI hits categorisation paradigm
Figure 1: Illustration of the categorisation of predicted ARGs used in RGI. Perfect hits are a
perfect (100%) match to a reference ARG. Strict hits are predicted as functional variants as the
match of the query sequence lies within the curated BLAST bit-score cutoffs. Loose hits are
similar to the reference but fall outside of the curated BLAST bit-score cutoffs.
Using loose hits can be relevant to guide the discovery of novel ARGs and emerging
threats. However, it also implies a considerable amount of false positives. Due to the
inherent uncertainty involved with metagenomic sequencing and assembly loose hits are
not recommended to be trusted when working with this type of data [16].
2.3
Differential gene abundance analysis
The abundance of different genes in metagenomic samples is of interest as it reveals sev-
eral characteristics of the sampled microbial community. To perform a differential abun-
dance analysis genes are usually organised into a large matrix in which columns represents
genes and rows represents samples. In this type of gene count matrix each element corre-
sponds to the abundance of a specific gene in a specific sample. This data structure is the
main input to most methods of differential abundance analysis.
One of the main problems underlying differential abundance analysis is that the observed
gene counts may be influenced by the library size in an unpredictable manner. This can
lead to systematic bias in the gene count matrix which can introduce a high false discovery
rate (FDR) of differentially abundant genes. Thus, the choice of normalization strategy is
5
==PAGE:14==
important to ensure reliable results of the differential abundance analysis. There are gen-
erally two overall strategies commonly used to achieve normalisation of the gene counts.
The first strategy is known as rarefying of the samples which is performed according to
the following three steps:
1. Select a minimum library size often referred to as the rarefraction level.
2. Discard samples that have fewer reads than the rarefraction level.
3. Subsample the remaining sample libraries without replacement so that all have a
size equal to the rarefraction level.
Often the rarefraction level will be chosen to equal the library size of the smallest sample
library. The main concern of the rarefy strategy is that it entails omission of available
valid data and that the selection of rarefraction level is somewhat arbitrary [22].
The second strategy is to normalize the readcounts by applying a mathematical trans-
formation to each of the counts. A common transformation in this case is scaling the
abundances by dividing the observed abundances with a scaling factor to eliminate bias
from differing library sizes. This is sometimes accompanied by another transformation of
the scaled abundances such as Log-transformation.
There is currently no scientific consensus on which strategy is the most effective, and this
may depend on the type of samples analysed [23], [22], [24], [25].
The recently developed DAtest[26] R-package addresses this issue by providing an eas-
ily executed workflow comparing different methods for differential abundance analysis.
The main function of this package ”testDA” uses an input gene count matrix to compare
25 different methods for differential abundance analysis. The performed comparison of
different methods can be summarized in the three following steps:
1. Shuffling the predictor variable (E.g. sample geographic location). This should
in principal result in no genes being differentially abundant based on the predictor
variable.
2. Spike in gene counts such that a number of known genes are differentially abundant
according to the predictor.
3. Apply the 25 different methods and check if they are able to identify spike-ins and
whether the FDR is controlled [26].
6
==PAGE:15==
The performance of the different methods can then be evaluated to help guide the choice
of method towards a suitable method for the specific data set.
2.4
Plasmid assembly
Horizontal gene transfer is an integral component of environmental adaption and evolu-
tion in bacteria, and is often mediated by the exchange of plasmids [27]. Specifically,
plasmids are known to play a key role in the dissemination of ARGs, but the evolution
and ecology of plasmids from different environments remains poorly characterized and
understood [28], [27], [29]. The use of shotgun metagenomic sequencing to assemble
plasmids from different environmental samples presents a promising approach to further
the understanding of plasmid mediated dissemination of ARGs, as it is culture indepen-
dent and can potentially discover putative novel plasmid sequences [30]. However, the
assembling of plasmid sequences from shotgun metagenomic sequences does imply a set
of challenges. This is partially due to the small fraction of plasmid DNA present in most
samples, as well as the shared sequences between plasmid and chromosomal DNA.
Multiple different bioinformatic tools that detect plasmids in sequencing data have been
developed and include PlasmidFinder[31], cBar[32], gPlas[33], and PlasFlow[34]. Cur-
rently, only three tools are available which attempt to fully reconstruct plasmid sequences
from metagenomic sequencing data specifically. These are Recycler[35], metaplasmidSPAdes[36],
and the newly developed SCAPP(Sequence Contents-Aware Plasmid Peeler)[29]. No-
tably, all three tools only focus on circular plasmids and do not attempt to assemble linear
plasmids[29]. All three of these tools implement a strategy involving identification of
cyclic paths in the assembly graph of the given metagenomic data. SCAPP has been
demonstrated to show overall better performance of the three tools when benchmarked on
both simulated and real metagenomic datasets [29].
The essence of the method employed by the SCAPP algorithm is to annotate the input
assembly graph with plasmid specific genes while assigning nodes with weights that rep-
resent the likelihood of them being plasmidic. Circular paths that represent potential
plasmid sequnces are then iteratively peeled from the assembly graph and filtered to re-
move likely false-positives, yielding a set of confident plasmid sequences. An overview
of the SCAPP algorithm is illustrated in Figure 2.
7
==PAGE:16==
Overview of the SCAPP algorithm
Figure 2: Graphical overview of the SCAPP algorithm A) The metagenomic reads are assembled
producing the assembly graph. B) The assembly graph is annotated with mapped reads, plasmid
specific genes, and the node weights. C) Potential plasmids are iteratively peeled from the anno-
tated assembly graph. Cyclic paths with uniform coverage are prioritized. D) Confident plasmid
sequences are retained based on the plasmid sequence classification and presence of plasmid spe-
cific genes to filter away likely false positive potential plasmids.
This illustration was borrowed from the SCAPP publication and is available under Open access
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License[29].
The first step in plasmid assembly using SCAPP involves generating an assembly graph
of the metagenomic reads which can be achieved by using a separate assembly tool such
as metaSPAdes[37]. The assembly graph is then annotated, which involves mapping the
metagenomic reads onto the constructed assembly graph with BWA[38] as an aligner.
This allows for identification of paired-end links between different nodes in the graph
which are evaluated as potential plasmid paths in the graph. Furthermore, the annotation
of the assembly graph involves overlaying the location of identified plasmid specific genes
onto the assembly graph. These genes are identified using a database of plasmid specific
genes and aligned to the nodes in the graph using blast with a cut-off of at least 75%
8
==PAGE:17==
sequence identity across at least 75% of the gene. Additionally, the nodes are annotated
with a plasmid score using PlasClass[39] which denotes the likelihood of a sequence
being of plasmid origin. The plasmid probability of each node, p, and the node length, L
are then used to calculate a re-weighted plasmid score, s according to Equation 1.
s = 0.5+
p−0.5
1+e−0.001(L−2000)
(1)
The idea of this scoring is that the score of shorter nodes with low plasmid probabil-
ity will be pulled towards s = 0.5 while leaving the score of long sequences practically
unchanged. Long nodes (L > 10 kbp) with a low score (s < 0.2) are classified as chromo-
somal sequences and therefore removed to help simplify the assembly graph. Contrarily,
longer nodes (L > 10 kbp) with a high score (s > 0.9) are classified as probable plasmid
nodes.
In order to apply the peeling idea of potential plasmid sequences the nodes in the assembly
graph are weighted such that lower weights imply a higher likelihood of being assembled
into a plasmid. Both the calculated plasmid score, s and the identified plasmid specific
genes are incorporated into the node weighing. This is achieved as the weight of a node
w(v) is calculated according to Equation 2 where C(v) is the coverage of a node and L(v)
is the length of the node.
w(v) =









0,
v contains plasmid genes
1−s(v)
C(v)·L(v),
else
(2)
Thus, nodes with plasmid specific genes will always be assigned a weight of 0 making
them likely to be integrated into low-weight cycles in the graph. Equation 2 ensures that
nodes with higher coverage, long length, and higher plasmid score are assigned a low
node weight.
Once nodes have been assigned weight, the core of the SCAPP algorithm is to iteratively
find the lowest weight cycle in the graph and peel these cycles from the graph to be con-
sidered as potential plasmid sequences. This strategy implies that nodes are peeled from
9
==PAGE:18==
the graph in each iteration, and thus the order in which the nodes are considered does
indeed matter. The steps that were involved in annotating the assembly graph guide the
order that nodes are considered in the following manner: first all nodes containing plas-
mid specific genes, then all probable plasmid nodes (s > 0.9), and finally the remaining
nodes. This is done to ensure that the search for light cycles in the graph that go through
plasmid nodes are considered before other cycles.
Identified cyclic paths are peeled from the graph. In cases where a node has multiple
cyclic paths, the paths are accessed according to the uniformity of coverage of the in-
volved nodes. This allows paths with a uniform coverage to be peeled first.
The light cyclic paths that are peeled are subjected to a final filtering step to remove likely
false-positive plasmids. Similar to the annotation of the assembly graph all potential plas-
mid sequences are assigned a length weighted plasmid score and annotated with plasmid
specific genes. Sequences that belong to at least two of the following categories are re-
ported as confident plasmids: a) potential plasmids containing plasmid specific gene(s),
b) potential plasmids a with plasmid score s > 0.5, and c) self-looping nodes.
The confident plasmid DNA sequences are then outputted in Fasta format for further anal-
ysis.
10
==PAGE:19==
3
Methods
In the following section the methods used in this study will be described in detail. Exact
commands and examples of scripts used for data analysis are found in the supplementary
files as described in Appendix A.
3.1
Workflow
The technical workflow employed in this study for data analysis is illustrated in Figure 3.
The analysis performed was divided into a pre-processing segment which produced clean
high quality metagenomic reads and an analysis segment comprising the bioinformatic
pipeline of the study. In the following sections each method and parameters used in the
different programs will be described in detail.
Schematic overview of workflow
Figure 3: Graphical representation of the technical workflow employed in this study. The work-
flow is divided into to two main sections: Pre-processing and analysis. Red squares represent files
or results while blue squares represent tools or programs used.
Most of the resource-intensive data analysis was performed using the The Danish National
11
==PAGE:20==
Supercomputer for Life Sciences (Computerome 2.0)[40] with access provided by the
Department of Health Technology at the Technical University of Denmark.
3.2
Data set
For this study a chicken microbiome data set was constructed by subsetting a selected set
of publicly available data sets from the NCBI and ENA databases. Both databases where
searched with the query ”Chicken gut microbiome” while ENA was also searched using
the queries ”Chicken gut microbiota” and ”chicken gut metagenome”. A criteria for the
inclusion of data sets was that a published paper had to accompany the data set in order to
validate the sampling procedure, sequencing method as well as ensuring that no potential
trial designs such as feeding of probiotcs were interfering. Another criteria was that the
samples in the data sets had to be sequenced using shotgun sequencing and not 16S or
other amplicon-based technologies.
The selected data sets were downloaded using the SRA toolkit[41].
3.3
Metagenomic data pre-processing
In order to access the quality of the raw reads fastQC [42] was run in default mode
and the output of each sample was compiled into a single HTML report using multiQC
[43]. Adapter content removal and read trimming was perfomed using bbduk.sh from
BBtools[44]. The adapter reference file provided by the BBtools Github was used while
the five first bases were trimmed from the 5’-end based on the multiQC report of per
base sequence content. The adapter content removal was done in k-mer mode using the
”ktrim=r” option with a kmer length of 23, ”k=23”, and a minimum kmer length of 11,
”mink=11”, to be used at read tips. The ”tpe” flag was used to specify that reads are
trimmed to the same length if an adapter is only found in one paried-end read and the
”tbo” flag was set to specify that adapters are also trimmed based on pair overlap de-
tection. These settings and options are recommended in the BBduk guide by the Joint
Genome Institute [45].
Low quality bases with a Phred score below 20 were trimmed and reads shorter than 50 bp
were removed using Sickle[46] version 1.33. The ”sanger” option was selected to specify
the quality encoding to Phred-33 since this is the quality score used by newer illumina
12
==PAGE:21==
sequencing platforms(illumina 1.8).
PhiX contamination was also removed using bbduk.sh from BBtools but the reference file
was changed to the genome of bacteriophage phi X 174 supplied by the BBtools github
and the kmer length was set to 31.
Host and feed contamination was removed utilizing bbmap.sh also from BBtools. The
genomes of Gallus gallus and Branchypodium distachyon were downloaded from NCBI
and combined into a single file which was used as reference. bbmap.sh was run using 32
threads and the ”nodisk=true” option.
Coverage estimation of the metagenomes was performed using Nonpareil[47]. Nonpareil
was run in kmer mode on the post-processed reads with otherwise default settings.
3.4
Metagenomic assembly
The high quality post-processed reads were assembled into contigs using metaSPAdes[37]
as an assembler with the meta option. The assembly was run with k-mer sizes of 21,33,55,77
and otherwise default settings. Contigs shorter than 500bp were filtered out from any fur-
ther analysis.
From the resulting assembly output QUAST[48] was used to compute various common
metrics such as N50, contig length and number of contigs in each assembly. These metrics
were used to roughly eludicate potential differences between single and pooled sample
types.
3.5
Gene prediction and clustering
Protein-coding regions of the assembled contigs were predicted using Prodigal version
2.6.3[49]. Prodigal was run in META mode and using the -a and -d option to write both
protein translations and nucleotide sequences of the predicted ORFs. The rest of the
Prodigal settings were set to default.
The resulting nucleotide sequences of predicted ORFs were clustered using MMseqs2[50]
version 13.45111 to produce a non-redundant gene catalogue. The MMseqs2 clustering
was performed using the ”easy-linclust” workflow which ensures a linear runtime scaling
13
==PAGE:22==
with input size. The clustering was performed with a minimum sequence identity set to
0.95 and minimum coverage to 0.95. The protein and nucleotide sequences of the the clus-
ter representatives was extracted from the MMSeq2 and Prodigal output using Seqkit[51]
yielding a non-redundant gene catalogue and a corresponding protein catalogue.
3.6
ARG, BRG, MRG and MGE prediction
The constructed protein catalogue was used as input to identify ARGs, MRGs/BRGs, and
MGEs respectively. The antibacterial biocide and metal resistance gene, BacMet[52] ver-
sion 2.0, was used for prediction of BRGs and MRGs. The protein catalogue was used in
a similarity search against the BacMet database with DIAMOND[21] as the aligner us-
ing default setting. Only BRG and MRG hits with at least 90% identity and a maximum
e-value of 1 · 10−3 were retained. In cases where a query had more than one hit in the
database the hit with the lowest e-value was retained.
The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database, CARD[16] version 3.1.4, was used
to detect ARGs with RGI as the identifier tool. RGI was run using 40 threads with DIA-
MOND as the aligner. The ”clean” flag was used to remove temporary files and the input
type was set to ”protein” while the rest of the settings were at default. Only ARG hits
with ”Strict” or ”Perfect” significance cut-offs were retained.
MGE homologs were identified using a custom database of MGEs from the PFAM[53]
and TnpPred[54] databases. The database was searched with the ”hmmsearch” tool from
HMMER[55] version 3.3.2. The search was perform with the ”cut tc” flag in order to use
the profile’s trusted cut-offs as thresholds to retain hits. Furthermore, hits with an e-value
below 1·10−5 were discarded and in cases where a query had multiple MGE homologues
the hit with the lowest e-value was retained.
3.7
Contig co-occurence analysis
Resistance genes located on the same contig or located on a contig with a MGE were con-
sidered as a proxy for co-resistance or mobile resistance genes respectively. The amount
of co-resistant and mobile contigs were analyzed in Rstudio[56] and visualized in Venn
diagrams using the ”draw.triple.venn” function from the R package ”VennDiagram”[57].
14
==PAGE:23==
The proportion of contigs with co-occurrence in each geographic location and poultry en-
vironment was tested for statistical significant difference using Fisher’s exact test in the
function ”fisher.test” in the R package ”stats”.
3.8
Read mapping and abundance estimation of resistance genes
A readmapping of the processed reads to the predicted resistance genes was performed to
construct resistance gene read count matrices. The steps involved in this process starting
from resistance gene catalogues and eventually ending in resistance gene count matrices
were performed as a single workflow using the Snakemake[58] workflow management
system.
The nucleotide sequences of predicted ARGs and BRG/MRG were extracted from the
non-redundant gene catalogue using SeqKit[51] yielding two distinct resistance gene cat-
alogues to be used for read mapping. The processed reads were mapped to each resistance
gene catalogue using minimap2[59] version 2.17 (r941). Minimap2 was run using the
short single-end read preset option ”sr” which notably does not output secondary align-
ments.
The number of mapped reads were retrieved using ”idxstats” from SAMtools[60] and the
counts were constructed into read count matrices using Python version [61]. In cases
where multiple genes in the gene count matrices had been identified as the same resis-
tance gene based on the accession number in the database, the read counts were merged.
In these cases the predicted gene with the highest number of total reads mapped across all
samples was kept as representative.
The read count matrices of resistance genes produced by the readmapping procedure were
normalized according to gene length and library size using to the formula in Equation 3:
ai,j = ci,j ·L−1
i
·106
Rj
(3)
where ai,j denotes the normalized abundance in the read count matrice of a gene i in a
sample j, ci,j denotes raw read counts of a gene i in a sample j, Li denotes gene length in
15
==PAGE:24==
bp of a gene i, and Rj denotes the library size in number of total reads of a sample j.
3.9
Diversity estimation of resistance genes
The alpha diversity of ARG’s and MRG’s/BRG’s was estimated by calculating the Shan-
non index using the phyloseq package[62] version 1.38.0 in R studio. One-way ANOVA
from the R package ”stats” was used to compare differences in alpha diversity between
the sample groups while a TukeyHSD test from the R package ”agricolae”[63] was used
to evaluate if the null hypothesis could be rejected at an alpha-level of 0.05.
3.10
Resistome clustering and PCoA
The normalized read count matrices of resistance genes was used to analyse the be-
tween sample diversity of resistance genes. This β-diversity was evaluated by construct-
ing Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrices using the ”vegdist” function from the ”vegan” R-
package[64]. Using the resulting dissimilarity matrices the samples were clustered using
the ”hclust” function from the R package ”stats”. The resulting dendrogram was visual-
ized using the Interactive Tree of Life (iTOL v6.5) [65].
Furthermore, the dissimilarity matrices were ordinated using a PCoA plot to reveal po-
tential clustering patterns of the samples. The PCoA ordination was performed using the
”pcoa” function from the R package ”ape”[66]. A permutational multivariate analysis of
variance (PERMANOVA) of the dissimilarity matrices was performed with 10000 per-
mutations using the ”adonis” function from the ”vegan” R package [64] to statistically
evaluate the differences in β-diversity between different groupings of the samples.
3.11
Differential abundance analysis of resistance genes
The gene count matrices of resistance genes were used to identify ARGs and BRG/MRGs
that differed in abundance between geographic locations and farming environments. In
order to determine a suitable differential abundance method for the data set the ”testDA”
function from the DAtest[26] R package was applied to the raw read count matrices.
Based on this comparison of different methods a Welch’s t-test with Log transformed
read counts was applied in R studio using the ”ltt2” function from the ”DAtest” package
along with phyloseq[62] version 1.38.0.
16
==PAGE:25==
3.12
Plasmid assembly and typing
Plasmid sequences in the metagenomic samples were assembled from the processed reads
and corresponding assembly graphs using SCAPP [29]. The plasmid assembly was per-
formed with the maximum k value used by the assembler ”-k” set to 77 to match the value
employed in the assembly process.
The resulting plasmid sequences were typed using MOB-typer from the MOB-suite soft-
ware tools [67]. Hereby, plasmids were categorized according to their predicted mobi-
lization potential in the categories ”non-mobilizable”, ”mobilizable”, and ”conjugative”.
Furthermore, potential ARG’s present on the plasmids were predicted using CARD[16]
version 3.1.4, with RGI as the identifier tool. A selected set of conjugative plasmids host-
ing predicted ARG’s were further analysed by perfoming a functional annotation with
eggNOG-mapper[68] version 2.17 using the eggnogg mapper webservice with default
settings. The annotated plasmids were visualized using SnapGene viewer[69].
3.13
Horizontal gene transfer prediction
WAAFLE (a Workflow to Annotate Assemblies)[70] was applied to the assembled contigs
in order to identify putative HGT events. The contigs were searched against the WAAFLE
blastn database of microbial pangenomes using the blastn wrapper ”waafle search”. The
”waffle orgscorer” command was then run with default settings using: the assembled
contigs, the resulting BLAST output from ”waaffle search”, the GFF files produced by
Prodigal in the ORF prediction, and the taxonomy file corresponding to the WAAFLE
blastn database of microbial pangenomes.
The predicted genes on contigs identified as carrying putative HGT were then compared
to the predicted ARG’s using their Prodigal ID to identify potential HGT ARGs.
17
==PAGE:26==
4
Results
4.1
Data set
The publicly available chicken gut metagenomic data sets from three studies (dChina,
dSurrey, and dEFFORT) were selected for subsetting. These data sets were all accompa-
nied by a published scientific paper and therefore included in this study. In total 56 sam-
ples were selected from these data sets, representing the geographic locations of China
as well as different European countries. Samples representing chickens from a free range
farming environment as well as conventional farming environment were selected from
Europe and China respectively. An overview of the data set can be seen in Table 1 and
the full metadata and sample overview is found in Appendix B.
Metagenomic data set
Data set
Samples
Pooled samples
Farms
bioProject ID
Country
Ref
dChina
31
10
7
PRJNA417359
China
[71]
dSurrey
5
0
1
PRJNA543206
UK
[72]
dEFFORT
20
20
20
PRJEB22062
DK, ITA, NL, PL
[73]
Table 1: Overview of the 3 subsetted data sets and part of the corresponding metadata. UK
(United Kingdom), DK (Denmark), ITA (Italy), NL (The Netherlands), PL (Poland).
From the dChina data set a total of 31 samples were included from seven different farms.
Of these seven farms, five farms were conventional and two were free range. From a total
of five farms five samples were collected while only three samples were collected from
the remaining two farms. Out of the total 31 samples, 10 samples were pooled. Each
pooled sample consisted of a specific intestinal compartment from five different chickens.
The pooled samples were collected from a total of two farms. From the remaining five
farms each sample were collected from single chickens.
To keep the chickens age difference to a minimum all samples were selected within the
age range of 41 to 78 days old. The sampled chickens represented the following breeds:
Arbor Acres broiler chicken breed, Local yellow-feather chicken, Yellow dwarf chicken,
Guangxi local chicken breed, and Ross 308.
From the dSurrey data set a total of five faecal samples were included all taken from the
same UK free range farm. The chickens sampled were all of the Lohmann Brown chicken
breed.
18
==PAGE:27==
From the dEFFORT data set a total of 20 faecal samples were included from four differ-
ent European countries: Denmark, The Netherlands, Italy, and Poland. The samples from
this data set were all pooled samples and each sample represented a different conventional
farm.
The samples from all three data sets were sequenced using Illumina sequencing platforms
namely Illumina Hiseq 2500/3000/X ten or NovaSeq 6000.
The raw data set of the 56 samples comprised a total of 3.042.581.492 reads. The raw
data sets differed in size in terms of number of reads as seen in Figure 4. dChina had the
lowest median number of bases sequenced at approximately 4 Gbases while the dSurrey
data set was relatively close in size at a median of approximately 6 Gbases. The dEFFORT
samples were notably larger with a median of approximately 14 Gbases.
Number of bases per data set
Figure 4: Boxplot showing number of bases per sample in each of the 3 data sets. The y-axis
displays the number of gigabases
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2
Metagenomic data pre-processing
Each step of the pre-processing pipeline resulted in a number of reads being discarded
from the different samples. An overview of the number of reads/bases discarded after
each step is illustrated in Table 2. The removal of adapter sequences and trimming of the
first five bases is listed in percentage of bases removed, since this type of pre-processing
is unlikely to remove entire reads. The amount of reads removed during the removal of
low quality and short reads is listed as the total number of reads, due to the format of the
Sickle output. Host/feed and PhiX contamination is simply listed as the percentage of
reads removed.
Reads/bases removed after each pre-processing step
Reads/bases
Adapter &
5 first bases(bases)
Short &
low quality
PhiX
contam.
Host/feed
contam.
Min
3.38%
8 paired
0 single
0.00%
0.002%
Max
9.89%
787614 paired
2176090 single
2.41%
16.61%
Mean
4.78%
154950 paired
600599 single
0.28%
1.17%
Table 2: Results of the pre-processing steps showing the percentage of bases discarded and the
number of single and paired reads discarded from the short and low quality reads removal.
The total number of raw reads was reduced from 3.042.581.482 to 2.957.817.888 high
quality clean reads as a result of the pre-processing. The effects of the pre-processing on
the data set is further illustrated in Figure 5.
20
==PAGE:29==
Data quality control before and after pre-processing
Figure 5: FastQC/MultiQC overview of the read quality before and after pre-processing. A) Per
base sequence content before trimming of the left most 5 bases from each read. B) Per base Se-
quence content after trimming of the left most 5 bases from each read. C) Percentage of sequences
with adapter content at each position before adapter removal. D) Percentage of sequences with
adapter content at each position after adapter removal. E) Mean quality Phred score before trim-
ming and low quality/short read removal. F) Mean quality Phred score after trimming and low
quality/short read removal.
After the pre-processing, the majority of adapter content had been removed and the mean
quality score at the start and end of the reads had improved which is seen in Figure 5
C & D as well as Figure 5 E & F. Furthermore, Figure 5 A & B illustrates an example
of how the base percentage content stabilized in the start of the reads as a result of the
pre-processing.
21
==PAGE:30==
The result of the metagenome coverage estimation by Nonpareil3 indicated a general high
coverage of the metagenomic samples as seen in Figure 6. The median coverage is almost
at 90% as seen in Figure 6B while the lower and upper range values were 67.5% and
98.3% respectively. Thus, the coverage estimation implied that the sequencing effort was
above the requirement to reach 50% coverage for all samples.
Nonpareil curves and coverage
Figure 6: A) Nonpariel curves showing the estimated average coverage against the sequencing
effort for each of the 56 samples. The dots represent the actual sequencing effort of each sample
while the arrows on the x-axis illustrate the sequencing effort needed to reach 50% estimated
average coverage. B) Box/Violin plot showing the distribution of coverage across the samples.
22
==PAGE:31==
4.3
Assembly
All of the 56 metagenomes were successfully assembled into contigs using metaSPAdes.
Basic metrics were determined from the assemblies in order to evaluate potential differ-
ences in the assemblies produced by the pooled and single microbiome samples as seen
in Figure 7.
Assembly statistics
Figure 7: Overview of the assemblies of the pooled and single metagenomic samples. A) Box-
plots of the N50 value of the pooled and single samples. B) Boxplots of the largest contig in
number of bp of the pooled and single samples. C) Boxplots of the total contig length in the
pooled and single samples. D) The number of contigs in the pooled and single samples.
The pooled and single samples showed similar median values in all of the four determined
assembly metrics as illustrated in the boxplots in Figure 7.
4.4
Contig co-occurence
The assembled contigs harboring combinations of predicted ARGs, MRGs/BRGs and
MGEs were assessed to evaluate potential for co-selection. For each grouping of samples
MGEs were the largest category and showed ample overlap with the other categories as
seen in Figure 8. Furthermore, European and free-range samples showed the highest
23
==PAGE:32==
number of selected gene-carrying contigs and gene combination in each of the categories
when compared to their respective opposing categories. Contigs harboring a gene from all
3 of the gene categories were identified in each of the sample groupings. In the geography
based grouping, European samples had the highest number of this type of contig at 125
while the Chinese samples contained 15. In the sample environment based grouping, the
free-range samples had the highest number at 126 while the conventional farm samples
contained 14.
Overview of co-occurennce of selected genes in assembled contigs
Figure 8: Venn diagrams showing contigs carrying ARGs, MRGs/BRGs, MGEs, and their com-
binations in each of the four sample groupings.
When examining the proportion of contigs in each of the categories, the European samples
also showed a higher proportion of contigs in each of the categories with Fisher’s exact
test p-vaules<0.001 as seen in Figure 9A. In the sample environment based grouping
shown in Figure 9B, the conventional samples showed a higher proportion of contigs in
the categories: ARG (p-value<0.01), MRG/BRG(p-value<0.001) as well as ARG+MRG/BRG(p-
value<0.001). Meanwhile the free-range samples had a higher proportion of ARG +
MGE (p-value<0.005), MRG/BRG + MGE (p-value<0.001) and ARG+MRG/BRG+MGE(p-
value<0.001).
The proportion of contigs containing MGE and either type of resistance gene was exam-
24
==PAGE:33==
ined across all samples to give an overview of the most occurring mobile resistance gene
type. As seen in Figure 9C, a larger proportion of ARGs were found on contigs together
with MGEs as compared to MRGs/BRGs (p-value<0.001).
Proportion of contigs with co-occurrence of selected genes
Figure 9: Different comparisons of proportion of contigs carrying resistance genes. Asterisk
indicate significant statistical difference between groups (Fisher’s exact test; p-value<0.05*, p-
value<0.01**, p-value<0.001***). A) The proportion of contigs with co-occurrence of ARGs
and MRGs/BRGs, ARGs and MGEs, MRGs/BRGs and MGEs, MRGs/BRGs, ARGs and MGEs
in samples based on geographic location. B) The proportion of contigs with co-occurrence of
ARGs and MRGs/BRGs, ARGs and MGEs, MRGs/BRGs and MGEs, MRGs/BRGs, ARGs and
MGEs in samples based on sample environment. C) The proportion of contigs carrying ARGs and
BRGs/MRGs with MGEs in all samples combined.
25
==PAGE:34==
4.5
ARG read mapping and abundance
The high quality processed reads were mapped to a non-redundant gene catalogue of 439
identified ARGs. The mapping ratio of the reads to the gene catalogue is illustrated for
each of the sample groupings in Figure 10A and B. Generally, the mapping ratios of ARGs
in each grouping were within the same range with median values of approximately 0.4%
for each sample grouping as illustrated in Figure 10A and B.
ARG read mapping ratios
Figure 10: ARG read mapping rations of in each sample grouping. The mapping ratio denotes
the percentage of reads mapped to the ARG gene catalogue. A) Boxplots of ARG read mapping
ratios in the samples grouped by geographic location. B) Boxplots of ARG read mapping ratios in
the samples grouped by sample environment.
The abundance of the different identified ARGs was estimated using the number of reads
mapped in each sample. After normalization of the read counts as described in section
3.8 a comparison of the normalized abundance of the different identified ARGs was made
based on the antibiotic drug class resistances conferred by the genes. This comparison
based on the geographic and sample environment groupings are illustrated in Figure 11
and 12.
26
==PAGE:35==
ARG drug classes by geographic location
Figure 11: ARG drug class abundances in the European and Chinese samples of the 20 most
abundant ARG drug classes. The abundances were normalized as described in section 3.8 while
also dividing by the number of samples in each geographic sample group (China: 31, Europe: 25).
ARG drug classes by Sample environment
Figure 12: ARG drug class abundances in the free-range and conventional samples of the 20
most abundant ARG drug classes. The abundances were normalized as described in section 3.8
while also dividing by the number of samples in each sample environment group (Free-range: 15,
Conventional: 41).
27
==PAGE:36==
As seen in Figure 11 and 12 tetracycline is distinctively the most abundant ARG drug
class in both the geographic locations and sample environments. The Chinese and Eu-
ropean samples show similar normalized abundances of tetracycline-resistant ARGs as
illustrated in Figure 11. Aminoglycoside, phenicol, and lincosamide-resistant ARGs also
show similar normalized abundances between the two locations. However, the European
samples had noticeably higher normalized abundances for the majority of the ARG drug
classes. Only streptogramin-resistant ARGs had higher normalized abundance in the Chi-
nese samples.
The sample environment based grouping illustrated in Figure 12 had a less clear sep-
aration of normalized abundances between the two groupings. Most of the ARG drug
classes had similar abundances with the free-range samples showing slightly higher nor-
malized abundances in some of the more abundant ARG drug classes such as phenicol
and aminoglcoside. Furthermore, the conventional samples had an apparently higher nor-
malized abundance in the less abundant ARG drug class categories such as triclosan and
nucleosides.
As previously described in section 3.2 the Chinese samples were comprised of different
types of gastrointestinal samples while the European samples solely consisted of faecal
samples. Another ARG drug abundance plot contatining only the colorectum sample type
and the faecal European samples was constructed to clarify whether the large difference in
normalized abundance between the geographic locations is confounded by the difference
between intestinal and faecal samples. The colorectum samples were used for this com-
parison due it being in close proximity to the end of gastrointestinal tract. The resulting
plot is seen in Figure 13.
28
==PAGE:37==
ARG drug classes by Sample spot
Figure 13: ARG drug class abundances in the colorectum and faecal samples of the 20 most
abundant ARG drug classes. The abundances were normalized as described in section 3.8 while
also dividing by the number of samples in each sample spot groups (Colorectum: 10, Faecal: 25).
When inspected visually the difference in normalized ARG drug class abundances did
appear slightly less pronounced using this subset of Chinese samples as compared rather
clear higher ARG drug class abundances of European samples in the geographic location
based barchart in Figure 11.
29
==PAGE:38==
4.6
Resistome clustering and PCoA
The dissimilarity in abundance of ARG’s showed a clear separation based on geographic
location of the samples when visualized in a dendrogram as seen in Figure 14. The den-
drogram displays three different clusters for each of the two geographic locations. The
same level of pronounced clustering based on sample environment was not observed in
the dendrogram. The free-range and conventional samples are found in the same cluster in
several instances and also show cases where conventional samples of the same geographic
location cluster more closely to free-range samples than other conventional samples of the
same location (SRR6323502, SRR6323449, SRR6323343).
Resistome clustering of ARGs
Figure 14: Dendrogram showing the hierarchical clustering of Bray-Curtis dissimilarities based
on ARG gene abundances in each of the 56 samples. Sample ID’s are coloured according to
sample environment while a color strip is added to illustrate geographic location.
The Bray-Curtis dissimilarities were also employed to construct PCoA plots of the abun-
dance of resistance genes as seen in Figure 15. Here both the abundance of ARGs as well
as MRGs/BRGs were examined. A clustering according to geographic location seemed
visible by simply inspecting the PCoA plots in Figure 15A and Figure 15B. The geo-
30
==PAGE:39==
graphical based clustering was also verified statistically using the PermANOVA test of
the Bray-Curtis dissimilarities which gave p-values of 0.001 when run with 10000 per-
mutations. In addition, the R2-value was 0.21226 for the ARGs while a slightly higher
R2-value of 0.29766 for the MRGs/BRGs was observed.
PermANOVA test of the Bray-Curtis dissimilarities using the sample environment based
grouping had substantially lower R2-values for both ARGs and MRG/BRG. ARGs had a
R2-value of 0.04165 and p-value of 0.0356 while the MRG/BRG showed a R2-value of
0.0258 with a non-significant p-value of 0.1914.
In an attempt to elucidate whether the clustering of the samples based on geographical
location was due to the different parts of the chickens sampled, the PCoA plots were also
coloured according to the intestinal sample spot. In this grouping the Bray-Curtis dis-
similarity of the Chinese samples were examined in a PermANOVA test with 10000 per-
mutations as these samples contained different sampled spots of the chickens intestines.
This test also did not show significant clustering with a p-value of 0.1687 and R2-value
of 0.16887 for ARGs while the MRG/BRGs showed significant clustering with a p-value
of 0.0047 and R2 of 0.27033. Thus, the R2-value was lower in this sample spot based
clustering as compared to the geographical location based clustering for both resistance
gene types.
31
==PAGE:40==
PCoA of ARGs and BRGs/MRGs
Figure 15:
PCoA plots showing Bray-Curtis dissimilarities in abundance of ARGs and
MRGs/BRGs. A) PCoA of ARGs coloured by geographic location and shapes of points repre-
sents sample environment. B) PCoA of MRGs/BRGs coloured by geographic location and shapes
of points represents sample environment. C) PCoA of ARGs coloured by sample spot and shapes
of points represents geographic locations. D) PCoA of MRGs/BRGs coloured by sample spot and
shapes of points represents geographic locations.
The alpha diversity of resistance genes was evaluated by calculation of the Shannon index
for the ARGs abundances and the abundance of MRGs/BRGs as seen in Figure 16. In
geographical based grouping of the samples the diversity of ARGs was not significantly
different while the diversity of MRGs/BRGs was significantly higher in the European
samples. When grouping the samples based on sample environment the diversity of ARGs
or MRG/BRG was not significantly different between sample environments.
32
==PAGE:41==
Alpha diversity of resistance genes
Figure 16: Alpha diversity based on resistance genes. Asteriks stand for significant statistical
difference between groups and NS stand for Non-significant (TukeyHSD test; p-value< 0.05 A)
Violin/box plot of Shannon index of ARG’s grouped by geographic location. B) Violin/box plot
of Shannon index of MRGs/BRGs grouped by geographic location. C) Violin/box plot of Shan-
non index of ARG’s grouped by sample environment. D) Violin/box plot of Shannon index of
MRGs/BRGs grouped by sample environment.
4.7
Differential abundance analysis of ARG’s
The performances of different differential abundance methods were compared based on
the raw read count matrice of ARGs using geographic location as the predictor based on
200 test runs. The result of the comparison is summarized in Figure 17. This compar-
ison did not reveal any clear wining method, but Log2 t-test was chosen as it shows a
reasonable AUC and is clear to interpret compared to other methods.
33
==PAGE:42==
Comparison of differential abundance methods
Figure 17: Performance of 13 different DA methods tested on the raw ARG abundance results
and measured by ROC, Power, and False Discovery Rate.
The Log2 t-test differential abundance analysis was performed based on geographic lo-
cation as well as sample environment and the result is visualized in Figure 18. ARGs
with an FDR<0.05 and a log2-fold change with an absolute value larger than 1 were
considered to be significantly differentially abundant. Based on these criteria 103 ARGs
were found to be differentially abundant between Chinese and European samples while no
ARGs were found to be differentially abundant between the free-range and conventional
sample groupings.
34
==PAGE:43==
Differential abundance of ARGs
Figure 18: Volcano plots of the Log t-test2 differential abundance of ARGs. A) Differential
abundance of ARGs based on geographical location of samples. Positive log2FC values corre-
spond to a higher abundance in European samples while negative log2FC values correspond to a
higher abundance in Chinese samples. B) Differential abundance of ARGs based on sample en-
vironment. Positive log2FC values correspond to a higher abundance in free-range samples while
negative log2FC values correspond to a higher abundance in conventional samples.
The same approach was employed to determine potential differentially abundant MRGs/BRGs
between the geographical location and sample environment based sample groupings and
the result is visualized in Figure 19. This analysis identified 113 differentially abundant
MRGs/BRGs between the geographic locations and 6 between the sample environment
based grouping.
35
==PAGE:44==
Differential abundance of MRGs/BRGs
Figure 19: Volcano plots of the Log t-test2 differential abundance of MRGs/BRGs. A) Differen-
tial abundance of MRGs/BRGs based on the geographical location of samples. Positive log2FC
values correspond to a higher abundance in European samples while negative log2FC values cor-
respond to a higher abundance in Chinese samples. B) Differential abundance of ARGs based
on sample environment. Positive log2FC values correspond to a higher abundance in free-range
samples while negative log2FC values correspond to a higher abundance in conventional samples.
The most differentially abundant ARGs in each region measured by the absolute log2FC
value and with a significant adjusted p-value were further examined and are summarized
in Table 3 and Table 4.
36
==PAGE:45==
Ten most differentially abundant ARGs, China
AMR Gene Family
Resistance Mechanism
Drug Class
log2FC
APH(3’)
Antibiotic inactivation
Aminoglycoside
-3.686
APH(2”), AAC(6’)
Antibiotic inactivation
Aminoglycoside
-3.5700
ABC-F
ATP-binding cassette RPP
Antibiotic target protection
Macrolide , lincosamide ,
streptogramin , tetracycline ,
oxazolidinone , phenicol ,
pleuromutilin
-2.961
rpoB
Antibiotic target alteration,
Antibiotic target replacement
Rifamycin
-2.729
SAT
Antibiotic inactivation
Nucleoside antibiotic
-2.400
ANT(6)
Antibiotic inactivation
Aminoglycoside
-2.306
RND
Antibiotic efflux
Macrolide , fluoroquinolone ,
aminoglycoside , cephalosporin,
penam, tetracycline ,
aminocoumarin ,
diaminopyrimidine ,
phenicol
-2.211
CAT
Antibiotic inactivation
Phenicol
-2.101
APH(2”)
Antibiotic inactivation
Aminoglycoside
-2.065
tetracycline-resistant RPP
Antibiotic target protection
Tetracycline
-1.134
Table 3: Overview of the top ten most differentially abundant genes in the Chinese sam-
ples. Abbreviations of the CARD AMR Gene Families has been employed to make the
table fit the page.
RPP: ribosomal protection protein,
SAT: streptothricin acetyltransferase,
rpoB:
rifamycin-resistant beta-subunit of RNA polymerase, CAT: chloramphenicol acetyltrans-
ferase.
37
==PAGE:46==
Ten most differentially abundant ARGs, Europe
AMR Gene Family
Resistance Mechanism
Drug Class
log2FC
MFS, RND
Antibiotic efflux
Macrolide , fluoroquinolone ,
penam, tetracycline
3.911
RND
Antibiotic efflux
Macrolide , fluoroquinolone ,
penam
3.476
RND
Antibiotic efflux
Fluoroquinolone , cephalosporin,
cephamycin, penam
3.414
RND
Antibiotic efflux
Fluoroquinolone , cephalosporin,
glycylcycline, penam,
tetracycline , rifamycin ,
phenicol , triclosan
3.339
RND
Antibiotic efflux
Aminoglycoside
3.254
pmr PEA
Antibiotic target alteration
Peptide antibiotic
3.146
MFS
Antibiotic efflux
Nucleoside , acridine dye,
disinfecting agents and intercalating dyes
3.037
RND
Antibiotic efflux
Aminocoumarin
2.981
RND
Antibiotic efflux
Aminoglycoside , aminocoumarin
2.976
PBP mutation
Antibiotic target alteration
Aephalosporin, cephamycin, penam
2.958
Table 4: Overview of the top ten most differentially abundant genes in the European sam-
ples. Abbreviations of the CARD AMR Gene Families has been employed to make the
table fit the page.
MFS: Major facilitator superfamily, RND: resistance-nodulation-cell division, rpoB:
rifamycin-resistant beta-subunit of RNA polymerase, PMR: phosphoethanolamine trans-
ferase, PBP: Penicillin-binding protein.
4.8
ARG harboring plasmids and horizontal gene transfer of ARG’s
Plasmids were successfully assembled from all samples except for sample ERR2241891
which was not able to perform the plasmid assembly due to a run-out of computing re-
sources. An overview of the number of successfully assembled plasmids and their size
distribution is illustrated in Figure 20A and B. The European samples all had a higher
amount of assembled plasmids compared to the Chinese samples as seen in the boxplots
in Figure 20A. The size distribution of the plasmids illustrated in Figure 20B shows that
the vast majority of assembled plasmids were of short length (<10000bp). However, a
few plasmids were successfully assembled at sizes (>60000bp).
38
==PAGE:47==
Assembled plasmids overview
Figure 20: Overview of the assembled plasmids in samples from each geographical location. A)
Boxplots showing the total number of assembled plasmids in samples from the two geographical
locations. B) Stacked histogram of size of assembled plasmids in bp visualized using 40 bins.
The plasmids were typed based on their mobilization potential and surveyed for presence
of ARGs in order to identify potential vectors of horizontal resistance gene transfer. Out
of the 103 differentially abundant ARGs between geographical locations, 48 were also
identified in one of the assembled plasmids. Six of these 48 ARGs were predicted on
plasmids typed as conjugative and are summarized in Table 5.
Conjugative plasmids harbouring differentially abundant ARG’s
Sample ID
Size(bp)
Replicon type(s)
AMR Gene Family
Drug Class
ERR2241649
84315
-
Trimethoprim resistant dfr
Diaminopyrimidine antibiotic
ERR2241649
84315
-
TEM beta-lactamase
Monobactam; cephalosporin;
penam; penem
ERR2241653
34119
IncX4
TEM beta-lactamase
Monobactam; cephalosporin;
penam; penem
ERR2241919
112896
IncI-gamma/K1
TEM beta-lactamase
Monobactam; cephalosporin;
penam; penem
ERR2241848
24749
-
TEM beta-lactamase
Monobactam; cephalosporin;
penam; penem
ERR2241919
112896
IncI-gamma/K1
Trimethoprim resistant dfr
Diaminopyrimidine antibiotic
Table 5: The conjugative plasmids found to harbor differentially abundant ARGs and their repli-
con type according to MOB-typer.
39
==PAGE:48==
A plasmid map of one of the conjugative plasmids harboring the differentially abundant
ARG from the gene family ”trimethoprim resistant dihydrofolate reductase dfr” as well
as an ”TEM beta-lactamase” gene is seen in Figure 21. This plasmid also carried another
identified ARGs and multiple MGEs. Furthermore, a domain identified as a ParE type II
toxin-antitoxin is also located on this plasmid.
Conjugative antibiotic resistance plasmid
Figure 21: Plasmid map of predicted conjugative plasmid harboring differentially abundant an-
tibiotic resistance genes. The plasmid sequence was assembled from the European sample with ID
ERR2241649. The differentially abundant ARGs are coloured in red while other predicted ARGs
are coloured in yellow. Other genes predicted by eggNOG-mapper are coloured in gray
None of the genes found in table 5 were also linked to predicted putative HGT events.
However, a set of four differentially abundant ARGs were also identified in putative HGT
evens and are listed in Table 6. The genes were all found to be more differentially abun-
dant in the Chinese samples. The bottom two genes have the same log2 fold change
value as they were represented by the same gene cluster representative in the differential
abundance analysis.
40
==PAGE:49==
Differentially abundant ARGs in predicted HGT events
AMR Gene Family
Resistance Mechanism
Drug Class
log2FC
APH(2”), AAC(6’)
Antibiotic inactivation
Aminoglycoside
-3.57
APH(2”)
Antibiotic inactivation
Aminoglycoside
-1.106
Tetracycline-resistant RPP
Antibiotic target protection
Tetracycline
-1.334
Tetracycline-resistant RPP
Antibiotic target protection
Tetracycline
-1.334
Table 6: Differentially abundant ARGs that were also involved in predicted HGT events using
WAAFLE.
5
Discussion
5.1
Geographical location showed highest influence on resistance gene
abundance and composition
The analysis performed in this study indicated that the geographical location of the anal-
ysed samples had a more pronounced effect on several characteristics of ARGs and MRGs/BRGs.
Contrarily, the effect of sample environment showed a less apparent effect on these resis-
tance gene characteristics.
The ARG resistomes were found to cluster significantly according to their geographic
location while the samples did not cluster significantly according to the sample environ-
ment. Similarly, the samples were significantly different in α-diversity based on geo-
graphic location but not sample environment when examining the Shannon index as a
diversity measure of ARGs as well as MRGs/BRGs. In terms of contig proportions har-
boring ARGs, MRGs/BRGs, and MGEs as well as co-occurrence of these gene types,
significant differences were detected between both geographic location and sample en-
vironment. However, the difference was more pronounced for the geographic location
based sample groupings.
Interestingly, the European samples showed a higher ARG abundance and diversity in
all of the significant geographic differences. In a similar metagenomic study examining
ARGs in Chinese and European chicken livestock performed by Hu et al. some of these
same tendencies were observed. Here the diversity of ARGs were also lower in the Chi-
nese chickens in comparison to the European chickens [9]. They proposed that the higher
41
==PAGE:50==
levels of ARG diversity in the European samples could be mediated by plasmids as these
also showed to harbor a more diverse and abundant plasmidome. However, in addition
Hu et al. also found that the relative abundance of ARGs was higher in the Chinese
samples compared to the European samples which contradicts the findings of this study.
Furthermore, Hu et al. found that the chicken gut antibiotic resistome was more related to
the plasmid composition than the microbial composition. The abundance of the complete
set of confident plasmids was not examined in the present study. However, mapping the
reads to the set of confidently assembled plasmids could have helped elucidate whether
a similar relationship between plasmid composition and ARG resistome was indicated in
the present study’s data set.
Another identified geographic difference was the significantly higher proportion of re-
sistance contigs in the European samples. These samples were also found to have more
differentially abundant ARGs. The difference in sample type (faecal vs. intestinal) and
library size between the European and Chinese samples does indeed present a set of plau-
sible confounding variables that may contribute to the differences observed based on geo-
graphic location. When examining the Chinese samples separately in terms of clustering
according to sample spot in the intestine the samples did not show significant clustering
of ARGs. This could indicate that the sample spot is not the variable dictating the ob-
served geographic clustering patterns. However, a fundamental issue with this approach
is that no faecal samples were part of the Chinese data set. Thus, the observed difference
between geographic location could still be due to the difference between intestinal and
faecal sample resistome characteristics.
The geographic comparison of normalized ARG drug class abundances also generally
showed much higher values in the European samples. To examine the influence of sample
spots on this observed difference, an approach similar to the one used in the clustering
analysis was applied. This was achieved by limiting the comparison to the Chinese col-
orectum samples and European faecal samples. This approach indicated a slightly less
pronounced difference in ARG drug class normalized abundances than when comparing
the full set of samples. This could indicate that the lower abundance of ARGs in Chi-
nese chickens may be partly caused by the samples being higher in the gastrointestinal
tract. However, this part of the analysis was not evaluated statistically which would be
42
==PAGE:51==
essential to confirming the sample spot as an explanation for the lower ARG drug class
abundances. Other studies have found faecal samples to be a good proxy to represent the
microbial composition of the gastrointestinal tract in chickens [74] [75]. However, appar-
ently no studies currently exist that explicitly compare the similarity in resistome between
faecal and gastrointestinal chicken microbiome samples.
5.2
Differentially abundant ARGs are associated with conjugative
plasmids
Out of the pool of 103 identified differential abundant ARGs between geographic loca-
tion, six ARGs were found on assembled conjugative plasmid sequences. These ARGs all
belonged to the TEM beta-lactamase or trimethoprim resistance dfr AMR gene families.
Both of these types of ARGs are known to be associated with plasmids and IncI-plasmids
have specifically been established as carrier of TEM beta-lactamases in samples of Eu-
ropean poultry livestock [76] [77], [78]. In the European sample with ID ERR2241919
an assembled plasmid of IncI plasmid replicon type was also found to carry a TEM beta-
lactamase ARG which conforms with the previous findings.
One strategy proposed to mitigate plasmid mediated spread and propagation of ARGs in
poultry livestock is the inclusion of chemical conjugation inhibitors [79]. The conjuga-
tive inhibitors have been examined in poultry either as fed-additives or to treat the poultry
litter[80], [81]. This strategy has shown preliminary evidence of limiting the conjugation
of ARGs in controlled trails. Large scale implementation and studies of this effect would
be essential to verify conjugation inhibitors as a feasible technology to lessen antibiotic
resistance in poultry livestock.
The conjugative plasmid harboring two differentially abundant ARGs that were function-
ally annotated and visualized in a plasmid map was not successfully typed according to
replicon type. Thus, this could be evidence of a potentially novel conjugative plasmid
carrying ARGs which disseminates these ARGs readily. Furthermore, the functional an-
notation of this plasmid showed putative indications of a toxin-antitoxin system as a ParE
type II domain was identified. These systems are known to facilitate maintenance of an-
tibiotic resistance in bacterial populations by killing or inhibiting plasmid free daughter
cells [82]. Thus, the presence of this system could further explain the plasmid as a driver
of the observed differentially abundance of it’s associated ARGs.
43
==PAGE:52==
However, the functional annotation only identified one ParE type II domian. The archety-
pal toxin-antitoxin system is a two-gene operon coding both the toxin and the antitoxin
[83]. Thus, it would be expected to identify a corresponding ParE type II domain lo-
cated next to the identified domain. This could possibly be explained by a misannotation
by eggNOG-mapper which could have been further examined by using a toxin-antitoxin
specific database to annotate the plasmid.
There were four differentially abundant ARGs which were linked to putative HGT events
in the present study. However, none of these ARGs were also found to be harbored by the
assembled conjugative plasmids. Had this been the case it would have provided further
evidence of plasmid mediated spread as being a driver of the differential abundance of
these ARGs. The tools available for predicting HGT events in metagenomic data are still
limited and in their developing phases. This could partly explain why the identification
of HGT ARGs harbored by conjugative plasmids was unsuccessful using WAAFLE. An
alternative approach would have been to use Metachip[84] which is one of the few other
tools designed for HGT prediction of metagenomic data. Use of Metachip would require
constructing metagenome-assembled genomes(MAGs) from the metagenomic data using
a tool such as VAMB[85]. The MAGs would also have to be taxonomically classified
using GTDB-Tk[86], which is required as MetaChip uses a comparison of the genes in
different MAGs to identify putative HGT events. This approach was applied by Hu et al.
to successfully identify putative ARG HGT events within chicken gut communities [9].
A disadvantage of this strategy is the limitation of the pool of ARGs to those assembled
into MAGs as potential detection of HGT events may be missed.
5.3
Limitations of the data set
This study was based solely on publicly available metagenomic data sets from previous
studies. A predicament of this approach was a lack of homogeneous sampling strategies
and sequencing protocols between the studies producing the analysed data. This entailed
multiple varying factors which complicated the evaluation of whether the observed varia-
tion between geographic locations were attributed to any of these confounding variables.
Since a thorough research of publicly available chicken gut metagenomic samples was
already performed in the construction of the present data set, completing a new study
including sampling and sequencing would likely be necessary to mitigate the limitations
44
==PAGE:53==
of the current data. Ideally, an improved study design would include a homogeneous
sampling and sequencing protocol of the metagenomic data to elucidate and exclude con-
founding variables.
Furthermore, detailed metadata about the antibiotic usage and other farming practices
would have improved the ability to explain observed differences in resistome character-
istics between the samples. Specifically, observations of frequency of decontamination,
type of feed, and heavy metal additives would have been particularly pertinent to help
decipher the role of co-selection in ARG abundance and composition.
6
Conclusion
This study used publicly availible chicken gut metagenomic data to examine ARGs in
different chicken microbiomes from Chinese and European free range and conventional
poultry farms. Co-occurence of ARGs, MRGs/BRGs, and MGEs in assembled contigs
were observed in samples of both geopraphic locations and farming environments pro-
viding partial evidence of co-selection. The proportion of these contigs were significantly
higher in European samples and also differed significantly between free range and con-
ventional samples.
Geographical location was found to be the main contributing factor in the abundance of
ARG’s and compotision of ARG resistomes. The European samples were found to have
significantly higher ARG α-diversity and harbored more differentially abundant ARGs
than the Chinese samples. It was possible to link differentially abundant ARGs to assem-
bled conjugative plasmids in the European samples, thus providing evidence of plasmids-
mediated dissemination. However, it was not possible to link these ARGs to predicted
HGT events in the assembled contigs.
This work illustrates the utility of the metagenomic approach in investigating correlations
between ARGs, MRGs/BRGs, and MGEs to further the understanding of the genetic pro-
cesses that drive AMR dissemination in different livestock environments.
45
==PAGE:54==
Appendix
A
Supplementary files
The files in the supplementary file archive ”supplemntary files.zip” contain examples of
scripts used in the analysis related to, contig co-occurence, read mapping, differential
abundance analysis, and HGT prediction
Read mapping of MRGs/BRGs: ”readmap bacmet.smk”
Read mapping of ARGs: ”readmap rgi.smk”
Contig co-occurence analysis: ”contig co occurence.R”
Alpha-diversity and PCoA: ”alpha diversity and pcoa.R”
Differential abundance analysis of ARGs and MRGs/BRGs: ”DA analysis.R”
46
==PAGE:55==
B
Full metadata table
Dataset
ID
Country
Gender
Age
(days)
Breed
Sample
Spot
Type
Sample Environment
Sequencing
method
Sample type
Region
G bases
dChina
SRR6323134
China
male
42
Arbor Acres broiler
cecum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Beijing
2.40
dChina
SRR6323252
China
male
42
Arbor Acres broiler
duodenum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Beijing
2.80
dChina
SRR6323384
China
male
42
Arbor Acres broiler
ileum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Beijing
2.60
dChina
SRR6323414
China
male
42
Arbor Acres broiler
jejunum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Beijing
3.00
dChina
SRR6323550
China
male
42
Arbor Acres broiler
colorectum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Beijing
3.00
dChina
SRR6323556
China
female
42
Local yellow-feather
cecum
layer
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Hunan
4.60
dChina
SRR6323530
China
female
42
Local yellow-feather
ileum
layer
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Hunan
2.50
dChina
SRR6323503
China
female
42
Local yellow-feather
colorectum
layer
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Hunan
4.20
dChina
SRR6323350
China
female
42
Local yellow-feather
jejunum
layer
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Hunan
1.70
dChina
SRR6323197
China
female
42
Local yellow-feather
duodenum
layer
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
pooled five chickens
Hunan
3.20
dChina
SRR6323250
China
male
42
Arbor Acres broiler
cecum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Beijing
3.50
dChina
SRR6323249
China
male
42
Arbor Acres broiler
cecum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Beijing
3.10
dChina
SRR6323247
China
male
42
Arbor Acres broiler
cecum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Beijing
2.80
dChina
SRR6323200
China
female
56
Local yellow-feather
cecum
layer
conventional
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Hunan
5.00
dChina
SRR6323205
China
female
56
Local yellow-feather
cecum
layer
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Hunan
7.20
dChina
SRR6323502
China
female
56
Local yellow-feather
colorectum
layer
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Hunan
7.40
dChina
SRR6323493
China
male
62
Yellow dwarf chicken
colorectum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Guandong
4.70
dChina
SRR6323343
China
female
62
Yellow dwarf chicken
colorectum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Guandong
5.50
dChina
SRR6323088
China
female
62
Yellow dwarf chicken
cecum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Guandong
4.60
dChina
SRR6323338
China
female
62
Yellow dwarf chicken
colorectum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Guandong
5.10
dChina
SRR6323340
China
male
62
Yellow dwarf chicken
cecum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Guandong
6.90
dChina
SRR6323449
China
female
78
Guangxi local chicken
cecum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Hunan
4.10
dChina
SRR6323167
China
male
78
Guangxi local chicken
colorectum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Hunan
3.90
dChina
SRR6323172
China
male
78
Guangxi local chicken
colorectum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Hunan
3.40
dChina
SRR6323295
China
female
78
Guangxi local chicken
colorectum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Hunan
3.30
dChina
SRR6323296
China
female
78
Guangxi local chicken
colorectum
broiler
free-range
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Hunan
5.70
dChina
SRR6323514
China
female
41
Ross 308
cecum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Shanxi
4.20
dChina
SRR6323244
China
male
41
Ross 308
cecum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Shanxi
4.40
dChina
SRR6323243
China
male
41
Ross 308
cecum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Shanxi
4.70
dChina
SRR6323367
China
female
41
Ross 308
colorectum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 2500
single replicate
Shanxi
4.30
dChina
SRR6323516
China
female
41
Ross 308
cecum
broiler
conventional
HiSeq X Ten
single replicate
Shanxi
5.70
dSurrey
SRR9113691
UK
female
133-504
Lohmann Brown
Faecal
layer
free-range
NovaSeq 6000
single replicate
Surrey
6.70
dSurrey
SRR9113706
UK
female
133-504
Lohmann Brown
Faecal
layer
free-range
NovaSeq 6000
single replicate
Surrey
5.80
dSurrey
SRR9113707
UK
female
133-504
Lohmann Brown
Faecal
layer
free-range
NovaSeq 6000
single replicate
Surrey
6.00
dSurrey
SRR9113725
UK
female
133-504
Lohmann Brown
Faecal
layer
free-range
NovaSeq 6000
single replicate
Surrey
5.70
dSurrey
SRR9113737
UK
female
133-504
Lohmann Brown
Faecal
layer
free-range
NovaSeq 6000
single replicate
Surrey
5.80
dEffort
ERR2241647
Netherlands
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
NL
14.40
dEffort
ERR2241649
Netherlands
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
NL
14.10
dEffort
ERR2241651
Netherlands
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
NL
15.40
dEffort
ERR2241653
Netherlands
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
NL
13.30
47
==PAGE:56==
Dataset
ID
Country
Gender
Age
(days)
Breed
Sample
Spot
Type
Sample Environment
Sequencing
method
Sample type
Region
G bases
dEffort
ERR2241655
Netherlands
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
NL
12.30
dEffort
ERR2241848
Italy
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
ITA
13.50
dEffort
ERR2241849
Italy
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
ITA
14.50
dEffort
ERR2241855
Italy
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
ITA
13.00
dEffort
ERR2241856
Italy
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
ITA
12.80
dEffort
ERR2241860
Italy
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
ITA
11.70
dEffort
ERR2241919
Denmark
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
DEN
14.10
dEffort
ERR2241923
Denmark
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
DEN
14.10
dEffort
ERR2241925
Denmark
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
DEN
15.90
dEffort
ERR2241927
Denmark
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
DEN
11.80
dEffort
ERR2241945
Denmark
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
DEN
15.10
dEffort
ERR2241887
Poland
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
POL
16.40
dEffort
ERR2241890
Poland
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
POL
17.90
dEffort
ERR2241891
Poland
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
POL
14.20
dEffort
ERR2241893
Poland
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
POL
15.30
dEffort
ERR2241899
Poland
avg 33.8
Faecal
broiler
conventional
HiSeq 3000
pooled 25 chickens
POL
13.90
Table 7: Full available metadata of the 56 chicken samples subsetted from 3 different publicly available datasets. dEFFORT did not provide information
about gender and breed while the age was only given as an average which was noted in the table. In dSurrey the age was also not provided but only
noted that the chickens were adults. Since the egg laying age of an Lohmann Brown chicken is 133 to 504 days this is noted as the age assuming adults
chickens are egg laying.
48
==PAGE:57==
References
[1] World Health Organization. Who antimicrobial resistence, 2021.
[2] Sobhan Nandi, John J. Maurer, Charles Hofacre, and Anne O. Summers. Gram-
positive bacteria are a major reservoir of class 1 antibiotic resistance integrons in
poultry litter. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 101:7118–7122, 5 2004.
[3] Yanan Wang, Na Lyu, Fei Liu, William J. Liu, Yuhai Bi, Zewu Zhang, Sufang Ma,
Jian Cao, Xiaofeng Song, Aiping Wang, Gaiping Zhang, Yongfei Hu, Baoli Zhu, and
George Fu Gao. More diversified antibiotic resistance genes in chickens and workers
of the live poultry markets. Environment International, 153:106534, 8 2021.
[4] M. Henchion, A. P. Moloney, J. Hyland, J. Zimmermann, and S. McCarthy. Review:
Trends for meat, milk and egg consumption for the next decades and the role played
by livestock systems in the global production of proteins. Animal, 15:100287, 12
2021.
[5] Frank M Aarestrup. The livestock reservoir for antimicrobial resistance: a personal
view on changing patterns of risks, effects of interventions and the way forward.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 370:20140085, 2015.
[6] Dan I Andersson and Diarmaid Hughes. Antibiotic resistance and its cost: is it
possible to reverse resistance? Nature Publishing Group, 2010.
[7] Xuanji Li, Christopher Rensing, Gisle Vestergaard, Manimozhiyan Arumugam,
Joseph Nesme, Shashank Gupta, Asker Daniel Brejnrod, and Søren Johannes
Sørensen. Metagenomic evidence for co-occurrence of antibiotic, biocide and metal
resistance genes in pigs. Environment International, 158:106899, 1 2022.
[8] Sohaib H Mazhar,
Xuanji Li,
Azhar Rashid,
JunMing Su,
Junqiang Xu,
Asker Daniel Brejnrod, Jian-Qiang Su, Yijian Wu, Yong-Guan Zhu, Shun Gui Zhou,
Renwei Feng, and Christopher Rensing. Co-selection of antibiotic resistance genes,
and mobile genetic elements in the presence of heavy metals in poultry farm envi-
ronments. Science of The Total Environment, 755:142702, 2021.
[9] Yuqing Feng, Yanan Wang, Baoli Zhu, George Fu Gao, Yuming Guo, and Yongfei
Hu. Metagenome-assembled genomes and gene catalog from the chicken gut micro-
biome aid in deciphering antibiotic resistomes. Communications Biology, 4, 2021.
49
==PAGE:58==
[10] Torsten Thomas, Jack Gilbert, and Folker Meyer. Metagenomics-a guide from sam-
pling to data analysis, 2012.
[11] Steve Lindemann, Julien Tremblay, Joseph Henry Vineis, Luisa W Hugerth, and An-
ders F Andersson. Analysing microbial community composition through amplicon
sequencing: From sampling to hypothesis testing a brief history of methodologies
for determining microbial community composition. Frontiers in Microbiology —
www.frontiersin.org, 8, 2017.
[12] Barton E. Slatko, Andrew F. Gardner, and Frederick M. Ausubel.
Overview of
next-generation sequencing technologies. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology,
122:e59, 4 2018.
[13] H Soon Gweon, Liam P Shaw, Jeremy Swann, Nicola De Maio, Manal Abuoun,
Rene Niehus, Alasdair T M Hubbard, Mike J Bowes, Mark J Bailey, Tim E A Peto,
Sarah J Hoosdally, A Sarah Walker, Robert P Sebra, Derrick W Crook, Muna F
Anjum, Daniel S Read, and Nicole Stoesser. The impact of sequencing depth on
the inferred taxonomic composition and amr gene content of metagenomic samples.
Environmental Microbiome, 14, 2019.
[14] Ea Zankari, Henrik Hasman, Salvatore Cosentino, Martin Vestergaard, Simon Ras-
mussen, Ole Lund, Frank M. Aarestrup, and Mette Voldby Larsen. Identification of
acquired antimicrobial resistance genes. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy,
67:2640–2644, 11 2012.
[15] Tom J. B. de Man and Brandi M. Limbago. Sstar, a stand-alone easy-to-use antimi-
crobial resistance gene predictor. mSphere, 1, 2 2016.
[16] Brian P Alcock, Amogelang R Raphenya, Tammy TY Lau, Kara K Tsang,
egane Bouchard, Arman Edalatmand, William Huynh, Anna-Lisa V Nguyen, An-
nie A Cheng, Sihan Liu, Sally Y Min, Anatoly Miroshnichenko, Hiu-Ki Tran,
Rafik E Werfalli, Jalees A Nasir, Martins Oloni, David J Speicher, Alexandra Flo-
rescu, Bhavya Singh, Mateusz Faltyn, Anastasia Hernandez-Koutoucheva, Arjun N
Sharma, Emily Bordeleau, Andrew C Pawlowski, Haley L Zubyk, Damion Doo-
ley, Emma Griffiths, Finlay Maguire, Geoff L Winsor, Robert G Beiko, Fiona SL
Brinkman, William WL Hsiao, Gary V Domselaar, and Andrew G McArthur. Card
2020: antibiotic resistome surveillance with the comprehensive antibiotic resistance
database. Nucleic Acids Research, 48, 2019.
50
==PAGE:59==
[17] Giorgio Casaburi, Rebbeca M. Duar, Heather Brown, Ryan D. Mitchell, Sufyan
Kazi, Stephanie Chew, Orla Cagney, Robin L. Flannery, Karl G. Sylvester, Steven A.
Frese, Bethany M. Henrick, and Samara L. Freeman. Metagenomic insights of the
infant microbiome community structure and function across multiple sites in the
united states. Scientific Reports 2021 11:1, 11:1–12, 1 2021.
[18] Xuanji Li, Jakob Stokholm, Asker Brejnrod, Gisle Alberg Vestergaard, Jakob Rus-
sel, Urvish Trivedi, Jonathan Thorsen, Shashank Gupta, Mathis Hjort Hjelmsø,
Shiraz A. Shah, Morten Arendt Rasmussen, Hans Bisgaard, and Søren Johannes
Sørensen. The infant gut resistome associates with e. coli, environmental exposures,
gut microbiome maturity, and asthma-associated bacterial composition. Cell Host
Microbe, 29:975–987.e4, 6 2021.
[19] Dennis A Benson, Mark Cavanaugh, Karen Clark, Ilene Karsch-Mizrachi, David J
Lipman, James Ostell, and Eric W Sayers.
Genbank.
Nucleic acids research,
41:D36–D42, 2012.
[20] Christiam Camacho, George Coulouris, Vahram Avagyan, Ning Ma, Jason Pa-
padopoulos, Kevin Bealer, and Thomas L. Madden. Blast+: Architecture and appli-
cations. BMC Bioinformatics, 10:1–9, 12 2009.
[21] Benjamin Buchfink, Chao Xie, and Daniel H Huson. Fast and sensitive protein
alignment using diamond. NATURE METHODS, 12, 2015.
[22] P J Mcmurdie and S Holmes. Waste not, want not: Why rarefying microbiome data
is inadmissible. PLoS Comput Biol, 10:1003531, 2014.
[23] Huang Lin and Shyamal Das Peddada. Analysis of microbial compositions: a review
of normalization and differential abundance analysis. npj Biofilms and Microbiomes,
6, 2020.
[24] Johnny Hong, Ulas Karaoz, Perry de Valpine, and William Fithian. To rarefy or
not to rarefy: robustness and efficiency trade-offs of rarefying microbiome data.
Bioinformatics, 2 2022.
[25] Sophie Weiss, Zhenjiang Zech Xu, Shyamal Peddada, Amnon Amir, Kyle Bittinger,
Antonio Gonzalez, Catherine Lozupone, Jesse R. Zaneveld, Yoshiki V´azquez-
Baeza, Amanda Birmingham, Embriette R. Hyde, and Rob Knight. Normalization
51
==PAGE:60==
and microbial differential abundance strategies depend upon data characteristics.
Microbiome, 5:1–18, 3 2017.
[26] Jakob Russel, Jonathan Thorsen, Asker D Brejnrod, Hans Bisgaard, Søren J
Sørensen, and Mette Burmølle. Datest: a framework for choosing differential abun-
dance or expression method. BioRxiv, page 241802, 2018.
[27] Lauren Elisabeth Brooks, Mo Kaze, and Mark Sistrom. Where the plasmids roam:
Large-scale sequence analysis reveals plasmids with large host ranges. Microbial
Genomics, 5, 1 2019.
[28] Gilberto Igrejas, Jose Luis Balcazar, Elaine Allan, Christopher Morton Thomas,
Christian J H Von Wintersdorff, John Penders, Julius M Van Niekerk, Nathan D
Mills, Snehali Majumder, Lieke B Van Alphen, Paul H M Savelkoul, and Petra F G
Wolffs. Dissemination of antimicrobial resistance in microbial ecosystems through
horizontal gene transfer. Frontiers in Microbiology — www.frontiersin.org, 7:173,
2016.
[29] David Pellow, Alvah Zorea, Maraike Probst, Ori Furman, Arik Segal, Itzhak
Mizrahi, and Ron Shamir. Scapp: an algorithm for improved plasmid assembly
in metagenomes. Microbiome, 9, 2021.
[30] Anuj Tyagi, · Balwinder Singh, Naveen K Billekallu Thammegowda, and Ni-
raj K Singh. Shotgun metagenomics offers novel insights into taxonomic compo-
sitions, metabolic pathways and antibiotic resistance genes in fish gut microbiome.
201:295–303, 2019.
[31] Alessandra Carattoli, Ea Zankari, Aurora Garci´a-Fern´andez, Mette Voldby Larsen,
Ole Lund, Laura Villa, Frank Mløler Aarestrup, and Henrik Hasman. In silico de-
tection and typing of plasmids using plasmidfinder and plasmid multilocus sequence
typing. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 58:3895–3903, 2014.
[32] Fengfeng Zhou and Ying Xu. cbar: a computer program to distinguish plasmid-
derived from chromosome-derived sequence fragments in metagenomics data.
Bioinformatics, 26:2051–2052, 8 2010.
[33] Sergio Arredondo-Alonso, Martin Bootsma, Yaı¨r Yaı¨r Hein, Malbert R C Rogers,
Jukka Corander, Rob J L Willems, and Anita C Sch¨u Rch. gplas: a comprehensive
52
==PAGE:61==
tool for plasmid analysis using short-read graphs. Bioinformatics, 36:3874–3876,
2020.
[34] Pawel S. Krawczyk, Leszek Lipinski, and Andrzej Dziembowski. Plasflow: pre-
dicting plasmid sequences in metagenomic data using genome signatures. Nucleic
Acids Research, 46:e35–e35, 4 2018.
[35] Roye Rozov, Aya Brown Kav, David Bogumil, Naama Shterzer, Eran Halperin,
Itzhak Mizrahi, and Ron Shamir. Recycler: an algorithm for detecting plasmids
from de novo assembly graphs. Bioinformatics, 33:475–482, 2016.
[36] Dmitry Antipov, Mikhail Raiko, Alla Lapidus, and Pavel A. Pevzner. Plasmid de-
tection and assembly in genomic and metagenomic data sets. Genome Research,
29:961–968, 6 2019.
[37] Sergey Nurk, Dmitry Meleshko, Anton Korobeynikov, and Pavel A Pevzner. metas-
pades: a new versatile metagenomic assembler. Genome Research, 27:824–834,
2017.
[38] Heng Li and Richard Durbin.
Fast and accurate short read alignment with bur-
rows–wheeler transform. Bioinformatics, 25:1754–1760, 7 2009.
[39] David Pellow, Itzik Mizrahi, and Ron Shamir. Plasclass improves plasmid sequence
classification. PLOS Computational Biology, 16:e1007781, 4 2020.
[40] Computerome 2020. The danish national supercomputer for life sciences (a.k.a.
computerome).
[41] SRA Toolkit Development Team. Ncbi sra toolkit.
[42] S. Andrews. Fastqc: A quality control tool for high throughpu sequence data, 6
2015.
[43] Philip Ewels, M˚ans Magnusson, Sverker Lundin, and Max K¨aller. Multiqc: Summa-
rize analysis results for multiple tools and samples in a single report. Bioinformatics,
32:3047–3048, 10 2016.
[44] B Bushnell, J Rood, and E Singer. Bbmerge – accurate paired shotgun read merging
via overlap. PLoS ONE, 12:e0185056, 10 2017.
[45] JGI Joint Genome Institute. Bbduk guide.
53
==PAGE:62==
[46] N A Joshi, JN2011 Fass, et al. Sickle: A sliding-window, adaptive, quality-based
trimming tool for fastq files (version 1.33)[software], 2011.
[47] Luis M Rodriguez-R, Santosh Gunturu, James M Tiedje, James R Cole, and Kon-
stantinos T Konstantinidis. Nonpareil 3: Fast estimation of metagenomic coverage
and sequence diversity nonpareil 3 estimates coverage and sequence diversity from
metagenomes without reference databases. mSystems, 3, 2018.
[48] Alexey Gurevich, Vladislav Saveliev, Nikolay Vyahhi, and Glenn Tesler. Genome
analysis quast: quality assessment tool for genome assemblies.
Bioinformatics,
29:1072–1075, 2013.
[49] Doug Hyatt, Gwo-Liang Chen, Philip F Locascio, Miriam L Land, Frank W
Larimer, and Loren J Hauser. Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation
initiation site identification. BMC Bioinformatics, 2010.
[50] Martin Steinegger and Johannes S¨oding. Mmseqs2 enables sensitive protein se-
quence searching for the analysis of massive data sets. Nature Publishing Group,
35, 2017.
[51] Wei Shen, Shuai Le, Yan Li, and Fuquan Hu. Seqkit: a cross-platform and ultrafast
toolkit for fasta/q file manipulation-supplementary data. PLOS ONE, 11:1–10, 2016.
[52] Chandan Pal, Johan Bengtsson-Palme, Christopher Rensing, Erik Kristiansson, and
D G Joakim Larsson.
Bacmet: antibacterial biocide and metal resistance genes
database. Nucleic Acids Research, 42, 2014.
[53] Jaina Mistry, Sara Chuguransky, Lowri Williams, Matloob Qureshi, Gustavo A
Salazar, Erik L L Sonnhammer, Silvio C E Tosatto, Lisanna Paladin, Shriya Raj,
Lorna J Richardson, Robert D Finn, and Alex Bateman. Pfam: The protein families
database in 2021. Nucleic Acids Research, 49, 2021.
[54] Gonzalo Riadi, Cristobal Medina-Moenne, and David S Holmes. Tnppred: A web
service for the robust prediction of prokaryotic transposases.
Comparative and
Functional Genomics, 2012, 2012.
[55] Robert D. Finn, Jody Clements, and Sean R. Eddy. Hmmer web server: interactive
sequence similarity searching. Nucleic Acids Research, 39:W29–W37, 7 2011.
[56] RStudio Team. Rstudio: Integrated development environment for r, 2020.
54
==PAGE:63==
[57] Hanbo Chen and Paul C Boutros. Venndiagram: a package for the generation of
highly-customizable venn and euler diagrams in r. BMC Bioinformatics, 2011.
[58] M¨older Felix, Kim P Jablonski, Letcher Brice, Michael B Hall, Christo-
pher Tomkins-Tinch,
Sochat Vanessa,
Jan Forster,
Soohyun Lee,
Sven O
Twardziok, Alexander Kanitz, Andreas Wilm, Manuel Holtgrewe, Rahmann Sven,
Nahnsen Sven, and K¨oster Johannes. Sustainable data analysis with snakemake.
F1000Research, 10, 2021.
Copyright - Copyright:
© 2021 M¨older F et al.
This work is published under https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ (the “Li-
cense”). Notwithstanding the ProQuest Terms and Conditions, you may use this
content in accordance with the terms of the License; Last updated - 2022-02-10.
[59] Heng Li. Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics,
34:3094–3100, 2018.
[60] Petr Danecek, James K Bonfield, Jennifer Liddle, John Marshall, Valeriu Ohan,
Martin O Pollard, Andrew Whitwham, Thomas Keane, Shane A Mccarthy, Robert M
Davies, and Heng Li. Twelve years of samtools and bcftools. GigaScience, 10:1–4,
2021.
[61] Guido Van Rossum and Fred L Drake. Python 3 Reference Manual. CreateSpace,
2009.
[62] Paul J McMurdie and Susan Holmes. phyloseq: an r package for reproducible in-
teractive analysis and graphics of microbiome census data. PloS one, 8:e61217,
2013.
[63] Felipe de Mendiburu and Maintainer Felipe de Mendiburu. Package ‘agricolae’. R
Package, Version, 1:3, 2019.
[64] Jari Oksanen, F Guillaume Blanchet, Michael Friendly, Roeland Kindt, Pierre Leg-
endre, Dan McGlinn, Peter R Minchin, R B O’Hara, Gavin L Simpson, Peter Soly-
mos, M Henry H Stevens, Eduard Szoecs, and Helene Wagner. vegan: Community
ecology package, 2020. R package version 2.5-7.
[65] Ivica Letunic and Peer Bork. Interactive tree of life (itol) v4: recent updates and
new developments. Nucleic Acids Research, 47:W256–W259, 7 2019.
[66] Emmanuel Paradis, Julien Claude, and Korbinian Strimmer. Ape: Analyses of phy-
logenetics and evolution in r language. Bioinformatics, 20:289–290, 1 2004.
55
==PAGE:64==
[67] James Robertson and John H E Nash. Mob-suite: software tools for clustering,
reconstruction and typing of plasmids from draft assemblies. Microbial Genomics,
4, 2018.
[68] Carlos P Cantalapiedra, Ana Hern Andez-Plaza, Ivica Letunic, Peer Bork, and Jaime
Huerta-Cepas. eggnog-mapper v2: Functional annotation, orthology assignments,
and domain prediction at the metagenomic scale. Molecular Biology and Evolution,
38:5825–5829, 12 2021.
[69] Insightful Science; available at snapgene.com. Snapgene software.
[70] Chengwei Luo Robert G. Beiko Morgan Langille Curtis Huttenhower Tiffany Y. Hsu
Eric A. Franzosa, Dennis Wong. Waafle: a workflow to annotate assemblies and find
lgt events, 2022.
[71] Peng Huang, Yan Zhang, Kangpeng Xiao, Fan Jiang, Hengchao Wang, Dazhi Tang,
Dan Liu, Bo Liu, Yisong Liu, Xi He, Hua Liu, Xiubin Liu, Zhixing Qing, Conghui
Liu, Jialu Huang, Yuwei Ren, Long Yun, Lijuan Yin, Qian Lin, Cheng Zeng, Xiao-
gang Su, Jingyang Yuan, Li Lin, Nanxi Hu, Hualiang Cao, Sanwen Huang, Yuming
Guo, Wei Fan, and Jianguo Zeng. The chicken gut metagenome and the modulatory
effects of plant-derived benzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Microbiome, 6, 11 2018.
[72] Rachel Gilroy, Anuradha Ravi, Maria Getino, Isabella Pursley, Daniel L Hor-
ton, Nabil-Fareed Alikhan, Dave Baker, Karim Gharbi, Neil Hall, Mick Watson,
Evelien M Adriaenssens, Ebenezer Foster-Nyarko, Arss Secka, Martin Antonio,
Aharon Oren, Roy R Chaudhuri, Roberto La Ragione, Falk Hildebrand, and Mark J
Pallen. Extensive microbial diversity within the chicken gut microbiome revealed
by metagenomics and culture. PeerJ, 2021.
[73] Patrick Munk, Berith Elkamp, Oksana Lukjancenko, Ana Sofia Ribeiro Duarte,
Liese Gompel, Roosmarijn E C Luiken, Lidwien A M Smit, Heike Schmitt, Ale-
jandro Dorado Garcia, Rasmus Borup Hansen, Thomas Nordahl Petersen, Alex
Bossers, Etienne Ruppamp, Haitske Graveland, Alieda van Essen, Bruno Gonzalez-
Zorn, Gabriel Moyano, Pascal Sanders, Claire Chauvin, Julie David, Antonio Bat-
tisti, Andrea Caprioli, Jeroen Dewulf, Thomas Blaha, Katharina Wadepohl, Max-
imiliane Brandt, Dariusz Wasyl, Magdalena Skarzyamp, Magdalena Zajac, Hristo
Daskalov, Helmut W Saatkamp, Katharina D C Stamp, Ole Lund, Tine Hald, nje Jo-
hanna Pamp, kan Vigre, Dick Heederik, Jaap A Wagenaar, Dik Mevius, and Frank M
56
==PAGE:65==
Aarestrup. Abundance and diversity of the faecal resistome in slaughter pigs and
broilers in nine european countries. Nature microbiology, 3:898–908, 8 2018.
[74] Guillermina Hernandez-Raquet, Michael J Rothrock, Edward Pajarillo, Zhuocheng
Hou, Ning Yang, Wei Yan, Congjiao Sun, Jiangxia Zheng, Chaoliang Wen, Con-
gliang Ji, Dexiang Zhang, and Yonghua Chen. Efficacy of fecal sampling as a gut
proxy in the study of chicken gut microbiota. 2019.
[75] Elin Videvall, Maria Strandh, Anel Engelbrecht, — Schalk Cloete, and Charlie K
Cornwallis.
Measuring the gut microbiome in birds: Comparison of faecal and
cloacal sampling. 2017.
[76] Agnieszka Wr´obel, Karolina Arciszewska, • Dawid Maliszewski, and Danuta Droz-
dowska. Trimethoprim and other nonclassical antifolates an excellent template for
searching modifications of dihydrofolate reductase enzyme inhibitors. The Journal
of Antibiotics, 73:5–27, 2020.
[77] Stefan B¨orjesson, Bj¨orn Bengtsson, Cecilia Jernberg, and Stina Englund. Spread
of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase producing escherichia coli isolates in swedish
broilers mediated by an inci plasmid carrying bla ctx-m-1. 2013.
[78] Umaer Naseer and Arnfinn Sundsfjord. The ctx-m conundrum: Dissemination of
plasmids and escherichia coli clones. Microbial Drug Resistance, 17:83–97, 3 2011.
[79] Elena Cabez´on, Fernando de la Cruz, and Ignacio Arechaga. Conjugation inhibitors
and their potential use to prevent dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes in
bacteria. Frontiers in Microbiology, 8:2329, 11 2017.
[80] V. A. Aletor, K. Eder, K. Becker, B. R. Paulicks, F. X. Roth, and D. A. Roth-Maier.
The effects of conjugated linoleic acids or an -glucosidase inhibitor on tissue lipid
concentrations and fatty acid composition of broiler chicks fed a low-protein diet.
Poultry Science, 82:796–804, 2003.
[81] M. M.S. Saraiva, A. L.B. Moreira Filho, P. C. Vasconcelos, P. V. Nascimento, P. S.
Azevedo, O. C. Freitas Neto, P. E.N. Givisiez, W. A. Gebreyes, and C. J.B. Oliveira.
Chemical treatment of poultry litter affects the conjugation of plasmid-mediated
extended-spectrum beta-lactamase resistance genes in e. coli. Journal of Applied
Poultry Research, 29:197–203, 3 2020.
[82] Muhammad Kamruzzaman and Jonathan Iredell. A parde-family toxin antitoxin
57
==PAGE:66==
system in major resistance plasmids of enterobacteriaceae confers antibiotic and
heat tolerance. Scientific Reports, 9, 2019.
[83] Yoshihiro Yamaguchi, Jung-Ho Park, and Masayori Inouye. Toxin-antitoxin systems
in bacteria and archaea. 2011.
[84] Weizhi Song, Bernd Wemheuer, Shan Zhang, Kerrin Steensen, and Torsten Thomas.
Metachip: community-level horizontal gene transfer identification through the com-
bination of best-match and phylogenetic approaches. Microbiome, 7, 2019.
[85] Jakob Nybo Nissen, Joachim Johansen, Rosa Lundbye Allesøe, Casper Kaae
Sønderby, Jose Juan, Almagro Armenteros, Christopher Heje Grønbech, Lars Juhl
Jensen, Henrik Bjørn Nielsen, Thomas Nordahl Petersen, Ole Winther, and Simon
Rasmussen. Improved metagenome binning and assembly using deep variational
autoencoders. nature biotechnology, 39:555–560, 2021.
[86] Pierre-Alain Chaumeil, Aaron J Mussig, Philip Hugenholtz, and Donovan H Parks.
Gtdb-tk: a toolkit to classify genomes with the genome taxonomy database. Bioin-
formatics, 36:1925–1927, 2020.
58
