==PAGE:1==
The impact of plant growth and various soil
types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
Master Thesis
DTU BIO
DTU bioengineering
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Food security is a worldwide problem that is only exacerbated by climate change. The
land suitable for agricultural production is limited. One of the ways to increase yield is to
reduce loss due to pests. Current agriculture uses synthetically produced pesticides that
pollute aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. An alternative is the use of microbial biocontrol
agents to keep pests in check. Some biocontrol agents are even beneficial for growth in
the absence of a biotic stressor. B. subtilis is a promising biocontrol agent as it is makes
resistant endospores that are easy to spread on a field and is known as a plant growth
promoting rhizobacterium (PGPR). B. subtilis is well studied in a laboratory environment
however not much is known about its interaction in natural soil environments with plants.
This study has sought to understand the plant-soil-microbe relationship by doing two
growth experiments and then a metaxanomic analysis utilizing amplicon sequencing. The
growth experiments involved growing Solanum lycopersicum (domestic tomato plant) in
either forest or grass soil with or without B. subtilis added. In the first experiment a non
sporulating mutant’s ability to colonize plants and soil was analyzed a long with the effect
addition of B. subtilis had on the growth of the plants . In the second growth experiment the
dynamics B. subtilis population changes was analyzed in more detail and plants growth
was also analyzed. Lastly in the third experiment the plant-soil-microbe relationships im-
pact on the microbiome composition as a whole was analyzed via soil samples from the
rhizoshpere and bulk soil taken from experiment 2.
The first experiment showed that sporulation was important for soil survival for B. subtilis.
B. subtilis grew best in grass soil however the optimal growth conditions for S. lycoper-
sicum varied between the experiments. The addition of B. subtilis to forest soil had a
positive impact on plant growth measurements however it had the opposite effect when
inoculated into grass soil. The microbiome results show a high relative abundance of
Bacillus genera in the grass soil and that addition of B. subtilis had a negative effect on
the alpha diversity in the grass soil. The addition of Bacillus increased the alpha diver-
sity in the forest soil. This could be explained by the forest soil not having much Bacillus
already present which allowed the B. subtilis to take new niches where in the case of
the grass soil the niches of Bacillus genus were already occupied and the addition of B.
subtilis outcompeted some of the other strains of the Bacillus genus thus reducing diver-
sity. The alpha diversity results also suggest that the presence of Solanum lycopersicum
decreased the diversity suggesting selectivity.
ii
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:3==
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
Master Thesis
29/04, 2022
By
Katrine Damgaard Nielsen
Foreword
This master thesis is the result of 6 months and 2 weeks work at the center for biological
engineering at DTU. The project lasted from November 2021 to April 2022 in Prof. Ákos
Kovacs lab, Bacterial interactions and Evolution (BIE). The project is about soil-plant-
microbe interactions between natural soils tomato plants and Bacillus subtilis. Extra time
was permitted for rest days due to a knee injury which made it possible to finish the project
without overworking myself. Despite a wave of Covid19 spreading over the winter the
slight inconvenience of wearing a mask was sufficient to keep working with a small sick
period of my own.
First I wish to thank Xinming Xu for her unending patience with teaching me how to
navigate the laboratory and invaluable help in correcting my thesis to get rid of the spoken
language and make it more formal. She has been a great help for me when dealing with
the bioinformatic tools and programming that was necessary in this project. I also want to
thank her for going beyond her role as a co-supervisor in the tasks that I was not physically
capable of doing due to my knee injury.
I would also like to thank Ákos Kovacs for giving me the opportunity to make a project
despite the slightly awkward time of starting the project. The guidance in experimental
design and the meetings we had made me sure that despite not having many options for
projects I found the right one.
I would also like to thank PhD. Mathilde Nordgaard for the great advice and suggestions
in experimental design during the weekly meetings giving rise to some of the changes for
more repeatability between the growth experiments.
Lastly I want to the rest of the BIE department: Caja, Carlos, Mark, Regina, and Rune
for helping me navigate the laboratory and come with invaluable advice during meetings
and generally being nice to spend time with.
==PAGE:4==
Participants
Katrine Damgaard Nielsen, MSc Biotechnology, DTU
Author of the thesis
[Xinming Xu], [PhD],
[Ákos T. Kovács], [Professor],
ii
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Biocontrol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Bacillus subtilis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Root colonization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Microbiome analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Aim of study
8
3
Materials and methods
9
3.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
CFU experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Sample collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
pH measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.6
DNA extraction and amplicon sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Results
14
4.1
First experiment: Analyzing sporulation’s role for B. subtilis soil survival
. . 14
4.2
P5-B1 B. subtilis population increased while sigF mutant population de-
creased over 15 day growth period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Second experiment: Analysis of colonization dynamics of B. subtilis on S.
lycopersicum and the effect it has on plant growth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
pH of water is not a factor creating difference in experiments
. . . . . . . . 19
4.5
Colony count and plant weight suggests that S. lycopersicum and B. subtilis
grew best in grass soil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.6
Third experiment: Microbiome analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
Conclusion
30
6
Discussion
31
6.1
Differences between the experimental setups in the growth experiments
make comparison difficult . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Sampling of soil and plants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.3
Choice of method for analyzing microbiome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.4
Microbiome analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.5
Future perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Bibliography
36
A Appendix
41
A.1 Primer sequences and barcodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Biocontrol
As the population continues to increase, climate change is happening and the amount of
agricultural land is limited. This makes it an increasing problem to feed the masses [1,
2]. Increasing crop yield by reducing harmful conditions for the crops could be a solution.
Agricultural plants are subject to several biotic and abiotic stresses that all affect crop yield
negatively [3]. One of the ways the biotic stresses are sought minimized is through the use
of pesticides [4]. However pesticides will contaminate the aquatic and terrestrial ecosys-
tems and enter the food chain eventually harming human health.[5–7]. An alternative way
is to use biocontrol agents (BCA)[8]. Biocontrol is where living organisms beneficial for the
crop is used to protect against weeds, insects, arthropods, and microorganisms [9–11].
Biocontrol agents can reduce the pathogen load either by direct or indirect antagonism. In
direct antagonism, microbial BCAs either have antibiosis with the phytopathogen or par-
asitize it thereby reducing their numbers[12]. In indirect antagonism the BCA competes
for nutrients with the phytopathogen, secretes antimicrobial compounds, or siderophores
that restrict the pathogens access to iron[13]. The biocontrol organism can also induce
systemic resistance (ISR) in the plant via phenolic compounds and its presence to prime
the plants defenses for an attack[14].
However some microbial BCAs also have plant growth promoting effects even in the ab-
sence of pathogens. Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) can make nutrients
more available for the plant and even affect the phytohormone signaling leading to in-
creased growth[15].
1.2
Bacillus subtilis
Bacillus subtilis is a known PGPR, a generally regarded as safe (GRAS) organism, and
is one of the most well studied gram positive bacteria [16].B. subtilis has special interest
as a biocontrol agent due to its ability to form highly resistant endospores that can be
easily stored and spread over a field should need be [17]. Another interesting property
of B. subtilis is its ability to form a myriad of secondary metabolites such as surfactin
which is both an antibacterial agent as well as a surfactant allowing for sliding mobility
[18, 19]. Gibberellic acid and indole3acetic acid, produced by B. subtilis, has been shown
to increase tomato plants’ root and shoot growth [14]. Cytokinin is also known to have
the same growth promoting effect [20]. Phosphorus and many minerals are in inorganic
or wrong oxidation states for the plant to uptake through the roots. B. subtilis produces
phytateses to break down phytate which releases both phosphates and the iron chelated
to the phytate [20].Some Bacillus strains have also shown to have the important nif gene
for nitrogen fixation further increasing nutrient availability. These strains can fix N2 from
the atmosphere into nitrogen compounds use able by the plant [19, 21, 22].
1.3
Root colonization
The rhizosphere is a hotspot for microbial interaction and is a narrow compartment of soil
influenced by the presence of a plant root, it is a rich source of nutrients for the bacte-
ria. The released root exudates allow for interconnected microbiota with high population
densities. Each plant has a unique root exudate profile to the species and even the cul-
tivar along with the time in its growth cycle [23]. The root exudate profile selects specific
organisms from its environment as such the soil acts as a seed bank. By doing so the
2
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:7==
microorganism finds a nutrient rich niche where in return it provides the beneficial proper-
ties such as: protection from pathogens, increased nutrient availability, and faster growth
[24]. The higher nutrient density makes for a much greater concentration of bacteria in
the rhizosphere compared to the surrounding bulk soil. Studies show that the rhizosphere
effect also impacts diversity when compared to the bulk soil [25, 26].
Due to the motility and biofilm forming properties of B. subtilis, it is able to localize the
plant via chemotaxis, move from the bulk soil surrounding the plant into the rhizosphere
and eventually adhere to the root as a biofilm [25, 27]. When introducingBacillus sub-
tilis as BCA into non-sterilized soil it is important to add large quantities as otherwise a
stable colonization and biofilm might not form. Other more fast growing organisms like
Pseudomonas spp. might outgrow them otherwise. Studies show that the population of
Bacillus subtilis tends to increase sharply and then drop off during colonization under lab-
oratory conditions. Little is known about this phenomenon, especially in natural soils [28].
Experiments done in laboratory, green house, and field conditions rarely show the same
results making it hard to get conclusive evidence from laboratory experiments. Labora-
tory experiments often use sterilized predefined soils and thereby miss the complexity of
interactions between soil type and microbiota in natural soils [28, 29].
Figure 1.1: The process of root colonization by B.subtilis on S.lycopersicum The bac-
terium senses the presence of chemo-attractants and swims up the gradient to reach the
roots.
1.3.1
Chemotaxis and Motility
Chemotaxis, is the bacteria sensing their environment for attractants or repellents and
then doing a biased walk towards or away from the signal compounds. This mechanism
is important for bacteria to localize plants and colonize them[27]. The signal compounds
bind to a chemoreceptor-CheA-CheW complex. CheW autophosphorylates and transfers
phopshates to CheY. The proportion of CheY to CheY-P decides whether the flagella
should turn clock wise or counter clockwise. clockwise is tumbling and counterclockwise is
running. This coupled with rapid dephosporylation by CheB makes for a fast and sensitive
response. This creates a phenotype where a bacterium will tumble if the concentration of
attractant decreases trying to reorient itself in a direction with a better gradient [30, 31].
Allard shows a B. subtilis ΔCheA mutant will express tumbling behavior and not find the
roots of A. thaliana via chemotaxis as the wild type would[27]. They also show in a capillary
assay that it is in fact the root exudates of the plant that attracts the bacteria. This means
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
3
==PAGE:8==
that chemotaxis is required for root colonization and without it little to no colonization can
take place.
1.3.2
Biofilm formation and sporulation
B. subtilis has the ability to sporulate, swim, swarm, glide, and make biofilm. [27, 32–34].
B. subtilis has many different possible phenotypical states that can create heterogeneity
in a community allowing for a bet hedging strategy to survive[16, 35]. Biofilm formation
and sporulation is of particular interest in the case of living in soil and colonizing plants.
To establish a lasting colonization on the plant roots and convey its beneficial attributes
biofilm formation is necessary [36]. Biofilm formation is when bacteria form a matrix to
stick to a surface and go from a mobile state to a sessile state [37]. The biofilm matrix of B.
subtilis consists of exopolysaccharides (EPS) and the protein TasA. Biofilm formation has
been shown to be activated by the presence of polysaccharides from the plant cell wall.
This activated the kinases C and D which phosphorylates the Spo0A master regulator
that then starts the biofilm formation cascade [38]. The Spo0A-P protein regulates over
100 genes and bind to the 0A box but are mainly associated with biofilm formation and
sporulation [39, 40]. Not only is the polysaccharides a signal to initiate biofilm formation,
but it is also the building material for the EPS [38].
Sporulation is the asymmetric cell division where the daughter cell develops into a highly
resistant spore inside the mother cell and is then released [37, 41]. During sporulation
alternative sigma factors sigF, sigE, sigG, and sigK are activated in chronological order.
In the prespore sigG is active and in the mother cell sigK is activated leading to the sur-
vival of the spore and death of the mother cell. The spore is coated in several layers of
refractive spore coat proteins and is almost entirely dessicated[41]. Knight’s team Shows
that sporulation is an important survival strategy for S. cerevisiae to survive in soil with
its many shifting characteristics in nature. They even show that compared to other me-
dia soil induces sporulation in yeast [42]. Tokuda’s team shows that B. subtilis rapidly
goes towards a sporulation state when inoculated into both sterile and nonsterile soil[43].
This shows that it might be abiotic factors that induce the sporulation. Soil can have long
periods of no rain or periods of much rain and times of leaf and fruit fall all affecting the
water activity and nutrient density[42]. Thus the formation of endospores that have high
resistance to arid conditions might allow the bacteria to wait for more favorable condi-
tions. The initiation of sporulation is, like biofilm formation, also regulated by the master
regulator Spo0A.[41].
1.3.3
Gene regulation and quorum sensing
The amount of Spo0A that’s phosphorylated acts as a bistable switch, and decides whether
B. subtilis is in biofilm or sporulation mode[40]. There is both a lower threshold of Spo0A-
P for biofilm and for sporulation. Biofilm has the lowest threshold and therefore needs
a smaller amount of Spo0A-P. As the threshold for the sporulation is overcome AbrB re-
presses the biofilm pathway and the repressor sinR is no longer inhibited by sinI[33]. The
kinases that feed into Spo0A phosphorylation called KinA-E have different speeds of phos-
phorylation. These kinases all phosphorylate Spo0F that then transfers the phosphate to
Spo0B and that finally transfers the phosphate to Spo0A. Kinase A and B is associated
with sporulation and KinC and D is associated with biofilm formation. The kinC and D
thus have a lower rate of phosphorylation than KinA and B[35]. Accumulation of larger
quantities of Spo0A-P over time give rise to the fruiting body phenotype where biofilm is
formed first and the buds shoot off where sporulation happens [44]. Chai’s team shows
that expression of sporulation is heterogenous in a population pointing back to the bet
hedging strategy[45].
4
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:9==
To have further fine tuning and couple the biofilm formation to quorum sensing, the Re-
sponse regulator aspartyl-phosphate (Rap) phosphotases exist[32]. The Raps dephospory-
late the Spo0F to suppress matrix formation and sporulation. However Raps are tran-
scribed on gene cassettes together with the Phosphotase regulators Phr. These Phr can
inhibit the dephosphorylation activity of the Raps[32]. The Phr gene products are exported
out of the cells by sec dependent export pathways and processed into six amino acid sig-
nal peptides. At high cell densities the concentration of Phr reaches a threshold and is
transported into the cells again by oligopeptide permease[32]. Inside the cell again the
Phr can inhibit their corresponding Raps thus relieving the inhibition of the pathway.
Figure 1.2: A scheme of gene regulation involved with biofilm formation. Specific kinases
are activated by certain external stimuli and feed phosphates into the phosphorelay sys-
tem. With high enough cell density the Raps are sequestered allowing phosphorelay
functionality. With medium levels of Spo0A-P AbrB is inhibited and sinR is inhibited by
SinI leading to production of EPS and tasA.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
5
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.3: A scheme of gene regulation involved with sporulation. KinA and B phospho-
rylate at a high rate. With high enough cell density the Raps are sequestered allowing
phosphorelay functionality. At high levels of Spo0A-P the inhibitors of the biofilm circuit is
active and the sporulation program is initiated.
1.4
Microbiome analysis
Due to the emergence of next generation sequencing (NGS), a rapid growth of microbiome
researh on human, plants and the environment was made possible. The developement
of NGS and analysis method provided new insights into the structures and functions of
microbiome [46]. Instead of traditional cultivation-dependent approach, NGS allows the
detection of unculturable microbes which possibly play an essential ecological role. NGS-
based 16s and ITS sequencing are common amplicon sequencing methods to identify
and compare bacteria or fungi present within a given sample. Compared to amplicon se-
quencing, shotgun metagenomic sequencing allows us to comprehensively sample all the
genes in all microorganisms present in a sample, but in the meantime, massive amounts
of data will be generated which is both money and time-consuming. By sequencing the
16s rRNA hyperviariable region of bacteria it could provide excellent insights into micro-
biome members in soil habitats. For example, by collecting global amplicon sequencing
data of rhizosphere and bulk soil [26]. From amplicon sequencing results, the functional
mechanisms that mediate plant-microbiome interactions and the core microbiome could
be elucidated. The population of amplicon sequence variants (ASV)s can be compared
across samples to get an idea of the differences in populations[47]. The ASVs are spe-
cific to each analysis and needs to be compared with a database in order to yield taxo-
nomic information [48]. The taxonomic information can then be used to infer functionality
of genes based core genome functions of those taxa. After the genus of bacteria are
identified comparison of populations within a sample known as alpha diversity as well
as relative abundance can be analyzed. Lastly with non metric multidimensional scaling
(NMDS) each sample can be compared to each other known as beta diversity by placing
the points on a grid based on a multitude of variable’s values [47]. The clustering is used
to determine how alike the samples are.
Ling shows a clear bias in the kind of bacteria resident in the rhizosphere and bulk soil.
r-strategy bacteria that grow fast in nutrient abundant environments are more prevalent
in the rhizosphere where k-strategy bacteria grow slower and a built to survive harsher
6
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:11==
conditions are more prevalent in the bulk soil [26]. The alpha diversity was significantly
reduced in the rhizosphere compared to the bulk soil suggesting that only a select amount
of bacteria get picked from the bulk soil seed bank. The rhizosphere bacteria are often
associated with denitrification and lysis of the plant polysaccharides such as cellulose and
xylan[26].
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
7
==PAGE:12==
2
Aim of study
It was previously discovered that the bacterial population could be rich in B. subtilis in
one type of natural soil but a few meters away be much lower in abundance in another
type of soil. The two types of soil were grass soil and forest soil. Furthermore it was
hypothesized that the biotic factor of plant presence could affect the concentration of B.
subtilis. To investigate the effect that B. subtilis have on plant growth and plants have on
the microbiome, the study was split into three parts: In the first part of the experiment,
the effect of B. subtilis sporulation has on root colonization of Solanum lycopersicum was
analyzed. The analysis was done by measuring colony count in both the bulk soil and the
rhizosphere after inoculation with a sigF mutant that was incapable of sporulation. The
effect that the bacteria and soil type had on the plant was also analyzed by measuring the
height and weight of the plant after the experiment. The second part of the experiment an-
other growth experiment this time with only the wild type strain of B. subtilis but with many
more measurements of colony count after the inoculation. In the second experiments the
plants were also measured.
In the third part of the experiment the effect of B. subtilis inoculation and plant on the soil
microbiome was investigated. Bulk soil and rhizosphere soil was taken from the pots in
experiment two and analyzed for microbial composition by utilizing amplicon sequencing
of the V3-V4 16s rRNA sequences of the bacteria in the microbiome.
The overall aim of the project is to monitor the interactions between soil type, B. subtilis
and the Solanum lycopersicum. To investigate this the following questions were asked: -
Is sporulation important for soil survival of B. subtilis? - Is there a soil type that B. subtilis
grows best in? - Is there a soil type that Solanum lycopersicum grows best in? - Is B.
subtilis beneficial for the growth of Solanum lycopersicum? - How does the presence or
absence of Solanum lycopersicum and B. subtilis affect the soil microbiota?
8
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:13==
3
Materials and methods
3.1
Experimental setup
3.1.1
Plant material and growth conditions
Solanum lycopersicum was used for the experiments in this study. Seeds were saturated
with water for two hours before grown in 1.5% agar plates, then placed in darkness for
4 days in room temperature to allow germination. Five to eight germinated seedlings
were transplanted in a 6.5 cm × 5 cm pots with drainage holes, containing approximately
80g of non-sterile soil. The plant were placed in the growth chamber with 16/8 light/dark
photoperiod, 25￿for the daytime and 16￿for night. The method of how these seeds
were planted differs slightly between first run and second run of the experiment. At the
first run a tweezer was used to push the seeds deep into the soil and for the second time
a sterilized round tool was used to poke a hole in the soil to avoid damage to the seeds in
the planting procedure. After both times watering was done quickly after. Lastly in order
to get enough bioreplicates the grass soil with strain and plant had to be grown again.
The third planting involved watering the soil first and then poking holes for the seeds to
avoid the water disturbing the seeds once they were added.
Soil samples were collected from 2 sites in Zealand, Denmark, sampling site 1 is in Dyre-
haven (Grass: 55.791000, 12.566300; Forest: 55.789651, 12.566300), sampling site 2
is Hjortedam balplads (Grass: 55.774154, 12.538458; Forest: 55.773085,12.538669).
Both sampling sites harbor both grassland and forest and the distance between sampling
points to get two types of soil were close. The deeper layer of bulk soil under 10cm from
the surface was collected into a sterilized Falcon tube. B. subtilis were inoculate into two-
week grown plant root to colonize 106 cells/g soil of overnight culture of P5-B1 Bacillus
subtilis was added to the soil by mixing overnight culture with the tap water used to water
the plants a method known as soil drench.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
9
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: The different variables in the growth experiment
Inoculation of strains in soil When the plants had grown significantly big (after one
week) to have enough root to colonize 106 cells/g soil of overnight culture of P5-B1 Bacillus
subtilis was added to the soil by mixing overnight culture with the tap water used to water
the plants a method known as soil drench.
3.2
CFU experiments
2.5% LB-Lennox and 1.5% agar was used to make the agar plates used in all experiments.
Experiments involving sigF mutants used 5µg/ml chloramphenicol on the LB plates whereas
the experiments with only P5-B1 strains used a heat treatment step prior to plating. The
heat treatment was 15 minutes in an 80°C heatblock to kill off non sporulators.
3.2.1
Historical Bacillus subtilis in soil
In order to see how many B.s. colonies could be found in the soil before inoculation a bulk
soil CFU experiment was done. 1g of soil for each soil type and sampling site was diluted
first 10 times then heat treated and then diluted to 103 and 104 times with sterilized water.
Then the diluted soil was plated on LB-agar plates O/N at 37°C. The B.s. colonies were
identified based on morphology alone.
3.2.2
Bulk soil
2g of top soil was sampled via a sterilized spoon. 1 g of bulk soil was weighed and put into
falcon tubes. The soil was then diluted 10 times with 9ml sterilized DI water. If one gram
wasn’t reached precisely equivalent water to get 10 times dilution was used. The falcon
tubes were then vortexed at full power for 10 minutes to get a homogeneous mixture. After
the vortexing a dilution series was performed. 100µl of the diluted soil was added to 900µl
sterilized DI water in Eppendorf tubes. The Eppendorf tube was the vortexed and another
100µl was pipetted into a new tube etc. Dilutions were plated in triplicates for grass soil
with the amyE::hyGFP B. subtilis strain inoculated. After this 1000 fold and 10.000 fold
10
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:15==
dilution was used for best colony counting ability. To plate the samples 100µl from the
Eppendorf tubes were added to agar plates. In the case of the Then 5-8 sterilized glass
beads were added and swirled around to cover the plate. The plates were then incubated
at 37°C at least O/N. After incubation the plates were analyzed under a fluorescence
microscope and the number of fluorescent colonies were counted.
3.2.3
Rhizosphere
The plants were dug out taking care to preserve as much root as possible. Big lumps
of dirt were removed from the root so only the soil closest adhering to the roots were
collected. All the plants in the one pot were individually put into sterilized falcon tubes
and shaken to release the soil. This was done for each sample. 1g of that soil was
weighed into sterilized falcon tubes and then diluted with 9ml of sterilized DI water. The
tubes were then vortexed for 10 minutes full power. 100 µl were plated on LB-agar plates
in triplicates. 5-8 sterilized glass beads were added and swirled around to coat the plate.
The plates were then incubated at 37°C at least O/N and analyzed on a fluorescence
microscope.
3.2.4
Endophytes
One pot was chosen from the forest soil with the non-sigF mutant strain inoculated. The
plant was dug up, rhizosphere soil was collected as described above. Then the root and
leaves of all the plants were cut off each type put in different falcon tubes. Then 1g of
leaves or roots were weighed and added to another falcon tube. 5ml of 70% ethanol
was then added to each falcon tube and was vortexed for 1 minute. Then the liquid was
removed by opening the lid only slightly and pouring it out. Then 5ml of sterilized DI water
was added and removed by same method 5 times in order to wash off the ethanol. Then
1ml of Ø0.75-1.0mm sterilized beads were added along with 9 ml sterilized DI water. Then
the tubes were vortexed at full speed for 10 minutes. Because that was not sufficient to
bruise the leaves 10 sterilized beads of 0.5cm size was added and another 10 minutes
of vortexing was done. Another 10 sterilized beads and 10 minutes vortexing was done
until a satisfying result was obtained. Then 100µl of each sample was pipetted into LB-
Agar plates with Chloramphenicol in triplicates. 5-8 sterilized glass beads were added
and swirled around for even coating. The plates were then incubated at 37°C O/N and
analyzed on a fluorescence microscope.
3.2.5
Fluoresence microscopy
The plates grown at least O/N were put into an Axio Zoom V16 microscope from Zeiss
equipped with Fluoresence-Auto-Best-Fit Axiocam SO3 and a 38HE Green fluoresecent
Prot BP 450-490 4x motorized reflector changer. The motorized zoom was set to 0.7x
The resolution was set to 1936x1460 with a pixel size of 4.54x4.54 and with 2x gain. The
mode was set to bit depth 14. The noise filter was engaged with a threshold of 1:5. The
fluorescent colonies were counted and marked as show in figure 3.4. Each colony was
marked by distinct borders and a wrinkly center from which they colony started its spread.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
11
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.2: Counting of colonies under fluorescence microscope
3.3
Sample collection
The 3 largest plants in 3 pots of the 6 replicates were measured for height via a sterilized
metal ruler from ground to the latest branch point and subsequently dug up trying to pre-
serve as much root as possible and removing stuck on soil. Each plant was put into a
marked petri dish. An empty petri dish was measured and used as tare to weigh the plants
in petri dishes. The root dry weight was obtained by cutting the plant at the last visible
lateral root from the tap root. Then the cut off root material was dried in a desiccator for
at least 6 hours and the roots were weighed in petri dishes with the same method as for
fresh weight.
3.4
pH measurement
In order to find out if there was a comparable difference between rainwater and tap water
a pH test was conducted. A beaker was left outside to catch rain until it had 200 ml and
another beaker was filled with 200 ml tap water. Then they were covered and left to get
to room temperature O/N. Next day each sample was measured via a pH meter 3 times
each.
3.5
qPCR
Soil DNA from the bulk soil was extract using DNeasy PowerSoil kit. The primer gyrB-
F (5’-CGGTCGTAAACGCACTATC-3’), gyrB-R (5’AGGGTCCGGGACAAAATGTGTC G-
3’) and gyrB-probe (5’-FAM-AGAGCTTGATGTGACG-BHQ1-3’) were used to specificly
detect the B. subtilis abundant in bulk soil. A 20 μl mixture contained 10 μl of 2 × Premix
Ex Taq (Probe qPCR), 0.4 μl of each primer (10 μmol L-1), 0.4 μl of probe (10 μmol L-1),
0.4 μl of 50 × ROX Reference Dye, 2 μl of genomic DNA. Thermal cycling conditions were
95°C for 30 sec, and then 40 cycles of 95°C for 5 sec and 60°C for 31 sec.
12
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.3: The samples that are taken from the growth experiment
3.6
DNA extraction and amplicon sequencing
DNA was extracted from 250mg soil using DNeasy PowerSoil kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Ger-
many) according to manufacturer’s instructions and quantified using a NanoDrop spec-
trophotometer. Each sampling site have gDNA extracted in three biological replicates.
The V3-V4 hypervariable region of bacterial 16S rRNA gene was amplified using primers
341F (5’-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3’)and 805R (5’-GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-
3’). Thermal cycling conditions were as follows: 95 °C for 15 min followed by 30 cy-
cles of 95 °C for 30 s, 62 °C for 30s and 72 °C for 30s and a final extension at 72 °C
for 5min. The at 25μl PCR reaction containing 10.6 μl DNase-free water, 12.5 μl TEM-
Pase Hot Start 2X Master Mix, 0.8 μl of each primer (10μM), and 0.3 μl of DNA template.
PCR products were purified by NucleoSpin gel and PCR cleanup kit (Macherey-Nagel)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. The purified DNA was then pooled in equimolar
concentrations. The amplicon pool was submitted to Novogene Europe Company Lim-
ited (United Kingdom) for sequencing on NovaSeq PE250 platform with 1 million reads
per sample. The raw sequence data was processed on QIIME2 pipeline. Primers and
barcodes were screened and removed by QIIME2 plugin cutadapt. After demultiplexing,
filtered reads were denoised, merged and chimeras were removed by using DADA2s[49].
The taxonomy was assigned to the sequence using a Navie Bayes classifier trained on
SILVA (132 release) database for 16s [46]. All statistical analyses were performed in R,
using ‘vegan’, ‘ampvis2’, ‘phyloseq’ , ’NetComi’packages.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
13
==PAGE:18==
4
Results
In this project it was attempted to cast light on what happened with B. subtilis upon inocu-
lation in different soil types with Solanum lycopersicum. The soil types were either forest
soil or grass soil that was taken from two separate locations each. Furthermore it was
investigated whether sporulation played an important role in the survival of B. subtilis in
soil, this was investigated via the sigF mutant that could not sporulate.
4.1
First experiment: Analyzing sporulation’s role for B.
subtilis soil survival
4.1.1
No measurable B. subtilis via qPCR
In order to find out if a genetic method for quantifiation could be used when measuring
concentration of B. subtilis a qPCR was performed. However it took more cycles to amplify
the sample DNA to a measurable level than the positive control. So we couldn’t say for
sure that it was actually B. subtilis rpoD that was detected in the samples. So it was
decided that this was not the method to be used for future analysis.
Figure 4.1: A plot from qPCR results showing the amount of cycles necessary to get
detectable levels rpoD from B. subtilis. The detection limit is indicated by the blue line
and the first 3 curves are the positive controls.
4.2
P5-B1 B. subtilis population increased while sigF mutant
population decreased over 15 day growth period
To investigate whether sporulation was important for soil survival for B. subtilis the sigF
mutants ability to survive in forest and grass bulk soil was investigated and compared
to non mutant strains. Initially there was no population of sigF mutants or a very low but
they all disappeared after the 15 days. A contrary image can be seen from the non mutant
strains. All except for the GrassWT+plant group had an increase in colony counts over
14
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:19==
the 15 days after inoculation. This indicates that sporulation is important for survival in
bulk soil.
Figure 4.2: The change in CFU over the 15 days after addition of B.subtilis Forest and
grass indicates the soil types, sigF or WT indicates the sigF mutant or the wildtype P5-B1
strain and +/- plant indicates presence or absence of plant.
4.2.1
Rhizosphere colony count shows no sign of sporulation mutant
To verify that the sigF mutants had not just left the bulk soil and all lived near the roots the
colony count was analyzed for the rhizosphere. These results showed a clear picture as
well that in the rhizosphere there were too many colonies to count for the WT strains and
none to be found of the non sporulating mutant.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
15
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.3: The colony count found in the rhizosphere of the plants in the two soil types
with either mutant or wildtype strain added. Forest and Grass refers to the soil type and
sigF or WT refers to the sigF nonsporulating mutant and the wild type respectively
4.2.2
B. subtilis was found in the endosphere of a tomato plant
To investigate B. subtilis relation with the plant and find out if the bacterium could live
inside that plant. An experiment was performed to look for endophytes in both leaf and
root. The samples were taken from forest soil plants with the P5-B1 strain added. The
results show that endophytes could be detected in both the roots endosphere and the
leaves’ phyllosphere. However there was a higher amount of endophytes in the roots
than in the leaves.
Figure 4.4: The colony count found inside different plant tissue after surface sterilization.
16
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:21==
4.3
Second experiment: Analysis of colonization dynamics
of B. subtilis on S. lycopersicum and the effect it has on
plant growth
After the growth experiment was finished the plants were measured in height, fresh weight,
and root dry weight. This was done to find out if the addition of B. subtilis WT or sigF
mutant had a beneficial impact on the plants growth. From the results it can be seen that
the tomato plants overall grew better on forest soil compared to grass soil regardless if
any strain was added or not. If only the height curve is observed the relationship that was
expected shows itself with the WT strains growing higher than, the mutant strains and the
no strain plants being smaller. However there is an outlier in the ForestsigF with much
greater variation in size. The graph where it is easiest to see the difference of the soil
types is the freshweight where a very obvious relationship shows. The root dry weight
shows considerable more variation which might have been due to the soil attached to the
roots not removed properly before weighing.
Figure 4.5: The plant height from ground to tallest part of stem. Forest and Grass refers
to the soil type. sigF, WT, and nostrain refers to the sigF nonsporulating mutant, wild type
and no strain added.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.6: The plant weight measured. Forest and Grass refers to the soil type. sigF,
WT, and nostrain refers to the sigF nonsporulating mutant, wild type and no strain added
respectively.
Figure 4.7: The root dry weight measured after drying. Forest and Grass refers to the soil
type. sigF, WT, and nostrain refers to the sigF nonsporulating mutant, wild type and no
strain added respectively.
18
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:23==
4.4
pH of water is not a factor creating difference in
experiments
In order to discern whether the water used to water (tap water) was similar to the water
source found in nature (rainwater) pH was deemed the most important metric to analyze.
So a pH measurement comparison was performed. The data shows that there is very
little difference between the rain and tap water’s pH indicated that the tap water should
not interfere with the results. Although it is a logarithmic scale the variance in the rain pH
value overlapped with the mean of the tap pH value.
Figure 4.8: The pH measured from rainwater and tap-water.
4.5
Colony count and plant weight suggests that S.
lycopersicum and B. subtilis grew best in grass soil.
4.5.1
Bulk soil and rhizosphere colony counts show contrary results with
regards to soil type
Colony count goes up first and then down when measuring the bulk soil over a
15 day period A second growth experiment was performed where new soil was used
and with new seeds. This time more samples would be taken over the growth period
to get more chronological data. The samples from the pots without strains added show
a very low colony count as expected however there was a small peak at day 8 which
can only be due to a contamination. At day 8 in particular the error bars are quite broad
showing that these results are very hard to get anything conclusive from. If the errorbars
are disregarded a relationship showing that the colony counts from groups without plants
are actually higher than those with plants. This could be because some of the bacteria
can be found in the rhizosphere rather than bulk soil. This relationship could be worth
looking further into in another growth experiment with more replicates. The overall picture
shows a rise in colony counts from day 5 to day 8 and then followed by a drop.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.9: A graph showing the change in colony counts for the different sample groups
over a period of 15 days. Day 0 is 14 days of plant growth followed by addition of B.
subtilis. S1/S2 is grass and forest soil. WT/ns is wild type or no strain +/-P is with or
without plant.
Looking closer at day number 8 the same relationships with those groups with plants in
them having lower colony count than those without. However the group with grass soil,
strain, and plant show a big spread in colony counts making it difficult to compare anything
at all.
20
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.10: A boxplot of the colony counts on day 8. S1/S2 refers is grass/forest soil.
WT/ns is strain added or not. +/- P means with or without plant .
The colony count in the rhizosphere was the highest in the plants grown in forest
soil Turning the attention to the rhizosphere there are some samples without added B.
subtilis that have fluorescent colonies indicating a contamination event. Comparing the
the two groups with strain added, it seems like the rhizosphere of the forest soil had a
higher colony count. However there was a larger spread in the data points for the forest
soil than the grass soil making it difficult to find out if their distributions overlap.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.11: The plot shows the amount of colonies found in the rhizosphere of each
group. S1 is grass soil, S2 is forest soil WT is wild type, sigF is the nonsporulating mutant,
and +/-P indicates presence or absence of plant.
4.5.2
The plant weight suggests grass soil is best for tomato plant growth
In the second growth experiment the plants grown on grass soil without addition of B.
subtilis is biggest on all parameters tested for followed by the grass soil with strain added
group in the weight graphs however the picture is a bit different for height. It should be
noted that the grassWT group has 6 replicates instead of 3 in the others because on the
separate growth experiment all 6 pots had surviving plants. The non correlative relation-
ship between height and weight could either mean that the measurement of height was
done differently between the groups or that plants can grow in weight without necessarily
increasing in shoot height.
22
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.12: The average plant height from ground to tallest part of stem. Grass/Forest
refers to the soil type, WT/nostrain refers to wild type or no strain.
Figure 4.13: The plant weight measured by weighing in petri dishes. Grass/Forest refers
to the soil type, WT/nostrain refers to wild type or no strain.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.14: The root dry-weight measured by weighing in petri dishes after drying.
Grass/Forest refers to the soil type, WT/nostrain refers to wild type or no strain.
4.6
Third experiment: Microbiome analysis
In order to find out the impact the different conditions of the groups had on the microbiome
a metataxonomic analysis was done via amplicon sequencing taking both bulk soil and
rhizosphere soil from the plant pots in second experiment.
4.6.1
Network analysis of correlative relationships between microbes
In order to try and understand the relationship between taxa in the different samples a
differential network analysis was done.
in figure 4.15 there’s a contrast between the grass soil and forest soil. In the grass soil it
appears that there’s one small tightly knit cluster and one much more lose but with less
positive correlation. There seems to be a strong correlation between the bacillus and
uncultured proteobacterium nodes in the grass soil. Though it may appear that there are
more positive edges in the forest network figure 4.16 shows that there’s a 10% higher
positive note amount in the grass network.
When looking at the forest soil network another relationship is present. In this soil type
all the nodes are strongly correlated with each other. This suggests a high prevalence of
many of the same strains within samples.
Figure 4.17 shows there are more edges for configurations without plants present than
with. However the positive edge percentage in figure 4.18 reveals that it is only a dif-
ference of 12.36%. There appears to be a small cluster centered around Candidatus
Udeobacter and another cluster around Pseudolabrys which includes a strong connec-
tion between Bacillus and GAS113. GAS113 is an unclassified hyphomicrobiales known
as Rhizobiales. As seen from figure 4.18 these also appear as hub taxa. The strong
correlations could indicate cooperation is taking place.
24
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:29==
The network without plant is much more interconnected suggesting a larger diversity to be
found. A strong connection can be seen between Lysinibacillus and textitSporosarcina.
Another interesting connection is between Bacillus, firmcutes and Chungangia. Some of
these are also seen as hub taxa in figure 4.16.
Grass soil and forest soil
Figure 4.15: A network showing the relationship between taxa found in the samples. On
the left is the network for grass soil and on the right forest soil. The nodes are taxa and
the edges are correlations. Positive correlations are indicated with green and negative
with red. The stronger the correlation the wider the edge. The size of the node indicate
their hub taxa score, the bigger the more interconnected the node
Figure 4.16
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
25
==PAGE:30==
With and without plant
Figure 4.17: A network showing the relationship between taxa found in the samples. On
the left is the network when a the tomato plant is present and on the right the network
without.The nodes are taxa and the edges are correlations. Positive correlations are indi-
cated with green and negative with red. The stronger the correlation the wider the edge.
The size of the node indicate their hub taxa score, the bigger the more interconnected the
node
Figure 4.18
4.6.2
Relative abundance of taxa
To find the relative abundance of taxa in the samples a heatmap was made showcasing
the soil types and the two sample sites DH and HB. A high number relative to the others
show a high presence and a low number means a low relative presence. In the DH forest
group chloroplasts were the most abundant taxa and then Bacillus. In the HB forest group
the most abundant taxa was Aquisphaera which was orginally isolated in an aquarium in
Portugal and next is acidothermus which was originally isolated from hot spring in the
yellowstone park. The grass soil tells a different story. In the DH grass group Bacillus
is the absolute most prevalent taxa with over double the abundance of the next which
26
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:31==
is sporosarcina known to be another endospore forming bacterium. With the HB grass
group it can be seen that Candidatus Udeobacter is the most prevalent, the followed by
Bacillus. Candidatus Udeobacter is the most abundant soil bacterium in the world and
thrives in antibiotic laden grass land.
Figure 4.19: A heatmap showing the relative abundance of genera of bacteria in forest
and grass soil samples. Two samples pr. soil type was taken, one at dyrehaven (DH) and
another near Hjortedam bålplads (HB).
4.6.3
Alpha diversity
To investigate the conditions of the groups’ impact on the alpha diversity box plots were
constructed showing two variables. A higher alpha diversity indicates more different taxa
of bacteria within samples. In the first plot indicating soil type and sample site it can
be seen that the forest soil generally has higher alpha diversity than grass. However the
spread on the grass data in sample site HB is greater. The effect that addition of B. subtilis
in the soil seems to have an inverted relationship between the two soil types. In forest soil
the diversity is increased whereas in grass soil the diversity is decreased. Suggesting that
the addition of strain has an adverse effects on some of already present bacteria in grass
soil. The bulk soil has higher diversity than the rhizosphere soil in both soil types however
the grass soil had a much larger spread on the rhizosphere soil. Lastly the addition of
plant seemed to reduce the alpha diversity overall between the two soil types but mostly
in the forest soil.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
27
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.20: Boxplots of the alpha diversity when comparing groups representing vari-
ables of interest. Forest and Grass refers to the soil type, Strain Y/N means if bacteria
is added or not. Sample point Bulk/Rhizosphere is where in the pot the soil sample was
taken from, and plant Y/N conveys plant presence or absence
Soiltype ANOSIM statistic R: 0.05531 Significance: 0.089
Samplepoint: (Bulk/rhizosphere) ANOSIM statistic R: -0.0171 Significance: 0.57
Strain: ANOSIM statistic R: 0.1818 Significance: 0.005
Plant: ANOSIM statistic R: 0.07099 Significance: 0.121
4.6.4
Beta diversity
To find out whether there is a difference between the samples and not just within the beta
diversity is analyzed via a non metric multi dimensional scaling (NMDS) plot. sample point
and addition of strain seems to create a large overlap suggesting that there is not a big
difference between the two environments. The soil type seems to have a very prominent
separation suggesting that the environments are very different. Then with plant addition
the samples without plants seem as a sub group of the samples with plant. However the
ANOSIM suggests differently. The R value is a dissimilarity score, the closer the value
is to 1 the more dissimilar the groups and and if it is closer to 0 there is an even amount
of high and low ranks within the group. The strain added or not group is the only one
showing a statistical significant difference between the two groups. This is despite the
areas overlapping in the NMDS plot it also has the highest R value suggesting greatest
dissimilarity.
28
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.21: non metric multi dimensional scaling (NMDS) plot. showing each sample
represented as a dot and the area these samples create. An overlap means that there’s no
difference between the groups where a strong separation means that there is a difference.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
29
==PAGE:34==
5
Conclusion
This project has explored some of the relations between Bacillus subtilis survival and
growth in different environments. It is demonstrated that sporulation is important for soil
survival of B. subtilis. B. subtilis grew best on grass soil in both growth experiments.
It is unclear which soil type Solanum lycopersicum prefers as in the first experiment it
was forest soil but in the second experiment it was grass soil. Addition of B. subtilis had a
beneficial effect on plant growth in the forest soil. However in the grass soil, the addition of
B. subtilis had a negative effect. The microbiome results show a high relative abundance
of Bacillus genera in the grass soil and that addition of B. subtilis had a negative effect on
the alpha diversity in the grass soil. The addition of Bacillus increased the alpha diversity
in the forest soil. This could be explained by the forest soil not having much Bacillus
already present which allowed the B. subtilis to take new niches where in the case of the
grass soil the niches of Bacillus genus were already occupied and the addition of B. subtilis
outcompeted some of the other strains of the Bacillus genus thus reducing diversity. The
alpha diversity results also suggest that the presence of Solanum lycopersicum decreased
the diversity suggesting selectivity.
30
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:35==
6
Discussion
The usage of B. subtilis as a PGPR in agriculture is a promising alternative to the use
of synthetic pesticides for increasing crop yield.B. subtilis’ endospore formation property
makes it an ideal candidate for commercial use as it simplifies storage and dispersion [17].
B. subtilis is a well studied model organism in laboratory environments however in field
conditions results vary widely. It was previously discovered that B. subtilis is easily isolated
from grassland soil conditions but much less present in forest soil conditions. The reason
for this difference is not well understood. There are biotic and abiotic factors affecting the
survival of B. subtilis. One the biotic factors thought to be important is the presence of
a plant in the case of this project Solanum lycopersicum (domestic tomato plant). It was
sought to understand if sporulation was a necessity for soil survival so a nonsporulating
sigF mutant of B. subtilis was analyzed for its ability to colonize soil. Lastly the effect of
plants and additon of B. subtilis had on the native soil microbiome in the natural soil types
was analyzed.
6.1
Differences between the experimental setups in the
growth experiments make comparison difficult
There were three attempts of growing tomato plants in this project. Between each round
new knowledge was gained and tested making comparison between the experiments diffi-
cult. The sampling of soil for growth experiment 1 and 2 were at different times of the year
first one in spring and second in autumn. The difference in soil sampling season might af-
fect the activity and population of bacteria because the plants in the soil will be in different
parts of their growth cycle affecting their root exudate composition [23] . The storage of the
soil from experiment 2 used in the smaller experiment 3 in the growth chamber resulted
in algae growing on the outside of the bag. The algae effect was sought limited by taking
soil from the innermost part with no algae present however it might have affect the soil
microbiome.In growth experiment 2 the soil added was not broken down into equal sized
particles or sifted in any way resulting in problems with the irrigation. The germination
process of the seeds sometimes led to fungal growth in the petri dish so these seeds had
to be discarded. The addition of seeds was done slightly different between experiment 2
and 3. Poking holes, adding water and then adding the germinated seeds were found to
be the best method for planting seeds as it disturbs the seeds the least after planting. For
some pots the water floated on-top of the soil giving rise to algae formation in the pots
without S. lycopersicum present. The algae formation was not an issue in the first or third
experiment suggesting either excessive watering or poor drainage. Some rhizosphere
bacteria are aerobic requiring to not be submerged in water all the time in order to sur-
vive [26] . A suggestion to watering could be that instead of watering to saturation every
second day, the pots were placed in trays with water and could then absorb from there.
This could create cross contamination between the pots as they would all share the same
water source however this could be mitigated by making sure each group had their own
tray. The addition of multiple seeds in order to ensure plant growth in each pot should also
be followed up by removing saplings so only one is present. In growth experiment 1 and
2 additional saplings were not removed creating the possibility for competition between
the plants affecting the repeatability of the experiment.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
31
==PAGE:36==
6.2
Sampling of soil and plants
In the sampling procedure of the soil the rhizosphere soil sampling was a particular chal-
lenge. It was important to only sample the narrow zone around the roots and dig the plant
up without loosing any of this soil. A review by Romano et. al suggests that rhizosphere
soil should be harvested by shaking the roots into a 0.9 % NaCl solution [50]. In this ex-
periment the vigorous shaking into a falcon tube was enough to collect soil but it left some
of the tightly adhering soil still on the roots. For the first and second growth experiment
where there were multiple plants in each pot this was not an issue as there were multiple
sources of soil. In the third experiment only one plant was per pot which meant that in
order to get enough soil some bulk soil might have gotten mixed up with the rhizosphere.
Despite this risk of mixing of soil the alpha diversity shows a detectable difference which
can also be seen when comparing the colony counts between bulk soil and rhizosphere.
As expected the rhizosphere in general has a higher colony count than the bulk soil. This
is due to the rhizosphere effect which is the root exudates enriching the local environment
allowing for higher population densities giving rise to new niches [26]. It could also be ex-
plained by the biofilm formation happening on the roots allowing B. subtilis to grow much
denser locally.
6.2.1
Endophytes was difficult to extract and their path to leaf was
unknown
The endophyte results show that B. subtilis can be found in the endosphere and phyllo-
sphere of the S. lycopersicum but mainly in the endosphere. It is not clear how the B.
subtilis made it to the leaves of the plant. So it is not known for sure if the bacteria trav-
eled through the inside of the plant out to the leaves or if some other contamination event
like soil dust or aerosols carried the inoculataed B. subtilis to the leaves. One of the big
challenges in analyzing the endosphere of plants is the homogenization procedure. In
Zhou et al they do the homogenization by way of maceration in a sterile pestil and mortar
with 10mM sterilized MgSO4 [51]. The sterilization process of a mortar, as well as the
risk of spilling everywhere, is an impractical way to homogenize the plant material. In this
project an alternative solution was proposed. By vortexing the plant material with sterile
glass beads at full speed the plant material was broken down enough to detect endo-
phytes. The resistance of the plant material to the mechanical breakdown of the beads
may have played a role in why more endophytes were detected in the roots that in the
leaves.
6.2.2
Measuring plants repeatably proved to be a challenge
As previously mentioned the methods changed between the growth experiments. In the
first experiment the plant weight was with the strongly adhering soil still attached to the
root. This created variability as the amount adhering differed between the plants. In the
second and growth experiment this variability was removed by washing of the soil and
then lightly drying the plants. This difference makes it difficult to compare results across
the two growth experiments.
6.2.3
The soil type’s effect on colony count and plant growth differed
upon addition of B. subtilis
The results show that forest soil benefits from addition of B. subtilis in terms of plant growth
and alpha diversity of microbiome. The opposite relationship can be seen with the grass
soil. From figure 4.17 it can seen that Grass soil already has a high relative abundance
of Bacillus genus bacteria. This also makes sense as B. subtilis was originally isolated
from hay. So the reason for the drop in alpha diversity and plant growth may be because
of the added B. subtilis taking up the same niches as the other Bacillus genus bacteria.
The niche competition may be won by the added B. subtilis outcompeting the natives and
32
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:37==
that way reducing the alpha diversity as well as removing some of the other PGPR that
would have otherwise positively affected the plant growth.
6.3
Choice of method for analyzing microbiome
When considering doing a microbiome analysis there are multiple approaches. Each
unique bacterium could be isolated and identified which would be a laborious process
and it would only reveal the culturable bacteria. It is known that the majority of soil bacte-
ria are unculturable [52]. Therefore a genetics based approach would be best suited for
this project. The genetics approaches have become more widely available as the cost of
sequencing has gone down and the computer processing power has gone up. A disad-
vantage of the genetics based approach in comparison to the culture method is that DNA
released from dead cells are also amplified. The genetics based approach giving the
most information is metagenomics. In metagenomics the entire genome is sequenced.
An often used method of metagenomics is shotgun sequencing, where unspecific primers
are used to amplify pieces of DNA from all the bacteria that are then sequenced. These
k-mer sequences can then either be sequenced individually or stitched together to contigs
create make for a whole genome and can be used to find the identity of each strain and
which functions they might have. This technology is costly, time consuming, and makes
a lot of data.
6.3.1
Amplicon sequencing
Using the metataxonimic approach of amplicon sequencing is often a better alternative
[46]. amplicon sequencing amplifies variable regions of conserved molecular clock genes.
In the case of bacteria it is the 16sRNA genes variable regions that are amplified. After
sequencing the results can be compared to a database where based on the history of
mutations in the variable regions the taxonomy of the bacteria to a genus level can be
inferred. By using databases of functionalities of the genera it is possible to infer the
function of the taxa. By comparing the taxa with a database showing the typical func-
tionalities of the genera, function can be inferred. amplicon sequencing is better suited
than metagenomics for this project because it has an easier time with analysing small
amounts of DNA with host DNA contaminiation as is the case in rhizosphere [47]. It is
also cheaper, faster, and requires less processing power for the data analysis however it
also comes with other drawbacks. The binding sequences of the primers on the bacterial
DNA vary which can induce bias in the binding affinity for the PCR primers. [46]. The
powersoil pro kit used for DNA extraction lysis bacteria in the soil matrix. This type of
DNA extraction may favor the bacteria that are the least resistant to lysis. The Qiime2
pipeline was chosen for the data processing as it has many functions and is widely used
and allows plugins from third party creators [53]. The V3 to V4 area was sequenced for
the microbiome analysis. This is a 435 bp long sequence that was sequenced with the
250 bp paired end method which makes it cover 500 bp in all. A longer sequencing length
would have been preferred as there would have been more sequences that would reach
between the two points. This meant that many sequences had to be sorted out in the
denoising stage with DADA2. The choice of database as the SILVA database was by the
co-supervisors suggestion. Although Greengenes and RDP could have been considered
as databases the silva database was used in this project because a model for taxonomic
composition determination was already trained.
6.4
Microbiome analysis
The visualization of the microbiome analysis was done in R due to the familiarity with the
programming language as well as the easy handling of file management. In the Qiime2
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
33
==PAGE:38==
”moving pictures” tutorials it was shown the Qiime2 system could have been used for
visualization however this was not chosen due to above reasons. The networks was
made to show the correlation each taxa had with each other, relative abundance plot was
made to find out which taxa were the most represented within samples and alpha and
beta diversity was used to see if the different conditions of the groups had an effect on
diversity overall.
6.4.1
Network analysis
The grass network in figure 4.15 shows Bacillus having a positive correlation with the un-
cultured protobacteria which is connected to Sporosarcina which is another spore forming
rod shaped gram positive bacterium much like B. subtilis, this could explain their co oc-
currence [54]. A known proteobacterium to appear in soil in conjunction with B. subtilis
are pseudomonas strains which may be what’s represented by that node[55]. In the other
cluster two other nodes acted as strong hub taxa the Candidatus Udaeobacter and Nocar-
dioides. Candidatus Udaeobacter is a ubiqituous soil dwelling bacterium that is known
to thrive in conditions with high amounts of antibiotics[56]. In figure 4.19 the heatmap
reveals that the second sampling from grass soil had a high relative abundance of Candi-
datus Udaeobacter. This could be explained by the grass soil being near a horse pen and
antibiotics being used there. This also reveals that the two clusters seen in the grass net-
work might be a result of the difference between the two sample sites. The Nocardioides
is a soil dwelling gram positive bacterium that can create mycelium much like fungi and
have been implicated as having an important role in bioremediation [57]. The forest net-
work in figure 4.15 show Roseiarcus and Aquisphaera are the main hub taxa. Roseiarcus
known as the pink bow capable of dinitrogen fixation which is beneficial for a plant as a
fertilizer [58]. The Aquisphaera is normally isolated from aquatic environments [59] Fig-
ure 4.17 shows that with plants present the network became less interconnected which
created the two clusters centered around Pseudolabrys and Udeobacter. In the network
with plant bacillus is correltated with rhizobiales which is a nitrogen binding bacterium.
[19, 21, 22]. In the network without plant the bacillus is correlated with firmicutes and
Chungangia, which is a type of Firmicute a Bacilli undergroup.
6.4.2
Diversity plots
In alpha diversity plot shown in figure 4.20 it can be seen that the forest soil had higher di-
versity than the grass soil. This could be explained with a higher diversity of plant species
present in the forest soil and that it was fall season with leaves lightly covering the top
soil layer, that were removed. The addition of strain had an interesting effect between the
two soil types. Adding B. subtilis to forest soil increased the diversity suggesting that the
addition of B. subtilis had a positive effect on the already present microbiome. However in
the grass soil it had a negative effect which may be explained b,y as talked about earlier
in the colony count section, that the added B. subtilis outcompeted already present taxa
and thus reduced the alpha diversity. The bulk soil had a higher alpha diversity than the
rhizosphere soil which may in part be explained by the rhizosphere effect of the selectivity
of the micro environemnt around a plant [26]. This relationship could also be seen with
the mere presence of a plant regardless if bulk soil or rhizosphere was sampled principal
coordinate analysis (PCoA) could have been used to visualize beta diversity however it
does not allow for comparison of distances between groups whereas NMDS does due to
it not assuming linearity. The linearity between the actual distance and projected distance
is shown as Stress value. The observable difference in figure 4.21 is the clear separa-
tion between the forest and grass soil group. In order to analyze the relationship further
ANOSIM is used. The statistical data suggest that the greatest difference is in fact be-
tween the strain and no strain group, so much so that the difference is significant showing
34
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:39==
higher difference between groups than within groups in taxa.
It should be noted that there were only 3 replicates for each group measured which in-
creased the risk that the group effects may have affected the view of the other groups as
a clear separation is difficult.
6.5
Future perspectives
The projects gathering of information have been limited by the scope and time and thus
several more analysis could be done in order to examine the plant-soil-microbe relations.
A growth experiment with more pots and samplings of specifically rhizosphere soil at differ-
ent time points could allow the time dynamics of rhizosphere colonization if a fluorescent
labeled bacterium was used like in this project.
The detection of endophytes present a unique opportunity to follow the path of the bac-
terium to the phyllosphere. Several plants could be inoculated and then sampled at differ-
ent times. Then the plant would be harvested in split up along it’s stem and leaves. Each
group would be measured to see how far the labeled B. subtilis had made it at the given
time.
The difference in response between the soil types give rise to question of, how would
Bacillus subtilis fare in other soil types like desert or boreal soil ecosystems, which could
be worth investigating as growth of crops also takes place in these ecosystems.
The network plots and relative abundance plot show specific taxa that have strong co-
occurrence with Bacillus subtilis which may suggest that they are working together. There-
fore future experiments examining these strains in coculture could be interesting.
The use of Bacillus subtilis outside of greenhouse and laboratory conditions have a long
way to go yet. The complex interactions between the environment, plants, and microbes
all affect the relationship with Bacillus subtilis making it necessary to choose the bioproc-
tant agent or biofertilizer carefully to the present conditions as Bacillus subtilis cannot
thrive in all conditions.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
35
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
H. Charles J. Godfray et al. “Food Security: The Challenge of Feeding 9 Billion
People”. In: Science 327.5967 (Feb. 2010), pp. 812–818. DOI: 10.1126/science.
1185383. URL: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1185383.
[2]
Richard Tito, Heraldo L. Vasconcelos, and Kenneth J. Feeley. “Global climate change
increases risk of crop yield losses and food insecurity in the tropical Andes”. In:
Global Change Biology 24.2 (Nov. 2017). DOI: 10.1111/gcb.13959. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1111/gcb.13959.
[3]
Thomas Dresselhaus and Ralph Hückelhoven. “Biotic and Abiotic Stress Responses
in Crop Plants”. In: Agronomy 8.11 (Nov. 2018), p. 267. DOI: 10.3390/agronomy8110267.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy8110267.
[4]
Sanjeev Kumar Dhungana et al. “Comparative effect of different insecticides on the
growth and yield of soybeans”. In: Plant Protection Science 56.No. 3 (June 2020),
pp. 206–213. DOI: 10.17221/77/2019-pps. URL: https://doi.org/10.17221/77/2019-
pps.
[5]
Mariana Portela de-Assis et al. “Health problems in agricultural workers occupation-
ally exposed to pesticides”. In: Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Trabalho 18.03
(2020), pp. 352–363. DOI: 10.47626/1679-4435-2020-532. URL: https://doi.org/10.
47626/1679-4435-2020-532.
[6]
B Eskenazi, A Bradman, and R Castorina. “Exposures of children to organophos-
phate pesticides and their potential adverse health effects.” In: Environmental Health
Perspectives 107.suppl 3 (June 1999), pp. 409–419. DOI: 10.1289/ehp.99107s3409.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.99107s3409.
[7]
A.D. Carter and A.I.J. Heather. “Pesticides in Groundwater”. In: Pesticides. Elsevier,
1995, pp. 112–123. DOI: 10.1533/9781845693183.112. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1533/9781845693183.112.
[8]
Tomislav Cernava and Gabriele Berg. “The emergence of disease-preventing bac-
teria within the plant microbiota”. In: Environmental Microbiology (Jan. 2022). DOI:
10.1111/1462-2920.15896. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.15896.
[9]
Alan K. Watson. “Biocontrol”. In: Parasitic Orobanchaceae. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, 2013, pp. 469–497. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 642- 38146- 1_26. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38146-1_26.
[10]
Manasi Pawaskar and Savita Kerkar. “Microbial biocontrol agents against chilli plant
pathogens over synthetic pesticides: a review”. In: Proceedings of the Indian Na-
tional Science Academy 87.4 (Oct. 2021), pp. 578–594. DOI: 10.1007/s43538-021-
00053-2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s43538-021-00053-2.
[11]
Omkar and Bhupendra Kumar. “Biocontrol of Insect Pests”. In: Ecofriendly Pest
Management for Food Security. Elsevier, 2016, pp. 25–61. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-
12-803265-7.00002-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-803265-7.00002-6.
[12]
Jürgen Köhl, Rogier Kolnaar, and Willem J. Ravensberg. “Mode of Action of Micro-
bial Biological Control Agents Against Plant Diseases: Relevance Beyond Efficacy”.
In: Frontiers in Plant Science 10 (July 2019). DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00845. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00845.
[13]
Sai Shiva Krishna Prasad Vurukonda, Davide Giovanardi, and Emilio Stefani. “Plant
Growth Promoting and Biocontrol Activity of Streptomyces spp. as Endophytes”. In:
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 19.4 (Mar. 2018), p. 952. DOI: 10.3390/
ijms19040952. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19040952.
36
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:41==
[14]
P. Chowdappa et al. “Growth stimulation and induction of systemic resistance in
tomato against early and late blight by Bacillus subtilis OTPB1 or Trichoderma
harzianum OTPB3”. In: Biological Control 65.1 (2013), pp. 109–117. ISSN: 1049-
9644. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2012.11.009. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1049964412002551.
[15]
Mohammad Miransari. “Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobacteria”. In: Journal of Plant
Nutrition 37.14 (Aug. 2014), pp. 2227–2235. DOI: 10.1080/01904167.2014.920384.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/01904167.2014.920384.
[16]
Ákos T. Kovács. “Bacillus subtilis”. In: Trends in Microbiology 27.8 (Aug. 2019),
pp. 724–725. DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2019.03.008. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.
2019.03.008.
[17]
Rainer Borriss. “Use of Plant-Associated Bacillus Strains as Biofertilizers and Bio-
control Agents in Agriculture”. In: Bacteria in Agrobiology: Plant Growth Responses.
Ed. by Dinesh K. Maheshwari. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011,
pp. 41–76. ISBN: 978-3-642-20332-9. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-20332-9_3. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20332-9_3.
[18]
Maude Thérien et al. “Surfactin production is not essential for pellicle and root-
associated biofilm development of Bacillus subtilis”. In: Biofilm 2 (2020), p. 100021.
ISSN: 2590-2075. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioflm.2020.100021. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590207520300034.
[19]
B.N. Aloo, B.A. Makumba, and E.R. Mbega. “The potential of Bacilli rhizobacteria for
sustainable crop production and environmental sustainability”. In: Microbiological
Research 219 (2019), pp. 26–39. ISSN: 0944-5013. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.micres.2018.10.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0944501318308656.
[20]
Alejandro Pérez-García, Diego Romero, and Antonio de Vicente. “Plant protection
and growth stimulation by microorganisms: biotechnological applications of Bacilli in
agriculture”. In: Current Opinion in Biotechnology 22.2 (2011). Food biotechnology
– Plant biotechnology, pp. 187–193. ISSN: 0958-1669. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.copbio.2010.12.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0958166910002351.
[21]
Sushanto Gouda et al. “Revitalization of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria for
sustainable development in agriculture”. In: Microbiological Research 206 (2018),
pp. 131–140. ISSN: 0944-5013. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2017.08.016.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0944501317303415.
[22]
Guang Hui Xie et al. “Identification ofnif genes in N2-fixing bacterial strains isolated
from rice fields along the Yangtze River Plain”. In: Journal of Basic Microbiology
46.1 (Feb. 2006), pp. 56–63. DOI: 10.1002/jobm.200510513. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1002/jobm.200510513.
[23]
Vicente Vives-Peris et al. “Root exudates: from plant to rhizosphere and beyond”.
In: Plant Cell Reports 39.1 (July 2019), pp. 3–17. DOI: 10.1007/s00299-019-02447-5.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-019-02447-5.
[24]
Geoffrey W. Zehnder et al. In: European Journal of Plant Pathology 107.1 (2001),
pp. 39–50. DOI: 10 . 1023 / a: 1008732400383. URL: https: // doi. org /10 .1023 / a:
1008732400383.
[25]
Peter A. H. M. Bakker et al. “The rhizosphere revisited: root microbiomics”. In: Fron-
tiers in Plant Science 4 (2013). DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00165. URL: https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpls.2013.00165.
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
37
==PAGE:42==
[26]
Ning Ling, Tingting Wang, and Yakov Kuzyakov. “Rhizosphere bacteriome structure
and functions”. In: Nature Communications 13.1 (Feb. 2022). DOI: 10.1038/s41467-
022-28448-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28448-9.
[27]
Rosalie Allard-Massicotte et al. “Bacillus subtilis Early Colonization of Arabidopsis
thaliana Roots Involves Multiple Chemotaxis Receptors”. In: mBio 7.6 (Dec. 2016).
Ed. by Paul D. Straight and Edward G. Ruby. DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01664-16. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.01664-16.
[28]
Makoto Shoda. “Bacterial control of plant diseases”. In: Journal of Bioscience and
Bioengineering 89.6 (Jan. 2000), pp. 515–521. DOI: 10.1016/s1389-1723(00)80049-
3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/s1389-1723(00)80049-3.
[29]
Patricia Broadbent. “Effect of Bacillus spp. on Increased Growth of Seedlings in
Steamed and in Nontreated Soil”. In: Phytopathology 77.8 (1977), p. 1027. DOI:
10.1094/phyto-67-1027. URL: https://doi.org/10.1094/phyto-67-1027.
[30]
Haichao Feng et al. “Chemotaxis of Beneficial Rhizobacteria to Root Exudates: The
First Step towards Root–Microbe Rhizosphere Interactions”. In: International Jour-
nal of Molecular Sciences 22.13 (June 2021), p. 6655. DOI: 10.3390/ijms22136655.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22136655.
[31]
John S. Parkinson, Gerald L. Hazelbauer, and Joseph J. Falke. “Signaling and sen-
sory adaptation in Escherichia coli chemoreceptors: 2015 update”. In: Trends in
Microbiology 23.5 (May 2015), pp. 257–266. DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2015.03.003. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2015.03.003.
[32]
Mathilde Nordgaard et al. “Deletion of Rap-Phr systems in Bacillus subtilis influ-
ences in vitro biofilm formation and plant root colonization”. In: MicrobiologyOpen
10.3 (June 2021). DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.1212. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/mbo3.
1212.
[33]
Daniel B. Kearns and Richard Losick. “Swarming motility in undomesticated Bacillus
subtilis”. In: Molecular Microbiology 49.3 (Jan. 2004), pp. 581–590. DOI: 10.1046/j.
1365-2958.2003.03584.x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03584.x.
[34]
Rebecca F. Kinsinger, Megan C. Shirk, and Ray Fall. “Rapid Surface Motility in
Bacillus subtilis Is Dependent on Extracellular Surfactin and Potassium Ion”. In:
Journal of Bacteriology 185.18 (Sept. 2003), pp. 5627–5631. DOI: 10.1128/jb.185.
18.5627-5631.2003. URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.185.18.5627-5631.2003.
[35]
Daniel López and Roberto Kolter. “Extracellular signals that define distinct and co-
existing cell fates inBacillus subtilis”. In: FEMS Microbiology Reviews 34.2 (Mar.
2010), pp. 134–149. DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2009.00199.x. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1574-6976.2009.00199.x.
[36]
Yun Chen et al. “Biocontrol of tomato wilt disease byBacillus subtilisisolates from
natural environments depends on conserved genes mediating biofilm formation”. In:
Environmental Microbiology 15.3 (Aug. 2012), pp. 848–864. DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-
2920.2012.02860.x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2012.02860.x.
[37]
Iqra Liaqat and Saiyed Ahmed. “Biofilm formation and sporulation in Bacillus sub-
tilis”. In: Int J Microbiol Res Rev 1 (Jan. 2013), pp. 61–67.
[38]
Pascale B. Beauregard et al. “iBacillus subtilis/i biofilm induction by plant polysac-
charides”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110.17 (Apr. 2013).
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1218984110. URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1218984110.
[39]
Virginie Molle et al. “The Spo0A regulon of Bacillus subtilis”. In: Molecular Microbi-
ology 50.5 (Nov. 2003), pp. 1683–1701. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03818.x.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03818.x.
[40]
Masaya Fujita, Jose
Eduardo Gonza
38
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:43==
lez-Pastor, and Richard Losick. “High- and Low-Threshold Genes in the Spo0A
Regulon of Bacillus subtilis”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 187.4 (Feb. 2005), pp. 1357–
1368. DOI: 10.1128/jb.187.4.1357-1368.2005. URL: https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.187.
4.1357-1368.2005.
[41]
A. Danchin. “Bacillus Subtilis”. In: Encyclopedia of Genetics. Elsevier, 2001, pp. 135–
144. DOI: 10.1006/rwgn.2001.0099. URL: https://doi.org/10.1006/rwgn.2001.0099.
[42]
Sarah J. Knight and Matthew R. Goddard. “Sporulation in soil as an overwinter sur-
vival strategy inSaccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: FEMS Yeast Research 16.1 (Nov.
2015). Ed. by Jens Nielsen, fov102. DOI: 10.1093/femsyr/fov102. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1093/femsyr/fov102.
[43]
Yukinori Tokuda, Takashi Ano, and Makoto Shoda. “Survival of Bacillus subtilis
NB22 and its transformant in soil”. In: Applied Soil Ecology 2.2 (June 1995), pp. 85–
94. DOI: 10.1016/0929- 1393(94)00042- 6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/0929-
1393(94)00042-6.
[44]
Steven S. Branda et al. “Fruiting body formation by Bacillus subtilis”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 98.20 (Sept. 2001), pp. 11621–11626. DOI:
10.1073/pnas.191384198. URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.191384198.
[45]
Yunrong Chai et al. “Bistability and biofilm formation in Bacillus subtilis”. In: Molec-
ular Microbiology 67.2 (Nov. 2007), pp. 254–263. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.
06040.x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.06040.x.
[46]
Rob Knight et al. “Best practices for analysing microbiomes”. In: Nature Reviews
Microbiology 16.7 (May 2018), pp. 410–422. DOI: 10.1038/s41579- 018- 0029- 9.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-018-0029-9.
[47]
Yong-Xin Liu et al. “A practical guide to amplicon and metagenomic analysis of
microbiome data”. In: Protein & Cell 12.5 (May 2020), pp. 315–330. DOI: 10.1007/
s13238-020-00724-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13238-020-00724-8.
[48]
Jan Torsten Jeske and Claudia Gallert. “Microbiome Analysis via OTU and ASV-
Based Pipelines—A Comparative Interpretation of Ecological Data in WWTP Sys-
tems”. In: Bioengineering 9.4 (Mar. 2022), p. 146. DOI: 10.3390/bioengineering9040146.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering9040146.
[49]
Benjamin J Callahan et al. “DADA2: High-resolution sample inference from Illumina
amplicon data”. In: Nature Methods 13.7 (May 2016), pp. 581–583. DOI: 10.1038/
nmeth.3869. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3869.
[50]
Ida Romano, Valeria Ventorino, and Olimpia Pepe. “Effectiveness of Plant Beneficial
Microbes: Overview of the Methodological Approaches for the Assessment of Root
Colonization and Persistence”. In: Frontiers in Plant Science 11 (Jan. 2020). DOI:
10.3389/fpls.2020.00006. URL: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.00006.
[51]
Lu Zhou et al. “Antimicrobial activity screening of rhizosphere soil bacteria from
tomato and genome-based analysis of their antimicrobial biosynthetic potential”. In:
BMC Genomics 22.1 (Jan. 2021). DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-07346-8. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-07346-8.
[52]
Karine Alain and Joël Querellou. “Cultivating the uncultured: limits, advances and
future challenges”. In: Extremophiles 13.4 (June 2009), pp. 583–594. DOI: 10.1007/
s00792-009-0261-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007%5C%2Fs00792-009-0261-3.
[53]
Evan Bolyen et al. “Reproducible, interactive, scalable and extensible microbiome
data science using QIIME 2”. In: Nature Biotechnology 37.8 (July 2019), pp. 852–
857. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-019-0209-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038%5C%2Fs41587-
019-0209-9.
[54]
Soon-Wo Kwon et al. “Sporosarcina koreensis sp. nov. and Sporosarcina soli sp.
nov., isolated from soil in Korea”. In: International Journal of Systematic and Evolu-
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
39
==PAGE:44==
tionary Microbiology 57.8 (Aug. 2007), pp. 1694–1698. DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.64352-0.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1099%2Fijs.0.64352-0.
[55]
Sofia Arnaouteli et al. “Bacillus subtilis biofilm formation and social interactions”. In:
Nature Reviews Microbiology 19.9 (Apr. 2021), pp. 600–614. DOI: 10.1038/s41579-
021-00540-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41579-021-00540-9.
[56]
Inka M. Willms et al. “Globally Abundant “ iCandidatus/i Udaeobacter” Benefits from
Release of Antibiotics in Soil and Potentially Performs Trace Gas Scavenging”. In:
mSphere 5.4 (Aug. 2020). Ed. by Angela D. Kent. DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00186-20.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1128%2Fmsphere.00186-20.
[57]
Jung-Hoon Yoon and Yong-Ha Park. “The Genus Nocardioides”. In: The Prokary-
otes. Springer New York, 2006, pp. 1099–1113. DOI: 10.1007/0-387-30743-5_44.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007%2F0-387-30743-5_44.
[58]
Irina S. Kulichevskaya et al. “Descriptions of Roseiarcus fermentans gen. nov., sp.
nov., a bacteriochlorophyll a-containing fermentative bacterium related phylogenet-
ically to alphaproteobacterial methanotrophs, and of the family Roseiarcaceae fam.
nov.” In: International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 64.Pt_8
(Aug. 2014), pp. 2558–2565. DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.064576-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1099%2Fijs.0.064576-0.
[59]
Joana Bondoso et al. “Aquisphaera giovannonii gen. nov., sp. nov., a planctomycete
isolated from a freshwater aquarium”. In: International Journal of Systematic and
Evolutionary Microbiology 61.12 (Dec. 2011), pp. 2844–2850. DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.
027474-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1099%2Fijs.0.027474-0.
40
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
==PAGE:45==
A
Appendix
A.1
Primer sequences and barcodes
Figure A.1: The primers used for amplicon sequencing
A.2
Materials
Material
Material name
Brand name
Agar
Agar-Agar, Kobe 1
Carl Roth
Chloramphenicol
LB
LB(Lennox)
Carl Roth
Nuclease free water
Nuclease free water
Omega
Powersoil pro kit
Dneasy
Qiagen
TAE buffer
Ultra pure 10x TAE
Invitrogen
Seeds: Solanum lycopersicum Maja bush tomatoes from Buzzy Heerenveen Holland
A.2.1
Equipment
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
41
==PAGE:46==
Equipment
Equipment name(s)
Brand name
Autoclave
Classic, multi control, labor auto clav
Certoclav
Centrifuge
Centrifuge 5424R
Eppendorf
Electrophoresis chamber
Biorad
Fluoresence microscope
Axio zoom V16 microscope
Zeiss
Gel image apperatus
GelDoc XR+
Biorad
Growth chamber
Model KBW 720
Binder
Heat block
Labnet
Incubator
Heratherm incubator
Thermo Scientific
LAF bench 1
VFB 1806E
Clan LAF-o-matic
LAF bench 2
ESCO
Microscale
ABS 220-4N
Kern
pH meter
SI analytics
qPCR machine
Stratagene Mx3005P
Agilent technologies
Scale
PCB
Kern
Rarefaction plot
Figure A.2: The curve showing the relationship between sequencing depth and OTUs
discovered. All the curves should saturate and flatten off showing that the sequencing
depth chosen was sufficient
42
The impact of plant growth and various soil types on Bacillus subtilis abundance
