==PAGE:1==
Formalization of Deductive Systems in Isabelle
10 Axiomatic Systems of Classical Propositional Logic
Agnes Moesg˚ard Eschen
15 April 2022
Abstract
In this thesis, I formalize 10 axiomatic systems of classical propositional logic
in Isabelle/HOL and show their soundness and completeness.
I choose to
embed propositional statements deeply in Isabelle/HOL. The project is mo-
tivated by previous work I participated in, where 6 other axiomatic systems of
other fragments of classical propositional logic were formalized and shown com-
plete in Isabelle/HOL. First, the historical three-axiom system L1, due to Jan
 Lukasiewicz, is shown complete by reconfiguring a Henkin-style completeness
proof formalized in Isabelle/HOL by Asta Halkjær From. Then, this result is
used to show the remaining 9 systems complete by verified axiomatic proofs of
the three axioms of the L1 system. This thesis shows not only that it is possible
to use a proof assistant to establish meta-theoretical results of propositional
axiomatic systems, but also that Isabelle/HOL and its Sledgehammer tool sig-
nificantly enhance the process of doing so by providing the user with a suite of
relevant tools and features.
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis was fulfilled at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) as the
final project of my Master of Science in Engineering (Computer Science and
Engineering) program. It started on 15 November 2021 and ended on 15 April
2022. 30 ECTS points are registered for the project. The project is supervised
by Jørgen Villadsen.
I have no previous experience with the deductive systems analyzed in this
project, but I have studied deductive systems before in the DTU BSc course
02156 Logical Systems and Logic Programming (5 ECTS) and in the DTU MSc
course 02256 Automated Reasoning (5 ECTS).
I have previous experience working with Isabelle/HOL from the DTU MSc
course 02256 Automated Reasoning (5 ECTS) along with two special courses
Advanced Theorem Proving in Isabelle (5 ECTS) and Advanced Automated
Reasoning (10 ECTS).
Acknowledgements
First off, I want to thank my supervisor Jørgen Villadsen for suggesting the topic
of the thesis and for helping and guiding me with frequent meetings throughout
the entire 5-month project period. I have come to know Jørgen through my
bachelor project and several courses on my master’s degree where he has been
ever helpful and supportive. Through these years he has helped me grow to
take on the challenge of writing this final project, and for that I am grateful.
I also want to thank my friends for helpful comments and corrections on this
thesis. Writing a project alone can sometimes be lonesome, so I thoroughly
enjoyed your company and I am grateful for your volunteering. Your names
in alphabetical order: Alexander Birch Jensen, Asta Halkjær From, Frederik
Krogsdal Jacobsen, Lauritz Thomas Barfoed, Lukas Backhausen, Miria Emma
Clausen Knudsen and Tilde Olsen. I want to also thank my Mom and Dad
for being supportive throughout the entire project and lending an ear to my
frustrations and endless ramblings. I want to thank Ulrich Hansen for his help
and advice on managing my symptoms during stressful situations.
Finally, I want to thank censor Torben Bra¨uner for taking the time to evaluate
my project.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Deductive Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Isabelle/HOL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Formalizing Syntax and Semantics
9
2.1
Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Formalizing Axioms and Rules of Inference
14
3.1
Rules of Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Axioms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Formalizing the Completeness of the L1 System
17
4.1
Formalizing Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Establishing Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Completeness of the L1 System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Preliminary Derivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Formalizing 10 Axiomatic Systems
30
5.1
The L1 System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
The H System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
The L3 System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
The R System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
The F System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.6
The S1 System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.7
The L2 System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.8
The S2 System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.9
The LT System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.10 The M System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Evaluation
55
6.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
References
62
Appendix: List of Axiomatic Systems
69
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
This thesis is about formalizing deductive systems using the proof assistant Is-
abelle/HOL and then showing meta-theoretical results about them. I narrow
the scope of the project by focusing on deductive systems that are axiomatic
systems of classical propositional logic, and on showing the meta-theoretical re-
sults of soundness and completeness. An overview of all systems formalized in
this thesis is listed in the appendix.
This section gives a short introduction to the concept of a deductive system
and the proof assistant Isabelle/HOL. Following this, I discuss related work and
outline the contents of the rest of this thesis.
1.1
Deductive Systems
Looking up the word deductive in Google’s English dictionary returns the sen-
tence “characterized by or based on the inference of particular instances from a
general law.” From this definition I define, for the purpose of this thesis, de-
ductive reasoning as the act of inferring particular instances from general laws.
For example, from the general law stars are round, deductive reasoning can be
used to infer the particular instance the sun is round.
This inference might
seem intuitive on its surface, but should you choose to investigate this kind of
reasoning and its implications further, it could lead you down the rabbit hole.
At least it has for many people, for thousands of years, and in many fields of
study, including psychology, philosophy and symbolic logic.
As my field of study is symbolic logic, I now restrict myself to its interpretation
of deductive reasoning. In symbolic logic a focus on precisely specified systems
is prevalent. In this thesis the word formal can be taken to mean the same as
“precisely specified”, and the word formalization to mean “a formal system”.
A deductive system is a formalization of deductive reasoning. Several kinds of
deductive systems have been developed over the years, for example, the Sequent
Calculus, Natural Deduction and Axiomatic systems [8]. This thesis is dedicated
to investigating Axiomatic systems.
Axiomatic systems consist of two parts: axioms and rules of inference. Together
they describe a formal way to reason deductively. Axioms are declarative state-
ments taken to be true.
They serve as starting premises for the deductive
reasoning which is then done by applying rules of inference. A rule of inference
is a formal method of deduction that from a set of specific premises can be
applied to derive a conclusion that is a logical consequence of the premises.
To ensure that the deductions of an axiomatic system are logical consequences,
a formalization of a language of declarative statements, and a formalization
of their meaning are required.
This is referred to as syntax and semantics
respectively. A deductive system together with syntax and semantics constitutes
1
==PAGE:5==
a logic. In this thesis, I will study Axiomatic systems of classical propositional
logic which is one of the standard forms of symbolic logic in use today [55].
1.1.1
A brief history of deductive systems
Humans have been using deductive reasoning for millennia but it took until
classical antiquity for the first recognized attempts at formalizing the act to
be made [56]. The honor for this goes to Aristotle of Stagira (d. 322 B.C) for
the invention of his Term Logic in which each proposition is composed of two
so-called terms [79]. The rule of inference in this system is Aristotle’s syllogism
which takes two propositions as premises and yields a conclusion [79]. For the
two propositions “All men are mortal” (whose terms are men and mortal) and
“Socrates is a man” (whose terms are Socrates and man) applying Aristotle’s
syllogism will yield the conclusion “Therefore, Socrates is mortal”.
While the idea of propositions being composed of terms would eventually lead
to the development of first-order logic, for formal logic’s development, viewing
propositions as atomic objects proved more fruitful [79]. Taking on this view,
propositions are indivisible, meaning they contain no terms and are the small-
est objects in the language. This idea was first considered by the Stoics (∼3rd
century B.C) who came up with a rivaling logic to Aristotle’s called Sentential
Logic (the logic consisting of sentences) [79]. Unlike the Term Logic in which
Aristotle’s syllogism can be interpreted both as a rule of inference and a logical
theorem, the Stoic logic made a clear distinction between logical theorems and
rules of inference [79]. Logical theorems consisted of propositions (which were
atomic) and connectives. Rules of inference were not logical theorems them-
selves, but rather methods that could be applied to logical theorems to yield
new ones [79]. This is also where the famous rule of inference Modus Ponens
“If p, then q. Now p. Therefore q” was first formalized [79].
This initial surge in the development of formal logic in classical antiquity was
followed by a long period of relative silence. For many centuries the primary
logic under study was Aristotle’s Term Logic [58]. However, from the lack of
new developments, it seems that the Term Logic proved difficult to develop fur-
ther on, and its ideas hard to reuse to formalize new deductive systems. In my
opinion, this is because of its complicated and overly specific proposition struc-
ture and the unclear distinction between logical theorems and rules of inference.
It was only when researchers moved away from studying the Term Logic and
started investigating the Sentential Logic of the Stoics that formal logic as a
whole saw significant development [79].
This happened in the 19th and 20th centuries with Gottlob Frege (d. 1925)
being the first to formalize propositional logic as a deductive system [79]. He
did this by providing an axiomatization of the Sentential Logic which along
with two specific rules of inference, Modus Ponens and Substitution, could be
shown to capture exactly all valid statements in the logic and nothing more [79].
2
==PAGE:6==
Frege’s unprecedented precision in his reasoning and notation revolutionized
the standards for formalizing logic and started an avalanche of developments in
propositional logic during the 20th century [79]. The propositional logic used
in this period has come to be known as the classical propositional logic. This
thesis will focus on investigating these developments using Isabelle/HOL.
1.1.2
Applications
The study of deductive systems in symbolic logic has led to the creation of
many technologies such as automated theorem provers and interactive theorem
provers, also called proof assistants. Otter [38], E [54], SPASS [67] and Vampire
[51] are examples of automated theorem provers, and Isabelle/HOL, Coq and
HOL are examples of interactive theorem provers [73]. Axiomatic systems of
classical propositional logic are often used as foundations for developing more
advanced logics, such as Modal Logics [24], First-Order Logics [8] and Higher-
Order Logics [66]. Two examples of this are Asta Halkjær From’s Isabelle/HOL
formalizations of Modal Logic [20] and of First-Order Logic [21].
1.2
Isabelle/HOL
Isabelle is a generic framework for interactive theorem proving based on natu-
ral deduction. It’s available for free at https://isabelle.in.tum.de/. The main
three people behind the project are Lawrence C. Paulson, Tobias Nipkow and
Markarius Wenzel [73]. Stefan Berghofer and Gerwin Klein have also made ma-
jor contributions [73]. The Isabelle project is huge and has many collaborators
who have contributed to it since its release.
The framework is instantiated by specifying an object-logic with its rules as
axioms [72]. There are many instances but by far the most popular and widely
used is Isabelle/HOL which is based on higher-order logic [68].
This is the
instance that I use in this thesis. I also use the Isabelle/jEdit [70] user interface
application which serves as an interactive development environment for writing
proofs. For an example of how this looks, see figure 1.
In this thesis I use the Isar proof language1 [69] to write proofs in Isabelle/HOL.
This formal language, the syntax of which imitates the English language, can
be used for writing structured proofs that are then mechanically checked for
correctness by Isabelle’s trusted kernel. For an example of how Isar looks, see
figure 2. These proofs, called formalizations, are written in files called theories
(with the extension .thy) which can be developed in a modular way by struc-
turing hierarchies of theory imports.
Writing formalizations in Isabelle/HOL lets the user utilize its many powerful
features. First off, the user can use specify their datatypes, inductive definitions
1Isar is an acronym of intelligible semi-automated reasoning.
3
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1: A screenshot of Isabelle/jEdit in use. On the left-side a file browser
can be seen. In this case the System L1.thy file is opened and can be viewed
in the main window. Here several aspects of Isabelle/HOL can be seen. First,
an inductive definition Axiomatics is specified with the ⊢symbol. Next, an
abbreviation Truth is defined with the ⊤symbol. A theorem ⊢⊤is shown
by the automated theorem prover metis using the fact Axiomatics.intros.
Then a primitive recursive function semantics is specified with the |= symbol.
Another theorem I |= p if ⊢p is shown by induction and the proof stategy auto.
The current cursor position, marked with a red tile, prompts Isabelle/jEdit to
show the proof goal in the State window seen at the bottom of the screen.
Finally a definition of valid is specified.
4
==PAGE:8==
Figure 2: A proof of the theorem valid p =
⊢p written in Isar. The proof
is commenced by writing the keyword proof which prompts Isabelle/HOL to
find a suitable proof method and generate a number of sub-goals for the user
to show. In this case the user must show the sub-goals valid p =⇒⊢p and
⊢p =⇒valid p.
Starting with the first, the premise valid p is assumed.
Now, with the previously shown fact L1 completeness the sub-goal ⊢p can
be shown directly by unfolding the definition of valid (valid def). For the
other direction ⊢p =⇒valid p, ⊢p is assumed. This time, the previously
shown fact L1 soundness is used to show valid p by unfolding the definition
of valid and applying the allI introduction inference rule. Finally, the proof
is closed by writing the qed keyword.
and recursive functions using Isabelle/HOL’s extensive specification tools. Is-
abelle/HOL also has built-in automated reasoning tools to help with the proving
process. There’s also support for external automated reasoning software. These
external tools can be executed through the built-in tool Sledgehammer which
results in the user easily being able to consult a powerful suite of automated
theorem provers. If a proof is found, its correctness is checked internally in
Isabelle so that even external untrusted reasoners can be raised to Isabelle’s
correctness standards. Isabelle/HOL also has built-in counterexample search
software that will automatically search for a counterexample for the theorem
that the user is trying to prove. This can be an incredible time-saver if the user
is unknowingly trying to show a non-theorem, as is often the case. Executable
theories formalized in Isabelle/HOL can be automatically translated into dif-
ferent functional programming languages, after which machine-executable code
can be generated. Even though the correctness of the translation isn’t guaran-
teed, this method still provides a high degree of trust in the generated code.
Another reason to use Isabelle is the large library of formalized theories that
comes pre-packaged with it. These formally verified mathematics, such as num-
ber theory, algebra and set theory, provide a foundation for the user to start
writing formalized proofs. In addition to this, there’s a vast library of develop-
ments called The Archive of Formal proofs, available at https://www.isa-afp.org.
The Archive of Formal proofs is an open library of Isabelle formalizations that
is being built upon by the community. Much of the groundbreaking research
stemming from applications of Isabelle in pure mathematics, system verification
and programming languages among others can be found here. It is constantly
5
==PAGE:9==
being expanded by the addition of new state-of-the-art formalizations [72].
1.2.1
A brief history of Isabelle
Interactive theorem provers, in general, originated in the research that was be-
ing done on the verification of functional programming in the 1970s [49]. The
Edinburgh LCF tool was initially developed in the early 1970s, and would be-
come the ancestor to proof assistants like the popular HOL systems, Coq, and
also to Isabelle [49]. The design philosophy behind the Edinburgh LCF has been
dubbed the “LCF approach” and has been reused in many theorem provers [49].
The strategy is to implement the inference rules of a logical calculus within a
proof kernel that has the exclusive right to create theorems. This helps ensure a
solid sense of correctness of the proof system since the developers can focus on
verifying the correctness of the kernel, which is often comparatively small, rather
than all parts of the system. The use of the Meta Language (ML) programming
language plays a central role in the Edinburgh LCF and also in Isabelle [49].
ML has a sound polymorphic type system with first-class functions and abstract
types [49]. Using abstract types it’s possible to store proofs of theorems using
very little space: a theorem is defined as an abstract class where its operations
are inference rules. This means that, since instances of theorems are guaranteed
to be created exclusively by applications of inference rules, it is not needed to
store the rule applications themselves: they are correct from the construction of
the theory. The Edinburgh LCF also introduced the idea of tactics [49]. These
are functions that make it possible to do backward goal-directed reasoning. A
tactic takes a proof goal as input and outputs a list of subgoals that are suffi-
cient to show the original goal. The idea of tactics is heavily used in Isabelle [49].
Mike Gordon, one of the creators of the Edinburgh LCF, made the HOL system
in 1986 to use higher-order logic to perform formal verification and specifica-
tion of hardware systems [49]. The project was a huge success and spawned a
family of HOL systems [49]. Isabelle, like HOL, started with the idea of mak-
ing an LCF-style proof assistant [49]. The two main inspirations were the idea
of doing reasoning based on unification so that goals could include variables,
and the idea that tactics should be able to output multiple results to represent
alternative proof attempts [49]. The central idea behind Isabelle is that using
lambda calculus, inference rules can be specified as templates and instantiated
using unification [49]. Unification can be used in either direction of the rule,
making it possible to perform both backward reasoning and forward reasoning
using the same single mechanism.
Since then, Isabelle has seen continuous development and has become used
worldwide [73]. However, these initial design choices still have a crucial influence
on the system. The choice to use ML, a polymorphic functional programming
language, makes the system’s performance scale favorably with multi-core com-
puters, a CPU architecture nobody expected in the 1970s [49]. This property,
6
==PAGE:10==
the small proof kernel and the proof storage strategy, are still the foundations
of Isabelle/HOL’s strong performance today [49].
1.2.2
Applications
The generic nature of Isabelle makes its areas of application vast and many [72].
Here, I briefly cite some of its well-known applications. Tobias Nipkow, Gertrud
Bauer and Paula Schultz verified one part [46], and Steven Obua verified a
second part [47], of the algorithmic parts of Thomas Hales’ proof of the Kepler
Conjecture [26]. In 2007 Jeremy Avigad verified a proof of the Prime Number
Theorem [6].
When it comes to system verification, the Verisoft project is
known for formalizing the hardware and operating system kernel of a computer
system [2], along with a C compiler [36]. In the area of programming languages,
the Java-like language Jinja [35] has been formalized and verified in different
ways, including its byte-code, virtual machine and compiler [35].
1.3
Related Work
In this section, I summarize the most relevant related work. First off are the
two works immediate to this thesis:
l Formalizing Axiomatic Systems for Propositional Logic in Isabelle/HOL
by Asta Halkjær From, Agnes Moesg˚ard Eschen, and Jørgen Villadsen [22]:
This article represents the closest related work to this thesis. In it six
axiomatic systems of classical propositional logic are formalized and shown
sound and complete in Isabelle/HOL: three that use the {→, ⊥}-fragment,
and three that use the {∨, ¬}-fragment. I participated in writing these
formalizations and it was in part what prompted the subject of this thesis.
This thesis distinguishes itself from this work by considering axiomatic
systems of the {→, ¬}-fragment.
l Formalizing Henkin-Style Completeness of an Axiomatic System for Propo-
sitional Logic by Asta Halkjær From [23]: This is the initial completeness
formalization of an axiomatic system of classical propositional logic in
Isabelle/HOL that this thesis and the above work [22], is based upon.
I reconfigure this formalization to show the completeness of the L1 sys-
tem [79], see section 4. I then propagate this result to nine other axiomatic
systems, see section 5.
Then, there are other works that involve using theorem provers to establish
results for axiomatic systems:
l Formalized Proof Systems for Propositional Logic by Julius Michaelis and
Tobias Nipkow [42]: In this work, the two authors formalize an array of
deductive systems of classical propositional logic in Isabelle/HOL, includ-
ing an axiomatic system. The axiomatic system is inspired by a system
made by David Hilbert. However, the authors have added five additional
7
==PAGE:11==
axioms and use a {→, ∧, ∨, ¬, ⊥}-fragment, broader than the one Hilbert
used himself [28]. They then formalize the completeness of this system
utilizing a similar proof strategy to the one used in this thesis. This how-
ever constitutes only a small part of the work as many results for many
other deductive systems are also formalized.
l Finding Missing Proofs with Automated Reasoning by Branden Fitelsen
and Larry Wos [18]: In this work, the authors use the automated theorem
prover Otter2 to construct axiomatic proofs in several historical axiomatic
systems of classical propositional logic. In 2003 they released a book called
Automated Reasoning and the Finding of Missing and Elegant Proofs in
Formal Logic [76] expanding on this work with even more proofs [18].
l Conquering the Meredith Single Axiom by Larry Wos [75]: In this work
Larry Wos uses Otter again, this time in a case study of the 1953 single-
axiom system of classical propositional logic due to Carew Arthur Mered-
ith [40]. Through in-depth configurations Wos makes Otter generate sev-
eral axiomatic proofs, in this single-axiom system, of the three axioms of
the famous axiomatic system of Jan  Lukasiewicz [79]. This article has
been an inspiration for me in my own investigation of the single-axiom
system, which I cover in section 5.10.
Much work has been made regarding the formalization of deductive systems and
their soundness and completeness using theorem provers, take for example the
IsaFOL project [11]. However, the application of theorem provers in the specific
field of axiomatic systems of classical propositional logic is to my knowledge
relatively sparse. With this thesis, I hope to contribute to and motivate the
usage of theorem provers in this area of research.
1.4
Thesis Overview
In section 2 I present the formalized syntax and semantics of the classical propo-
sitional logic that I will use in the rest of the thesis. Then in section 3, I show
how rules of inference and axioms are formalized in this thesis. Following these
preliminary sections I, in section 4, turn to the completeness of the L1 system
and explain how it is shown in Isabelle/HOL. Having established this result, I
use it in section 5 to show the other 9 systems considered in this thesis complete.
Finally, in section 6 I evaluate, discuss and conclude the project.
2For more information about Otter, see https://www.mcs.anl.gov/research/projects/
AR/otter/.
8
==PAGE:12==
2
Formalizing Syntax and Semantics
This section introduces the syntax and semantics of the classical propositional
logic used in this thesis. The defining characteristics of classical propositional
logic are that propositions are atomic and either true or false. It is seen as one
of the standard forms of logic and it has seen widespread applications ever since
its creation [55].
There are two primitive notions in the language of classical propositional logic:
propositions and connectives.
Together they form the building blocks of all
statements that can be expressed in the language. Propositions are declarative
statements that are taken to be atomic. This can be anything from the sun
is round to 2 = 3, and even declarations that cannot be stated in a natural
language. What matters is that they can be said to be either true or false, not
both, and nothing in-between. The truth of a proposition might differ depend-
ing on how it is interpreted, but it always has a value of either true or false.
This is referred to as a proposition’s truth value, and it is also why classical
propositional logic is sometimes referred to as two-valued or bivalent.
In this thesis I exclusively discuss arbitrary propositions. Thus the sun is round
will never appear again but in its stead the letter p might. I use alphabetical
letters like p and q to represent arbitrary statements of classical propositional
logic. p might therefore also represent a composite statement: one that is built
with connectives. A connective is a symbol whose meaning is defined by the
statements it is connected to. The most well-known connectives are:
→logical implication, also referred to as if then. For statements p and q
logical implication is written in infix notation as p →q and is to be
interpreted in natural language as this statement is true unless p is true
and q is false3. I will refer to the left-side statement p as the antecedent,
and the right-side statement q as the consequent of the logical implication.
I use these terms instead of the commonly used premise and conclusion
which I reserve to describe the constituents of rules of inference instead.
The truth table definition used is:
p
q
p →q
true
true
true
true
false
false
false
true
true
false
false
true
3The truth table definition for logical implication is hard to translate into a natural lan-
guage sentence elegantly. This is mainly because p →q is true, no matter the value of q if p
is false. The natural language sentence if p is true then q is true does not capture this. The
translation details between natural language conditionals and logical conditionals have been
discussed for hundreds of years, for more information see [17].
9
==PAGE:13==
∨logical disjunction, also referred to as inclusive or. For statements p and
q logical disjunction is written in infix notation as p ∨q and is to be
interpreted in natural language as at least one of p and q are true. The
truth table definition used is:
p
q
p ∨q
true
true
true
true
false
true
false
true
true
false
false
false
∧logical conjunction, also referred to as and. For statements p and q logical
conjunction is written in infix notation as p ∧q and is to be interpreted in
natural language as both p and q are true. The truth table definition used
is:
p
q
p ∧q
true
true
true
true
false
false
false
true
false
false
false
false
¬ logical negation, also referred to as not. For a statement p logical negation
is written in prefix notation as ¬p and is to be interpreted in natural
language as the truth value that p does not have. The truth table definition
used is:
p
¬p
true
false
false
true
When I want to make clear that a letter p is denoting an atomic proposition in
particular, I will refer to it as a propositional symbol - otherwise I will refer to
p simply as a statement.
There exist many more connectives4, but typically formalizations of classical
propositional logic use only a few to reduce the complexity of the system. The
set of connectives used specifies which fragment of classical propositional logic
is being considered. For a set of connectives to be adequate as a fragment of
classical propositional logic, it must be functionally complete. A functionally
4There exist 4 connectives that take a single proposition as an argument, and there exist
16 which takes two propositions as arguments. Many of these, however, can be defined in
terms of each other [8].
10
==PAGE:14==
complete fragment can create a statement for each truth table that exactly ex-
presses that truth table using only connectives included in the fragment.
In this thesis I consider the fragment {→, ¬} i.e. the fragment consisting of log-
ical implication and logical negation only. This is partly because of the original
purpose of this project, which was to formalize in Isabelle/HOL the complete-
ness of the 8 systems compiled in [30] which are all of the {→, ¬} fragment. But
it is also because the {→, ¬} fragment is the one used by Jan  Lukasiewicz in his
famous axiomatization presented in [79]. This system is used to show the com-
pleteness of other well-known systems5, and so the {→, ¬} fragment appears to
be a widely used fragment with many systems to investigate. For an incomplete
list of deductive systems using different fragments of classical propositional logic
see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Hilbert_systems.
2.1
Syntax
The syntax for propositional statements is specified in Isabelle/HOL as a datatype
with the name form:
datatype form = Pro nat (⟨· ⟩) |
Neg form (⟨∼⟩) |
Imp form form (infix
⟨→⟩0)
Atomic propositions are specified as a natural number with either a preceding
Pro or · symbol. Using natural numbers instead of letters provides us with an
infinite supply of unique propositional symbols. A logical implication can be
written either with a preceding Imp or in infix notation using the →symbol. The
0 in the infix specification signifies the precedence. Note that logical negation
binds tighter than logical implication: ¬p →q is thus read as (¬p) →q. Logical
implication is typically defined to be right-associative, and this is also possible
in Isabelle/HOL using infixr instead of infix. In this thesis, I stick to infix
and instead express the associativity explicitly using parentheses when writing
statements. Logical negation is written with a preceding Neg or ∼symbol6.
Below are three examples of how statements are written in this syntax:
((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r)))
((∼p →p) →p)
(p →(∼p →q))
Note that for all statements there’s an outermost set of parentheses which is
normally not strictly necessary. In this Isabelle/HOL formalization, it is re-
quired to encapsulate the datatype instance, due to how the precedences are
5For example Carew Arthur Meredith’s single axioms system presented in [40].
6Note that in the Isabelle/HOL formalization ∼is used instead of ¬ as the symbol for
logical negation. When writing propositional statements that are not part of an Isabelle/HOL
formalization I will use ¬.
11
==PAGE:15==
specified.
Finally, there are also two syntactical abbreviations used. First off is a statement
abbreviated Truth, since it is always true:
abbreviation Truth (⟨⊤⟩) where
⟨⊤≡(undefined →undefined) ⟩
Truth is written with the symbol ⊤and is equivalent to the logical implication
with the same antecedent and consequent. In Isabelle/HOL each datatype has
one designated value called undefined of which nothing is known [22]. This can
be utilized to define Truth by acting as both antecedent and consequent of the
logical implication. The next abbreviation is Falsity, a statement that is always
false:
abbreviation Falsity (⟨⊥⟩) where
⟨⊥≡∼⊤⟩
Falsity is simply a negated Truth and it is written using the symbol ⊥. It is
used extensively in the completeness proof of section 4.
2.2
Semantics
The semantics of propositional statements is specified in Isabelle/HOL as a
primitive recursive function. The function takes two arguments: an interpreta-
tion and a statement to evaluate under that interpretation:
primrec semantics (infix
⟨|= ⟩0) where
⟨(I |= · n) = I n ⟩|
⟨(I |= ∼p) = (if I |= p then False else True) ⟩|
⟨(I |= (p →q)) = (if I |= p then (I |= q) else True) ⟩
The function is written in infix notation using the symbol |= with the interpre-
tation I on the left side and the statement on the right. How the statement
is evaluated depends on its form. If it is an atomic proposition · n, its unique
identifier n is passed to the interpretation I. The interpretation is technically
a map, which for each unique identifier of atomic propositions maps to a truth
value. The result of evaluating · n is thus whatever I maps n to, either true
or false. A negated statement ∼p is evaluated to the opposite truth value of
whatever p evaluates to under I. The semantics of logical implication mimics
the natural language definition presented earlier: if the antecedent evaluates to
true under I, then the result is whatever truth value the consequent evaluates
to under I - otherwise, the implication evaluates to true by default.
The concept of validity is an important semantic definition in this thesis. It’s a
property that a propositional statement has when it evaluates to true under all
possible interpretations:
definition
⟨valid p ≡∀I. (I |= p) ⟩
12
==PAGE:16==
For the deductive systems investigated in this thesis the main aspiration is to
show their soundness and completeness. For a system to be considered sound,
all provable statements within the system must possess the property of validity
as defined here. For a system to be considered complete, all valid statements
must be provable in the system.
13
==PAGE:17==
3
Formalizing Axioms and Rules of Inference
This section outlines how axiomatic systems of classical propositional logic are
formalized in Isabelle/HOL in this thesis. An axiomatic system consists of two
parts: axioms, and rules of inference. The word “axiom” is commonly said to
mean a statement whose truth is self-evident. In this thesis, I use a more tech-
nical definition of the word: an axiom is a statement that is assumed proven
within the axiomatic system under consideration. A rule of inference can essen-
tially be thought of as a function, which takes propositional statements, called
premises, as input and returns a new proposition called the conclusion as out-
put. The idea is to define the function so that it is sound, in the sense that if
the premises are true, then so is the conclusion of the rule application.
In this section I refer to the axioms and rule of inference of the L1 system by
 Lukasiewicz [79] as an example. It is specified as an inductive definition with
the name Axiomatics and the symbol ⊢:
inductive Axiomatics (⟨⊢⟩) where
⟨⊢q ⟩if
⟨⊢p ⟩and
⟨⊢(p →q) ⟩|
⟨⊢((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩|
⟨⊢((∼p →p) →p) ⟩|
⟨⊢(p →(∼p →q)) ⟩
The rule and axioms are separated by vertical bars |. First off, the inference
rule Modus Ponens is specified, and on the subsequent three lines, the axioms
of the L1 system are declared. I will refer to the L1 system using its name and
the ⊢symbol interchangeably.
3.1
Rules of Inference
Rules of inference are used to derive new theorems in a deductive system. While
the intuition of a rule can be expressed as a theorem, the rules themselves
are not statements but rather methods of derivation. Rules of inference are
often expressed formally using a horizontal bar where the premises are shown
above and the conclusion below. The quintessential inference rule of classical
propositional logic is called Modus Ponens. Its intuition can be summarized by
the statement if p implies q, and p is true, then q must also be true, and it is
formally depicted as:
p →q
p
q
From the truth table definition of logical implication shown in section 2 Modus
Ponens can be seen to be sound: if p →q and p are true at the same time then
the only possibility is for q to also be true. The first formalization of Modus
Ponens was done by Theophrastus who lived in Ancient Greece and was the
successor to Aristotle in the Peripatetic school [12]. In many of the key works
that inspired this thesis, such as [30] and [79], Modus Ponens is named the rule
14
==PAGE:18==
of detachment instead. The intuition behind this alternative naming elucidates
how the rule is often applied in practice: Modus Ponens can be used to elimi-
nate a logical implication that appears left-most in a larger statement. In this
way the antecedent of this implication can be detached, so to speak, from the
larger statement, producing a shorter formula that can now be used for further
derivations. Later, in section 5 when performing derivations, I will make use of
this intuition by referring to applications of Modus Ponens as detachments.
In Isabelle/HOL, Modus Ponens is specified for the L1 system as part of an
inductive definition in the following line:
⟨⊢q ⟩if
⟨⊢p ⟩and
⟨⊢(p →q) ⟩
Note that p and q does not refer to propositional symbols but rather arbitrary
propositional statements. They are referred to as free variables in Isabelle/HOL.
A rule defined in this way is often referred to as a rule scheme and allows for
broader applications, acting on entire statements rather than only propositional
symbols. A rule scheme can be instantiated with specific statements to create a
rule that can conclude the desired statement of a given situation. The preced-
ing ⊢symbol in the premises and conclusion specifies which rendition of Modus
Ponens is being considered: in this case the one tied to the L1 system. In this
thesis Modus Ponens is not defined as a universal rule, but rather there is a new
definition for each deductive system considered. They differ only in the symbol
preceding the propositional statements specified in the rule. This emphasizes
that derivations are never universal: they are always seen in the context of the
deductive system that they are proven in.
Modus Ponens is the only rule of inference used in this thesis. However, there is
also the rule of substitution that I want to discuss briefly since it appears in many
key works of the 20th century that relate to this thesis, including [79] and [30].
In his 1963 textbook Jan  Lukasiewicz formulates the rule as follows:
“The rule of substitution: if an expression a is a thesis of the system, then
we may recognize as a thesis of the system any expression which is a correct
substitution of the expression a.” [79]
Substitution is a key concept in mathematical logic, but it can often be tricky7 to
formulate precisely and intuitively. The concept is often defined using equality,
but it can be done without. For example, in a formalization in Isabelle/HOL of
a simple prover for first-order logic that I participated in working on, substitu-
tion is done using de Bruijn indices8, see https://github.com/logic-tools/
simpro/blob/master/Simple_Prover.thy for the formalization, and [65] for
the accompanying conference paper. In this thesis, the fact that substitution
7At least to me.
8de Bruijn indices are a technique for representing lambda calculus terms without naming
bound variables. It was developed by Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn in 1972, see [16].
15
==PAGE:19==
is an axiom of Isabelle/HOL itself [71] is utilized instead.
This means that
Isabelle/HOL at a meta-logical level will automatically accept correct substitu-
tions as derivations. This works because of the use of free variables throughout
the formalizations in this thesis. Thus, instead of performing substitution explic-
itly using a rule of inference, substitution is done implicitly in the Isabelle/HOL
meta-logic. The expressive power is the same, in the sense that this technique
will not allow for any derivation that could not have been done using the law of
substitution, but it does ease the process of specifying derivations significantly.
3.2
Axioms
In a deductive system with Modus Ponens as the only inference rule, at least
one axiom is needed as a starting point for derivations. In Isabelle/HOL, the
three axioms of the L1 system are specified as part of the inductive definition
in the following lines:
⟨⊢((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩|
⟨⊢(((Neg p) →p) →p) ⟩|
⟨⊢(p →((Neg p) →q)) ⟩
Note that p, q and r do not refer to propositional symbols but rather arbitrary
propositional statements. Axioms defined in this way are referred to as axiom
schemes. Each axiom scheme describes an infinite number of axioms, one for
each possible substitution of propositional statements in place of the free vari-
ables p, q and r. Axiom schemes themselves can be used to deduce statements
by substituting specific statements in place of the free variables. However, to de-
rive statements with different structures than the axioms, Modus Ponens must
be used. All axioms covered in this thesis are schemes. Thus I will refer to
axiom schemes as axioms.
The turnstile symbol ⊢preceding each axiom specifies that the statements are
provable within the L1 system. However, no derivation has been shown to es-
tablish this. This is why axioms are also sometimes referred to as a deductive
system’s assumptions. They’re part of the system’s definition, and no justifica-
tion for their validity exists within the system. An argument for the validity
of the axioms is usually presented alongside the system specification. It’s nec-
essary for the system’s soundness that its axioms are all valid, see section 2.2.
In this thesis I only consider valid axioms.
All axiomatic systems considered in this thesis are of the same {→, ¬}-fragment
and they all have Modus Ponens as the only rule of inference.
They differ
only in their choice of axioms. In this thesis, axioms can thus be seen as a
system’s defining characteristics.
As will come to be seen, in section 5, the
selection of axioms impacts how derivations are performed within the system
in a fundamental way. A statement that is straightforward to derive from one
set of axioms, might be almost impossible to derive from another. Investigating
this fact, and the consequences of it is a large part of what this thesis is about.
16
==PAGE:20==
4
Formalizing the Completeness of the L1
System
This section provides a detailed walk-through of how the completeness of the
L1 system is proven in Isabelle/HOL. The axiomatics of the L1 system can be
viewed in section 3. The completeness formalization used in System L1.thy is
due to Asta Halkjær From who wrote it to show the completeness of another
axiomatic system of classical propositional logic using a different fragment [23].
I reconfigured the formalization to instead show the completeness of the L1
system. This, however, turned out not to be a trivial task and required many
additional derivations to be made. I will discuss these in the final subsection
4.4 of this section.
The idea of completeness of a deductive system is to show that all valid state-
ments are provable within the system. Validity is a semantic property of certain
statements.
A statement is said to be valid, wrt. the semantics under con-
sideration if it evaluates to true in all possible interpretations. Provability is
a syntactic property of certain statements.
A statement is said to be prov-
able wrt. the deductive system under consideration if there exists a sequence
of derivations that conclude with the statement. The property of completeness
thus supports the deductive system, with the semantic weight of ensuring the
validity of all derived statements.
Valid statements are in many cases the most sought after by logicians, as their
truth is universal. Valid statements often grant insight into deductive reason-
ing itself and provide ground to reason further. The hunt for valid statements
is partly the reason why deductive systems were formalized in the first place.
Then, the property of completeness provides a reassurance that no valid state-
ment is impossible to find.
Of course, performing derivations in a complete
system is not a guarantee that valid statements will be derived, but rather that
all of them can be. Also important to deduction is the concept of soundness.
A deductive system is sound if all provable statements in the system are valid.
A sound and complete deductive system is a candidate well fit for deductive
reasoning.
However, soundness is generally a much easier property to show than com-
pleteness.
Isabelle/HOL’s automated theorem provers can show the sound-
ness of the deductive systems under consideration in this thesis in a matter
of seconds, or less.
On the other hand, showing completeness is often toil-
some, and it is generally much harder to design a useful complete deductive
system than it is to design a sound one.
This is why the result of showing
completeness is often regarded higher than the result of showing soundness.
Therefore, in this thesis I will mainly be concerned with discussing the com-
pleteness of systems, leaving soundness as an expected property to the reader:
All systems considered in this thesis are sound.
17
==PAGE:21==
4.1
Formalizing Concepts
The following completeness proof deploys a handful of concepts that need to
be specified in Isabelle/HOL before they can be used. In this section, I explain
these concepts and show how they are formalized in Isabelle/HOL.
This proof works extensively with sets of statements which I will use the sym-
bols S and S′ to denote. Lists of statements are also used. For these I use the
same symbols as for sets but make their type explicit using square brackets. For
individual statements I use the traditional symbols of p, q, r, s, etc. and use p1,
p2, p3, ..., pn etc. for denoting n statements. For a set of statements of size n I
write S = {p1, ..., pn}. The following fundamental definitions are taken from [8].
A statement p is said to be satisfiable if there exists an interpretation I such
that I |= p is true, where |= is the semantics specified in section 2.2. I is in this
case referred to as a model of p. This concept extends to sets of statements. A
set of statements S = {p1, p2, ..., pn} is said to be satisfiable if there exists an
interpretation IS such that IS |= pi for all i = 1, 2, ..., n. In this case IS is said
to be a model of S.
4.1.1
Entailment
Entailment, also referred to as logical consequence, is a key concept in mathe-
matical logic. A set of statements S is said to entail a statement p if every model
of S is a model of p. For the finite set of statements S = {p1, ..., pn} entailment
of q can be related to the validity of a single statement in the following way:
S entails q if and only if ∀I. I |= (p1 ∧... ∧pn) →q
In the interpretations where p1 ∧... ∧pn is true it follows from entailment that
q is also true. In the interpretations where p1 ∧... ∧pn is false the statement
is true by the truth table definition of logical implication. On the other hand,
if (p1 ∧... ∧pn) →q holds in all interpretations, then the truth table definition
of logical implication dictates that q must be true in the interpretations in
which p1 ∧... ∧pn is.
Thus implying that S = {p1, ..., pn} entails q.
The
statements p1, ..., pn are often referred to as assumptions, since when trying
to show (p1 ∧... ∧pn) →q one need only to consider the interpretations in
which they are all true. The intuition behind entailment is that the truth of
the assumptions necessitate the truth of the conclusion q. In the L1 system this
can be captured by proving a chain of implications:
⊢p1 →... →pn →q
Recall that ⊢denotes the provability of the subsequent statement in the L1
system, and that →is right-associative. If ⊢p1, Modus Ponens can be applied
to reduce the statement to a smaller one:
18
==PAGE:22==
⊢p1 →... →pn →q
⊢p1
p2 →... →pn →q
If ⊢p1, ..., ⊢pn, then Modus Ponens can be used as such repeatedly to derive
⊢q.
If ⊢p1, ..., ⊢pn, then from the soundness of the L1 system: ⊢p ⇒
∀I. I |= p it follows that ∀I. I |= p1 ∧... ∧pn, and since ⊢p1, ..., ⊢pn implies
⊢q the provability of p1 →... →pn →q captures the semantic notion of
S = {p1, ..., pn} entailing q. In this completeness proof, the provability of a
chain of implications like this is used to describe entailment. The last consequent
is the conclusion and the preceding ones form the list of assumptions. In the
Isabelle/HOL formalization, the primitive recursive function imply is specified
to build a chain of implications from a list of assumptions and a conclusion:
primrec imply ::
⟨form list ⇒form ⇒form ⟩where
⟨imply [] q = q ⟩|
⟨imply (p # ps) q = (p →imply ps q) ⟩
where # is the list constructor. From a list of assumptions S = [p1, ..., pn] and
conclusion q, S entails q is thus formalized in Isabelle/HOL as ⊢imply S q.
imply performs pattern matching on the list of assumptions to decide which
value to return: if the list is empty the conclusion q is returned, otherwise the
head of the list p is added as an antecedent to the result of the recursive call on
the rest of the list.
4.1.2
Consistency
A deductive system is said to be consistent if no derivations lead to a contra-
diction, i.e. that both p being provable and ¬p being provable simultaneously is
impossible for any statement p. Any sound deductive system is also consistent.
A set of statements S is said to be consistent if it is impossible for S to entail
p and for S to entail ¬p, for any statement p. Consider the third axiom of the
L1 system:
⊢p →¬p →q
If both ⊢p and ⊢¬p then using two applications of Modus Ponens any statement
q can be derived. This includes ⊥itself which is abbreviated ⊥and by definition
is false in all interpretations, see section 2.2. Therefore, consistency can also be
defined in terms of the provability of ⊥: a deductive system is consistent if ⊢⊥
is impossible. For a set of statements, it is consistent if no subset entails ⊥. In
the Isabelle/HOL formalization this is specified as follows:
definition consistent ::
⟨form set ⇒bool ⟩where
⟨consistent S ≡∄S’. set S’ ⊆S ∧⊢(imply S’ ⊥) ⟩
where set is a function that takes a list as input and outputs the corresponding
set.
19
==PAGE:23==
4.1.3
Maximal sets and extensions
A set of statements S is said to be maximal if adding any new statement to
S will cause it to be inconsistent, i.e. not consistent.
In the Isabelle/HOL
formalization this is specified as follows:
definition maximal ::
⟨form set ⇒bool ⟩where
⟨maximal S ≡∀p. p /∈S −→¬ consistent ({p} ∪S) ⟩
Here, −→is Isabelle/HOL’s meta-logic implication: it is not the same impli-
cation as →which is used in the syntax of propositional statements. Having
defined a measure of an upper limit in terms of a set of statements and its mem-
bers, a natural question to ask is how a set of statements might be extended
towards such maximality. In the Isabelle/HOL formalization this is done by
specifying the following primitive recursive function:
primrec extend ::
⟨form set ⇒(nat ⇒form) ⇒nat ⇒form set ⟩
where
⟨extend S f 0 = S ⟩|
⟨extend S f (Suc n) =
(if consistent ({f n} ∪extend S f n)
then {f n} ∪extend S f n
else extend S f n) ⟩
where f is a function that enumerates all statements: given a natural number
n as input, f n will output the statement pn which has been uniquely identified
with n by f.
extend S f n will consider all statements identified by f as
numbers 1, ..., n −1 and will extend S with those that when added constitute a
consistent set. A super version of extend can be defined when considering all
natural numbers:
definition Extend ::
⟨form set ⇒(nat ⇒form) ⇒form set ⟩where
⟨Extend S f ≡Sn. extend S f n ⟩
here S n. denotes the infinite union of the output from evaluating extend S f
with each natural number n. This is defined using a capital E and omitting a
natural number. As it turns out, a set of statements extended in this way is
maximal:
lemma maximal_Extend:
assumes
⟨surj f ⟩
shows
⟨maximal (Extend S f) ⟩
proof (rule ccontr)
assume
⟨¬ maximal (Extend S f) ⟩
...
then show False
using
⟨consistent ({p} ∪Extend S f) ⟩by blast
qed
20
==PAGE:24==
The above proof of maximal Extend is abbreviated here with ...; for the full
proof formalization consult System L1.thy. The lemma assumes that f is sur-
jective, i.e. all statements that exist are part of f’s enumeration. This ensures
that f is well-defined, in the sense that no statement is left without considera-
tion in the proof. To show that Extend S f is maximal, the method of proof
by classical contradiction, ccontr, is applied. If Extend S f were not to be
maximal, then there must be a statement p, not in Extend S f, that can be
added to form a new consistent set. But by the definition of Extend such a
statement would have already been added. Therefore, the addition of p must
cause Extend S f to become inconsistent. This creates a contradiction in the
addition of p both making Extend S f consistent and inconsistent, thus the
assumption of Extend S f not being maximal must be false. Therefore Extend
S f is maximal.
4.1.4
Hintikka sets
The concept of a Hintikka set is attributed to the Finnish philosopher and lo-
gician Jaakko Hintikka [64]. Hintikka sets are sets of statements with certain
properties. A Hintikka set has by design a satisfying interpretation, i.e. model.
This is done by defining the set in terms of the semantics of the language of
statements being used. In the case of the {¬, →}-fragment of classical proposi-
tional logic Hintikka sets can be defined in the following way in Isabelle/HOL:
locale Hintikka =
fixes H ::
⟨form set ⟩
assumes
NoFalsity:
⟨⊥/∈H ⟩and
ProP:
⟨· n ∈H =⇒(∼(· n)) /∈H ⟩and
ImpP:
⟨(p →q) ∈H =⇒(∼p) ∈H ∨q ∈H ⟩and
ImpN:
⟨(∼(p →q)) ∈H =⇒p ∈H ∧(∼q) ∈H ⟩and
NegN:
⟨(∼(∼p)) ∈H =⇒p ∈H ⟩
locale is a keyword in Isabelle/HOL that allows for modular reasoning which
is utilized here [7]. For a Hintikka set H the facts specified subsequent to the
assumes keyword define the properties of H. The first one, NoFalsity, specifies
that ⊥is not in any Hintikka set. Since the idea is that Hintikka sets should be
satisfiable by definition, the unsatisfiable ⊥should never appear. ProP specifies
that if a propositional symbol · n is in H, then its negation is not. Any set that
includes both p and ¬p is unsatisfiable, so for Hintikka sets this should never
happen. ImpP guarantees that logical implications p →q in H are satisfiable
by ensuring the inclusion of ¬p or q. If ¬p is in H then p →q is true by the
truth table definition of logical implication. Othwerwise, if ¬p is not in H, then
p might be and therefore the inclusion of q in H is needed to make p →q true.
For the inclusion of a negated implication ¬(p →q) ImpN ensures its truth by
forcing both p and ¬q to be in H. This is because the only way for p →q to be
false is for both p and ¬q to be true, which in turn makes ¬(p →q) true. Finally
NegN ensures that double negations in H are true by enforcing the inclusion of
21
==PAGE:25==
p.
These properties cover the semantics in such a way that H implicitly speci-
fies a model for itself. Statements in H are broken down into the inclusion of
propositional symbols that ensure their truth. The inclusion, or exclusion, of
a propositional symbol in H thus specifies an interpretation formalized in the
following way:
abbreviation (input)
⟨model H n ≡· n ∈H ⟩
All propositional symbols in H are interpreted as true, and all propositional
symbols not in H are interpreted as false.
By induction and the use of the
Isabelle/HOL simplifier simp along with the automated theorem prover blast,
Isabelle/HOL can show that this interpretation is a model of H:
lemma Hintikka_model:
⟨Hintikka H =⇒
(p ∈H −→(model H |= p)) ∧((∼p) ∈H −→¬ (model H |= p)) ⟩
by (induct p) (simp; unfold Hintikka_def, blast)+
The lemma states that for any statement p, if it is in H, then model H is model
of it. And, if its complement ¬p is in H, then model H is not a model of it. In
this way, H has a model by definition. This is a key result that will be used in
the proof of completeness.
4.2
Establishing Lemmas
In this section, I present the remaining important lemmas required to show the
completeness of the L1 system.
4.2.1
Consistent sets extended are consistent
In the previous section it was shown that for a set of statements S the extension
Extend S f is maximal. It is also the case that if S is consistent, then Extend S f
is too. To see this, first consider the function extend from which Extend is
defined. extend will only extend S with statements whose addition results in a
consistent set. The resulting set will therefore always be consistent if S were so
in the first place:
lemma consistent_extend:
⟨consistent S =⇒consistent (extend S f n) ⟩
by (induct n) simp_all
This is shown automatically by the Isabelle/HOL simplifier by performing in-
duction over n. To show consistent (Extend S f) proof by contradiction is
again used:
22
==PAGE:26==
lemma consistent_Extend:
assumes
⟨consistent S ⟩
shows
⟨consistent (Extend S f) ⟩
unfolding Extend_def
proof (rule ccontr)
assume
⟨¬ consistent (Sn. extend S f n) ⟩
...
moreover have
⟨consistent (extend S f m) ⟩
using assms consistent_extend by blast
ultimately show False
unfolding consistent_def using ... by blast
qed
The above proof is here abbreviated with ... and the unfolding keyword is
used to utilize Extend’s definition. First, Extend S f is assumed to be inconsis-
tent. Under this assumption, since S is consistent, extend must at some point
have extended S with a statement which made it inconsistent. Identify such
statement as f m. So, extend S f m is inconsistent. But from the previously
shown lemma consistent extend it can be inferred that since S is consistent
extend S f m is too. This causes a contradiction and so the assumptions of
Extend S f being inconsistent must have been false, showing that Extend S f
is consistent.
4.2.2
Maximal consistent sets are Hintikka sets
A maximal consistent set S is a Hintikka set. To show this, each of the five
defining properties of Hintikka sets must be proven to hold for S:
lemma Hintikka_Extend:
assumes
⟨maximal S ⟩
⟨consistent S ⟩
shows
⟨Hintikka S ⟩
proof
show
⟨⊥/∈S ⟩
...
First off, ⊥is not allowed to be in S. From the definition of consistency, no
subset of S entails ⊥. By the lemma imply mem, covered in section 4.4, any
assumption entails itself. This means that ⊥cannot be in S, because if it were,
S would entail ⊥which is in contradiction to its consistency.
next fix n assume
⟨· n ∈S ⟩show
⟨(∼(· n)) /∈S ⟩
...
Next, it is shown that for an arbitrary propositional symbol · n in S its com-
plement ¬(· n) is not in S. If it were, then by the third axiom of the L1 system
⊥could be derived. This contradicts the fact that S is consistent and therefore
¬(· n) is not in S.
23
==PAGE:27==
next fix p q assume
⟨(p →q) ∈S ⟩show
⟨∼p ∈S ∨q ∈S ⟩
...
For arbitrary statements p and q, if p →q is in S, then ¬p is in S or q is in
S, or both. Assume for the sake of contradiction that neither is. Then, since
S is maximal, the addition of either to S would result in S entailing ⊥. Now
consider the case where both are added to S. It can be shown that if {¬p, q}∪S
entails ⊥, then {p →q} ∪S does too. But since p →q is in fact in S this
contradicts S being consistent. Therefore, at least one of ¬p or q must be in S.
Next, it is shown that if a negated implication is in S, then both the antecedent
and the negated consequent are also in S:
next fix p q assume
⟨(∼(p →q)) ∈S ⟩show
⟨p ∈S ∧(∼q) ∈S ⟩
...
Assume for the sake of contradiction that either p or ¬q is not in S. If p is not
in S, then since S is maximal the addition of p to S would have some subset
{p} ∪S′ of S entailing ⊥. Due to various lemmas shown in the formalization it
turns out that {p} ∪S′ entailing ⊥implies that {¬(p →q)} ∪S′ entailing ⊥as
well. But this is in contradiction to S being consistent, and so the assumption
of p not being in S must have been false. Therefore p is in S. A symmetric
argument holds for ¬q being in S.
next fix p assume
⟨(∼(∼p)) ∈S ⟩show
⟨p ∈S ⟩
...
qed
To show that the final property of Hintikka sets holds for S, i.e. that if ¬¬p is in
S then p is too, contradiction is again used as the proof method. Assume that
p is not in S. Then, due to the maximality of S, there must be some subset
S′ of S such that {p} ∪S′ entails ⊥. However, from the lemma imply DNeg
(see section 4.4.3) and Modus Ponens it can be shown that since ¬¬p is in S
then some subset of S entails p. Thus the addition of p entails ⊥, but since
p was already derivable beforehand ⊥should also have been - but this is in
contradiction with S being consistent. Therefore p is in S. This concludes the
proof which in Isabelle/HOL is signified with qed.
For the full proof without ... abbreviations inspect the System L1.thy for-
malization. The takeaway from this result is that any set of statements S that
is both maximal and consistent has a satisfying interpretation, namely model S.
4.3
Completeness of the L1 System
The proof method used to show the completeness of the L1 system is called the
Henkin-style proof method, which was developed by Leon Henkin in 1947 [27].
First, a slightly different version of completeness is shown, one that works with
formulas built with imply:
24
==PAGE:28==
lemma imply_completeness:
assumes valid:
⟨∀I. list_all (λq. (I |= q)) ps −→(I |= p) ⟩
shows
⟨⊢(imply ps p) ⟩
The assumption valid states that, if all assumptions listed in ps are satisfied by
an interpretation, then p is satisfied by that interpretation too. The intuition
is that p is valid under the assumptions ps.
The goal is then to show that
imply ps p is derivable in the L1 system. The proof continues by way of proof
by contradiction: assume for the sake of contradiction that imply ps p is not
derivable:
proof (rule ccontr)
assume
⟨¬ ⊢(imply ps p) ⟩
Then, using the lemma Boole, which has been established previously in the
formalization, see section 4.4.3, it can be concluded that it is not possible to
derive ⊥assuming ¬p either:
then have *:
⟨¬ ⊢(imply ((∼p) # ps) ⊥) ⟩
using Boole by blast
The intuition is that if p cannot be derived, then assuming the opposite ¬p at
least cannot lead to any contradiction, and therefore neither to the derivation
of ⊥. This directly implies that the set {¬p} ∪ps is consistent. Therefore it
can be extended, via Extend, to a maximal and consistent set S. Since S is
maximal and consistent, it is a Hintikka set. Therefore it has the satisfying
interpretation: model S. Since ({¬p} ∪ps) ⊆S we have that:
...
then have
⟨model S |= (∼p) ⟩
⟨list_all (λp. (model S |= p)) ps ⟩
unfolding list_all_def by fastforce+
meaning that model S satisfies ¬p and all assumptions ps.
Now, from the
original assumption valid, it can be seen that since model S satisfies all of ps
it also satisfies p:
then have
⟨model S |= p ⟩
using valid by blast
This forms a contradiction where both of model S |= ¬p and model S |= p
cannot be true. Therefore the assumption that p is not derivable under the
assumptions ps is false. Therefore p is derivable in the L1 system under the
assumptions ps qed. The sense of completeness we want to show is simply a
special case of this completeness where there are no assumptions:
theorem L1_completeness:
⟨∀I. (I |= p) =⇒⊢p ⟩
using imply_completeness[where ps=⟨[] ⟩] by simp
25
==PAGE:29==
and thus both soundness and completeness of the L1 system have been shown.
The main property most desired of deductive systems can now be established
for the L1 system: that the property of a statement being valid is the same as
it being derivable in the L1 system:
theorem main:
⟨valid p = ⊢p ⟩
unfolding valid_def using L1_soundness L1_completeness by blast
4.4
Preliminary Derivations
The completeness formalization described in the previous sections works almost
entirely with propositional statements built using imply. Lemmas that show
how to reason with derivations of imply-statements are needed in the rest of
the proof. Some footwork has to be done to establish these lemmas to hold for
the L1 system as many cannot be derived directly from its three axioms. In this
section, I go over the most important preliminary derivations and the lemmas
they are used to show.
The facts used to show the following lemmas are abbreviated with ... unless
they are derivations of the L1 system. This includes Modus Ponens but not the
three axioms of the L1 system, as they are seen as the first three derivations
of the system. Descriptive names are used to note the axioms: Tran denotes
the first axiom which derives transitivity, Clav denotes the second axiom which
derives Clavius’s Law, Expl denotes the third axiom which derives the principle
of explosion. The rest of the derivations are each named thes followed by a
number. The number represents the order in which the derivation was done in
the creator of the L1 system’s textbook on the matter Elements of Mathematical
Logic.9 [79].
I have partitioned the derivations into three sections that relate to the lemmas
they are used to show. In each section, I discuss the most important derivations
and finish by summarizing their prerequisite derivations.
To understand all
details of the summaries the System L1.thy formalization has to be consulted.
4.4.1
Assumptions and conclusions in imply
The first lemma that has to be shown, states that if a statement p is both
the first assumption and the conclusion, then the corresponding imply can be
derived no matter what the rest of the assumptions are:
lemma imply_head:
⟨⊢(imply (p # ps) p) ⟩
by (induct ps) (simp add: thes16, metis ... thes18 ...)
where thes16 is ⊢p →p and thes18 is ⊢q →p →q. The proof is done by
induction on the list of assumptions ps: in the base case ps = [] and so it must
9The textbook was translated from Polish to English in 1963
26
==PAGE:30==
be shown that p →p, which is done by the simplifier using thes16 alone. metis
handles the induction step using thes18 among other facts.
p →p is often referred to as the law of identity and it is one of the simplest
tautologies. It can be used to show p from the assumption of p. This is some-
times seen as a triviality, but in complex statements, such as the one shown in
imply head, its usefulness can be seen. q →p →q is the law of simplification.
From the truth of q the conclusion q can be drawn without needing to evaluate
p at all. It can thus be used, in a sense, to simplify the evaluation of a state-
ment, hence the name. It can also be used in another way: to show that the
prepending of an assumption in an already proven imply does not change its
provability:
lemma imply_Cons:
⟨⊢(imply ps q) =⇒⊢(imply (p # ps) q) ⟩
using ... thes18 ... by metis
By combining imply head and imply Cons the lemma imply mem, which is used
in section 4.2.2, can be established. It states that any imply can be derived if
its conclusion is among its assumptions:
lemma imply_mem:
⟨p ∈set ps =⇒⊢(imply ps p) ⟩
using imply_head imply_Cons by (induct ps) auto
The derivation of thes16 requires the derivation of thes09 ⊢((¬p →q) →
r) →p →r which can be derived from the axioms alone. The derivation of
thes18 requires the derivation of thes17 ⊢p →(q →p) →p and thes05
⊢(p →q →r) →(s →q) →(p →s →r). thes17 is one of the results of the
chain of derivations thes10 to thes15, and thes05 is derived from thes04 which
is derived directly from the axioms. For further details see the System L1.thy
formalization.
4.4.2
Implications of imply
The next lemma is complicated to state, although its intuition is relatively
simple. Consider a chain of imply’s that share the same assumptions: if the
first imply concludes the statement p, and the next concludes the statement
p →q, then a third imply which concludes q, can be concluded:
lemma imply_MP:
⟨⊢(imply ps p →
(imply ps (p →q) →imply ps q)) ⟩
... by (induct ps) (metis thes20, metis ... thes35 thes21)
This is shown using structural induction on the list of assumptions ps. In the
base case, where ps = [], the goal reduces to showing that ⊢p →(p →q) →q.
This is exactly thes20 and it can be viewed as the statement which expresses
the intuition of Modus Ponens.
To show the induction step the derivations
thes21 and thes35 are used.
thes21 is ⊢(p →q →r) →(q →p →r)
27
==PAGE:31==
and is referred to as the law of commutation. This statement states that the
two antecedents, p and q, may be rearranged without affecting the truth of the
consequent r. thes35 is ⊢((p →q →r) →(p →q) →(p →r)) and is an
axiom of one of the systems defined by Gottlob Frege in his monumental work
Begriffsschrift [19]. It differs slightly from the classical law of the hypothetical
syllogism due to Aristotle, in that p is added as an antecedent in the first an-
tecedent: (p →q →r). Combined with transitivity and Modus Ponens, these
three derivations are enough for metis to show imply MP.
While it might seem intuitive that these derivations, in particular, are needed to
show imply MP, it is not straightforward to see that they alone are sufficient10.
Furthermore, actually performing the intermediate derivations to establish a
complicated abstract statement like this, using just pen and paper, is a far from
trivial task11.
Therefore Isabelle/HOL’s suite of automated reasoners along
with its structured proof language ISAR help immensely and is the principal
basis for the results established in this thesis.
thes20 can be derived from thes15 ⊢(¬p →q) →(q →p) →p and thes19
⊢((p →q) →r) →q →r. thes21 is derived from thes20 ⊢p →(p →q) →q
and thes05 ⊢(p →q →r) →(s →q) →(p →s →r). thes35 is the result of a
long chain of derivations of thes21 to thes34. Of note among these is thes22:
⊢(q →r) →(p →q) →(p →r) which is a classic formulation of the law of the
hypothetical syllogism. For further detail see the System L1.thy formalization.
4.4.3
Negations in imply
The final lemmas I will highlight from the L1 System.thy formalization have
to do with negated statements that appear in imply statements. First off is
imply DNeg which states that if an imply concludes a double negated statement,
the same imply, but with the double negation removed, may be inferred:
lemma imply_DNeg:
⟨⊢(imply ps (∼(∼p)) →imply ps p) ⟩
using thes39 ... by simp
Perhaps not surprisingly the derivation used to show this lemma is thes39 which
states that ⊢(¬¬p) →p. Along with thes39 ⊢p →(¬¬p) these form the well
known laws of double negation.
On the basis of these laws the four laws of
transposition can be derived. The most well known of these is ⊢(p →q) →
(¬q →¬p) which is derived as thes46. It states that from any implication
its contrapositive form can be inferred.
This law, when stated in the other
direction: ⊢(¬q →¬p) →(p →q) is the intuition behind the proof method
proof by contrapositive: To show that p implies q it might sometimes be easier
to instead show that the falsity of q implies the falsity of p. A third law of
transposition: ⊢(¬p →q) →(¬q →p) expresses the intuition behind proof by
10At least to me.
11At least to me.
28
==PAGE:32==
contradiction when q is substituted with ⊥: Assume that the statement p to
be shown is false, then establish ¬p →⊥. Now the law states that ¬⊥→p
may be inferred. Since ¬⊥≡⊤is Truth, which is by definition always true,
¬⊥→p can be used to derive p.
The fourth law of transposition thes47:
⊢(p →¬q) →(q →¬p) can be used to derive the following lemma:
lemma ∼:
⟨⊢((p →⊥) →∼p) ⟩
using ... thes21 thes16 thes47 by metis
This lemma, named ∼(not to be confused with the negation operator ∼),
connects the object of ⊥with the definition of logical negation. Defining ⊥as a
logical object that is part of the fragment, is a practice that grew in popularity
with Alonzo Church’s textbook Introduction to Mathematical Logic [33], where
he defines a propositional calculus using such a fragment [14]. The deductive
systems studied in this thesis precede this work by one or more decades and do
not make use of ⊥as a logical object, but express it in terms of statements that
are unsatisfiable. This completeness formalization does however make extensive
use of ⊥and so the definition of negation in terms of ⊥: p →⊥needs to be
connected with the primitive notion of negation ¬p that is used in the L1 system.
This fact, when combined with imply DNeg, is ground for meson to show the
important lemma Boole:
lemma Boole:
⟨⊢(imply ((∼p) # ps) ⊥) =⇒⊢(imply ps p) ⟩
by (meson ∼imply_DNeg ...)
Boole expresses a proof by contradiction style reasoning: if ¬p, when present
as an assumption, entails ⊥, then the same assumptions entail p. The intuition
is that p must be either true or false: if the assumption of p being false leads to
⊥, then the assumption must be wrong and so p must be true.
The final derivations thes66: ⊢(¬(p →q)) →p and thes67: ⊢(¬(p →
q)) →¬q are used in the proof of Hintikka Extend to show the case involving
negated implications. They are derived from thes48 ⊢(¬p →q) →(¬q →p)
along with thes36 ⊢¬p →p →q, and thes46 ⊢(p →q) →(¬p →¬q)
along with thes18 ⊢q →p →q, respectively.
thes39 is the result of the
the chain of derivations thes21 ⊢(p →q →→r) →(q →p →r), thes36
⊢¬p →p →q, thes37 ⊢((p →q) →r) →¬p →r. This chain continues
with thes41 to thes45 concluding with the three laws of transposition used
in the formalization: thes46, thes47 and thes48. For further details see the
System L1.thy formalization.
29
==PAGE:33==
5
Formalizing 10 Axiomatic Systems
In this chapter, I will discuss the 10 axiomatic systems formalized in Isabelle/HOL
in this thesis. An overview of these 10 systems can be seen in the appendix. For
each system, I will show its equivalence with another axiomatic system consid-
ered in this thesis. Showing equivalence between two systems amounts to deriv-
ing from each, the axioms of the other. For 9 of the 10 systems, this has been
done before by researchers Yasuyuki Imai, Kiyoshi Is´eki, Yoshinari Arai, Shˆotarˆo
Tanaka and Kashiko Tanaka in a series of publications in the Proceedings of the
Japan Academy throughout 1965. The series is called On Axiom Systems of
Propositional Calculi, and through each entry these researchers investigate var-
ious properties of different axiomatic systems that use different fragments of
propositional logic. In the first entry, On Axiom Systems of Propositional Cal-
culi. I [30] they outline the goal of showing the equivalence of the 9 systems: L1,
F, R, H, L2, L3, LT, S1 and S2. The majority of entries 1 to 13 revolve around
fulfilling this goal. My Isabelle/HOL formalizations of these 9 systems started
with derivations that are demonstrated throughout these publications. Later I
have optimized some of the proofs by cutting out unnecessary derivations found
using Isabelle/HOL’s Sledgehammer tool. For the final system, M, I have shown
its equivalence with the L1 system by heavy usage of Isabelle/HOL’s automated
reasoning tools.
Through the completeness of the L1 system shown in section 4, I have shown
the completeness of each of the other 9 systems through these equivalences.
This is an example of how Isabelle/HOL can be used in a modular way. At
the beginning of each of the 9 system’s formalization, an import of another
system’s facts and definitions is performed. As an example, for the H system
the L1 system is imported:
theory System_H imports System_L1 begin
This lets the System H formalization make use of the syntax and semantics
for propositional statements defined in System L1. It also lets System H reuse
definitions and abbreviations from System L1, such as the ones for valid, ⊥
and ⊤. Finally, it brings the theorems established in System L1 into scope, in
particular the fact L1 completeness. The task is now to derive the three axioms
of the L1 system from the axioms of H. If this can be done, then it can be shown
that a proof of a statement in L1 necessitates the existence of a proof of the same
statement in H. This, along with the completeness of the L1 system, is sufficient
to establish the completeness of the H system. Thus, the elaborate completeness
formalization shown in section 4 only needs to be done once. From this point on,
the completeness of an axiomatic system is shown through the completeness of
another system by deriving the other system’s axioms. 5 systems in this thesis
are shown complete through L1, the completeness of the remaining 4 systems is
shown at the next layer of dependency, see figure 3.
30
==PAGE:34==
L1
H
L3
F
LT
M
R
S1
L2
S2 pre
S2
Figure 3: Tree illustrating how completeness is propagated from L1 to the other
systems. At the root is L1 whose completeness is shown independently from
other systems, section 4. In the next layer L1’s six children are seen. Their
completeness is shown through L1’s completeness by deriving L1’s three axioms.
Finally, in the third layer, systems F, LT, L2 and S2 are seen. The completeness
of F and LT is shown through the completeness of L3, the completeness of L2
is shown through the completeness of S1, and the completeness of S2 is shown
through the completeness of S2 pre, which is a system formalized to be used in
the completeness proof of S2. Because of this, S2 pre will not be covered any
further than to this end.
In the following sections, I will for each system, explain how the axioms of
the imported system are derived. I will also discuss the choice of axioms and
give background information on the systems and their creators. I will use a
mapping notation for expressing interpretations and substitutions of variables
in statements. For an interpretation I that evaluates p to true and q to false I
write I = [p 7→True, q 7→False]. For a substitution of p with r and of q with
s in a statement, I write [p 7→r, q 7→s].
5.1
The L1 System
The L1 System is shown complete independently from other systems and thus
only imports the Main formalization, which is the standard import for using the
classical higher-order logic of Isabelle/HOL [45]:
theory System_L1 imports Main begin
...
inductive Axiomatics (⟨⊢⟩) where
⟨⊢q ⟩if
⟨⊢p ⟩and
⟨⊢(p →q) ⟩|
⟨⊢((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩|
⟨⊢((∼p →p) →p) ⟩|
⟨⊢(p →(∼p →q)) ⟩
Axiomatics is the inductive definition of the L1 system in my Isabelle/HOL
formalization. It is abbreviated with a ⊢symbol: ⊢p is to be read as the state-
ment p is provable in the L1 system. The first line in the definition specifies
Modus Ponens, and the next three specify the axioms of L1. The name used
31
==PAGE:35==
in this thesis, L1, is not given by the creator of the system, Jan  Lukasiewicz,
but by Yasuyuki Imai and Kiyoshi Is´eki when outlining 8 axiomatic systems
of classical propositional logic [30]. This is also the case for the other systems
covered in this thesis, except LT, M and S2 pre which I have named myself. The
L in L1 refers to Jan  Lukasiewicz himself, and the 1 in L1 refers to the fact that
 Lukasiewicz created multiple systems alone: three of them will be considered in
this thesis: L1, L2 and L3. The other systems mentioned are similarly named
from the initials of their creators.
L1 was the first of these three to be published.
 Lukasiewicz introduced the
system in lectures on the foundations of philosophy at Warsaw University in
1929 [79]. Later, in 1963 the second edition of the notes for these lectures was
translated from Polish to English by Olgierd Wojtasiewicz, which is the version
I am citing in this thesis. Jan  Lukasiewicz (1878–1956) was a Polish logician
and philosopher who was a founder of the Warsaw School of Logic and one
of the main architects and teachers of the school [57]. As a researcher, he is
most known for his work on many-valued logic, his work on propositional logic,
and his discoveries on the history of logic [57]. Being the, by and large, person
who introduced symbolic logic in Poland12, the extent of his legacy can easily
be seen in the wealth of outstanding Polish logicians, such as Alfred Tarski,
Adolf Lindenbaum, Jerzy S lupecki, Boles law Soboci´nski, Mordechaj Wajsberg,
Moj˙zesz Presburger among many others [57]. It has been said about Poland that
“there is probably no country which has contributed, relative to the size of its
population, so much to mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics”
[74].
A majority of these contributions were made in about one generation,
from 1920 to 1939 which is called the golden period of Polish Logic13.
This
coincides with the period that  Lukasiewicz returned to Warsaw University to
teach mathematical logic. From this, his widespread influence can be inferred.
5.1.1
Axioms
Jan  Lukasiewicz stated propositional statements in his own notation, which has
become known as Polish notation. He wrote logical connectives in prefix instead
of the typical infix: for logical implication, he would thus write →pq instead
of p →q. He used capital letters to denote the connectives instead of the usual
symbols: C for logical implication and N for logical negation. Parentheses are
never needed to handle ambiguity since statements in this notation can only be
read in one way. Polish notation saw widespread usage in the symbolic logic
community, where it was the standard style used. A majority of the systems and
theorems mentioned in this thesis were originally written in Polish Notation.
Polish Notation was also influential outside of symbolic logic: because of its
unambiguousness and structure, Alan Turing noted, when meeting  Lukasiewicz
12His teacher in mathematical logic, Kazimierz Twardowski, did not consider himself a
logician [74].
13For more information about Polish contributions to mathematical logic in this period see
Polish Logic by Jan Wol´enski: [74].
32
==PAGE:36==
in 1949, that Polish notation was much better for computers because formulas
with function-symbols in front could be better elaborated by mechanical devices
[74]. The axioms of the L1 system are stated in Polish notation in the following
way:
⊢CCpqCCqrCpr
⊢CCNppp
⊢CpCNpq
The first axiom CCpqCCqrCpr, written in infix notation as (p →q) →(q →
r) →(p →r), is referred to by  Lukasiewicz as a form of the law of the hy-
pothetical syllogism [79]. From the derivation of the two premises p →q and
q →r, Modus Ponens can be used to derive p →q. This form of argument
was used in Ancient Greece, in particular by Aristotle, who coined the term
syllogism [79]. To people familiar with mathematics, the concept of transitivity
might bring intuition to the meaning behind this axiom: if →is viewed as a
binary relation then the axiom describes the property of →being transitive.
Because of this I will also refer to (p →q) →(q →r) →(p →r) as the law
of transitivity. Aristotle stated this argument with its antecedents swapped:
(q →r) →(p →q) →(p →r) and since this form is also used frequently I will
make a distinction between the two forms by referring to the first as the law
of transitivity, and the latter as the law of the hypothetical syllogism. Though
both forms share the same underlying intuition they differ syntactically and so
their derivations are not the same.
The second axiom CCNppp, written in infix notation as (¬p →p) →p, is
typically referred to as Clavius’ Law. Christopher Clavius was a mathematician
that lived in the 16th century [79]. He commented on Euclid’s use of this type
of reasoning and pointed out its peculiar structure [79]. Indeed, the axiom does
look strange: from the implication ¬p →p it can be used to derive p. Intuition
aside, its truth can be seen from the truth table definition of logical implication:
if p were not to be true, then ¬p →p would be false, therefore p is true if ¬p →p
is true. I have thought of ways to describe the intuition behind this axiom, but
I am unable to do so in an elegant way, and without using other connectives.
The third axiom CpCNpq, written in infix notation as p →¬p →q, is a form
of the principle of explosion. This principle states that from contradiction, any-
thing follows. In this case, the contradiction is p and ¬p both being provable. If
they are, then Modus Ponens can be used with this axiom to derive an arbitrary
statement q. One way to look at the intuition behind this is to consider the fact
that, for any interpretation I, either I |= p →q or I |= ¬p →q. This is the
case, since if I = [p 7→True, q 7→True] or I = [p 7→False, q 7→False] then
I |= p →q, and if I = [p 7→False, q 7→True] or I = [p 7→True, q 7→False]
then I |= ¬p →q. Thus if both p and ¬p are valid, then in all interpretations
either p →q or ¬p →q can be used to deduce q. Of course, p and ¬p cannot
33
==PAGE:37==
1. l “A system with fewer primitive concepts is better.”
2. l “A system with fewer axioms is better.”
3. l “If we define the length of an axiom system as the number of symbols
occuring in all of its axioms, the shortest axiom system is the best.”
4. l “A system with fewer of different symbols is better.”
5. l “If we define an organic theorem as one which has no other theorem inside
it, organic axioms are better than non-organic ones.”
Figure 4: Direct quotes of structural properties of axiomatic systems used as
heuristics at the Warsaw School of Logic for designing sets of axioms to form a
deductive system when combined with Modus Ponens [74]. In (5. l) “no other
theorem inside it” refers to there being no valid statement that is a sub-string
of the statement.
both be valid, and ⊢p cannot be the case if ⊢¬p, and vice versa, from the
soundness of the L1 system. The axiom expresses this mutual exclusion of the
two truth values of classical propositional logic and threatens to ruin, by deriv-
ing ⊥, any deductive system that does not uphold this.
Now, after inspecting the three axioms of the L1 system, a natural question
might be: why did  Lukasiewicz choose exactly these statements as axioms? To
gain insight into this, his design goals for axiomatic systems can be investigated.
Any axiomatic system should be sound and complete by design, however, at the
Warsaw School of Logic, where  Lukasiewicz taught, there were additional prop-
erties striven for. In particular the independence between axioms and between
connectives was considered a property of utmost importance [74]. An axiom is
independent if it cannot be derived in a system consisting of the other axioms.
The axioms of the L1 system, as well as the connectives in the {→, ¬}-fragment,
are indeed independent as shown by  Lukasiewicz himself in [79]. In addition to
this, a handful of heuristics were set as design goals [74], see figure 4.
Considering these heuristics, the L1 system can be seen as particularly well-
designed. While (1. l) is the same for all 10 systems considered in this thesis,
since they all make use of the same fragment, when it comes to (2. l) compared
to the other systems, L1 has the fewest axioms. The length of L1 in terms of (3.
l) is 23, putting L1 ahead of all other 9 systems except M which has a length
of 21. However, for (4. l) L1 only makes use of three distinct propositional
symbols p, q and r while M deploys s and t as well, resulting in 5 different
symbols used. Finally, regarding (5. l), all of L1’s axioms are organic. L1’s
relatively low number of axioms, combined with the overall shortness of the
system, and its low number of distinct symbols results in an elegant simplicity.
This makes the system an ideal candidate as a target for axiom derivation.
34
==PAGE:38==
This is likely why so many axiomatic systems have been shown complete by
derivation of the axioms of the L1 system.
5.1.2
Completeness
The completeness of the L1 system has already been shown in section 4.  Lukasiewicz
himself also showed completeness of L1 in [79]. The proof method was unique
at the time and consists of showing that each statement is either a logical conse-
quence of the axioms or will lead to a contradiction being derivable when added
as an axiom. This is much akin to the notions of entailment and consistency
used in the L1 System proof formalization. To preface his proofs of indepen-
dence and completeness he states that “The proofs to be presented below might
be formalized within some axiomatic system, but that would be extremely diffi-
cult.” [79]. Here the span of technological advances of the past century can be
felt: Isabelle/HOL is exactly such an axiomatic system in which a proof of L1’s
completeness has just been formalized.
5.2
The H System
theory System_H imports System_L1 begin
inductive H (⟨H ⟩) where
H_MP:
⟨H q ⟩if
⟨H p ⟩and
⟨H (p →q) ⟩|
H_1:
⟨H (p →(q →p)) ⟩|
H_2:
⟨H ((p →(q →r)) →(q →(p →r))) ⟩|
H_3:
⟨H ((q →r) →((p →q) →(p →r))) ⟩|
H_4:
⟨H (p →(∼p →q)) ⟩|
H_5:
⟨H ((p →q) →((∼p →q) →q)) ⟩
The above Isabelle/HOL code snippet defines the H system: H MP specifies
Modus Ponens, and H 1 to H 5 specify five of the six axioms of the system given
by David Hilbert in 1922 in his book Die Logischen Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik [28]. The sixth axiom (p →p →q) →p →q is omitted as it is not
independent of the other 5 axioms and thus not necessary for the system to be
complete [79]. David Hilbert (1862-1943) was an extremely influential German
mathematician. In the early 1920’s he put forward a proposal for a logical foun-
dation to be established for mathematics - this is now referred to as Hilbert’s
Program [77]. His work in symbolic logic, including the development of H, was
mainly done to serve this end.
5.2.1
Axioms
The first two axioms p →q →p, called the law of simplification, and (p →
q →r) →(q →p →r), called the law of commutation, have previously been
discussed in sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 respectively. H 3 (q →r) →(p →q) →
(p →r) is the form of Aristotle’s law of the hypothetical syllogism previously
mentioned in 5.1.1 [79]. The next axiom H 4 p →¬p →q is the same principle
of explosion as the one shown in the second axiom of L1.
The final axiom
35
==PAGE:39==
(p →q) →(¬p →q) →q shows that a statement which is implied by two
contradictory statements is true. It makes sense that if these two antecedents
are valid, then in every interpretation, depending on the truth-value of p in that
interpretation, either p →q or ¬p →q can be used with Modus Ponens to
derive q.
5.2.2
Completeness
To prove the completeness of H, the remaining two axioms of L1 are derived.
Yasuyuki Imai and Kiyoshi Is´eki showed how to do this in 1965 in [30]. Their
proof consists of only four derivations, the first one being the form of transitivity
specified in the first axiom of L1. In the Isabelle/HOL formalization of System H
the derivation is done in the following way:
lemma H_6:
⟨H ((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩
using H_2 H_3 H_MP by metis
The statement is signified provable in the H system with the preceeding H. The
derivation is done by the automated theorem prover metis which when sup-
plied with the axioms H 2 and H 3 can use Modus Ponens (H MP) to deduce it.
Following the trend of naming the axioms of a system as the first sequence of
derivations, this new established theorem is labeled H 6. How did metis do this?
By performing the substitution [p 7→(q →r), q 7→(p →q), r 7→(p →r)] in
axiom H 2 ((q →r) →(p →q) →(p →r)) →((p →q) →(q →r) →(p →r))
is derived. Here H 3 can be identified as the antecedent, and H 6 as the conse-
quent. Thus H 3 can be used with H 2 and Modus Ponens to derive H 6.
Now, the only L1 axiom left to show is Clavius’ Law (¬p →p) →p. To derive
it, the law of identity (H 8) is utilized, which is in turn derived using the lemma
H 7 and the axiom H 1:
lemma H_7:
⟨H (q →(p →p)) ⟩
using H_2 H_1 H_MP by metis
lemma H_8:
⟨H (p →p) ⟩
using H_1 H_7 H_MP by metis
H 7 is a rearranged form of the law of simplification, with the premises p and q
swapped. The idea of swapping two premises is exactly what the law of com-
mutation, H 2, expresses, and so when combined with the law of simplification,
H 1, metis can derive H 7 using Modus Ponens. Now, substituting any of H’s
axioms for q in H 7 will result in p →p being derivable with Modus Ponens. In
H 8 the axiom H 1 is arbitrarily picked and the law of identity is shown to hold
in H by metis. To show Clavius’s Law H 8 and H 5 are used together:
lemma H_9:
⟨H (((∼p) →p) →p) ⟩
using H_5 H_8 H_MP by metis
36
==PAGE:40==
The result of performing the substitution [q 7→p] in H 5 is (p →p) →((¬p →
p) →p). Here Clavius’s Law can be identified as the consequent, and the law of
identity as the antecedent. Thus H 8 can be used with H 5 and Modus Ponens
to derive H 9.
Having proven the three axioms L1 to hold in H, the scene is set for showing
the deductive equivalence of the two systems.
This theorem is expressed in
Isabelle/HOL with a meta-logic bi-implication:
theorem H_iff_L1:
⟨H p ←→⊢p ⟩
Writing proof immediately after stating an unproven theorem queries Isabelle/HOL
to suggest a proof method. Isabelle/HOL in this case responds by declaring two
sub-goals: 1. H p =⇒⊢p and 2. ⊢p =⇒H p . In other words, if p is prov-
able in H then p is also provable in ⊢, and vice versa. If we can show this, then
Isabelle/HOL reasons that our original theorem is proven.
proof
have L1_H_1:
⟨⊢(p →(q →p)) ⟩for p q
using L1_completeness by simp
have L1_H_2:
⟨⊢((p →(q →r)) →(q →(p →r))) ⟩for p q r
using L1_completeness by simp
have L1_H_3:
⟨⊢((q →r) →((p →q) →(p →r))) ⟩for p q r
using L1_completeness by simp
have L1_H_4:
⟨⊢(p →((∼p) →q)) ⟩for p q
using L1_completeness by simp
have L1_H_5:
⟨⊢((p →q) →(((∼p) →q) →q)) ⟩for p q
using L1_completeness by simp
The first sub-goal is shown by utilizing the established completeness of the L1
system. By completeness, all valid propositions are provable in ⊢, and since
the five axioms of H are all valid, Isabelle/HOL’s simplifier can immediately
show that they are provable in ⊢when provided with the L1 completeness
fact. Since all statements that are provable in H have been proven from these
axioms and Modus Ponens alone, we can, from the derivation of the axioms in
⊢, mimic the H proof and show that if H p then ⊢p:
show
⟨⊢p ⟩if
⟨H p ⟩
using that by (induct) (metis MP, metis L1_H_1, metis L1_H_2,
metis L1_H_3, metis L1_H_4, metis L1_H_5)
To show the second sub-goal the derivations three axioms of the L1-system are
utilized. Using the same argument, if a proposition is provable in ⊢then we
can, from the derivation in H of L1’s three axioms, repeat the same proof in H:
show
⟨H p ⟩if
⟨⊢p ⟩
using that by (induct) (metis H_MP, metis H_6, metis H_9,
metis H_4)
37
==PAGE:41==
Having shown H and ⊢to be deductively equivalent, Isabelle/HOL can infer the
completeness of H from the completeness of ⊢:
theorem H_completeness:
⟨∀I. (I |= p) =⇒H p ⟩
using H_iff_L1 by (simp add: L1_completeness)
In the following sections, when deriving completeness of the other systems, the
formalizations of deductive equivalences are omitted as they all follow the same
structure as the proof shown here. Instead, I focus on discussing the derivations
of axioms.
5.3
The L3 System
theory System_L3 imports System_L1 begin
inductive L3 (⟨L3 ⟩) where
L3_MP:
⟨L3 q ⟩if
⟨L3 p ⟩and
⟨L3 (p →q) ⟩|
L3_1:
⟨L3 (p →(q →p)) ⟩|
L3_2:
⟨L3 ((p →(q →r)) →((p →q) →(p →r))) ⟩|
L3_3:
⟨L3 ((∼p →∼q) →(q →p)) ⟩
The L3 system is formalized in Isabelle/HOL as shown above. The three axioms,
L3 1, L3 2 and L3 3 are to be seen in comparison with the F system, see section
5.5. The two systems share the same pair of first axioms. However,  Lukasiewicz
showed that the last three axioms of the F system can be replaced by the axiom:
(¬p →¬q) →(q →p) [13].
5.3.1
Axioms
As the first axiom, L3 1, the law of simplification is seen again. The second
axiom, L3 2 is an extension of the law of the hypothetical syllogism where an
additional antecedent p is added in the first premise: (p →q →r) →(p →q) →
(p →r). These two axioms together are enough to describe the {→}-fragment
of Intuitionistic propositional logic fully [1]. Intuitionistic propositional logic
can be seen as a weakening of classical propositional logic, in which certain
statements not deemed constructive are excluded from the proof system. These
statements include in particular the law of excluded middle: p ∨¬p, and the
first law of double negation ¬¬p →p [43], and all their forms. Thus to bring
a deductive system with axioms L3 1 and L3 2 into the {→, ¬}-fragment of
classical propositional logic, more axioms must be added.  Lukasiewicz saw that
the addition of the fourth law of transposition: (¬p →¬q) →(q →p), see
section 4.4.3, alone is sufficient.
5.3.2
Completeness
Yoshinari Arai showed derivations of each of L1’s axioms in the L3 system in
1965 [3]. The proof is 27 steps of derivations. I will not be describing each one
in detail here, but rather strive to give an overview of the process. The first L1
axiom that is derived is the principle of explosion:
38
==PAGE:42==
lemma L3_8:
⟨L3 (q →((∼q) →p)) ⟩
using L3_1 L3_2 L3_7 L3_MP by metis
To start off, by substituting [p 7→L3 3] in L3 1 and performing Modus Po-
nens the statement ¬p →(¬q →¬p) →(p →q) is derived (L3 4). Now, by
substituting this statement in place of p →(q →r) in L3 2 and using Modus
Ponens, first with L3 4, and then with L3 1, to detach the two antecedents:
¬p →(p →q) is derived (L3 5). This statement is in turn substituted in L3 2
instead of p →(q →r) and detached using Modus Ponens, ¬p is renamed to
¬q, and the statement: (¬q →q) →(¬q →p) is derived (L3 6). [p 7→L3 6] is
substituted in the law of simplification and the premise is again detached using
Modus Ponens to derive: q →(¬q →q) →(¬q →p) (L3 7) which is simply
L3 6 but with q added as an antecedent. Finally the principle of explosion is
derived by substituting p →(q →r) for L3 7 in L3 2 and using Modus Ponens
with L3 7, followed by L3 1 to detach the two premises from L3 2 and end up
with L3 8.
Next up is the law of transitivity, derived in step 14 of the proof:
lemma L3_14:
⟨L3 ((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩
using L3_1 L3_2 L3_13 L3_MP by metis
Similarly to derivation L3 7 the law of simplification can be used with Modus
Ponens to add an arbitrary antecedent to a theorem.
This time q →r is
added as an antecedent to the second axiom of L3 (L3 10). By using L3 1 and
L3 2 together with this statement and Modus Ponens, the second antecedent
p →(q →p) can be removed to produce: (q →r) →(p →q) →(p →r)
(L3 11). This is the law of the hypothetical syllogism, but to reach the form
used in L1 the two antecedents must be swapped. To do this, first L3 11 is
substituted in instead of p →(q →r) in L3 2 and the antecedent (which is now
L3 11) is detached using Modus Ponens to derive: ((q →r) →(p →q) →((q →
r) →(p →r))) (L3 12). The same trick as in L3 10 and L3 11 is now used to
first add p →q as an antecedent to L3 12, and then remove the, now second,
antecedent (q →r) →(p →q) to derive L3 14.
lemma L3_27:
⟨L3 (((∼p) →p) →p) ⟩
using L3_19 L3_26 L3_MP by metis
Finally, after 13 further derivations, Clavius’s law is established as L3 27. L3 2
is substituted in instead of p →(q →r) in L3 2 and the antecedent, now L3 2,
is detached (L3 15).
Meanwhile (p →q) →(p →p) (L3 16) is derived by
substituting r with p and referring to the law of simplification to detach the
antecedent of L3 2. By combining L3 15 and L3 16 the statement (p →(p →
q)) →(p →q) (L3 19) is derived. Together with L3 26: (¬q →q) →(¬q →
q) →q it is used with Modus Ponens to derive L3 27. By substituting p for
¬q →q in L3 19 the statement’s antecedent becomes L3 26 which can now be
detached using Modus Ponens. What is left is the consequent, which is Clavius’s
Law.
39
==PAGE:43==
5.4
The R System
theory System_R imports System_L1 begin
inductive R (⟨R ⟩) where
R_MP:
⟨R q ⟩if
⟨R p ⟩and
⟨R (p →q) ⟩|
R_1:
⟨R (p →(q →p)) ⟩|
R_2:
⟨R ((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩|
R_3:
⟨R ((p →(q →r)) →(q →(p →r))) ⟩|
R_4:
⟨R ((∼∼p) →p) ⟩|
R_5:
⟨R ((p →∼p) →∼p) ⟩|
R_6:
⟨R ((p →∼q) →(q →∼p)) ⟩
The above Isabelle/HOL code specifies an axiomatic system due to Bertrand
Russell in his 1906 work The Theory of Implication [53].
Bertrand Russell
(1872–1970) was a British philosopher, logician and mathematician [31]. Like
Hilbert and Frege he worked on developing a logical foundation for mathematics,
and together with Alfred North Whitehead, he published an influential three-
volume book on the topic: Principia Mathematica [37]. Principia Mathematica
introduced an accessible logical notation that gained widespread use among
contemporaries [37]. It also prompted researchers such as Kurt G¨odel, Alonzo
Church and Alan Turing among others to establish meta-theoretical results with
widespread implications [37].
5.4.1
Axioms
The first three axioms of R are the law of simplification (R 1), the law of transi-
tivity (R 2) and law of commutation (R 3) respectively, see section 5.2.1. Then
follows R 4: the first law of double negation. It states that a negation cancels a
subsequent one out, resulting in the dissolving of them both. Thus from the fact
that it cannot be true that p is not true, p can be deduced. While the reasoning
holds, this law is excluded from Intuitionistic propositional logic as a proof of
p using this law does not require any constructive evidence of p. Axiom R 5
is reminiscent of Clavius’s law (¬p →p) →p but in this case, the antecedent
and consequent of the antecedent are swapped, and thus the axiom concludes
¬p instead of p. Finally, the second law of transposition is declared as the sixth
axiom R 6.
5.4.2
Completeness
In [34] Kiyoshi Is´eki and Shˆotarˆo Tanaka derived each of L1’s axioms in R.
The first axiom of L1 is the second axiom of R, and so only the remaining two
axioms: Clavius’s Law and the principle of explosion, need to be derived. The
first target is the principle of explosion which is proven to hold in R after 8
derivations:
lemma R_14:
⟨R (p →((∼p) →q)) ⟩
using R_3 R_13 R_MP by metis
40
==PAGE:44==
First, the law of identity is derived p →p (R 8). This is done by substituting
R 1 for the premise of R 3 and then detaching it with Modus Ponens to reach
q →(p →p). By substituting q for any axiom it can be detached to derive the
law of identity. Now the law of the hypothetical syllogism (q →r) →(p →q) →
(p →r) (R 10) is derived by utilizing R 2 with the law of commutation R 3. In
R 10 the substitution [q 7→¬¬p, r 7→p, p 7→q] identifies the antecedent as R 4
which can now be detached to produce (q →¬¬p) →(q →p) (R 11). This,
when combined with axioms R 2 and R 6 can be used to derive the fourth law
of transposition (¬p →¬q) →(q →p) (R 12). By substituting [p 7→¬p, q 7→
(¬q →¬p), r 7→(p →q)] into the law of transitivity its first antecedent takes
the form of the law of simplification and its second antecedent takes the form of
R 12. Its consequent, which can now be derived, becomes ¬p →p →q (R 13).
Now the law of commutation can be used to swap the antecedents of R 13 and
derive R 14.
lemma R_25:
⟨R (((∼p) →p) →p) ⟩
using R_15 R_24 R_MP by metis
R 11 shows how a double negation can be removed from a consequent. Thus by
deriving (¬p →p) →¬¬p (R 24) and using R 11, Clavius’s Law (R 25) can be
proven to hold in R. To reach R 25 a row of derivations are performed, starting
with (¬p →q) →(¬p →¬¬q) (R 16) which is established by substituting
[p 7→¬p, r 7→¬¬q] in R 10 and detaching its antecedent which is now in the
form of R 9.
Together with the fourth law of transposition and the law of
transitivity this statement can be used to derive the third law of transposition
(¬p →q) →(¬q →p) (R 17). This law, when combined with the two statements
((¬¬p →q) →r) →(p →q) →r (R 19) and ((p →r) →s) →(p →q) →
((q →r) →s) (R 22) can be used to show ((¬q →¬p) →r) →((p →q) →r)
(R 23). Substituting [p 7→¬p, q 7→p, r 7→¬¬p] in R 23 gives its antecedent the
form of R 5 under the substitution [p 7→¬p]. Detaching it with Modus Ponens
leaves the goal of R 24 remaining.
5.5
The F System
theory System_F imports System_L3 begin
inductive F (⟨F ⟩) where
F_MP:
⟨F q ⟩if
⟨F p ⟩and
⟨F (p →q) ⟩|
F_1:
⟨F (p →(q →p)) ⟩|
F_2:
⟨F ((p →(q →r)) →((p →q) →(p →r))) ⟩|
F_3:
⟨F ((p →q) →(∼q →∼p)) ⟩|
F_4:
⟨F (∼∼p →p) ⟩|
F_5:
⟨F (p →∼∼p) ⟩
The F system is an Isabelle/HOL formalization of five of the six axioms of
the first-ever deductive system of classical propositional logic. The system was
published by Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob Frege in 1879 in his work Begriffsschrift
[19]. The sixth axiom of his system, which is not included in F, is the law of
41
==PAGE:45==
commutation (p →q →r) →(q →p →r). It is not included here as it is not
independent of the other axioms: it can be derived from axioms F 1 and F 2
as shown by  Lukasiewicz [13]. Frege and his works on symbolic logic, including
Begriffsschrift, are so influential that they can be said to be the foundation of
the entire discipline itself [78].
5.5.1
Axioms
The first two axioms are the law of simplification and Frege’s extended law of the
hypothetical syllogism, see section 4.4.2. They work great in tandem for deriving
new theorems, as has been shown in section 5.3.2. The third axiom is the first
law of transposition, also called the law of contrapositive: (p →q) →(¬q →¬p).
Its intuition is sometimes used as a rule of inference: If p →q and ¬q then ¬p
may be inferred. This rule is referred to as Modus Tollens and has, like Modus
Ponens, been discussed since Ancient Greece [12]. Finally, the two laws of double
negation: ¬¬p →p and p →¬¬p are specified as the last two axioms.
5.5.2
Completeness
The expressive power of the last three axioms, F 3, F 4 and F 5 can be captured
with the fourth law of transposition (¬p →¬q) →(q →p) instead when
combined with the first two axioms, as shown by  Lukasiewicz [79]. F 1, F 2 and
this axiom constitute the L3 system which thus provides a seemingly promising
target for derivation in F, as only the fourth law of transposition is left to be
shown. In 1965 Yoshinari Arai and Kiyoshi Iseki performed twelve derivations
to show this law to hold in F [5]. In System F these derivations are used to show
the completeness of F. To derive the fourth law of transposition, three lemmas
F 12, F 15 and F 16 need to be established:
lemma F_17:
⟨F (((∼p) →(∼q)) →(q →p)) ⟩
using F_12 F_15 F_16 F_MP by metis
As demonstrated in section 5.3.2, the law of simplication can be used with
Modus Ponens to attach an arbitrary antecedent to another axiom. To show
F 12 this is utilized with F 2 to produce (q →r) →(p →q →r) →(p →
q) →(p →r) (F 6). Now the second antecedent of this statement, p →q →r
is detached in the following way: p →q →r is substituted with F 6 in F 2
and the antecedent, which now identifies with F 6, is detached to produce:
((q →r) →(p →q →r)) →(q →r) →(p →q) →(p →r). The antecedent in
this statement identifies with the law of simplification and can thus be detached
to derive F 7: (q →r) →(p →q) →(p →r) the law of the hypothetical
syllogism. Following this F 1 is used again to add an antecedent to an axiom,
this time adding itself as an antecedent to itself, to derive F 8: ((p →q) →(p →
r)) →(q →p →q). Performing the substitution [q 7→(p →q), r 7→(p →r)]
in F 7 gives it the form ((p →q) →(p →r)) →(q →p →q) →(q →p →r).
F 2 can again be used, this time with F 8, to detach the second antecedent
q →p →q of this statement and derive ((p →q) →(p →q)) →(q →p →r)
42
==PAGE:46==
(F 10).
By performing the substitution [q 7→((p →q) →(p →r)), r 7→
(q →p →r), p 7→(p →q →r)] F 7 becomes a statement which has a first
antecedent in the form of F 10, a second antecedent in the form of F 2 and a
consequent: (p →q →r) →(q →p →r) (F 11) which can now be derived by
detachment. This statement is the law of commutation which can be used with
Modus Ponens to swap two antecedents. By swapping the antecedents of F 7
the law of transitivity, F 12, is derived:
lemma F_12:
⟨F ((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩
using F_7 F_11 F_MP by metis
To move forward the substitution [p 7→q, q 7→¬¬q, r 7→¬p] is performed in
F 12. This identifies its antecedent with the second law of double negation, F 5
which can now be detached to derive F 14: (¬¬q →¬p) →(q →¬p). Now, a
substitution is performed in F 12 again, this time [p 7→(p →¬q), q 7→(¬¬q →
¬p), r 7→(q →¬p)] which brings it to the form ((p →¬q) →(¬¬q →¬p)) →
((¬¬q →¬p) →(q →¬p)) →((p →¬q) →(q →¬p)). In this statement, the
first antecedent can be identified as F 3 under the substitution [q 7→¬q] (F 13),
and the second antecedent as F 14. Thus these can be detached with Modus
Ponens to derive its conclusion (F 15) which is the second law of transposition:
lemma F_15:
⟨F ((p →(∼q)) →(q →(∼p))) ⟩
using F_12 F_13 F_14 F_MP by metis
lemma F_16:
⟨F ((q →(∼(∼p))) →(q →p)) ⟩
using F_4 F_7 F_MP by metis
To show F 16 the substitution [p 7→q, q 7→¬¬p, r 7→q] is performed in F 7
which identifies its antecedent with the first law of double negation F 4. De-
taching it from the statement using Modus Ponens reaches F 16. Now, to derive
F 17 the substitution [p 7→(¬p →¬q), q 7→(q →¬¬p), r 7→(q →p)] is per-
formed in F 12. This identifies its first antecedent as F 15 under the substitution
[p 7→¬p], its second antecedent as F 16 and its conclusion as the fourth law of
transposition. The two antecedents can thus be detached with Modus Ponens
to arrive at F 17.
5.6
The S1 System
theory System_S1 imports System_L1 begin
inductive S1 (⟨S1 ⟩) where
S1_MP:
⟨S1 q ⟩if
⟨S1 p ⟩and
⟨S1 (p →q) ⟩|
S1_1:
⟨S1 (∼p →(p →q)) ⟩|
S1_2:
⟨S1 (p →(q →(r →p))) ⟩|
S1_3:
⟨S1 ((∼p →r) →((q →r) →((p →q) →r))) ⟩
The code above shows the Isabelle/HOL formalization of the S1 system which
43
==PAGE:47==
was first published by Boles law Soboci´nski (1906–1980) in 1954 [59]. Soboci´nski14
was a Ph.D. student of  Lukasiewicz at the Warsaw School of Logic and was a
leading figure in the sustainment of Polish excellence in the field of symbolic
logic, contributing to it in many ways [52].
5.6.1
Axioms
The S1 axiomatization is, according to Soboci´nski himself [60], stated in his ar-
ticle Axiomatization of the conjunctive-negative calculus of propositions (1954)
published in the first, and only [52], volume of The Journal of Computing Sys-
tems which he co-founded. The article was a reconstruction from memory of
a paper that originated in the “ill-fated” [52] journal Collectana Logica from
1939 [52]. I have not been able to find either. Furthermore, I have not been
able to find any paper that discusses the S1 system to a greater extent than
mentioning its existence and stating its axioms. I, therefore, lack any insight
about the system that might have been given by Soboci´nski himself as well as
that from other qualified sources. This leaves me to describe the S1 system on
my own:
The first axiom S1 1 ¬p →p →q is the principle of explosion but stated in a
form where its antecedents are swapped. The second axiom S1 2 p →q →r →p
is used by Soboci´nski again in the S2 system [60]. It depicts an extended form of
the law of simplification with an extra propositional symbol r stuck in between
q and the consequent p. The third axiom S1 3 (¬p →r) →(q →r) →((p →
q) →r) is peculiar15: it shows that an arbitrary antecedent implication p →q
of a statement r can be detached if both ¬p and q can be shown to imply the
same statement. If ¬p →r and q →r are valid, then (p →q) →r is also valid
since in all interpretations in which p →q is true, either ¬p is true, or q is true.
If ¬p is true it can be detached from ¬p →r to show r, and if q is true it can
be detached from q →r to show r.
5.6.2
Completeness
Kashiko Tanaka derived in 1965, from the axioms of S1, multiple other well
known axioms, including those of L1 [62]. I use these derivations as inspiration
for showing completeness of S1 in Isabelle/HOL through the completeness of
L1. The first axiom of L1, the law of transitivity, is established to hold in S1
after six derivations:
lemma S1_9:
⟨S1 ((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩
using S1_3 S1_6 S1_8 S1_MP by metis
The six derivations are as follows: first Frege’s extended law of the hypothetical
syllogism (p →q →r) →(q →p) →(q →r) (S1 4) is established.
This
14I want to honor Soboci´nski by pointing out his active membership in Polish underground
resistances against German occupation and communism during the second world war [52].
15To me at least.
44
==PAGE:48==
is done by substituting [r 7→(q →r)] in S1 3 and detaching its antecedent
which now identifies as S1 1 under the substitution [p 7→q, q 7→r]. By sub-
stituting [r 7→(r →p)] in S1 4 its antecedent becomes S1 2 which can be
detatched to produce (q →p) →(q →r →p) (S1 5).
Now, substituting
[p 7→(p →q), q 7→¬p, r 7→s] in S1 5 turns its antecedent into S1 1 producing
¬p →(s →p →q) (S1 6) when detached. This statement expresses a combi-
nation of the principle of explosion with the law of simplification in an indirect
way. Substituting [q 7→(q →r), r 7→(q →p →r)] in S1 3 gives it the form:
(¬p →(q →p →r)) →((q →r) →(q →p →r)) →((p →q →r) →(q →p →
r)) in which, under proper substitutions, the first antecedent is S1 6 and the
second S1 5. Its conclusion (p →q →r) →(q →p →r) (S1 7), which can now
be derived, is the law of commutation. This law is immediately used to swap
the antecedents of S1 5: q →(q →p) →(r →p) (S1 8). Like in the derivation
of S1 7, S1 3 and S1 6 is again used in conjunction, this time with S1 8 to add
an antecedent to S1 8’s antecedent: in this case p, and also substitute symbols
so that S1 9 is derived.
The law of commutation, S1 7, is also used to swap the antecedents of S1 1,
turning it into the same form of the principle of explosion seen in L1:
lemma S1_15:
⟨S1 (p →((∼p) →q)) ⟩
using S1_1 S1_7 S1_MP by metis
The final target axiom is Clavius’s law: (¬p →p) →p. The idea is that in
S1 3, the substitution [p 7→¬p, r 7→p, q 7→p] forms its consequent into Clav-
ius’s law, and its two antecedents into the first law of double negation ¬¬p →p
and the law of identity p →p respectively. The goal is thus to derive these
two theses and detach them from S1 3 using Modus Ponens. To do this, S1 3
and S1 6 is again used in tandem to add the antecedent p to S1 2’s antecedent:
(p →q) →(s →p →q) (S1 10). The second antecedent s, is removed utilizing
S1 4 in a similar way as has been done for the F system in section 5.5.2: by
substituting [p 7→(s →p →q), q 7→(p →q), r 7→(p →q)] S1 4 has a form
which identifies, under proper substitutions, its first antecedent as S1 4 itself, its
second antecedent as S1 10, and its consequent as (p →q) →(p →q) (S1 11).
This is almost the law of identity. To get closer to it, the same S1 4-trick is
utilized, this time using S1 11, and this time to remove the second antecedent of
S1 4 itself and perform proper substitutions to reach: (q →q →r) →(q →r)
(S1 12). Substituting [q 7→p, r 7→(q →p)] in S1 12 identifies its antecedent as
S1 2 which can be detached to produce the law of simplification: p →q →p
(S1 13). Returning to S1 12 and performing [q 7→p, r 7→p] identifies its an-
tecedent as S1 13 and its consequent as the law of identity S1 14.
To derive the first law of double negation [q 7→p, r 7→(¬¬p →p)] is substituted
in S1 3.
This turns the statement’s three antecedents into the principle of
explosion, the law of simplification and the law of identity respectively. Since
these have all been derived they can be detached with modus ponens to reach
45
==PAGE:49==
the statement’s conclusion which is the first law of double negation (S1 16). I
am now ready to derive Clavius’s law:
lemma S1_17:
⟨S1 (((∼p) →p) →p) ⟩
using S1_3 S1_14 S1_16 S1_MP by metis
5.7
The L2 System
theory System_L2 imports System_S1 begin
inductive L2 (⟨L2 ⟩) where
L2_MP:
⟨L2 q ⟩if
⟨L2 p ⟩and
⟨L2 (p →q) ⟩|
L2_1:
⟨L2 (((p →q) →r) →(∼p →r)) ⟩|
L2_2:
⟨L2 (((p →q) →r) →(q →r)) ⟩|
L2_3:
⟨L2 ((∼p →r) →((q →r) →((p →q) →r))) ⟩
The above Isabelle/HOL formalization is of the axiomatic system due to  Lukasiewicz
and mentioned by him on page 54 of his textbook Elements of Mathematical
Logic [79] where he notes the system’s interesting structure.
5.7.1
Axioms
The first two axioms L2 1 ((p →q) →r) →(¬p →r) and L2 2 ((p →q) →
r) →(q →r) show that if an implication p →q, implies a statement r, then
¬p and q, respectively, will also imply r. To see this, consider the disjunction
logically equivalent to an implication: p →q ≡¬p ∨q [8]. Thus if the truth of
either ¬p or q implies r, then ¬p will imply r and so will q. The three axioms
of L2 share a structural relationship: if α = ((p →q) →r), β = (¬p →r) and
γ = (q →r) then they can be described as α →β, α →γ and β →γ →α
respectively [79]. The third axiom, L2 3 β →γ →α, complements the first
two by showing a way to derive an α. This α can then be used by the first two
axioms to derive β’s and γ’s who in turn can be used by the third axiom further
- thus forming an elegant symbiosis between the axioms.
5.7.2
Completeness
Yoshinari Arai has derived, from the axioms of L2, the axioms of various other
systems including L1, F, H, L3, R, S1 and S2 [4]. To show the completeness
of L2 in Isabelle/HOL I use his derivations of the S1 system as they share the
same third axiom. This leaves the two remaining axioms of S1 to be derived.
The first target axiom will be the principle of explosion with its antecedents
swapped:
lemma L2_7:
⟨L2 ((∼p) →(p →q)) ⟩
using L2_1 L2_6 L2_MP by metis
The idea is to notice that L2 1 under the substitution [r 7→(p →q)] has
the axiom as its consequent, and the law of identity p →p as its antecedent.
46
==PAGE:50==
Thus by deriving p →p it can be detached from L2 1 using Modus Ponens
to reach L2 7. To establish the law of identity first the law of simplification
p →q →p (L2 4) is derived by substituting [p 7→(r →q), q 7→p, r 7→(q →p)]
in L2 2 and detaching its antecedent which now identifies with L2 2 itself. Next,
¬p →s →(p →p) (L2 5) is derived by substituting [q 7→p, r 7→(s →(p →p))]
in L2 1 identifying its antecedent with the law of simplification which can then
be detached. Now, under the substitution [q 7→(p →p), r 7→(s →(p →p))]
L2 3’s three antecedents take on the forms of L2 5, L2 4 and L2 4 respectively,
while its consequent is the law of identity.
lemma L2_8:
⟨L2 (p →(q →(r →p))) ⟩
using L2_2 L2_4 L2_MP by metis
The last axiom to be derived is the extended form of the law of simplification:
p →q →r →p (L2 8). Fortunately, having already shown the law of sim-
plification, it turns out that L2 2 and L2 4 are sufficient: by performing the
substitution [p 7→r, q 7→p, r 7→(q →r →p)] in L2 2 the statement gets the
form ((r →p) →(q →r →p)) →(p →q →r →p). This statement’s an-
tecedent can be identified as L2 4 under the substitution [p 7→(r →p)] which
can now be detached to reach its consequent: L2 8.
5.8
The S2 System
theory System_S2 imports System_L1 begin
inductive S2 (⟨S2 ⟩) where
S2_MP:
⟨S2 q ⟩if
⟨S2 p ⟩and
⟨S2 (p →q) ⟩|
S2_1:
⟨S2 (p →(q →(r →p))) ⟩|
S2_2:
⟨S2 ((p →q) →(∼q →(p →r))) ⟩|
S2_3:
⟨S2 ((∼p →q) →((p →q) →q)) ⟩
In 1953 the Journal of Symbolic Logic received a problem proposal from Paul
Bernays [9]. In it he asks the following:
What is the smallest number n such that the propositional calculus, formu-
lated with substitution and modus ponens as the only rules of inference, can be
based on a set of initial formulas each of which contains at most n propositional
letters (counted with multiplicity)?
After stating this he goes on to note that several axiomatic systems where n = 6
have been formulated, and that Mordchaj Wajsberg has shown that n must be
at least 4.
Two years later, in 1955, Soboci´nski published an article in the
same journal with a solution to the problem, showing that n = 5 [60]. First,
he shows that axiomatic systems where n = 4 cannot fully express classical
propositional logic. Then, he formulates two axiomatic systems that possess
completeness and where n = 5. The above Isabelle/HOL formalization is the
second of these systems, and in this section, the first is also shown as Soboci´nski
uses the completeness of this to show the completeness of S2.
47
==PAGE:51==
5.8.1
Axioms
As can be counted, none of S2’s three axioms S2 1, S2 2 or S2 3 contain more
than 5 propositional symbols. S2 2 and S2 3 are both the longest axioms of the
system, in terms of figure 4, with a length of 10. This makes S2 the system with
the shortest possible length of its longest axiom [50].
The first axiom p →q →r →p is the extended law of simplification which
Soboci´nski used previously in his S1 system, see section 5.6.1.
The second
axiom (p →q) →¬q →p →r can be viewed as a weaker form of the principle
of explosion which addresses an implication p →q in specific rather than an
arbitrary statement. From the logical equivalence ¬(p →q) ≡¬q ∧p [8] it
can be seen that the derivation of both ¬q and p stand in contradiction to
the derivation of p →q and thus any statement r follows. The third axiom
(¬p →q) →(p →q) →q is the fifth axiom of the H system with its antecedents
swapped, see section 5.2.1.
5.8.2
Completeness
To show the completeness of S2 in Isabelle/HOL I follow Soboci´nski’s derivations
and strategy [60]: First, the other system by him where n = 5 is specified, named
S2 pre and symbolized with s2:
inductive S2_pre (⟨s2 ⟩) where
S2_pre_MP:
⟨s2 q ⟩if
⟨s2 p ⟩and
⟨s2 (p →q) ⟩|
S2_pre_1:
⟨s2 (p →(q →(r →(s →p)))) ⟩|
S2_pre_2:
⟨s2 (∼q →((p →q) →(p →r))) ⟩|
S2_pre_3:
⟨s2 ((∼p →q) →((p →q) →q)) ⟩
This system shares its third axiom with S2, but differs in the other two: S2 pre 1
is an even further extended law of simplification with s added, and S2 pre 2 is
S2 2 with its antecedents swapped. The completeness of L1 is propagated to
S2 pre by deriving the three axioms of the L1 system, starting with the law of
transitivity:
lemma S2_pre_17:
⟨s2 ((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩
using S2_pre_11 S2_pre_16 S2_pre_MP by metis
This is done, in a similar way to other systems, by deriving first the law of
commutation (p →q →r) →(q →p →r) (S2 pre 11), and then the law of the
hypothetical syllogism (q →r) →(p →q) →(p →q) (S2 pre 16). S2 pre 17
can then be derived by swapping the antecedents using the law of commutation.
Next, the second axiom of L1, Clavius’s Law, is derived:
lemma S2_pre_18:
⟨s2 ((∼p →p) →p) ⟩
using S2_pre_3 S2_pre_11 S2_pre_14 S2_pre_MP by metis
48
==PAGE:52==
By substituting [p 7→(¬p →p), q 7→(p →p), r 7→p] in the law of commutation
it takes the form ((¬p →p) →(p →p) →p) →((p →p) →(¬p →p) →
p). This statement’s first antecedent can be identified as S2 pre 3, its second
antecedent as the law of identity (derived in S2 pre 14). Its consequent becomes
S2 pre 18, which can now be reached by detachment.
Finally, to show the
completeness of S2 pre the principle of explosion is derived:
lemma S2_pre_20:
⟨s2 (p →(∼p →q)) ⟩
using S2_pre_11 S2_pre_19 S2_pre_MP by metis
Again the law of commutation is used, this time to swap the antecedents of the
derived statement ¬p →p →q (S2 pre 19) and establish S2 pre 20. Now, to
show the completeness of S2 the remaining two axioms of S2 pre are derived
within the system, starting with S2 pre 1:
lemma S2_5:
⟨S2 (p →(q →(r →(s →p)))) ⟩
using S2_1 S2_3 S2_4 S2_MP by metis
First, the statement ¬(q →r →p) →p →s (S2 4) is derived by substituting
[q 7→(q →r →p), r 7→s] in S2 2 and detaching its antecedent which now iden-
tifies with S2 1. Then by substituting S2 pre 1 in as the conclusion q of S2 3
the statement’s two antecedents can be identfied, under proper substitutions,
as S2 4 and S2 1 respectively, which can now be detached to reach S2 5. To
derive the final axiom:
lemma S2_25:
⟨S2 (∼q →((p →q) →(p →r))) ⟩
using S2_3 S2_20 S2_24 S2_MP by metis
the same S2 3-strategy is used, this time with the derived statements ¬p →r →
s →p →q (S2 20) and p →¬q →(p →q) →r (S2 24) as antecedents that are
detached.
5.9
The LT System
theory System_LT imports System_L3 begin
inductive LT (⟨⊩⟩) where
LT_MP:
⟨⊩q ⟩if
⟨⊩p ⟩and
⟨⊩(p →q) ⟩|
LT_1:
⟨⊩(((p →(q →p))
→(((∼r →(s →∼t))
→((r →(s →u))
→((t →s) →(t →u)))) →v))
→(w →v)) ⟩
The inductive definition shown above is an Isabelle/HOL formalization of the
single-axiom system published by Jan  Lukasiewicz and Alfred Tarski in 1930
[80]. It is symbolized with a preceding ⊩symbol. With a length of 33 symbols,
not counting parentheses, it was at the time the shortest known singular axiom
49
==PAGE:53==
to capture all of classical propositional logic [13].  Lukasiewicz continued work-
ing on shortening the axiom, and in 1936 he published a single-axiom system of
classical propositional logic with the length 23 [13]. This would later be short-
ened further, down to a length of 21, by Carew Arthur Meredith resulting in
the M system, covered in section 5.10 [13].
While  Lukasiewicz has been referred to extensively throughout this thesis this
is the only the second mention of Alfred Tarski (1901–1983) who studied at the
Warsaw School of Logic and rose to become one of the greatest logicians of all
time [25]. He is in particular known for his symbolic discussions of the concepts
of truth and logical consequence [25].
5.9.1
Axiom
The axiom itself consists of one large and complicated antecedent (which I note
as A) and the peculiar consequent w →v (Q) where only v, of v and w, ap-
pears in A. A has the law of simplification p →q →p (Aa) as its antecedent
and a consequent (Aq) which can be broken further down. In Aq v is the con-
sequent (Aqq), and the antecedent is the long statement: (¬r →s →¬t) →
(r →s →u) →(t →s) →(t →u) (Aqa). Now, the only way16 to conclude
an arbitrary statement v from premises which does not mention it at all, is
by showing a contradiction and utilizing the principle of explosion, see section
5.1.1. How might Aqa express this idea? Consider the substitution [u 7→¬t]
in Aqa: (¬r →s →¬t) →(r →s →¬t) →(t →s) →(t →¬t). The two
first antecedents differ only in whether r or ¬r is the first premise. By assum-
ing them both to be valid it can be inferred that s →¬t must also be valid.
Now, under the assumption of the validity of the next antecedent t →s, it can
also be inferred, from the principle of transitivity, that t →¬t is valid, which
is the statement’s conclusion. t →¬t is a contradiction and from its validity
any statement v can be concluded. This is one intuition behind Aq, but not
the only as ¬t is just one substitution of the arbitrary u. Aqa is valid and it
may thus be derived in LT and used together with the axiom in, for example,
this way to establish an arbitrary statement v. As has been seen in previous
derivations, see section 5.3.2, the law of simplification can be used to add an
arbitrary statement w as an antecedent to an established statement. This is the
intuition behind its inclusion in the axiom and how the final consequent w →v
is concluded.
The axiom thus shows how to prove a completely arbitrary statement that has
the form of a logical implication. From this, a glimpse may be caught of how
this single-axiom system can describe the entirety of the {→, ¬}-fragment of
classical propositional logic. After this discussion, one might wonder if the set
of axioms consisting of the law of simplification and Aqa can do the same? This
turns out to be the case, as is shown by Jørgen Villadsen in LT4.thy where he
16To my knowledge.
50
==PAGE:54==
shows a system consisting of these two statements as axioms to be sound and
complete.
5.9.2
Completeness
Shˆotarˆo Tanaka has in 1965 shown derivations of the L3 system’s axioms from
LT in [63]. His proof consists of 19 derivations and is the inspiration for the
derivations done to show the completeness of LT here. The number n in the
name of the following lemmas corresponds to the n’th derivation in Shˆotarˆo
Tanaka’s proof.
Lemmas LT 3, LT 5 and LT 19 are the three axioms of the
L3 system. The first derivation performed is the third derivation in Shˆotarˆo
Tanaka’s proof:
lemma LT_3:
⟨⊩(p →(q →p)) ⟩
using LT_1 LT_MP by metis
LT 3 can be identified as the premise of the premise of LT 1. It is derivable
using only LT 1 and LT MP. The proof is done by the automatic theorem prover
metis.
lemma LT_4:
⟨⊩((∼r →(s →∼t))
→((r →(s →u)) →((t →s) →(t →u)))) ⟩
using LT_1 LT_3 LT_MP by metis
LT 4 is the conclusion of the premise of LT 1 and it can be derived from LT 1
and LT 3 by metis, using Modus Ponens (LT MP) as the proof method.
lemma LT_5:
⟨⊩((p →(q →r))
→((p →q) →(p →r))) ⟩
using LT_3 LT_4 LT_MP by metis
LT 5 is the conclusion of LT 4 under the substitution [r 7→p, s 7→q, u 7→r, t 7→
p]. Under this same substitution, the premise of LT 4 becomes ¬p →q →¬p
which under the substitution [p 7→¬p] is LT 3, and so from a single application
of Modus Ponens with LT 3 and LT 4 as the premises, metis can derive LT 5.
lemma LT_11:
⟨⊩((p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))) ⟩
using LT_3 LT_5 LT_MP by metis
LT 11 is derivable with Modus Ponens from LT 3 and LT 5 by metis. In Shˆotarˆo
Tanaka’s proof, derivations 6-10 are set up for derivations 11 and 12. It turns
out that these set up lemmas are not strictly needed, which I found out by
utilizing Isabelle’s Sledgehammer tool. Sledgehammer deploys a suite of auto-
mated reasoning software, along with the user’s already established lemmas, to
perform a proof search. From this search it turned out that LT 3 and LT 5 are
sufficient to show LT 11.
51
==PAGE:55==
lemma LT_13:
⟨⊩(((p →q) →(p →r))
→(q →(p →r))) ⟩
using LT_3 LT_5 LT_11 LT_MP by metis
It also turned out that Shˆotarˆo Tanaka’s derivation 12 is not strictly needed
either. LT 13 which is originally proved by Shˆotarˆo Tanaka from his derivations
5, 8 and 12 can be shown by metis from LT 3, LT 5 and LT 11 instead, resulting
in an overall shorter proof.
lemma LT_19:
⟨⊩((∼p →∼q) →(q →p)) ⟩
using LT_3 LT_4 LT_5 LT_11 LT_13 LT_MP by metis
Providing metis with all the derivations shown up until now turns out to be
enough for it to show LT 19. Shˆotarˆo Tanaka’s original derivations 14-18 can
thus be omitted and the proofs of L3’s three axioms are now completed.
5.10
The M System
theory System_M imports System_L1 begin
inductive M (⟨M ⟩) where
M_MP:
⟨M q ⟩if M p ⟩and
⟨M (p →q) ⟩|
M_1:
⟨M (((((p →q) →((∼r) →(∼s))) →r) →t)
→((t →p) →(s →p))) ⟩
The above Isabelle/HOL inductive definition M specifies the single-axiom sys-
tem presented by Carew Arthur Meredith in his 1953 work Single Axioms for
the Systems (C, N), (C, O) and (A, N) of the Two-Valued Propositional Cal-
culus [40]. I have not been able to find this article but several other sources,
including [13,30,50,74,75], confirm that this is the origin of the system. With
a length of 21 symbols, not counting parentheses, M is the shortest single-
axiom system, and also the shortest system in general, of classical propositional
logic [74]. The system was created in response to  Lukasiewicz’s quest of finding
the shortest single-axiom system for the {→, ¬}-fragment of classical proposi-
tional logic which was made public when his, and Tarski’s, initial single-axiom
system LT was published, see section 5.9. In 1936  Lukasiewicz shortened the
axiom down to a length of 23, and 17 years later Meredith then brought it down
further to 21 with the publication of M [13].
Carew Arthur Meredith (1904-1976) was an Irish mathematician and logician
whose study of symbolic logic spurred from the admiration of contemporary
Polish logicians [41]. After the second world war, Jan  Lukasiewicz came to Ire-
land and was appointed professor at the Royal Irish Academy where he started
teaching symbolic logic [41]. Meredith attended his lectures and became capti-
vated by the topic. Following many years of tireless work in the field, Meredith
became widely known among logicians and was held in high regard by the com-
munity [41].
52
==PAGE:56==
5.10.1
Axiom
Compared to LT, the axiom of M is significantly shorter and also manages to
deploy fewer unique propositional symbols. I have not been able to decipher
the intuition behind the axiom. Thus, I leave it as an exercise for the reader!
Inspecting  Lukasiewicz’s 1936 shortened single-axiom system, might bring in-
spiration to the task as it appears similar in structure to the axiom of M:
L1936: ((p →q) →(((¬r →¬s) →t) →r)) →u →(r →p) →(s →p)
M:
((((p →q) →(¬r →¬s)) →r) →t) →(t →p) →(s →p)
5.10.2
Completeness
In the same work where Meredith published the system, he also proved its com-
pleteness by deriving from it the three axioms of L1, a system that was known
to be complete. While I do not have access to the paper itself, his proof can be
found, formulated in the automated theorem prover Otter17, in the appendix
of Larry Wos’s article Conquering the Meredith Single Axiom [75]. The proof
consists of 38 derivations. I have utilized Isabelle/HOL’s Sledgehammer tool
to shorten the proof down to 26 derivations, see System M.thy. Jørgen Villad-
sen has improved on this by producing a proof of L1’s axioms from M in only
10 derivations, see SLAI 1.thy. In this section, rather than try to explain the
derivations in System M, which are mostly unintuitive, I give a short introduc-
tion to Sledgehammer and how I have used it to create the proof.
Sledgehammer is an extremely useful subsystem of Isabelle/HOL that invokes
automated theorem provers to help the user in establishing a lemma [48]. Au-
tomated theorem provers can construct proofs that consist of long chains of
unintuitive deductions that the user would probably never see. They are thus
a synergistic complement to an interactive proof assistant like Isabelle/HOL. If
the Isabelle/HOL user is experiencing difficulty proving a lemma, they might
invoke the Sledgehammer subsystem which in turn invokes a suite of automated
theorem provers to assist, in particular, E [54], SPASS [67] and Vampire [51].
For an example of how I used Sledgehammer in my proof of the completeness
of system M, see figure 5.
Sledgehammer has since its release been incorporated into the average Isabelle/HOL
user’s everyday routine. Its broad applications and ease of use also make it
convenient for new users. Sledgehammer not only makes use of previously es-
tablished lemmas in the theory file but also draws upon lemmas the user might
not even know about from lemma libraries [48]. Together with the intuitive
structured proof language Isar even a beginner of Isabelle/HOL can show an
impressive amount of theorems with relative ease.
17For more information about Otter, see https://www.mcs.anl.gov/research/projects/
AR/otter/.
53
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5: The above screenshot shows how Sledgehammer is invoked to help
perform the derivation of M 22.
I want to derive the statement ((p →q →
¬((r →¬¬s →s) →¬q)) →t) →t (M 22) since it can be used for the eventual
derivation of the first axiom of L1. I want to see if any of the previous derivations
I have established so far are enough to show M 22, or if I have to perform
additional intermediate derivations. However, the statement is too complicated
for me to figure this out on my own. I know that the derivation will probably
make use of the single axiom M 1 and that the proof method is Modus Ponens, so
I write using M 1 M MP. Then I write sledgehammer to invoke Sledgehammer,
which will see my listed facts M 1 M MP and prioritize their usage in the proof
search [10]. When I mouse over the word an output window pops up, telling me
that Sledgehammer is sledgehammering. After some seconds it outputs that a
proof has been found. In this case, it has been found by the automated theorem
prover Vampire. Vampire tells me to try inserting by (metis (full types)
M 15 M 21) after the facts I have already written. I then click on this to have
the text automatically inserted and the proof that metis creates is checked by
Isabelle/HOL to be correct. It turned out that the previous derivations M 15
and M 21 are sufficient, when combined with M 1, to show M 22.
54
==PAGE:58==
6
Evaluation
In the previous sections I have presented the 10 Isabelle/HOL formalizations
that were produced in this thesis. System L1.thy act as the center of these,
being home to the specification of the syntax and semantics of classical propo-
sitional logic (section 2), and where the initial completeness result is shown
(section 4).
I use this result to show 9 other systems complete (section 5).
Through the derivations of the axioms of the L1 system from each system, the
systems H, L3, M, R, S1 and S2 are shown complete. System H.thy contains
the formalization of H and its axiomatic proof of completeness. System L3.thy,
System M.thy, System R.thy, System S1.thy and System S2.thy describes
the same for L3, M, R, S1 and S2 respectively. The systems F and LT are
formalized and shown complete by axiomatic proofs of the axioms of L3 in
System F.thy and System LT.thy respectively. The L2 system is in the same
way formalized and shown complete through the completeness of S1 in the
System L2.thy formalization.
The initial goal of this thesis, as outlined in my submitted project plan, was
to see if it was possible to formalize in Isabelle/HOL the completeness of the
8 historical axiomatic systems outlined in Yasuyuki Imai and Kiyoshi Is´eki’s
paper [30]. Evaluating this project, the resulting answer is “yes it is!”. Not
only was it possible, but Isabelle/HOL’s features made it convenient to do so.
So convenient, in fact, that I formalized the completeness of two additional his-
torical axiomatic systems: M and LT, and that the prospects of adding further
systems to the list look bright.
In this section I reflect on and discuss this result. I then outline its implications
for future works. Finally, I conclude the project.
6.1
Discussion
In this section, I discuss the experiences I have made with formalizing axiomatic
proofs in Isabelle/HOL during this thesis. The following is in reference to sec-
tion 5 in particular.
Axiomatic proofs are proofs done at the object-level of the axiomatic system. In
principle, only the axioms and the rules of inferences of the axiomatic systems
are to be used. In this thesis, I perform substitution at the meta-level by uti-
lizing Isabelle/HOL’s substitution axiom. Thus, I am not strictly following this
principle. For a discussion on why I choose to do this, instead of implementing
substitution as an inference rule, see section 3.1. However, apart from this, I
am not utilizing any of Isabelle/HOL’s meta-level theorems or identities in the
axiomatic proofs of this thesis.
The benefits of using Isabelle/HOL to formalize proofs have already been out-
lined in section 1.2. Here, I want to point out some of Isabelle/HOL’s features
55
==PAGE:59==
that are relevant in formalizing axiomatic proofs in particular.
6.1.1
Using Isabelle/HOL abbreviations to specify connectives
The fragment of classical propositional logic that an axiomatic system use is
a defining characteristic of the system. The choice of connectives, and possi-
ble logical objects, dictate how statements can be written and in turn also what
statements come across as intuitive. A statement such as “the sun is shining and
it is summer” is easy to write using the and-connective: the sun is shining ∧
it is summer. However, in the {→, ¬}-fragment the simplest way of writing this
statement is ¬(the sun is shining →¬it is summer) which roughly translates
into “it is not the case that if the sun is shining then it is not summer”, a much
more complicated and unnatural-sounding sentence. Thus, sentences that are
intuitive when written with the fragment’s connectives and logical objects are
indirectly promoted over those that are not.
Because of this, even though an axiomatic proof is a purely syntactical construct,
a user might find themselves bound by thinking in terms of the semantics of the
connectives of the fragment when trying to come up with a proof. This might
be why certain fragments have seen more historical use than others. An exam-
ple of this is the Sheffer’s stroke connective, also referred to as NAND (Not
AND). This connective, typically written with a | symbol, is functionally com-
plete. p|q is often explained as ¬(p∧q) since their truth tables are identical, and
since there is no single word in English that describes Sheffer’s Stroke precisely.
As early as 1917 a single-axiom system of length 23 using the {|}-fragment of
classical propositional logic was shown complete by Jean Nicod [44]. Evaluat-
ing this system in terms of the heuristics used at the Warsaw School of Logic
around that time, see figure 4, it can be seen to possess a high score: while
the axiom deploys 5 unique propositional symbols, and also isn’t organic, the
fact that it is a single-axiom system of length 23 using only 1 primitive concept
puts it, to my knowledge, in direct competition with some of the highest rated
axiomatic systems known at the time, in terms of these heuristics. Despite this,
this system, and the {|}-fragment in general, seem to have seen much less use
in the axiomatic proof community, than the {→, ¬}-fragment has, a fragment
which was prevalent at the Warsaw School of Logic. Jan  Lukasiewicz himself
even wrote of the system that “Nicod’s axiom is very complicated and not very
intuitive” [79].
Thus, even if an axiomatic system is deemed elegant or better, it matters little
to how much use it sees, if people do not find the fragment used intuitive. Is-
abelle/HOL’s abbreviation feature lets the user write connectives that are not
included in the fragment. These can be defined from the primitive connectives
as abbreviations. They can then be used in writing axiomatic proofs as if they
were primitive terms themselves.
Isabelle/HOL can translate any statement
written, into an equivalent statement that only consists of connectives from the
fragment. This mechanism is purely syntactical, similar to that of macro in-
56
==PAGE:60==
structions in programming languages. Thus, Isabelle/HOL cannot check that a
connective, specified as an abbreviation, matches the intended truth-table defi-
nition.
It must be noted that this use of Isabelle/HOL’s meta-level, like with substitu-
tion, is a departure from the idea behind axiomatic proofs. The act of replacing
an expression with an abbreviation could be specified at the object-level as an
inference rule. Jan  Lukasiewicz does this and describes it as the rule of replace-
ment:
“The rule of replacement : if an expression α is a thesis of the system, and
an expression β is part of expression α and is equiform with the right side of
one of the definitions given above or one of its correct substitutions, then we
may recognize as a thesis of the system any expression γ which is obtained from
expression a through the replacement of expression β by an expression equiform
with the left side of the same definition or by its corresponding correct substitu-
tion of that left side.” [79]
This inference rule specification is long and convoluted when compared to Modus
Ponens. Furthermore, it relies on concepts being defined at the object-level such
as equality, to specify the definitions, and expressions, to identify well-formed
sub-strings of statements. This clutters the axiomatic system with concepts that
naturally lend themselves to be specified at the meta-level anyway. In addition,
having to perform a rule application just to replace part of a statement with
an abbreviation is tedious.
Letting Isabelle/HOL handle the replacement of
abbreviations frees a burden from the proof writer while providing no more
expressive power than the inference rule would.
6.1.2
Using Metis and Sledgehammer to construct axiomatic proofs
In section 5.10 I outlined how the automated theorem prover Metis [29] and Is-
abelle/HOL’s built-in tool Sledgehammer [10] can be used in conjunction to find
derivations of user-proposed statements in an axiomatic proof. These tools can-
not tell the user what statements to show in order to progress in the axiomatic
proof, but can, when prompted, search for a derivation of a user-proposed state-
ment using previously derived statements from the formalization. For an exam-
ple of this see 5.
If the user has found a statement that they want to derive, but Sledgehammer,
when prompted, cannot find an axiomatic proof of it, it might be because cer-
tain preliminary derivations need to be established first. This might also be
the case if Sledgehammer does find a proof, but the proof is too difficult for
Metis to show [10]. In this situation, the metis proof method will run forever.
This is a sign that a proof exists, but that the derivations established so far
are too “far” away from the statement, in terms of the number of intermediate
derivations required. The user is now likely to engage in clever experimentation
57
==PAGE:61==
to find what preliminary derivations are sufficient for Metis to show the state-
ment. Isabelle/HOL’s sorry keyword can help with this. sorry represents a
“fake proof ” [71] that, when written under a lemma, will cause Isabelle/HOL
to accept that lemma as a proven fact. This fact can now be included in Sledge-
hammer’s list of facts that it passes to the automated theorem provers when
performing a proof search. Thus, the user can use the sorry keyword to see if
a preliminary derivation might be helpful before trying to derive it, saving a lot
of time when experimenting.
The automated theorem provers that Sledgehammer queries frequently use more
facts that are necessary in their proofs [10]. Sledgehammer has an in-built tool
that tries to find a proof that use a minimal set of facts [10]. However, it is
still the case that Sledgehammer might return a proof that refers to previous
derivations that are not necessary. This is especially the case if the user pro-
vides derivations, that are not actually needed, as facts. It is in my experience
worth experimenting with different sets of provided derivations when querying
Sledgehammer. There might be multiple ways to derive the desired statement,
one or more which are minimal or fastest for Metis to show.
One downside to using Sledgehammer and Metis in formalizing axiomatic proofs
is that information about the individual substitutions and rule applications is
lost. An axiomatic proof of a statement using metis is checked for correctness
by Isabelle/HOL, but the individual steps of the proof are not stored, see sec-
tion 1.2.1. The user thus cannot inspect the proof, and so any crucial intuition
that the proof might have expressed is lost. The user can try to recreate the
intuition of the proof by showing more preliminary derivations, thus decreasing
the number of substitutions and rule applications between each step of the proof.
In general there seem to be a “granularity” to formalizing axiomatic proofs in
Isabelle/HOL. Utilizing the full power of Sledgehammer and Metis can let the
user make huge leaps in derivations. An example of this is LT2.thy where Jørgen
Villadsen derives the three axioms of L1 from the single-axiom system LT in only
5 steps (lemmas). Three of these are the axioms of L1, and the other two are the
statements (p →q →r) →((p →q) →(p →r)) and ((p →q) →r) →(q →r).
These two derivations are step 5 and 15 respectively of the 19 step proof of
L3’s axioms from LT, formalized in System LT.thy, see section 5.9. Thus, it is
possible to omit at least 12 derivations from the System LT.thy formalization
by utilizing Sledgehammer and Metis. However, doing so might make the proof
less understandable from the perspective of a human reading the formalization.
Including derivations, that are not strictly needed, to convey the intuition be-
hind the proof might help a potential reader understand the formalization, but
in turn, makes the proof longer. Another consideration is the time it takes Is-
abelle/HOL to check the proof formalization. A derivation that takes metis a
long time to show, might be sped up by adding relevant preliminary derivations
to the proof to help Metis.
58
==PAGE:62==
In the history of axiomatic proofs there has been an emphasis on writing shorter
proofs [18,76]. Using Isabelle/HOL’s Sledgehammer tool and Metis, shorter ax-
iomatic proofs than would ever be possible in pen and paper can be formalized.
However, this can be deceiving, as the number of lemmas in an Isabelle/HOL
axiomatic proof does not necessarily correspond to the number of actual deriva-
tions being made. Chaining multiple rule applications and calling it a single
derivation has been a common tradition since at least the 1920s [79]. This has
usually been limited to a handful or even just a couple of rule applications, but
Metis can chain an unknown, potentially very high, number of rule applications
together to perform a single derivation. Is such a proof truly shorter? And
if so, is a shorter proof better? I think that in the context of formalizing ax-
iomatic proofs in Isabelle/HOL what it means for a proof to be elegant needs
to be reevaluated. After all, axiomatic proofs seem to be loved by many exactly
because of their elegance. I’m proposing “how short can a proof be while still
presenting itself as intuitive when read”.
It is important to remember that in these proofs, the “steps left for the imagi-
nation” are not omitted, and they are verified by Isabelle/HOL’s kernel. Thus,
this is not a case of improper detailing, a situation common in erroneous pen
and paper proofs. But elegance aside, there are other reasons why an axiomatic
proof should be intuitive. Lifetimes worth of research and practice has gone
into developing techniques and methodology for performing axiomatic proofs.
These are not only useful when learning how to write good axiomatic proofs, but
they also grant profound insights into the design of axiomatic systems and in
some sense the act of deduction itself. These insights are expressed in detailed
axiomatic proofs. During this thesis, I have learned a great deal from studying
axiomatic proofs written by experts in the field, and my wish is for this property
to be conveyed in the Isabelle/HOL formalizations too.
6.2
Future Work
In this thesis, I have presented and discussed how Isabelle/HOL can be used
to formalize the soundness and completeness of axiomatic systems of classical
propositional logic. With Isabelle/HOL’s many relevant features and powerful
tools, the potential for future work looks promising. In this section, I present 3
directions in which the project could be taken further.
6.2.1
Formalize axiomatic proofs of more axiomatic systems
A natural direction forward is to extend the list of formalized axiomatic sys-
tems of classical propositional logic by formalizing axiomatic proofs for more
systems, of potentially different fragments. Meredith and Arthur Prior’s 1963
article Notes on the Axiomatics of the Propositional Calculus [39] compiles many
axiomatic systems, that in total use 13 different fragments. Meredith provides
an axiomatic proof for each system, thus this work provides a convenient start-
ing point for adding more Isabelle/HOL formalizations to the list. The pub-
59
==PAGE:63==
lication series On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, see section 5, also
contain more axiomatic proofs that could be formalized. For example, publica-
tion XXIII [32] and XXIV [33] where Kiyoshi Is´eki show various derivations of
systems that use the {→, ⊥}-fragment.
6.2.2
Formalize initial completeness of other axiomatic systems and
generalize the method
The Henkin-style completeness proof formalized by Asta Halkjær From [23] was
reconfigured in section 4 to show the completeness of the L1 system. To do
this several preliminary derivations had to be made, which have been covered
in section 4.4. A question is, whether another system lends itself better to this:
requiring fewer, or simpler, preliminary derivations. If such a system exists, a
follow-up question is then whether this system’s axioms are easier to derive from
other systems than L1’s axioms have been. If the answer is yes, such a system
would be a better host of the initial completeness proof.
Going a step further, it would be interesting to investigate whether it is possible
to generalize the proof formalization even further so that it becomes parametric.
What this entails, precisely, is unclear to me, but if the formalization could be
abstracted in such a way that the user simply had to specify an axiomatic system
of classical propositional logic and not worry about any preliminary derivations,
then the proof formalization would be truly generic.
If this turns out to be impossible, another goal could be investigating if there
are certain statements which are universally simple to derive from axiomatic
systems of classical propositional logic. The completeness formalization could
then be modified to have these statements as the preliminary lemmas needed.
This would make the formalization more generic, in the sense that it could
be reconfigured to show any axiomatic system of classical propositional logic
complete, requiring relatively few preliminary derivations.
6.2.3
Formalize other meta-theoretical properties of axiomatic sys-
tems
In this thesis, I have focused on the meta-theoretical properties of soundness and
completeness. There exist other meta-theoretical properties of axiomatic sys-
tems of classical propositional logic that could be formalized in Isabelle/HOL.
Two examples of this are axiom independence and axiom awkwardness. Axiom
independence is an important property that has not been discussed in this the-
sis. It is used to decide whether a sound and complete axiomatic system’s set
of axioms is a minimal one. The “matrix” method of deciding mutual indepen-
dence of a set of axioms shown by Jan  Lukasiewicz in [79] could be formalized
in Isabelle/HOL. Boles law Soboci´nski’s notion of awkward axiom systems [61]
is a lesser known property. In [61] he presents awkwardness as a measure of
elegance of an axiomatic system and specifies a decision procedure for it, which
60
==PAGE:64==
could be formalized in Isabelle/HOL.
Formalizing meta-theoretical properties like these might provide insights into
the general theory of axiomatic systems of classical propositional logic. In this
thesis, I have considered 10 specific instances of axiomatic systems of classical
propositional logic. Each of these systems has been carefully crafted by their
author, who were all world-class experts in the field. However, in my study of
the writings of these experts, I have not come across a single proposal of general
theory of axiomatic systems of classical propositional logic, or even an attempt
at formalizing one. What is more puzzling, to a novice like me, is that I have
not even seen, or heard, mention of such a theory existing, or possibly exist-
ing. Except in one place, in Alonzo Church’s review of [40] - the article where
Meredith presents system M, see section 5.10. Here, Church writes the following:
“Much labor and ingenuity have been expended on special results. As there are an
infinite number of sets of primitive connectives for, and fragments of, the two-
valued propositional calculus inviting study, and beyond those the many-valued
propositional calculi, the task threatens to be endless.
Not even the slightest
suggestion has ever been made (and the reviewer has none) towards a general
theory of the matter, in any appropriate sense. Yet it seems worth while to ask
whether such a theory, or at least partial theory, might not be found” [15]
The modern state-of-the-art technology of Isabelle/HOL might be the help that
is needed to start investigating this.
6.3
Conclusion
In this thesis, I have formalized in Isabelle/HOL the 10 historical axiomatic
systems of classical propositional logic listed in the appendix. I have shown
the completeness of the L1 system through a Henkin-style completeness proof
formalized in Isabelle/HOL. I have shown the completeness of the other 9 sys-
tems through axiomatic proofs formalized in Isabelle/HOL. To aid in the con-
struction of these proofs I have utilized the automated theorem prover Metis
and Isabelle/HOL’s in-built tool Sledgehammer. Throughout this project, Is-
abelle/HOL, Metis and Sledgehammer have been demonstrated to be power-
ful assets in formalizing axiomatic systems of classical propositional logic and
showing their soundness and completeness. One downside, however, is that in-
dividual axiomatic derivations are not stored and thus cannot be inspected by
the user. For future work I propose 3 different directions the project can be
taken in. First off, more axiomatic systems can be formalized, adding to the
current list. This can either be done by way of formalized axiomatic proofs,
or by reconfiguring the Henkin-style completeness proof again. Finally, other
meta-theoretical properties of axiomatic systems of classical propositional logic
can be formalized.
61
==PAGE:65==
References
[1] J. Alama and J. Korbmacher, “The Lambda Calculus,” in The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University, 2021.
[2] E. Alkassar, N. Schirmer, and A. Starostin, “Formal Pervasive Verification
of a Paging Mechanism,” in Tools and Algorithms for the Construction
and Analysis of Systems, 14th International Conference, TACAS 2008,
Held as Part of the Joint European Conferences on Theory and Practice
of Software, ETAPS 2008, Budapest, Hungary, March 29-April 6, 2008.
Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, C. R. Ramakrishnan
and J. Rehof, Eds., vol. 4963.
Springer, 2008, pp. 109–123. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3 9
[3] Y. Arai, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, III,” Proceedings of
the Japan Academy, pp. 570–574, 1965.
[4] ——, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, XII,” Proceedings of
the Japan Academy, pp. 901–903, 1965.
[5] Y. Arai and K. Is´eki, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, VII,”
Proceedings of the Japan Academy, pp. 667–669, 1965.
[6] J. Avigad, K. Donnelly, D. Gray, and P. Raff, “A formally verified proof
of the prime number theorem,” ACM Trans. Comput. Log., vol. 9, no. 1,
p. 2, 2007. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1297658.1297660
[7] C. Ballarin,
“Locales and Locale Expressions in Isabelle/Isar,”
in
Types for Proofs and Programs, International Workshop, TYPES 2003,
Torino,
Italy,
April 30 - May 4,
2003,
Revised Selected Papers,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, S. Berardi, M. Coppo, and
F. Damiani,
Eds.,
vol. 3085.
Springer,
2003,
pp. 34–50. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24849-1 3
[8] M.
Ben-Ari,
Mathematical
Logic
for
Computer
Science,
3rd
Edi-
tion.
Springer,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4471-4129-7
[9] P. Bernays, “Problems,” Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 18, no. 4, p. 350,
1953.
[10] J. Blanchette, “Hammering Away: A User’s Guide to Sledgehammer for
Isabelle/HOL,” Tutorials and manuals for Isabelle2021-1, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://isabelle.in.tum.de/documentation.html
[11] J. C. Blanchette, “Formalizing the metatheory of logical calculi and
automatic provers in Isabelle/HOL (invited talk),” in Proceedings of the
8th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and
62
==PAGE:66==
Proofs, CPP 2019, Cascais, Portugal, January 14-15, 2019, A. Mahboubi
and M. O. Myreen, Eds.
ACM, 2019, pp. 1–13. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3293880.3294087
[12] S. Bobzien, “Ancient Logic,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2020.
[13] L. Borkowski and J. Slupecki, “The Logical Works of J.  Lukasiewicz,”
Studia Logica, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 7–56, 1958.
[14] A. Church, Introduction to Mathematical Logic.
Princeton, 1956.
[15] ——, “Review:
Carew A. Meredith, Single Axioms for the Systems
(C, N), (C, O) and (A, N) of the Two-Valued Propositional Calculus,”
Journal of Symbolic Logic, no. 2, pp. 143–144, 1954. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2268913
[16] N. de Bruijn, “Lambda calculus notation with nameless dummies, a tool for
automatic formula manipulation, with application to the church-rosser the-
orem,” Proceedings of the Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie Van Weten-
schappen. Series A, Indagationes Mathematica, vol. 75, no. 75, pp. 381–392,
1972.
[17] P. Egr´e and H. Rott, “The Logic of Conditionals,” in The Stanford En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy, E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University, 2021.
[18] B. Fitelson and L. Wos,
“Finding Missing Proofs with Automated
Reasoning,” Stud Logica, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 329–356, 2001. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1012486904520
[19] G. Frege, Begriffsschrift, eine der mathematischen nachgebildete Formel-
sprache des reinen Denkens.
Halle a/S: Verlag von Louis Nebert, 1879.
[20] A. H. From, “Formalized Soundness and Completeness of Epistemic Logic,”
in Logic, Language, Information, and Computation - 27th International
Workshop, WoLLIC 2021, Virtual Event, October 5-8, 2021, Proceedings,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, A. Silva, R. Wassermann, and
R. J. G. B. de Queiroz, Eds., vol. 13038.
Springer, 2021, pp. 1–15.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-88853-4 1
[21] ——, “Soundness and completeness of an axiomatic system for first-order
logic,”
Arch.
Formal
Proofs,
vol.
2021,
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.isa-afp.org/entries/FOL Axiomatic.html
[22] A. H. From, A. M. Eschen, and J. Villadsen, “Formalizing Axiomatic
Systems for Propositional logic in Isabelle/HOL,” in Intelligent Computer
Mathematics - 14th International Conference, CICM 2021, Timisoara,
Romania,
July
26-31,
2021,
Proceedings,
ser.
Lecture
Notes
in
Computer Science, F. Kamareddine and C. S. Coen, Eds., vol. 12833.
63
==PAGE:67==
Springer, 2021, pp. 32–46. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-81097-9 3
[23] A. H. From, “Formalizing Henkin-Style Completeness of an Axiomatic Sys-
tem for Propositional Logic,” Proceedings of the ESSLLI & WESSLLI Stu-
dent Session 2020, pp. 1–12, 2020.
[24] J. Garson, “Modal Logic,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2021.
[25] M. G´omez-Torrente, “Alfred Tarski,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy, E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
2022.
[26] T. C. Hales, “Introduction to the Flyspeck Project,” in Mathematics,
Algorithms,
Proofs,
9.-14.
January
2005,
ser.
Dagstuhl
Seminar
Proceedings, T. Coquand, H. Lombardi, and M. Roy, Eds., vol. 05021.
Internationales
Begegnungs-
und
Forschungszentrum
f¨ur
Informatik
(IBFI), Schloss Dagstuhl, Germany, 2005. [Online]. Available:
http:
//drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2006/432
[27] L. Henkin, “The discovery of my completeness proofs,” Bull. Symb.
Log., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 127–158, 1996. [Online]. Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.2307/421107
[28] D. Hilbert, “Die logischen grundlagen der Mathematik,” Mathematische
Annalen, vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 151–165, 1922.
[29] J. Hurd, “First-Order Proof Tactics in Higher-Order Logic Theorem
Provers,” in Design and Application of Strategies/Tactics in Higher Order
Logics (STRATA 2003), ser. NASA Technical Reports, M. Archer, B. D.
Vito, and C. Mu˜noz, Eds., no. NASA/CP-2003-212448, Sep. 2003, pp.
56–68. [Online]. Available: http://www.gilith.com/papers
[30] Y. Imai and K. Is´eki, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, I,”
Proceedings of the Japan Academy, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 436 – 439, 1965.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3792/pja/1195522378
[31] A. D. Irvine, “Bertrand Russell,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy, E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
2022.
[32] K. Is´eki, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, XXIII,” Proceedings
of the Japan Academy, pp. 875–877, 1966.
[33] ——, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, XXIV,” Proceedings of
the Japan Academy, pp. 878–879, 1966.
[34] K. Is´eki and S. Tanaka, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, V,”
Proceedings of the Japan Academy, pp. 661–662, 1965.
64
==PAGE:68==
[35] G. Klein and T. Nipkow, “A machine-checked model for a Java-like
language,
virtual
machine,
and
compiler,”
ACM
Trans.
Program.
Lang. Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 619–695, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1146811
[36] D.
Leinenbach
and
E.
Petrova,
“Pervasive
Compiler
Verification
-
From
Verified
Programs
to
Verified
Systems,”
Electron.
Notes
Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 217, pp. 23–40, 2008. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2008.06.040
[37] B. Linsky and A. D. Irvine, “Principia Mathematica,” in The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University, 2022.
[38] W. McCune and L. Wos, “Otter - the CADE-13 competition incarnations,”
J. Autom. Reason., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 211–220, 1997. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1005843632307
[39] C. A. Meredith and A. N. Prior, “Notes on the Axiomatics of the
Propositional Calculus,” Notre Dame J. Formal Log., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 171–
187, 1963. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1305/ndjfl/1093957574
[40] C. A. Meredith, Single axioms for the systems (C, N), (C, O) and (A, N)
of the two-valued propositional calculus.
Institute of Applied Logic, 1953.
[41] D. Meredith, “In memoriam: Carew Arthur Meredith (1904-1976),” Notre
Dame J. Formal Log., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 513–516, 1977. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1305/ndjfl/1093888116
[42] J. Michaelis and T. Nipkow, “Formalized Proof Systems for Propositional
Logic,”
in 23rd International Conference on Types for Proofs and
Programs, TYPES 2017, May 29-June 1, 2017, Budapest, Hungary, ser.
LIPIcs, A. Abel, F. N. Forsberg, and A. Kaposi, Eds., vol. 104.
Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik, 2017, pp. 5:1–5:16. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.TYPES.2017.5
[43] J. Moschovakis, “Intuitionistic Logic,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy, E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
2021.
[44] J. G. P. Nicod, “A Reduction in the number of Primitive Propositions of
Logic,” Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., vol. 19, pp. 32–41, 1917.
[45] T. Nipkow, “What’s in Main,” Tutorials and manuals for Isabelle2021-1,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://isabelle.in.tum.de/documentation.html
[46] T. Nipkow, G. Bauer, and P. Schultz, “Flyspeck I: Tame Graphs,” in
Automated Reasoning, Third International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2006,
Seattle, WA, USA, August 17-20, 2006, Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, U. Furbach and N. Shankar, Eds., vol. 4130.
Springer,
2006, pp. 21–35. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/11814771 4
65
==PAGE:69==
[47] S. Obua and T. Nipkow, “Flyspeck II: the basic linear programs,” Ann.
Math. Artif. Intell., vol. 56, no. 3-4, pp. 245–272, 2009. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10472-009-9168-z
[48] L. C. Paulson and J. C. Blanchette, “Three years of experience with
Sledgehammer,
a practical link between Automatic and Interactive
Theorem Provers,” in The 8th International Workshop on the Imple-
mentation of Logics, IWIL 2010, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, October 9,
2011, ser. EPiC Series in Computing, G. Sutcliffe, S. Schulz, and
E. Ternovska, Eds., vol. 2.
EasyChair, 2010, pp. 1–11. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.29007/36dt
[49] L. C. Paulson, T. Nipkow, and M. Wenzel, “From LCF to Isabelle/HOL,”
Formal Aspects Comput., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 675–698, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00165-019-00492-1
[50] A. N. Prior, Formal Logic.
Oxford University Press, 1963. [Online].
Available:
https://oxford.universitypressscholarship.com/view/10.1093/
acprof:oso/9780198241560.001.0001/acprof-9780198241560
[51] A. Riazanov and A. Voronkov, “Vampire 1.1 (System Description),”
in Automated Reasoning, First International Joint Conference, IJCAR
2001,
Siena,
Italy,
June
18-23,
2001,
Proceedings,
ser.
Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, R. Gor´e, A. Leitsch, and T. Nipkow,
Eds.,
vol. 2083.
Springer,
2001,
pp. 376–380. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45744-5 29
[52] V. F. Rickey, “Professor Boleslaw Soboci´nski and Logic at Notre Dame,”
Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, pp. 1–24, 2020.
[53] B. Russell, “The theory of implication,” American Journal of Mathematics,
vol. 28, pp. 159–202, 1906.
[54] S. Schulz, “System Description:
E 0.81,” in Automated Reasoning -
Second International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2004, Cork, Ireland, July
4-8, 2004, Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, D. A.
Basin and M. Rusinowitch, Eds., vol. 3097.
Springer, 2004, pp. 223–228.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-25984-8 15
[55] S. Shapiro and T. Kouri Kissel, “Classical Logic,” in The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy, E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University, 2021.
[56] C. Shields, “Aristotle,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, E. N.
Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2022.
[57] P. Simons, “Jan  Lukasiewicz,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2021.
66
==PAGE:70==
[58] R. Smith, “Aristotle’s Logic,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2020.
[59] B. Soboci´nski, “Axiomization of a conjunctive-negative calculus of propo-
sitions,” The Journal of Computing Systems, vol. 1, pp. 239–240, 1954.
[60] ——, “Note on a Problem of Paul Bernays,” J. Symb. Log., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 109–114, 1955. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.2307/2266894
[61] ——, “Awkward axiom-systems,” Notre Dame J. Formal Log., vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 315–320, 1978. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1305/
ndjfl/1093888329
[62] K. Tanaka, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, XI,” Proceedings
of the Japan Academy, pp. 898–900, 1965.
[63] S. Tanaka, “On Axiom Systems of Propositional Calculi, XIII,” Proceedings
of the Japan Academy, pp. 904–907, 1965.
[64] J. V¨a¨an¨anen,
“Obituary:
Jaakko Hintikka 1929-2015,” Bull. Symb.
Log., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 431–436, 2015. [Online]. Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1017/bsl.2015.35
[65] J. Villadsen, A. Schlichtkrull, and A. H. From, “A Verified Simple
Prover for First-Order Logic,”
in Proceedings of the 6th Workshop
on Practical Aspects of Automated Reasoning co-located with Federated
Logic Conference 2018 (FLoC 2018), Oxford, UK, July 19th, 2018, ser.
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, B. Konev, J. Urban, and P. R¨ummer,
Eds., vol. 2162.
CEUR-WS.org, 2018, pp. 88–104. [Online]. Available:
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2162/paper-08.pdf
[66] J. V¨a¨an¨anen, “Second-order and Higher-order Logic,” in The Stanford En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy, E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University, 2021.
[67] C. Weidenbach, “SPASS: Combining Superposition, Sorts and Splitting,”
preprint article, 2010.
[68] M. Wenzel,
“Overview,”
https://isabelle.in.tum.de/overview.html,
ac-
cessed: 2022-04-04.
[69] ——,
“The Isabelle/Isar Reference Manual,”
Tutorials and manuals
for Isabelle2021-1, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://isabelle.in.tum.de/
documentation.html
[70] ——, “Isabelle/jEdit,” Tutorials and manuals for Isabelle2021-1, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://isabelle.in.tum.de/documentation.html
[71] ——,
“The Isabelle/Isar Reference Manual,”
Tutorials and manuals
for Isabelle2021-1, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://isabelle.in.tum.de/
documentation.html
67
==PAGE:71==
[72] M. Wenzel, L. C. Paulson, and T. Nipkow, “The Isabelle Framework,” in
Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics, 21st International Conference,
TPHOLs 2008, Montreal, Canada, August 18-21, 2008. Proceedings, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, O. A. Mohamed, C. A. Mu˜noz, and
S. Tahar, Eds., vol. 5170.
Springer, 2008, pp. 33–38. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-71067-7 7
[73] F. Wiedijk, Ed., The Seventeen Provers of the World, Foreword by Dana
S. Scott, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer, 2006, vol.
3600. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/11542384
[74] J. Wolenski, “Polish Logic,” Log. J. IGPL, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 399–428,
2004. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/jigpal/12.5.399
[75] L.
Wos,
“Conquering
the
Meredith
Single
Axiom,”
J.
Autom.
Reason.,
vol.
27,
no.
2,
pp.
175–199,
2001.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010691726881
[76] L. Wos and G. W. Pieper, Automated Reasoning and the Discovery of
Missing and the Discovery of Missing and Elegant Proofs.
Rinton Press,
Princeton, 2003.
[77] R. Zach, “Hilbert’s Program,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2019.
[78] E. N. Zalta, “Gottlob Frege,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2022.
[79] J.  Lukasiewicz, Elements of Mathematical Logic.
New York: Macmillan,
1963, translated from Polish by Olgierd Wojtasiewicz.
[80] J.  Lukasiewicz and A. Tarski, “Untersuchungen ¨uber den Aussagenkalk¨ul,”
C. R. de Varsovie, vol. C1. III, no. 23, pp. 30–50, 1930.
68
==PAGE:72==
Appendix: List of Axiomatic Systems
The below axiomatic systems are ordered, from left to right, by their appearance in section 5.
L1: Jan  Lukasiewicz 1929 [79]
( p →q ) →( ( q →r ) →( p →r ) )
( ¬ p →p ) →p
p →( ¬ p →q )
H: David Hilbert 1922 [28]
p →( q →p )
( p →( q →r ) ) →( q →( p →r ) )
( q →r ) →( ( p →q ) →( p →r ) )
p →( ¬ p →q )
( p →q ) →( ( ¬ p →q ) →q )
L3: Jan  Lukasiewicz 1929 [79]
p →( q →p )
( p →( q →r ) ) →( ( p →q ) →( p →r ) )
( ¬ p →¬ q ) →( q →p )
R: Bertrand Russell 1906 [53]
p →( q →p )
( p →q ) →( ( q →r ) →( p →r ) )
( p →( q →r ) ) →( q →( p →r ) )
¬ ¬ p →p
( p →¬ p ) →¬ p
( p →¬ q ) →( q →¬ p )
F: Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob Frege 1879 [19]
p →( q →p )
( p →( q →r ) ) →( ( p →q ) →( p →r ) )
( p →q ) →( ¬ q →¬ p )
¬ ¬ p →p
p →¬ ¬ p
S1: Boles law Soboci´nski 1954 [59]
¬ p →( p →q )
p →( q →( r →p ) )
( ¬ p →r ) →( ( q →r ) →( ( p →q ) →r ) )
L2: Jan  Lukasiewicz 1929 [79]
( ( p →q ) →r ) →( ¬ p →r )
( ( p →q ) →r ) →( q →r )
( ¬ p →r ) →( ( q →r ) →( ( p →q ) →r ) )
S2: Boles law Soboci´nski 1955 [60]
p →( q →( r →p ) )
( p →q ) →( ¬ q →( p →r ) )
( ¬ p →q ) →( ( p →q ) →q )
LT: Jan  Lukasiewicz & Alfred Tarski 1930 [80]
((p →(q →p)) →(((¬ r →(s →¬ t)) →((r →(s →u))
→((t →s) →(t →u)))) →v)) →(w →v)
M: Carew Arthur Meredith 1953 [40]
(((((p →q) →(¬ r →¬ s)) →r) →t)
→((t →p) →(s →p)))
69
