==PAGE:1==
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting
Self-tracking Pre- and Post-tracking
Master's Thesis
Laura Camila Vargas Castillo
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
Master’s Thesis
May 3rd, 2022
by Laura Camila Vargas Castillo
Supervisor: Jakob Eg, Associate Professor, Dept. of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science (DTU Compute), Technical University of Denmark
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Bygning 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at Dept. of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science (DTU Compute), Technical University of Denmark, under supervision
of Jakob Eg, Associate Professor, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Laura Camila Vargas Castillo ­ s150303
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Modern capabilities of digital media technology allow users to acquire important data ex­
tracted from tracking tools designed to create a footprint of a given behaviour in real time.
Self­tracking may be largely beneficial to the user that intends to modify a behavioural
trait, based on such data. The work done in this project aims at investigating how would
a tool that helps the user to visualize their expectations towards a given behaviour, would
benefit the individuals reflective perspective when compared to the data extracted from
tracking. Several models were developed in order to understand the contrast and the
implications for the user, the most prominent features evaluated are: flexibility of input,
temporal schemes, control over the expectation phrasing, and story telling. This projects
supports the notion that the exercise should it be one of reflection more than an actual
behavioural incentive, due to the exploratory nature of it.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to the following:
Jakob Eg, my supervisor: Thank you for the constant supervision, time and patience
throughout the whole project. Despite things being tougher during Corona, I felt supported
both technically and academically.
Test Participants: Thank you for being invaluable help to the development the project.
Shout out to H.V. and N.C.
Nicki Frederiksen, my boyfriend: Thank you for being the most important , beautiful, gen­
erous, amazing, intelligent person in the entire universe.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Objectives, Hypotheses/Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Personal informatics in behavioural medicine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Momentary methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Models in self­monitoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Analysis
10
3.1
Observation mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Observation Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Design
16
4.1
Brainstoming Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Minimal viable simplest user input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Minimal viable product: Basic slider bar input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
Minimal viable product: Basic matrix input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
Minimal viable product: Basic drawing input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.6
Minimal viable product: Glyphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
Implementation
29
5.1
Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Imports
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
Credits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Test
31
6.1
Slider Bar­Bar Chart prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Matrix­bar chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.3
Free hand drawing­area chart prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
v
==PAGE:7==
6.4
Glyph­totem prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.5
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7
Results and Discussion
39
7.1
Slider bar­bar chart prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7.2
Matrix­bar chart prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.3
Free hand drawing­area chart prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.4
Glyph­totem prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7.5
Story Telling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
8
Conclusion
46
8.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
References
50
A Appendix
53
A.1 Sketchbook Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Our ability to map a given trait of our behaviour has improved significantly with the aid
of digital technologies and the increasing development of instruments designed to track
a person’s activities. In some areas within the scope of behavioural medicine, the moni­
toring of relevant variables is a commonplace (such as in sports science, chronic illness
treatment, symptoms and psychological function). However, in the area of treatment re­
lated to psychopathologies in mental health, while there is research available, there are
several considerations to be made. The first and perhaps most relevant is that treat­
ment of mental disorders usually involves the recollection of events, occurrences, and/or
symptoms in the form of a dialogue between the patient and the therapist. According to
Moskowitz et al. [1], more than 90% of clinical studies related to mood and social behav­
ior included the clinicians’ rating as the main source of evaluation. This exchange relies
heavily on the patient’s memory, which in turn tends to be in accordance with the indi­
vidual’s beliefs about behavior or the way the world functions. It can also be influenced
by the outcome of the event and/or cognitive and memory limitations [2]. The result is a
filtered version of the behaviour to be treated or modified.
Two instances may be identified as a result of such dissonance: a) The narrative that
the patient has built around their condition, and b) the actual occurrences of the symp­
toms associated with the behaviour. Since the structure of the self­report traditionally has
been descriptive, the advent of new tracking wearable technology in situ represents an
important step toward the accuracy of representations of a person’s condition, especially
because it allows the study of behavior, psychological states, and physiological reactions
in their natural context, also allowing an approach that takes into account peoples’ natural
environment [2]. In a way is the ultimate version of diary and its perspective on human
phenomenology [3].
Wearables and self­tracking are a source of valuable information that may benefit indi­
viduals who require support in a time­sensitive and targeted manner [4]. However, an
increase in consumption of digital products does not necessarily translate into a more
educated user in terms of their ability to understand the functional implications of technol­
ogy on their cognitive abilities. To harness the enormous potential of such applications it
becomes necessary to question the assumptions of usability for the large segment of the
population, for whom digital literacy and more specifically data driven tools, are not part
of their everyday life.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
2
==PAGE:9==
1.1
Objectives, Hypotheses/Research Questions
This thesis explores the instances of reflection possible when a self­tracking individual
expresses their expectations towards the behavioural element being tracked. There are
three distinct phases in this process: 1) the pre­tracking stage, where the user anticipates
how the behaviour is most likely to develop according to their autobiographical knowledge.
To this purpose this project introduces four prototypes that make use of different visual
metaphors to help the user translate the aforementioned expectations into manageable
data. 2) the post tracking stage is where the user uses the data gathered from their own
tracking and evaluates it according to the previous stage. Finally 3) the third stage involves
contrasting the two previous versions and generating knowledge around the result of the
exercise (see Figure 1.1).
The result is a map of both stages where one is an non­reliable predictor of a behavior
and the other one is a factual representation of the events over time. The intersection
between these two will reveal the type of narrative the person has subjected themselves
to and inherently contribute to the articulation of a more accurate picture.
Figure 1.1: General overlook of the three stages involved in this project
1.2
Structure of the Thesis
The first stage of the project entails a literature review on the topic of digital therapeutics
and self­tracking mechanisms, as well as similar technologies using self­tracking devices
to eliminate, improve, or modify a certain behaviour. Additionally, work done on visu­
alizations and expectations transformed in data visualization are described in the later
sections. The core part of the project is an iterative process where an initial case is se­
lected and possible solutions for behavioural modification are prototyped, implemented,
and tested; using data visualization tools. It is worth noting that the plan includes multi­
ple rounds of design, prototyping, and implementation, which attempts to understand the
contextual variables that affect or trigger the patient’s episodes, given that these environ­
mental parameters may not be the same as the ones that the patient originally assumed.
The project examines four prototypes that cover variations in two instances: a) A visual
representation of the user’s expectation towards a specific behaviour, and b) the repre­
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
3
==PAGE:10==
sentation of the results from the self tracking exercise that the same user produced. A
final reflective instance involves the examination the misalignment in both instances to
pinpoint specific scenarios where occurrences of a given behaviour are either more in­
tense or influential to the user’s quality of life. The implementation of the prototypes will
be performed in an web based platform called ”Observable” [5]. It is important to mention
that since no tests were performed in a clinical setting, the process of defining and de­
velopment will be referred as an exercise. The mock data used as one of the contrasted
data sets, was extracted from a person whose self­tracking was supervised under med­
ical instruction. The participants that took part of the exercise are referred as users for
the most part and the behavioural traits expected to be tracked are describes as either
symptoms, occurrences, events or episodes.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
4
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
2.1
Personal Informatics
Monitoring natural phenomena is not a new endeavour, but it has become increasingly
easier, faster, and less burdensome given the remarkable development in ubiquitous dig­
ital technology. Not only are our devices passively sensing our actions, movements, and
changes, but like never before, individuals have the possibility to modify and tailor treat­
ments to their individual goals and needs as they change over time [4]. Until recently, it
was only possible to get access to this information through interviews or questionnaires
[6]. Therefore tools that allow for self­assessment and self­management, by leveraging
computational capacity, individual­generated data, informatics, and signal detection, are
needed [4].
2.1.1
Tracking devices
All of this is possible thanks to the development of interactive technologies, capable of
collecting and storing data in a user friendly manner. Although there are different types of
tracking artifacts, the signaling typically occurs through the use of a small electronic device
such as paging devices, programmable wristwatches, and palmtop computers [2]. More
recent studies have analyzed the viability of other interface, such as pressure­sensitive
tangible user interface [7], squeezable interfaces [8], interactive jewellery [9], and fitness
tracking services [10]. It is expected hat the number of tools will increase in the future
as more segments of the population will be able to have access to such developing tech­
nologies.
2.2
Personal informatics in behavioural medicine
The pervasive nature of data allows us to develop health technologies that require valid
and reliable measures of behavior for surveillance, epidemiological, and intervention stud­
ies [11]. A well developed area within the field of personal informatics is behavioural
medicine, concerning not only the assessment of a full range of behaviours, feelings, sen­
sations and activities [1], but also a number of psychopathologies within mental health
treatment. Such areas include disorder­based conditions, such as affective, psychotic,
anxiety, eating and attention disorders, and the less studied tracking mechanisms within
stress and gene­environment therapies [12]. Behavioral medicine research is integrative
and typically involves a wide array of outcome types (e.g., symptoms, behavior, mood,
physiological function) [2], which allows research in the area to be adaptable to the users
requirements. Within the scope of chronic illness, some studies have developed tools for
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
5
==PAGE:12==
chronic pain measurement that support in situ, naturalistic self­assessment and remain
reliable and low burden to use [7].
2.3
Momentary methods
The process of self­tracking involves the translation of unconscious processes into explicit
representations by the use of data [12]. Momentary assessments methods vary in formal
aspects, but always consider the balance in the number of reports to avoid reactivity to
the method.
One of the most cited methods is the Momentary Ecological Assessment (EMA), which
prompts the user to answer questions in context sensitive situations [11]. An advantage
of EMA methods is that it has been successfully carried out in patients with a variety
of different types of psychopathology and research supports the reliability of measures
aggregated across occasions [1], therefore generating temporal stability. It also can be
used to learn about behavior as it happens and then use that data to intervene in the
process, Intille et al.developed a microEMA (μEMA) smartwatch system where the users
carry out the assessment with only one digital interaction [11]. Other studies combined
it with the network visualization approach to generate personalized feedback of complex
symptom dynamics [13].
Furthermore, the Experience Sampling Methods (ESM) provide an insight into the nature
of psychiatric pathologies, answering questions such as: When are psychiatric symptoms
present? Do they fluctuate over time? How do they impact on daily functioning and what
contextual conditions trigger, accompany or follow symptoms in the flow of daily life? [12]
Another area of momentary sampling is the field of interactive technologies, the use of
the Experience Sampling and the Day Reconstruction, in which the reconstruction of the
occurrence is performed during recall and it is inferred from contextual details that are
retrieved from episodic memory with the assistance of technology [14]. This type of tech­
nique has prompted Research in the Wild Studies (RIW), which allow the inclusion of
complex and rich narratives by: a) Identifying triggers, 2) facilitating accurate recall inci­
dents, and 3) prompt discussion about both positive and negative experiences [15].
2.4
Models in self-monitoring
Now, in order to warrant some sort of progress in the sphere of behavioural, mental, or
physiological patterns there is a bridge to be built between the user, the data, and the
expected outcome. This connection requires a scientific approach which may be seen
as a three­step process: (1) Formulating a hypothesis, (2) testing a hypothesis, and (3)
interpreting a result [16]. To do so, research has been made towards the most suitable
path to translate momentary experience data into action. Li et al. propose a five­stage
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
6
==PAGE:13==
model of personal informatics, consisting of Preparation, Collection, Integration, Reflec­
tion, and Action [17]. A more limited scope is proposed by Spring et al. who argues that
to changing a deeply ingrained health risk behavior requires four instances: monitoring,
modeling, motivating, and modifying [18].
More recent research has shown that the approach of exploring the role of technology
in managing mental health with the concept of the concept of intentive computing as
the study of the use of a human­actuated system, where an intentive action is defined
as requiring the user to consciously and knowingly trigger a system [19]. And a more
sophisticated approach called goal­directed self­tracking, where self­tracking technology
supports the evolution of goals, forcing the user to add or change tracking tools as their
goals change [20].
2.5
Visualization
The reflective aspect of self­monitoring cannot be done without the use of a way to visu­
alize current status and progress. The field of Personal Visual Analytics (PVAs) intends
to gain awareness of, explore, and learn from data in personal contexts [21]. More con­
cretely, Personal Visualizations (PVs) aim at transforming visualizations into an adaptable
tool [22]. Despite the important function of visualizations, research has shown that the
ones used are basic representations of a given variable, such as records on a timeline
view [8], data as a time series [6], and cumulative sum and temporal distribution [23]. Only
one study describes a different type of visualization: network graphs form a personalized
feedback report [13].
Visualizations have different forms: tables, maps, captions, timelines and graphs, how­
ever the latest are meant to better illustrate the correlation and show users outliers or
other points that can show the overall strength of the correlation [24]. Multiples tools have
been designed to examine data in a more visually attractive manner, such as Figure 2.1
were the author [25] explores the concept by using different channels of encoded data.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Film flowers: Top summer blockbusters reimagined as flowers (by Shirley Wu
[25])
2.6
Expectation
Part of the project involves the capture of the users expectations in regards to his/her
future tracking, therefore one particular aspect to consider is the differentiation between
current and future goals [20]. And in order to accomplish said differentiation it is also
important to factor the complexity of an emotion and the chain of events it entails, which
can be represented by the use of different languages [26] and/or types of abstraction [27].
Similarly, other designs support before/after tests so people can examine their symptoms
before and after making a change [20], with the caveat that these exclusive to clinical
settings.
Current tools are generally limited to simple presentations based on minimal interpreta­
tion, such as extremely low­level data views (e.g., step counts for every 15 minute in­
terval), high­level aggregation over time (e.g., step count for a day or a month), or long
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
8
==PAGE:15==
historical event streams (e.g., steps with location traces) [28]. These place the burden of
synthesis on the self­tracker, which should not be the case given the possibility of building
a narrative derived from the data. Work on story telling has been the focus of some agents
in digital media, particularly in journalism. An example The Pudding: a digital publication
that explains ideas debated in culture with visual essays [29]. Figure 2.2 shows the differ­
ence of how names in complexion cosmetics can reveal bias inn beauty. More examples
may be found in more mainstream media outlets such as: The Economist [30] and the
New York Times [31].
Figure 2.2: The naked truth, how the names of 6,816 complexion products can reveal
bias in beauty [32]
Informed by this prior work, we designed our prototype to: 1) Include different categories of
tracking goals; 2) (e.g., by explaining that prediction requires knowledge of one’s personal
contributors); and 3) support evolution between goals.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
9
==PAGE:16==
3
Analysis
From the user standpoint, the mapping of an occurrence in a given period of time is not
only an exercise of remembrance, but an intensive cognitive activity that requires some
effort from the individual. This has psychological implications at the moment of produc­
ing a declaration of an occurrence in a digital interface,because it requires the use of
resources from different areas of a person’s mental reserve. It also influences the reflec­
tion on one’s behavior, which in order to produce some behavioural change, it demands
a proper management of information to deliver a meaningful insight.
3.1
Observation mechanism
Regardless of the nature of the type of behaviour being examined, a comparison of one’s
objective circumstances is made in relation to conventional standards [33]. For example,
if the habit to be tracked is physical exercise, it should be fitting to establish a base level
of exercise per week for his particular user. However this is not possible in all instances,
since most of our behaviours are complex, rich, and amorphous experiences. Trying to
turn them into units of signals and meanings [34] may be the most challenging part of the
exercise. Therefore the designed interface should be flexible enough to allow the user
to explore the anatomy of their behaviour and fine tune the different variables associated
to it.
The way a user remembers an occurrence follows from the way people order incidents
while reporting their recollections [35]. This is important because it calls for a reference
to locate events in time. In order to generate coherent long­term goals and plans, an oc­
currence should become integrated with the conceptual system [36], giving the user the
chance to build their own tools that allow for self­assessment and self­management [4].
Thus the need for a solution that can interrelate other aspects of the user’s environment,
such as triggers, motivations, and other environmental cues.
At this point, some challenges are related to the determination of the extent of the informa­
tion to collect, because the designed tool might not satisfy the user’s informational needs
[17]. One challenge is that in early stages of detection of a pattern, associations between
symptoms are uniformly weak [37], which in turn can produce a distorted version of the
pattern (or an even entirely different one). This should not be a problem for users whose
symptoms are well known and have a history of treatment. Another challenge is that the
solution to be designed should reflect the characteristic under study [1]. This involves the
type of behaviour being tracked, the setting of study (clinical, in the field, natural).
Now for the second part of the exercise, the post­tracking, the ultimate goal is to gen­
erate knowledge through reflection, so the question is how to generate knowledge from
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
10
==PAGE:17==
autobiographical knowledge [36]. According to Sengers et al., critical reflection is the in­
troduction of unconscious aspects of experience to conscious awareness, thereby making
them available for conscious choice [38]. For this exercise the unconscious and/or un­
known reveal the makeup of the narrative of the user in present time, which as described
earlier is a difficult task to accomplish. At this point it is important to question the validity
of a high fidelity picture of the tracked phenomena, due to the fact that the comparison to
a data­based picture of it, should be the triggering point in the user’s understanding of a
pattern. In fact, the future user has a critical advantage compared to their past self in the
sense that the larger the gap between the two versions the more insight is possible, given
that the initial picture is coherent with the conceptual model in place. So as long as the
fidelity of the first picture is logical and viable and a sense making process with familiar
criteria [39] is achieved, the user will have the the basic tools to understand his/her data.
Figure 3.1 exemplifies the different between a high fidelity and accurate version of one’s
reality and a very distorted one.
Figure 3.1: Fidelity of a habit. High resolution vs. low resolution mapping
As much as generalizations allow, there is a big obstacle towards the implementations
of a thorough tool for introspection. The vast majority of people are not visualization
or data analytic experts so again there is a need for flexibility to choose from different
baselines depending on their situation and goals [21]. It should also be noted that since
reflection is not a purely cognitive activity [36], the offered solution should include themes
that appeal to the users emotions. The affective intensity effect suggests that memories
associated with emotional arousal are better remembered than those that are affectively
neutral [14], so it would be interesting to design elements that engage with memories
which are affectively intensive as a way to set a support frame. It can also be a way to
identify what may be triggering and reinforcing a behavior [15].
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
11
==PAGE:18==
3.2
Observation Parameters
The advantage of having a tracking device is that it enables the user to access episodic
memories which can provide the basis for goals and plans that extend beyond a few
days [36]. But this does not mean that the duration of the experiences is well repre­
sented or that the causation of the event is well understood [40]. Both of these require
the user to recall the circumstances under which the event took place, which again may
lead to biases or wrong convictions regarding the tracked behaviour. In order to exam­
ine these dimensions of the pre­tracking exercise it could come in handy to understand
causal relationships, to produce replicable results and general insights [41] based per­
haps on summary statistics. However, since the base of the exercise is to explore the
users insights through a prediction exercise, a strict method may ignore important vari­
ables. Other type of metrics may be implemented using well researched principles within
the area of user experience, such as visibility, feedback, constraints, consistency, and af­
fordance, allowing a progression as follows: 1) Discovering requirements for the product,
2) designing something to fulfill those requirements, and 3) producing prototypes that are
then evaluated [42].
The use of metaphors can also lead the user how to understand what a product is used
for and how to use it [42], especially if the objective is to generate consciousness around
a given event.
In more practical terms, the designed tool is expected to be in line with user experience
goals by being effective, efficient, useful and easy to learn [42]. These rules are not
important just to this particular exercise, but they are unavoidable because this application
is aimed at different types of users, of different ages and backgrounds. As well as the
type of temporal scheme that the user finds more suitable to their particular situation, for
example: day­of­the­week and time­of­the­day. This hierarchy depends on how temporal
information is represented in memory [14]
In the second part of the exercise, the post­tracking stage, it is relevant to note that the
solution should encourage mappings between the concepts, for example if one object
contains another [42] or if there is a relationship among seemingly distant variables. Which
entails the distinction of a symptom as a function of an overall construct or as a function
of symptoms impacting on each other [43].
3.2.1
Technical parameters
The comparison between the expected outcome and the actual outcome is the result of the
user’s own autobiographical experimentation. As such, the representation of their story
must be articulated on the right premises and coherent with the users view of the world.
Therefore it becomes necessary to consider the three following instances: Aesthetic,
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
12
==PAGE:19==
substantive (the data being presented), and perceptual (confusing or misleading) [44].
The aesthetic component is a function of the elements in the perceived user space, so
to facilitate a logical relation between those elements it is pertinent to consider some of
the well studied principles of the Gestalt: Proximity , similarity, connection, continuity,
closure, figure and ground, common fate [44]. These rules are designed to cover a range
of aspects related to the composition of the visualization, however for the post­tracking
part of the exercise, the task of decoding the visualization, there should be contrasting
elements that are perceptually easy to grasp, these may include uniform color schemes
and transparent positional arguments.
In the first part of the exercise, the user will be asked to describe the pattern of a given
habit or behaviour in order to establish a prologue to the story. To this purpose, the ques­
tions asked should take advantage of the opportunities that arise when different affection
descriptors are presented [33]. In this way, the substantive element of the visualization
becomes more of a companion than a questionnaire to be filled out of obligation. How­
ever, this does not mean that it will be possible to fully grasp an emotional state of the user.
To do so, it would be important to be able to measure subjective states, associated be­
haviors, personality traits, diagnostic implications, ego defenses, and coping styles [26].
Oversimplification of complex events is again a dangerous trap to be avoided. A potential
solution could be to maximize the potential of explorability that may help people develop
stories using their own narratives and their data [21], since they will not be delimited by
the shape of the design.
Given that the tracker generates temporal based data, an important consideration would
be how to space the intervals of tracking. For example, a fixed time schedule has the
advantage of lessening the burden on the user [3]. However it should be up to the user
to declare which type of interval works best for them, because each behaviour answers
to a specific time structure. Alternatively, the solution should allow for some margin of
error in regards temporal accuracy since the pre­tracking phase is mostly a remembering
exercise, and the user might feel constrained if the control parameters are too strict or if
they have no influence in their activity [28].
The perceptual element is subjected to the reactions, assumptions, intuitions and reser­
vations from the user side and confirmation and feedback and accessibility from the sys­
tem side [7]. To set a neutral parting point to the user it could be useful to induce break­
downs which may provide opportunities for moments of reflection [45], if the input is de­
signed in several compartments, as opposed to a mega structure, the user will have a
chance to take on the task in tandem. This type of design is intended to users to maintain
control of and responsibility for the meaning­making process [38].
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
13
==PAGE:20==
3.2.2
Visualization
Traditional methods of visualization are as useful as they are capable of representing the
kind of data that we have [44]. This means choosing the appropriate channels and dis­
playing the information in an unambiguous manner, and if done properly they can depict
large sets of data in a relatively comprehensive way. However, the disadvantage of bar
plots as well as curves is that they show effects under the constraint that the other predic­
tors have fixed chosen values [46]. Therefore, in the interest of exploring different ways
of data input and data contrast, this project will explore other types of visualization. Figure
3.2 shows the tow most common visualizations used to summarize data.
Figure 3.2: Bar chart and area chart
One possibility is the use of networks, which uses a collection of time series data which
may be represented by a differently colored ‘nodes’ according to the pertinent categories
[13]. But understanding a network might be a complex task especially if the data set
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
14
==PAGE:21==
is too large. Alternatively, another way to visualize data that enables different channels
is the use of glyphs; these have the ability to show multiple different object types and
users do not need to relearn new visualization structures for each component type [47]. A
consideration to be made is the a glyph offers the possibility multiple segmenting complex
information into simpler parts [48]. An example of such data reworded i nglyph language
is the work done by Amir Kapor on symmetric glyphs by using the custom shapes and
fold operation (see Figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3: Symetric glyphs by using the custom shapes and fold operation in VegaLite
[49]
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
15
==PAGE:22==
4
Design
The development of the prototype was divided into three distinctive phases. First, the
design of the user’s input interface, which main goal was to map a procedure to help the
user understand their universe. Secondly, enabling the user to visualize the data extracted
from their own tracking. Thirdly, the development of a visualization which contrasts the
previous ones. An initial minimal viable product (MVP) was used as the base to develop
four distinct prototypes. In this section, each of the four prototypes and their components
will be described. By far the most interesting part was the first one, due to the novelty
of the task. Phrasing expectations is not an action that users are accustomed and in
consequence many options were considered during the brainstorm stage. Figure 4.1
shows the thought process behind the development of the expectation phrasing and what
would it mean to the user.
Figure 4.1: Expectation considerations before the beginning of the design stage
4.1
Brainstoming Phase
The first round of brainstorming concerned the temporal space of the user and how they
could engage with their own narrative. This first approach was a playful way to experiment
with different ways to engage the user in the exercise (see Figure 4.2 and Appendix A.1).
The basic component in this round was a vague temporal frame, with options to manipu­
late: negative space, blocking mechanisms and positional variables.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
16
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.2: One of several brainstorming ideas
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
17
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Minimal viable simplest user input
Implementing a concrete solution from such an abstract concept proved to be more chal­
lenging than expected. The simplest way possible to ask a user to translate their expec­
tations from their autobiography turned out to be a scale (see Figure 4.3). The question
asked was: In a range from a to b what which number do you think represents more accu­
rately the intensity of occurrence of a given behaviour?. Figure 4.3 shows a basic slider
input form the first prototype.
Figure 4.3: Basic slider bar
The questionnaire was generalized to a fixed time frame of a week, the result is a plain bar
chart which depicts the outcome in real­time (see Figure 4.4). The important parameter
here is the width of the interval. The upper limit was chosen as the top because it is the
maximum number of occurrences for a real case data set. This is a far fetched scenario
and in no way replicable, therefore adjustments will have to be implemented in further
prototypes.
Figure 4.4: Plain bar chart
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
18
==PAGE:25==
4.3
Minimal viable product: Basic slider bar input
The next step was to built a tool that encompasses the whole story: pre­tracking, post­
tracking and contrast. Changes to this prototype include: modification of the slider bar by
removing the counter of the bar and making it more robust. Also, as a test the user can
translate the selected input into an emoji as a way to add a connection to the intensity of
the occurrence (see Figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5: Interactive emoji slider
The next step was to visualize the expected data and compare it to the actual tracked
data. The important element here is the negative space generated by the juxtaposition of
the two data sets. In Figure 4.6 the orange bars represent the expected data form the
users input exercise. Figure 4.6b and Figure 4.6c illustrate two possible ways to show
the contrast between the prospected map and the data output result. In Figure 4.6b the
factual data is represented by the blue bars with a diminished opacity, which can be
controlled by the user. Additionally the size of the bars can also be manipulated in order
to produce a personalized version of the visualization. The Figure 4.6c is an alternative
way to visualize divergence form the two distinctive sets. In this case the user can adjust
the size of the bars back and forth for a more comprehensive understanding of the trends.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
19
==PAGE:26==
(a) Pre­tracking expectation input
(b) Pre­tracking expectation input compared to post­tracking opacity control
(c) Pre­tracking expectation input compared to post­tracking bar size control
Figure 4.6: Options for contrast manipulation from the user end
4.4
Minimal viable product: Basic matrix input
The next prototype was developed in accordance with the requirements for flexibility de­
scribed in the previous (chapter 3). The idea was to let the user check the segments of
the day were they thought the matrix as described in Table 4.1, the time periods are not
strictly define so as to let the user explore their own projection of the selected behaviour
to track. The result is shown in Figure 4.7 where the user has the opportunity to create a
contour of the expected outcome.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
20
==PAGE:27==
Table 4.1: Matrix definition for the grid input
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Morning
Morning
Morning
Morning
Morning
Morning
Morning
Noon
Noon
Noon
Noon
Noon
Noon
Noon
Evening
Evening
Evening
Evening
Evening
Evening
Evening
Night
Night
Night
Night
Night
Night
Night
Figure 4.7: Matrix checkbox as expectation input alternative
The comparison between the pre­tracked input and the post­tracked data is represented
again as a bar chart Figure 4.8a. Here the blue bars change in opacity depending on the
frequency of occurrences expected by the user from the matrix checkbox. The legend on
the side shows a normalized color gradient where the day with the maximum number of
occurrences corresponds to blue and the minimum varies by decreasing opacity. The
user is then able to juxtapose the tracked data by controlling the opacity of the orange
bars. The superposition does not seem to improve the readability of the graph, and con­
sequently the bars were placed side to side in Figure 4.8b without relevant improvements.
The third option, Figure 4.8c, combines both data sets in a single channel, where the nor­
malized percentage of orange is part of a blue normalized bar. Only the first two options,
Figure 4.8a and Figure 4.8b, are interactive in the sense that the user may change the
intensity of the color or size of the bars. Other features of this prototype include a cell
which tells the user that they should be aware of the difference between the two versions,
this is calculated from the graph and changes according to the user’s input.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
21
==PAGE:28==
(a) Pre­tracking expectation input compared to post­tracking overlap and opac­
ity control
(b) Pre­tracking expectation input compared to post­tracking side bars
(c) Pre­tracking expectation input compared to post­tracking normalized
Figure 4.8: Matrix checkbox generated input compared to mock data
4.5
Minimal viable product: Basic drawing input
Further exploration was performed on the input task in order to challenge the user to think
about the expected behaviour in a more fluid way. The exercise was inspired by the idea
of the user drawing their own version of the story. Figure 4.9 shows how the user can
draw freely on the a cell associated to the days of the week as a title. The bottom cell
shows a reproduction of the drawing as an area chart, which later can be compared to
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
22
==PAGE:29==
the tracked data.
Figure 4.9: Free hand drawn input with automatic visualization (bottom)
Figure 4.10: Pre­tracking expectation input compared to post­tracking using normal in­
terpolation
The comparison is shown in an exaggerated version in Figure 4.10 where the orange
area represents the tracked data and the slate blue area shows the expected outcome.
The selected interpolation was natural, which greatly exaggerates the features of both
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
23
==PAGE:30==
data sets and forces the users to accept the contrast in a more dramatic way. A less
extreme versions are shown in Appendix A.1, Figure A.2, using a monotone interpolation.
4.6
Minimal viable product: Glyphs
The first prototypes were developed from a simple premise: If the user can map and locate
the the temporal intervals where the incidence of a given occurrence are more memorable,
then it should be a straight forward task to compare that mapping to the tracked data in a
simple and transparent fashion. It works as a sequence activated by the user and ended
by the clarification of the moments in time where the user made a mistake in prediction or
an overestimation of the frequency of the examined action.
A new brainstorming session was required to produce a prototype that could tackle more
variables in a more abstract form. The result was the idea of glyphs as a way to interact
more intuitively with the tool. The first part involves a number of shapes that will be later
used as the basis for other interactions (see Figure 4.11). These were hand drawn as
scalable vector graphics (SVG) paths and integrated to the observable prototype. The
idea was to create simple and neutral shapes with round edges to avoid the sensation of
stiffness or inflexibility. Additionally they were created in such a way that the majority of
them could be rotated or translated without losing their wholeness.
Figure 4.11: Initial shape path designs
The exercise starts by asking the user to think about which behaviour or habit they would
like to modify. The user is then asked to think about it and how can they correlate it to a
given shape by modifying one or more of its properties. In this case the temporal framing
was designed to be the days of the week, however it should be possible to select other
settings, depending on the type of tracking the user is interested in. Figure 4.12 shows an
example for Monday, where the user has the option to adjust three settings: 1) The filling
of the shape, 2) the color of the top section of the shape and, 3) the color of the bottom
section of the shape. The three variables may be modulated by the corresponding slide
bars on top of the shape. The number of variables was set as an experiment to be tested
by the users in the testing phase.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.12: Monday glyph control parameters
Figure 4.13 shows a different example of how to inquire reflection from the user. In this
case the shape contains a central core and is surrounded by elements which can be
added to or removed from the final visualization. The idea behind this is that a user may
identify some elements as more or less significant for this particular day. The novelty
of this exercise is the fact that the user may construct their own definition of frequency
or intensity of a behavioural pattern. There are five other interactions available in this
prototype which modify other parameters including: translation, rotation, outline thickness,
texture, and change of color.
Figure 4.13: Sunday glyph control parameters
The outcome is a totem, which is a personalized digital item that the user can claim to
be unique and representative of their own history. While there is a default version of
the totem, its important to highlight that the version constructed by the user is the one
to be compared to the one from the tracked data. Figure 4.14 shows the two data sets
in the shape of totems, where the user may identify the differences between them and
establish the gaps among the two versions. The interpretation of these glyphs is open
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
25
==PAGE:32==
to the user and if necessary, more focal exploration may be performed via methods of
statistical summary described above.
Figure 4.14: Comparison between totems pre­tracking and post­tracking
4.6.1
Story Telling
Each of the elements subjected to user interaction are not meaningful unless they are part
of a whole. This means that the function of the particular elements is to give meaning to a
piece of the narrative within a users autobiography. In order to develop a coherent thread
a structure for story telling was developed (see Figure 4.15). Said structure is composed
of three distinctive units: Explaining unit, user input unit, and parallel visualization unit.
The aim of the first unit is to immerse the user in the experience and clarify some important
definitions that will be used throughout the experiment. A challenging aspect is the amount
of text involved. If the text is too long, the user has two options: Read the text at the risk
of getting tired or skip the text. None of these options are desirable, hence the decision
of making the text as concise as possible.
The second unit is the where the user has to interact with the system by either controlling
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
26
==PAGE:33==
a visual interface or uploading their data. The former intends to be as intuitive as possible,
so as to reduce the cognitive load on the user by channeling the exploratory sense of the
user. The latter should be as automatic as possible, because the most important part of
the exercise follows next. Figure 4.15 illustrates the three units in graphical sequence, as
it may be observed the explanation unit is common throughout the process and it is likely
to be the most overlooked part. Arguably, the most important unit is the third one, were
the user’s notions collide to create a realistic version of their story.
4.6.2
Elements which were not developed further
Due to the exploratory nature of this project, there were many elements which remained
as concepts or sketches. It would be interesting to develop them further and include them
in future testing.
1. More possibilities for temporal distribution besides the days of the week and/or seg­
ments of the day. The user should be able to decide which time frame is more
suitable for their needs. For example, if the user is tracking an occurrence that
only happens twice a month, a week based visualization does not provide enough
meaning.
2. Some experiments were made with the matrix checkbox and color. Each position
had four color possibilities to denote the intensity of the occurrence at a given point
of the day. However it was conceptually difficult to relate this interactive expression
to the tracked data results. To implement a solution like this the tracker would need
to have a control for a second variable other than time, for example duration of the
occurrence, or place of the occurrence.
3. During the expectation input of the glyph prototype, it should be possible to introduce
the user to the different shapes and allow them to select which shape will be used
for a given period. It will depend on the complexity of the task, but for relatively
straight froward cases, the selection of a shape could invite the user to engage with
an even more personalized version of the visualization.
4. The parallel comparison of data sets allows the user to distinguish obvious differ­
ences between both of them. But if the user wanted a more comprehensive rep­
resentation of their believes and their actual behaviour, the union of totems could
eventually incite reflection on the basis of self improvement.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.15: Story­telling sequence
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
28
==PAGE:35==
5
Implementation
The implementation of the prototypes was made entirely on the web­based application
Observable, which is described by the creators as a collaborative data canvas built to
make sense of the world with data1. The platform allows the user to manage data, plot
visualizations, and more importantly interact with such, with the possibility of working with
different libraries and extensions. This feature enables almost limitless sources of material
already implemented by the community, as seen below.
import {slider} from "@jashkenas/inputs"
The feature can then be used with the data/code in this project’s notebook, for example:
viewof opacity = slider({
min: 0,
max: 1,
step: 1,
description: "Change in opacity of the expected data bars"
})
Another useful item is the ability of observable to combine variables programmed in with
different libraries.
5.1
Libraries
5.1.1
Plot
Observable’s own plotting tool, Plot, allows open­source JavaScript designed to visualize
tabular data2. It was used only for the first approximation prototype, because at the time
it lacked the flexibility to modify very specific data encodings. Until now, it has developed
greatly and it can be accessed though a side pane containing the available snipets to plot,
manipulate, and input data.
5.1.2
Vega-Lite
Vega­Lite 3 is a high­level grammar of interactive graphics. It provides a concise, declar­
ative JSON syntax to create an expressive range of visualizations for data analysis and
presentation. An important advantage in comparison to Plot is that it allows the encoding
data with visual properties of graphical marks. In the bar chart and area prototype it made
1https://observablehq.com/about
2https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/plot?collection=@observablehq/plot
3https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
29
==PAGE:36==
possible the use of of different types of measurements: quantitative, temporal, ordinal, or
nominal, which made the task comparably easier. It also allowed to change properties of
the mark (bar, area) as a way to personalize the presentation of the visualization.
5.1.3
Vega
The glyph prototype introduced SVG components to the prototype, which is why Vega 4
was the intermediate option to use. It turned to be more adaptable to thepath elements.
This original version does not provide automatic visualizations as Vega­Lite does. This
library requires to be embedded in the cell as a function.
5.1.4
D3
D35 is a JavaScript library for manipulating documents based on data using HTML, SVG,
and CSS. This library is the ultimate visualization tool to manipulate elements. D3 was
used to add interaction to the shape elements, and it was specifically useful to transform
the attributes of the SVG’s.
5.2
Imports
Some important features developed include: inputs6, such as sliders, checkboxes, color
opacity selector7, grid input8, composing of views9, playful Inputs10. These are defined in
the bottom of each prototype.
5.3
Credits
Other used tools used include: SVG path creator11 to generate the path of the shape
of the glyph prototype, and the Organic Glyphs project12 which constructs a categorized
system of glyphs to visualize data.
4https://vega.github.io/vega/
5https://d3js.org/
6https://observablehq.com/@jashkenas/inputs
7https://observablehq.com/@mootari/color-opacity
8https://observablehq.com/@bryangingechen/grid-inputs
9https://observablehq.com/@tomlarkworthy/view
10https://observablehq.com/@bartok32/diy-inputs
11https://yqnn.github.io/svg-path-editor/
12https://observablehq.com/@amitkaps/glyphs-organic
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
30
==PAGE:37==
6
Test
The methodology used to test the prototypes is based on the double diamond design
framework [50]. It is a process of exploring an issue through divergent thinking and then
taking focused action convergent thinking. The double diamond considers four principles
as stated in their design manual:
1. Put people first. Start with an understanding of the people using a service, their
needs, strengths and aspirations.
2. Communicate visually and inclusively. Help people gain a shared understanding of
the problem and ideas.
3. Collaborate and co­create. Work together and get inspired by what others are doing.
4. Iterate, iterate, iterate. Do this to spot errors early, avoid risk, and build confidence
in your ideas.
The implementation of these principles was encapsulated in Figure 6.1. It summarizes
the structure of the workshops developed to test the user’s experience with the proto­
types. The first diamond of the double structure proposes a diverging stage of discovery,
followed by a converging definition phase. The second one again diverges towards de­
velopment and finally converges to deliverance. Concrete testing conditions were added
as the internal elements of the double diamond structure. In four stages the participants
were led to explore, inquire and respond to the design questions. The elements of the
workshops were planned as follows: introduction, create comfort, stage discussion and
development. The following sections will describe the each of the mentioned elements
for the different prototypes.
6.1
Slider Bar-Bar Chart prototype
The participants of this workshop are presented in the Table 6.1
Table 6.1: Participants in the testing workshop for the slider bar­bar chart prototype
Participant
Language
Age Group
Digital Media Use
Educational Level
N.F
English
25­30
Very High
Post graduate
C.M
English
25­30
Very High
Post graduate
L.L
English
25­30
High
Post graduate
E.B
English
25­30
Very High
Post graduate
N.G.
Spanish
30­35
High
Graduate
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.1: Workshop structure
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
32
==PAGE:39==
6.1.1
Introduction
As an initial prototype, the participants were introduced to the concept of self­tracking
and the possibilities of gaining relevant knowledge on behaviour that they would like to
modulate, control, or eliminate form their lives. The duration of this exercise was highly
dependent on the background of the participants, their digital literacy, and habits.
6.1.2
Create Comfort
In this stage, the participants were introduced to the Observable platform: They were
given the link, and were encouraged to access it for themselves. They were able to select
which habit, behaviour, and/or occurrence they would like to track. An explanation of the
exercise was issued and the participants were asked to express their thoughts out loud
while going though the prototype.
6.1.3
Stage Discussion
At this point the users weer invited to answer the following questions:
Q1: Could you align your expectations in regards to the chosen behaviour with the way
the slider bar questionnaire was designed?
Q2: Was it easy to calculate the scale of how much or how little in the slide bar you
expect a given occurrence to happen in the future?
Q3: When comparing both data sets, was it clear which data set corresponded to which
part of the exercise?
Q4: Is the contrast between the two bar charts able to communicate what you wish to
know?
6.1.4
Develop
The last part of the exercise involves a collaborative approach to determine which ele­
ments can be improved upon and how. The participants were asked to describe what
method would be best suited for their own expectations.
6.2
Matrix-bar chart
The second prototype was shared with more participants during another session Table
6.2. The setting of the experiment was online for the Spanish speaking participants and
a round table for the Danish and English speaking participants.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
33
==PAGE:40==
Table 6.2: Participants in the testing workshop for the matrix­bar chart prototype
Participant
Language
Age Group
Digital Media Use
Educational Level
N.F.
English
25­30
Very High
Post graduate
C.M.
English
25­30
Very High
Post graduate
L.L.
English
25­30
High
Post graduate
E.B.
English
25­30
Very High
Post graduate
N.G.
Spanish
30­35
High
Graduate
N.C.
Spanish
65­70
Low
Post­Graduate
H.V.
Spanish
65­70
Medium
Graduate
T.M.V.
Spanish
30­35
High
Graduate
6.2.1
Introduction
The same introduction was performed for this exercise. The only difference was that
further explanation was necessary for the users in the age group 65­70. The group was
encouraged to ask questions and voice concerns if an element was not well understood
or clear enough.
6.2.2
Create Comfort
Again, the participants were asked to think of a behavioural instance were they would
like to make improvements or edits. There was focus on the fact that it could be a trivial
occurrence, so at not to alienate the user with complex scenarios.
6.2.3
Stage Discussion
With the prototype in hand the users were asked the following questions:
Q1: Could you align your expectations in regards to the chosen behaviour with the way
the matrix checkbox as it was design?
Q2: Was it easy to estimate which position of the matrix corresponds to which time of
the day?
Q3: Do you think that a binary method of input is enough to grasp the intensity of an
occurrence at a given time of the day?
Q4: Is the contrast between the two bar charts able to communicate what you wish to
know?
6.2.4
Develop
The last segment of the exercise involved a conversation around the possibilities to map
a behaviour in a Cartesian plane based visualization. The users were asked to elaborate
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
34
==PAGE:41==
on which other scenarios would the imagine being suited for this purpose.
6.3
Free hand drawing-area chart prototype
The participants selected to participate in this exercise were the same as in Table 6.2.
The setting of the exercise was also the same and on the same date.
6.3.1
Introduction
The introductory explanation was focused on the free hand drawn capabilities of modern
digital tools. Since the most common way to interact with digital media is through a key­
board, the participants were encouraged to express their assumptions about hand drown
inputs.
6.3.2
Create Comfort
The presentation of the expectations input exercise required several indicators of what it
mean to outline a behaviour as a function of time.
6.3.3
Stage Discussion
Q1: How relevant do you think it was to use the free hand drawing input as a means to
encapsulate a behavioural pattern?
Q2: Which aspect of the free hand drawing input were easy to manipulate, and which of
them were not?
Q3: How does the free hand drawing input relates to the area chart visualization in the
following steps?
6.3.4
Develop
A collaborative approach was selected to identify which how to develop further features for
this prototype. The participants were asked to play with the input prototype with specific
scenarios: a) If your behavioural expectation was to exercise more, how would you phrase
it graphically in the free hand drawing cell?, b) If you think your consumption of sweets
is abnormally high on Friday, how would you draw it on the input cell?, c) If you wanted
to expresses certainty around the absence of of occurrences when you are trying to quit
smoking, for example?. The participants tried to visualize each scenarios and saved some
snapshots of them.
6.4
Glyph-totem prototype
Given that more time was invested in this prototype compared to the others, the testing
involved two stages. The discovering and defining stage involved the use of physical
object to achieve basic level of understanding of the problem, in this case the versatility
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
35
==PAGE:42==
of a tangible element was the most important consideration. LEGO bricks [51] were used
as the media to enable to users to create their own shapes, using different colors and
configurations.
The instructions were the following:
1. Take a 8×8 LEGO [51] plate.
2. Decide on 7 different figures you would like to add to the LEGO [51] plate. Each
figure may be composed of more sub­figures.
3. Construct your totem in any direction.
Only two participants were involved in this mini­test, the results of their totems may be
seen in Figure 6.2, the reproduction of the prototypes was made in the LEGO modelling
software [52]. Both participants belong to the same age group, educational level and
background.
(a) Own LEGO build
(b) N.F. LEGO build
(c) C.M. LEGO build
Figure 6.2: Three prototypes made with LEGO bricks
6.4.1
Introduction
A physical preface to the prototype was a useful way to narrow the formal aspects of the
digital prototype. In this case the introductory explanation was longer due to the abstract
nature of the totem construction. The users were asked to think about a habit, behaviour,
and/or occurrence which the would like to modify. They were introduced to the concept
of glyphs and categorical data. Table 6.3 summarizes relevant descriptive information of
the participants. The tests were developed in three sessions.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
36
==PAGE:43==
Table 6.3: Participant information for Glyph prototype user test
Participant
Language
Age Group
Digital Media Use
Educational Level
Testing Environment
P.F
English
25­30
Medium
Under­Graduate
In person
H.H
English
25­30
Medium
Under­Graduate
In person
A.C.
English
30­35
High
Graduate
In person
L.F
English
25­30
High
Graduate
In person
T.V.
Spanish
30­35
High
Graduate
Online
N.C.
Spanish
65­70
Low
Post­Graduate
Online
H.V.
Spanish
65­70
Medium
Graduate
Online
V.P.
English
25­30
High
Graduate
In person
K.C.
English
20­25
Very High
Under­Graduate
In person
6.4.2
Create Comfort
Each user was informed about the different ways they could interact with each figure in
the prototype. They level of engagement for each figure was left to be decided by the
user.
6.4.3
Stage Discussion
It became necessary to moderate the debate, due to the differences in the approach from
each user. The considerations to be evaluated by the test are summarized bellow as
questions.
Q1: Can you think of one instance were it would be possible to use a shape to represent
an occurrence?
Q2: How can you translate the frequency and intensity of such occurrences visually?
Q3: Which variables would most likely be made to be representatives of an occurrence?
Q4: How do you interpret the result?
Q5: Is the parallel totem representation effective enough?
6.4.4
Develop
The participants suggested numerous possibilities to improve the visualization on their
own. A discussion of which parameters were relevant ensued more participation from the
other user, they collaborated to generate a solution that they could easily relate to.
6.5
Limitations
The most obvious shortcoming in the testing stage is the lack of diversity of the partici­
pants. All of them were literate adults with access to digital media and internet access
of high quality, which can lead to cognitive biases in the results. Also, no subjects with
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
37
==PAGE:44==
physical nor cognitive disabilities participated in the experiment. There were no limita­
tions surrounding the language of the test, given the high proficiency of English by Dan­
ish speakers, in the case of the Spanish speakers the interviews were performed in their
native language.
An important limitation was the lack of actual data to compare user behavior, the tests
were executed with data provided previous tracking experiments by the Thesis supervi­
sor Jakob Eg. An experiment of such magnitude would provide a meaningful insight into
the users perceptive universe. Not all of the impressions were annotated by the moder­
ator, which means that there was a data leak that can only be dealt if the sessions were
recorded.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
38
==PAGE:45==
7
Results and Discussion
One of the challenges of an exploratory approach is setting the boundaries for the solution
of a problem. If the solution is too general, it will lack depth and consequently it may miss
some important considerations that lie beyond the surface. On the other hand, if it is too
constricted, it is possible that the direction of the solution will take forced turns, and pos­
sible biases may be present. In the case of this project, the borders of the problem were
centered around how to make the user reflect around their on behaviour and translate
said reflection into a visual representation. The user had no compromises with the exper­
iment, meaning they have total freedom to express their intentions and beliefs; nowhere
in the experiment is there a clause that states that they should abide to a standard for
the behaviour they chose to examine. The reason for this is that the universe of events
that the user may encounter is limitless, and highly personal. During the interviews, the
participants mentioned that despite their intention of eating better, exercising more, stop
smoking, call their parents more, be more independent, or more purposefully tracking a
symptom derived from an illness; the dependent variables were too wide and too complex
to simplify.
Leaving aside the temporal composition of the tracked behaviour, the most common in­
quiries from the participants in terms of additional information that they would like to asso­
ciate with the event, were the intensity of the event and the emotional weight that it has on
the person. This makes sense when the cause of the event is known and well understood
[40], which may occur if the person is very self aware. However if the tracked behaviour is
new and not necessarily episodic, the task of understanding it will require some cognitive
effort and possibly some experienced counsel that is not possible within the realm of a
digital tool. An important concern that was somewhat overlooked during the design stage
had to do precisely with the nature of the type of behaviour to be tracked; it should not be
the same to interact with an interface that supports a negatively charged event compared
to positively charged one. Given the narrow range of diversity in the participants’ habits
to track, there was no need to define the sentiment in the design of the interactive space,
nevertheless is a compromise that allowed for further exploration in other areas.
Quite some time was used to deliberate if the exercise itself should it be one of reflection
more than an actual behavioural incentive, the reason being that the only reason a per­
son would start to use it its because they would like to improve or modify some aspect
that is not compatible with their vision of themselves. The offer intended to cover the be­
havioural incentive tools segment is wide and well updated, Google has digital wellbeing
[53], Apple has digital wellness features, and several apps in the market attempt to cater
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
39
==PAGE:46==
to the segment of the population whose goal it is to change a habit. The target audience
for this project’s tool does not overlap with the type of user that demands an action from
the system to trigger a certain response, the prototypes developed here aim at high return
on relatively low input investment. The following sections will describe the outcome and
discussion for each of the prototypes.
7.1
Slider bar-bar chart prototype
The general consensus when interacting with this prototype was that it was unnecessarily
cluttered. The overall conclusion was that just because the user has more choices it does
not mean they will be more informed and consequently more satisfied. Having to perform
the same action seven times proved to be tedious to the point were the actions performed
by the users usually involved manipulating a slide bar and thereafter scrolling down to
check the result in the Bar Chart. This action eliminates the intended progression of the
exercise, by priming the user with an image of what they want to see instead of what they
intend to see. If one can iterate over what seems to be more appropriate, it is inevitable
to decide upon a more optimistic scenario.
Some of the participants were confused by the randomness of the counter on the right
side of the slide bar, participant N.F. quickly observed that it was a number related to the
actual data, because the frequency was quite high. In real life, most participants reported
that a daily average of more than 20 occurrences would be their expected highest count,
an assumption that can only be confirmed after long term tracking. Two users reported
the use of the emoji as being more helpful than the slide bar, but only if one could define
the emoji to be use. This observation came form the participants E.B. and N.G., who
are in the lower group range among the participants unsurprisingly. Some users were
concerned with the appropriateness and meaning of an emoji, thus in general it is not a
feature that is worth investigating further.
The aesthetic concerns were varied, participants N.F., L.L. C.M. E.B were distracted by
the color palette and the roundness of the bars. N.G. on the contrary was motivated by
the colors and reported that it made the exercise ”fun”. Some cultural biased may be
expected due to N.G. being the only from a different country, this was also the case for
the temporal implications of the week­based structure. Some of the participants reported
that they expected their habits to occur once or twice a month, therefore annulling the
validity of the weekly scheme. Others appreciated it because they expected at least one
event per day. This signals he need for a unique temporal structure designed by the user.
Now, the most substantial part of the prototype is the contrast between the two sets of
data, where the users were able to modify the opacity of the color and the size/ width of
the bar. Beginning with the opacity, it was found that it was an effective way to review
the differences between one set and the other, it is an easy solution to go back and forth
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
40
==PAGE:47==
and draw conclusions. On the other hand the size of the bar was regarded as a formal
addition with no obvious purpose, which opens the possibility for other interactions that
could incite reflection more efficiently.
7.2
Matrix-bar chart prototype
The original idea that gave origin to this prototype was the premise that negative space
could be as meaningful as the positive. The missing values are also a representation
of a symptom, which is why an area with clickable element seemed to take advantage
of the phenomenon. The pool of participants who tried this prototype was larger and
consequently, the disparity in the responses was notable. Again some cultural bias may
be expected from the participants who completed the exercise online. The first impression
was that the grid does not represent an obvious division of time, the seven rows for the
days of the week are clear enough, but the four subdivisions were reported to be too loose.
L.L., C.M., and E.B had trouble framing the period segments in particular around noon and
night. A previous step could be developed, were the user predefined the division of the
day, or days of the month which are more likely to represent their vision. However, this
is not recommended because it would entail an intensive use of cognitive resources that
would deflect the attention from the mapping exercise, which is where more definition is
needed.
Some time was spent discussing if the checking of one element should be a binary op­
eration: black for positive, white for negative or vice versa. H.V. and N.C. in particular
defended this version because it simplifies the actual interaction, most of the other par­
ticipants claimed that some advantages could be extracted from a palette that includes
more nuances: From light to dark to denote graveness, or green, yellow, and red to signal
sentiment were some of the discussed options. Such an implementation would be a gain
in substance and reflection, only if it was contrasted with the same type of visualization.
For example, a user clicked green on a given element because they expect to exercise
for several hours on Saturday mornings, however after months of tracking it turns out that
this person rather exercise on Sundays so the element for the post­tracking visualization
is red for Saturdays. It would be necessary to either blend the colors, or add them in order
to create a new definition of Saturday mornings. Examples of color blending are shown
in Figure 7.1, for this case the number of elements is five.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 7.1: Multiple Set Venn with Color Blending by Philomenix
The bar charts used to make the comparison were almost uniformly accepted, but they
did not incite exploration because the result was too evident. The fact that it must be an
easy to read task, limits the number free agents that could be added to the comparison,
for example: Gradients, color juxtapositions, length of a given event, importance of an
occurrence, temporal vicinity to a crisis or a breakthrough, and/or spacial context. During
the brainstorming stage, several ideas included the option of selecting a color for specific
an specific circumstance, so the user would be able to create twists within the same
element. This however proved to be a difficult feature to implement, due to the complexity
of the visual complexity that it would require.
Participant T.V. mentioned that they interpreted this prototype as a time planner, the fa­
miliarity to it allowed this user to think of the exercise as an intentive way act on in the
future as opposed to a memory exercise where the user tries to fit what they remember
to be true into a schedule.
7.3
Free hand drawing-area chart prototype
The first impression as described by the users was that the free hand drawing was diffi­
cult to control, particularly because they could not identify the borders of the drawing cell.
Also the lack of a feedback cue that signals when the action may begin. The participants
needed in average five tries to generate a curve with which they were satisfied, which
damped the initial enthusiasm and limited the time the users had to understand the whole
story. Having tested the matrix prototype and the free hand drawing prototype with the
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
42
==PAGE:49==
same subjects, it became evident that the first was thought of as too restrictive and the
later was labelled as too free. Trying to find a balance between these opposites was the
most challenging part of this project, because it requires the development of conceptual
framework which is valid for the majority of users despite the different behavioural ele­
ments they are willing to track. For example, in a clinical setting it would be necessary to
stipulate the tracking parameters with the medical professional in charge, so as to ensure
that if tracking is part of the treatment it will provide some useful information about the
user. On the other hand if the setting is natural, the participant may want to explore the
initial settings and fine­tune them as the tracking progresses. A metaphor to understand
the problem of restricting the users input is illustrated in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: From point A to point B there are two ways to go. Knowing the exact path
or taking a more exploratory approach. The dilemma was an important element in the
conceptual debate
Although the area charts generated after the user input were exaggerated due to the type
of interpolation used, they did not offer a significant improvement compared to the bar
charts in earlier prototypes. However for most of the participants there was interest in
the visual metaphor of the curve translating into an area chart. Perhaps the use of this
element would be useful in clinical settings were the patients already have a definition of
the expected symptoms.
7.4
Glyph-totem prototype
The notion of glyph was initially considered to open the possibility of cross­referencing
data. Adding more variables that were not or could not be part of the rest of the proto­
types. During the test, the participants had the most issues with relating what the different
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
43
==PAGE:50==
controls were to the behavior visual definition, this was more noticeable in participants who
preferred the summary statistic visualizations, H.V. in particular said that it may have value
for digital natives who are more proficient in digital use. Other participants N.C., V.P, K.E.,
T.V and N.F., mentioned that the shapes were playful, cute and they were visibly inter­
ested in trying out the exercise. This could be an element to explore if after further testing
it was found that certain types of user respond better to certain types of visual stimulus.
What turned out to be a failed feature almost unanimously was that if the number of con­
trolling variables is larger than two, it became extremely difficult to define that third vari­
able. Participant P.F. decided to explore the number of kilometers of biking per day, so
as it may be observed in Figure 4.12 there are three controls: filling percentage, color
for one end of the shape and color for the other end. P.F. decided that the filling the
figure up to the top end of the shape would mean that that bike the desired amount of
kilometers for Monday and the selected the filling color would define how good was the
ride, in terms of performance, cadence and effort. However the other color control had
no function in their view, this would not be relevant if the person could deactivate the top
color to a default/neutral option. In this case, it is not possible to assume that neutral
is white or black, because such also have functional connotations. This is how the third
variable may be too redundant, this is the case for Monday and Saturday. The features
that attracted more interested where: rotation, textural fulling, and thickness of the out­
lines, all have only one controllable slider, and appeared to be more manageable. The
shape that represents Sunday was the only one using check boxes instead of slider bars,
this feature received positive attention from the majority of the participants, because of
the idea of building their own mega­structure. N.C. in particular was attracted to it, but
proposed that some elements should remain unmovable or uncheckable, in order to have
a basis. This possibility would limit the option of discovering the shape as it is being built,
which is different to the more familiar gestures or interactions the users are used to. More
types of shapes should be tested if this project applies to other types by also examining
psychological preconceptions related to forms in the brain.
The participants reported that the glyphs were a good solution to manage their temporal
expectations. They would consider a shape as a unit and they could decide upon which
period suits their demands. This kind of flexibility empowers them to explore more un­
conventional of time and space configurations. This is also true for the color usage, the
prototype provided a defined color palette which included nuances of the primary and
secondary colors. The participants pondered about the meaning of the colors and ended
up giving them them emotional values according to their own experiences.
The contrast visualization gathered some attention, but for the most part the users went
back to change the configurations of their totem because it did not look as extreme as
they thought it would be. This was a counterproductive realization, because in real life
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
44
==PAGE:51==
they wont have a set of data to compare unless they have tracked data beforehand. In­
terestingly, there was consistency among the users regarding their opinion on how likely
they would use a more refined version of this prototype, they stated that it was a novel
way to think about aspects of their life which are not known to them. Some improvements
according to the users are written as follows: ”Make them look like icons on a computer”,
”I want more space to move them around”, ”you could have them in different sizes so for
example, if I think Tuesday is important I will make it huge”. All of these are very valuable
observations and deserve exploration on their own. A feature that would be worth imple­
menting here is the union of both versions of data, so in the end the user will have only
one version that combines their intention and their actions, this unique totem would be
suitable to be compared with the next set of tracked data, making it a tool for continuous
improvement.
7.5
Story Telling
Since the development of the prototypes was done in Observable, there were limited
options to make the exercise feel less linear. It is an advantage in the sense that it allows
the users to explore and then analyse the contrast interaction. If both visualizations were
available at the same time, it would prime the user think about the day two as the result
of day one. None of this is a problem if they know their symptoms beforehand or are
generally self aware of the of their selected behaviour. This observation conveys the need
for better digital education for the population, in developed countries such as Denmark it
is possible to create digital tools that will improve citizens lives across different aspects
of their humanity. Tracking technologies could neutralize the negative effects that are the
result of the use digital platforms that do not encourage agency form the user, for example
informing oneself via Facebook or Twitter as opposed to more robust journalistic media.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
45
==PAGE:52==
8
Conclusion
This thesis explores the instances of reflection possible when a self­tracking individual
expresses their expectations towards the behavioural element being tracked. There are
three distinct phases in this process: 1) The pre­tracking stage, where the user anticipates
how the behaviour is most likely to develop according to their autobiographical knowledge.
To this purpose this project introduces four prototypes that make use of different visual
metaphors to help the user translate the aforementioned expectations into manageable
data. 2) The post tracking stage is where the user uses the data gathered from their own
tracking and evaluates it according to the previous stage. Finally 3) the third stage involves
contrasting the two previous versions and generating knowledge around the result of the
exercise.
The initial considerations during the analysis portion of the project were related to the
memory biases and the need for a conceptual system. The former are associated with
the individual’s beliefs about behavior or the way the world functions therefore presenting
a distorted image. A reasonable assumption is that the dissonance between the narrative
that the user has built around their behaviour and the actual occurrences, is an important
tool of reflection due to the impact of the contrast. If the outcome is true when the user
predicted it to be true, then knowledge will be reinforced. On the contrary, if the outcome
results to be false and the expectation was to be true, the user at the very least will
acknowledge the falsity of the premise. In regards to the Conceptual system, it was found
that it should be flexible enough to allow the user to explore the anatomy of their behaviour
and fine tune the different variables associated to it. In this way the when the user designs
their own visual scheme, the initial unknown parameters will reveal the makeup of the
narrative of the user in the future time.
The type of input relies on the type of context where the occurrences develop, hence the
need of references. Such references may be temporal, spatial or emotional and their main
goal is to provide observational parameters. This will influence how the visualizations are
presented and how the aesthetic, functional and perceptual elements are to be designed.
The first prototype, the slider bar­bar chart, was a basic introduction to the problem and
revealed the need for more options for temporal distribution, the composition of the pre­
tracking part turned out to be constraining and left little margin to add information associ­
ated to particular events as well as the lack of opportunity to input intensity or emotional
weight controls. The second one, the matrix­bar chart, was affirmed the assumption that
negative space is also a representation of a symptom, this is important because it is easy
to design a tool with too many elements that will be redundant in the end. It was found that
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
46
==PAGE:53==
in order to provide a transparent an easy to read visualization, the the number free agents
that could be added to the comparison stage are not as unlimited as initially thought. The
bar charts used to make the comparison were almost uniforming accepted, but they did
not incite exploration because the result was too evident. Which means that there is a
threshold for explorability that is also connected to the number and complexity of the el­
ements. The third prototype, the free hand drawing­area chart proved to be difficult to
control due to the lack of a feedback cues that signal when the action may begin or end.
This result delved into the problem of finding a balance between too much or too little con­
trol, it was found that because it requires the development of conceptual framework which
is valid for each user. Meaning that there should be a clear difference between the setting
where the exercise is executed. The last prototype, the glyph­totem, rapidly revealed that
if the number of parameters exceeds two, it became extremely difficult to define that third
variable. This calls for solutions that allow gestures that can change the formal aspects
of the shape instead of the functional ones, such could be: Sizing, dragging, and adding
further elements within the main shape. However more of this research should examine
the psychological preconceptions related to forms and shapes in the brain. In other words
it is important to treat the shape as a changeable that can empower the user to explore
more unconventional of time and space configurations.
Regarding the way how the whole process is configured, it is hypothesized that tracking
/reflective tools could neutralize the negative effects that are the result of the use digital
platforms that do not encourage agency form the user. Because the encourage the story
to develop a story in their own terms, instead of consuming prefabricated stories based
on manufactured episodes.
The next step should be to to overlap the post­tracking version to the pre­tracked version
and analyze the negative space generated by the differences or confirm expectations by
focusing on events that yield a positive action in both cases. It needs to consider more
complex perceptual notions that require focused test where the user has data to compare
to. Also there should be an option to generate a personalized report with the expected
outcome and the factual outcome, this report would evaluate the difference between the
two versions and possibly hint at instances that may be inflection points.
Finally, this projects supports the notion that the exercise should it be one of reflection
more than an actual behavioural incentive, due to the exploratory nature of it. This tool en­
ables the user to act autonomously, it does not provide constant input to incite behavioural
change which because the user already has an incentive. Reflection by contrast as a way
to improve behaviour.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
47
==PAGE:54==
8.1
Future Work
The work developed in this project is novel in the sense that digital tracking technologies
are recently emerging as a mainstream tools to examine facets of an individual’s life that
could be improved, either because it is physically or psychologically relevant, or because
it could improve the future wellbeing of a person. As more personal data is stored, an
informed citizen should be able to access it, manage it and more importantly understand
it. It is implicit that the user has the digital literacy to do so, however this is the case for a
marginal segment of the population, therefore the development of tools such as this has
extensive possibilities to be improved.
Work on the concept of fluidity of time to each individual is an important aspect that could
be examined further. The user should be able to provide the intervals of time that best
match the selected behavioural element to be tracked. After the COVID­19 pandemic,
some modern assumptions were reevaluated, and the possibility of working from home
opens new segments of the day that were unappreciated before. This especially applies
to age groups which belong to the digital native denomination, as for these individuals,
the limits of a week or a weekend may be more blurry compared to traditional working
settings.
In order to improve reflection, it should be possible to overlap the post­tracking version to
the pre­tracking version and analyze the negative space generated by the differences or
confirm expectations by focusing on events that yield a positive action in both cases. This
is where color research becomes a valuable tool to reinforce knowledge around a habit
or behavioural truth or acknowledge the false scenarios that may arise. This may also
be researched by using other gestures, such as the possibility to drag items, activation
of a delete option and the ability to pan over a group of items and mark the as common
element to a certain circumstance.
An important feature that was not developed here, was the option to generate a person­
alized report with the expected outcome and the factual outcome. This report would eval­
uate the difference between the two versions and possibly hint at instances that may be
inflection points to introduce a certain behaviour. In the case of the glyph­totem prototype,
it would be interesting to develop the totem as a physical badge that the user can carry
around as a reminder of what they intend to achieve. This would be a highly personal
object that only the user would be able to decipher, and it would go beyond a traditional
informative report.
Modern manipulation of data calls for a very important consideration, namely data man­
agement procedures [54]. These were not taken into account in this project and they
involve the: 1) Discussion of data management decisions that affect data analyses and
2) the definition of missing data criteria and actions. The latter point is particularly impor­
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
48
==PAGE:55==
tant because self­tracking as any other action, required time to master and experience to
understand. During the first month of tracking a person may omit events, which may be
related to the behaviour but not evident enough to force the user to tracked them as such.
Other reasons may technical or circumstantial, and the user is entitled to an explanation
of how this will affect the overall version of their study.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
49
==PAGE:56==
References
(1)
Moskowitz, D. S.; Young, S. N. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience 2006, 31,
13–20.
(2)
Smyth Joshua, M.; Stone Arthur, A. Journal of Happiness Studies 2003, 4, 35–52.
(3)
Bolger, N.; Davis, A.; Rafaeli, E. Annual Review of Psychology 2003, 54, 579–616.
(4)
Ben­Zeev, D. Psychiatric Services 2017, 68, 107–108.
(5)
Observable HQ https://observablehq.com.
(6)
Larsen, J. E.; Eskelund, K.; Christiansen, T. B. 2017, 5.
(7)
Adams, A. T.; Murnane, E. L.; Adams, P.; Elfenbein, M.; Chang, P. F.; Sannon, S.;
Gay, G.; Choudhury, T. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ­
Proceedings 2018, 2018­, 1–13.
(8)
Chong, M. K.; Whittle, J.; Rashid, U.; Ang, C. S. Ubicomp 2014 ­ Adjunct Proceed­
ings of the 2014 Acm International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing 2014, 219–222.
(9)
Versteeg, M.; Van Den Hoven, E.; Hummels, C. Tei 2016 ­ Proceedings of the 10th
Anniversary Conference on Tangible Embedded and Embodied Interaction 2016,
44–52.
(10)
Chen, K.; Zdorova, M.; Nathan­Roberts, D. Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society 2017, 2017­, 1066–1070.
(11)
Intille, S.; Haynes, C.; Maniar, D.; Ponnada, A.; Manjourides, J. Ubicomp 2016
­ Proceedings of the 2016 Acm International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing 2016, 2016, 1124–1135.
(12)
Myin­Germeys, I.; Oorschot, M.; Collip, D.; Lataster, J.; Delespaul, P.; Van Os, J.
Psychological Medicine 2009, 39, 1533–1547.
(13)
Kroeze, R.; van der Veen, D. C.; Servaas, M. N.; Bastiaansen, J. A.; Oude Voshaar,
R. C.; Borsboom, D.; Ruhe, H. G.; Schoevers, R. A.; Riese, H. Journal for Person­
oriented Research 2017, 3, 1–10.
(14)
Karapanos, E. Behaviour and Information Technology 2020, 39, 722–740.
(15)
Ferrario, M. A.; Simm, W.; Gradinar, A.; Forshaw, S.; Smith, M. T.; Lee, T.; Smith, I.;
Whittle, J. Acm International Conference Proceeding Series 2017, 1–10.
(16)
Karkar, R.; Fogarty, J.; Kientz, J. A.; Munson, S. A.; Vilardaga, R.; Zia, J. In Ad­
junct Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Sym­
posium on Wearable Computers, Association for Computing Machinery: Osaka,
Japan, 2015, pp 991–996.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
50
==PAGE:57==
(17)
Li, I.; Dey, A.; Forlizzi, J. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Fac­
tors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Machinery: Atlanta, Geor­
gia, USA, 2010, pp 557–566.
(18)
Spring, B.; Gotsis, M.; Paiva, A.; Spruijt­Metz, D. IEEE Pulse 2013, 4, 34–40.
(19)
Simm, W.; Ferrario, M. A.; Gradinar, A.; Smith, M. T.; Forshaw, S.; Smith, I.; Whit­
tle, J. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ­ Proceedings 2016,
1270–1281.
(20)
Schroeder, J.; Karkar, R.; Murinova, N.; Fogarty, J.; Munson, S. A. Proc. ACM In­
teract. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 2019, 3, DOI: 10.1145/3369809.
(21)
Huang, D.; Tory, M.; Adriel Aseniero, B.; Bartram, L.; Bateman, S.; Carpendale, S.;
Tang, A.; Woodbury, R. Ieee Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
2015, 21, 420–433.
(22)
Schneider, H.; Schauer, K.; Stachl, C.; Butz, A. In 16th IFIP Conference on Human­
Computer Interaction (INTERACT), ed. by Bernhaupt, R.; Dalvi, G.; Joshi, A.; Balkr­
ishan, D. K.; O’Neill, J.; Winckler, M.; Part 5: Personalisation and Visualisation,
Springer International Publishing: Bombay, India, 2017; Vol. LNCS­10515, pp 374–
392.
(23)
Torous, J.; Roux, S. Jmir Mental Health 2017, 4, ed. by Benson, N., e27.
(24)
Tollmar, K.; Bentley, F.; Viedma, C. 2012 6th International Conference on Per­
vasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare and Workshops, Pervasivehealth
2012 2012, 65–72.
(25)
Wu, S. Film flowers http://bl.ocks.org/sxywu/raw/d612c6c653fb8b4d7ff3d422be164a5d/.
(26)
Plutchik, R. Measurement of Emotions 1989, 1–35.
(27)
Kalnikaite, V.; Sellen, A.; Whittaker, S.; Kirk, D. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con­
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Ma­
chinery: Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2010, pp 2045–2054.
(28)
A. Epstein, D.; Cordeiro, F.; Bales, E.; Fogarty, J.; A. Munson Computer Science,
S. 2014.
(29)
The Pudding https://pudding.cool/.
(30)
The Economist https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail.
(31)
The New York Times https://www.nytimes.com/spotlight/graphics.
(32)
Amaka, O.; Thomas, A. The Naked Truth https://pudding.cool/2021/03/foundation-
names/.
(33)
Kahneman, D.; Krueger, A. B.; Schkade, D. A.; Schwarz, N.; Stone, A. A. Science
2004, 306, 1776–1780.
(34)
Boehner, K.; Depaula, R.; Dourish, P.; Sengers, P. 2015.
(35)
Brandburn, N.; Rips, L.; Shevell, S. Science 1987, 236, 157–161.
(36)
Conway, M. A. Neuropsychologia 2009, 47, Episodic Memory and the Brain, 2305–
2313.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
51
==PAGE:58==
(37)
Wigman, J. T.; van Os, J.; Thiery, E.; Derom, C.; Collip, D.; Jacobs, N.; Wichers, M.
Plos One 2013, 8, ed. by Baune, B. T., e59559.
(38)
Sengers, P.; Boehner, K.; David, S.; Kaye, J. j. In Proceedings of Critical Computing,
Association for Computing Machinery: Aarhus, Denmark, 2005, pp 49–58.
(39)
Raj, S.; Newman, M. W.; Lee, J. M.; Ackerman, M. S. Proc. ACM Hum.­Comput.
Interact. 2017, 1, DOI: 10.1145/3134723.
(40)
Schwarz, N.; A. Stone, A.; S. Shiffman, S.; Atienza, A.; Nebeling (eds, L. 2014.
(41)
Schneiderman, B. 2021.
(42)
Sharp, H.; Rogers, Y.; Preece, J., Interaction design; John Wiley and Sons: 10475
Crosspoint Boulevard, Indianapolis, IN 46256, 2019.
(43)
Van Os, J.; Delespaul, P.; Wigman, J.; Myin­Germeys, I.; Wichers, M. World Psy­
chiatry 2013, 12, 113–117.
(44)
Healy, K., Data Visualization A practical introduction; Princeton University Press:
Princeton, New Jersey, United States of America, 2019.
(45)
MacLeod, H.; Tang, A.; Carpendale, S. Proceedings ­ Graphics Interface 2013,
149–156.
(46)
Tutz, G.; Schauberger, G. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 2013,
22, 156–177.
(47)
C. Chuah, M.; G. Eick, S. 2014.
(48)
Yost, B.; North, C. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ­ Pro­
ceedings 2005, 1889–1892.
(49)
Glyphs: Organic. Symetric glyphs by using the custom shapes and fold operation
in VegaLite https://observablehq.com/@amitkaps/glyphs-organic.
(50)
What is the framework for Innovation? Design Council’s evolved double diamond
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/what-framework-innovation-design-
councils-evolved-double-diamond.
(51)
LEGO https://www.lego.com/da-dk.
(52)
Bricklink https://www.bricklink.com/v3/studio/download.page.
(53)
Digital Wellbeing Experiments https : / / experiments . withgoogle . com / collection /
digitalwellbeing.
(54)
Stone, A. A.; Shiffman, S. Annals of Behavioral Medicine 2002, 24, 236–243.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
52
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Mapping
Figure A.2: Monotone Interpolation
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.3: Current state of affairs
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
54
==PAGE:61==
A.1
Sketchbook Drawings
Figure A.4: Sketchbook page 1
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.5: Sketchbook page 3
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
56
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.6: Sketchbook page 4
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
57
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.7: Sketchbook page 5
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
58
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.8: Sketchbook page 6
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.9: Sketchbook page 7
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
60
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.10: Sketchbook page 8 and 9
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
61
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.11: Sketchbook page 10 and 11
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
62
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.12: Sketchbook page 12
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
63
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.13: Sketchbook page 13
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
64
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.14: Sketchbook page 14
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
65
==PAGE:72==
A.2
Results
A.2.1
First Prototype: Sliders
Participant: N.F.
Questionnaire
Q1: Yes
Q2: Yes
Q3: Yes, same colors as above
Q4: Yes, it’s very clear
Development Moved the sliders and observed change in bars. Then looked at graphs to
compare the two sets of bars.
Participant: C.M.
Questionnaire
Q1: Yes, very common design for surveys
Q2: No, some things may be very unpredictable
Q3: Yes, I think it was clear enough
Q4: Yes
Development Moved the sliders and observed change in bars. Then looked at graphs to
compare the two sets of bars.
Participant: L.L.
Questionnaire
Q1: Yes, very well
Q2: Yes, easily
Q3: A little confusing that overlapping bars give a third color
Q4: No, they should be next to each other
Development Moved the sliders and observed change in bars. Then looked at graphs to
compare the two sets of bars.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
66
==PAGE:73==
Participant: E.B.
Questionnaire
Q1: Not really
Q2: That’s very hard
Q3: Yes
Q4: Yes, but hard to interpret
Development Moved the sliders and observed change in bars. Then looked at graphs to
compare the two sets of bars.
Participant: N.G.
Questionnaire
Q1: Yes, I think so
Q2: I don’t know
Q3: I think the colors were good
Q4: I’m not sure
Development Moved the sliders and observed change in bars. Then looked at graphs to
compare the two sets of bars.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
67
==PAGE:74==
A.2.2
Second Prototype: Matrix
Participant: N.F.
Questionnaire
Q1: It’s very binary
Q2: Yes, it was clear
Q3: No, it’s too simple
Q4: Yes
Development Clicked squares in matrix and observed change in bars. Tried different
configurations of early/late occurrences. Then looked at graphs to compare the two sets
of bars.
Participant: C.M.
Questionnaire
Q1: It was a little difficult to understand
Q2: Not initially
Q3: No, I prefer sliders
Q4: Yes
Development Clicked squares in matrix for a while and observed change in bars. Then
looked at graphs to compare the two sets of bars.
Participant: L.L.
Questionnaire
Q1: Yes, it was OK
Q2: Yes
Q3: I don’t know
Q4: No, I don’t like it
Development Clicked squares in matrix and observed change in bars. Then looked at
graphs to compare the two sets of bars.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
68
==PAGE:75==
Participant: E.B.
Questionnaire
Q1: Not really
Q2: Yes
Q3: No
Q4: Yes, but hard to interpret
Development Clicked squares in matrix for a while. Then looked at first set of bars. Then
looked at graphs to compare the two sets of bars.
Participant: N.G.
Questionnaire
Q1: Yes
Q2: Yes, it was clear
Q3: No, it’s not specific enough
Q4: I’m not sure
Development Clicked squares in matrix and observed change in bars. Then looked at
graphs to compare the two sets of bars.
Participant: N.C.
Questionnaire
Q1: I don’t know
Q2: Yes, like a timetable
Q3: Yes
Q4: I don’t know
Development Clicked squares in matrix and observed change in bars. Then looked at
graphs to compare the two sets of bars.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
69
==PAGE:76==
Participant: H.V.
Questionnaire
Q1: No
Q2: Yes
Q3: No
Q4: Yes
Development Clicked squares in matrix for a while. Then looked at first set of bars. Then
looked at graphs to compare the two sets of bars.
Participant: T.V.
Questionnaire
Q1: Yes
Q2: Yes
Q3: Yes, it’s enough
Q4: Yes, but could be better
Development Clicked squares in matrix and observed change in bars. Then looked at
graphs to compare the two sets of bars.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
70
==PAGE:77==
A.2.3
Third Prototype: Drawing
Participant: N.F.
Questionnaire
Q1: It’s too complicated
Q2: Easy to draw, difficult to tell days apart
Q3: It relates well
Development Drew various lines/curves while observing the graph. Then looked at the
tracked data and comparisons.
Participant: C.M.
Questionnaire
Q1: Not very relevant
Q2: It was easy enough
Q3: Good
Development Drew various lines/curves while observing the graph. Then looked at the
tracked data and comparisons.
Participant: L.L.
Questionnaire
Q1: Not so much
Q2: Drawing was easy
Q3: It wasn’t clear
Development Drew various lines/curves, then looked at the graph. Then looked at the
tracked data and comparisons.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
71
==PAGE:78==
Participant: E.B.
Questionnaire
Q1: It’s very relevant
Q2: Everything was easy
Q3: It works really well
Development Drew various lines/curves while observing the graph. Then looked at the
tracked data and comparisons.
Participant: N.G.
Questionnaire
Q1: I prefer other options
Q2: I don’t know
Q3: It looks good
Development Drew various lines/curves while observing the graph. Then looked at the
tracked data and comparisons.
Participant: N.C.
Questionnaire
Q1: I don’t know
Q2: Difficult to see days
Q3: I don’t know
Development Looked at tracked data, then drew a curve. Then looked at the tracked
data and comparisons.
Participant: H.V.
Questionnaire
Q1: I don’t know
Q2: Drawing with a mouse is hard
Q3: Not well
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
72
==PAGE:79==
Development Drew various lines/curves while observing the graph. Then looked at the
tracked data and the comparisons.
Participant: T.V.
Questionnaire
Q1: It’s not so good
Q2: I couldn’t see the border
Q3: I don’t know
Development Drew a couple of lines while observing the graph. Then looked at the
tracked data and the comparisons.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
73
==PAGE:80==
A.2.4
Fourth Prototype: Totem
Participant: N.C.
Questionnaire
Q1: Symbols are common
Q2: Size or color
Q3: It’s not so easy
Q4: Yes, it’s very good
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the
totem.
Participant: H.V.
Questionnaire
Q1: Many examples, for example exercise
Q2: Shape? Long or short
Q3: I don’t know
Q4: Yes
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the re­
sulting totem. Then looked at the two totems.
Participant: T.V.
Questionnaire
Q1: Many apps use symbols for to represent various things
Q2: Size, shape, color, etc.
Q3: It’s difficult, the colors/patterns could be more logical
Q4: Yes
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the re­
sulting totem. Then looked at the two totems. Then went back and moved sliders to get
a different totem.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
74
==PAGE:81==
Participant: P.F.
Questionnaire
Q1: I don’t know
Q2: Different symbols
Q3: It looks good, but I don’t know
Q4: Yes, it looks good
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the re­
sulting totem. Then looked at the two totems.
Participant: H.H.
Questionnaire
Q1: Not sure
Q2: Colors
Q3: I can’t interpret it
Q4: No, I don’t understand
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the re­
sulting totem. Then looked at the two totems. Went back to change some options and
get a new totem.
Participant: A.P.
Questionnaire
Q1: Yes, exercise for example, with a bicycle
Q2: Number of bikes?
Q3: I need a guide
Q4: What do the other shapes represent?
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the re­
sulting totem. Then looked at the two totems.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
75
==PAGE:82==
Participant: L.F.
Questionnaire
Q1: Exercise maybe
Q2: I don’t know
Q3: I can’t really
Q4: I can tell the difference, but I don’t know what it means
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the re­
sulting totem. Then looked at the two totems. Went back to change some options and
get a new totem.
Participant: V.P.
Questionnaire
Q1: Many, like icons on a computer
Q2: Different parameters, size, color etc.
Q3: It looks great, but not well defined
Q4: Yes
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the re­
sulting totem. Then looked at the two totems. Went back to change some options and
get a new totem.
Participant: K.C.
Questionnaire
Q1: Exercise (shoe, weight), food (tomato, bread), sleep (number of hours)
Q2: Bigger = more, or color = type
Q3: I don’t know
Q4: Yes
Development First experimented with the sliders/checkboxes and then looked at the re­
sulting totem. Then looked at the two totems.
Exploring Interfaces for Supporting Self­tracking Pre­ and Post­tracking
76
==PAGE:83==
The current capabilities of digital media technology allow users to acquire important data extracted
from tracking tools designed to create a footprint of a given behaviour in real time. The activity of
tracking may be largely beneficial to the user that intends to modify a behavioural trait, based on
such data. The work done in this project aims at investigating how would a tool which helps the user
to visualize their expectations regarding a given behaviour, would benefit the individuals reflective
perspective when compared to the data extracted from tracking. Several models were develop in
order to understand such contrast and user testing was performed to acquire insights on usability
and effectiveness of the aforementioned tool.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Bygning 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
