==PAGE:1==
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
Master Thesis
May 20, 2022
By
Mark Tselikov
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Mark Tselikov, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Mark Tselikov ­ s192665
Signature
Date
ii
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Over the last years, the machine learning has become a very common tool of solving
complex models, which proved to be quite successful. However, due to the machine
learning relying on the statistical models and IID, it tends to struggle with out­of­distribution
data, data shifts, and preciously unseen data.
In this work, I make an attempt to develop machine learning models, architecture of which
are based on the causal structure of a problem. I state a hypothesis that such models
are more robust to the out­of­distribution data and data distribution shifts. Furthermore,
I train these causal models together with other non­causal models, and then perform
experiments with different data shifts to compare the performance of two types of models
to try to prove the proposed hypothesis. Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This
text should show what a printed text will look like at this place. If you read this text, you will
get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is there a difference between this text
and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives
you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an impression of
the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of
the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should
match the language.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to than my supervisors, Francisco Camara Pereira, Christoffer Riis, and Fran­
cisco Antues, for guiding me through this work, helping me a lot, and answering all my
questions. It was a great pleasure to work with all of them, and they made this work really
enjoyable and interesting.
I would also like to thank my family for always being there for me, no matter what, and
giving me the opportunity to go after my dreams. Without them, this work wouldn’t be
possible.
Finally, I would like to thank my friends and flatmates who always supported me whenever
I was stressed or in trouble. They are amazing people, and they made my days much
brighter throughout my studies.
iv
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Statistical Correlation and Underlying Issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Causality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Structural Causal Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Interventions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Confounders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Problem Statement and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Prototype Model on Kinematics Simulator
7
3.1
Kinematics Simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Model and Causal Artificial Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Scope of the Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Application on Complex Models
11
4.1
Coffee Simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Causal Approximation Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3
Cyclic Process Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.4
Overall Results and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
References
35
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Over the last years the world have witnessed a huge leap in development of the artificial
intelligence, and the machine learning in particular. A huge impact on the machine learn­
ing field was made by introduction of such models as AlexNet [1] or gradient boosting
[2], which showed that machine learning models can be efficiently used to solve complex
problems and opened the gates for the rapid development in that area. Some problems,
such as image or voice recognition, media generation, recommender systems, etc. be­
came possible to implement with high efficiency, which was unimaginable before.
However, even while being very efficient, there are still challenges that most of the modern
machine learning models face. Most methods used in the machine learning algorithms
heavily rely on the Independent and Identically Distributed (IID) principle. This assump­
tion is based on the data samples for a given dataset being independent of each other,
and they are identically distributed due to different samples coming from either the same
mathematical function or a model where the underlying processes that generate the data
are equal for each sample. This has been one of the most important principles for ma­
chine learning and its ability to generalize properly. For example, when training a machine
learning model, we wish to have the same type of data with similar distribution for both
the training dataset and the evaluation one. Thus, we expect the data that the model will
be working with to be IID for the model to work correctly with it.
However, in practice, the IID approach is not always applicable. It is practically impossi­
ble to cover all the possible data variation while training a machine learning model, and
many times the real­world data comes out of the IID assumption. In their paper, Bernhard
Schölkopf et al. discuss the IID and some challenges the machine learning models based
on this assumption face, some of which being weak robustness, problems with learning
reusable mechanisms, and lack of causality perspective. [3]
There are existing solutions as mentioned by Jingkang Yang et al. in their survey, that
face the challenges brought by out of distribution data when dealing with machine learning
algorithms, such as anomaly and novelty detection, outlier detection, and out of distribu­
tion detection methods. [4] However, all these methods for the most part deal with the
destructive impact of out of IID or previously unseen data on the models, but they don’t
necessarily change the design or philosophy of these models.
In the same paper, Bernhard Schölkopf et al. argue that the machine learning models
based on the statistical correlation are weaker compared to the causal models. This is
due to the aforementioned issues as well as the fact that most statistical models just
learn associations and joint distributions of variables they work with without taking into
consideration any underlying processes or real connections between the variables. Of
course, this is the strength of statistical machine learning models in the way that they can
learn on data without any external involvement and approximate it pretty well, however, if
our goal is to develop a system that can be robust and accurate in as many situations as
possible, this approach starts facing significant issues.
Lets consider a simple parabolic function f(y) of some variable x. An example of how
a statistical model can fail is if we train it on a portion of data that lies only in a part of
the function where 0 < x < x _max, where x _max is the maximum value in the training
dataset for the model. A visualization of the function can be seen in the figure below,
where the function is in red. As result, there is a possibility where the model can predict
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
1
==PAGE:10==
the function that perfectly fits the portion of the function where the training data came
from, but completely fails to generalize and doesn’t fit for values where x is lower than 0
or greater than x _max. That possible predicted function is in blue on the figure.
Figure 1.1: Generalization with OOD data
The causal models the point of interest of this work due to the advantages the causal re­
lation offers as opposed to the statistical correlation, which will be discussed in the further
chapters. As noted by Bernhard Schölkopf et al. in their work, the main application of
the current state statistical correlation based machine learning models is a simple pattern
recognition that varies in scale, but the actual cause­effect relationship, as well as some
intuitive for human brain things like domain change, interventions, etc., are overlooked.
In this work, I will make an attempt to implement machine learning models that take the
causality into account and their ability to face the issues emerging from the statistical
models. The scope of the project, the definition of the problem, and the hypothesis will
be defined at the end of the Background chapter.
2
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
In this section, I will provide the background and general concepts to fully understand the
definition of the problem and later approaches to solve it. The main purpose here is to
give a reader a general intuition and grasp of concepts of causality, and why I chose to
use causality in this work as opposed to the statistical correlation. Once all the concepts
will be introduced and briefly explained, I will state the scope and the definition of the
problem for this work, as well as introduce the main hypothesis.
2.1
Statistical Correlation and Underlying Issues
As mentioned previously, the classical machine learning algorithms rely heavily on sta­
tistical correlation. And even though it has been proven over the last years how efficient
that approach can be at solving complex tasks, it has some core underlying issues, which
will be explored further.
There are some really ridiculous examples of the statistical correlation and how it can be
unreliable. In the figure below, we can see how the number of people dying by drowning in
a pool is directly correlated to the number of movies starring Nicolas Cage. The correlation
is there, and it’s pretty strong, however, I highly doubt that these two things are connected
in any way and it’s just a coincidence. However, if we were to submit this data to a machine
learning model and train it, most probably it would agree with what we see on the graph.
Figure 2.1: Example of ridiculous correlations [5]
The two main issues with the correlation are that it’s blind and symmetric. The ”blindness”
of the correlation can be seen in situations where two absolutely unrelated variables or
phenomena all of a sudden show correlation. Usually, examples of this are ridiculous
pseudo correlations that people find, like in the fig. 2.1 figure, however, in the context
of machine learning, this can be tied to two or more variables seemingly correlate, while
not being related to each other at all. This can happen by accident, or by an unbalanced
dataset that is used to train a model. This can result in a machine learning model learning
wrong correlations and being wrongly biased, which will lead to a big impact on perfor­
mance once it starts working with new data without such accidental correlation.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
3
==PAGE:12==
The symmetry issue lies in the fact that with the statistical correlation when two variables
are correlated, changes in either of them will result in a change in the other one. This
means that given two variables X and Y, a change in X will result in a change in Y ac­
cording to how they are correlated, but at the same time, the same change in Y will also
correlate with a change in X. While normally it wouldn’t be an issue, when we try to con­
struct models that represent the real world surrounding us as closely as possible, this can
be a problem. An easy intuitive example of why this can be the base of faulty logic can
be this: ”when it rains (X), the ground is wet (Y)”, which is correct, but the opposite is ”if
the ground is wet (Y), it rains (X)” is not always necessarily true.
2.2
Causality
Now that the issues with the statistical correlation have been described, I will introduce
the concept of causality and some of its advantages. These advantages are the main
argument to using the causality with machine learning models in this work.
A variable X is said to cause variable Y when an intervention in X causes change in Y, but
intervention in Y does not necessarily cause change in X. Coming back to the example
from before, in the context of causality we can say that ”when it rains (X), the ground
is wet (Y)” however, ”when the ground is wet (Y), it does not necessarily mean that it’s
raining (X)”. This example involves only two variables, however, it is possible to draw
causation between more variables: maybe there can be other factors that can cause the
ground to be wet or other effects of rain, or maybe we can find some other effects of the
ground being wet, like people slipping and falling more often. We can chain the causes
and effects like that until we have a full picture of the problem and underlying processes.
Compared to the statistical correlation, causality offers a way more robust and complete
picture of how things are.
2.3
Structural Causal Models
Usualy, to describe the causality and causal relations, the Structural Causal Models (SCM)
are used. An SCM consists of two components: Structural Equation Model (SEM) and
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). SEM is a set of equations that describe every causal re­
lation of an SCM that is related to the variables. An important note on SEM equations
is that they are non­symmetrical, meaning that gives a function /( Y = f(X) /), it cannot
be inverted to find X. The DAG component consists of a directed graph that represents
the causal relationships between variables. The graph is directed, which means that if a
variable X has an edge pointing to a variable Y, this relation is not reversible.
2.4
Interventions
While it’s very simple to see if two variables are correlated or not, it’s a bit more compli­
cated to see the causality relation between two or more variables. Usually, when we want
to test causality, we can perform empirical tests to see if the cause­effect relationship is
present, but sometimes it’s impossible to perform such tests physically.
That is in the context of causality there is a concept of interventions. An intervention is
a forced change in a variable state or a process to see how it reflects on the rest of the
system. For example, coming back to the Nicolas Cage example shown on fig. 2.1, we
can test if there is a causality between these two events. Unfortunately, we can’t control
how many people drown in a swimming pool annually. However, if Nicolas Cake retires
and stops starring in movies, chances are the amount of drowned people won’t change.
This can show that these two events don’t actually have a cause­effect relationship.
4
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:13==
2.5
Confounders
Sometimes, there can be a variable in the causal graph that affects two or more other
variables at the same time. In that case, the parent variable is called confounder. An
example of a graph including a confounder can be found below where X is a confounder
of both A and B variables.
Figure 2.2: An example of a confounder
In the context of causality, the confounders are generally viewed as not desirable for a
couple of reasons. The biggest issue comes up when two variables affected by a single
confounder are statistically correlated, and then it’s important to distinguish if this correla­
tion is caused purely by their confounder, or if there is actually some connection between
them besides the confounder. Normally, we can figure this out by our expert knowledge
of the situation or performing interventions, however, a true problem appears when the
confounder is ”hidden”. Sometimes we might overlook components of the causal struc­
ture of a problem, or maybe we may lack some data for the full picture, so some elements
of the graph may be missing.
A popular example of a such situation is the Ice Cream and Shark Attacks. [6] This exam­
ple shows the direct correlation between how eating ice cream increases your chances
of getting attacked by a shark. The correlation is there, and at first sight, it doesn’t make
any sense. And it shouldn’t. The cause of the correlation is actually a third factor that
is overlooked in data, which is the season, or temperature. During summer or when it’s
warm people tend to eat more ice cream, as well as people swim and dive more, which
leads to more shark attacks. So the consumption of ice cream doesn’t cause the sharks
to attack people despite these two variables being correlated. However, both of them are
affected by their confounder which is not included in the data and is hidden.
Situation like this can be really confusing. Going back to the fact that most of the machine
learning algorithms rely on the statistical correlation, if we try to train a model on the data
without the temperature factor, it will just associate the ice cream consumption with the
shark attacks without a second thought. This shows how the problem of confounders is
very significant and how the current statistical machine learning models are vulnerable to
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
5
==PAGE:14==
it.
2.6
Problem Statement and Scope
The main objective of this project is to try to solve or improve the issues related to the sta­
tistical machine learning models that were mentioned before by introducing the causality
to the machine learning concepts. The way it will be done is by designing the architecture
of machine learning models around the causal structure of a problem. A similar approach
was described by Di Wu and G. Gary Wang [7] in their work where they describe an archi­
tecture of an artificial neural network based on the causal relations. This approach and
the details of model implementation will be discussed in further chapters.
The main hypothesis of this work is that the causal models are more robust to
the data distribution shifts and have better performance when working with out­of­
distribution data. To test this hypothesis, I will describe, develop and train a number of
causal models, as well as a number of non­causal models that are based on statistical
correlation. Then, I will perform a number of equal tests with out of distribution data and
compare the performance of all the models to prove or reject the proposed hypothesis.
The further work is split into stages, and the hypothesis will be tested using a prototype
model with a proof of concept problem, and later with a more complex problem. The
complex model will be split into simplified and full versions, with different models being
developed for both of them. In the end, all the models and their performance will be
compared to draw conclusions.
6
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:15==
3
Prototype Model on Kinematics
Simulator
At this point, we have the main hypothesis about causal models, but before considering
it with full seriousness and applying it to serious problems, it would be useful to test it
on a simple problem as a proof of concept. This section is dedicated to that. Here, I
will define a simple problem and develop a prototype causal and non­causal models that
solve it. Then, I will carry out an experiment to prove or disprove the hypothesis about
the robustness of the causal models to the shifts in data distribution.
For the purpose of this work, I will be using simulators that generate data based on pre­
defined rules. Each simulator and its functionality will be described in detail below. The
reason behind the decision to use the simulator and the simulated data is full knowledge
of every process that is happening inside the simulator. This provides an opportunity to
determine an accurate causal structure without any hidden external factors or influences
on the processes or data produced by a simulator. That way the experiment is pure and
it’s possible to argue that the causal structure is the only contributor to the difference in
the way of work between causal and non­causal models.
An important note is that since I am working with machine learning models that are pre­
dicting outcomes of a simulator, which is a model on its own, the correct way to refer to
these machine learning models would be metamodels.
3.1
Kinematics Simulator
The simulator for the proof of work should be relatively simple but still have at least several
processes to build an SCM of the problem. Ideally, the processes should be similar, and
the problem should be possible to be solved by relatively simple machine learning models
with a high degree of accuracy.
For the purpose of the prototype model, I will use a kinematics simulator that simulates a
moving object after a certain kinetic force had an impact on it. The most intuitive way to
visualize it is by imagining a ball of a certain mass that moves in space and gets pushed,
which changes its velocity. The starting coordinate x0 at the moment of push is measured,
and then the intermediate and target variables are calculated. The target variable of this
problem is the final coordinate x, thus making it a regression problem.
The simulator is essentially a function that takes a number of starting parameters and
calculates the result using the kinematics equations, and then outputs all the variables for
further use. The input variables of the simulator are: force applied to an object (F), time
of measurement (t), mass of the object (m), starting coordinate of the object (x0), and the
starting velocity (v0).
The output variables of the simulator are listed bellow. The acceleration that an object will
receive due to the applied force:
a = F
M
(3.1)
Velocity that the object will be moving with after the force applied:
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
7
==PAGE:16==
v = v0 + a · t
(3.2)
Coordinate where the object will be located after the force was applied:
x = x0 + v0 · t + a · t
2
(3.3)
The simulator will be used to construct a dataset for the prototype model and tests. To do
that, lists of randomly selected starting parameters will be created and submitted to the
simulator function. To create the dataset, I chose to use 10000 samples, which should be
enough to train models for the problem of this scale. The dataset will contain both input
and output variables.
Additionally, since we know all underlying processes of the simulator, we can define a
causal structure and SCM of the simulator based on the knowledge of the functionality of
the simulator, which is shown in the fig. 3.1:
Figure 3.1: DAG of Kinematics Simulator Problem
3.2
Model and Causal Artificial Neural Network
As a prototype causal model, I’ve decided to use a Causal Artificial Neural Network (C­
ANN) described in the paper by Di Wu and G. Gary Wang. [7] They describe an archi­
tecture of an artificial neural network that is based on the causal structure of a problem.
The causal structure is represented with SCM, and the architecture is based on the DAG
component of the SCM, which is a causal graph of the problem. The causal structure can
be either deducted by expert knowledge of the underlying processes, or by causal dis­
covery methods. Since I will be using a simulator where all the processes are predefined
and known, the causal structure of the problem is defined by this knowledge in this case.
Once the causal structure is defined and known, a C­ANN can be constructed. There’s
a key difference between the C­ANN and a regular ANN: while the regular ANN is a
singular network that takes all the input variables at once, passes them through hidden
layers, and predicts the output variables, the C­ANN consists of multiple subnetworks that
produce the intermediate and target variables. Each subnetwork is based on a singular
8
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:17==
causal relationship in the causal structure of the problem, where the input variables of
a subnetwork are causes in a causal relationship, and the output variables are effects.
Then, the outputs of subnetworks are passed forward according to the causal structure,
where in case an output of one subnetwork is a cause for another causal relationship in
the causal graph, it is used as an input for the respective subnetwork. The data is passed
forward through the subnetworks based on the causal structure until the target variables
are reached. This architecture fits the purposes of this work perfectly. It is following the
causal structure of the problem, and its architecture is directly connected to that structure.
We have already defined the SCM which contains DAG for the simulator in fig. 3.1, which
can be used to define the architecture of the model. Altogether, the C­ANN will consist of
3 subnetworks for a and V, which are intermediate variables, and for x, which is the tar­
get variable. The structure of each of the subnetworks is following the respective causal
relation in the causal structure of the problem. The data is propagated through the sub­
networks in such a way that a single network takes in all the required input parameters
and produces an output variable, which is passed as an input to the following subnetwork
until the target variable is reached. The target variable is the output of the entire C­ANN
network.
3.3
Scope of the Problem
The main goal of this stage is to test the theory that a causal model is more robust to
changes in the distribution of data, and that the modular structure of the model that is
based on the causal graph would perform better than a regular non­causal neural network.
To test this theory, I will construct a dataset with the kinematics simulator and train both
models using it.
After training the training process, the original dataset will be modified and the models will
be evaluated using it. The change I’ve decided to make is to shift both x0 and x variables
by adding the same value dx to them. That results in the distribution in data being changed
for both of those variables, but the processes, the rest of the variables, and the distance
traveled overall will remain unchanged. Essentially, as a test, the reference point of the
coordinate system will be shifted, but the object in the coordinate system and its behavior
will remain the same as in the original data. This is a perfect test since there is no need
to generate any new data or change any processes, and it can clearly demonstrate the
effects of data distribution changes on the performance of the models. The shifts will be
randomized across the dataset rows but will be the same per sample for both x0 and x.
Both models will receive the same data for both training and testing. The comparison
of the performance of the models will be made by matching the performance scores of
training loss, evaluation, and the altered data performances. The metrics to measure the
performance will be R2 metrics.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
9
==PAGE:18==
3.4
Results
After the models have been trained and tested on the dataset with shifted coordinate
variables, we can compare how they performed. The results can be seen in the table
below:
Data
Training
Evaluation
Shifted Data
ANN
0.8531
0.8532
­15.2882
C­ANN
0.7666
0.7246
0.1864
Judging by the result of this experiment, it becomes obvious that the causal model outper­
formed the non­causal one. Even though the performance of both models has dropped
significantly, the C­ANN shows more resilience to the change in the original data. This is
the first practical confirmation of the main hypothesis about causal models’ robustness,
so the proof of concept is successful. Even though it’s just one experiment with modified
data, it allows applying a similar approach to more complex problems to test the hypoth­
esis even further.
10
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:19==
4
Application on Complex Models
Now that the hypothesis of the causal models being more robust to the shifts of the dis­
tribution in data has been proven with the prototype model, I will try to apply the same
principles to a more complex system. So far I’ve been dealing with a simulator with very
simple linear processes, but to really test the hypothesis it would be good to apply it on
a more complex system. As with the prototype models, this stage will also use the data
generated by a simulator for the same reasons. The simulator itself and the principles of
its work are described in detail below.
4.1
Coffee Simulator
As the main simulator for this thesis I have chosen a coffee simulator proposed by [8]
with slight modifications to suit the needs of this work. The original simulator describes a
system consisting of a cup of coffee and the environment it is placed in, and it simulates
how the temperature of a coffee would change every defined time step depending on the
parameters of the system.
In his paper, Downey describes three ways of heat transfer: Conduction, Convection, and
Radiation. However, he argues that in the setting of the simulator and for simplicity, we can
neglect the Convection and Radiation types of heat transfer types, and focus only on the
Conduction. As the base of the model Downey uses the Newton’s Law of Cooling, which
defines how the change in temperature of an object is proportional to the temperature
difference between the object and the environment it’s placed in, and it’s described by the
following equation:
dT
dt = −r(T −Tenv)
(4.1)
Downey mentions how the Newton’s Law of Cooling as a model can become complex
when dealing with convection, and it’s a bad model when dealing with Radiation, but
since the simulator takes into consideration only the conduction, the law can be applied
to get a very good estimate of how the temperature is going to change. Another important
note is that the paper mentions how Newton’s Law of Cooling is a differential equation,
but for a short time period it can be approximated with the following difference equation:
∆T = −r(T −Tenv)dt
(4.2)
The simulator described in the paper is designed in such a way that it takes in a number
of parameters, namely volume ­ volume of coffee in a cup, T ­ the starting temperature of
the coffee, r ­ the heat coefficient, T _env ­ the temperature of the environment, t _0 ­ the
starting temperature of the measurements, t _end ­ the total time of the simulation, dt ­ the
time step of temperature measurement. Then, the equation eq. (4.2) is used to calculate
the temperature for every time step between t _0 and t _end, where a new temperature
Ti = Ti−1 −∆T. The result of the simulation is a table with time steps t and temperature
T columns, and respective data for each time step of the simulation. The reason why this
simulator has caught my attention is because it has a cyclic process, which complicates
the causal relationships and flow of data.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
11
==PAGE:20==
4.1.1
Modifications on the Original Simulator
For the purpose of this thesis, some modifications have been made to the original sim­
ulator. Firstly, the biggest addition to the simulator is the introduction of an intervention
in the form of milk being added to the coffee, which essentially means that a colder liq­
uid is added to the container with coffee, which changes the temperature of the liquid at
a given time. In practice, three new variables have been added to the simulator: Temp
_milk ­ temperature of the milk that is being added, vol _milk ­ volume of added milk, and
t _inter ­ time of the intervention in the simulation process. The time of the intervention is
random, and the resulting temperature of the liquid after the intervention is calculated by
the following equation:
T = m1C1T1 + m2C2T2 + ... + mnCnTn
m1C1 + m2C2 + ... + mnCn
(4.3)
However, since the simulator is dealing with volumes of the liquids, we need to use the
following equation to calculate the mass of a liquid using its density and volume:
m = pV
(4.4)
We assume that the density of coffee is equal to the density of water. Also, the densities
of milk and water are very close (1035 kg/L and 1000 kg/L), so to simplify the equation
eq. (4.3) we will treat these two densities as equal. This allows us to remove the density
from the equation. The final equation for finding the temperature of the coffee after adding
milk to it is following:
T = VcCcTc + VmCmTm
VcCc + VmCm
(4.5)
It’s also worth noting that the equation uses the following constant heat capacity values:
Ccoffee = 4.2 kJ/(kg K), Cmilk = 3.93 kJ/(kg K).
The addition of milk to the coffee is mentioned in the paper by Downey when he talks
about the scope of the problem, however, it is not implemented or taken into account later
on. However, in my version of the simulator, I have decided to implement it to make the
causal structure more complex and interesting. In addition, the milk addition can act as
an intervention that drops the temperature outside the scope of the cooling cycle.
Then, instead of returning just temperature data as in the original version, the simulator
now also returns the all data that participates in the process, like environmental temper­
ature, volume, etc. The result of one iteration of the simulator is a time series table with
the temperature data and a row of data with all the other variables.
4.1.2
Data Generation
To generate a dataset using the simulator, first, the distributions for each variable are
defined and a list of size N of randomized input variables or the simulator is generated
based on those distributions. Then, for every set of variables, the simulation is executed
N times and the resulting time series table and general process data row are appended
to the corresponding dataset. As result, there are two datasets: one with the temperature
data in the form of time series, and the other with general data. Both of these datasets
are connected through a variable ind corresponding to a sample number, which is needed
due to a many­to­one relationship since one sample in the general dataset corresponds
to multiple rows in the time series one.
12
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:21==
Since the simulator has been modified and some new variables have been introduced to
it, for convenience and future reference I will list out what variables are being produced
and what each dataset contains. Notice that some variables have been renamed to avoid
confusion, for example, T (temperature variables) have been renamed to Temp due to
similarity to the time variables t. The general dataset contains 12 variables in total, which
are:
• ind ­ sample index, connecting the general and the time series datasets
• Temp _0 ­ starting temperature of coffee
• vol ­ volume of coffee
• Temp _env ­ temperature of the environment
• t _end ­ total time of the cooling process
• r ­ the heat coefficient
• Temp _end ­ final temperature of the coffee after the cooling
• t _inter ­ time of the intervention/milk addition
• Temp _milk ­ temperature of milk being added
• t _inter ­ time of the intervention/milk addition
• vol _milk ­ volume of milk being added
• Temp _before _inter ­ temperature at the time step before intervention
• Temp _inter ­ temperature at the time step after intervention
The time series temperature dataset contains the following 3 variables:
• ind ­ sample index, connecting the general and the time series datasets
• t ­ time step of the temperature measurement in the process
• Temp ­ temperature for a given time step
4.1.3
Scope of Experiments and Goals
As described before, the simulator has a cycling process of cooling. However, the work
on this simulator is split into two parts: one is a simplified, and the other is full cyclic. This
is made to test different types of models and explore if simplifying and approximating the
cyclic processes can improve the performance of the models.
The rest of this work is dedicated to training multiple models, both causal and classical,
and measuring their performance. First, all the models will be trained on the initial dataset
with predefined distributions, which you can find later in this subsection. Then, they will
be evaluated on a portion of the initial dataset to measure how accurate they are on the
data with the same distribution and to make sure that the training process was successful.
Once the models are trained and evaluated on the initial dataset, they will be presented
with a number of new datasets generated by the simulator, but with different distributions
in one or multiple variables. Since the variables are generated randomly using the normal
distribution, we can easily shift the mean or the deviation values of respective variables.
Then, each model will be evaluated on each of the datasets and the performance mea­
sured.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
13
==PAGE:22==
The distribution of variables in the initial training dataset are as follows: Temp _0 mean =
80; Temp _0 std = 20; volume mean = 500; volume std = 200; T _env mean = 15; T _env
std = 15; r mean = 0.03; r std = 0.01; T _milk mean = 20; T _milk std = 7; vol _milk mean
= 70; vol _milk std = 20.
For each model discussed further, both sequential and non­sequential, the goal is to pre­
dict the final temperature after the cooling process, which is Temp _end variable, thus it’s
a regression problem. In this work, I am not concerned with how accurate the models
can recreate the simulation, or if all underlying processes in these models are completely
accurate. The metrics used to measure the performance of each model will be Mean
Squared Error (MSE) and R2.
The main objective for this part of the thesis is to benchmark all the models and see how
they perform with different types of datasets. The general goal is to check the hypothesis
that the causal models perform better on shifted data distributions and have better and
more robust generalization capabilities compared to the classical models. Furthermore,
my goal is not to try to implement models that would be extremely accurate in every
scenario, but rather to compare the performance of the models relative to each other, so
the models used will be implemented with this objective in mind. The results, discussion,
and conclusions will be presented at the end.
14
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:23==
4.2
Causal Approximation Models
The first model I will test will be similar to the one used with the kinematics simulator,
and will be used on a causal structure of the problem. However, since there is a cyclic
process in the simulation, the causal models, like C­ANN, would be difficult to apply in this
case. That is why for this stage I’ve decided to simplify the process, and instead of using
a model to predict every step of the process and temperature change, I will use models
to approximate the temperature at certain time intervals that are defined by the causal
structure of the problem.
Of course, this approach skips many steps and is not able to predict temperatures at
intermediate steps of the cooling process, but for the purpose of this thesis, the scope
would be limited to predicting the final temperature after the cooling process given the
input variables. The main goal is not to recreate the accurate simulation or recreate the
underlying processes, but rather to approximate the end result and compare different
approaches and see how they perform compared to each other.
4.2.1
Causal Structure of the Problem
The simulator gives us a very detailed picture of what is going on at every time step of the
cooling process, however, the overall cooling process can be broken down into two sub­
processes: the cooling of the liquid determined by the equation eq. (4.2) and the addition
of milk determined by the equation eq. (4.3). The milk is added at a random point in the
cooling process t _inter. From that, in the current scope we can split the entire process into
three parts: cooling before adding milk, the addition of milk, the cooling after adding milk
till the end. This split requires the introduction of a new intermediate temperature variable
Temp _before _inter which is the result of the first part and represents the temperature
right before adding the milk to the coffee.
Apart from that, since at this stage we are not dealing with sequential models, we can
treat the time variables t _inter and t as regular input variables for the models. However,
since the whole process has been split into three parts, two of which are the actual cooling
sub­processes, the total time variable t becomes obsolete as an input variable due to not
being directly associated with any of the sub­processes. Instead, a new variable t _rem
has been introduced for the third sub­process which represents the time remaining after
adding the milk. This variable is calculated by simply subtracting time of intervention t
_inter from the total time of the process t.
Now that all the processes and additional variables have been described, we can construct
an DAG of the problem which will determine the causal model structure, which can be seen
at fig. 4.1:
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.1: DAG of Approximation Approach of Coffee Problem
Again, it’s important to note that this structure is just an abstraction of the whole process
of the simulation for the purpose of this stage. The actual causal structure is a bit more
complex, and in the current version, the cyclic process of cooling is excluded.
4.2.2
Baseline and Non­Causal Models
To see if the causal models actually perform better and if they are more robust compared
to the conventional approach, we need to train both types of models on the same data
and perform a set of equal tests that involve some kind of distribution shift. There will be
three baseline models for this stage that will be trained on the same data. The method
of choosing these baseline models is trying to pick ones that would potentially solve the
problem outside the scope of causality, and at least one model that will most certainly fail
during the tests to make sure that the other models have an adequate performance by
comparing them to this failing baseline model.
Linear Regression
The first baseline model that will be used for this stage is linear regression. Linear re­
gression is a pretty weak model to approximate complex data. While linear regression
might fit the training data relatively well in some cases, its generalization capabilities are
extremely low. This is pronounced even more when we are dealing with distribution shifts
in data that a linear regression model hasn’t been trained on.
The reason behind choosing a linear regression as a baseline model is that we expect it
to perform extremely poorly on the validation data and the experiments with distribution
shifts with the data. We expect all the other models to perform at least better than the
linear regression as a sanity check.
Artificial Neural Network
The second baseline model is going to be a fully connected ANN. ANN models are known
to be very good at generalizing data, so we assume that they would be a good competitor
16
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:25==
for causal models as they might be somewhat robust to the distribution shifts. It is also
good to directly compare a regular ANN with a C­ANN since the fundamental algorithms
are the same for both models. I will also use the same implementation of the ANN both
for the non­causal version, and the subnetworks of the C­ANN.
The ANN model would take in all the input variables from the data and try to predict the
final temperature of the liquid at the end of a simulation. It’s important to note that all
the variables that are being used for training other models, including the intermediate
variables, will be used to train the baseline models as well. This is done for the fairness
of the experiment, so one model doesn’t get an advantage over another in terms of data
available for training.
The network will consist of 2 hidden layers with 500 neurons in each of them. The input
variables will be Temp _0, vol, Temp _env, r, t _inter, t, Temp _inter, Temp _milk, vol _milk.
The target variable will be Temp _end.
Gradient Boosting
Gradient Boosting is another well­known model that gained popularity in recent years, the
first iteration of which was introduced by Jerome H. Friedman in 2001. [2] It should be a
good competitor to the causal models and the ANN model mentioned before. In practice,
just as the rest of the non­causal models, the gradient boosting model will take in all the
input parameters at the same time and predict the target variable Temp _end.
4.2.3
Causal Models
Apart from the classical models, two causal models will be trained and then compared.
When selecting the causal models, I tried to pick ones that would be direct counterparts
to the non­causal models, but it would also be interesting to see how they perform against
every non­causal model regardless of their relation.
Causal Artificial Neural Network
The first model is going to be a C­ANN that works on the same principle as in the previous
chapter with the kinematics simulator. We know the causal structure of the problem and
its DAG from fig. 4.1, so we can design the architecture of the network and its subnet­
works according to that. The architecture of the C­ANN model for the current problem will
consist of three subnetworks in total. Each of them calculates the temperature at different
intervals of time, which are before the milk addition, after the milk addition, and the final
temperature.
The first subnetwork is responsible for calculating the temperature all the way up to the
milk addition point. The input variables are Temp _0, t _inter, Temp _env, r, and the
output is Temp _before _inter. Then the output of the first subnetwork is passed to the
second one, which is associated with the milk addition. Apart from the temperature input,
the second subnetwork takes in vol, Temp _milk, vol _milk parameters, and the output is
Temp _inter. Then the final subnetwork takes in the same parameters as the first one,
except instead of Temp _0 it takes the output of the second subnetwork, and the time
is a substitute for the t _rem variable. The output of the third subnetwork is the final
temperature Temp _end, which is the target variable.
C­ANN is able to use the same datasets as all the other non­causal models, but it has to
be split into parts according to the inputs of each subnetwork of the model. Thus, it would
be fair to compare it with the non­causal models, and it allows for fair testing.
Causal Gradient Boosting
Since gradient boosting is a supposedly strong model and is used as one of the baseline
models, I’ve decided to see how a gradient boosting model based on a causal structure
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
17
==PAGE:26==
would work. The Causal Gradient Boosting (C­GB) model conceptually is working on the
same principle as a C­ANN, which is breaking a model into smaller submodels based
on the causal structure of a problem, but instead of using ANN blocks, gradient boosting
blocks will be used as submodels. Then, the input variables and intermediate output is
propagated through the blocks, with the final block predicting the target variable.
The goal of adding the C­GB to the experiment is not only to see how it performs compared
to the regular gradient boosting but also to compare it to the C­ANN. Since the causal
structure is the same for C­ANN and C­GB, the input variables, intermediate variables,
and the target variable will be the same. It will be also trained on the same data for the
fairness of the experiment and tested in the same fashion as the rest of the models.
18
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:27==
4.2.4
Model Training
The models are trained on the dataset produced by the coffee simulator which has around
10000 samples. The dataset is split into training and evaluation datasets in a 75/25 ratio,
and the same splits are used to train every model to avoid an advantage due to a possible
advantageous data distribution during training or evaluation. The variables distribution for
the initial training dataset is discussed in the previous section under the data generation.
After the training process of each of the aforementioned model and evaluating them on
the evaluation data, the following results were achieved:
Metric
Linear Regression
ANN
C­ANN
Gradient Boosting
C­GB
MSE
2.4052
5.4371
11.4546
1.8517
4.2830
R2
0.9295
0.9696
0.9363
0.9852
0.9761
Looking at the evaluation scores we can conclude that the models have been trained
successfully as their performance is good. Linear regression, which is a baseline model
for a sanity check, fits the evaluation data well. The rest of the models are performing
on the evaluation data goo, too. The best model in terms of scores so far is gradient
boosting.
Another noticeable thing in the results is that the causal models have worse performance
than their non­causal counterparts, and even lower than linear regression. However, we
are not aiming to make the most accurate model for the initial dataset, and the main point
is to test them on the experimental data later on, so their performance is still good and
satisfactory at this point since it’s not drastically different from the other models.
4.2.5
Model Evaluation and Tests
The main part of the experiment is testing how each model performs with data where the
distributions of different variables have been shifted. To evaluate the performance, each
model will be given sets of datasets with different distributions in different variables. Each
of those datasets is produced by the coffee simulator which was given a shifted distribution
for one or more input variables. That ensures that the final temperature is accurate as
a result of simulation, which is important to correctly evaluate the models as opposed to
modifying the original dataset directly. At this stage, only the general data is used, and
the time series temperature data is not included. Each dataset will include around 3000
samples, which will be enough to include diverse data from a normal distribution.
It’s important to note that most of the experimental datasets are produced by a simple shift
in data distribution to see if a model can handle it, but some of them are far more complex
down to a point of changing how the process works, for example, heating the liquid instead
of cooling. While I don’t expect models to perform too well with those experiments, it is
still interesting how each model can handle such a change in data.
Experiment 1: Hot Liquid Temperature
The first evaluation is simply shifting the starting temperature of the liquid to extremely
high, while leaving the rest of the variables the same, including the environmental tem­
perature. This leads to a situation where the difference between the liquid temperature
and the temperature of the environment is much higher compared to the original training
dataset, which results in a much faster drop in the liquid temperature. This means that by
the end of the process, the difference between starting and final temperatures of the liquid
will drastically increase. Additionally, the impact of adding milk to the coffee will have a
greater impact because of the temperature difference, too. The goal here is to see if any
of the models can increase speed of cooling, and how resistant they are to the change.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
19
==PAGE:28==
The changes in the distribution compared to the original data are as follows: Temp _0
mean = 200; Temp _0 std = 25.
I also have to address the abnormal temperature of the coffee: while I understand that
having a cup of coffee with a temperature far beyond a 100C°would be impossible in
practice, for the sake of the experiment we will not worry about the physics behind the
simulating and drastically simplify it by assuming we found a way to break the laws of
nature.
Experiment 2: Cold Liquid Temperature
Opposite from the previous dataset, in this case, we shift the temperature mean to drop
it to low values. While occasionally the liquid temperature will be greater or the same as
the environment temperature, most of the samples will have a liquid temperature lower
than the environmental one. Again, some coffee temperatures will be way below zero,
which would in reality turn the coffee into ice, but we will simplify the process and assume
it stays liquid no matter what.
This is interesting because in this case, the process of the simulation changes: instead
of cooling the temperature of the liquid, the coffee will be heating up in most samples. In
addition, the milk addition will cause the further heating of the liquid. This results in the
starting temperature of coffee being lower than the final one. While it’s interesting to see
how each model can handle such a change, I don’t expect a great performance of either
of them with this experiment since it can be too complex.
The distribution changes in this experiment are as follows: Temp _0 mean = ­20; Temp
_0 std = 20.
Experiment 3: Cold Environment Temperature
This experiment is very similar to the one with hot liquid, but this time the temperature
of the environment will be lowered by shifting the mean of the corresponding variable. It
has the same effect, which is a more rapid fall in the liquid temperature and a greater
difference between the starting and final temperatures of the liquid, however, in this case,
the variable that is causing it is different.
It’s interesting to see how the models handle this change since the starting temperature
variable, as in the case of the first experiment, is participating only in the start of the
process with the current simplified causal structure, while the environmental temperature
is present in every process except the milk intervention. Also, during the training process
models might be biased to one or the other variable, so it would be interesting to see how
changes in them reflect on the performance.
The distribution changes in this experiment are as follows: Temp _env mean = ­60; Temp
_env std = 10.
Experiment 4: Extreme Deviation
All the previous experiments were focused on changing the mean of one or more vari­
ables, which lead to the entire dataset focused around a certain situation or an experi­
mental context. For example, when the starting temperature of the coffee is increased,
the data is still concentrated around a new mean in the distribution, but it’s not more di­
verse compared to the original data.
In this experiment instead of shifting the mean of the starting temperature of the liquid, its
deviation will be changed. This means that the data and the processes will be scattered
all around: while in some cases the difference between the liquid and the environment
temperatures will be great, similarly to the previous experiments, in other cases the dif­
ference will be very small. The assumption is that this experiment will give us a better
20
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:29==
idea about how the models handle diverse data on average, and it should give us a better
insight into the generalization capabilities of each model.
The following changes to the distribution parameters were made: Temp _0 mean = 100;
Temp _0 std = 50. Since the data is more spread, to get more accurate results this dataset
has 10000 samples, which is more than the rest of the experimental datasets.
Experiment 5: Extremely Cold Milk
In this experiment, the mean of the milk temperature Temp _milk has been shifted to
the extreme low. With the initial data, the milk doesn’t have too big of an impact on
the temperature of the coffee since its volume is not too big in comparison to the coffee
volume, and the temperature difference between the milk and the coffee is not too great.
The point of the experiment is to see if the models can adapt to the drastic drop in tem­
perature that is caused by the addition of extremely cold milk. Again, we assume that milk
is still liquid way below the freezing point. In addition, to make the impact of milk more
noticeable, its volume has been increased for this experiment.
The new distribution parameters are following: Temp _milk mean = ­40; Temp _milk std =
120.
Experiment 6: Hot Coffee and Hot Environment
This experiment is similar to the first one, but this time both the temperature of the coffee
and the temperature of the environment have been increased. In this situation, the tem­
perature change should be at around the same rate as in the initial dataset, and all the
processes remain unchanged.
The point of this experiment is to see if the models can adequately deal with the change
of distribution without any other changes in the process. The experiment checks if the
models are biased to predict the final temperature based on one of the parameters, or if
they take into consideration both of them and can adjust to a simple shift in temperatures
without processes changed.
New distributions look as follows: Temp _0 mean = 200; Temp _0 std = 25; Temp _env
mean = 100; Temp _env std = 15.
4.2.6
Results
Now that the models have been trained and have a good performance on the evaluation
data, they can be applied to the experimental data. The experimental data hasn’t been
split in any way, and is submitted to the model as a whole and equally. Then, each model
produces the output predictions on the T _end target variable, which is later compared to
the true values using a scoring function. This allows us to compare how models performed
on the same data under the same conditions and draw conclusions.
After submitting the experimental data to the models, the following results were achieved
with the MSE metric:
Experiment
Linear Regression
ANN
C­ANN
Gradient Boosting
C­GB
Evaluation
2.4052
5.4371
11.4546
1.8517
4.2830
Exp. 1
612976275.5
5348.4383
783.3365
1971.7665
724.4918
Exp. 2
612951260.6
190.4837
339.8970
124.9150
275.7900
Exp. 3
612947048.8
572.7662
262.8269
343.2401
478.1753
Exp. 4
612972524.1
2013.1697
83.4724
482.8021
78.6132
Exp. 5
603272020.6
824.8558
102.4277
93.8226
86.4051
Exp. 6
603405142.8
15117.91
204.0735
3967.3446
2896.3137
Exp. 7
603368839.8
2467.3490
127.8224
482.8152
298.6029
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
21
==PAGE:30==
The same results using the R2 metric can be seen below:
Experiment
Linear Regression
ANN
C­ANN
Gradient Boosting
C­GB
Evaluation
0.9285
0.9636
0.9058
0.9885
0.9618
Exp. 1
­955543.8
­7.3740
­0.4666
­2.3897
­0.0870
Exp. 2
­3951072.4
­0.2129
­0.3681
0.2083
­0.7248
Exp. 3
­1572220.8
­0.5247
0.4535
0.0987
­0.3946
Exp. 4
­1332533.9
­3.3690
0.7937
­0.1380
0.8383
Exp. 5
­3128797.7
­3.2780
0.4687
0.5133
0.5518
Exp. 6
­1853084.4
­45.4278
0.3732
­11.1839
­7.8947
Exp. 7
­456142.9
­0.8653
0.9033
0.6349
0.7742
Hot Coffee Experiment Results
Let’s go through the experiments one by one and try to analyze the results and try to draw
some conclusions. In the first experiment with extremely hot coffee, the linear regres­
sion performed extremely poorly failing to fit the data completely, as expected. However,
what is interesting, the causal models outperformed their classical counterparts quite sig­
nificantly: both C­ANN and C­GB got better scores compared to the ANN and gradient
boosting, respectively.
The best model in this experiment turned out to be C­GB followed very closely by C­ANN.
After that follows the gradient boosting model, which performed better than the ANN.
Another interesting note is that C­ANN performed better than the gradient boosting, but
with evaluation data from the original distribution its performance was far worse.
This experiment demonstrates the hypothesized advantage of the causal models com­
pared to the classical ones. The experiment was simple with a shift in only one variable
distribution in the data, and all the underlying processes remained unchanged. However,
even that change managed to completely throw off the classical models, and their perfor­
mance significantly dropped. On the other hand, we can witness the performance drop
with the causal models, too, but it’s way less compared to the classical ones.
Cold Coffee Experiment Results
The second experiment with cold coffee is a bit more interesting than the previous one:
this time it is possible that the coffee temperature is lower than the environmental one,
which means that in this case, the coffee might end up warmer in the end compared to
the start. This is a significant change in the underlying process, and it is a good challenge
for the models.
The linear regression failed, as expected. The rest of the models have satisfying per­
formance, however, compared to the previous experiment, we can observe the opposite
results: the classical models outperformed the causal ones, even though the difference
in scores is not drastically different. This time, the best model turned out to be the gradi­
ent boosting followed by ANN. C­GB model got better performance than C­ANN this time
again.
My assumption is that the non­causal models have better performance due to the learned
joint distribution and bias towards the environmental temperature variable. Since all the
input variables are submitted together and there are no intermediate steps like in the case
of causal models, the non­causal models tend to be more biased towards the Temp _env.
Cold Environment Experiment Results
The third experiment in nature is very similar to the first one, but this time the environmen­
tal temperature variable is changed. The result of that is a greater difference between the
22
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:31==
start and end temperatures. The process of cooling and the increased rate of temperature
drop should be similar to the first experiment.
The linear regression model failed to fit the new data again. The rest of the models per­
formed better on average compared to the previous experiments. This time, the best
model ended up being the C­ANN, which performed better than a regular ANN. However,
a regular gradient boosting outperformed the C­GB model this time, but the C­GB model
still has a better performance compared to the ANN.
One noticeable difference in the results of this experiment is that the performance of
causal and classical models is not significantly different. My assumption as to why it
happened is that the environmental variable Temp _env has greater importance for the
models, especially the non­causal ones. It does make sense since in causal models Temp
_env participates in all the processes except the milk addition. In the case of non­causal
models, they might be more biased toward this variable since the final temperature Temp
_end will almost always be closer to the temperature of the environment after the cooling
process compared to the starting temperature Temp _0. This can also explain why non­
causal models performed worse in the first experiment with a hotter starting temperature
of the coffee, and why they performed so much better in the second experiment where
the coffee gets heated up: those models tend to estimate the final temperature around
the environmental one due to the learned distributions.
Coffee Temperature Big Deviation Experiment Results
The fourth experiment involves data with extreme deviation in the starting temperature
variable, meaning that there will be all sorts of values included. This test is supposed to
show the overall performance of the models with random shifts in one variable rather than
shifting the mean of a variable to one or another extreme.
The linear model fails. From all the experiments so far, the causal models showed the
best performance in this one: both C­ANN and C­GB have great scores that are really
close to one another. Gradient boosting has a relatively well performance, but is still
considerably worse than the causal models. The ANN appears to be the worst model
whose performance is way behind other models.
This is a relatively simple experiment that doesn’t change any underlying processes and
is supposed to test the robustness of the models to different data distributions. As a result
of this experiment, we can see that the causal models are far more superior compared to
the non­causal ones, which supports the main hypothesis of this work.
Cold Milk Experiment Results
In the experiment with extremely cold milk the linear regression fails. The ANN also
doesn’t have the best performance of all the models. Both of the causal models per­
formed well in this test, being able to adjust to the temperature jump due to the cold milk
addition. However, the best model this time is gradient boosting, even though its score is
not much different from the causal models.
The main challenge in this experiment is that in the original data the milk didn’t have a
drastic impact on the temperature, but this time it is quite significant. The causal models
performed exceptionally well due to a dedicated element in their architecture responsible
for the temperature after the milk addition calculation. However, the gradient boosting
performed surprisingly well, too.
Hot Coffee and Environment Experiment Results
This experiment demonstrates amazing results. The linear regression fails, as expected.
The non­causal models also didn’t perform well, with ANN having a terrible score, and
gradient boosting, while better than ANN, still didn’t adjust well. On the other hand, the
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
23
==PAGE:32==
causal models were able to adjust much better and each of them has better results than
its non­causal counterpart. C­GB has a relatively bad score, but it still outperformed the
gradient boosting model. However, the C­ANN has an amazing score and is way better
than ANN.
This experiment was supposed to be very similar to one performed on the prototype
model: instead of shifting the distribution of one variable and changing the underlying
process as result, the distributions of multiple variables were changed in such a way that
the process stays relatively the same. This allows us to see how models react to the same
conditions and context but with different data. As can be observed from the results, the
causal models did noticeably better than the non­causal ones, which can help to confirm
the main hypothesis of the work.
Extreme Deviations Experiment Results
This experiment includes data that is distributed all over the place with the same means
as in the original dataset. This gives us an opportunity to see how the models handle the
diverse data and test the overall quality and robustness. The linear regression fails again.
This time the non­causal models performed worse than any of the causal ones, with ANN
being worse than gradient boosting. The best model in this experiment turned out to be
C­ANN, but the score of the C­GB model is still pretty close.
Again, from the results of this experiment, we can assume that the causal models were
able to withstand the extreme changes in deviation, similarly to the fourth experiment.
This proves that the main hypothesis works for this case.
4.2.7
Discussion
After reviewing the results and comparing the models for each experiment, we can see
that the causal models overall performed better in most cases. Almost in every experiment
one or both causal models performed better than non­causal ones, and most importantly,
in the experiments where the processes remain unchanged and only the data is shifted,
the causal models are obvious winners.
Just as with the prototype model and proof of concept, these experiments confirm the
main hypothesis about the causal model robustness, and I consider this stage a success.
Even though the causal models didn’t perform best in every single experiment, the trend
suggests that in most cases they outperform not only their non­causal counterparts but
also any non­causal models used in this experiment.
24
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:33==
4.3
Cyclic Process Models
So far I’ve been dealing with a very simplified causal structure of the coffee simulator,
and all the models used so far only approximate the target variable or certain intermedi­
ate variables based on the input variables. The experiments in the previous stage were
successful, but the models were following a simplified causal structure of the problem.
The cyclic process which makes this problem complex and interesting in the first place
wasn’t taken directly into consideration with the aforementioned models. In this section,
I will discuss the causal structure that takes the cyclic process into consideration, as well
as describe, implement, and test the models that can deal with those cyclic processes.
4.3.1
Cyclic Causal Structure of the Problem
The previous causal structure was very simplified and treated the cyclic processes inside
the simulator as one big step: from the start to the milk addition, and then from the milk
addition to the end. This has worked perfectly well for the models described so far, and
they’ve managed to achieve a decent performance even with simplified structure and data
related to it. This time, I will define the full structure that includes the cycles.
The full structure is very similar to the one already described in the previous stage. We can
still split the entire process into three parts: the cooling before the milk addition, the milk
addition and temperature change after the mixture, and the cooling after the milk addition
which results in the final temperature. However, this time instead of treating the cooling
process as one big step, we will treat it as a continuous cyclic process. The process is
cyclic since the temperature for the next time step depends on the temperature in the
current time step and the temperature of the environment and the heat coefficient r, as
seen in eq. (4.2). The milk addition process remains unchanged.
This new structure requires the introduction of two new variables Temp _before and Temp
_after that represent the cyclic process of cooling and change accordingly for each time
step. Practically, we can say that it’s one variable that represents the current temperature
of the coffee, but for the simplicity and for the purpose of the causal structure I’ve decided
to split it into two aforementioned variables.
In the previous stage all the models have been dealing with only the general data, but this
time the time series dataset with the temperature at every time step will be used as well.
This will give the new models the opportunity to deal with the cyclic processes.
The new causal structure and it’s graph looks as follows:
It’s important to note that the graph at section 4.3.1 cannot be called a DAG since it has
cyclic processes because it directly contradicts the definition of a DAG, which shouldn’t
contain any cycles. However, for the purpose of this work, this will be overlooked, but I
won’t call the aforementioned graph a DAG.
The graph looks very similar to the one from the previous stage, which can be seen in
fig. 4.1. In the current graph, the most noticeable and important change is in two cycles
for the temperature before and after milk addition. The temperature right before the milk
addition, as seen on the previous stage graph, is now included in the cycle of Temp _be­
fore. The final temperature Temp _end could technically also be included in the second
cycle variable Temp _after, but since it’s the target variable, I’ve decided to split it into a
separate unit. Also, notice that the time remaining after the milk addition variable t _rem
is still present in the new causal graph.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: Directed graph of cyclic coffee problem
4.3.2
Scope of the Stage
With the causal structure and the causal graph of the problem defined, now I can describe
the models and how they will function with the current definition of the problem. At this
stage, we have cyclic variables and the time series data that supports those cycles. That
means that for this stage I need models that can deal with the time series data and that
can predict the final temperature after t number of time steps for the duration of the cooling
process.
In total, there will be four models discussed, trained, and tested for this stage. The training
process this time will involve both the general data and the time series datasets, however,
not every model will use the same data for the training due to the difference in the model’s
functionality. However, both the general data and the time series dataset used for training
will be the same as in the previous stage to make it fair when I compare all the models
together.
Once the models are defined and trained, they will be tested on the experimental datasets,
which are the same as in the previous stage. At this stage, only the models described
below will be compared and discussed, and the overall comparison of all the models will
be in the following section under results and discussion.
4.3.3
Baseline Model
When dealing with time series and sequential data, an obvious choice when it comes to
model selection is a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). It’s a neural network model that can
work with sequential data, which is exactly what is required for this stage of the problem.
The architecture of the model used in this work will consist of one RNN layer and a fully
connected layer. It will only take the temperature of the coffee as an input parameter
and try to predict the sequence of how it would change over time. The last point in the
sequence will be the target variable.
26
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:35==
In this implementation, I don’t expect this model to perform well since it’s unaware of
any other variables or conditions, and can only learn a sequence of temperature change.
However, when the temperature drop rate changes, I expect this model to fail. It is a
baseline model, and just as the linear regression from the previous stage, it serves the
purpose of sanity check, and I expect the other models to perform at least as good or
better than this model
4.3.4
RNN with Expanded Input
The baseline RNN has a chance of achieving a relatively good result, however, it is ab­
solutely unaware of the process and is able to only learn a sequence that changes at
a certain rate. This might happen because it takes only one temperature input variable
Temp, while in reality, it’s necessary to know at least Temp _env and r variables to cor­
rectly estimate the temperature change, which can be seen in eq. (4.2).
The second model tries to solve this issue by introducing Temp _env and r as input vari­
ables. This is done by embedding these two new variables into the input sequence to­
gether with the temperature. This small change gives the updated RNN model a chance
to learn a correlation between the three input variables. Except for this change to the
input variables, the model has the same architecture and principle of work as an RNN
described in the previous subsection.
Further in this work, this model will be referenced as Extended RNN. We can’t really
call this model causal since it’s not directly following a causal structure that was defined
earlier for this stage, however, we can argue that the inputs to the model were deducted
from the knowledge of an underlying process, which can be seen on the causal graph at
section 4.3.1 in the cooling cycles.
4.3.5
Causal RNN
While an RNN can learn the sequential data pretty well, it is still unaware of the causal
structure of the problem. In addition to that, RNN is not taking into consideration the milk
addition to the coffee. To face these challenges, I will define a modified RNN architecture
that would follow the causal structure and have an additional fully connected block to work
with the milk addition. The new architecture described in this subsection will be called a
Causal Recurrent Neural Network (C­RNN).
Earlier it’s been established that there are three main sub­processes in the causal struc­
ture of the problem: two cooling and one milk addition in between. That is why the ar­
chitecture of the C­RNN also consists of three blocks. The first and the last blocks are
normal RNN subnetworks that deal with the cooling process and the time series data as­
sociated with it. They can be viewed as the previous RNN model but on a smaller scale
with inclusion of expanded inputs. The middle block is responsible for the milk addition
and is essentially a fully connected ANN subnetwork and it works in the same fashion as
the one already described in the C­ANN architecture. The middle block doesn’t deal with
the time series data, only the general dataset. The visualization of the architecture can
be found in the figure below:
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.3: C­RNN model architecture
The principle of work of C­RNN is predicting the temperature for every time step from t
_0 until t _inter, then the output temperature from the first block together with other input
variables is passed to the middle block, where the temperature after the milk addition is
predicted, and finally, that updated mixture temperature is passed to the final RNN block
where it predicts the temperature for the remaining t _rem time steps.
It is worth noting that the middle block of C­RNN is trained independently from the other
two blocks, but when the model is not being trained, the data always flows through the
middle block at respective time t _inter.
4.3.6
Segmented ANN
One potential problem that can occur when using RNN as a model or part of a model is that
it might happen that RNN only learns the sequence, which would lead to the model always
predicting the temperature difference with the same rate, no matter the input. That can
lead to a huge problem where the model can’t adjust to the extreme shifts in the starting
temperature or other conditions where the rate of temperature change drastically changes
from the typical one.
To address these potential issues, I will introduce the last model for this stage, which is
called Segmented Artificial Neural Network (SegANN). This model combines the capabil­
ity of RNN to work with time series data and approximation from models from the previous
stage, such as C­ANN. The core idea behind this model is that instead of using an RNN to
predict every step of the process, a number of connected ANN subnetworks will be used
to predict the temperature at certain predefined time intervals.
The way this architecture works is by dividing the total time of the process t into small
intervals t i and assigning each ANN block to the respective interval. In the scope of
the current problem, it is established that the time of the process t in every simulation is
always 40 sec. From that, the total time has been split in 5s intervals, meaning there are
8 ANN blocks in total in this model, each responsible for time intervals from 0 sec to 5
sec, then from 5 sec to 10 sec, etc.
The input to an interval block is the temperature Temp i, the environmental temperature
Temp _env, the heat coefficient r, and the output is the temperature at the end of the time
interval Temp i+1. The input for the first block is always the starting temperature Temp _0
and the output for the last block is always the final temperature Temp _end, which is the
target variable.
In addition, there is one ”floating” ANN block that is responsible for the milk addition and
is similar to the same block in C­RNN and C­ANN models. It is floating because the milk
is added at a random time for each sample in the dataset, and it’s impossible to define its
28
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:37==
position in advance. The data is passed through the floating block between the interval
blocks when t _inter is between time intervals t i and t i+1 for the respective interval blocks.
That way the floating block ”intercepts” the data when it’s propagated forward between
the interval blocks. Of course, most of the time, the moment of the milk addition t _inter
will be inside the time intervals and the actual time of the floating block prediction will be
different, but since this model estimates the temperature at the time intervals, we can say
it’s also an estimation.
The training process of such architecture is done in clusters of data grouped by the time
of the milk addition t _inter. The data is grouped up in chunks where t _inter lies inside
intervals, in the case of the current model, between 0 sec and 5 sec, then between 5
sec and 10 sec, etc. This is done to enable the model to train on batched data with the
inclusion of the floating block. As mentioned before, the milk addition for every sample is
random, thus without grouping, the training would have to be done sample­by­sample so
it would be able to pass through the floating block in between appropriate intervals.
4.3.7
Model Training
All the models are trained on the same generated dataset with general data as in the
previous section containing 10000 samples and the time series dataset associated with
the general data containing t number of rows (in this case 40 rows) for each sample in
the general dataset. Not every model uses the same type of data in the same way, e.g.
RNN uses only the time series dataset; SegANN relies heavily on the general data, but
partially uses time series as well. However, the source of the training data for each model
comes from the aforementioned two datasets for each model.
Both datasets are equally split into a training and a validation datasets in a 75/25 ratio.
Then, each model is trained on the training dataset and then tested on the validation
dataset. After the training process and further evaluation, here are the validation results
for each model using both MSE and R2 metrics:
Metric
Baseline RNN
Extended RNN
C­RNN
SegANN
MSE
167.6346
89.6829
86.5930
0.0277
While the RNN based models struggle a bit with the evaluation data, the results of training
are still satisfactory. The SegANN has an amazing evaluation performance.
4.3.8
Model Evaluation and Tests
The experimental data used to evaluate the models described at this stage is the same that
was used in the previous stage: it’s the same experimental datasets that have previously
been described in detail that contain the same samples as the ones before to ensure
fairness in model comparison. However, before only the datasets with the general data
were used, but for the models of this stage, the time series datasets associated with the
experimental datasets from before are used as well.
The scope of the evaluation is also the same: each model will receive the aforementioned
data and its performance will be measured using both MSE and R2 metrics. After the
measuring is done, the performance of models will be compared and discussed for each
experiment. The goal is to confirm or reject the proposed hypothesis for the cyclic models
using the gathered measures.
4.3.9
Results
After measuring the performance of the models on the experimental datasets, the results
using the MSE metric are as follows:
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
29
==PAGE:38==
Metric
Base RNN
Ext. RNN
C­RNN
SegANN
Evaluation
167.63466
32.4401
32.5583
16.5945
Exp. 1
1279.0822
1299.1359
1296.3761
151.8950
Exp. 2
4124.7134
230.1401
226.7710
74.9322
Exp. 3
2820.0224
400.5902
400.6301
1278.1321
Exp. 4
411.4973
222.8088
219.9515
47.6843
Exp. 5
275.7915
106.5917
91.3224
128.7544
Exp. 6
6540.0203
2160.9152
2174.0644
334.9273
Exp. 7
1415.8318
269.2830
269.0481
382.5631
0
4.3.10
Evaluation Data
Judging by the performance of the models on the evaluation portion of the original dataset,
the best one so far is the SegANN. The extended RNN and C­RNN have decent results
as well, but worse than SegANN. The baseline RNN model has performed worse than the
rest of the models, and worse than the extended RNN and C­RNN, but the result is still
decent. This means that at least for this experiment, the inclusion of the other variables
with the temperature one really improved the performance.
The RNN­based models were trained on sequential data, and since the distribution of the
evaluation data is the same as in the training one, they can recreate the sequence quite
easily and accurately. However, an issue might occur when the rate of the temperature
change will be different with other experimental datasets since the sequence will be differ­
ent from the current dataset. That’s when the SegANN might have an advantage since it’s
not recreating a sequence but rather approximates the temperature at different intervals.
It is also curious how the performances of the extended RNN and the C­RNN are ex­
tremely close. My assumption is that on the scale of an RNN­based model a milk interven­
tion doesn’t make too big of a difference since it’s just another time step with temperature
change. Unless the jump in temperature is drastic, an extended RNN can still recreate
similar results as C­RNN.
4.3.11
Hot Coffee Experiment Results
In the first experiment, all the RNN­based models performed very similarly, and the perfor­
mance significantly dropped compared to the evaluation data case. On the other hand,
while still with a noticeable performance drop, the SegANN performed really well com­
pared to the RNN models. This might signalize about the approximation models, like
SegANN and models similar to the ones used in the previous section being more resilient
compared to the sequential ones, but at this point, it’s too early to draw that conclusion.
However, this contributes to the theory that sequence recreating models like RNN might
struggle with recreating data with different rate of temperature change since in this exper­
iment the coffee temperature drops faster due to the increased difference between it and
the environmental temperature.
4.3.12
Cold Coffee Experiment Results
In the test with cold coffee, the regular RNN model performed poorly, which can be ex­
plained by its inability to recreate a sequence where the temperature of the coffee in­
creases, and for most samples in this dataset it’s the case. Both extended RNN and
C­RNN performed way better than the base RNN, which is quite an impressive jump in
performance thanks to the expanded input.
30
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:39==
The best performing model in this test is SegANN. This test confirms my suspicion from
before that the RNN­base models might struggle with data where the change rate or un­
derlying processes are changed. However, the SegANN model is not tied to a sequence,
and each interval block is independent, which allows it to be more robust to such changes.
4.3.13
Cold Environment Experiment Results
This experiment is similar to the hot coffee one and has similar results. The base RNN
performed the worst of all models and worse than in the hot coffee experiment. It is pre­
dictable since the model is unaware of the environmental temperature that was changed
in this dataset, as opposed to the first experiment where the starting temperature of the
coffee was changed, hence the performance drop. SegANN didn’t perform too well either
this time.
On the other hand, the extended RNN and C­RNN have much better performance due to
the inclusion of the environmental temperature T _env variable, and the scores are even
better than the hot coffee test. This might signalize that the environmental temperature T
_env has more weight for the models when predicting the temperature change.
4.3.14
Coffee Temperature Deviation Experiment Results
In this experiment, all the models performed relatively similarly. C­RNN and extended
RNN have decent scores, followed by a regular RNN, and finally, SegANN has the best
performance. These results are almost identical to the situation with the evaluation data
from the original dataset but with slightly worse performance, and it is quite obvious why:
the mean remained the same, meaning that most samples would follow similar distribution
except some included by extended deviation. Those outlier samples are most probably
what is causing the performance drop.
4.3.15
Cold Milk Experiment Results
In the experiment with extremely cold milk, the regular RNN performed the worst. My
assumption is that it was unable to adjust to the drastic temperature drop from the milk
due to it being unaware of the process. The best two models are extended RNN and
the C­RNN, with the later having a slightly better performance, which might mean that
the middle ANN block of C­RNN helped to adjust to the temperature drop from milk. The
SegANN model has worse performance compared to extended RNN and C­RNN, but the
difference is not too big. I assume the score of the SegANN stands in the same line as
the other two models, and the difference is not too significant.
Hot Coffee and Environment Experiment Results
In the experiment with both coffee and the environment temperatures increased, the reg­
ular RNN has a terrible performance. The extended RNN and the C­RNN both have really
bad performances as well, and they scored very close to each other again. The SegANN
has the best performance of all the models and it significantly outperforms the RNN­based
models.
These results are interesting since, despite the changed data distribution, the process and
the rate of the temperature drop rate remain almost unchanged compared to the original
dataset. In theory, the RNN­based models should be able to recreate the sequence of
the temperature drop quite easily, while the SegANN model should have more trouble
adjusting to the distribution change. However, the results of this test suggest the opposite
is true.
Extreme Deviations Experiment Results
This experiment is supposed to test the overall robustness of a model to the diverse and
the outlier data where the means stay the same, but the deviation is extremely spread.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
31
==PAGE:40==
Here we see similar results as in the fourth experiment, but the overall performance of the
models is better.
The RNN has again the worst performance, followed by a significant improvement by
SegANN. The best two models are extended RNN and C­RNN which have very similar
scores again, but not much different from the performance of the SegANN. It’s difficult to
judge why the later three models have the same performance, but their robustness is still
decent, and I would argue that it’s very similar.
4.3.16
Discussion
After reviewing the results of the experiments, we can try to make some conclusions about
the cycling models and how they perform compared to each other. One obvious conclu­
sion is that all the models that have at least some connection to the causal structure of the
problem have much better performance than the baseline model. The basic RNN has the
worst performance in every experiment, and the rest of the models scored significantly
better. This again confirms the main hypothesis for cyclic and more complex models since
the causal models showed better results on changed data and outperformed the baseline
non­causal model in every test. I would like to note that while the extended RNN is not
a causal model per se since it’s not following the defined causal structure directly, it still
has causal a element to it due to the expanded input variables that are deducted from the
causal structure.
When it comes down to comparing the RNN­based models and the SegANN which is
more of an approximation model, it’s difficult to make an unambiguous single conclusion.
Both types of models performed well on most of the tests, and in most cases scored very
similarly. However, if we look at all the experimental results, overall the SegANN model
performed slightly better than the rest of the models, though at this point it’s difficult to say
that the approximation models work better than the sequential ones.
Another obvious fact from the experiments is that the extended RNN and the C­RNN have
noticeably similar performances. My assumption is that the milk addition block in C­RNN
didn’t contribute too much to the overall work of the model since it just contributes to one of
the steps in the entire sequence. However, it’s difficult to conclude if C­RNN architecture
in general is superior to the extended RNN one since the only difference between them
given the causal structure of the current problem is the addition of milk to the coffee. I
believe that to test which one performs best more processes that contribute to the final
temperature of the coffee have to be introduced and reflected in the structure of C­RNN,
but it’s not going to be in the scope of this work.
32
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:41==
4.4
Overall Results and Conclusion
Now that both approximating and cycling models have been introduced, trained, and eval­
uated on the experimental data, it is possible to compare all of them together and draw
conclusions in hindsight of the entire work. This section is dedicated to the analysis of
all the results achieved so far and further discussion, drawing conclusions for the entire
work and discussing the details.
4.4.1
Comparison of Overall Performance Results
First, it’s important to understand which models used in the entire project actually per­
formed better than others. Before the simplified approximation models and cyclic models
were compared separately, but now we can compare all of them and see what approach
works the best for the problem with the current implementation. For the sake of consis­
tency and saving space, in this section, only the MSE metric will be used to compare the
models.
After compiling all the results together, here are the final results for all the models together
using the MSE metric:
Figure 4.4: Compiled results of all the models’ performances
4.4.2
Discussion and Conclusions
Causal and Non­Causal Models Comparison
When comparing the results of all the experiments across all the models used with the
coffee simulator, both approximating and cyclic, we can notice certain trends in the perfor­
mance of the models. Apart from the baseline models, which were the linear regression
in the approximation stage and the base RNN in the cyclic stage, in most cases, the reg­
ular ANN has the worst performance. In most experiments, ANN is outperformed by all
the models, both approximating and the cyclic. The regular gradient boosting in some
experiments has similar or even better results than the rest of the models, but overall its
performance is far from the best. This means that the non­causal approximating models
are in general the worst models in this work. The same applies to the base RNN model,
which in some cases performed better than the ANN and the gradient boosting, and in
some worse, but the results for the RNN are far inferior compared to both approximating
and the cyclic causal models.
This result leads us to a very crucial conclusion: in the scope of the current work and
experiments conducted to measure how well the models can adjust to the changes in data
distribution, all non­causal models in general have worse performance than all the causal
ones. This means that the main hypothesis in the frame of this work is confirmed.
This was also confirmed by the proof of concept models using the kinematics simulator.
Approximating and Cyclic Models Comparison
Between the causal models, there were two types developed and tested: approximating
and cyclic models, where the SegANN is both cyclic and approximating in nature. From
the compiled results, it’s difficult to tell precisely which type of model is superior. How­
ever, in every experiment at least one of the approximating models including the SegANN
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
33
==PAGE:42==
scored better than the rest of the sequential ones, even if the difference is not too signifi­
cant. We can say that in the scope of this work, on average the approximating models
performed slightly better than the sequential ones. With that being said, I still wouldn’t
say that this is an undoubtful and unambiguous conclusion, and maybe in the scope of
different problems, experiments, or model architectures, this might prove wrong.
Limitations of the Work
The main objective of this work is completed successfully: the causal and non­causal
models were developed, tested, and compared, which allowed us to see a trend in perfor­
mance and test the main hypothesis proposed at the start of the paper with further proof
backed by the results of experiments. However, when it comes to the direct comparison
of all the models one by one and trying to pick the best performing one, it can get quite
difficult to do that. I tried my best to make the conditions and experiments as fair and equal
as possible for each model, but a big factor in the performance is also the implementation
details of the models, such as the hyperparameters, training process, external parame­
ters like the learning rate, and so on. As mentioned before, my goal wasn’t to develop the
perfect models that can ideally solve the problem, but rather to develop models that can
adequately predict the data and see a general trend.
Another limitation comes from the coffee simulator itself, especially for the cyclic models.
While having cyclic processes is a complex task to solve, cooling is still a single process
that is repeated multiple times. The addition of milk made things a bit more complex, but
that totals to two process types. This leads to the causal structure being relatively simple,
which limits the scale of the causal models’ application. That is why it was important for
me to note that the results for certain models are true for the scope of this project, but may
vary for other problems. Despite that, I was able to capture a trend in model performance
that helped to prove the main hypothesis, and I believe it would stay true for most of the
problems.
34
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
==PAGE:43==
References
[1]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. “ImageNet Classification
with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: NIPS’12 (2012), pp. 1097–1105.
[2]
Jerome Friedman. “Greedy Function Approximation: A Gradient Boosting Machine”.
In: The Annals of Statistics 29 (Nov. 2000). DOI: 10.1214/aos/1013203451.
[3]
Bernhard Schölkopf et al. “Towards Causal Representation Learning”. In: CoRR abs/2102.11107
(2021). arXiv: 2102.11107. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.11107.
[4]
Jingkang Yang et al. Generalized Out­of­Distribution Detection: A Survey. 2021. arXiv:
2110.11334 [cs.CV].
[5]
Tyler Vigen. Spurious Correlations. 2015.
[6]
Eric Siegel. “Why Ice Cream Is Linked to Shark Attacks – Correlation/Causation
Smackdown”. In: (2019). URL: https : / / www . kdnuggets . com / 2019 / 01 / dr - data -
ice-cream-linked-shark-attacks.html.
[7]
Di Wu and G. Gary Wang. “Causal artificial neural network and its applications in
engineering design”. In: Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 97 (2021),
p. 104089. ISSN: 0952­1976. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2020.104089.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0952197620303420.
[8]
Allen B. Downey. “Modeling and Simulation in Python”. In: (2017). URL: https://www.
greenteapress.com/modsimpy/ModSimPy3.pdf.
Causal Metamodels for Simulators
35
==PAGE:44==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
