==PAGE:1==
Novel solid state batteries using composite
electrolytes
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Storage and Conversion
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Martin Hanna Hoffmann
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Storage and Conversion, Fysikvej, Building
310, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Imaging and Structural
Analysis, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Martin Hanna Hoffmann - s144281
Signature
Date
ii
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will
look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no
information? Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest
gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected
font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should contain
all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There is no
need for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Solid-state batteries are promising alternatives to liquid-electrolyte batteries due to e.g.
the possibility of using lithium metal anodes. While solid-state electrolytes such as sul-
fides and oxides have good ionic conductivity, they are brittle and require high tempera-
ture sintering for interfacial contact. Alternatives such as PEO lack conductivity but have
excellent interfacial stability. Combining the two in order to make a polymer-in-ceramic
(PIC) electrolyte is a good candidate for ensuring both a good interfacial stability and
high conductivitiy. In addition, ternary metal halides have proven interesting due to high
room temperature conductivities and good electrochemical stability, when enables them
for use as solid-state catholytes. In this work, battery cells are assembled using a PIC
electrolyte and a Li3YCl6 (LYC) catholyte, but exhibit poor cycling and rate performance
due to lacking interfacial contact and a high electrolyte resistance.
Furthermore, cluster expansion is a good candidate for combining with machine learning
to predict physical quantities from atomic configurations. In this work, the cluster expan-
sion software CLEASE was used to predict the ground-state of a LYC cell.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Poul, Johan and Juanma for
always finding time to help me out when I was in doubt - and doing so with a positive
attitude no matter how basic my doubts were.
I would also like to thank Jin Chang for helping me get the hang of CLEASE, and Alexander
Tygesen for being a fantastic aid when it came to DFT and the computational part.
The MSc Thesis office and my thesis buddies Álex and Jesper also deserve special thanks
for always contributing to a positive work environment.
Lastly I would like to thank Greg Nuckols and Eric Trexler for making the podcast Stronger
by Science, which has kept me company during the long days in the glove box.
A special shout out to Monster Energy is also in its place. Without them, this thesis would
be very different.
iv
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
0.1
Introduction and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Working principles of batteries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
The LYC structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Experimental
9
2.1
Experimental Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3
Computational modelling of Li3YCl6
35
3.1
Theory behind the computational methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.2
Computational methods and parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4
Conclusion and Outlook
49
4.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Bibliography
51
A SEM images
53
B Data Sheets and Manuals
54
B.1 LFP (Electrodes and More) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
B.2 VMP3 Manua excerpt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
B.3 SP300 Manual excerpt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
C Electrolyte cell impedance
58
D Battery impedance
59
E
Monte Carlo simulation occupancies
61
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:9==
0.1
Introduction and motivation
Li-ion batteries (LIBs) have dominated the market for mobile-purpose batteries due to
their excellent specific energy and energy density as well as low degradation and self-
discharge resulting in long lifetimes. However, LIBs have also garnered some opposition
in recent years. This is mainly due to the volatility and flammability of the organic liquid
electrolytes that are used, which, although rarely, can lead to explosions and persistent
fires [1]. In addition, the growth of dendrites - which is faster in liquid electrolytes - can
lead to internal short circuits [2]. Lastly, the materials used in the common NMC batter-
ies (nickel, manganese and cobalt) are becoming more scarce [3], and improvements in
electrolyte materials might enable the implementation of cathodes based on abundant
materials without sacrificing performance.
An alternative to the conventional liquid-electrolyte-based battery system is to only use
solid components, i.e. electrolyte and electrodes, to make so-called solid-state batter-
ies (SSBs). These are generally categorized based on the type of solid-state electrolyte
(SSE) being used - inorganic-solid electrolytes (ISEs), solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs),
and composite polymer electrolytes (CPEs) - all of which pose less safety risks (e.g. in
regard to flammability, volatility, leakage etc.) than liquid electrolytes. Another significant
benefit of SSBs is that they possess higher theoretical densities than their liquid electrolyte
counterparts, making them interesting for mobile purposes such as in EVs.
One property of SSEs that has been heavily researched is the ionic conductivity, which
is generally low compared to that of liquid electrolytes. These easily reach ionic conduc-
tivities in the range of 10−2 to 10−1 S cm−1 [4, 5], while those of SPEs are generally in
the range of 10−5 to 10−3 S cm−1 [6], and with ISEs exhibiting conductivities in the range
10−3 to 10−2 S cm−1 (although observations of 10−1 S cm−1 for sulfide-based electrolytes
have been reported [7]).
However, the high conductivities of ISEs are counteracted by other, less positive, traits.
Oxides - particularly the garnet-structured Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) - exhibit better chemi-
cal stability than sulfides and wide electrochemical stability windows as well as very low
activation energies and relatively high ionic conductivity. Unfortunately, they ultimately
suffer from degradation of the cathode-electrolyte interface due to the high temperature
co-sintering that is required for pure, inorganic oxide SSEs. Sulfides have reached higher
conductivities than oxides, but suffer from low electrochemical- and chemical stability,
which leads to large interfacial resistance and thus slow kinetics when implemented with
oxide cathodes in addition to the formation of H2S gas if exposed to moisture or air.
A promising solution to overcoming these challenges is to combine a ceramic with a poly-
mer in order to produce a CPE in order to benefit from both the high conductivity of the
ceramic and the superior interface stability of the polymer. In practice, this approach has
been demonstrated to produce a CPE with an ionic conductivity of σ >0.1 mS cm−1 at
room temperature with good dendrite suppression and cycling stability [goodenough_llzo].
Halide-based SSEs, particularly Li3YCl6, have also been shown to possess very good
stability and ionic conductivities up to 10−3 S cm−1 [klorid_royalsociety, 7, 8]. As the
manufacturing is straight-forward and halide-based SSEs have been shown to be very
compatible with oxide-based cathodes, Li3YCl6 (LYC) would be a suitable candidate for
a catholyte.
In this project, a battery cell consisting of an LFP cathode with a halide catholyte and a pure
Li anode will be fabricated. The project will mainly focus on the experimental fabrication
and testing of a battery cell, but will also include some DFT simulations in order to quantify
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
1
==PAGE:10==
theoretical values for Li+-diffusion through Li3YCl6 and relate them to the experimentally
observed ones.
2
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Li-ion batteries (LIBs) have dominated the market for mobile-purpose batteries due to
their excellent specific energy and energy density as well as low degradation and self-
discharge resulting in long lifetimes. However, LIBs have also garnered some opposition
in recent years. This is mainly due to the volatility and flammability of the organic liquid
electrolytes that are used, which, although rarely, can lead to explosions and persistent
fires [1]. In addition, the growth of dendrites - which is faster in liquid electrolytes - can
lead to internal short circuits [2]. Lastly, the materials used in the common NMC batter-
ies (nickel, manganese and cobalt) are becoming more scarce [3], and improvements in
electrolyte materials might enable the implementation of cathodes based on abundant
materials without sacrificing performance.
An alternative to the conventional liquid-electrolyte-based battery system is to only use
solid components, i.e. electrolyte and electrodes, to make so-called solid-state batter-
ies (SSBs). These are generally categorized based on the type of solid-state electrolyte
(SSE) being used - inorganic-solid electrolytes (ISEs), solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs),
and composite polymer electrolytes (CPEs) - all of which pose less safety risks (e.g. in
regard to flammability, volatility, leakage etc.) than liquid electrolytes. Another significant
benefit of SSBs is that they possess higher theoretical densities than their liquid electrolyte
counterparts, making them interesting for mobile purposes such as in EVs.
One property of SSEs that has been heavily researched is the ionic conductivity, which
is generally low compared to that of liquid electrolytes. These easily reach ionic conduc-
tivities in the range of 10−2 to 10−1 S cm−1 [4, 5], while those of SPEs are generally in
the range of 10−5 to 10−3 S cm−1 [6], and with ISEs exhibiting conductivities in the range
10−3 to 10−2 S cm−1 (although observations of 10−1 S cm−1 for sulfide-based electrolytes
have been reported [7]).
However, the high conductivities of ISEs are counteracted by other, less positive, traits.
Oxides - particularly the garnet-structured Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) - exhibit better chemi-
cal stability than sulfides and wide electrochemical stability windows as well as very low
activation energies and relatively high ionic conductivity. Unfortunately, they ultimately
suffer from degradation of the cathode-electrolyte interface due to the high temperature
co-sintering that is required for pure, inorganic oxide SSEs. Sulfides have reached higher
conductivities than oxides, but suffer from low electrochemical- and chemical stability,
which leads to large interfacial resistance and thus slow kinetics when implemented with
oxide cathodes in addition to the formation of H2S gas if exposed to moisture or air.
A promising solution to overcoming these challenges is to combine a ceramic with a poly-
mer in order to produce a CPE in order to benefit from both the high conductivity of the
ceramic and the superior interface stability of the polymer. In practice, this approach has
been demonstrated to produce a CPE with an ionic conductivity of σ >0.1 mS cm−1 at
room temperature with good dendrite suppression and cycling stability [goodenough_llzo].
Halide-based SSEs, particularly Li3YCl6, have also been shown to possess very good
stability and ionic conductivities up to 10−3 S cm−1 [klorid_royalsociety, 7, 8]. As the
manufacturing is straight-forward and halide-based SSEs have been shown to be very
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
3
==PAGE:12==
compatible with oxide-based cathodes, Li3YCl6 (LYC) will be used to form a composite
cathode.
In this project, a battery cell consisting of an LFP cathode cathode with a halide catholyte
and a pure Li anode will be fabricated. The project will mainly focus on the experimental
fabrication and testing of a battery cell, but will also include some DFT simulations in
order to quantify theoretical values for Li+-diffusion through Li3YCl6 and relate them to the
experimentally observed ones.
1.2
Working principles of batteries
Batteries are built upon many different physical and chemical phenomena. In this chapter,
battery functionality will be explained based on some of these phenomena.and evaluate
their performance as well as the performances of individual cell components. Following
that will be an explanation of the individual components and materials of the cell design
used for this work.
1.2.1
Electrochemistry and Thermodynamics
The primary building block of electrochemistry and redox (reduction/oxidation) reactions
is the standard1 potential, E◦, associated with a given reaction. Essentially, what this po-
tential quantifies is the amount of energy obtained per charge from a given redox reaction.
A convenient example is the reduction of Lithium, i.e.
Li+ + e−→Li
(−3.04 V)
(1.1)
As is specified, the standard potential for this reduction is -3.04 V, which means that 3.04
V is required to drive it2. Of course, this means that ’going backwards’ releases energy, or
in other words, the oxidation of Lithium has a standard potential of +3.04 V. The reason for
choosing Lithium as the example is because it has the lowest reduction potential, which
is also the reason that pure lithium is widely regarded as an extremely attractive anode
material.
If two different electrodes are connected by an electric conductor and an electrolyte, one
electrode (the anode) will undergo oxidation, and the resulting free electrons will be in-
volved in a reduction of the cathode. This gives rise to the standard cell potential, E◦
cell,
which is the sum of the anode oxidation potential and cathode reduction potential and
thus describes the total obtainable energy per charge of the electrons involved in the re-
dox reactions. The maximum work obtainable from the cell can therefore be formulated
as the standard Gibbs’ free energy
∆G◦= −nFE◦
cell
(1.2)
Where n is the amount of electrons involved in the reaction and F is Faraday’s constant.
What this tells us is that in order to maximize the available energy in a battery cell, we
should strive to increase the cell potential and/or the amount of electron transfers per
reaction.
In reality, the extractible energy is not directly proportional to the cell voltage, but rather
the cell voltage and the overpotential, η. Overpotential is caused by many phenomena,
and will vary from cell to cell - in essence, the overpotential arises from the energy barriers
1By IUPAC’s definition, the standard state is 1 bar, 1 mol L−1 and 25 ◦C.v[9]
2This potential is measured in relation to the potential required to reduce hydrogen, it is not absolute.
4
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:13==
of different processes that are required for the battery to operate. It is generally divied into
three categories, based on the equation
V = Voc −iRohmic −(ηkc + ηka) −(ηtc + ηta)
(1.3)
Where Voc is the open circuit voltage, and is what would be the ideal voltage for cell oper-
ation. The iRohmic term is the potential lost to ohmic resistance through the whole circuit,
including electrolytes, electrodes and wires. The ηk are the kinetic overpotentials - over-
potentials associated with the kinetics of the faradiac processes, and ηt is the transport
overpotential associated with the energy needed to transport charge carriers, triggered
by mass transport limitations.
1.2.2
Battery terminology
In essence, batteries contain three functional components; two electrodes and an elec-
trolyte, the latter which must be an ionic conductor and electric insulator . Their working
principle, overly simplified, consists of one electrode being oxidized while the other is re-
duced, resulting in an electronic current going through an external circuit, and an ionic
current running through the electrolyte.
Batteries can be broadly categorized into two different types: primary batteries, which
work through irreversible redox reactions and can thus only be used once, and secondary
batteries, which are rechargeable as they rely on reversible redox reactions. For applica-
tions in e.g. electric vehicles, secondary batteries are used for obvious reasons. Figure
1.1 shows a schematic of a battery during charge and discharge - as the charging of the
battery
It is standard convention when discussing batteries to consider them in the process of
discharging, such that the more positive electrode undergoes a reduction and is thus the
cathode, while the anode is the more negative electrode as it undergoes an oxidation.
For a given battery cell, the maximum obtainable energy per mole of reactant is given by
equation 1.2, so the maximum theoretical specific energy is
MTSE = −nFEcell
M1 + M2
(1.4)
and the maximum theoretical energy density (MTED) is therefore
MTED = −nFEcell
M1
ρ1 + M2
ρ2
(1.5)
Where M1 is the molar mass of the fully reduced limiting electrode and M2 is that of the
fully oxidized other electrode, and ρ denotes mass density. Of course, there is additional
mass in the electrolyte, casing, and other inactive material.
As mentioned in the introduction, a high specific energy and/or energy density is generally
beneficial - in order to obtain that, we see that we should maximize the mass ratios of
active material (i.e. reactants) to that of inactive materials, while also striving to have the
cell potential be as high as possible at all times.
For most commercial purposes, e.g. EVs, the battery designs use liquid electrolytes due
to their high conductivity. As explained in the introduction, this introduces some safety
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.1: Diagram of a battery cell and its constituents. During galvanic mode, chemical
energy is transformed into electrical energy by freeing lithium ions from the anode, causing
an electric current to run to the cathode, while an ionic one runs from the cathode to the
anode. The opposite takes place in electrolytic mode.
concerns, but it also reduces the theoretical specific energy (and energy density). One
big reason for this is the anode material required with using liquid electrolytes. Using
pure lithium anodes with liquid electrolytes would result in dendrite formation, which end
up short-circuiting the battery cell by puncturing the separator.
There is therefore a high interest in developing all solid-state batteries in order to avoid
the liquid electrolytes. However, this interest is impeded by several obstacles. First of all,
the room temperature conductivities of solid electrolytes are far from being as high as
porous binder conductive electronic conductivity low with high catholyte concentration
LFP contraction
solid state prevents dendrites pure lithium
Solid-state conductivity
As previously mentioned, the ionic conductivity in solids is generally lower than in liquids.
This is due to the transport being limited to charge carriers ”jumping” to other sites - gen-
erally vacancies - due to thermal vibrations. The conductivity is defined as a number of
charge movements per volume,
σ = Nqµ
(1.6)
where N is the volumetric density of the charge carriers, q is the elementary charge and
6
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:15==
µ is the charge carrier mobility. The Nernst-Einstein relation gives a quantification of the
charge carrier mobility as a function of the material’s diffusion coefficient
µ = D
q
kBT
(1.7)
where D is the diffusion coefficient, kB is the boltzmann constant and T is temperature.
The diffusion coefficient is given by an Arrhenius relationship and an activation barrier
D = D0e−Ea/RT
(1.8)
where R is the ideal gas constant. Lastly, this allows us to write the conductivity through
an Arrhenius equation
σ = D0N q2
kBT e−Ea/RT
(1.9)
From this, diffusion coefficient and activation energy can be used to determine σ, or
temperature-variant σ can be used to determine the activation energy Ea.
1.3
The LYC structure
Ternary halides of the form Li3MX6 (M=Y, Sc, In, Ho, La, Er & X=Cl, Br) have been a
widely investigated topic over the recent years [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19] due
to their high electrochemical stability (>4 V vs. Li/Li+) [17] and high ionic conductivities
(on the order of mS cm−1 [10]) as well as easy synthesis [10, 12].
Of the ternary halides, Li3YCl6 (LYC) seems to be one of the most promising candidates as
it has a reported room temperature conductivity of 0.51 mS cm−1 which can be attributed
to the long anionic radii [10]. The material also has a high electrochemical stability window
of 4.21 V [19], good chemical stability and good mechanical deformability, making it suit-
able for direct contact with cathodes where the brittle sulfides and oxide fail. In addition,
the rigid anionic sublattices of ternary halides ensure that the anions have much higher
transport energy barriers, resulting in a high transport number of Li-ions.
The LYC structure can be classified as hexagonally close-packed, belonging to space
group Pˆ3m1. The chloride anions occupy an hcp sublattice, forming octahedrals that are
occupied by Li and Y as seen in figure 1.2. The partial occupancies are of Li and Y are
associated with two different phases - the meta-stable low temperature β phase and the
stable α phase that is generated when heating the material above ≈600 K. When supplied
with enough energy, Y in the β phase migrates to the nearest plane, transforming the unit
cell into a cell consisting of two distinct planes along the z-axis instead every plane being
identical.
While the ionic conductivity of LYC is 2-3 orders of magnitude below that of LYB (Li3YBr6),
LYC has the advantage of possessing Cl anions, reducing the mass significantly, which
might be a worthy tradeoff if the conductivity can either be improved or a compensated
for.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.2: α and β phases defined by their partial occupancies of LYC. During transition,
Y in the β phase gathers into the 1a positions, resulting in the α phase. Copied from [13].
8
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:17==
2
Experimental
This chapter consists of four parts; a theoretical description of different experimental meth-
ods and how they can quantify some of the properties described in chapter 1.2. This will
be followed by a section explaining the specifics of the practical experimental work (meth-
ods). Lastly, the experimental results will be shown and followed by a short discussion.
The scope of the experimental work is to work towards the assembly of a solid-state
battery using an LFP electrode with LYC catholyte, a Li metal anode, and a PIC (polymer-
in-ceramic) electrolyte.
2.1
Experimental Theory
Recall from chapter 1.2 that we are interested in different properties such as electrolyte-
and interfacial resistance, diffusivity, cyclability, porosity, etc. These properties can all be
quantified by different methods, which will be explained in this chapter. While all literature
on solid state batteries and electrolytes deal with different chemistries, the vast majority
contains investigations of transport (using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy) and
structure (using X-ray diffraction).
2.1.1
X-ray Diffraction
X-ray diffraction is used to determine theh structure of a crystalline material through the
bragg equation by exposing it to x-rays
nλ = 2d sin θ
(2.1)
Where d is the inter-planar distance between two lattice planes, θ is the angle of inci-
dence, λ is the wavelength and n is an integer. As different crystals and lattice planes
possess different interplanar distances, the criteria that the total path traveled by the x-
rays between a number of lattice planes must be an integer in order to create constructive
interference implies that a given crystal plane will reflect the x-rays at a specific angle θ
determined by the interplanar distance d.
2.1.2
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
For an ideal resistor, the resistance is given by Ohm’s law
U = RI
(2.2)
However, many materials correspond to circuit elements that cannot be viewed as an
ideal resistor - this is also the case for battery cells. The fact that a circuit element is not
an ideal resistor has one or several implications; the element does not necessarily follow
Ohm’s law, its resistance varies with the frequency, and an AC voltage signal with angular
frequency ω and amplitude Emax over the element, which can be described by
E = Emax sin (ωt)
(2.3)
results in a current signal with a phase-shift ϕ and amplitude Imax
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
9
==PAGE:18==
I = Imax sin (ωt −ϕ)
(2.4)
From Euler’s formula, we know that a complex number can be described by trigonometric
functions, and thus we can rewrite equations 2.3 and 2.4
E
= Emaxeiωt
(2.5a)
I
= Imaxei(ωt−ϕ)
(2.5b)
The phase shift gives rise to the concept of impedance Z, which is anologous to the
resistance of an ideal resistor. Substituting into Ohm’s law, we get the expression
Emaxeiωt = ZImaxei(ωt−ϕ) =⇒Z = Zmaxeiϕ
(2.6)
Where Zmax = Emax
Imax . This goes to show that the impedance of a circuit element is de-
scribed as a complex number with magnitude Zmax and an angle which is the phase shift
ϕ.
Recall that battery cells exhibit overpotentials due to a variety of phenomena - since this
is the case, impedance measurements could prove troublesome when overpotentials are
significant, i.e. when the relationship between E and I is non-linear. For this reason,
very small values (on the order of 10 mV) are generally used for Emax (i.e. the potential
amplitude).
Physical phenomena involving current (that is, charge transfer) can thus be described and
quantified by measuring their impedance response under alternating current and mod-
elling them to equivalent circuits. The most relevant ones are:
1. Resistor (R): ZR = R
Models a resistor.
2. Constant-phase element (CPE or Q): ZCPE = ((jω)αQ0)−1
Models an imperfect capacitor (caused by non-idealities at surfaces).
3. Inductor (L): ZL = jωL
Models inductance, which is generally caused by induction in the senses (i.e. mea-
surement wires) by the main wires due to Faraday’s law of induction.
4. Warburg element (W): ZW = AW ω−1
2 (1 −j)
Models diffusion phenomena and has finite, semi-infinite and infinite variations.
Where R is the resistance of the resistor, Q is a capacity analogue, α is the constant
phase, L is inductance and AW is the warburg coefficient, which is essentially a diffusion
coefficient.
As these elements are all dependent on ω ∝f in some way, EIS data is commonly
plotted on Nyquist plots (a 2D vector function plot of Z(f)) and sometimes on Bode plots
(magnitude and complex argument vs. f).
In solid-state batteries, there should generally be an R/CPE element to account for the
charge transfer resistance at the anodic interface as well as one for the cathodic interface
and one for diffusion. It varies between different cell chemistries, but these three elements
are usually apparent in addition to the bulk resistance - typically, in lithium-metal based
10
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:19==
batteries, and from high to low frequency, the elements appear in the order: electroylte
resistance, anodic charge transfer, cathodic charge transfer, and lastly diffusion [20].
Typically, the bulk resistance is a series of transport R/CPE circuits, but with such low
capacitance that they are usually modelled as a resistor.
2.1.3
Galvanostatic charge-discharge
As can be derived intuitively from the name, galvanostatic charge-discharge (GCD) mea-
surements are ones in which a constant current is drawn from an electrode in an electro-
chemical cell. The output is the cell potential vs. the time, which allows the measurer to
quantify cell resistance, which is independent of state of charge (SOC) as well as activa-
tion overpotential for the charge transfers and concentration and diffusion-related overpo-
tentials. In addition to all of this, it is also a helpful tool to decide what to investigate - for
example, a continuously decreasing capacity could indicate a degradation at an electrode
or essentially any kind of electron-consuming process.
This technique might well be classified as the most, or one of the most, important tech-
niques used for battery cell characterization as it holds information about the battery’s rate
performance, effective capacity, coulombic efficiency, energy efficiency, cyclability, etc.
OCV measurements
Although it might be misleading to place the OCV section within the GCD section, OCV
measurements are technically done while drawing a constant current of 0 A from the cell.
If one were to plot the OCV curves, the information would be the same as in GCD, that is
cell potential vs. time. Generally this us used before other techniques until some slope
threshold is reached in order to stabilize the cell.
2.1.4
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is an extremely useful and versatile tool for charac-
terization of materials. Image resolution is proportional to the wavelength of the medium
by which the image is gathered [21], so SEM utilizes the fact that the de Broglie wavelength
is inversely proportional to momentum (and therefore energy). Therefore, the resolution
of an electron microscope is proportional to the energy of the electron beam, and a typical
SEM can achieve resolutions hundreds of times better than visible light microscopes. Of
course, actually achieving the theoretical resolution is a far shot, but nevertheless SEMs
still have a much higher resolution and we can therefore investigate samples at a much
higher magnification.
In a SEM, the electron beam comes from electrons which are emitted from a source (in our
case a tungsten filament) and then accelerated by some potential differential (most often
∼5-25 kV). Much like a visible light microscope, the SEM has lenses and apertures to
focus the incoming electrons in addition to magnetic coils which can adjust the x-y shape
of the beam travelling along the z-axis and are important factors that should be adjusted
correctly in order to capture good images.
When the electron beam interacts with the sample, several phenomena occur. First and
foremost, electrons are deflected by the sample nuclei a number of times, leading to them
travelling back along the z-axis where they are caught by the backscattering detector
(BSD), which is placed directly around the accelerated electron beam. Since the only
interaction these electrons have with the sample is a deflection, they retain a large part of
their initial energies.
The secondary electrons are the ones that result from ionization of the sample and thus
they have a much lower energy (<50 eV) than the backscattered electrons. In practice
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
11
==PAGE:20==
they are ”vacuumed” into a secondary electron detector (SE), which sits closer to the sam-
ple, by a potential difference. As electrons from the beam penetrate the sample, there will
be ionization along the paths of the backscattered electrons, and since the secondary
electrons have a much lower energy, not all of them will escape the sample. This gives
rise to the interaction volume, which sets the boundaries for how far secondary electrons
might travel in the sample. When the beam is close to an edge, some of the interaction
volume might overlap with the sample edge and thus there will be an increase in the sec-
ondary electron signal, making secondary electrons suitable for investigating the sample
topography.
When a sample nucleus is ionized by a backscattered electron at lower energy, it might
also release compound-specific characteristic x-rays emitted from the energetic decay of
an electron in the compound. Capturing these characteristic x-rays gives the opportunity
to measure energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS).
Even though EDS would most often be the preferred tool to discern between elements
in a SEM image, one strength of the BSD is its ability to also do this to a weaker degree
based on the atomic numbers of the elements. This effect arises from the cross section,
which describes the probability that an electron on a trajectory towards a nucleus will be
deflected at an angle greater than ϕ by the nucleus’ electric field. It is given by [22]
Qϕ = 1.62 · 10−20
Z
E
2
cot2
ϕ
2

(2.7)
Where Z is the atomic number of the nucleus and E is the electron energy in keV, This
equation tells us three very important things:
• 180◦scattering is unlikely and lower angle scattering is most likely due to cot2(ϕ/2).
• heavy elements have a higher probability of scattering electrons due to Z2 propor-
tionaly.
• higher beam acceleration voltages decrease the probability of scattering due to in-
verse E2 proportionality.
In order to be able to discern between the different compounds based on their BSD intensi-
ties, their mean backscattered electron coefficients, ¯η, were calculated through Castaing’s
formula [23]
ˆη =
X
i
ciηi
(2.8)
Where ci is the mass fraction of element i in the compound, and ηi is the backscattered
electron coefficient, which, for element i with atomic number Zi, is given by
ηi = 2
−9
√
Zi
(2.9)
Figure 2.1 shows a relative brightness scale for some compounds that will definitely or
very likely be observed (Li, graphite, LFP, LYC, LLZO, PEO) and others that might also be
12
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:21==
observed. What the scale tells us is not exactly how bright every compound or element
will be, but rather which contrast one could expect between the different compounds and
elements in a BSD image in which they are the sole constituents. More specifically, for
two compounds i and j, the contrast Cij between them is given by
Cij = ηj −ηi
ηj
(2.10)
Where compound j is the heaviest - in figure 2.1 this is LLZO, so as an example the
contrast between PEO and LLZO would be expected to be CPEO/LLZO = 1 −0.27 = 0.73.
Figure 2.1: Relative brightnesses of relevant compounds and elements based on mean
backscattered electron coefficients.
Some preliminary considerations
Since electrolytes are not electronically conductive, one could expect to observe low
brightness or charging of the electrolyte by secondary electrons. This could be resolved
by carbon- og gold-coating the sample, which creates a conductive surface that transports
otherwise stationary electrons to ground. As the coating layer is usually on the order of
nm in thickness, it should not be visible in the actual image.
If the sample being investigated is a polymer, one could also expect that a a high intensity
(i.e. high beam current with a low spot size) electron beam would damage the sample
due to its low heat conductivity and low melting point1.
Some degree of contamination of the sample might also be observed, although this could
(and should) be avoided by handling the samples in an orderly fashion. Contamination
could arise from hydrocarbons or due to the samples being hygroscopic (as is the case
for LYC), which might create water vapor when hit by the electron beam.
2.1.5
Methods
Mechanochemical synthesis
For the initial mechanochemial synthesis of LYC, LiCl (Sigma Aldrich, ≥99%) and YCl3
(Sigma Aldrich, 99.99%) were mixed in a molar ratio of 1:1.46 (molar ratio of LiCl:YCl3 in
Li3YCl6 is 1:1.535), meaning we can expect a ∼5 wt% abundance of LiCl. The mixture
was loaded into a ZrO2 cup and ground in a Fritsch Premium Line Pulverisette 7 micro
mill with 10 mm ZrO2 grinding balls and ground for 68 cycles of 5 minutes grinding and 15
minutes rest at 240 rpm. After the 68 cycles, as much powder as possible was scraped
off of the cup walls. This was repeated an additional two times, but using 360 and 480
rpm instead. Lastly, the mixture was ground for an additional 111 cycles at 480 rpm.
For the second batch of Li3YCl6, LiCl and YCl3 were mixed in a 1:1.42 ratio (which trans-
lates to a 7 wt% abundance of LiCl). Inspired by the method in [10], the same setup is
162-65 ◦C for PEO according to kemibrug.dk
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
13
==PAGE:22==
used but with 10 mm ZrO2 grinding balls and 99 cycles at 500 rpm, doing 7 minutes of
milling and 13 minutes of rest at each cycle. After the 99 cycles, the mixture was scraped
off the cup walls and two more rounds of 99 cycles + scraping off of walls were carried
out.
Synthesis and coin cell assembly
For the initial mechanochemial synthesis of LYC, LiCl (Sigma Aldrich, ≥99%) and YCl3
(Sigma Aldrich, 99.99%) were mixed in a molar ratio of 1:1.46 (molar ratio of LiCl:YCl3 in
Li3YCl6 is 1:1.535), meaning we can expect a ∼5 wt% abundance of LiCl. The mixture
was loaded into a ZrO2 cup and ground in a Fritsch Premium Line Pulverisette 7 micro
mill with 10 mm ZrO2 grinding balls and ground for 68 cycles of 5 minutes grinding and 15
minutes rest at 240 rpm. After the 68 cycles, as much powder as possible was scraped
off of the cup walls. This was repeated an additional two times, but using 360 and 480
rpm instead. Lastly, the mixture was ground for an additional 111 cycles at 480 rpm.
For the second batch of Li3YCl6, LiCl and YCl3 were mixed in a 1:1.42 ratio (which trans-
lates to a 7 wt% abundance of LiCl). Inspired by the method in [10], the same setup is
used but with 10 mm ZrO2 grinding balls and 99 cycles at 500 rpm, doing 7 minutes of
milling and 13 minutes of rest at each cycle. After the 99 cycles, the mixture was scraped
off the cup walls and two more rounds of 99 cycles + scraping off of walls were carried
out.
Electrolyte coin cells
parameters for the electrolyte coin cells in figure 2.5 are shown
in table 2.1. All cells were assembled in an Ar filled glove box.
Table 2.1: Symmetric cell assembly specifications. SS = stainless steel. Uncertainties
were estimated as described in section 2.3.1.
∗derived from porosity
EC1
EC2
EC3
EC4
EC5
EC6
[10]
[12]
Milling balls / mm
10
10
10
10
10
3
5
3
Milling duration / h
20.4
20.4
20.4
20.4
20.4
34.7
50
24.8
Milling RPM
480
480
480
480
480
500
500
500
Ø / mm
13
13
13
13
13
13
9.5
5
LYC mass / mg
300
150
100
150
150
150
100
>328∗
Est. uncertainty / mg
20
20
20
20
20
20
–
–
Thickness / µm
1196
867
462
867
867
691
600
2000
Est. uncertainty / µm
20.54
52.12
32.08
52.12
52.12
25.19
–
–
Pressing force / MPa
503
270
270
270
270
270
300
360
Electrodes
SS
SS
SS
Li
Cu
Al
SS
SS
Battery cells
were assembled using LFP from Electrodes and More, which contains
1 mA cm−2 with a rated capacity of 125 mA g−1 at 0.05C and a first cycle efficiency of
>85% (data sheet in appendix B.1). The LFP was initially scraped off with a scalpel (BC1)
and later with a double-ended metal spatula (BC2-5). All cells were assembled in an Ar
filled glove box. Values were held as close to literature values as possible, while changing
as few parameters as possible. Batteries were made in batches of two at a time (BC2 &
BC3, BC4 & BC5), so as to remove as many possible error sources as possible, such as
miscalibrated scales or contaminations. The cells should therefore be compared in these
batches, and not directly with cells from other batches.
14
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.2: Specifications of the batteries in figure 2.13. Errors were estimated as de-
scribed in 2.3.1. PIC: polymer-in-ceramic.
∗”PEO-LLZTO-PEG- 60 wt% LiTFSI”
BC1
BC2
BC3
BC4
BC5
[10]
[6]
Electrolyte
LYC10
PIC
PIC
PIC
PIC
LYC5
PIC∗
Ø / mm
13
13
13
13
13
9.5
–
Anode
C
Li
Li
Li
Li
InLi
Li
Cathode
LFP
LFP
LFP
LFP
LFP
LCO
LFP
Catholyte
LYC10
LYC10
LYC3
LYC3
–
LYC5
–
wt. ratio
5.7:1
4:1
4:1
4:1
4:1
82:18
–
Loading / mg cm−2
11.5
15.1
15.1
15.1
15.1
9.9
–
Theoretical capacity / mAh
2.21
2.89
2.89
2.89
2.89
0.95
–
Electrolyte thickness / µm
289
345.6
345.6
345.6
345.6
350
–
Est. uncertainty / µm
20.4
14.3
14.3
14.3
14.3
–
–
Pressing force / MPa
270
270
270
270
270
300
–
The LFP was then mixed with LYC in a 4:1 weight-ratio ([10, 24]) with mortar and pestle,
before being pressed together with either LYC (BC1) or PIC (70LLZO:30PEO, BC2-5) and
an Al-foil current collector.
X-ray diffraction
The XRD measurements were carried out on an Aeris powder diffractometer. The initial
measurements (figure 2.2) were taken with a Si sample holder while the ones in figure
2.3 were recorded using a 3D printed PLA holder. Both batches were sealed with kapton
tape and contained ≈30 mg of powder each.
Electrochemical measurements
Impedance measurements were made using BioLogic VMP3 and SP300 potentiostats,
using different settings. Most commonly, a 10 mV sinusoidal amplitude was used with
11 or 22 points per decade and 8 measurements per point. Measurements were done
using both BioLogic CCH-8 holders, individual coin cell holders and a homemade, 3D-
printed holder. Different frequencies were used for the impedance measurements and
are specified in Nyquist plots.
Where temperatures are not explicitly mentioned, the measurements were carried out at
a temperature of 25 °C
Scanning Electron Microscopy
SEM was done using a ZEISS EVO MA10. Beam current and energy are specified in the
images in section 2.2. Samples were not pre-treated before imaging and were transported
in double-sealed, air-tight containers.
2.2
Results
2.2.1
Synthesis of LYC
The very first task of the experimental work was to synthesize LYC by ball milling. Three
different rotational velocities were used (240, 360 & 480 RPM), and figure 2.2 shows the
XRD results of LYC at each of these as well as one at 480 with prolonged milling time.
First and foremost, all samples exhibit all LiCl peaks, but also exhibit peaks uniquely
attributable to those of the 3¯31, 301 & 30¯1 and 30¯2, 3¯32, 3¯3¯2 & 032 planes of LYC.
It is evident that the LiCl and YCl3 peaks are decreasing while those of LYC are increasing
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.2: X-ray diffraction data of LiCl and YCl3 milled in a ZrO2 cup at 240, 360 and 480
RPM as well as prolonged milling at 480 RPM. Vertical lines are XRD patterns of YCl3,
LiCl and LYC ([12, 25, 26]m respectively).
with higher rotational velocities, which indicates that either increased milling time or veloc-
ity aids the reaction. A Rietveld refinement of the 480 RPM powder (not shown) revealed
that the powder contained 3 wt% LiCl, which corresponds to the slight excess of LiCl in
the precursor.
Another batch of LYC was produced following literature methods in order to decrease the
particle size (this will henceforth be referred to as LYC3, while the first batch will be referred
to as LYC10). In order to evaluate the product of the synthesis, the product powder was
compared to the 480 RPM 20.4 hour measurement from figure 2.2. In order to avoid
degradation of the Si sample holder due to reactions with LiCl owing to the hygroscopicity
of LYC, a custom holder was 3D-printed and measured on its own. This background is
also compared to the two powders as a control measure.
As figure 2.3 shows, the LYC3 has significantly lower peak amplitudes over all compared
to the LYC10, which is also the case for the 480 RPM measurement in figure 2.2 even
though the 20.4 h @ 480 RPM does not exhibit the same behavior. Although the peak
intensities have decreased, the same unique LYC peaks that were visible in figure 2.2 are
also clear for both LYC10 and LYC3 in figure 2.3, and this is taken as a confirmation that
the precursor has reacted, although it is not clear to which degree.
Figure 2.4 shows a comparison of LYC3 and LYC10 through SEM images. The figure
shows that big agglomorates are formed in both powders, but are much more frequent
in LYC3. One possible explanation is that since powders were synthesized with similar
rotational velocities, the bigger milling balls would have carried more kinetic energy and
thus would have broken down agglomorates. Images of the particle size distributions were
attempted (figure A.1, appendix A), but due to differences in the sample preparation, these
cannot reliably quantify a difference between the samples.
16
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: X-ray diffraction data of LiCl and YCl3 milled at 480 RPM for 20.4 hours with
10 mm balls and 500 RPM for 35 hours with 3 mm balls. Vertical lines are the same as in
figure 2.2.
(a) LYC10
(b) LYC3
Figure 2.4: Low-magnification SEM images for comparison of LYC10 and LYC3. While
the particle sizes seem to be on the order of <10 µm, agglomorates with sizes of >100 µm
appear for both powders, but are more frequent in LYC3.
2.2.2
Getting to know the potentiostats
It was first determined that an excitation voltage of 10 mV would be sufficient for
measurements (figure C.1 in appendix C). In addition, measurements on the VMP3
potentiostat exhibit noisy behavior (negative resistance, curling, etc.) at very high
frequencies and unless otherwise stated, very high frequencies will be excluded
from data presentation.
With the LYC synthesized, the next step is to characterize it, and the first value of interest
is the conductivity (and therefore impedance). Different coin cells were assembled for this
purpose - the noteworthy ones are shown in figure 2.5.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.5: Coin cells assembled with pure LYC pellets for the purpose of testing the
impedance of LYC. Full specifications are in table 2.1.
First, the cells EC1, EC2 and EC3 were measured both on the VMP3 and SP300 poten-
tiostats, ignoring the negative resistances in order to determine the electroylte resistance.
Figure 2.6 shows a comparison of the three cells (”VMP3” measurements) together with
fitted equivalent circuits (pictured in the figure). The fitting score is given by a modification
of the RSS
Figure 2.6: EIS measurements of EC1, EC2 and EC3 (EC3 with both VMP3 and SP300
potentiostats) with fits as pictured and scored by equation 2.11.
S
=
∑N
i E(Z(ωi),f(ωi))
N
(2.11)
E(Z(ω), f(ω))
=
 Z(ω)−f(ω)
∥Z(ω)∥

2
(2.12)
Where the error is divided by the length of the Zi such that the high frequency domain
has a larger weighing than the low frequency domain in order to compensate for the lower
18
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:27==
impedances. The resistances are given below in table 2.3 (the remaining fitting parame-
ters are in appendix C.1). Since all pellets should have the same conductivity, the ratio
of L/R should be constant and as m2/m3 = 1.5 and R2/R3 = 1.455, this might hold for
the CH-8 channels in the VMP3, which would make it appropriate for measuring relations
between different cells or conditions, such as temperature.
Table 2.3: Resistances of EC1, EC2 & EC3 based on fits in figure 2.6.
EC1
EC2
EC3
EC3 (SP300)
R1 / kΩ
18
16
11.25
14.5
It is also very noteworthy that the exact same cell measured with the exact same settings
yields such different impedance spectras when measured on two different potentiostats.
This was also investigated by using a different holder in the VMP3, which is shown in
figure 2.7. It is apparent that the shape of the EIS spectrum is very distorted for both
the external holder and the CH-8 holder, which reinforces the fact that the VMP3 should
not be used to determine an impedance with any accuracy. Therefore, the VMP3 will be
used to qualitatively evaluate EIS evolutions or comparisons, while the EIS will be used
to extract impedances with more accuracy.
Figure 2.7: Higher frequency region of the EC3 SP300 measurements from figure 2.6 and
VMP3 measurements using different coin cell holders.
2.2.3
Determining the electrolyte resistance
As was done in figure 2.6, the spectrum in figure 2.7 can also be fitted to the same circuit.
This is illustrated in figure 2.8
Figure 2.8: High frequency region of EC3 in the SP300 potentiostat with a fit as shown in
the figure (R1=14 kΩ).
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
19
==PAGE:28==
The resistive element in the fit has a value of 14 kΩwhich corresponds to a conductivity
of σ = 2.49 µS cm−1 ± 0.2 µS cm−1 (≈0.25% of what was reported in [10] and 1.31% of
what was reported in [12]).
Cell EC4 was made by sandwiching a similar LYC10 pellet inbetween two pieces of lithium
foil. Due to the non-blocking nature of the Li electrodes, we can expect a temporal evo-
lution of the impedance due to reactions taking place. An appropriate fit for the cell was
deemed to be the one shown in figure 2.9a, consisting of two R/CPE elements - one for
the LYC/Li interface and one for the parallel plate capacitance between the electrodes.
The figure shows that one semi-circle has an increasing ohmic resistance, which is due
to LYC being broken down into LiCl and Y [ji]. Ideally, the circuit should include an addi-
tional term (consisting of an R/CPE element and a Warburg element) in order to deal with
diffusion, but the objective of interest is currently the electrolyte resistance, and thus the
region of interest is the high frequency domain, where this element has not yet presented
itself.
(a) Temporal evolution
(b) Fit
Figure 2.9: Impedance of a symmetrical Li LYC10 cell (EC4). a): temporal evolution
(VMP3), b): high-resolution with fit to circuit as shown, giving an electrolyte resistance of
1.75 kΩ(SP300).
The other R/CPE element should be constant and hold information about the electrolyte
resistance - using the fitted resistance of the temporally constant semi-circle yields a re-
sistance of 1.75 kΩand thus a conductivity of σ = 37.33 µS cm−1 ± 2.96 µS cm−1.
As the conductivity is still much lower than previous reports and different methods have
yielded different conductivies, a new cell was made by pressing LYC10 together with Cu
current collectors (EC5). Figure 2.10a shows an impedance spectrum of this cell with
corresponding fit (same as in figures 2.6 and 2.8). With this fit, the electrolyte resistance
is fitted to be 5.2 kΩand the conductivity is thus σ = 12.5 µS cm−1 ± 1 µS cm−1.
Figure 2.10b shows the dependence of impedance on temperature in the range from 20
◦C to 70 ◦C in 10 ◦C intervals with corresponding equivalent circuit fits (as displayed in the
figure). Superficially, it seems that the electrolyte resistances (i.e. half-circle widths) are
not linearly dependent on temperature, which is expected due to the Arrhenius nature of
the conductivity (σ ∝eT ). The electrolyte resistances from the fits were used to determine
the conductivites, which are illustrated in figure 2.11.
20
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:29==
(a) Fit
(b) Fit
Figure 2.10: Impedance of a symmetrical Cu LYC10 cell. a): high frequency region and
fit (R3 = 5.2 kΩ), b): temperature dependence of the impedance.
Lastly, the conductivity of the LYC3 was measured by pressing a pellet inbetween two
pieces of aluminium foil. Its impedance spectrum is shown in figure 2.12 together with
the usual fit. This time, the resistive element is 3.2 kΩ, which yields a conductivity of
σ = 16.3 µS/cmpm0.84 µS/cm.
2.2.4
Battery cell testing
While many battery cell assemblies were attempted, six ended up being used for com-
parisons of different different configurations - these are shown in figure 2.13
The first cell, BC1, was made in order to test that some conductivity and therefore charg-
ing/discharging would be possible using LYC as an electrolyte in a similar fashion as to
[10]. Due to the instability towards lithium metal, a graphite anode was used (whereas
an InLi alloy was used in [10]). The cathode was LFP which was chosen due to having
a maximum reaction energy of 38 meV/atom with LYC [16]. The cathode used in [10]
was LCO, which has a maximum reaction energy of 52 meV/atom and resulted in a bat-
tery with high coulombic efficiency after the first cycle (≈100%) and excellent capacity
retention (≈99% after 100 cycles at 0.1C).
Asano et al. used three R/CPE elements and an electrolyte resistance, for example [10].
In this case, only the high frequency region will be investigated and so some of these
effects will not occur.
Before cycling, the impedance of the cell was tested in a high frequency range a few
minutes apart, so as to avoid going into charging or discharging territory, which could
take place if measured at lower frequencies. These initial impedance measurements are
shown in figure 2.14. It is evident that a resistance is increasing (likely due to some
reaction taking place somewhere), although it is uncertain which one. Based on the ”foot”
of the first measurement, it could be theorized there are actually two evident semi-circles
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.11: Arrhenius plot of σ vs. 1000 K−1 and temperature in with a linear regression
line from which the activation energy was determined.
(likely resistance and anodic interface) in this frequency domain, and that the resistance
in one of them increases so that the bigger semi-circle ”swallows” the lesser one. This
is further backed by the amplitude increase of the highest frequency point. Assuming
that the previous order also holds for graphite anodes, the more likely explanation is that
we are seeing the electrolyte resistance and charge transfer behavior at the anode, and
that some reactions are taking place at the anode. What is certain is that this reaction
takes place continuously (as with the Li/LYC instability) and increases the width of the
semi-cirlce (see figure D.1 in appendix D).
If this is the case, then, without making a fit, it is clear that the electrolyte resistance
must initially be ≈90 Ωdue to the end of the first semi-circle (which would correspond to
0.436 mS ± 0.035 mS, which is close to the one reported in [10]).
After measuring the pre-cycling conductivity, the battery cell was cycled at C/50002, which
is shown in figure 2.15. From the figure we instantly notice the increase in cell potential
after the first (actually second) cycle (marked orange). In addition, the shape of the charge
curve changes such that it seems two different reactions are occurring. The last cycle
was after variable temperature impedance measurements, which have evidently broken
the cell (EIS spectra in figure D.1 in appendix D).
2It quickly became quite clear that any higher C-rate would be infeasible.
22
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.12: Impedance measurement of LYC3 pressed inbetween two aluminium current
collectors. Fit is of the circuit as shown in the figure, where the electrolyte resistance is
3.2 kΩ.
Figure 2.15: Results of cycling BC1 at C/5000. The first cycle is at 0% SOC but was
included for clarity. The rated OCV is taken from appendix B.1.
As the objective is to make a lithium-PIC cell, this cell could merely be viewed as a valida-
tion that the electrolyte has an ionic conductivity and thus acts as an electrolyte. There-
fore, the specifics of the cycling behavior are not of interest. What is of interest is incor-
porating the LYC into an LFP cathode and assembling it with a PIC electrolyte.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.13: Assembled batteries that were used for testing. PIC: ceramic in polymer
(70LLZO:30PEO). Full specifications are in table 2.2.
2.2.5
Comparison of LFP3 and LYC10 as catholyte
Goodenough et al. have shown a good capacity retention (≈100% after 50 cycles at
0.2C) and coulombic efficiency (≈100% after first cycle) as well as rate performance for a
battery cell consisting of LFP and a PIC (polymer-in-ceramic, 70LLZO:30PEO) electrolyte
with a lithium anode, so the LFP cathode should still be possible, enabling the possibility
of an LFP+LYC/PIC/Li configuration, which was the one used for BC2 (using LYC10).
BC2 - LFP+LYC10/PIC/Li
Figure 2.16 shows the cycling behavior of BC2.
It is evident that the first-cycle capacity is extremely low (<0.4% of the rated C/20 capacity)
and that it is associated with an extremely low coulombic efficiency (28.3%). As with every
first cycle of a GCD measurement, some charge will be spent on establishing an SEI, and
this is likely the cause of the low efficiency. Going by literature, the first-cycle efficiency
could be expected to be ≈90 −99% [6, 10], which means that 1 −10% is of the initial
charge is consumed. However, as this value is generally tied to SEI formation, it should
be proportional to the interfacial area.
As such, if the effective capacity is much lower than the theoretical (or expected) capacity,
one could also expect a much lower coulombic efficiency due to the SEI consuming a
larger fraction of the electrons. The very rapid increase in the charge and discharge
curves indicate a lack of contact with the active material.
In the second cycle, the coulombic effiency and effective capacities both increase. The
former could be attributed to the SEI providing contact between the electrolyte and active
material and thus more paths for ions to diffuse through. The latter could be due to a
decreased amount of charges needed to build more SEI.
The third cycle has a coulombic efficiency more than 100% as the charge capacity has
decreased to almost that of the first cycle. Paired with the increasing discharge capacity, it
could be theorized that this is caused by volume expansions in the LFP detaching certain
regions and thus separating delithiated and lithiated LFP. If the lithiated LFP is what is in
contact with the electrolyte, this would explain the massively increasing overpotential at
certain points, and could also explain the volatile behavior. In addition, some regions of
lithiated LFP might be detached and at some point come in contact with electroylte again
through SEI formation, which would explain the ηc > 100%.
24
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.14: Initial impedance measurements of BC1 (LFP+LYC/LYC/C) immedately after
assembly. Measured on the SP300.
In the last two cycles, the charging behavior has become much less volatile and seems
to have a lower gradient slope, which indicates a much more stable cell, which is further
backed by the increasing coulombic efficiency until cycle five, which is very stable until
it seems from the charge curve gradient that the process was limited by mass transport.
The discharge is also much smaller, which would agree with the loss-of-contact theory.
Figure 2.17: Impedance measurements after cycles 1, 3, 4 and 5 (annotated together
with minimum and maximum frequencies) in figure 2.16 measured at 60 ◦C. Pre-cycling
and post cycle 2 were filtered out as they can be classified as noise (see figure D.2 in
appendix D).
Figure 2.17 shows the impedance pre-cycling and cycles one, three, four and five (pre-
cycling and post cycle two are in figure D.2 appendix D.2). As could be expected from
the cycling behavior, the behavior seems to stabilize with increased cycle number, and
very noisy measurements could be attributed to low interfacial contact. The very high
frequency regions exhibit non-physical behavior (as the measurement was done with the
VMP3). The high-frequency region is likely to be an additional semi-circle, and this would
mean that we see a decrease in both anodic and cathodic surface impedances.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 2.16: Cycling behavior of BC2 made with an LFP+LYC10/PIC/Li configuration at
0.09C and at 60 ◦C. SOC: State of Charge, DOD: Depth of Discharge (relative to rated
C/20 capacity). Annotations are cycle numbers and coulombic efficiencies where appro-
priate.
Figure 2.18a shows an identical pellet to CB2 before cycling and figure 2.18b shows BC2
after cycling using secondary electrons. There is a stark contrast between the two images
- the cycled LFP seems significantly more porous than its uncycled counterpart, which
again reinforces the working theory of expansion breaking the electrode/electrode and
electrode/electrolyte contact during cycling.
(a) Before
(b) After
Figure 2.18: SEM images of LFP+LYC10 showing the porosities of a): an identical pellet
before cycling and b): BC2 after cycling.
BC3 - LFP+LYC3/PIC/Li
Figure 2.19 shows the cycling behavior of BC3. This cell starts out significantly better than
BC2 at over three times its capacity, and this amount almost doubles for the second cycle
- most likely due to the SEI formation providing better contact with active material, allow-
ing for more storage of charge. The coulombic efficiency is almost significantly higher,
26
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:35==
surpassing that of what has been previously reported for first cycles with LCO [10].
It does still seem that there is a steep concentration polarization before the cutoff voltage
is reached (for both charge and discharge), indicating that the battery performance is
restricted by only being in contact with a limited amount of active material. After these two
cycles, there is no discharge capacity and extremely large mass transport overpotential.
Figure 2.19: Cycling behavior at 60 ◦C and 0.09C of BC3 made with an LFP+LYC13/PIC
(70LLZO:30PEO)/Li configuration.
Figure 2.20 shows the impedance pre-cycling and after the two first cycles, and, like with
CB2, this cell also exhibits decreasing interfacial impedance until the contact is suddenly
entirely lost.
Figure 2.20: Impedance measurements pre-cycling and after every cycle in figure 2.19
done at 60 ◦C.
Figure 2.21a shows an identical pellet to BC3 before cycling and figure 2.21b shows BC3
after cycling. The latter shows big pores of ≈µm diameter, confirming that there is a loss
of contact during the volumetric expansions and contractions imposed by the cycling.
However there is still regions of bare LFP, so the reason for the complete cell failure is
still unknown.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Before
(b) After
Figure 2.21: SEM images of LFP+LYC3 showing the surface topography of a): an identical
pellet before cycling and b): BC3 after cycling.
2.2.6
Comparison of LFP and LFP+LYC3 as cathode
The previous section showed that LYC3 performed significantly better than LYC10 until it
reached a point of complete cell failure. As such, it is deemed fitting to test a LFP+LYC3/PIC/Li
cell against a baseline of pure LFP, so a new LFP+LYC3/PIC/Li cell (BC4) was made and
tested against BC5, which was made with a configuration of LFP/PIC/Li.
BC4
Figure 2.22 shows the first five cycles of BC4. The initial cycling curves are smooth,
indicating a much more stable cell, but during the fourth cycle, the cell starts to show
some volatility. The gradients caused by the transport overpotential are also steep - an
additional sign of subpar transport. The capacity steadily increases from cycle to cycle,
but also grows more and more volatiile, which could be a sign of decompositioning.
Figure 2.22: Cycling behavior of BC4 made with an LFP+LYC10/PIC/Li configuration at
60 ◦C and 0.09C.
Figure 2.23 shows impedance measurements for BC4 after every cycle (and prer-cycling.
28
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:37==
In contrast to the previous cells, the interfacial impedance decreases after the first cycle
(and shows increased noise. Ultimately, the interfacial impedance decreases after every
cycle. In figure 2.22, the discharge capacities also increased after every cycle, which
makes sense with increasing interfacial stability, but the volatility is not reflected in the
impedance for some reason.
Figure 2.23: Impedance measurements pre-cycling and after every cycle in figure 2.22
measured at 60 ◦C.
BC5
The first five cycles of BC5 are shown in figure 2.24. Interestingly, this cell exhibits its
highest capacity during the first cycle, and with a small coulombic efficiency. After the first
cycle, both the available charge capacity and discharge seems to grow steadily.
Figure 2.24: Cycling behavior of BC5 made with an LFP/PIC/Li configuration. Cycled at
60 ◦C and at 0.09C.
The impedance in figure 2.25 seems to suggest an even lower electrolyte resistance than
that of BC4, as well as a steadily decreasing interfacial resistance. All of this is despite
the LFP gathering in agglomorates, causing it to be distributed in chunks and thus have
lesser contact with the electrolyte (see appendix A, figure A.2).
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 2.25: Impedance measurements pre-cycling and after every cycle in figure 2.24
measured at 60 ◦C.
Figure 2.26a shows a secondary electron SEM image of an identical pellet to BC5 before
cycling. Figure 2.26b shows one of BC5 after cycling. It is clear that there is a significant
mechanical effect of charging the battery - maybe even moreso than for the other battery
cells - as the latter shows a much more porous structure.
(a) Before
(b) After
Figure 2.26: SEM images of LFP+LYC10 showing the porosities of a): an identical pellet
before cycling and b): bc5 after cycling.
2.3
Discussion
As mentioned in the results, the XRD peak intensities corresponding to LiCl and especially
YCl3 are decreasing with increased milling time and rotational velocity. In addition, those
of LYC seem to be increasing, and according to a Rietveld refinement (not shown), the
powders seem to have fully reacted after the 480 RPM milling.
The peak amplitudes of 480 RPM are lower than those of both 240 RPM, 360 RPM and
20.4 h @ 480 RPM. This is also the case for the LYC3, which has smaller peak amplitudes
than LYC10. The reasoning likely lies in the hygroscopicity of LYC - even though every
sample was sealed with kapton tape, they were not air tight, and the 480 RPM and LYC3
samples had one thing in common; they were the last samples of each batch to be mea-
sured. Therefore it is not entirely unreasonable to attribute these lower peak amplitudes
to reactions with H2O. This would also explain why the 20.4 h @ 480 RPM sample did
not share the same low peak amplitudes of the 480 RPM sample.
The cause of the huge ohmic resistance of the electrolyte cells were attributed to bad
interfacial contact between the electrolyte and blocking electrodes. EC4 was assembled
30
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:39==
in order to hopefully increase the interfacial contact, but at the cost of side reactions hap-
pening (decompositioning of LYC into Li and Y). The electrolytic conductivity in this cell
was the highest. The next highest conductivity was that of the symmetric Cu cell, which
is harder than lithium, but softer than stainless steel. This reinforces the theory that the
interfacial contact was the issue as a softer material would be easier to press into a porous
surface in order to build more surface contact.
As for the LYC3 conductivity measurement, pressing it between aluminium foil was sub-
optimal when this had not been done with LYC10, but pressing it against copper was not
an option at the time due to a shortage of dehydrated copper current collectors. As the
conductivity of LYC3 pressed between aluminium foil is higher than that of LYC10 pressed
between copper but lower than that of LYC10 between lithium, it is difficult to determine
if there is a difference in ionic mobility between LYC3 and LYC10 as aluminium is harder
than lithium but softer than copper.
It is evident that all the assembled batteries suffer from very poor effective capacity. While
the PEO was initially used to serve as a ”glue” to ensure good surface contact of the
LLZO particles, it seems that this was not the case. The behavior of the batteries seems
to indicate that the low effective capacities are related to poor interfacial contact, which
increases after cycling due to SEI formation or increased contact due to expansion of LFP
- though this also seems to be what limits the cell performance.
This is based on the increasing capacity after cycling (for most of the battery cells), which
hints that some reaction establishes better contact and therefore allows for a new pathway,
increasing the amount of ions that are transportable out of the cathode. It is reinforced by
the EIS spectra that were measured after each cycle, showing a clear trend of decreased
interfacial resistance, which could be attributed to better surface contact, for cycles with
higher capacity.
One thing to note is that SEI formation was not observed in [10] (after the first cycle, at
least), but this is explained by the lower cycling window that was used (cutoff at 4 V, which
is within the stability window of LYC). This was possible due to a lower electrolyte resis-
tance of 0.51 mS cm−1. Previous studies have shown that using a too high cycling window
(up to 5 V) can cause extremely rapid interfacial resistance increases as compared to 4
V [5].
However, BC5 did not contain any LYC and still showed odd behavior (though not much).
As reported in [6], the lower boundary for the electrochemical stability window of the PIC
electrolyte is 2.5 V - a value within the cycling range. This could then be the explanation
for the slight volatility taking place in later cycles, whereas the initial volatility might be
some SEI formation, which would explain the initial low coulombic efficiency.
To summarize, the cells exhibit poor cyclability. The primary concern is high electrolytic
resistance and bad interfacial contact, both of which result in high overpotentials. Due
to these high overpotentials, the batteries were cycled in a broader potential window,
exceeding the electrochemical stability window of the LYC and also that of PIC. During
cycling, the effective capacity increases and the interfacial impedance decreases, which
can be interpreted as the cell building better contact during charging due to either SEI
formation or volumetric expansions. For cells BC2 and BC3, the capacity decreases sig-
nificantly. This is most likely caused by shielding of the active material by decomposed
LYC and/or the detachment of regions of active material during expansions and contrac-
tions.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
31
==PAGE:40==
2.3.1
Additional discussion of error sources
As previously mentioned, a large amount of powder has adsorbed on the pulverisette cup
after milling. Anecdotally, a color shift from white to gray-ish was also observed as these
peaks decreased, and this new powder was significantly easier to scrape off of the milling
cup walls after. This could prevent inner layers of powder from reacting due to shielding
by the outer layers, ultimately resulting in contamination when the powder is removed
from the cup. This might also be an explanation as to why the XRD pattern of the LYC3.
As seen in figure 2.6 the ohmic resistance was negative at high frequencies, which was ex-
plained by instrumental errors. The primary reason being that the VMP3 has a low-current
channel board which increases accuracy at low currents, but which can only measure up
to 150 KHz. Its main channel board on the other hand measures up to 1 MHz, but at this
point its impedance measurement range is limited to ≈125 Ω−10 kΩ(see contour plots
in appendix B.2).
The SP300 on the other hand has several ranges within its main board, which enables it
to measure down to ≈5 ohm at 7 MHz with reasonable accuracy (within 3%, appendix
B.3).3.
The deviance from the Arrhenius behavior seems to occur mostly at lower temperatures.
This is believed to be due to the script that was used to control the incubator and start
measurements. In reality, there should be two hours between every measurement, but in
reality, the measurement times were extracted from the data files and used to determine
the time difference from the starting time. What we see is that the incubator’s relaxation
time was based on the temperature, such that the coin cells had less time to absorb heat
at lower temperature etc. This would explain why the first measurement (20 ◦C) has a
higher conductivity than expected (since it had to cool from 25 ◦C), but does not explain
why the 25 ◦C measurement lies above the Arrhenius regression line. One explanation
would be that the subsequent measurements had too litle time to absorb heat and should
thus lie lower, making the 25 ◦C measurement a control point, in a sense. This is backed
by the fact the the 20 ◦C measurement is at σ = 12 µS cm−1, which is very close to the
value from figure 2.10a.
The uncertainty of the conductivities and thicknesses were based on the law of error
propagation, in which the relative uncertenties are added together for products of pa-
rameters. In this case, the thickness error was based on the mass error (estimated to
±10% due to adherence to surfaces) as well as measurements of pellet thicknesses,
which also determined the porosity uncertainties. The relative uncertainty of the resis-
tance is 1% (appendix B.2) for the measurements in the VMP3 and variable for the ones
in the SP300 (appendix B.3). Thus we have that the relative uncertainty of the conductivity
is ∆σ = σ

∆L
L + ∆R
R

.
Scales were used to determine many different quantities in this thesis, but upon disas-
sembling the coin cells and measuring quantities like mass and thickness, it was found
that the scales outside of the glove boxes showed masses ≈10% lower than what was
measured in the glove box. This could be explained by pressure equalization in the glove
box, or adherence of material to the coin press sleeve (the mass was measured by ze-
roing to the material container and scooping it into the sleeve). In addition to these two
factors, the scale was not optimally calibrated and its surface was uneven, so it had to be
centered before each use, which might yield different centerings for every measurement.
3The impedance of EC3 at 7 MHz was 149-i 60.9 Ω.
32
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:41==
In reality, the mass difference is most probably explained by all three factors, as the scale
fluctuated during measurements (pressure equalization) and the relative mass measure-
ment errors increased with smaller mass (which could be explained by adherence to the
sleeve).
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:43==
3
Computational modelling of Li3YCl6
When doing practical work with, or designing, batteries - or any other application of ma-
terials science, really - having a good theoretical understanding of the materials at hand
opens up new doors. An example could be investigating the effect of lithiation or de-
lithiation on the structure of an electrode in order to develop a fitting cell design, or deter-
mining which impact the synthesis method has on the phase of a material as well as the
properties of the different phases, which then allows for tuning of the material to achieve
the desired physical properties.
Another important aspect of theoretical work is that results might be generalizable. When
investigating one material, one might attribute some positive physical properties to certain
material characteristics. These characteristics might then be observed in other materials,
after which one can measure whether these other materials exhibit the same, desired
physical properties.
Even though LYC was only ’rediscovered’ recently [10], several articles have already been
published in which computational methods were used to investigate the material [16, 15,
19, 13, 14, 17, 18]. However there is no common convention among the different studies
as to how the disorder of the material should be treated.
Qi etal. used the site occupations from [10] to relax a single unit cell and stack it, giving
a 2x1x1 supercell with a total of 6 formula units which they then relaxed using different
functionals and used as training data for moment tensor potential model, which could then
estimate lattice parameters, activation energies and conductivities [qi_bridging]. Some
have worked around the issue of disorder by sampling random unit cells of LYC and doing
calculations on the lowest energy structure after relaxation [14, 18] and others have used
average values of 100 random structures to quantify structure properties.
In order to determine diffusion pathways, traditionally - as in the previously cited articles -
random structures would be relaxed and nudged elastic band (NEB, will be expanded on
in section ??) calculations would be carried out in order to determine activation energies
and thereby conductivities. A large supercell could then be made and real-time diffusion
could be quantified through a kinetic monte carlo simulation, where NEBS would have to
be calculated for every atom to every possible site it can travel to.
Since cluster expansion (section 3.1.1) is a useful tool for quantifying different configura-
tions’ influence on a physical property, the motivation behind this computational work is
to use CLEASE as a tool to quantify the influence of disorder (in the form of clusters) on
physical parameters, like migration barriers [27]. The idea is that CLEASE could then be
trained on the difference between the total transition energy and half of the Gibbs’ energy
between two states as determined by a small amount of NEB calculations, such that it
can determine the influence of different clusters on migration barriers and from there de-
termine which route a specific ion would migrate through in an atomic configuration. This
could then be used to do a kinetic Monte Carlo simulation of real-time diffusion through
a much smaller set of NEB calculations, significantly reducing time and computational
requirements.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
35
==PAGE:44==
3.1
Theory behind the computational methods
3.1.1
Cluster Expansion and CLEASE
Cluster expansion was first described in 1984, but was recently developed into an ASE-
compatible tool under the name of Cluster Expansion in Atomic Simulation Environment
(CLEASE) [28]. Its purpose arises from the fact that DFT is suboptimal at determining
ground state structures in materials with a significant substitutional disorder as the con-
figurational space is simply too big.
Where DFT has to do a large amount of complex, inter-dependent calculations, CLEASE
uses regression to predict the energy of a structure based on its atomic configuration. In
other words, an atomic configuration is fed into a regression model, which is optimized
with respect to the known energies calculated with DFT. In reality, the term ’fed into’ is
a major oversimplification - one extremely important aspect of machine learning is the
pre-processing of data, which takes place before (and has a very significant effect on) the
actual training.
Machine learning for optimization
The very simplistic goal of machine learning is to predict an outcome based on an input
through training of some sort. The type of training defines which type of machine learning
is taking place - the only type we need to use for cluster expansion is supervised machine
learning, in which the model is given an input and an output. A scoring scheme is then
used evaluate the error of the model and adjust fitting parameters until this error has been
minimized.
Now, almost any data set could be predicted with a complicated enough model that has no
training error. Of course, the model would hardly be able to predict anything outside of the
initial dataset, which means it would have a high generalization error. This is overfitting -
underfitting is the case where a too simplistic model is used, which in turn might be more
generalizable but has nothing to do with the data at hand and thus yields higher training
and generalization errors than a well-fitted model because the predictions are essentially
unrelated to the target variable.
In practice, the input is an N × M matrix X, i.e. it has N observations and M features.
The predictive impact of each feature m is quantified by an M-dimensional weight-vector
ω, such that the N predicted values are y = Xω.
There are three supported regularization schemes implemented in CLEASE; linear re-
gression, l1 regularized regression in the form of the least absolute shrinkage and selec-
tion operator (LASSO) and l2 regularized regression in the form of ridge regression.
CLEASE does linear regression through singular value decompositioning (SVD), which is
built around the decompositioning of a matrix X into a product of three matrices U, Σ, and
V, where the normalized eigenvectors of XXT are the columns of U and those of XTX are
the rows of VT (this will not be proven, but the interested reader can find a more thorough
explanation in [29]).
X = UΣVT
(3.1)
The purpose of this is that X is often not invertible, so that we can not simply compute
ω through ω = X−1y. Instead, we try to get as close to the ω vector through the best
possible estimation of X−1. Through equation 3.1, the prediction of y can be rewritten to
36
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:45==
y = Xω
= UΣVTω
(3.2)
and therefore, because matrix inversion is defined through the relation AA−1 = I, we get
that for the
(UΣVT)−1y = (UΣVT)−1UΣVTω
= UTΣ−1Vω
= VΣ−1UT
(3.3)
and lastly, due to the semi-unitarity of U and V, UTU = VVT = I and it can all be reduced
(not derived here, see [29]) to
ˆω = (XTX)−1XTy
(3.4)
Where ˆω is the solution that causes the least sum of squares, ∥Xω −y∥2
2
In order to prevent the previously mentioned overfitting, the model can be regularized
by adding an additional term to the RSS based on either the l1 norm or the l2 norm of
ω. Another way to prevent overfitting is through cross validation, which quantifies the
performance of the model on unknown data. This is done by splitting the measurements
up into different sets and then testing the model on each set while training on the remaining
sets. The two types used are k-fold and leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV). For k-
fold cross validation, a sample set of N samples is divided into k sets, and k cycles are
run of training on N −k sets and testing on k sets. Finally, the accuracies of all the cycles
are combined to give an estimate of the model’s performance. LOOCV is the case of k-
fold cross validation where k=N and also comes with a fast-variation which utilizes linear
algebra to do the evaluation through N calculations instead of N2 calculations [30].
3.1.2
CLEASE
Clease [28] is a python tool developed to utilize cluster expansion to train a machine
learning model to predict a physical quantity based on a physical configuration.
It predicts the physical quantity q based on the sum of all ECIs per atom for a configuration
σ, i.e.
q(σ) =
X
α
mαJαϕα
(3.5)
So for a system of N atomic configurations, this can be formulated through linear algebra
q = ϕJ
(3.6)
Such that q is an M-dimensional vector of physical properties qn, ϕ is an M × N matrix
holding the correlation functions ϕαi of cluster α for configuration (N is the number of
clusters). Lastly, ˆJ is an M dimensional vector holding the ECIs mαJα for every cluster α.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
37
==PAGE:46==
This equation resembles the one used for machine learning in section 3.1.1, and what
CLEASE does is predict q in the same way as any other linear regression through deter-
mining the fitting parameters that minimize the RSS, namely ˆJ.
For l1 regularization, CLEASE uses the Lasso function from the scikit-learn python mod-
ule, which fits X and y to a cost function of the form [31]
1
2N ∥q −ϕ^∥2
2 + α∥^∥1
(3.7)
And for Ridge regularization, it uses the formulation
∥q −ϕ^∥2
2α∥ˆ∥2
2
(3.8)
Which can be solved by [28]
(ϕTϕ + αI)−1ϕTq
CLEASE allows the user to specify settings that should be applied to the configurations.
Among these settings are concentration limits and restrictions, crystal structure, maximum
amount of unit cells per structure (supercell factor), maximum cluster size, bases of ele-
ments (in case of different partial occupancies), etc. After specifying the settings, CLEASE
allows the user to generate random structures adhering to them and ultimately fit the ECIs
ˆJ to the physical properties determined by DFT calculations through its ASE-compatibility.
From this point on, the user can then generate ground-state structures through simulated
annealing until the model has converged and has a high accuracy, and then choose to do
Monte Carlo sampling or predict further physical quantities.
3.2
Computational methods and parameters
First, CLEASE settings were made for the Li3YCl6 structure based on the cif file from [11],
meaning that that space group is automatically set to P¯3m1. The settings fix the positions
of all chloride atoms as well as one third of yttrium atoms, based on the α phase partial
occupations. It is also specified that the lithium vacancies amount to one fourth of all
lithium sites, while yttrium vacancies correspond to one half of the yttrium sites. This is
based on the unit cell (figure 1.2), where it can be seen that an α unit cell is comprised of
three formula units - i.e. Li9Y3Cl18, but has 12 lithium sites and 5 yttrium sites, such that
the composition of a single unit cell as defined in the settings is [Li9XLi
3 ], [Y1], [Y2XY
2], [Cl18]
where X denotes a vacancy. In addition to the concentration criteria, the settings also
specify a supercell factor of 2, meaning that a maximum of two unit cells will be constructed
for each initial configuration.
For DFT calculations, the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) with the PBE po-
tential, a k-point density of 3.5 Å−1, an energy cutoff of 650 Å and a convergence criteria
of 0.02 eV Å−1. NEB calculations were done with five images per path.
3.3
Results
As the first step, 70 random structures of LYC with a supercell factor limit of two were
constructed, two of which are shown in figure 3.1.
With the initial database constructed, all configurations were relaxed with DFT using a
PBE functional, a cutoff energy of 650 eV and a Monkhorst-Pack grid with 3.5 Å k−1.
38
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.1: Random initial structures with a super-cell factor of 2 made by CLEASE with
the concentration criteria [Li9XLi
3 ], [Y1], [Y2XY
2], [Cl18] based on the unit cell from [11].
Of the 70 initial structures, 69 of them converged and their energies are illustrated in
figure 3.2. At this point, it should be noted that the energies are the potential energies
determined by the VASP calculator - i.e. electrosatic, kinetic and XC energies of the
electrons in the structure.
The energies seem to be grouped into two clusters, which is most likely explained by
the supercell factor (remember that we allow for maximum two unit cells). Therefore, the
density of states vs. configurational energy per atom was also calculated and is shown in
figure 3.3.
The next step after generating the initial structures and relaxing them is performing the
actual cluster expansion. In order to ensure a good fit with a low generalization error,
both l1 and l2 regularization were used with LOOCV, fast-LOOCV and 10-fold validation,
depicted in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Penalty parameter α and errors (in meV/atom) for CLEASE models trained
through 10-fold CV, LLOCV and fast-LOOCV with Lasso and Ridge regularization.
Lasso
Ridge
10-fold
α
0.004
89.578
RMSE
21.265
12.805
Egen
24.165
21.607
LOOCV
α
0.002
54.182
RMSE
20.162
11.067
Egen
23.744
20.128
fast-LOOCV
α
0.002
7.252
RMSE
20.162
6.153
Egen
23.744
12.33
As the table shows, fast-LOOCV performs much better than any of the other validation
schemes. While it intuitively makes sense that LOOCV should perform at least as well as
10-fold CV, fast-LOOCV is simply LOOCV but with fewer calculations and should there-
fore have similar performance. As shown in figure 3.4a, the CV error is exponentially
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.2: Density of states of configurational energies (kinetic, coulombic and XC)
of random structures and a ground-state structure predicted by CLEASE (marked by a
dashed line).
increasing as α decreases, and reaches 1010 at low enough α values. In addition, fig-
ure 3.4b shows that the score is only stable over a small range of α values, meaning
that the model has a very high hyperparameter sensitivity, which can ultimately reduce
reproducibility
(a) α < 10−7
(b) α < 10−1
Figure 3.4: Convergence test of the CV score during α hyperparameter tuning for α limits
of a) 10−7 and b) 10−1. It is clear that the model is extremely sensitive to α-variance, with
the error exponentially increasing as α decreases below 1-10.
40
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.3: Density of states of configurational energies (kinetic, coulombic and XC)
per atom of random structures and a ground-state configuration predicted by CLEASE
(represented by the dashed line).
As table 3.1 shows, all validation schemes had larger errors when used with l1-regularized
models - this can be attributed to them dividing the different configurations into clusters
of energies (i.e. the image of the input through the model is not one continuous set,
but seems like smaller, distinguishable sets). This is most evident in figure 3.5, which
shows that for both the 10-fold and LOO validation schemes the predicted configurational
energies seem to have been grouped into clusters, which is expressed through the vertical
lines.
(a) LOOCV
(b) 10-fold
Figure 3.5: Fitting accuracy of a LASSO regularized model with a) LOOCV and b) 10-fold
cross validation. Red circles indicate the validation configuration for the LOOCV.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.6 shows the results of the 10-fold cross evaluated ridge model. Figure 3.6a
shows that the CV score for 10-fold CV is much more insensitive to α value than is the
case for fast-LOOCV (and regular LOOCV) with ridge regularization. This is likely also
what causes the high value of α (89.6), meaning that complex models cause very high
penalties and as such simple models are preferred. Figure 3.6b on the other hand shows
that the 10-fold evaluation also does not exhibit the same clustering of configurational
energies that were evident in the lasso regularized LOOCV-validated models.
(a) α-tuning
(b) Fitting accuracy
(c) Residuals
(d) ECI values
Figure 3.6: a) tuning of the α-hyperparameter through optimization of the CV score, b)
actual value vs. predicted value, c) residual errors of the predicted values, c) ECI val-
ues of different clusters (marked by geometric symbols). For a 10-fold validated ridge-
regularized model.
Model errors vs. predicted energies for the ridge regularized model with 10-fold scoring
are illustrated in figure 3.6c together with a distribution of the residual errors. Due to
the larger density of the distribution below 0, the model can be said to overestimate the
configurational energies slightly. Figure 3.6d shows the ECI contributions of the different
N-body clusters (marked by different geometric objects). Some clusters contribute with as
high as 12 TeV per atom, but this is a statistical artifact caused by division with a number
that is effectively 0 (due to a low variance along columns of the ECI matrix), as well as the
ECI values being fitting parameters and not representing a physical quantity, but merely
42
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:51==
just predicting one.
The dashed lines in figures 3.2 and 3.3 represent the 70th structure, which was con-
structed by the CLEASE ground-state generator function, and after relaxation it would
prove to also have the lowest total energy of all the generated structures, though the en-
ergy per atom is slightly above the minimum. However, after making an second ground-
state structure, when an attempt was made to create additional ground-state structures,
CLEASE reported that it was not possible to construct a suitable structure. An additional
attempt with an increased supercell factor did not reproduce this error.
Figure 3.7 shows the structure. While it is difficult to conclude anything from a supercell
of size 2x1x1, there are some clear symmetries of the Yttrium sites in the unit cell. In
particular, only one of the 2d sites is occupied for both the 001 and 002 planes in each
unit cell. Furthermore, it also seems that the Lithium vacancies are confined to specific
rows of Lithium sites in planes perpendicular to the xz-plane. In one row (the upper one
in the xy orientated image in figure 3.7), all Lithium sites intersecting with the 002 plane
are vacant, while the middle row has full occupancies, and the 001 plane has vacancies
in every other site along the a-axis.
Figure 3.7: 2x1x1 supercell of the ground-state structure of LYC generated by CLEASE.
With the ground-state structure established and relaxed, a randomized 20x20x20 super-
cell based on the fitted ECI was constructed in order to determine partial occupancies and
to evaluate larger-range configurations within the supercell in case of vacancy clusters (as
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
43
==PAGE:52==
could be the case based on the right cell in figure 3.1). For this purpose, the partial oc-
cupancies of the different sites in the cell were first checked by shifting every atom in the
supercell 0.5 Å along the x- and y-axes1 and then determining their unit cell position by
counting the number of atoms with unit cell position within a radius of 0.5 Å of each other
in the x-y plane.
(a) 001 plane
(b) 002 plane
Figure 3.8: Partial occupancies for a) the 001 plane and b) the 002 plane in a 30x30x30
supercell constructed by CLEASE based on the previously fitted ECI.
As figure 3.9 shows, the ECI-based supercell has the same partial occupancies as the
β-LYC structure albeit with the 100% occupied 1b Y position in the 001 plane due to the
fixed basis. It should be noted that the β-LYC structure is essentially just a completely
random configuration in regard to the occupation numbers - in other words, there is no
difference between the 001 plane and the 002 plane, and as such an algorithm choosing
whether to place a Y or Li atom on a given site based solely on the stoichiometry and unit
cell would yield the β structure.
What would really prove the accuracy of the fitted ECI would be to predict the α structure,
as there is a clear difference between the 001 and 002 planes, so that no random algorithm
would be able to predict it. In order to do this, a simulated annealing Monte Carlo run was
performed using the ECI, which is effectively the same as predicting a very large ground-
state supercell (recall that ground-states are also predicted using simulated annealing).
Due to the very large size of the cell (810,000 atoms), the number of steps had to be
restricted and the cell was therefore never fully equilibrated at each temperature step
(literature uses ≈1000 steps per atom per temperature [28]). The resulting occupancies
are shown in figure 3.10.
1This was done in order to avoid dislocated atoms counting toward another unit cell, which could cause
occupancies >1.
44
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:53==
(a) 001 plane
(b) 002 plane
Figure 3.9: Partial occupancies for a) the 001 plane with average Li-occupancy of 76.6%
and b) the 002 plane with average Li-occupancy of 73.3& in a 30x30x30 supercell con-
structed by CLEASE based on the previously fitted ECI and then annealed with one step
per non-restricted atom. Orange: Y, blue: Li.
While the partial occupancies reported previously ([13, 11]) are 73% at the Y2d and 79%
at the Li6h 002 sites are far from simulated values of 51% and 76.6% (average), it cannot
be taken as evidence of a weak ECI training. Multiple (relatively) short MC simulations
have been run on various supercells, and all of them have resulted in increased average
002 occupancies despite the short number of steps (see appendix E).
As the last task in the computational work, the second ground-state structure mentioned
above was used to do a short NEB calculation with a path chosen according to the pre-
ferred 1D diffusion channel mentioned in literature ([13, 14, 19] and such that the lithium
ion would migrate to a site in which it is farther from other cations. The path is shown in
figure 3.10a.
(a) NEB path
(b) Energy diagram
Figure 3.10: Second generated ground-state structure. a) route along the c-axis 1D dif-
fusion channel for NEB calculation, b) energy diagram for the NEB calculation along the
route.
The reported literature values for the diffusion along the 1D channel determined by com-
putational methods are 116 meV (β) / 166 meV α [13] to 190 meV [19], while the experi-
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
45
==PAGE:54==
mentally reported value is 400 meV [10].
3.4
Discussion
Starting with the making of the settings, it is clear from the basis constraints that CLEASE
will never generate a structure of β-LYC due to the fixing of the 100% occupancy 1a Y-
site. This should not be a problem as training the CLEASE model teaches it to predict a
structural energy from clusters of atoms through each unique clusters’ contribution.
One could think that the periodicity of Y on the z-axis might prevent CLEASE from predict-
ing β-LYC energies due to there never being a site inbetween two 1a sites. However in
the β phase, the 1a sites simply turn into two 2d sites, which already exist in the α phase -
in other words, sufficiently large supercells of the α- and β-phases would yield equal sets
of unique clusters, and therefore CLEASE should be indifferent to which phase is used
for the learning.
Since a large enough supercell would yield all possible clusters - one could wonder why
the model is not trained on a single, very large supercell. In short, while the large supercell
would have many individual ECIs, all of these would be used to predict a single energy,
and a wide variety of solutions would be possible. Instead, many small cells, which consist
of fewer clusters would hold much more information about each cluster’s ECI due to the
linear algebra nature of cluster expansion.
Generally for machine learning, large data sets are desired in order to improve the sample
size and thus increase the accuracy. Thus, considering that the α-LYC unit cell has 16
variable sites, a supercell factor of 2 might initially seem like a low number. However, a
unit cell with the concentration criteria 1320 possible configurations. Due to symmetry,
some of these configurations will be indistinguishable when rotated or mirrored, so this is
a maximum number of possible configurations.
A very crude estimate could be that every position is reproducible a number of times
according to its Wyckoff number multiplicity, and that the number of configurations should
therefore be divided by this multiplicity. This would hold for the Y sites since mirroring
about 110,
¯
110 and 002 reduces the actual number of configurations from 6 to 3. This
assumption would reduce the number of configurations per unit cell to 110, which generally
would be a small training set for machine learning, but the introduction of a new unit cell
greatly increases the number of configurations.
With that said, based on the obtained results, it is evident that CLEASE predicted a cor-
rect ground-state structure from just 69 random training structures. The fact that this was
achieved with a training scheme that was not the combination with the lowest generaliza-
tion error might serve as a proof of robustness. After constructing the initial ground-state
structure, CLEASE could only generate a single other ground-state structure, which indi-
cates that either the model is so finely trained that it has found the absolute minimum, or
that an entirely different configuration exists that is not part of the training set.
The latter seems unlikely, but then there is the peculiar fact that the second ground-state
structure was able to achieve a lower configurational energy by lithium migration - indicat-
ing that the structurer was, in fact, not a ground-state structure. However looking at figure
3.7, this cell was not chosen for the NEB due to there not being any obvious sites where a
lithium ion would be farther from other cations. The proposed NEB path is a 1D path from
a 001 site to the nearest neighbor 002 site and is therefore not reflective of actual ionic
pathways, which would be a combination of 1D and 2D paths and therefore have larger
energy barriers. This is caused by the non-ideality of the physical configuration sometimes
46
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:55==
hindering the 1D channel through different types of defects, such as antisites (swapping
of Y and Li), which have an activation energy of only 800 meV and might therefore occur
when large energies are transferred to the material by e.g. ball milling [19].
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:57==
4
Conclusion and Outlook
4.1
Conclusion
First, LYC was synthesized with 3 mm grinding balls and 10 mm grinding balls and the
ionic conductivity was measured, although values considerably higher than literature were
obtained. An Arrhenius plot of temperature-dependent impedance measurements proved
that the LYC acted as an electrolyte, albeit with a lower conductivity than previously re-
ported in literature and with a higher activation energy of 50% (60.4 kJ mol−1. Incorporat-
ing the LYC into an LFP cathode for testing with a polymer-in-ceramic electrolyte and a
lithium metal anode revealed a very low effective capacity, which was attributed to poor in-
terfacial contact and improved after cycling for most cells. Associated with this increase in
specific capacity was a decrease in interfacial impedance, which indicates that interfacial
contact was improving.
This was theorized to stem from SEI formation during cycling, although significant SEI
formation has not been reported and LYC has a high electrochemical window. However,
the difference between previous work and this work is the increased electrolyte resistance,
which manifests itself in a higher ohmic overpotential and therefore reduces the available
potential range in which the battery can safely operate without electrolyte degradation.
Combined with the bad interfacial contact, this required a widening of the cutoff voltages
due to transport limitations, exceeding the electrochemical window of the electrolyte.
Through a comparison of different battery cells, it seems that LYC synthesized with 3
mm grinding balls improved the cell performance significantly over one ground with LYC
synthesized with 10 mm grinding balls, but with pure LFP performing best. The hypothesis
that a too wide cycling window was used and thus decomposed LYC at the electrode
interface, causing interfacial problems with the LFP, strongly agrees with these results.
CLEASE was utilized to fit the LYC configuration to a configurational energy through ridge
regularized regression and successfully produced an LYC ground-state structure. Gen-
erating an additional ground-state structure and determining a diffusion barrier through
NEB calculations revealed a path with an energy barrier of 0.14 eV, which is lower than
most values reported in literature using random configurations. This value corresponds
to an activation energy of 13.5 kJ/mol, which is smaller than any experimentally obtained
value, which validates the theory of 1D diffusion channel blocking ([19]) requiring other
diffusion paths.
4.1.1
Outlook
The accuracy of CLEASE certainly warrants continued investigations using NEB calcu-
lations as the target variable for training and then predicting diffusion barriers based on
these. CLEASE could then be used to run a kinetic Monte Carlo simulation where the
probability of moving is based on the CLEASE ECI rather than a large amount of NEB
calculations.
The battery cells should be cycled in a narrower electrochemical to assess the behav-
ior within the stability window of LYC. Impedance could be measured charging (i.e. at
different states of charge) and at even lower C-rates, as the ones that were used were
too high1. Finding an optimal pressing force and mass loading would likely also lead to
1Unfortunately the C-rate was discovered too late.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
49
==PAGE:58==
improvements, as a too low pressure could result in even worse interfacial contact, while
a higher one might transfer enough energy to drive reactions. There is certainly also
room for improvement regarding the electrolyte as the resistance was high, which greatly
restricted the cyclability.
If the cell was investigated while keeping all of these changes in mind, a next step could
be to use a soft, inorganic electrolyte instead of PEO, or to investigate an anode-free
configuration of the cell, in which lithium is plated directly on a bare current collector.
50
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Yuqing Chen et al. “A review of lithium-ion battery safety concerns: The issues,
strategies, and testing standards”. In: Journal of Energy Chemistry 59 (Nov. 2020).
DOI: 10.1016/j.jechem.2020.10.017.
[2]
D. Doughty and E. Roth. “A General Discussion of Li Ion Battery Safety”. In: Elec-
trochemical Society Interface 21 (June 2012), pp. 37–44. DOI: 10.1149/2.F03122if.
[3]
Kostiantyn Turcheniuk et al. “Ten years left to redesign lithium-ion batteries”. In:
Nature 559 (July 2018), pp. 467–470. DOI: 10.1038/d41586-018-05752-3.
[4]
E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli. “Review—Emerging Trends in the Design of Elec-
trolytes for Lithium and Post-Lithium Batteries”. In: Journal of The Electrochemical
Society 167 (Jan. 2020), p. 050508. DOI: 10.1149/1945-7111/ab63c4.
[5]
Kunjoong Kim et al. “Solid￿State Li–Metal Batteries: Challenges and Horizons of
Oxide and Sulfide Solid Electrolytes and Their Interfaces”. In: Advanced Energy
Materials 11 (Nov. 2020), p. 2002689. DOI: 10.1002/aenm.202002689.
[6]
Long Chen et al. “PEO/Garnet Composite Electrolytes for Solid-State Lithium Bat-
teries: from “Ceramic-in-Polymer” to “Polymer-in-Ceramic””. In: Nano Energy 46
(Dec. 2017). DOI: 10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.12.037.
[7]
Qian Zhang et al. “Recent advances on rare earths in solid lithium ion conductors”.
In: Journal of Rare Earths 39 (Apr. 2020). DOI: 10.1016/j.jre.2020.04.001.
[8]
Laidong Zhou et al. “High areal capacity, long cycle life 4 V ceramic all-solid-state Li-
ion batteries enabled by chloride solid electrolytes”. In: Nature Energy (Jan. 2022).
DOI: 10.1038/s41560-021-00952-0.
[9]
A. D. McNaught and A. Wilkinson. Compendium of Chemical Terminology, 2nd ed.
(the ”Gold Book”). Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford (1997), 2019. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1351/goldbook.
[10]
Tetsuya Asano et al. “Solid Halide Electrolytes with High Lithium-Ion Conductivity for
Application in 4 V Class Bulk-Type All-Solid-State Batteries”. In: Advanced materials
(Deerfield Beach, Fla.) 30 (Sept. 2018), e1803075. DOI: 10.1002/adma.201803075.
[11]
Roman Schlem et al. “Insights into the Lithium Sub-structure of Superionic Con-
ductors Li 3 YCl 6 and Li 3 YBr 6”. In: Chemistry of Materials 33 (Jan. 2021). DOI:
10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c04352.
[12]
Roman Schlem et al. “Mechanochemical Synthesis: A Tool to Tune Cation Site Dis-
order and Ionic Transport Properties of Li3MCl6 (M = Y, Er) Superionic Conductors”.
In: Advanced Energy Materials 10 (Dec. 2019). DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201903719.
[13]
Hiroaki Ito et al. “Kinetically Stabilized Cation Arrangement in Li3YCl6 Superionic
Conductor during Solid￿State Reaction”. In: Advanced Science 8 (Aug. 2021). DOI:
10.1002/advs.202101413.
[14]
Jiahao Qiu et al. “Insights into Bulk Properties and Transport Mechanisms in New
Ternary Halide Solid Electrolytes: First-Principles Calculations”. In: The Journal of
Physical Chemistry C 125 (Oct. 2021). DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.1c07347.
[15]
J. Qi et al. “Bridging the gap between simulated and experimental ionic conduc-
tivities in lithium superionic conductors”. In: Materials Today Physics 21 (2021),
p. 100463. ISSN: 2542-5293. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtphys.2021.100463.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2542529321001243.
[16]
Dongsu Park et al. “Theoretical Design of Lithium Chloride Superionic Conductors
for All-Solid-State High Voltage Lithium-Ion Batteries”. In: ACS Applied Materials
Interfaces XXXX (July 2020). DOI: 10.1021/acsami.0c07003.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
51
==PAGE:60==
[17]
Xiaona Li et al. “Origin of Superionic Li3Y1-xInxCl6 Halide Solid-Electrolytes with
High Humidity Tolerance”. In: Nano Letters XXXX (May 2020). DOI: 10.1021/acs.
nanolett.0c01156.
[18]
Eveline van der Maas et al. “A Series of Ternary Metal Chloride Superionic Con-
ductors for High￿Performance All￿Solid￿State Lithium Batteries”. In: Advanced
Energy Materials (Apr. 2022), p. 2103921. DOI: 10.1002/aenm.202103921.
[19]
Shuo Wang et al. “Lithium Chlorides and Bromides as Promising Solid￿State Chemistries
for Fast Ion Conductors with Good Electrochemical Stability”. In: Angewandte Chemie
131 (Apr. 2019). DOI: 10.1002/ange.201901938.
[20]
Pooja Vadhva et al. “Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy for All￿Solid￿State
Batteries: Theory, Methods and Future Outlook”. In: ChemElectroChem 8 (Apr.
2021). DOI: 10.1002/celc.202100108.
[21]
David Williams and C. Carter. Transmission Electron Microscopy: A Textbook for
Materials Science. Vol. III. June 2009. ISBN: 9780387765020. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-
4757-2519-3.
[22]
J. Goldstein et al. Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanalysis ISBN:
0306472929. Vol. XIX. Jan. 2003. ISBN: 0306472929. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4615-
0215-9.
[23]
P. Howell, K. Davy, and Alan Boyde. “Mean atomic number and backscattered elec-
tron coefficient for some materials of low mean atomic number”. In: Scanning 20
(Dec. 2006), pp. 35–40. DOI: 10.1002/sca.1998.4950200105.
[24]
Hilal Al-Salih et al. “Composite Cathodes for Solid￿State Lithium Batteries: “Catholytes”
the Underrated Giants”. In: Advanced Energy and Sustainability Research (June
2022). DOI: 10.1002/aesr.202200032.
[25]
D. H. Templeton and Giles F. Carter. “The Crystal Structures of Yttrium Trichlo-
ride and Similar Compounds”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry 58.11 (1954),
pp. 940–944. DOI: 10.1021/j150521a002. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/j150521a002.
[26]
I. Ralph W. G. Wyckoff. “The crystal structures of the alkali halides”. In: Journal of
the Washington Academy of Sciences 11.18 (1921), pp. 429–434. ISSN: 00430439.
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/24532526 (visited on 06/28/2022).
[27]
Jin Chang et al. “On-the-fly assessment of diffusion barriers of disordered transition
metal oxyfluorides using local descriptors”. In: Electrochimica Acta 388 (May 2021),
p. 138551. DOI: 10.1016/j.electacta.2021.138551.
[28]
Jinhyun Chang et al. “CLEASE: A versatile and user-friendly implementation of
Cluster Expansion method”. English. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
31.32 (2019). ISSN: 0953-8984. DOI: 10.1088/1361-648X/ab1bbc.
[29]
Trevor Hastie et al. “The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference,
and Prediction”. In: Math. Intell. 27 (Nov. 2004), pp. 83–85. DOI: 10.1007/BF02985802.
[30]
Axel van de Walle and Gerbrand Ceder. “Automating First-Principles Phase Dia-
gram Calculations”. In: Journal of Phase Equilibria 23 (Feb. 2002). DOI: 10.1361/
105497102770331596.
[31]
scikit learn. sklearn.linearmodel.Lasso. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.linear_model.Lasso.html.
52
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:61==
A
SEM images
(a) LYC10
(b) LYC3
Figure A.1: Close-up of LYC powder. LYC3 was more densely dispersed than LYC10 and
thus the images cannot be used to determine particle sizes, but can provide a good idea
of it.
Figure A.2: BSD image of the surface plane of the LFP/PIC/Li pellet used for BC5. The
LFP is distributed in chunks.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
53
==PAGE:62==
B
Data Sheets and Manuals
54
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:63==
                          
 
Product Data Sheet 
Lithium Iron Phosphate (LFP) – Energy & Power 
 
Part No: EMLFEP-P 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rev. 1.0, Dated: April 3, 2013 
  
 
Form 
Powder 
Color 
Black 
D50 
 3–7 m 
Tap Density 
>0.8g/cm2 
Iron Content 
< 20 ppm 
Structure 
Olive 
Surface area - BET 
<15 m2/g 
Chemical Formula 
LiFePO4 
Voltage 
3.20V 
pH 
10.2 
Capacity 
125mAh/g at C/20 
First Cycle efficiency 
>85% 
Application 
High Energy, high power, battery, cathode 
Molecular Weight 
157.79 
EC Number 
15365-14-7 
www.electrodesandmore.com 
 
Battery Consulting, 4020 Christopher Way, Plano TX 75024 
Phone: (877)394-3941  Fax: (208)955-4890 
drmumu@electrodesandmore.com 
                                                                                                                  
 
B.1
LFP (Electrodes and More)
,
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
55
==PAGE:64==
 
Manual for VMP3-based instruments 
 
79 
 
Contour plot 
 
 
 
*FSR: Full Scale Range 
Specifications subject to change. 
10.2.2 
Low Current (LC) option 
Cell control 
Maximum current 
± 100 mA continuous  
Maximum current 
resolution 
0.004 % of the dynamic range 
programmable 76 fA on the 1 nA range 
Applied current 
resolution  
< 1 % FSR* on the 1 nA range 
< 0.5 % FSR* on the 10 nA range  
< 0.1 % FSR* on the other ranges 
Current measurement 
Ranges  
± 1 nA, ± 10 nA, ± 100 nA, ± 1 µA 
Maximum resolution 
0.004 % FSR*  
Accuracy  
< 1 % FSR* on the 1 nA range 
< 0.5 % FSR* on the 10 nA range  
< 0.1 % FSR* on the other ranges 
Electrometer 
Impedance 
1014 ohms in parallel with 1 pF 
Bias current 
60 fA typical, 
150 fA max at 25°C 
Bandwith  
1 MHz  
Impedance specifications (if connected to channel board with EIS ability) 
Contour plot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.2
VMP3 Manua excerpt
,
56
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:65==
 
Manual for SP300-based instruments 
 
75 
Ground to chassis impedance 
Floating mode 
1 MΩ ΙΙ 25 pF typical 
Grounded mode 
< 100 Ω 
IR compensation 
Resistance determination 
EIS 
Compensation mode  
Hardware or software positive feedback 
Compensation range 
Programmable from 0 to 100 % of the current range 
resistor 
Auxiliary Inputs/outputs 
External Input 
Can be used to apply an external waveform directly 
to the control amplifier 
2 Analog Inputs 
Automatic ± 2.5 V, ± 5 V, ± 10 V ranges - 16 bits 
resolution 
1 Analog Output 
16 bits resolution on the ± 10 V range 
2 Digital Inputs 
TTL level Trigger input and Open input 
1 Digital Output 
TTL level Trigger output 
2 Monitor Outputs 
Cell current and compensated working electrode 
potential  
Impedance specifications (EIS option only) 
Frequency range 
10 µHz to 7 MHz  
Frequency resolution 
< 10 ppm of the setting 
Sinus amplitude 
0.5 mV to 5 V with 76 µV resolution  
0.1 % to 100 % of the current range with resolution 
of 0.004 % of the range 
Accuracy 
See contour plot 
Mode 
Single sine, Multisine, FFT analysis 
Contour plot 
 
 
10.2.2 Ultra Low Current 
Cell Control 
Maximum Current  
± 500 mA (± 1 A continuous with 1 A/48 V) 
Maximum Current 
resolution 
0.004 % of the range (down to 76 aA on the ± 1 pA) 
Applied Current 
Accuracy 
< ±0.1% of range ±0.03% of setting for ±500 mA to ±100 nA 
ranges 
< ±0.1% of range ±1% of setting for ±10 nA range to ±1 nA ranges 
< ±0.2% of range ±2% of setting for ±100 pA range 
B.3
SP300 Manual excerpt
,
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
57
==PAGE:66==
C
Electrolyte cell impedance
(a) A subfigure
(b) A subfigure
Figure C.1: EIS measurements of symmetric stainless steel coin cells with a): 300 mg
LYC and b): 150 mg LYC, using excitation voltages from 5-25 mV (a) and 5-500 mV (b).
Table C.1: Fitting parameters for fits in figure 2.6.
EC1
EC2
EC3
EC3 (SP300)
R0 / kΩ
–
–
479
–
R1 / kΩ
18
16
11.25
14.5
CPE1 α
0.8
0.845
0.87
0.8525
CPE1 Q0
5 · 10−9
2.5 · 10−9
8.5 · 10−10
4.4 · 10−10
CPE2 α
0.94
0.85
0.894
0.86
CPE2 Q0
4 · 10−9
5.2 · 10−9
1.5 · 10−9
5 · 10−9
58
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:67==
D
Battery impedance
H
Figure D.1: Temperature-variant EIS measurements of BC1 long (read: days) after cycling
in figure 2.15.
H
Figure D.2: Figure 2.17 with the noisy measurements included.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
59
==PAGE:68==
H
Figure D.3: Figure 2.20 with the noisy measurements included.
60
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:69==
E
Monte Carlo simulation occupancies
(a) 10 swaps per atom per step
(b) 160,312,500 total steps
Figure E.1: Partial occupancies for a 15x15x15 supercell constructed by CLEASE based
on the previously fitted ECI and then annealed with different amounts of steps. Orange:
Y, blue: Li.
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) 6,412,500 total steps
(b) 190,000,000 total steps
Figure E.2: Partial occupancies for a 20x20x20 supercell constructed by CLEASE based
on the previously fitted ECI and then annealed with different amounts of steps. Orange:
Y, blue: Li.
62
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
==PAGE:71==
Novel solid state batteries using composite electrolytes
63
==PAGE:72==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 310
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.energy.dtu.dk
